 Christopher Jackson of <unk> described the track as a " to @-@ the @-@ point introduction to the classic Mogwai sound - elegant musings on a web of bass @-@ heavy guitars , growing patiently to a peak filled out with massive distorted chords and fat drum fills " . Brandon Wu of Ground and Sky described the song 's progression , " [ starting ] with a quietly pretty melody . . . [ building ] to a massive climax of guitar and bass noise . " and " woven through [ the ] crescendo is a beautiful , lyrical guitar line . . . simply stunning . " 
 = = Personnel and credits = = 
 = Scotland during the Roman Empire = 
 Scotland during the Roman Empire refers to the <unk> period during which the Roman Empire interacted with the area that is now Scotland , which was known to them as " Caledonia " . Roman legions arrived around AD 71 , having conquered the Celtic tribes of " Britain " ( England and Wales ) over the preceding three decades . Aiming to annex all of the island of " Albion " , Romans under Q. Petillius Cerialis and <unk> . Julius Agricola invaded the Caledonians in the 70s and 80s . An account by Agricola 's son @-@ in @-@ law Tacitus mentions a Roman victory at " Mons Graupius " which became the namesake of the Grampians but has been questioned by modern scholarship . The Romans then seem to have repeated an earlier Greek circumnavigation of the island and received submission from local tribes , establishing their border of actual control first along the Gask Ridge before withdrawing to a line south of the Solway Firth . This line was fortified as Hadrian 's Wall . Several Roman commanders attempted to fully conquer lands north of this line , including a brief expansion that was fortified as the Antonine Wall . Despite grandiose claims made by an 18th @-@ century forged manuscript , however , it is now believed that the Romans at no point controlled even half of present @-@ day Scotland and that Roman legions ceased to affect the area after around 211 . 
 The history of the period is complex and not well @-@ documented . The province of Valentia , for instance , may have been the lands between the two Roman walls , or the territory around and south of Hadrian 's Wall , or Roman Wales . Romans held most of their Caledonian territory only a little over 40 years ; they probably only held any Scottish land at all for about 80 years . Some Scottish historians such as Moffat go so far as to say Rome 's presence was entirely <unk> . " Scots " and " Scotland " proper would not emerge as unified ideas until centuries later . In fact , the Roman Empire influenced every part of Scotland during the period : by the time of the Roman withdrawal from Britain around 410 , the various Iron Age tribes native to the area had united as or fell under the control of the Picts while the southern half of the country was overrun by tribes of Romanized Britons . The Scoti , Gaelic Irish raiders who would give Scotland its English name , had begun to settle along the west coast as well . All three groups may have been involved in the Great Conspiracy that overran Roman Britain in 367 . The era also saw the emergence of the earliest historical accounts of the natives . The most enduring legacies of Rome , however , were Christianity and literacy , both of which arrived indirectly via Irish missionaries . 
 = = The dawn of Scottish history = = 
 Scotland had been inhabited for thousands of years before the Romans arrived . However , it is only during the Greco @-@ Roman period that Scotland is recorded in writing . 
 The work On the Cosmos by Aristotle or Pseudo @-@ Aristotle mentions two " very large " British Isles called Albion ( Great Britain ) and <unk> ( Ireland ) . The Greek explorer and geographer Pytheas visited Britain sometime between 322 and 285 BC and may have circumnavigated the mainland , which he describes as being triangular in shape . In his work On the Ocean , he refers to the most northerly point as Orcas ( Orkney ) . 
 The earliest written record of a formal connection between Rome and Scotland is the attendance of the " King of Orkney " who was one of 11 British kings who submitted to the Emperor Claudius at Colchester in AD 43 following the invasion of southern Britain three months earlier . The long distances and short period of time involved strongly suggest a prior connection between Rome and Orkney , although no evidence of this has been found and the contrast with later Caledonian resistance is striking . Originals of On the Ocean do not survive , but copies are known to have existed in the 1st century so at the least a rudimentary knowledge of the geography of north Britain would have been available to Roman military intelligence . Pomponius Mela , the Roman geographer , recorded in his De <unk> , written around AD 43 , that there were 30 Orkney islands and seven <unk> ( possibly Shetland ) . There is certainly evidence of an Orcadian connection with Rome prior to AD 60 from pottery found at the broch of Gurness . 
 By the time of Pliny the Elder ( d . AD 79 ) , Roman knowledge of the geography of Scotland had extended to the Hebudes ( The Hebrides ) , Dumna ( probably the Outer Hebrides ) , the Caledonian Forest , and the Caledonians . 
 Ptolemy , possibly drawing on earlier sources of information as well as more contemporary accounts from the Agricolan invasion , identified 18 tribes in Scotland in his Geography , but many of the names are obscure . His information becomes much less reliable in the north and west , suggesting early Roman knowledge of these area was confined to observations from the sea . Famously , his <unk> place most of Scotland north of Hadrian 's Wall bent at a right angle , stretching due eastward from the rest of Britain . 
 = = Iron Age culture in Scotland = = 
 Ptolemy 's tribes located north of the Forth @-@ Clyde isthmus include the Cornovii in Caithness , the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> also north of the Great Glen , the <unk> in the north @-@ east , the Epidii in Argyll , the <unk> in Fife , the Caledonians in the central Highlands and the <unk> centred near Strathmore . It is likely that all of these cultures spoke a form of Celtic language known as <unk> . The occupants of southern Scotland were the Damnonii in the Clyde valley , the <unk> in Galloway , the Selgovae on the south coast and the Votadini to the east . These peoples may have spoken a form of Brythonic language . 
 Despite the discovery of many hundreds of Iron Age sites in Scotland there is still a great deal that remains to be explained about the nature of the Celtic life in the early Christian era . Unfortunately radiocarbon dating for this period is problematic and chronological sequences are poorly understood . For a variety of reasons much of the archaeological work to date in Scotland has concentrated on the islands of the west and north and both excavations and analysis of societal structures on the mainland are more limited in scope . 
 The peoples of early Iron Age Scotland , particularly in the north and west , lived in substantial stone buildings called Atlantic roundhouses . The remains of hundreds of these houses exist throughout the country , some merely piles of rubble , others with impressive towers and outbuildings . They date from about 800 BC to AD 300 with the most imposing structures having been created around the 2nd century BC . The most massive constructions that date from this time are the circular broch towers . On average , the ruins only survive up to a few metres above ground level , although there are five extant examples of towers whose walls still exceed 6 @.@ 5 m ( 21 ft ) in height . There are at least 100 broch sites in Scotland . Despite extensive research , their purpose and the nature of the societies that created them are still a matter of debate . 
 In some parts of Iron Age Scotland , quite unlike almost all of recorded history right up to the present day , there does not seem to have been an hierarchical elite . Studies have shown that these stone roundhouses , with massively thick walls must have contained virtually the entire population of islands such as Barra and North Uist . Iron Age settlement patterns in Scotland are not homogenous , but in these places there is no sign of a privileged class living in large castles or forts , or of an elite priestly caste or of peasants with no access to the kind of accommodation enjoyed by the middle classes . 
 Over 400 souterrains have been discovered in Scotland , many of them in the south @-@ east , and although few have been dated those that have suggest a construction date in the 2nd or 3rd centuries . Unfortunately the purpose of these small underground structures is also obscure . They are usually found close to settlements ( whose timber frames are much less well @-@ preserved ) and may have been for storing perishable agricultural products . 
 Scotland also has numerous vitrified forts but again an accurate chronology has proven to be evasive . Extensive studies of such a fort at Finavon Hill near Forfar in Angus , using a variety of techniques , suggest dates for the destruction of the site in either the last two centuries BC or the mid @-@ 1st millennium . The lack of Roman artifacts ( common in local souterrain sites ) suggests that many sites were abandoned before the arrival of the legions . 
 Unlike the earlier Neolithic and Bronze Ages , which have provided massive monuments to the dead , Iron Age burial sites in Scotland are rare , and a recent find at Dunbar may provide further insight into the culture of this period . A similar site of a warrior 's grave at Alloa has been provisionally dated to AD 90 – 130 . A traveller called Demetrius of Tarsus related to Plutarch the tale of an expedition to the west coast in or shortly before AD 83 . He stated that it was " a gloomy journey amongst uninhabited islands " but that he had visited one which was the retreat of holy men . He mentioned neither the druids nor the name of the island . 
 = = The invasion of Caledonia = = 
 The apparently cordial beginnings recorded in Colchester did not last . We know nothing of the foreign policies of the senior leaders in mainland Scotland in the 1st century , but by AD 71 the Roman governor Quintus Petillius Cerialis had launched an invasion . The Votadini , who occupied the south @-@ east of Scotland , came under Roman sway at an early stage and Cerialis sent one division north through their territory to the shores of the Firth of Forth . The <unk> Legion took a western route through Annandale in an attempt to encircle and isolate the Selgovae who occupied the central Southern Uplands . Early success tempted Cerialis further north and he began constructing a line of <unk> forts to the north and west of the Gask Ridge which marked a frontier between the <unk> to the south and the Caledonians to the north . 
 In the summer of AD 78 Gnaeus Julius Agricola arrived in Britain to take up his appointment as the new governor . Two years later his legions constructed a substantial fort at Trimontium near Melrose . Excavations in the 20th century produced significant finds including the foundations of several successive structures , Roman coins and pottery . Remains from the Roman army were also found , including a collection of Roman armour ( with ornate cavalry parade helmets ) , and horse fittings ( with bronze <unk> and studded leather <unk> ) . Agricola is said to have pushed his armies to the estuary of the " River Taus " ( usually assumed to be the River Tay ) and established forts there , including a legionary fortress at Inchtuthil . 
 = = Mons Graupius = = 
 In the summer of AD 84 the Romans faced the massed armies of the Caledonians at the Battle of Mons Graupius . Agricola , whose forces included a fleet , arrived at the site with light infantry bolstered with British auxiliaries . It is estimated that a total of 20 @,@ 000 Romans faced 30 @,@ 000 Caledonian warriors . 
 Agricola put his auxiliaries in the front line , keeping the legions in reserve , and relied on close @-@ quarters fighting to make the Caledonians ' <unk> slashing swords useless . Even though the Caledonians were put to rout and therefore lost this battle , two thirds of their army managed to escape and hide in the Scottish Highlands or the " trackless wilds " as Tacitus called them . Battle casualties were estimated by Tacitus to be about 10 @,@ 000 on the Caledonian side and roughly 360 on the Roman side . A number of authors have reckoned the battle to have occurred in the Grampian Mounth within sight of the North Sea . In particular , Roy , <unk> , Watt , Hogan and others have advanced notions that the site of the battle may have been <unk> Hill , <unk> Hill or other knolls near the <unk> Roman camp . These points of high ground are proximate to the Elsick Mounth , an ancient trackway used by Romans and Caledonians for military manoeuvres . Other suggestions include the hill of <unk> in Aberdeenshire , the Gask Ridge not far from Perth and Sutherland . It has also been suggested that in the absence of any archaeological evidence and Tacitus ' low estimates of Roman casualties , that the battle was simply fabricated . 
 = = = Calgacus = = = 
 The first resident of Scotland to appear in history by name was Calgacus ( " the Swordsman " ) , a leader of the Caledonians at Mons Graupius , who is referred to by Tacitus in the Agricola as " the most distinguished for birth and valour among the chieftains " . Tacitus even invented a speech for him in advance of the battle in which he describes the Romans as : 
 Robbers of the world , having by their universal plunder exhausted the land , they rifle the deep . If the enemy be rich , they are rapacious ; if he be poor , they lust for dominion ; neither the east nor the west has been able to satisfy them . Alone among men they covet with equal eagerness poverty and riches . To robbery , slaughter , plunder , they give the lying name of empire ; they make a solitude and call it peace . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Calgacus ' fate is unknown but , according to Tacitus , after the battle Agricola ordered the prefect of the fleet to sail around the north of Scotland to confirm that Britain was an island and to receive the surrender of the Orcadians . It was proclaimed that Agricola had finally subdued all the tribes of Britain . However , the Roman historian Cassius Dio reports that this circumnavigation resulted in Titus receiving his 15th acclamation as emperor in AD 79 . This is five years before Mons Graupius is believed by most historians to have taken place . 
 Marching camps may have been constructed along the southern shores of the Moray Firth , although their existence is questioned . The total size of the Roman garrison in Scotland during the Flavian period of occupation is thought to be some 25 @,@ 000 troops , requiring 16 – 19 @,@ 000 tons of grain per annum . In addition , the material to construct the forts was substantial , estimated at 1 million cubic feet ( 28 @,@ 315 m3 ) of timber during the 1st century . Ten tons of buried nails were discovered at the Inchtuthil site , which may have had a garrison of up to 6 @,@ 000 men and which itself consumed 30 linear kilometres of wood for the walls alone , which would have used up 100 hectares ( 247 acres ) of forest . 
 Soon after his announcement of victory , Agricola was recalled to Rome by Domitian and his post passed to Sallustius Lucullus . Agricola 's successors were seemingly unable or unwilling to further subdue the far north . Despite his apparent successes , Agricola himself fell out of favour and it is possible that Domitian may have been informed of the fraudulence of his claims to have won a significant victory . The fortress at Inchtuthil was dismantled before its completion and the other fortifications of the Gask Ridge ( erected to consolidate the Roman presence in Scotland in the aftermath of Mons Graupius ) were abandoned within the space of a few years . It is possible that the costs of a drawn @-@ out war outweighed any economic or political benefit and it was deemed more profitable to leave the Caledonians to themselves . By AD 87 the occupation was limited to the Southern Uplands and by the end of the 1st century the northern limit of Roman expansion was a line drawn between the Tyne and Solway Firth . Elginhaugh fort , in Midlothian , dates to about this period as may Castle Greg in West Lothian , which was most likely used as a monitoring base for an east @-@ west road running along the foot of the nearby <unk> , from the Forth to the Clyde Valley . 
 Presumably as a consequence of the Roman advance , various hill forts such as Dun Mor in Perthshire , which had been abandoned by the natives long ago , were re @-@ occupied . Some new ones may even have been constructed in the north @-@ east such as Hill O ' Christ 's Kirk in Aberdeenshire . 
 = = Settlements and southern brochs = = 
 Ptolemy 's Geography identifies 19 " towns " from intelligence gathered during the Agricolan campaigns . No archaeological evidence of any truly urban places has been found from this time and the names may have indicated hill forts or temporary market and meeting places . Most of the names are obscure : <unk> may be the modern Banchory ; Alauna ( " the rock " ) in the west is probably Dumbarton Rock and the place of the same name in the east Lowlands may be the site of Edinburgh Castle . Lindon may be Balloch on Loch Lomond side . 
 There are the remains of various broch towers in southern Scotland that appear to date from the period immediately prior to or following Agricola 's invasion . They are about fifteen in number and are found in four locations : the Forth valley , close to the Firth of Tay , the far south @-@ west and the eastern Borders . Their existence so far from the main centres of broch @-@ building is something of a mystery . The destruction of the Leckie broch may have come at the hands of the Roman invaders , yet like the nearby site of Fairy <unk> at <unk> a substantial amount of both Roman and native artefacts have been recovered there . Both structures were built in the late 1st century and were evidently high @-@ status buildings . The inhabitants raised sheep , cattle and pigs , and benefited from a range of wild game including Red Deer and Wild Boar . 
 Edin 's Hall Broch in Berwickshire is the best preserved southern broch and although the ruins are superficially similar to some of the larger Orcadian broch villages it is unlikely that the tower was ever more than a single story high . There is an absence of Roman artefacts at this site . Various theories for the existence of these structures have been proposed , including their construction by northern invaders following the withdrawal of Roman troops after the Agricolan advance , or by allies of Rome encouraged to emulate the impressive northern style in order to suppress native resistance , perhaps even the Orcadian chiefs whose positive relationship with Rome may have continued from the beginnings of Romano @-@ British relations . It is also possible that their construction had little to do with Roman frontier policy and was simply the importation of a new style by southern elites or it may have been a response by such elites to the growing threat of Rome prior to the invasion and an attempt to ally themselves , actually or symbolically , with the free north . 
 = = Hadrian 's Wall = = 
 Quintus Pompeius Falco became governor of Britannia between 118 and 122 and is thought to have suppressed an uprising involving the Brigantes of northern Britannia and the Selgovae . In his last year of office he hosted a visit to the province by the Emperor Hadrian that resulted in the construction of Hadrian 's Wall ( Latin : <unk> Valli <unk> , " the line along Hadrian 's frontier " ) . 
 This line of occupation of Britain was consolidated as one of the limites ( defensible frontiers ) of the empire by its construction . It is a stone fortification built across the width of what is now northern England . The wall was 80 Roman miles ( 73 @.@ 5 statute miles or 117 kilometres ) long , its width and height dependent on the construction materials which were available nearby . East of the River <unk> the wall was made from squared stone and measured 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 7 ft ) wide and 5 – 6 metres ( 16 – 20 ft ) high , while west of the river the wall was originally made from turf and measured 6 metres ( 20 ft ) wide and 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 @.@ 5 ft ) high ; it was subsequently rebuilt in stone . The wall was augmented by various ditches , berms , and forts . 
 The wall had several purposes . Defence was the most obvious , but it also controlled movement behind the line , enabled the rapid transmission of military intelligence , and facilitated the collection of customs dues . Its scale also demonstrated the power of Rome to her enemies , and was surely intended to enhance the prestige of its builder . Hadrian 's Wall remained the frontier between the Roman and Celtic worlds in Britain until 139 . It was briefly superseded by the Antonine Wall . 
 = = Antonine Wall = = 
 Quintus <unk> Urbicus was made governor of Roman Britain in 138 , by the new Emperor Antoninus Pius . Urbicus was the son of a Libyan landowner and a native of Numidia ( modern Algeria ) . Prior to coming to Britain he served during the Jewish Rebellion of 132 – 135 , and then governing Germania Inferior . 
 Antoninus Pius soon reversed the containment policy of his predecessor Hadrian , and Urbicus was ordered to begin the reconquest of Lowland Scotland by moving north . Between 139 and 140 he rebuilt a fort at Corbridge and by 142 or 143 , commemorative coins were issued celebrating a victory in Britain . It is therefore likely that Urbicus led the reoccupation of southern Scotland c . 141 , probably using the 2nd Augustan Legion . He evidently campaigned against several British tribes ( possibly including factions of the northern Brigantes ) , certainly against the lowland tribes of Scotland , the Votadini and Selgovae of the Scottish Borders region , and the Damnonii of Strathclyde . His total force may have been about 16 @,@ 500 men . 
 It seems likely that Urbicus planned his campaign of attack from Corbridge , advancing north and leaving garrison forts at High Rochester in Northumberland and possibly also at Trimontium as he struck towards the Firth of Forth . Having secured an overland supply route for military personnel and equipment along Dere Street , Urbicus very likely set up a supply port at <unk> for the supply of grain and other foodstuffs before proceeding against the Damnonii . 
 Success was swift and the construction of a new limes between the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde commenced . Contingents from at least one British legion are known to have assisted in the erection of the new turf barrier , as evidenced by an inscription from the fort at Old Kilpatrick , the Antonine Wall 's western terminus . Today , the sward @-@ covered wall is the remains of a defensive line made of turf circa 7 metres ( 20 ft ) high , with nineteen forts . It was constructed after AD 139 and extended for 60 km ( 37 mi ) . It was possibly after the defences were finished that Urbicus turned his attention upon the fourth lowland Scottish tribe , the <unk> who inhabited the Dumfries and Galloway peninsula . The main lowland tribes , sandwiched as they were between Hadrian 's Wall of stone to the south and the new turf wall to the north , later formed a confederation against Roman rule , collectively known as the Maeatae . 
 The Antonine Wall had a variety of purposes . It provided a defensive line against the Caledonians . It cut off the Maeatae from their Caledonian allies and created a buffer zone north of Hadrian 's Wall . It also facilitated troop movements between east and west , but its main purpose may not have been primarily military . It enabled Rome to control and tax trade and may have prevented potentially disloyal new subjects of Roman rule from communicating with their independent brethren to the north and coordinating revolts . Urbicus achieved an impressive series of military successes , but like Agricola 's they were short @-@ lived . Having taken twelve years to build , the wall was overrun and abandoned soon after AD 160 . 
 The destruction of some of the southern brochs may date to the Antonine advance , the hypothesis being that whether or not they had previously been symbols of Roman patronage they had now outlived their usefulness from a Roman point of view . 
 = = 3rd century = = 
 The Roman frontier became Hadrian 's Wall again , although Roman incursions into Scotland continued . Initially outpost forts were occupied in the south @-@ west and Trimontium remained in use but they too were abandoned after the mid @-@ 180s . 
 Roman troops , however , penetrated far into the north of modern Scotland several more times . Indeed , there is a greater density of Roman marching camps in Scotland than anywhere else in Europe , as a result of at least four major attempts to subdue the area . The Antonine Wall was occupied again for a brief period after AD 197 . The most notable invasion was in 209 when the emperor Septimius Severus , claiming to be provoked by the belligerence of the Maeatae , campaigned against the Caledonian Confederacy . Severus invaded Caledonia with an army perhaps over 40 @,@ 000 strong . 
 According to Dio Cassius , he inflicted genocidal depredations on the natives and incurred the loss of 50 @,@ 000 of his own men to the attrition of guerrilla tactics , although it is likely that these figures are a significant exaggeration . 
 A string of forts was constructed in the north @-@ east ( some of which may date from the earlier Antonine campaign ) . These include camps associated with the Elsick Mounth , such as <unk> , <unk> Wells , <unk> Den and <unk> . However , only two forts in Scotland , at Cramond and Carpow ( in the Tay valley ) are definitely known to have been permanently occupied during this incursion before the troops were withdrawn again to Hadrian 's Wall circa 213 . There is some evidence that these campaigns are coincident with the wholesale destruction and abandonment of souterrains in southern Scotland . This may have been due either to Roman military aggression or the collapse of local grain markets in the wake of Roman withdrawal . 
 By 210 , Severus ' campaigning had made significant gains , but his campaign was cut short when he fell fatally ill , dying at Eboracum in 211 . Although his son Caracalla continued campaigning the following year , he soon settled for peace . The Romans never campaigned deep into Caledonia again : they soon withdrew south permanently to Hadrian 's Wall . 
 It was during the negotiations to purchase the truce necessary to secure the Roman retreat to the wall that the first recorded utterance , attributable with any reasonable degree of confidence , to a native of Scotland was made . When Julia Domna , the wife of Septimius Severus , criticised the sexual morals of the Caledonian women , the wife of Caledonian chief <unk> replied : " We fulfill the demands of nature in a much better way than do you Roman women ; for we consort openly with the best men , whereas you let yourselves be debauched in secret by the vilest " . 
 Little is known about this alliance of Iron Age tribes , which may have been augmented by fugitives from Roman rule further south . The exact location of " Caledonia " is unknown , and the boundaries are unlikely to have been fixed . The name itself is a Roman one , as used by Tacitus , Ptolemy , Pliny the Elder and Lucan , but the name by which the Caledonians referred to themselves is unknown . It is likely that the prior to the Roman invasions , political control in the region was highly decentralised and no evidence has emerged of any specific Caledonian military or political leadership . 
 Later excursions by the Romans were generally limited to the scouting expeditions in the buffer zone that developed between the walls , trading contacts , bribes to purchase truces from the natives , and eventually the spread of Christianity . The Ravenna Cosmography utilises a <unk> or 4th @-@ century Roman map and identifies four loci ( meeting places , possibly markets ) in southern Scotland . Locus <unk> is possibly the modern <unk> near Gretna which continued to be used as a muster point well into the historic period . Two of the others indicate meeting places of the Damnonii and Selgovae , and the fourth , Manavi may be Clackmannan . From the time of Caracalla onwards , no further attempts were made to permanently occupy territory in Scotland . 
 = = Picts = = 
 The intermittent Roman presence in Scotland coincided with the emergence of the Picts , a confederation of tribes who lived to the north of the Forth and Clyde from Roman times until the 10th century . They are often assumed to have been the descendants of the Caledonians though the evidence for this connection is circumstantial and the name by which the Picts called themselves is unknown . They are often said to have tattooed themselves , but evidence for this is limited . Naturalistic depictions of Pictish nobles , hunters and warriors , male and female , without obvious tattoos , are found on their monumental stones . The Gaels of Dalriada called the Picts Cruithne , and Irish poets portrayed their Pictish counterparts as very much like themselves . 
 The means by which the Pictish confederation formed is also unknown , although there is speculation that reaction to the growth of the Roman Empire was a factor . The early history of Pictland is unclear . In later periods multiple kings existed , ruling over separate kingdoms , with one king , sometimes two , more or less dominating their lesser neighbours . De Situ Albanie , the Pictish Chronicle , and the Duan Albanach , along with Irish legends , have been used to argue the existence of seven Pictish kingdoms although more may have existed and some evidence suggests that a Pictish kingdom also existed in Orkney . 
 The Pictish relationship with Rome appears to have been less overtly hostile than their Caledonian predecessors , at least in the beginning . There were no more pitched battles and conflict was generally limited to raiding parties from both sides of the frontier until immediately prior to and after the Roman retreat from Britannia . Their apparent success in holding back Roman forces cannot be explained solely with reference to the remoteness of Caledonia or the difficulties of the terrain . In part it may have been due to the difficulties encountered in subjugating a population that did not conform to the strictures of local governance that Roman power usually depended on to operate through . 
 The technology of everyday life is not well recorded , but archaeological evidence shows it to have been similar to that in Ireland and Anglo @-@ Saxon England . Recently evidence has been found of watermills in Pictland and kilns were used for drying kernels of wheat or barley , not otherwise easy in the changeable , temperate climate . Although constructed in earlier times , brochs , roundhouses and crannogs remained in use into and beyond the Pictish period . 
 Elsewhere in Scotland wheelhouses were constructed , probably for ritualistic purposes , in the west and north . Their geographical locations are highly restricted , which suggests that they may have been contained within a political or cultural frontier of some kind and the co @-@ incidence of their arrival and departure being associated with the period of Roman influence in Scotland is a matter of ongoing debate . It is not known whether the culture that constructed them was " Pictish " as such although they would certainly have been known to the Picts . 
 As Rome 's power waned , the Picts were emboldened . War bands raided south of Hadrian 's Wall in earnest in 342 , 360 , and 365 and they participated with the <unk> in the Great Conspiracy of 367 . Rome fought back , mounting a campaign under Count Theodosius in 369 which <unk> a province which was renamed Valentia in honor of the emperor . Its location is unclear , but it is sometimes placed on or beyond Hadrian 's Wall . Another campaign was mounted in 384 , but both were short @-@ lived successes . Rome had fully withdrawn from Britain by 410 , never to return . 
 = = Modern study = = 
 From the mid @-@ 18th century to the mid @-@ 19th century , Charles Bertram 's forged Description of Britain ( Latin : De Situ <unk> ) placed Valentia squarely between Hadrian 's Wall and the Antonine Wall and even gave Rome a " short @-@ lived " province named <unk> beyond the Antonine Wall in lowland Scotland . The work is now known to have been one of the most successful historical forgeries in history and it is no longer believed to contain any truthful independent content . 
 In 1984 , a candidate for a Roman fort was identified by aerial photography at Easter <unk> , south west of Cawdor . The site was excavated between 1984 and 1988 and several features were identified which are supportive of this classification . Roman pottery similar to that found at <unk> Roman fort has been discovered . If confirmed , it would be one of the most northerly known Roman forts in the British Isles . 
 The possibility that the legions reached further north in Scotland is suggested by discoveries in Easter Ross . The sites of temporary camps have been proposed at Portmahomack in 1949 , although this has not been fully confirmed , In 1991 an investigation of <unk> on the Black Isle near the Beauly Firth concluded that " the site appears to conform to the morphology of a Roman camp or fort . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 The military presence of Rome lasted for little more than 40 years for most of Scotland and only as much as 80 years in total anywhere . It 's now generally considered that at no time was even half of Scotland 's land mass under Roman control . 
 Scotland has inherited two main features from the Roman period , although mostly indirectly : the use of the Latin script for its languages and the emergence of Christianity as the predominant religion . Through Christianity , the Latin language would become used by the natives of Scotland for the purposes of church and government for centuries more . 
 Roman influence assisted the spread of Christianity throughout Europe , but there is little evidence of a direct link between the Roman Empire and Christian missions north of Hadrian 's Wall . Traditionally , Ninian is credited as the first bishop active in Scotland . He is briefly mentioned by Bede who states that around 397 he set up his base at Whithorn in the south @-@ west of Scotland , building a stone church there , known as Candida Casa . More recently it has been suggested that Ninian was the 6th @-@ century missionary Finnian of <unk> , but either way Roman influence on early Christianity in Scotland does not seem to have been significant . 
 Although little more than a series of relatively brief interludes of military occupation , Imperial Rome was ruthless and brutal in pursuit of its ends . Genocide was a familiar part of its foreign policy and it is clear that the invasions and occupations cost thousands of lives . Alistair Moffat writes : 
 The reality is that the Romans came to what is now Scotland , they saw , they burned , killed , stole and occasionally conquered , and then they left a tremendous mess behind them , clearing away native settlements and covering good farmland with the remains of ditches , banks , roads , and other sorts of ancient military debris . Like most imperialists they arrived to make money , to gain political advantage and to exploit the resources of their colonies at virtually any price to the conquered . And remarkably , in Britain , in Scotland , we continue to admire them for it . 
 All the more surprising given that the Vindolanda tablets show that the Roman nickname for the north British locals was <unk> meaning " nasty little Britons " . 
 Similarly , William Hanson concludes that : 
 For many years it has been almost axiomatic in studies of the period that the Roman conquest must have had some major medium or long @-@ term impact on Scotland . On present evidence that cannot be substantiated either in terms of environment , economy , or , indeed , society . The impact appears to have been very limited . The general picture remains one of broad continuity , not of disruption .... The Roman presence in Scotland was little more than a series of brief interludes within a longer continuum of indigenous development . " 
 The Romans ' part in the clearances of the once extensive Caledonian forest remains a matter of debate . That these forests were once considerably more extensive than they are now is not in dispute , but the timing and causes of the reduction are . The 16th @-@ century writer Hector Boece believed that the woods in Roman times stretched north from Stirling into Atholl and Lochaber and was inhabited by white bulls with " crisp and <unk> mane , like <unk> <unk> " . Later historians such as P. F. Tytler and W. F. Skene followed suit as did the 20th @-@ century naturalist Frank Fraser Darling . Modern techniques , including palynology and dendrochronology suggest a more complex picture . Changing post @-@ glacial climates may have allowed for a maximum forest cover between 4000 and 3000 BC and deforestation of the Southern uplands , caused both climatically and <unk> , was well underway by the time the legions arrived . Extensive analyses of Black Loch in Fife suggest that arable land spread at the expense of forest from about 2000 BC until the 1st @-@ century Roman advance . Thereafter , there was re @-@ growth of birch , oak and hazel for a period of five centuries , suggesting the invasions had a very negative impact on the native population . The situation outside the Roman @-@ held areas is harder to assess , but the long @-@ term influence of Rome may not have been substantial . 
 The archaeological legacy of Rome in Scotland is of interest , but sparse , especially in the north . Almost all the sites are essentially military in nature and include about 650 km ( 400 mi ) of roads . Overall , it is hard to detect any direct connections between native architecture and settlement patterns and Roman influence . Elsewhere in Europe , new kingdoms and languages emerged from the remnants of the once @-@ mighty Roman world . In Scotland , the Celtic Iron Age way of life , often troubled , but never extinguished by Rome , simply re @-@ asserted itself . In the north the Picts continued to be the main power prior to the arrival and subsequent domination of the Scots of Dalriada . The Damnonii eventually formed the Kingdom of Strathclyde based at Dumbarton Rock . South of the Forth , the Welsh speaking Brythonic kingdoms of Yr Hen Ogledd ( English : " The Old North " ) flourished during the 5th – 7th centuries . 
 The most enduring Roman legacy may be that created by Hadrian 's Wall . Its line approximates the border between modern Scotland and England and it created a distinction between the northern third and southern two @-@ thirds of the island of Great Britain that plays a part in modern political debate . This is probably coincidental however , as there is little to suggest its influence played an important role in the early Medieval period after the fall of Rome . 
 = = = In fiction = = = 
 The 9th Spanish Legion participated in the Roman invasion of Britain , suffering losses under Quintus Petillius Cerialis in the rebellion of Boudica of 61 , and setting up a fortress in 71 that later became part of <unk> . Although some authors have claimed that the 9th Legion disappeared in 117 , there are extant records for it later than that year , and it was probably annihilated in the east of the Roman Empire . For a time it was believed , at least by some British historians , that the legion vanished during its conflicts in present @-@ day Scotland . This idea was used in the novels The Eagle of the Ninth by Rosemary Sutcliff , Legion From the Shadows by Karl Edward Wagner , Red Shift by Alan Garner , Engine City by Ken MacLeod , Warriors of <unk> by N. M. Browne , and in the feature films The Last Legion , Centurion and The Eagle . 
 = Norman Selfe = 
 Norman Selfe ( 9 December 1839 – 15 October 1911 ) was an Australian engineer , naval architect , inventor , urban planner and outspoken advocate of technical education . After emigrating to Sydney with his family from England as a boy he became an apprentice engineer , following his father 's trade . Selfe designed many bridges , docks , boats , and much precision machinery for the city . He also introduced new refrigeration , hydraulic , electrical and transport systems . For these achievements he received international acclaim during his lifetime . Decades before the Sydney Harbour Bridge was built , the city came close to building a Selfe @-@ designed steel cantilever bridge across the harbour after he won the second public competition for a bridge design . 
 Selfe was honoured during his life by the name of the Sydney suburb of Normanhurst , where his grand house Gilligaloola is a local landmark . He was energetically involved in organisations such as the Sydney Mechanics ' School of Arts and the Australian Historical Society . As president of the Board of Technical Education , he fought consistently for the establishment of an independent system of technical education to serve the needs of a rapidly industrialising society . He was acknowledged upon his death as one of the best @-@ known people in , and greatest individual influences upon , the city of Sydney . 
 = = Family background and apprenticeship = = 
 Selfe came from a long line of inventors and engineers . Both sides of his family came from Kingston upon Thames in London , where one grandfather had owned a plumbing and engineering works . His father Henry was a plumber and inventor , whose high @-@ pressure fire @-@ fighting hose was displayed at The Great Exhibition in London 's Crystal Palace in 1851 . Selfe 's cousin Edward Muggeridge grew up in the same town but moved to the United States in 1855 , restyled himself Eadweard Muybridge , and achieved global fame as a pioneer in the new field of photography . 
 The Selfe family landed at Sydney 's Semi @-@ circular Quay in January 1855 , when Norman was 15 years old . One of the reasons they emigrated to the colony of New South Wales was to enable him and his brother Harry to undertake engineering apprenticeships without having to pay the heavy premium required by large firms in London . They initially resided in the nearby Rocks district in a small house that had also previously been the first Sydney home of Mary Reibey , a former convict who became Australia 's first businesswoman . Selfe 's parents had high expectations of their children , particularly of Norman , whose ability in mathematics and draughtsmanship was apparent from a young age . The brothers earned a reputation for innovation during their youth , and were the first to construct a velocipede in the country . 
 Selfe very quickly began his career as an engineer , taking articles of apprenticeship to the ironmaster Peter Nicol Russell , at whose firm he worked in several departments and eventually became its chief draughtsman . He would remain there until 1864 . In 1859 , when PN Russell & Co expanded to a site in Barker Street near the head of Darling Harbour , Selfe drew up plans for the new works and the wharf , and oversaw their construction . In an address to the Engineering Section of the Royal Society of New South Wales in 1900 , Selfe recalled his work for Russell 's : 
 While there [ I ] prepared plans for numbers of flour mills , and for the first ice @-@ making machines , designing machinery for the multifarious requirements of colonial industries , many of which ( such as sheep @-@ washing and boiling down ) no longer exist on the old lines . 
 While at Russell 's , Selfe made several innovations in the design and construction of dredges for " <unk> our harbours and rivers " – something of crucial importance to industry in early Sydney . He later recalled the success of Pluto , one of his dredges purchased by the government : 
 [ I ] n this there were several novelties introduced , and among them , the ladder was lifted by hydraulic power instead of by a chain from a winch ... The day of the official trial ... was a proud one for [ me ] , because during the course of the little festivities which followed their formal approval and official acceptance , [ head engineer ] Mr Dunlop pointedly remarked that " as she was all right , the credit must be given to his boy in the drawing office " . 
 = = Inventor and engineer = = 
 Selfe achieved international recognition in 1861 when leading British journal The Engineer published illustrations of his designs for one of the first refrigerating machines . One such machine was installed behind the Royal Hotel in George Street in Sydney 's ice @-@ works – one of the world 's earliest commercial refrigeration plants . The decades following Selfe 's arrival in Australia were watershed years in the development of refrigeration technology , and he was closely involved with its evolution . The introduction of refrigeration to the colony revolutionised farming , allowing the expansion of settlement , and made possible the export of meat and dairy products . In Sydney itself , refrigeration changed commercial practices and led to the eventual demise of city dairies . Selfe became an international authority on refrigeration engineering ; he wrote articles and eventually a definitive textbook on the subject , published in the US in 1900 . 
 After leaving PN Russell , Selfe went into partnership with his former employer James Dunlop . They designed and built major installations for the Australasian Mineral Oil Company , the Western Kerosene Oil Company and the Australian Gas Light Company . In 1869 Selfe was appointed to the senior post of " chief draftsman and scientific engineer " at Mort 's Dock and Engineering Company in Balmain . In this role he oversaw the design and construction of the mail ship SS Governor Blackall , personally commissioned for the Queensland government by the Premier Charles Lilley in 1869 . The Sydney @-@ built but Queensland @-@ owned ship was an attempt to break what was later described as the " capricious monopoly " of the Australasian Steam Navigation Company on coastal trade and mail delivery from England . However , it ultimately caused the political downfall of Lilley as he had undertaken the contract without consulting his colleagues . 
 Selfe left Mort 's in 1877 to practice as a consulting engineer at 141 Pitt Street , gaining a reputation for versatility and originality . Upon his return from an overseas trip through America , Britain and continental Europe in 1884 – 85 , where he visited engineering works and technical education facilities in search of new ideas to take back to Sydney , Selfe set up a new office in Lloyd 's Chambers at 348 George Street . He would later move to No. 279 where he operated the consultancy until his death in 1911 . In the late 1890s he employed William Dixson as an engineer , who would later make a major donation of Australiana to the State Library of New South Wales . The collection of Selfe 's own papers and drawings have since been donated to the same library that his former employee greatly augmented . 
 Selfe designed the hulls or the machinery for some 50 steam vessels , including two torpedo boats for the New South Wales government , which he claimed were the fastest boats on the harbour for 20 years , and the SS Wallaby , Sydney Harbour 's first double @-@ ended screw ferry . Double @-@ ended hulls remain the design of Sydney 's current " Freshwater class " ferries . He designed the first concrete quay wall in Sydney Harbour , and wharves for deep @-@ sea vessels . He also designed the first ice @-@ making machines in New South Wales , introduced the first lifts , patented an improved system of baling wool which increased capacity fourfold , and oversaw hydraulic and electric light installations in the city and the carriages on its railway network . He planned mills , waterworks and pumping stations , including the high @-@ level pumps at the reservoir on Crown Street . He made major electric light installations at the Anthony Hordern & Sons department store and the Hotel Australia , and provided a hot @-@ water system for the hotel . He designed machinery for factories , dairies and railways , including , in 1878 , the incline of what is now the Scenic Railway attraction at Katoomba in the Blue Mountains – which claims to be the world 's steepest . Its original purpose was the transportation of coal from the Jamison Valley to the cliff @-@ top . 
 During his lifetime Selfe received both local and international recognition for his engineering skill . He had been president of both the Australian mechanical engineers ' and naval architects ' institutes as well as a member of both the British equivalent organisations . He was also elected a full member of the English Institution of Civil Engineers and , by virtue of his writings also being published in Chicago , also an honorary member of an American engineering association . 
 = = Sydney = = 
 Selfe 's capacity for invention was not limited to the realm of machinery – he was also an energetic civic and urban reformer . He had high hopes for Sydney : 
 " Every well wisher of Sydney , who sees and understands what magnificent latent possibilities there are before her must hope that she will for all time be the Queen City of the Southern Hemisphere ; and that the new century will open finding old ways departed from , and a glorious new era of progress , prosperity , morality and cleanliness installed in our midst . When that day arrives , we shall look back with curiosity and wonder at the continued blindness and negligence from which our city – so highly gifted by nature – had suffered so long . " 
 From the time of Selfe 's return in 1886 from two years ' travel in the United States and Europe , he campaigned for improvements to the city of Sydney . These included proposals for a city railway loop , the redevelopment of the Rocks , and a bridge to the North Shore . His obituary in The Sydney Morning Herald notes , " Mr. Selfe for over twenty years was a strenuous advocate of a circular city railway that should connect up the eastern , western , and northern suburbs of the city with the marine suburbs of the harbour , and stations adjacent to the ferries " . He published plans and proposals elaborating on his ideas , and produced major articles with titles like " Sydney : past , present and possible " and " Sydney and its institutions , as they are , and might be from an engineer 's point of view " . 
 In 1887 Selfe published proposals for a city underground railway , with stations at Wynyard , the Rocks and Circular Quay , and a loop to Woolloomooloo and the eastern suburbs . The proposal included a bridge across Sydney Harbour for trains , vehicles and pedestrians . He presented these schemes to the Royal Commission on City and Suburban Railways in 1890 ; but nothing was to come of it , largely because the 1890s depression brought public works initiatives to a standstill . 
 In 1908 – 09 he served as one of 11 expert commissioners to the Royal Commission for the Improvement of the City of Sydney and its Suburbs . Selfe 's proposals included an overhead railway station at Circular Quay and major landscaping works at Belmore Park opposite Central Railway Station . Both of these visions were later realised , but not in his lifetime . 
 = = = Sydney Harbour Bridge = = = 
 By the late 1890s a harbour crossing and a city railway extension were again on the agenda . The Lyne government committed to building the new Central Railway Station , and organised a worldwide competition for the design and construction of a Harbour Bridge . Selfe submitted a design for a suspension bridge estimated to cost £ 1 @,@ 128 @,@ 000 and won the second prize of £ 500 . The first prize went to C. E. W. Crutwell , of Westminster with a design estimated to cost more than twice as much . After the outcome of the competition had become mired in controversy , in 1902 Selfe won a second competition outright , with a design for a steel cantilever bridge stretching from Dawes Point to McMahons Point . The selection board were unanimous , commenting that " The structural lines are correct and in true proportion , and ... the outline is graceful " . 
 Construction of Selfe 's version of the Sydney harbour bridge never started due to an economic slowdown and a change of government at the 1904 state election . Much to Selfe 's outrage , the Department of Public Works kept his calculations and drawings , and also copied and printed them . Eventually in 1907 , the department contacted Selfe and asked him to collect his drawings , but refused to return the calculations . Selfe was never given the £ 1 @,@ 100 prize , nor was he paid for his subsequent work which he estimated to be worth more than £ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 Among the Selfe family papers in Mitchell Library there is a large collection of postcards featuring bridges from across the world . Some were sent to Selfe by friends and relatives from Japan , Italy , New Zealand , and Switzerland . Others , un @-@ postmarked , were collected on his own travels in 1884 @-@ 85 . These would have formed a research catalogue of contemporary international bridge @-@ building practices for Selfe 's own designs . 
 In 1908 , Selfe presented new proposals based upon the old design to the Royal Commission on Communication between Sydney and North Sydney . However , this time the commissioners preferred a tunnel scheme ; again , no work proceeded . Agitation for a bridge was renewed with the election of a Labor government at the 1910 State election . But with Selfe 's death in 1911 , it was time for a new generation of bridge builders . In 1912 the government appointed J.J. Bradfield as " engineer @-@ in @-@ chief of Sydney Harbour Bridge and City Transit " ; the call for tenders for constructing the bridge was not made until a decade later . Over the following decades , versions of what Selfe had much earlier articulated for a city circle railway link and a bridge to the north shore were realised . Selfe 's contribution received little public or formal recognition . 
 = = Historian = = 
 Selfe was founding vice @-@ president of the Australian Historical Society in 1901 , serving with president Andrew Houison and patron David Scott Mitchell ( after whom the Mitchell wing of the State Library of New South Wales is named ) . He remained actively involved in the society for 10 years , despite what he called " the evident lack of interest ... taken in the proceedings of the Society " by the general public in the early years . The society got off to a shaky start , with low attendance of lectures and meetings . Early papers delivered by Selfe included " A century of Sydney Cove " and " Some notes on the Sydney windmills " . Slowly , interest increased , and by 1905 membership had reached 100 . Known as the Royal Australian Historical Society ( <unk> ) since 1918 , and housed in a grand Victorian style townhouse on Macquarie Street , the organisation is Australia 's oldest historical society ; Selfe is celebrated as one of its pioneers . 
 = = Technical education = = 
 Selfe was a key figure in the history of technical education in New South Wales . He advocated a more utilitarian and less literary education system , to produce a skilled workforce that could realise Australia 's potential as an efficient industrial state . He was utopian in his vision : 
 There is no doubt that it is on the work of tools directed by brains that the future of Australia depends more than anything else . With tools our Australian deserts may be turned into gardens ... They will pluck the hidden treasure from the bowels of the earth , enable us to soar in the air , or explore the depths of the water . They will weave a network of communication over our island continent , dot it with the homes of a happy people , and minister to our wants in providing not only the necessities and comforts of life , but the most refined luxuries that are needed to satisfy the novel and exacting wants which arise every day , as the standard of intellectual and technical cultivation is raised and extended among us ... 
 Selfe believed an overhaul of education was needed , from kindergarten to tertiary study . His concept of technical education encompassed Friedrich Fröbel 's kindergarten activities based around play and occupations ; the teaching of drawing , manual work and science in schools ; and specialised practical training of workmen and professionals in technical colleges . He argued for the establishment of a new kind of university – an " industrial university " , less theory @-@ oriented and more concerned with the practical and the useful . He saw technical education as a distinct sphere of education to be administered and delivered by people with practical industry experience , not government officials or traditional teachers . 
 = = = Teacher = = = 
 As early as 1865 Selfe gave regular classes in mechanical drawing to tradesmen at the Sydney Mechanics ' School of Arts in Pitt Street . Selfe 's class in mechanical drawing was the first technical , vocational offering at the School of Arts , and its popularity led to the introduction of other practical subjects . 
 Due to colony 's rapidly expanding population and demand for skilled labour , there were increasing calls in the 1870s for a formal system of technical education . In 1870 , Selfe helped found the Engineering Association of New South Wales which amalgamated into Engineers Australia in 1919 . He was its president from 1877 to 1879 and Engineers Australia annually awards the " Norman Selfe Medal " to a student at the Australian Maritime College . In 1878 , the association joined forces with the New South Wales Trades and Labour Council and the Sydney Mechanics ' School of Arts to form the Technical and Working Men 's College . The College initially operated as an agency of the Sydney Mechanics ' School of Arts . The college occupied premises in Pitt , Sussex and Castlereagh Streets , and rooms in the Royal Arcade , before it moved to Ultimo in 1889 . The college later became the Sydney Technical College out of which grew the University of New South Wales , the University of Technology , Sydney , and the National Art School . The Ultimo buildings still serve their original purpose , now as the main campus of the Sydney Institute of TAFE . 
 In 1880 , Selfe became vice president of the School of Arts . He supported the school 's Working Men 's College , but felt a more thorough focus on practical skills was needed . He rejected the non @-@ technical , non @-@ practical approach of the school 's model and campaigned instead for the establishment of a proper institute of technical education , where instructors would be skilled tradesmen with practical industrial experience . He also pushed for the expansion of technical education facilities into the suburban and regional districts . 
 = = = Critic = = = 
 On 1 August 1883 the New South Wales government made a proclamation which transferred control of the Technical and Working Men 's College to an independent Board of Technical Education , to which Selfe was appointed , and assumed financial responsibility directly . The government also provided funds to fit out workshops in Kent Street that opened in 1886 . This was an initiative driven by Selfe , who had admired the workshop teaching model abroad . It represented a major innovation in technical education in New South Wales . 
 Many of the board 's initiatives were based on observations made abroad by Selfe and board president Edward Combes , or recommendations made by the British Royal Commission into Technical Education of 1881 – 84 . However , most of the board 's schemes were frustrated by an unresponsive colonial government . Norm Neill , historian of the early years of the Sydney Technical College , argues that the Board caused many of its own problems : 
 There was a marked lack of unity ... Members either resigned or became inactive [ and the Board failed ] to accept that its autonomy was more nominal than real . Any expansion of technical education was dependent on government funding and governments were unlikely to allocate resources to an organisation unwilling or unable to cooperate . 
 Selfe was president of the Board from January 1887 until it was disbanded in 1889 . During this time the relationship between the board and the government deteriorated with Selfe being overtly critical of two powerful institutions : the newly formed Department of Public Instruction and the University of Sydney . Selfe strongly opposed the government 's taking control of technical education , which had been underway since the government first declared its interest in doing so at a special meeting of the Sydney Mechanics School of Arts in September 1883 . He also did not support an alternative proposal that the University of Sydney should take over . In an address at the annual presentation of prizes at Sydney Technical College in 1887 , Selfe alienated the Minister for Public Instruction and others by being openly contemptuous of the traditional pursuits of schools and universities : 
 [ T ] he whole experience of the past goes to show that the learning of the schools has had little , if anything , to do with the material advancement of the world , and that while it may have produced intellectual giants , subjective teaching has not brought forth those men who have been inventors and manufacturers that have entirely changed the character of our civilisation . 
 Selfe criticised the classical liberal arts education offered at the University of Sydney as elitist . In his 1888 address to Sydney Technical College students on prize night , he again caused affront to the establishment when he called for greater diversity of educational opportunities in the colony : 
 [ I ] t is not ... easy ... to see why the general public should pay so many thousands a year to make our future professional men in medicine and law in the colony , to form part of the so @-@ called upper classes , when our " principles " will not allow us to pay just a little more in order to have , say , our locomotives made here , and when we are doing so very little , proportionately , to train and educate the artisans who make these locomotives , and who belong to a much less wealthy and influential level in society . 
 In 1889 the colonial government , already in financial control , assumed direct operational control by abolishing the Board and placing the College within the Technical Education Branch of the Department of Public Instruction ( now the New South Wales Department of Education ) . 
 = = = Reformer = = = 
 In the early years of the 20th century , education remained a major political issue in New South Wales . While Selfe would not be drawn again into the centre of the fray , he supported the efforts of his sister Maybanke and her second husband Francis Anderson towards education reform . Following the <unk> @-@ Turner Royal Commission into New South Wales Education in 1902 , and the appointment of Peter Board as Director of Education in 1905 , many of Selfe 's ideas for technical education were implemented . Ultimately , in 1949 , a separate Department of Technical Education was created , and the New South Wales University of Technology ( later the University of New South Wales ) was established at Kensington . 
 Les Mandelson , historian of Australia 's education systems , categorises Selfe as " a nineteenth century protagonist for the New Education " , who helped pave the way for the extensive reforms of the twentieth century . " Without him " , he adds , " education in the late nineteenth century would have been decidedly more mundane " . However , Mandelson sounds a critical note : 
 Selfe 's contempt for the liberal arts tradition and the priority he accorded practical skill have certain implications which cannot be commended . These reflected and augmented ... one of the less attractive features of the Australian ethos – indifference to higher learning and advanced attainments , an indifference shading into contempt and suspicion ... Selfe may have lost a battle but before long , the liberal arts tradition faced still greater defeats . To these , Selfe certainly contributed , and what must be recognised is that in the vehemence of the struggle , and in the lauding of efficiency over culture , much that was valuable in the liberal arts tradition was lost . 
 Biographer Stephen Murray @-@ Smith is more generous in his assessment of Selfe 's contribution to education debates around the turn of the twentieth century : " Selfe went beyond the concept of helping the working man to achieve a share of the good things hitherto reserved for others , towards the concept of leading him to create good things for himself . " 
 Selfe was a noted activist for the Federation of Australia being a member of the Central Federation League . Edward Dowling , his colleague on the inaugural board of the Australian Historical Society , was also the Secretary of the Central League of the Australasian Federation League and his former articled engineer John Jacob Cohen would later be elected at the 1898 New South Wales election in the seat of Petersham representing the National Federal Party . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 When Selfe obtained a steady job after his apprenticeship , he brought his family with him from The Rocks to live at Balmain . Selfe bought waterfront land and built twin terraced houses called Normanton and Maybank , which are still at 21 and 23 Wharf Road , Birchgrove . It is likely that Selfe shared Normanton with his widowed mother . Next door lived his brother Harry , his sister Maybanke and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Edmund Wolstenholme . 
 Selfe was a supportive brother , both emotionally and materially . His sister Maybanke bore seven children to her first husband Edmund , four of whom died as infants from tuberculosis . He also provided financial support after Maybanke 's marriage came to an end . Maybanke earned fame in her own right as a prominent suffragist and pioneer of education for women and girls . In the 1890s brother and sister campaigned together for education reform . 
 On 10 October 1872 at St Mary 's Church , Balmain Selfe married Emily Ann Booth , the daughter of John Booth , a well @-@ known shipbuilder and Balmain 's first mayor ( and formerly the member for East Macquarie in the colonial parliament ) . They lived for many years at Rockleigh in Donnelly Street , Balmain , in a house that has since been demolished . In 1884 their first daughter Rhoda Jane was born , followed by a stillborn daughter in 1886 , and then Norma Catherine in 1888 . In 1885 Selfe bought land in Ashfield and designed a grand house called Amesbury . Described at the time as having “ more novelties both externally and internally than any other house in the colony ” including terracotta lyrebird reliefs by artist Lucien Henry on the front wall , and a tower purpose @-@ built for Selfe to pursue his hobby of astronomy . Built around 1888 to honour the centenary of the colony , Amesbury still stands at 78 Alt Street and was used by Brahma <unk> from 1986 as its Australian headquarters until 2014 when it was auctioned for over $ 3 @.@ 5 million . As children , Rhoda and Norma attended their Aunt Maybanke 's school in Dulwich Hill . As adults , they trained in Italy with educator Maria Montessori and returned to Sydney to open a Montessori school of their own in the building knows as Warwick on Bland Street , Ashfield . 
 Around 1894 , the family moved , this time to Hornsby Shire , where a new Selfe @-@ designed house , Gilligaloola , was built on 11 acres ( 4 @.@ 5 ha ) purchased by Selfe ten years earlier . Situated at what is now 82 Pennant Hills Road , the house is still a local landmark , notable for its distinctive tower and twin chimneys . Selfe was a committed citizen and a natural spokesman for the local community , to the extent that when the railways needed a name for the locality , the community chose Normanhurst ( though Selfe himself felt that St Normans would have been " much more elegant and suggestive " ) . 
 On 12 May 1906 , four years after the death of his first wife , Selfe married Marion Bolton at St Philip 's Church , Sydney . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Selfe died suddenly on 15 October 1911 . His death certificate states the cause of death as " heart failure brought on by exertion " . His daughter Norma offered some context to a journalist in 1957 . She said : 
 " On the day of his death he climbed trees in the church grounds to <unk> branches , as the gardener was too nervous to climb so high . That night he died in his sleep . " 
 Norma reported that her father had been sanguine to the end , playful with his nephews and learning to play the oboe . However , other reports suggest that Selfe was concealing a bitter sense of disappointment at the end of his life , most particularly over the Harbour Bridge affair . His obituary in the journal Building concluded : 
 ... [ T ] here is none today who can replace the noble personality , that keen energetic brain ever ready to give of its wonderful store of knowledge , and that happy spirit ever bright , ever optimistic , even though crushed beneath the cruel and unjust blow of the non @-@ acceptance of his prize design for the North Shore bridge . " It will crown my life " he said . We will always remember the bright gleam in his eyes as they peered beyond the anxiety of today , looked afar to the future glory of his beloved Sydney where in his dreams he saw his mighty bridge spanning what he called " God 's noblest waterway " . 
 Selfe 's funeral was held at St Paul 's Church , Wahroonga , where he had been a churchwarden . He was buried in Gore Hill cemetery in the presence of a large gathering of businessmen and representatives of the organisations he had been involved with . He was survived by his two daughters from his first marriage , Rhoda and Jane , and his second wife , Marion . His estate was valued for probate at nearly £ 5000 . Twenty @-@ one years later , on 11 March 1932 Marion 's charred body was found in her new house , also in Normanhurst where she lived alone , having reportedly set fire to her clothes when lighting a candle . Marion was buried alongside Norman in plot CE I : 7 . Rhoda 's ashes were also placed nearby when she died aged 69 in 1954 , still living in Gilligaloola . 
 = SMS Friedrich Carl = 
 For the broadside ironclad , see SMS Friedrich Carl ( 1867 ) 
 SMS Friedrich Carl was a German armored cruiser built in the early 1900s for the Imperial German Navy . She was the second ship of the Prinz Adalbert class . Friedrich Carl was built in Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg . She was laid down in 1901 , and completed in December 1903 , at the cost of 15 @,@ 665 @,@ 000 Marks . She was armed with a main battery of four 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns and was capable of a top speed of 20 @.@ 4 kn ( 37 @.@ 8 km / h ; 23 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 The ship served with the German fleet after her commissioning before being used as a torpedo training ship in 1909 . In August 1914 after the outbreak of World War I , she was brought back to active service to act as Rear Admiral Behring 's flagship in the Baltic Sea . Her wartime career was cut short on 17 November when she struck a pair of Russian mines off Memel at 55 ° 41 ′ N 20 ° 11 ′ E. The mines caused fatal damage , but the ship sank slowly enough to permit the safe evacuation of most of the crew ; only seven men were killed in the incident . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Friedrich Carl was ordered under the provisional name Ersatz König Wilhelm and built at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg under construction number 155 . Her keel was laid in 1900 and she was launched on 22 June 1902 . Fitting @-@ out work followed and this was completed by 12 December 1903 , the day she was commissioned into the Imperial German Navy . She had cost the Imperial German Government 15 @,@ 665 @,@ 000 Goldmarks . 
 Friedrich Carl displaced 9 @,@ 087 t ( 8 @,@ 943 long tons ; 10 @,@ 017 short tons ) as built and 9 @,@ 875 t ( 9 @,@ 719 long tons ; 10 @,@ 885 short tons ) fully loaded , with a length of 126 @.@ 5 m ( 415 ft ) , a beam of 19 @.@ 6 m ( 64 ft ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 43 m ( 24 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She was powered by three vertical triple expansion engines , which produced a total of 17 @,@ 272 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 880 kW ) and yielded a maximum speed of 20 @.@ 4 kn ( 37 @.@ 8 km / h ; 23 @.@ 5 mph ) on trials . She carried up to 1 @,@ 630 t ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ; 1 @,@ 800 short tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of up to 5 @,@ 080 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 410 km ; 5 @,@ 850 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 She was armed with four 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns arranged in two twin gun turrets , one on either end of the superstructure . Her secondary armament consisted of ten 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 91 in ) SK L / 40 guns , twelve 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) guns and four 45 cm ( 18 in ) underwater torpedo tubes , one in the bow , one in the stern , and one on both beams . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Friedrich Carl served with the fleet from her commissioning on 12 December 1903 . She was assigned to I Subdivision of the Cruiser Division of the Active Fleet . Along with the light cruisers Frauenlob , Arcona , and Hamburg , Friedrich Carl 's subdivision was attached to the I Squadron of the Active Fleet . Friedrich Carl was the flagship of Rear Admiral Schmidt , the commander of the Cruiser Division . A second subdivision , composed of an armored cruiser and three light cruisers was attached to the II Squadron . On 20 September 1906 , Franz von Hipper took command of the ship . Under his leadership , the gunners aboard Friedrich Carl won the Kaiser 's Prize for best shooting in the fleet in 1907 . Hipper remained in the position until March 1908 . 
 Friedrich Carl served with the fleet until 1 March 1909 , when she was withdrawn for use as a torpedo training ship . She served in this capacity until the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , when she was again placed in active service with the cruiser division in the Baltic Sea . In October 1914 , Friedrich Carl was the first German warship to carry seaplanes . The ship carried two planes provisionally and had no permanent modifications made to support them . She was made the flagship of Rear Admiral Behring , the commander of the German cruiser squadron in the Baltic Sea . The squadron was based in Neufahrwasser in Danzig . The German naval command was aware that British submarines were operating in the Baltic Sea , and so ordered Behring to attack the Russian port at Libau to prevent it from being used as a British submarine base . 
 The Russian Navy , however , had begun a campaign of mine @-@ warfare in the Baltic . Russian destroyers laid a series of minefields off Memel , Pillau , and other German ports in October 1914 . The Russian operations went completely undetected by the German navy . During this period , Friedrich Carl used her seaplanes in operations against the port in Libau . Behring was ordered to begin the attack on Libau in November ; poor weather conditions delayed the operation until the 16th . Early on the 17th , Friedrich Carl was steaming some 30 nmi ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) off Memel when she struck two Russian mines . The ship was kept afloat for several hours , which allowed the crew to be evacuated safely . The operation went ahead as scheduled and blockships were sunk at the entrance to Libau . After the crew was removed , Friedrich Carl was abandoned ; she capsized and sank at around 06 : 30 . Only seven men were killed in the attack . 
 = = In media = = 
 The sinking of Friedrich Carl is portrayed in the Russian movie Admiral , where Russian admiral Alexander Kolchak tricks the ship into a Russian minefield . 
 = Bryan D. Brown = 
 Bryan Douglas " Doug " Brown ( born October 20 , 1948 ) was a four @-@ star United States Army general , who retired in 2007 after four decades of military service . In his final assignment , he served as the seventh commander of U.S. Special Operations Command ( USSOCOM ) , from September 2 , 2003 until July 9 , 2007 . As USSOCOM 's commander , he was responsible for all unified special operations forces ( SOF ) , both active duty and reserve . 
 Brown joined the United States Army in 1967 as a private in the infantry and after graduating from Special Forces Qualification Course , he became a Green Beret . Shortly afterwards he fought in the Vietnam War as part of a Special Forces " A " team . After returning from his combat tour he enrolled in Officer Candidate School and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in May 1970 . After attending Army Aviation School he returned to Vietnam as a UH @-@ 1 helicopter pilot . After the Vietnam War he was part of a task force that would go on to later found the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment in 1981 . During his stint in the 160th SOAR Brown took part in numerous contingency operations in the 1980s and early 1990s . In 1983 Brown participated in the invasion of Grenada where his unit became the first aviation unit to use night vision goggles in combat . In the late 1980s he led all U.S. forces assigned to Operation Prime Chance in the Persian Gulf amidst the Iran @-@ Iraq War . Shortly thereafter he commanded a battalion within 160th SOAR during Operation Desert Storm ; after which he was promoted to colonel and commander of the regiment . After leaving 160th SOAR Brown served at the helm of Joint Special Operations Command from 1998 – 2000 and then U.S. Army Special Operations Command from 2000 – 2002 . 
 In 2002 , Brown became the deputy commander of U.S. Special Operations Command and , holding the post until 2003 when he was selected to replace Air Force General Charles R. Holland as Commander of U.S. Special Operations Command . Shortly after becoming the head of USSOCOM , in 2004 , he was involved in the aftermath of the Pat Tillman friendly fire incident which culminated when he testified before the congressional Committee on Oversight and Government Reform in 2007 . Also during his tenure in command of USSOCOM he announced the creation of Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command in 2006 . Brown retired in 2007 after leading USSOCOM through four years of the Iraq War and War in Afghanistan . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Brown , a native of Fort Meade , Maryland , was born in 1948 and grew up in a military family . His father , Arnett Brown , was a member of the 89th Infantry Division during World War II , who became a Command Sergeant Major and served in the Vietnam War . His mother was Mary Lou Brown . Brown played baseball and basketball in high school , and eventually made it onto a semi @-@ pro baseball team in Fayetteville , North Carolina . In a 2009 interview with The Year in Special Operations , he commented on his short @-@ lived semi @-@ pro baseball career , saying , " I played three games with them and found that life couldn ’ t be sustained on $ 3 per game " . Losing interest in college , and with his father in Vietnam , he walked into a recruiting office and joined the Army as an infantryman . He is married to Penelope " Penny " Brown ( née <unk> ) , a native of Fayetteville . Together , they have two daughters and five grandchildren . 
 = = Military service = = 
 = = = Early military career and Vietnam = = = 
 He entered the Army in 1966 as a private in the infantry . While attending Airborne School at Fort Bragg in North Carolina , he signed up for Army Special Forces ( SF ) after meeting Army SF recruiters . After Brown completed the Special Forces Qualification Course , he was assigned to the 7th Special Forces Group . Shortly thereafter , he deployed to Vietnam as part of a Special Forces " A Team " . His interest in aviation started after returning to the United States from his tour in Vietnam . While at Mountain Ranger Camp , he became enthralled with helicopters after he was asked by a UH @-@ 1 helicopter pilot to assist him in conducting reconnaissance flight over northern Georgia . Immediately afterwards , he signed up for Officer Candidate School ( OCS ) and flight school . He graduated OCS in May 1970 , obtaining a field artillery officer commission as a second lieutenant . He was thereafter stationed at Camp Pelham , South Korea as part of the Headquarters and Headquarters Battery , 2 / 17th Field Artillery Regiment . 
 Brown went on to earn his aviator badge in 1971 after attending Army Aviation School at Fort Rucker , Alabama . After aviation school , he returned to Vietnam as a UH @-@ 1 helicopter pilot in the 129th Assault Helicopter Company . He would go on to become the first member of the aviation branch to attain the rank of four @-@ star general . In June 1978 , Brown was assigned to the 158th Aviation Battalion at Fort Campbell , Kentucky flying Sikorsky UH @-@ 60 Black Hawks . While a member of the 158th Aviation Battalion Brown was a Company Commander . The 158th Aviation Battalion was originally part of the 101st Aviation Group , the air arm of the 101st Airborne Division . 
 = = = Operation Credible Sport = = = 
 In 1979 , Iranian students seized the American embassy in Tehran and held the embassy staff hostage ; the first rescue operation , code @-@ named Eagle Claw ended in failure due to equipment and coordination problems , culminating in the crash of a RH @-@ <unk> Sea Stallion helicopter into a parked C @-@ 130 Hercules in the Iranian desert , killing eight servicemen . A second rescue attempt , Operation Credible Sport , was ordered , and Brown was involved in planning and preparation . The follow @-@ up rescue included U.S. Air Force , U.S. Navy and Army assets . The Army units involved were the battalions that made up the 101st Aviation Group : the 158th Aviation Battalion , the 229th Aviation Battalion and the 159th Aviation Battalion . All three battalions formed Task Force 158 . President Carter meanwhile appointed the former Chief of Naval Operations , Admiral James L. Holloway , III , to head a commission to study the deficiencies revealed by the failure of Eagle Claw . Among the presented findings was the fact that the military lacked aircraft and crews who were trained and prepared to perform these mission types . 
 The Task Force began night flight training using night vision goggles ( NVG ) to develop nighttime extraction capabilities ; however , they were doing so with AN / PVS @-@ 5 NVGs which were originally developed for ground forces . Never before had anyone in the U.S. Department of Defense flown in NVGs and the Task Force quickly adapted the NVGs for flying and by Brown 's own words " a warrant officer figured out we could cut them apart and mount them to our helmets and increase our efficiency and safety by a huge margin . So there we were , without authority , cutting up goggles and building our own NVGs . " Their nighttime training took place at Dugway Proving Ground , Utah . As a result of the night vision goggle training Brown asserted in a 2011 interview that " most of today 's NVG tactics , techniques , and procedures as well as Black Hawk and Chinook modifications came directly from that mission . " Ultimately Operation Credible Sport did not come to fruition due to a peaceful resolution to the crisis where the hostages were released as a result of long negotiations . 
 = = = 160th SOAR = = = 
 After Operation Credible Sport ended the Army leadership decided the unit was needed for future contingency operations . <unk> , on October 16 , 1981 Task Force 158 became the 160th Aviation Battalion , with Brown a founding member . The choice of the unit 's name was accepted by the U.S. Army Institute of Heraldry as a logical progression of the 101st 's 158th and 159th Battalions . The 160th Aviation Battalion was later renamed the 160th Special Operations Aviation Group in 1986 ; it was not until 1990 when it would take on its current name , 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment . In October 1983 , Brown participated in the invasion of Grenada , during which his unit became the first aviation unit to use night vision goggles in combat . In the late 1980s , Brown led all U.S. forces assigned to Operation Prime Chance , which provided escort security for American @-@ flagged Kuwaiti tankers during the Iran @-@ Iraq War . During Operation Prime Chance Brown 's unit became the first aviation unit to engage in combat using night vision devices when they engaged an Iranian @-@ flagged ship , Iran Ajr , that was seen deploying mines in the Persian Gulf . 
 In 1988 , he participated in Operation Mount Hope III , during which U.S. forces recovered a crashed Soviet @-@ made Mi @-@ 24 Hind attack helicopter in Chad . Company E of the 160th deployed to N 'Djamena , Chad via C @-@ 5 Galaxy . Once in Chad the company flew two CH @-@ 47 Chinooks 490 nautical miles at night , without the use of navigational aids , to the crash site . Once at the crash site the crews harnessed the crashed Hind to a Chinook via sling @-@ load . During the returning flight both Chinooks performed an air @-@ to @-@ air refuel with a C @-@ 130 ; and later endured a sandstorm before returning with the Hind . 
 During the Persian Gulf War in 1991 , Brown commanded a battalion within 160th SOAR for both Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm . Their missions during the operations included inserting and extracting Special Forces teams ; resupplying SOF units ; performing reconnaissance ; and attacking pre @-@ designated targets . Brown became the third commanding officer of the Regiment after Desert Storm . 
 = = = General Officer = = = 
 Between 1994 and 1996 , Brown served as assistant division commander for maneuver , 1st Infantry Division ( Mechanized ) , at Fort Riley , Kansas . He later served as director of Plans , Policy and Strategic Assessments ( J5 / <unk> ) at U.S. Special Operations Command . As a lieutenant general , he commanded the Joint Special Operations Command ( JSOC ) from 1998 – 2000 . Brown went on to lead U.S. Army Special Operations Command ( USASOC ) from October 2000 to 2002 . 
 While at the helm of USASOC , Brown sought to modernize neglected aspects of Army special operations , mainly the civil affairs and psychological operations units . By the time Brown left , he had increased USASOC 's budget by 200 percent . After leading all of the Army 's special operations forces for two years , Brown was selected to become the Deputy Commander of U.S. Special Operations Command . He held the position from 2002 until 2003 when he was nominated to take over U.S. Special Operations Command . 
 = = = Commander of USSOCOM = = = 
 On September 2 , 2003 , Brown replaced Air Force General Charles R. Holland as the Commander of U.S. Special Operations Command . During Brown 's tenure as USSOCOM commander , he was involved in the aftermath of the Pat Tillman friendly fire incident that occurred in early 2004 . He testified before the congressional Committee on Oversight and Government Reform in 2007 about receiving a memo from Lt. Gen. Stanley McChrystal , then @-@ commander of JSOC , informing Brown that it was " highly possible that Corporal Tillman was killed by friendly fire " . Ultimately , former commanding general of USASOC Lt. Gen. Philip <unk> and other Army officers were held responsible for the mishandling of information surrounding Tillman 's death . 
 On November 23 , 2005 , Brown , together with U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld , and Marine Corps Commandant General Michael Hagee announced the creation of the Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command ( MARSOC ) . Prior to the creation of MARSOC , the Marine Corps had not been involved in special operations , which were conducted by Army , Navy and Air Force units assigned to U.S. Special Operations Command . After the September 11 attacks , the Secretary of Defense had directed the Marine Corps and Brown 's predecessor to work closer together in the Global War on Terror . This culminated in the creation of <unk> Detachment One on June 19 , 2003 , shortly before Brown took command of USSOCOM . It was nearly three years later on February 24 , 2006 , when MARSOC was activated at Camp Lejeune , North Carolina . 
 In 2006 Brown oversaw the SOF component of the Quadrennial Defense Review ( QDR ) which is a legislatively @-@ mandated study by the Department of Defense that analyzes strategic objectives and potential military threats . As a result of Brown 's contributions to the 2006 QDR were considered a success and a " major stride forward " in preparing U.S. special forces for future contingencies by increasing the SOF budget and manpower . As a result of the 2006 QDR the capabilities of USSOCOM were greatly expanded , including increasing active @-@ duty Special Forces battalions by one @-@ third , expansion of psychological operations and civil affairs units by 33 % , increasing the number of Navy SEALs , among other major changes . 
 After four years of leading USSOCOM through the Iraq War and War in Afghanistan , President George W. Bush nominated Rear Admiral Eric T. Olson to succeed Brown as the commander of U.S. Special Operations Command on May 11 , 2007 . Brown and Olson had served at the USSOCOM headquarters in Tampa together for four years , and Olson had been the deputy commander since 2003 . The change of command ceremony took place on July 9 , 2007 , at the Tampa Convention Center . It was presided over by Secretary of Defense Robert Gates . During the ceremony , Gates said , " He came to this post four years ago determined to improve the way special operators fight . He has done just that " . At the time of the change of command ceremony Brown was the longest serving commander in U.S. Special Operations Command history with 1 @,@ 406 days in office . Over the course of his military career , Brown amassed a total of 4 @,@ 400 hours of flight time in fixed and rotary @-@ winged aircraft . 
 = = Education = = 
 His military education included the Field Artillery Officer Advance Course , U.S. Army Command and General Staff College and the United States Army War College . At the Army War College in 1992 , a then @-@ Lieutenant Colonel Brown co @-@ wrote a military studies program with future United States Northern Command commander , Victor E. <unk> , Jr . , in a paper titled Combat Search and Rescue : A Search for Tomorrow . In it , Brown was highly critical of the United States Air Force , saying , " The U.S. Air Force is the proponent agency for search and rescue , but chose not to deploy any forces to Desert Storm " . Brown graduated from the Harvard Executive Education Program 's National and International Security Managers Course . He received a bachelor 's degree in history from Cameron University , as well as a master 's degree in business from Webster University . 
 = = Post @-@ military life = = 
 In November 2007 , shortly after Brown retired from the Army , he joined the board of directors for Aurora Flight Sciences , which specializes in the scientific and military applications of robotic aircraft and aerospace vehicles . Brown is the president and founder of his own consultation firm , Tier 4 Consulting . He is an advisor to the Patriot Defense Group , LLC , a defense and intelligence contracting company that directly supports the training requirements of the defense and intelligence communities . He serves on the board of directors for the Special Operations Warrior Foundation , and the board of directors for The Protective Group , a company which specializes in developing composite armor for personnel , vehicles and aircraft . He is a senior advisor to the CEO of Smith & Wesson . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 General Brown was awarded the following military awards and decorations : 
 = = = Other accolades = = = 
 Shortly after his retirement , Brown was named " Patriot of the Year " for 2007 by the Congressional Medal of Honor Society , and he also received the Ellis Island Medal of Honor . The following year , he was inducted into the Army Aviation Hall of Fame . The Association of Special Operations Professionals named Brown " Man of the Year " in 2011 . In 2012 , the 160th SOAR compound at Fort Campbell was renamed the " Gen. Bryan " Doug " Brown Compound " in his honor . 
 = = In film = = 
 = = Works by Brown = = 
 Bryan D. Brown ; Victor E. <unk> , Jr . ( 1992 ) . Combat Search and Rescue : A Search for Tomorrow ( PDF ) . Carlisle Barracks , Pennsylvania : United States Army War College . Retrieved May 16 , 2013 . 
 Bryan D. Brown ( 2001 ) . " The 160th SOAR : The Quiet Aviation Professionals " . Special Warfare : The Professional Bulletin of the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School ( John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School ) 14 ( 3 ) : 2 – 4 . Retrieved May 19 , 2013 . 
 Bryan D. Brown ( 2006 ) . " U.S. Special Operations Command : Meeting the Challenges of the 21st Century " 4 ( 40 ) . Joint Force Quarterly . 
 = Ernest Groth = 
 Ernest William Groth ( May 3 , 1922 – December 27 , 2004 ) was an American Major League Baseball right @-@ handed pitcher who played for three seasons . He played for the Cleveland Indians during the 1947 and 1948 seasons and the Chicago White Sox during the 1949 season . In four career games , Groth pitched 7 ⅓ innings and had a 4 @.@ 91 earned run average ( ERA ) . 
 Born and raised in Pennsylvania , Groth began his professional career in the Wisconsin State League in 1942 . After his rookie season , he spent the next three years serving in the military during World War II . After he returned , he spent more time in the minor leagues , then spent parts of the 1947 and 1948 seasons with the Cleveland Indians . After the end of the 1948 season , he was traded to the Chicago White Sox , and played with them in 1949 . He spent the next seven seasons pitching in the minor leagues , retiring at the end of the 1956 season . After his retirement , he ran Groth 's Nursery and worked for Standard Steel , and died in 2004 . 
 = = Early life and minor leagues = = 
 Groth was born in Beaver Falls , Pennsylvania to William T. and Clara Court Groth . He played American Legion Baseball in East Palestine , Ohio in his teens , and attended Beaver Falls High School . He grew up pitching in the county league , and was both a right fielder and pitcher for the Chippewa Indians . After pitching for Chippewa in 1941 , he was offered a contract for the 1942 season by the Pittsburgh Pirates . Groth turned down the offer instead signing with the Cleveland Indians , spending the 1942 season with the Indians ' D @-@ Class ( Rookie League ) affiliate , the Appleton Papermakers of the Wisconsin State League , where he played alongside future teammate Mike Garcia . In 26 games , he pitched in 203 innings , had a 16 – 10 win – loss record and a 3 @.@ 59 ERA . 
 After the 1942 season , Groth spent the following three years serving with the United States Army in the Pacific Theater of Operations during World War II . After the war , he returned to baseball , spending the 1946 season with the Wilkes @-@ Barre Barons , a Cleveland Indians minor league team that played in the Eastern League . His performances that season included a one @-@ hitter against the Elmira Pioneers in the second game of a doubleheader on August 19 . In 29 games , Groth finished with a 13 – 7 record and a 2 @.@ 98 ERA . Shortly afterward , he became engaged to Blanche Klein , a fellow graduate of Beaver Falls High . The two were married shortly after . 
 = = Cleveland Indians and Chicago White Sox = = 
 In 1947 , Groth was promoted to the Oklahoma City Indians of the Texas League , the Cleveland Indians ' AA @-@ class minor league affiliate . In 33 games with Oklahoma City , he threw 180 innings and finished the season with a 7 – 11 record and a 3 @.@ 45 ERA . After the minor league season ended in September , Groth was called up to the Cleveland Indians major league roster , and made his debut on September 11 , 1947 . He pitched in one more game , finishing the season having pitched 1 ⅓ innings , striking out one batter and not allowing a run . 
 Groth was looking to stay in the major league in 1948 . He spent spring training on the Indians ' roster , and originally made a great impression on the team . However , he was one of seven Indians stricken with dysentery in early April , causing him to miss some time . By the end of spring training , Groth was optioned to the Baltimore Orioles of the International League , the Indians ' AAA @-@ class minor league affiliate . He spent the season with the Orioles , and his pitching performances included a 13 – 0 victory over the Newark Bears , as well as a 1 – 0 victory where Groth limited the Bears to three hits . Groth finished the season with Baltimore having amassed 29 pitching appearances , 27 of them starts , a 12 – 12 record and a 4 @.@ 48 ERA , while also pitching in two games for the Dallas Eagles . After Baltimore 's season ended , he was promoted to the Indians ' roster , and pitched in one game for the Indians that season . 
 At the end of the 1948 season , on December 2 , the Indians traded Groth to the Chicago White Sox along with Bob <unk> for Frank Papish . After signing a contract with the White Sox , Groth took part in spring , training alongside many other newcomers to the White Sox , where his pitching performance earned him a place on the major league roster . He pitched in three games for the White Sox , losing one , and finished his tenure with the White Sox with a 5 @.@ 40 ERA in five innings pitched . After his final game on May 4 , the White Sox purchased Ed Klieman and sold Groth to the Kansas City Blues , a New York Yankees minor league team , ending his major league career . 
 = = Return to minor leagues = = 
 Groth spent the 1949 season with the Kansas City Blues , finishing with a 12 – 9 record , a 4 @.@ 28 ERA , and 162 innings pitched . When the 1950 season began , the New York Yankees had five holdouts ( players who wanted more money and would not sign their contracts ) . Groth was one of them , and was the only minor leaguer to hold out . He eventually signed his contract with Kansas City , and after spring training ended , Groth was sent to the Oakland Oaks of the Pacific Coast League , the Yankees ' AAA minor league affiliate . The Yankees sent Groth to the Oaks to make up for sending over George Earl <unk> last season , who the Oaks had to return because his condition was poor . Groth finished the season with a 7 – 11 record and a 5 @.@ 09 ERA . In January 1951 , the Oaks sold Groth to the Baltimore Orioles of the International League , now a farm team of the Philadelphia Phillies . He struggled in ten appearances , finishing with an ERA of 7 @.@ 58 , and was sent to the Chattanooga Lookouts , the AA minor league team of the Washington Senators . He pitched in 26 games for the Lookouts , finishing with a 3 – 8 record and a 6 @.@ 29 ERA . 
 For the next five seasons , Groth played for the Oklahoma City Indians of the Texas League . He was sold to Oklahoma City by Baltimore in December 1951 . In his first season with Oklahoma City , he finished with a 15 – 12 record , a 3 @.@ 43 ERA , and 207 innings pitched . The following season , Groth started things off with a victory in an early appearance against the Dallas Eagles where he allowed only four hits . He finished the season with an 8 – 8 record and a 5 @.@ 37 ERA . In 1954 , Groth improved his pitching , finishing the season with a 14 – 11 record and a 3 @.@ 75 ERA . After a 9 – 13 season in 1955 , Groth split time between Oklahoma City and the Tulsa Oilers in 1956 , finishing the season with a combined 9 – 16 record . He ended his professional career after the 1956 season . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After retiring from baseball , Groth returned to his hometown of Beaver Falls . He and his family ran Groth 's Nursery , and he worked for Standard Steel until his retirement . He and his wife had three daughters ; Elizabeth , Constance , and Suellen . Groth was inducted into the Beaver County Sports Hall of Fame in 1990 . He also spent time playing in local golf tournaments . Groth died on December 27 , 2004 . 
 = Cologne War = 
 The Cologne War ( 1583 – 88 ) devastated the Electorate of Cologne , a historical ecclesiastical principality of the Holy Roman Empire , within present @-@ day North @-@ Rhine @-@ Westphalia , in Germany . The war occurred within the context of the Protestant Reformation in Germany and the subsequent Counter @-@ Reformation , and concurrently with the Dutch Revolt and the French Wars of Religion . 
 Also called the Seneschal 's War or the Seneschal Upheaval and occasionally the Sewer War , the conflict tested the principle of ecclesiastical reservation , which had been included in the religious Peace of Augsburg ( 1555 ) . This principle excluded , or " reserved " , the ecclesiastical territories of the Holy Roman Empire from the application of cuius regio , eius religio , or " whose rule , his religion " , as the primary means of determining the religion of a territory . It stipulated instead that if an ecclesiastical prince converted to Protestantism , he would resign from his position rather than force the conversion of his subjects . 
 In December 1582 , Gebhard Truchsess von Waldburg , the Prince @-@ elector of Cologne , converted to Protestantism . The principle of ecclesiastical reservation required his resignation . Instead , he declared religious parity for his subjects and , in 1583 , married Agnes von Mansfeld @-@ Eisleben , intending to convert the ecclesiastical principality into a secular , dynastic duchy . A faction in the Cathedral Chapter elected another archbishop , Ernst of Bavaria . 
 Initially , troops of the competing archbishops of Cologne fought over control of sections of the territory . Several of the barons and counts holding territory with feudal obligations to the Elector also held territory in nearby Dutch provinces ; Westphalia , Liege and the Southern , or Spanish Netherlands . <unk> of enfeoffment and dynastic appanage magnified a localized feud into one including supporters from the Electorate of the Palatinate and Dutch , Scots and English mercenaries on the Protestant side , and Bavarian and papal mercenaries on the Catholic side . In 1586 , the conflict expanded further , with the direct involvement of Spanish troops and Italian mercenaries on the Catholic side , and financial and diplomatic support from Henry III of France and Elizabeth I of England on the Protestant side . 
 The conflict coincided with the Dutch Revolt , 1568 – 1648 , encouraging the participation of the rebellious Dutch provinces and the Spanish . The successful conclusion of the war consolidated Wittelsbach authority in northwestern German territories and encouraged a Catholic revival on the lower Rhine . Importantly , it also set a precedent for outside intervention in German religious and dynastic conflicts . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Religious divisions in the Holy Roman Empire = = = 
 Prior to the 16th century , the Catholic Church had been the sole official Christian faith in the Holy Roman Empire . Martin Luther 's initial agenda called for the reform of the Church 's doctrines and practices , but after his excommunication from the Church his ideas became embodied in an altogether separate religious movement , Lutheranism . Initially dismissed by Holy Roman Emperor Charles V as an inconsequential argument between monks , the idea of a reformation of the Church 's doctrines , considered infallible and sacrosanct by Catholic teaching , accentuated controversy and competition in many of the territories of the Holy Roman Empire and quickly devolved into armed factions that exacerbated existing social , political and territorial grievances . These tensions were embodied in such alliances as the Protestant Schmalkaldic League , through which many of the Lutheran princes agreed to protect each other from encroachment on their territories and local authority ; in retaliation , the princes that remained loyal to the Catholic Church formed the defensive Holy League . By the mid @-@ 1530s , the German @-@ speaking states of the Holy Roman Empire had devolved into armed factions determined by family ties , geographic needs , religious loyalties , and dynastic aspirations . The religious issue both accentuated and masked these secular conflicts . 
 Princes and clergy alike understood that institutional abuses hindered the practices of the faithful , but they disagreed on the solution to the problem . The Protestants believed a reform of doctrine was needed ( especially regarding the Church 's teachings on justification , indulgences , Purgatory , and the Papacy ) while those that remained Catholic wished to reform the morals of the clergy only , without sacrificing Catholic doctrine . Pope Paul III convened a council to examine the problem in 1537 and instituted several internal , institutional reforms intended to obviate some of the most flagrant prebendary abuses , simony and nepotism ; despite efforts by both the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and the Roman Pontiff , unification of the two strands of belief foundered on different concepts of " Church " and the principle of justification . Catholics clung to the traditional teaching that the Catholic Church alone is the one true Church , while Protestants insisted that the Church Christ founded was invisible and not tied to any single religious institution on earth . Regarding justification , the Lutherans insisted that it occurred by faith alone , while the Catholics upheld the traditional Catholic doctrine that justification involves both faith and active charity . The Schmalkaldic League called its own ecumenical council in 1537 , and set forward several precepts of faith . When the delegates met in Regensburg in 1540 – 41 , representatives agreed on the doctrine of faith and justification , but could not agree on sacraments , confession , absolution , and the definition of the church . Catholic and Lutheran adherents seemed further apart than ever ; in only a few towns and cities were Lutherans and Catholics able to live together in even a semblance of harmony . By 1548 , political disagreements overlapped with religious issues , making any kind of agreement seem remote . 
 In 1548 Charles declared an <unk> imperialis ( also known as the Augsburg Interim ) through which he sought to find some common ground for religious peace . This effort alienated both Protestant and Catholic princes and the papacy ; even Charles , whose decree it was , was unhappy with the political and diplomatic dimensions of what amounted to half of a religious settlement . The 1551 – 52 sessions convened by Pope Julius III at the supposedly ecumenical Council of Trent solved none of the larger religious issues but simply restated Catholic teaching and condemned Protestant teaching as heresies . 
 = = = Overcoming religious division = = = 
 Clearly , Charles ' interim solution could not continue . He ordered a general Diet in Augsburg at which the various states would discuss the religious problem and its solution . He himself did not attend , and delegated authority to his brother , Ferdinand , to " act and settle " disputes of territory , religion and local power . At the conference , Ferdinand cajoled , persuaded and threatened the various representatives into agreement on three important principles . The principle of cuius regio , eius religio provided for internal religious unity within a state : The religion of the prince became the religion of the state and all its inhabitants . Those inhabitants who could not conform to the prince 's religion were allowed to leave , an innovative idea in the 16th century ; this principle was discussed at length by the various delegates , who finally reached agreement on the specifics of its wording after examining the problem and the proposed solution from every possible angle . The second principle covered the special status of the ecclesiastical states , called the ecclesiastical reservation , or <unk> <unk> . If the prelate of an ecclesiastic state changed his religion , the men and women living in that state did not have to do so . Instead , the prelate was expected to resign from his post , although this was not spelled out in the agreement . The third principle , known as Ferdinand 's Declaration , exempted knights and some of the cities from the requirement of religious uniformity , if the reformed religion had been practiced there since the mid @-@ 1520s , allowing for a few mixed cities and towns where Catholics and Lutherans had lived together . It also protected the authority of the princely families , the knights and some of the cities to determine what religious uniformity meant in their territories . Ferdinand inserted this at the last minute , on his own authority . 
 = = = Remaining problems = = = 
 After 1555 , the Peace of Augsburg became the <unk> legal document governing the co @-@ existence of the Lutheran and Catholic faiths in the German lands of the Holy Roman Empire , and it served to ameliorate many of the tensions between followers of the so @-@ called Old Faith and the followers of Luther , but it had two fundamental flaws . First , Ferdinand had rushed the article on ecclesiastical reservation through the debate ; it had not undergone the scrutiny and discussion that attended the wide @-@ spread acceptance and support of cuius regio , eius religio . Consequently , its wording did not cover all , or even most , potential legal scenarios . The <unk> <unk> was not debated in plenary session at all ; using his authority to " act and settle , " Ferdinand had added it at the last minute , responding to lobbying by princely families and knights . 
 While these specific failings came back to haunt the Empire in subsequent decades , perhaps the greatest weakness of the Peace of Augsburg was its failure to take into account the growing diversity of religious expression emerging in the evangelical ( Lutheran ) and Reformed traditions . Other confessions had acquired popular , if not legal , legitimacy in the intervening decades and by 1555 , the reforms proposed by Luther were no longer the only possibilities of religious expression : Anabaptists , such as the Frisian Menno Simons ( 1492 – 1559 ) and his followers ; the followers of John Calvin , who were particularly strong in the southwest and the northwest ; and the followers of Huldrych Zwingli were excluded from considerations and protections under the Peace of Augsburg . According to the Augsburg agreement , their religious beliefs remained heretical . 
 = = = Charles V 's abdication = = = 
 In 1556 , amid great pomp , and leaning on the shoulder of one of his favorites ( the 24 @-@ year @-@ old William , Count of Nassau and Orange ) , Charles gave away his lands and his offices . The Spanish empire , which included Spain , the Netherlands , Naples , Milan and Spain 's possessions in the Americas , went to his son , Philip . His brother , Ferdinand , who had negotiated the treaty in the previous year , was already in possession of the Austrian lands and was also the obvious candidate to succeed Charles as Holy Roman Emperor . 
 Charles ' choices were appropriate . Philip was culturally Spanish : he was born in Valladolid and raised in the Spanish court , his native tongue was Spanish , and he preferred to live in Spain . Ferdinand was familiar with , and to , the other princes of the Holy Roman Empire . Although he too had been born in Spain , he had administered his brother 's affairs in the Empire since 1531 . Some historians maintain Ferdinand had also been touched by the reformed philosophies , and was probably the closest the Holy Roman Empire ever came to a Protestant emperor ; he remained at least nominally a Catholic throughout his life , although reportedly he refused last rites on his deathbed . Other historians maintain that while Ferdinand was a practising Catholic , unlike his brother he considered religion to be outside the political sphere . 
 Charles ' abdication had far @-@ reaching consequences in imperial diplomatic relations with France and the Netherlands , particularly in his allotment of the Spanish kingdom to Philip . In France , the kings and their ministers grew increasingly uneasy about Habsburg encirclement and sought allies against Habsburg hegemony from among the border German territories ; they were even prepared to ally with some of the Protestant kings . In the Netherlands , Philip 's ascension in Spain raised particular problems ; for the sake of harmony , order , and prosperity , Charles had not oppressed the Reformation too harshly there , and even had tolerated a high level of local autonomy . An ardent Catholic and rigidly autocratic prince , Philip pursued an aggressive political , economic and religious policy toward the Dutch , resulting in their rebellion shortly after he became king . Philip 's militant response meant the occupation of much of the upper provinces by troops of , or hired by , Habsburg Spain and the constant ebb and flow of Spanish men and provisions over the Spanish road from northern Italy , through the Burgundian lands , to and from Flanders . 
 = = Cause of the war = = 
 As an ecclesiastical principality of the Holy Roman Empire , the Electorate of Cologne ( German : <unk> Köln or <unk> ) included the temporal possessions of the Archbishop of Cologne ( German : <unk> Köln ) : the so @-@ called Oberstift ( the southern part of the Electorate ) , the northern section , called the <unk> , the fiefdom of Vest Recklinghausen and the Duchy of Westphalia , plus several small <unk> territories separated from the Electorate by the neighboring Duchies of Cleves , Berg , <unk> and Mark . <unk> by the electoral territory , Cologne was part of the archdiocese but not among the Elector 's temporal possessions . The Electorate was ruled by an archbishop prince @-@ elector of the empire . As an archbishop , he was responsible for the spiritual leadership of one the richest sees in the Empire , and entitled to draw on its wealth . As a prince @-@ prelate , he stood in the highest social category of the Empire , with specific and expansive legal , economic , and juridical rights . As an Elector , he was one of the men who elected the Holy Roman Emperor from among a group of imperial candidates . 
 The Electorate obtained its name from the city , and Cologne had served as the capital of the archbishopric until 1288 . After that , the archbishop and Prince @-@ elector used the smaller cities of Bonn , 30 kilometers ( 19 mi ) south of Cologne , and Brühl , 12 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) south of Cologne , on the Rhine River , as his capital and residence ; by 1580 , both his residence and the capital were located in Bonn . Although the city of Cologne obtained its status as a free imperial city in 1478 , the Archbishop of Cologne retained judicial rights in the city ; he acted as a Vogt , or reeve , and reserved the right of blood justice , or <unk> ; only he could impose the so @-@ called blood punishments , which included capital punishments , but also physical punishments that drew blood . Regardless of his position as judge , he could not enter the city of Cologne except under special circumstances , and between the city council and the elector @-@ archbishop , a politically and diplomatically precarious and usually adversarial relationship developed over the centuries . ( See also History of Cologne for more details . ) 
 The position of archbishop was usually held by a scion of nobility , and not necessarily a priest ; this widespread practice allowed younger sons of noble houses to find prestigious and financially secure positions without the requirements of priesthood . The archbishop and prince @-@ elector was chosen by the cathedral chapter , the members of which also served as his advisers . As members of a cathedral chapter , they participated in the Mass , or sang the Mass ; in addition , they performed other duties as needed . They were not required to be priests but they could , if they wished , take Holy Orders . As prebendaries , they received stipends from cathedral income ; depending on the location and wealth of the cathedral , this could amount to substantial annual income . In the Electorate , the Chapter included 24 canons of various social ranks ; they each had a place in the choir , based on their rank , which in turn was usually derived from the social standing of their families . 
 = = = Election of 1577 = = = 
 When his nephew , Arnold , died without issue , Salentin von Isenburg @-@ Grenzau ( 1532 – 1610 ) resigned from the office of Elector ( September 1577 ) and , in December , married Antonia Wilhelmine d <unk> , sister of Charles d <unk> , Prince of Arenberg . Salentin 's resignation required the election of a new archbishop and prince @-@ elector from among the Cathedral Chapter . Two candidates emerged . Gebhard ( 1547 – 1601 ) was the second son of William , Truchsess of Waldburg , known as William the younger , and Johanna von Fürstenberg . He was descended from the Jacobin line of the House of Waldburg ; his uncle was a cardinal , and his family had significant imperial contacts . The second candidate , Ernst of Bavaria ( 1554 – 1612 ) , was the third son of Albert V , Duke of Bavaria . As a member of the powerful House of Wittelsbach , Ernst could marshal support from his extensive family connections throughout the Catholic houses of the empire ; he also had contacts in important canonic establishments at Salzburg , Trier , Würzburg , and Münster that could exert collateral pressure . 
 Ernst had been a canon at Cologne since 1570 . He had the support of the neighboring Duke of Jülich and several allies within the Cathedral Chapter . Although supported by both the papacy and his influential father , a 1571 effort to secure for him the office of coadjutor of the electorate of Cologne had failed once Salentin had agreed to abide by the <unk> proceedings ; as the coadjutor bishop , Ernst would have been well @-@ positioned to present himself as Salentin 's logical successor . Since then , however , he had advanced in other sees , becoming bishop of Liège , Freising and Hildesheim , important strongholds of Counter @-@ Reformation Catholicism . He was a career cleric , not necessarily qualified to be an archbishop on the basis of his theological erudition , but by his family connections . His membership in several chapters extended the family influence , and his status as a prebendary gave him a portion of revenues from several cathedrals . He had been educated by Jesuits and the papacy considered collaboration with his family as a means to limit the spread of Lutheranism and Calvinism in the northern provinces . 
 Also a younger son , Gebhard had prepared for an ecclesiastical career with a broad , Humanist education ; apart from his native German , he had learned several languages ( including Latin , Italian , French ) , and studied history and theology . After studying at the universities of Dillingen , Ingolstadt , Perugia , Louvain and elsewhere , he began his ecclesiastical career in 1560 at Augsburg . His conduct at Augsburg caused some scandal ; the bishop , his uncle , petitioned the Duke of Bavaria to remonstrate with him about it , which apparently led to some improvement in his behavior . In 1561 , he became a deacon at Cologne Cathedral ( 1561 – 77 ) , a canon of St. Gereon , the basilica in Cologne ( 1562 – 67 ) , a canon in Strassburg ( 1567 – 1601 ) , in <unk> ( 1567 – 83 ) , and in Würzburg ( 1569 – 70 ) . In 1571 , he became deacon of Strassburg Cathedral , a position he held until his death . In 1576 , by papal nomination , he also became provost of the Cathedral in Augsburg . Similar to his opponent , these positions brought him influence and wealth ; they had little to do with his priestly character . 
 If the election had been left to the papacy , Ernst would have been the choice , but the Pope was not a member of the Cathedral Chapter and Gebhard had the support of several of the Catholic canons , and all the Protestant canons in the Chapter . In December 1577 , he was chosen Elector and Archbishop of Cologne after a spirited contest with the papacy 's candidate , Ernst : Gebhard won the election by two votes . Although it was not required of him , Gebhard agreed to undergo priestly ordination ; he was duly consecrated in March 1578 , and swore to uphold the Council of Trent 's decrees . 
 = = = Gebhard 's conversion = = = 
 Agnes von Mansfeld @-@ Eisleben ( 1551 – 1637 ) was a Protestant canoness at the cloister in Gerresheim , today a district of Düsseldorf . Her family was a cadet line of the old House of Mansfeld which , by the mid @-@ 16th century , had lost much of its affluence , but not its influence . The Mansfeld @-@ Eisleben line retained significant authority in its district ; several of Agnes ' cousins and uncles had signed the Book of Concord , and the family exercised considerable influence in Reformation affairs . She had been raised in Eisleben , the town in which Martin Luther had been born . The family 's estates were located in Saxony , but Agnes ' sister lived in the city of Cologne , married to the Freiherr ( or Baron ) , Peter von <unk> . Although a member of the Gerresheim cloister , Agnes was free during her days to go where she wished . Reports differ on how she came to Gebhard 's notice . Some say he saw her on one of her visits to her sister in Cologne . Others claim he noticed her during a religious procession . Regardless , in late 1579 or early 1580 , she attracted Gebhard 's notice . He sought her out , and they started a liaison . Two of her brothers , Ernst and Hoyer Christoph , soon visited Gebhard at the archbishop 's residence and convinced him to marry her . " Gebhard 's Catholic belief , which was by no means based on his innermost conviction , started to waver when he had to decide whether to renounce the bishop 's mitre and stay faithful to the woman he loved , or to renounce his love and remain a member of the church hierarchy . " While he considered this , rumors of his possible conversion flew throughout the Electorate . 
 The mere possibility of Gebhard 's conversion caused consternation in the Electorate , in the Empire , and in such European states as England and France . Gebhard considered his options , and listened to his advisers , chief among them his brother Karl , Truchsess von Waldburg ( 1548 – 1593 ) , and Adolf , Count von Neuenahr ( 1545 – 1589 ) . His opponents in the Cathedral Chapter enlisted external support from the Wittelsbachs in Bavaria and from the pope . Diplomats shuttled from court to court through the Rhineland , bearing pleas to Gebhard to consider the outcome of a conversion , and how it would destroy the Electorate . These diplomats assured him of support for his cause should he convert and hold the Electorate and threats to destroy him if he did convert . The magistrates of Cologne vehemently opposed any possible conversion and the extension of parity to Protestants in the archdiocese . His Protestant supporters told Gebhard that he could marry the woman and keep the Electorate , converting it into a dynastic duchy . Throughout the Electorate , and on its borders , his supporters and opponents gathered their troops , armed their garrisons , stockpiled foodstuffs , and prepared for war . On 19 December 1582 , Gebhard announced his conversion , from , as he phrased it , the " darkness of the papacy to the Light " of the Word of God . 
 = = = Implications of his conversion = = = 
 The conversion of the Archbishop of Cologne to Protestantism triggered religious and political repercussions throughout the Holy Roman Empire . His conversion had widespread implications for the future of the Holy Roman Empire 's electoral process established by the Golden Bull of 1356 . In this process , seven Imperial Electors — the four secular electors of Bohemia , Brandenburg , the Palatinate , and Saxony ; and the three ecclesiastical electors of Mainz , Trier , and Cologne — selected an emperor . The presence of at least three inherently Catholic electors , who collectively governed some of the most prosperous ecclesiastical territories in the Empire , guaranteed the delicate balance of Catholics and Protestants in the voting ; only one other elector needed to vote for a Catholic candidate , ensuring that future emperors would remain in the so @-@ called Old Faith . The possibility of one of those electors shifting to the Protestant side , and of that elector producing an heir to perpetuate this shift , would change the balance in the electoral college in favor of the Protestants . 
 The conversion of the ecclesiastic see to a dynastic realm ruled by a Protestant prince challenged the principle of ecclesiastical reservation , which was intended to preserve the ecclesiastical electorates from this very possibility . The difficulties of such a conversion had been faced before : Hermann von Wied , a previous prince @-@ elector and archbishop in Cologne , had also converted to Protestantism , but had resigned from his office . Similarly , Gebhard 's predecessor , Salentin von Isenburg @-@ Grenzau had indeed married in 1577 , but had resigned from the office prior to his marriage . Furthermore , the reason for his marriage — to perpetuate his house — differed considerably from Gebhard 's . The House of Waldburg was in no apparent danger of extinction ; Gebhard was one of six brothers , and only one other had chosen an ecclesiastical career . Unlike his abdicating predecessors , when Gebhard converted , he proclaimed the Reformation in the city of Cologne itself , angering Cologne 's Catholic leadership and alienating the Catholic faction in the Cathedral Chapter . Furthermore , Gebhard adhered not to the teachings of Martin Luther , but to those of John Calvin , a form of religious observation not approved by the Augsburg conventions of 1555 . Finally , he made no move to resign from his position as Prince @-@ elector . 
 Affairs became further complicated when , on 2 February 1583 , also known as Candlemas , Gebhard married Agnes von Mansfeld @-@ Eisleben in a private house in Rosenthal , outside of Bonn . After the ceremony , the couple processed to the Elector 's palace in Bonn , and held a great feast . Unbeknownst to them , while they celebrated their marriage , Frederick , Duke of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg ( 1554 – 1586 ) , who was also a member of the Cathedral Chapter , and his soldiers approached the fortified <unk> , across the river , and took the castle after a brief fight . When the citizens of Cologne heard the news , there was a great public celebration . 
 Two days after his marriage , Gebhard invested his brother Karl with the duties of <unk> ( governor ) and charged him with the rule of Bonn . He and Agnes then traveled to Zweibrücken and from there , to the territory of Dillingen , near Solms @-@ Braunfels , where the Count , a staunch supporter , would help him to raise funds and troops to hold the territory ; Adolf , Count von Neuenahr returned to the Electorate to prepare for its defense . 
 Gebhard clearly intended to transform an important ecclesiastical territory into a secular , dynastic duchy . This problematic conversion would then bring the principle of cuius regio , eius religio into play in the Electorate . Under this principle , all of Gebhard 's subjects would be required to convert to his faith : his rule , his religion . Furthermore , as a relatively young man , heirs would be expected . Gebhard and his young wife presented the very real possibility of successfully converting a rich , diplomatically important and strategically placed ecclesiastical territory of a prince @-@ prelate into a dynastic territory that carried with it one of the coveted offices of imperial elector . 
 Pope Gregory XIII excommunicated him in March 1583 , and the Chapter deposed him , by electing in his place the 29 @-@ year @-@ old canon , Ernst of Bavaria , brother of the pious William V , Duke of Bavaria . Ernst 's election ensured the involvement of the powerful House of Wittelsbach in the coming contest . 
 = = Course of the war = = 
 The war had three phases . Initially it was a localized feud between supporters of Gebhard and those of the Catholic core of the Cathedral Chapter . With the election of Ernst of Bavaria as a competing archbishop , what had been a local conflict expanded in scale : Ernst 's election guaranteed the military , diplomatic , and financial interest of the Wittelsbach family in the Electorate of Cologne 's local affairs . After the deaths of Louis VI , Elector Palatine in 1583 and William the Silent in 1584 , the conflict shifted gears again , as the two evenly matched combatants sought outside assistance to break the stalemate . Finally , the intervention of Alexander Farnese , Duke of Parma , who had at his command the Spanish Army of Flanders , threw the balance of power in favor of the Catholic side . By 1588 , Spanish forces had pushed Gebhard from the Electorate . In 1588 he took refuge in Strassburg , and the remaining Protestant strongholds of the Electorate fell to Parma 's forces in 1589 . 
 = = = Cathedral feud = = = 
 Although Gebhard had gathered some troops around him , he hoped to recruit support from the Lutheran princes . Unfortunately for him , he had converted to another branch of the Reformed faith ; such cautious Lutheran princes as Augustus I , Elector of Saxony , balked at extending their military support to Calvinists and the Elector Palatine was unable to persuade them to join the cause . Gebhard had three primary supporters . His brother , Karl , had married Eleonore , Countess of Hohenzollern ( 1551 – after 1598 ) , and Gebhard could hope that this family alliance with the power @-@ hungry Hohenzollerns would help his cause . Gebhard 's long @-@ time ally and supporter Adolf , Count von Neuenahr was a successful and cunning military commander whose army secured the northern part of the territory . Finally , John Casimir ( 1543 – 1592 ) , the brother of the Elector Palatine , had expressed his support , and made a great show of force in the southern part of the Electorate . 
 In the first months after Gebhard 's conversion , two competing armies rampaged throughout the southern portion of the Electoral territory in the destruction of the so @-@ called Oberstift . Villages , abbeys and convents and several towns , were plundered and burned , by both sides ; Linz am Rhein and Ahrweiler avoided destruction by swearing loyalty to Salentin . In the summer of 1583 , Gebhard and Agnes took refuge , first at Vest in Vest Recklinghausen , a fief of the Electorate , and then in the Duchy of Westphalia , at Arensberg castle . In both territories , Gebhard set in motion as much of the Reformation as he could , although his soldiers indulged in a bout of iconoclasm and plundering . 
 Initially , despite a few setbacks , military action seemed to go in Gebhard 's favor , until October , 1583 , when the Elector Palatine died , and Casimir disbanded his army and returned to his brother 's court as guardian for the 10 @-@ year @-@ old duke . In November , 1583 , from his castle Arensberg in Westphalia , he wrote to Francis Walsingham , adviser and spymaster to Queen Elizabeth : " Our needs are pressing , and you [ Walsingham ] and the Queen 's other virtuous counsellors we believe can aid us ; moreover , since God has called us to a knowledge of Himself , we have heard from our counsellors that you love and further the service of God . " 
 On the same day , Gebhard wrote also to the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Bishop of London , presenting his case : " Verily , the Roman Antichrist moves every stone to oppress us and our churches .... " Two days later , he wrote a more lengthy letter to the Queen : " We therefore humbly pray your Majesty to lend us 10 @,@ 000 <unk> , and to send it speedily , that we may preserve our churches this winter from the invasion of the enemy ; for if we lost Bonn , they would be in the greatest danger , while if God permits us to keep it , we hope , by his grace , that Antichrist and his agents will be foiled in their damnable attempts against those who call upon the true God . " 
 Godesburg , a fortress a few kilometers from the Elector 's capital city of Bonn , was taken by storm in late 1583 after a brutal month @-@ long siege ; when Bavarian cannonades failed to break the bastions , sappers tunneled under the thick walls and blew up the fortifications from below . The Catholic Archbishop 's forces still could not break through the remains of the fortifications , so they crawled through the garderobe sluices ( hence the name , Sewer War ) . Upon taking the fortress , they killed every defender except three , a Captain of the Guard who could prove he was a citizen of Cologne , and the son of an important Cologne politician , the commander and his wife . The five miles of road between Godesberg and Bonn was filled with so many troops , that it looked like a military camp . At the same time , in one of the few set battles of the war , Gebhard 's supporters won at <unk> ( French : <unk> ) over the Catholic forces of the Frederick of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , who had raised his own army and had entered the fray of his own accord a few months earlier . 
 The Catholics offered Gebhard a great sum of money , which he refused , demanding instead , the restoration of his state . When further negotiations among the Electors and the Emperor at Frankfurt am Main , then at Muhlhausen in Westphalia , failed to reach an agreement settling the dispute , the Pope arranged for the support of several thousand Spanish troops in early 1584 . 
 = = = Engagement of outside military forces = = = 
 The election of Ernst of Bavaria expanded the local feud into a more German @-@ wide phenomenon . The pope committed 55 @,@ 000 crowns to pay soldiers to fight for Ernst , and another 40 @,@ 000 directly into the coffers of the new Archbishop . Under the command of his brother , Ernst 's forces pushed their way into Westphalia , threatening Gebhard and Agnes at their stronghold at Arensburg . Gebhard and Agnes escaped to the rebellious provinces of the Netherlands with almost 1000 cavalry , where Prince William gave them a haven in Delft . There , Gebhard solicited the impecunious William for troops and money . After William 's assassination in July 1584 , Gebhard wrote to Queen Elizabeth requesting assistance . Elizabeth responded toward the end of 1585 , directing him to contact Robert Dudley , 1st Earl of Leicester , her deputy with the rebellious Dutch , and recently commissioned as the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of her army in the Netherlands . Elizabeth had her own problems with adherents of her cousin Mary , Queen of Scots , and the Spanish . 
 = = = Stalemate = = = 
 By late 1585 , although Ernst 's brother had made significant inroads into the Electorate of Cologne , both sides had reached an impasse . Sizable portions of the population subscribed to the Calvinist doctrine ; to support them , Calvinist Switzerland and Strassburg furnished a steady stream of theologians , jurists , books and ideas . The Calvinist barons and counts understood the danger of Spanish intervention : it meant the aggressive introduction of the Counter @-@ Reformation in their territories . France , in the person of Henry III , was equally interested , since the encirclement of France by Habsburgs was cause for concern . Another sizable portion of the electorate 's populace adhered to the old faith , supported by Wittelsbach @-@ funded Jesuits . The supporters of both sides committed atrocities of their own : in the city of Cologne , the mere rumor of Gebhard 's approaching army caused rioters to murder several people suspected of sympathizing with the Protestant cause . 
 Ernst depended on his brother and the Catholic barons in the Cathedral Chapter to hold the territory he acquired . In 1585 , Munster , Paderborn , and Osnabrück succumbed to Ferdinand 's energetic pursuit in the eastern regions of the electorate , and a short time later , Minden . With their help , Ernst could hold Bonn . Support from the city of Cologne itself was also secure . To oust Gebhard , though , Ernst ultimately had to appeal for aid to Alexander Farnese , Duke of Parma , who commanded Spanish forces in the Netherlands . 
 Parma was more than willing to help . The Electorate , strategically important to Spain , offered another land route by which to approach the rebellious northern Provinces of the Netherlands . Although the Spanish road from Spain 's holdings on the Mediterranean shores led to its territories in what is today Belgium , it was a long , arduous march , complicated by the provisioning of troops and the potentially hostile populations of the territories through which it passed . An alternative route on the Rhine promised better access to the Habsburg Netherlands . Furthermore , the presence of a Calvinist electorate almost on the Dutch border could delay their efforts to bring the rebellious Dutch back to the Spanish rule and the Catholic confession . Philip II and his generals could be convinced to support Ernst 's cause for such considerations . Indeed , the process of intervention had started earlier . In 1581 , Philip 's forces , paid for by papal gold , had taken Aachen , which Protestants had seized ; by the mid – 1580s , the Duke of Parma 's forces , encouraged by the Wittelsbachs and the Catholics in Cologne , had secured garrisons throughout the northern territories of the Electorate . By 1590 , these garrisons gave Spain access to the northern provinces and Philip felt comfortable enough with his military access to the provinces , and with their isolation from possible support by German Protestants , to direct more of his attention to France , and less to his problems with the Dutch . 
 On the other side of the feud , to hold the territory , Gebhard needed the full support of his military brother and the very able Neuenahr . To push Ernst out , he needed additional support , which he had requested from Delft and from England . It was clearly in the interests of England and the Dutch to offer assistance ; if the Dutch could not tie up the Spanish army in Flanders , and if that army needed a navy to supply it , Philip could not focus his attention on the English and the French . His own diplomats had sought to present his case as one of pressing concern to all Protestant princes : in November , 1583 , one of his advisers , Dr. Wenceslaus <unk> , wrote to Francis Walsingham : " I assure you if the Elector of Cologne is not assisted , you will see that the war in the Low Countries will shortly spread over the whole of Germany . " The support Gebhard received , in the form of troops from the Earl of Leicester , and from the Dutch , in the form of the mercenary Martin Schenck , had mixed results . Leicester 's troops , professional and well @-@ led , performed well but their usefulness was limited : Elizabeth 's instructions to help Gebhard had not come with financial support and Leicester had sold his own plate and had exhausted his own personal credit while trying to field an army . Martin Schenck had seen considerable service in Spain 's Army of Flanders , for the French king and for Parma himself . He was a skilled and charismatic soldier , and his men would do anything for him ; reportedly , he could sleep in his saddle , and seemed indomitable in the field . Unfortunately , Schenck was little more than a land @-@ pirate , a free @-@ <unk> , and rascal , and ultimately he did Gebhard more harm than good , as his behavior in Westphalia and at the Battle of Werl demonstrated . 
 = = = = Sack of Westphalia = = = = 
 In late February 1586 , Friedrich Cloedt , whom Gebhard had placed in command of Neuss , and Martin Schenck went to Westphalia at the head of 500 foot and 500 horse . After plundering Vest Recklinghausen , on 1 March they captured Werl through trickery . They loaded a train of wagons with soldiers and covered them with salt . When the wagons of salt were seen outside the city gates , they were immediately admitted , salt being a valued commodity . The " salted soldiers " then over @-@ powered the guard and captured the town . Some of the defenders escaped to the citadel , and could not be dislodged . Claude de Berlaymont , also known as Haultpenne after the name of his castle , collected his own force of 4000 and besieged Schenck and Cloedt in Werl . Attacked from the outside by Haultpenne , and from the inside by the soldiers in the citadel , Schenck and Cloedt broke out of the city with their soldiers on 3 March . Unable to break through the lines , they retreated into the city once more , but several of their soldiers did not make it into the city , and plundered the neighboring villages ; 250 local residents were killed . On 8 March , Schenck and Cloedt loaded their wagons , this time with booty , took 30 magistrates as hostages , and attacked Haultpenne 's force , killing about 500 of them , and losing 200 of their own . Included in the hostages were the Bürgermeister Johann von <unk> and several other high @-@ ranking officials ; although von <unk> died during the retreat , the remaining hostages were released after the payment of a high ransom . Schenck retreated to Venlo and Cloedt returned to the city of Neuss . 
 = = = Spanish intervention = = = 
 To some extent , the difficulties both Gebhard and Ernst faced in winning the war were the same the Spanish had in subduing the Dutch Revolt . The <unk> of the Spanish and Dutch war — 80 years of bitter fighting interrupted by periodic truces while both sides gathered resources — lay in the kind of war it was : Enemies lived in fortified towns defended by Italian @-@ style bastions , which meant the towns had to be taken and then fortified and maintained . For both Gebhard and Ernst , as for the Spanish commanders in the nearby Lowlands , winning the war meant not only mobilizing enough men to encircle a seemingly endless cycle of enemy artillery fortresses , but also maintaining the army one had and defending all one 's own possessions as they were acquired . The Cologne War , similar to the Dutch Revolt in that respect , was also a war of sieges , not of assembled armies facing one another on the field of battle , nor of maneuver , feint , and parry that characterized wars two centuries earlier and later . These wars required men who could operate the machinery of war , which meant extensive economic resources for soldiers to build and operate the siege works , and a political and military will to keep the machinery of war operating . The Spanish faced another problem , distance , which gave them a distinct interest in intervening in the Cologne affair . 
 = = = = Razing of Neuss = = = = 
 Gebhard 's supporter , Adolf von Neuenahr , surrounded Neuss in March 1586 , and persuaded Ernst 's small garrison to capitulate . He refortified and restocked the city and placed young Friedrich Cloedt in command of a garrison of 1600 men , mostly Germans and Dutch soldiers . The town 's fortifications were substantial ; 100 years earlier it had resisted a lengthy siege by Charles the Bold ( 1433 – 1477 ) of Burgundy , and between the fortifications , the natural defenses of rivers , and the garrison , it could withstand all but the most determined assaults . In July 1586 , the Duke of Parma approached and surrounded the city ; by some irony , Agnes ' cousin , Karl von Mansfeld and his troops were a part of the Spanish force assembled against Neuss . Parma had an impressive force at his command ; in addition to Mansfeld 's 2000 troops , he had another 6000 or so foot and <unk> , 2000 well @-@ mounted , experienced Italian , Spanish and German soldiers , and some 45 cannons , which he distributed on the redoubt across the river and on the heights a short distance from the city walls . According to the protocols of war generally accepted in 1586 , Parma requested the capitulation of the city prior to the cannonade . Cloedt declined to capitulate , politely . The next day , being the feast of St. James , and the patron day for the Spanish , the bombardment was not initiated , although mendacious reports circulated in the Spanish camp that the Protestants had roasted two Spanish soldiers alive on the Catholic Holy day , a desecration which fanned their enthusiasm for the impending battle . 
 The following day , Parma 's artillery pounded at the walls for 30 hours with iron cannonballs weighing 30 – 50 pounds ; in total , his artillery fired more than 2700 rounds . The Spanish made several attempts to storm the city , each repelled by Cloedt 's 1600 soldiers . The ninth assault breached the outer wall . The Spanish and Italian forces entered the town from opposite ends and met in the middle . Cloedt , gravely injured ( his leg was reportedly almost ripped off and he had five other serious wounds ) , had been carried into the town . Parma 's troops discovered Cloedt , being nursed by his wife and his sister . Although Parma was inclined to honor the garrison commander with a soldier 's death by sword , Ernst demanded his immediate execution . The dying man was hanged from the window , with several other officers in his force . 
 Parma made no effort to restrain his soldiers . On their rampage through the city , Italian and Spanish soldiers slaughtered the rest of the garrison , even the men who tried to surrender . Once their blood @-@ lust was satiated , they began to plunder . Civilians who had taken refuge in the churches were initially ignored , but when the fire started , they were forced into the streets and trapped by the rampaging soldiers . Contemporary accounts refer to children , women , and old men , their clothes smoldering , or in flames , trying to escape the conflagration , only to be trapped by the enraged Spanish ; if they escaped the flames and the Spanish , they were cornered by the enraged Italians . Parma wrote to King Philip that over 4000 lay dead in the ditches ( moats ) . English observers confirmed this report , and elaborated that only eight buildings remained standing . 
 = = = Siege warfare runs its course = = = 
 Parma had gone to Neuss prepared for a major assault , and the resources of Spain 's Army of the Netherlands quickly changed the balance in favor of Ernst . In 1586 , Ernst 's allies had secured Vest Recklinghausen , even though they had failed to catch the elusive Schenck , and they had reduced Neuss to a pile of rubble , proving their overwhelming fire @-@ power . In 1587 , they encircled and took the fortified towns in the Oberstift , recapturing Bonn , Godesberg , and Linz am Rhein , and dozens of smaller fortified towns , villages and farmsteads throughout the countryside . Throughout , soldiers from both parties <unk> and plundered throughout the countryside , searching either for important officials , booty , or other valuables . On 12 November 1587 , one of Walsingham 's informants wrote , the " soldiers of <unk> ( Martin Schenck ) go out daily on excursions , doing very great harm in all places , for they have free passage every where . The other evening they went with 180 horse to above Bonn , between <unk> and Linz ( am Rhein ) , to make prisoner Count <unk> d <unk> ( Salentin von Isenburg ) , but their design did not succeed , as he withdrew into a castle . " In early 1588 , Gebhardt 's supporters once more acquired Bonn ; one of Walsingham 's observers in the Palatinate , in Heidelberg , reported that the Prince of Taxis had been slain outside of Bonn , with 300 Spanish soldiers . 
 By Spring 1588 , Gebhard had run out of options . In 1583 , he had refused the settlement offered to him after the conferences at Frankfurt and in Westphalia , counting on the support of the other Protestant electors . When their support did not materialize , he pursued diplomatic options with the French , the Dutch , and the English ; these also were of limited help . After the destruction of Neuss in 1586 , and the loss of the most of southern part of the Electorate in 1587 , Rheinberg and its environs were the only territories of the Electorate he could claim , and much of this slipped from his grasp in 1588 . He had exhausted his diplomatic , financial and military possibilities . His health problems ( referred to as <unk> , or joint pain ) prohibited him from riding , which limited his ability to travel . In the spring of 1588 , he relinquished his claim on the Electorate to the protection of Neuenahr and Martin Schenck , and retired to Strassburg . Neuenahr and Schenck continued to fight for him , but the former died in an artillery explosion in 1589 , and the latter was killed at Nijmegen that summer . Without them to defend his claim on the Electorate , Rheinberg , Gebhard 's last outpost in the northern Electorate , fell to Parma 's force in 1589 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Gebhard 's expulsion , Ernst assumed full charge of the Electorate of Cologne . In his later years , a nuncio at Cologne took responsibilities for the financial administration of the archdiocese , and Ernst 's nephew , Ferdinand of Bavaria , was elected to the Cathedral Chapter , the Wittelsbach heir @-@ apparent . When Ernst died in 1612 , the Cathedral Chapter duly elected his nephew to the position and Wittelsbachs held the Electorate until 1761 . Ernst 's victory , both in winning the election in 1583 , and in convincing the assembly of other electors to accept him in 1585 , confirmed him as the new archbishop of Cologne and gave the Wittelsbach family a foothold on the northern Rhine . 
 Ernst 's rule , and that of his four Wittelsbach successors , strengthened the position of his family in Imperial politics . The victory of the Catholic party further consolidated the Counter @-@ Reformation in the northwest territories of the Holy Roman Empire , especially in the bishoprics of Münster , Paderborn , Osnabrück and Minden , which were bordered by Protestant territories . Once Ernst 's brother or such allies as the Duke of Parma regained control , Jesuits efficiently identified any recalcitrant Protestants and converted them to Catholicism . The Counter @-@ Reformation was thoroughly applied in the lower Rhineland , with the goal that every Protestant , whether Lutheran or Calvinist , would be brought to the Catholic fold . For their efforts , the Spanish acquired important bridgeheads on the Rhine River , securing a land route to the rebellious northern provinces , which helped to extend an already long war of secession well into the next century . 
 The German tradition of local and regional autonomy differed structurally and culturally from the increasingly centralized authority of such other European states as France , England , and Spain . This difference made them vulnerable to the unabashed intervention of Spanish , French , Italian , Dutch , English and Scots mercenaries and the influence of papal gold and changed the dynamic of internal German confessional and dynastic disputes . The great " players " of the Early Modern European political stage realized that they could enhance their own positions vis @-@ a @-@ vis one another by assisting , promoting , or undermining local and regional competition among the German princes , as they did in the localized feud between Gebhard and Ernst . Conversely , German princes , dukes , and counts realized that they could gain an edge over their competitors by promoting the interests of powerful neighbors . The scale of the engagement of such external mercenary armies as Spain 's Army of Flanders set a precedent to internationalize contests of local autonomy and religious issues in the German states , a problem not settled until the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 . Even after that settlement , German states remained vulnerable to both external intervention and the religious division exemplified in the Cologne war . 
 = Every Sunday = 
 Every Sunday ( sometimes incorrectly listed as Every Sunday Afternoon or Opera vs. Jazz ) is a 1936 American short musical film . It tells the story of two young girls and their efforts to save a public concert series , which was being threatened by poor attendance . 
 Directed by Felix E. Feist , the film served as a screen test for , and is the first significant screen appearance of , two young actresses who would go on to become major stars , Judy Garland and Deanna Durbin . Although only lightly reviewed at the time of its release , the film has garnered a generally positive reputation among Garland biographers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Small town friends Edna ( Deanna Durbin ) and Judy ( Judy Garland ) are upset . Edna 's grandfather and his orchestra , who play free Sunday concerts at a local park , have been fired by the town council because the concerts are poorly attended . The girls hit upon the idea of singing at the concerts and set about promoting the next concert . The following Sunday Edna and Judy join <unk> on the bandstand . Edna 's operatic style and Judy 's swing bring crowds running from all over the park . The event is a huge success and <unk> 's concerts are saved . 
 = = Production = = 
 Deanna Durbin and Judy Garland were both under contract to Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer but the studio had not put them to work in films . With their contracts coming up for renewal , feelings among studio executives were that the studio didn 't need two girl singers . Every Sunday would serve as an extended screen test to decide which girl 's contract would be renewed . 
 Durbin recorded the aria Il <unk> for the film . Composers Con Conrad and Herb Magidson wrote a specialty number for Garland , " The Americana . " 
 Following the screening of the short for MGM executives , opinion was divided on whether Garland or Durbin should be retained . Finally , Louis B. Mayer , upon his return from a European trip , decreed that both girls should be kept . However , Durbin 's contract option had expired by then . She was signed by Universal Studios , where her first picture , Three Smart Girls , was so successful that it saved Universal from bankruptcy . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 As a short film that served as a second feature , Every Sunday received scant critical attention upon its release . Durbin 's hometown newspaper , the Winnipeg Free Press , did praise the film , lamenting that it was " all too short " and citing Garland as a " girl singer of distinction . " 
 Garland biographers , when discussing the film in any detail , are generally complimentary both to the film and to Garland . " <unk> and fascinating ... Every Sunday gives us a marvelous glimpse of Judy 's talent in an unrefined state " is a typical comment , with the film " reveal [ ing ] how accomplished a performer Judy Garland already was at fourteen . " Durbin does not fare quite as well . Although described by one biographer as appearing " relaxed " and " happy " on film others dismiss her " diffidence " and call her " stiff . " 
 = StarCraft = 
 StarCraft is a military science fiction media franchise created by Chris Metzen and James Phinney , and owned by Blizzard Entertainment . The series centers on a galactic struggle for dominance between four species — the adaptable and mobile Terrans , the ever @-@ evolving insectoid Zerg , the powerfully enigmatic Protoss , and the " god @-@ like " Xel 'Naga creator race — in a distant part of the Milky Way galaxy known as the Koprulu Sector at the beginning of the 26th century . The series debuted with the video game StarCraft in 1998 . Since then it has grown to include a number of other games as well as eight novelizations , two Amazing Stories articles , a board game , and other licensed merchandise such as collectible statues and toys . 
 Blizzard Entertainment began planning StarCraft in 1995 , with a development team led by Metzen and Phinney . The game debuted at E3 1996 , and used a modified Warcraft II game engine . StarCraft also marked the creation of Blizzard Entertainment 's film department ; the game introduced high quality cinematics integral to the storyline of the series . Most of the original development team for StarCraft returned to work on the game 's official expansion pack , Brood War ; the game 's development began shortly after StarCraft was released . In 2001 , StarCraft : Ghost began development under Nihilistic Software . Unlike the previous real @-@ time strategy games in the series , Ghost was to be a stealth @-@ action game . After three years of development , work on the game was postponed in 2004 . Development of StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty began in 2003 ; the game was later announced on May 19 , 2007 and was released on July 27 , 2010 . The StarCraft II franchise continued with the StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm expansion , which was released on March 12 , 2013 . The third StarCraft II installment is titled StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void , released on November 10 , 2015 . 
 The original game and its official expansion have been praised as one of the benchmark real @-@ time strategy games of its time . The series has gathered a solid following around the world , particularly in South Korea , where professional players and teams participate in matches , earn sponsorships , and compete in televised matches . As of May 31 , 2007 , StarCraft and Brood War have sold almost 10 million copies combined . In addition , the series was awarded a star on the Walk of Game in 2006 , and holds four Guinness World Records in the Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition of 2008 . 
 = = Story = = 
 The story focuses on the activities of the three species in a part of the Milky Way known as the Koprulu Sector . Millennia before any of the events of the games , a species known as the Xel 'Naga genetically engineered the Protoss and later the Zerg in attempts to create pure beings . These experiments backfire and the Xel 'Naga are largely destroyed by the Zerg . Centuries before the beginning of StarCraft in 2499 , the hardline international government of Earth , the United Earth Directorate ( UED ) , commissions a colonization program as part of a solution to overpopulation . However , the computers automating the colony ships malfunction , propelling the Terran colonists far off course to the edge of Protoss space . Out of contact with Earth , they form various factions to maintain their interests . Intrigued by the behavior and mentality of the Terrans , the Protoss remain hidden to examine the humans , while protecting them from other threats without their knowledge . However , the Zerg target the Terrans for assimilation to harness their psionic potential , forcing the Protoss to destroy tainted Terran colonies to contain the Zerg infestation . 
 StarCraft begins just days after the first of these attacks , where the predominant Terran government , the Confederacy of Man , falls into a state of panic as it comes under attack by both the Zerg and the Protoss , in addition to increasing rebel activity led by Arcturus Mengsk against its rule . The Confederacy eventually succumbs to Mengsk 's rebels when they use Confederate technology to lure the Zerg into attacking the Confederate capital , Tarsonis . In the consequent power vacuum , Mengsk crowns himself emperor of a new Terran Dominion . However , during the assault on Tarsonis , Mengsk allows the Zerg to capture and infest his psychic second @-@ in @-@ command , Sarah Kerrigan . This betrayal prompts Mengsk 's other commander , Jim Raynor , to desert him with a small army . Having retreated with Kerrigan to their primary hive clusters , the Zerg are assaulted by Protoss forces commanded by Tassadar and the dark templar Zeratul . Through assassinating a Zerg cerebrate , Zeratul inadvertently allows the Overmind to learn the location of the Protoss homeworld , Aiur . The Overmind quickly launches an invasion to assimilate the Protoss and gain genetic perfection . Pursued by his own people as a heretic for siding with the dark templar , Tassadar returns with Zeratul to Aiur and with the assistance of Raynor and the templar Fenix , Tassadar launches an attack on the Overmind and ultimately sacrifices himself to kill the creature . 
 In Brood War , the Protoss are now led by Zeratul and Artanis . They begin to evacuate the surviving population of Aiur to the dark templar homeworld of Shakuras under a fragile alliance between the two untrusting branches of the Protoss . On Shakuras , they are misled by Kerrigan into attacking the Zerg to advance Kerrigan 's quest to securing power over the Zerg . This deception comes after she reveals that a new Overmind has entered incubation . Meanwhile , Earth decides to take action in the sector , sending a fleet to conquer the Terran Dominion and capture the new Overmind . Although successfully taking the Dominion capital Korhal and enslaving the Overmind , the UED 's efforts to capture Mengsk are thwarted by a double agent working for Kerrigan , Samir Duran . Kerrigan , allying with Mengsk , Fenix and Raynor , launches a campaign against the UED , recapturing Korhal . However , she turns against her allies ; Fenix and Duke both perish in the ensuing attacks . Kerrigan later blackmails Zeratul into killing the new Overmind , giving her full control over the entire Zerg Swarm . After defeating a retaliatory attack by the Protoss , Dominion and the UED , consequently destroying the last of the UED fleet , Kerrigan and her Zerg broods become the dominant power in the sector . 
 Four years later , in Wings of Liberty , Kerrigan and the Zerg suddenly vanish from the Koprulu Sector , allowing the Protoss to once again take on a passive role in the galaxy . Meanwhile , Raynor forms a revolutionary group named Raynor 's Raiders in order to overthrow Mengsk . On Mar Sara , Raynor liberates the local population from Dominion control and also discovers a component of a mysterious Xel 'Naga artifact . The Zerg suddenly reappear and overrun Mar Sara , forcing Raynor to arrange an evacuation to his battlecruiser , the Hyperion . The Raiders embark on a series of missions to undermine Mengsk , stop frequent Zerg infestations on Terran worlds , gather psychic individuals for military assets , and find the remaining pieces of the Xel 'Naga artifact , which they sell to the enigmatic Moebius Foundation in order to fund their revolution . Soon after , Zeratul delivers a psychic crystal that allows Raynor to share visions involving an ominous prophecy where Zerg @-@ Protoss hybrids and an enslaved Zerg swarm wipe out the Terrans and the Protoss . The vision reveals that only Kerrigan has the power to prevent the eradication of all life in the sector and beyond . After collecting more artifact pieces , the Raiders forge an alliance with Valerian Mengsk , Arcturus ' son , who is their secret benefactor from Moebius Foundation . After recovering the final artifact piece , Valerian and Raynor work together to invade the Zerg world of Char and use the artifact to restore Kerrigan 's humanity , thus weakening the Zerg at the cost of much of the Dominion fleet . However , an agent of Arcturus makes an attempt on Kerrigan 's life , and Raynor defends her and takes her in for medical examination . 
 In Heart of the Swarm , the Dominion discovers where Raynor and Kerrigan are hiding and launch an attack on them . Kerrigan manages to escape , but is cut off from Raynor and upon hearing news that he was captured and executed , she returns to Zerg territory to retake control of the swarm and enact revenge on Mengsk . During her quest , she has an encounter with Zeratul , who advises her to travel to Zerus , the original homeworld of the Zerg , where she not only regains her powers as the Queen of Blades , returning stronger than ever , but also learns that a fallen Xel 'Naga named Amon was responsible for making the Zerg what they are : A warring swarm , bound to a single overriding will . After confronting a legion of servants of Amon , including a breed of Protoss @-@ Zerg hybrids , Mengsk informs Kerrigan that Raynor is still alive and uses him as a leverage against her , keeping the location where he is imprisoned a secret , until she joins forces with the Hyperion to locate and rescue him . However , seeing that she discarded her humanity after all the effort he took to restore it , Raynor rejects her , despite her confession that she loves him , and part ways with her . Kerrigan then turns her attention to Korhal and sends her forces to bring down Mengsk once and for all . However , during their showdown , Mengsk uses the artifact to immobilize her , but Raynor appears to protect her , and Mengsk is ultimately killed by Kerrigan . With the Dominion under control of Mengsk 's son Valerian , Kerrigan bids farewell to Raynor and departs with the Zerg Swarm to confront Amon and his forces . 
 In Legacy of the Void , Zeratul invades a Terran installation under control of Amon in order to pinpoint the exact location of his resurrection , taking advantage of a sudden attack by Kerrigan and the Zerg swarm . After obtaining the exact location , he departs to an ancient Xel 'Naga temple where he has a vision of Tassadar , who prompts him to claim the artifact in possession of the Terrans . Zeratul then returns to warn Artanis of Amon 's return , but he decides to proceed with his plans of leading his army to reclaim Aiur . However , Amon awakens on Aiur and takes control of the majority of the Protoss race through the Khala , the telepathic bond that unites all emotions for the Khalai faction of the Protoss . Only Zeratul and the Nerazim , the Dark Templar , are immune due to their lack of connection to the Khala , and the Nerazim proceed to save as many Khalai as they can by severing their nerve chords , which connect them to the Khala , with Zeratul sacrificing himself to save Artanis in the occasion . After escaping the planet with an ancient vessel , the Spear of Adun , Artanis reclaims the artifact as Zeratul suggested and gathers allies among the many Protoss tribes scattered across the galaxy in order to remake his army and launch another assault on Aiur . Using the artifact , Artanis ' forces restrain Amon 's essence , time enough for the other Khalai Protoss who were still under his control to sever their nerve chords and banish Amon to the Void . 
 In a short epilogue after the end of Legacy of the Void , Kerrigan calls for Artanis and Raynor 's help to confront Amon inside the Void to defeat him once and for all . In the occasion , they meet Ouros , the last of the Xel 'Naga who reveals that to confront Amon on equal terms , Kerrigan must inherit Ouros ' essence and become a Xel 'Naga herself , as Ouros himself is at the last of his strengths . Assisted by the Zerg , Terran and Protoss forces , the empowered Kerrigan vanquishes Amon , before disappearing without a trace . Two years later , Kerrigan appears before Raynor in human form and he departs with her to never be heard from again , while the Zerg , the Terran and the Protoss civilizations begin to rebuild in an age of peace and prosperity . 
 = = Games = = 
 The StarCraft series includes a core set of titles which carry the main storyline . These games were released in chronological order , with each new title following on from the events that are depicted in the previous title . A full second game , StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty , was released on July 27 , 2010 , taking place four years after the end of Brood War . Two expansions , Heart of the Swarm and Legacy of the Void ( both currently stand alone games ) , were planned from the beginning ; the former was released on March 12 , 2013 . 
 All the games in the main series are real @-@ time strategy games , where the player views the events as a military commander for each of the three species . In addition , two spin @-@ off titles have been released ; these are authorized expansion packs to the original which focus on other characters and settings based at the same time as the main storyline . Like the main series , these two titles are also real @-@ time strategy games . A spin @-@ off , StarCraft : Ghost , which was to be a third person action @-@ stealth game was in development , but has been placed on indefinite hiatus . 
 = = = StarCraft = = = 
 StarCraft , released for Windows on March 31 , 1998 , is the first video game in the StarCraft series . A science fiction real @-@ time strategy game , StarCraft is set in a distant sector of the Milky Way galaxy . A Mac OS version of the game was released by Blizzard Entertainment in March 1999 . A Nintendo 64 port including StarCraft , Brood War and a new secret mission " Resurrection IV " was released in the United States on June 13 , 2000 . The game 's story revolves around the appearance of two alien races in Terran space , and each race 's attempts to survive and adapt over the others . The player assumes three roles through the course of the three campaigns : a Confederate colonial governor who becomes a revolutionary commander , a Zerg cerebrate pushing forward the species ' doctrine of assimilation , and a Protoss fleet executor tasked with defending the Protoss from the Zerg . StarCraft soon gained critical acclaim , winning numerous awards , including being labelled " the best real @-@ time strategy game ever made " and being ranked the seventh best game of all time by IGN in both 2003 and 2005 , and the eleventh best game in 2007 . 
 StarCraft : Brood War is the official expansion pack for StarCraft , developed by Blizzard Entertainment and Saffire . Released for Windows and Mac OS in the United States on November 30 , 1998 , the expansion directly continues the events of StarCraft . The expansion 's story continues only days after the conclusion of the original game . It starts with the Protoss ' struggle to ensure the survival of their species and continues with the intervention of the United Earth Directorate into local Terran affairs . The livelihood of both the Protoss and the previously silent Earth government is then threatened by the ever @-@ increasing power of Sarah Kerrigan and her Zerg broods . In addition , the expansion introduces new features and improvements . A total of seven new units with different functions and abilities are included , the artificial intelligence behavior was modified , new graphical tilesets for terrain were added and the game 's level editor received improved scripting tools to facilitate cut scenes with the in @-@ game engine . The expansion received critical praise for fixing various balance issues with the original game , development attention on par with that of a full game and for continuing with single player campaigns that were heavily story @-@ driven . 
 = = = StarCraft II = = = 
 StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty is the official sequel to StarCraft released for Windows and Mac OS X by Blizzard Entertainment on July 27 , 2010 . The game was announced at the Worldwide Invitational in South Korea on May 19 , 2007 with a pre @-@ rendered cinematic cut scene trailer and a gameplay demonstration of the Protoss . Further demonstrations regarding the game 's new features have been showcased at subsequent <unk> and other games conventions . The game incorporates a new 3D graphics engine and adds new features such as the Havok physics engine . StarCraft II also incorporates DirectX 10 level effects in Windows . Originally envisioned as a single game , StarCraft II was split into three parts during development , one for focusing on each race . The base game , Wings of Liberty , follows the Terrans , while two expansion packs , Heart of the Swarm and Legacy of the Void are to be released to complement Wings of Liberty after release and further the story from the views of the Zerg and Protoss , respectively . The story of Wings of Liberty continues from four years after the conclusion of Brood War , and revolves around Jim Raynor 's struggles against the Terran Dominion . 
 StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm is an expansion pack to StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty and was released on March 12 , 2013 . It is part two of the StarCraft II trilogy . The expansion includes additional units and multiplayer changes from Wings of Liberty , as well as a continuing campaign focusing on Kerrigan and the Zerg race . It spans 27 missions ( 20 main missions and 7 side missions ) . 
 The saga of StarCraft is ultimately completed with StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void , which was released on November 10 , 2015 . StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void is a stand @-@ alone game in which new units are added to all three races as well as changing existing units , and also makes groundbreaking changes to the economy @-@ aspect of the game . The story of Starcraft is concluded by following the Protoss Race in their quest to reclaim their homeworld and for Kerrigan to ultimately slay the greatest threat to the entire universe . The game is divided by a 3 @-@ mission prologue , a 19 @-@ mission main story campaign followed by a 3 @-@ mission epilogue wrapping up . 
 At BlizzCon 2015 during the " Future of Starcraft 2 " presentation it was revealed that Blizzard will release additional mission packs to keep players engaged with Starcraft 2 . The first pack is called Nova Covert Ops , and will center around the character Nova . The mission pack will consist of three episodes , with a total of nine new missions . It does not require the purchase of StarCraft II , and can be played with the Starter Edition . The release date for the first episode is 29 March 2016 . At the same time Blizzard has announced that new commanders are planned to be added to the Co @-@ Op mode in Legacy of the Void as a DLC , with Karax to be the first addition given for free . 
 = = = Spin @-@ off titles = = = 
 The success of StarCraft has spurred the creation of two authorized add @-@ on titles to StarCraft , as well as a deviation into genres other than real @-@ time strategy . Insurrection was the first add @-@ on pack released for StarCraft . Although developed and published by <unk> New Media , it is authorized by Blizzard Entertainment . It was released for the PC on July 31 , 1998 . The expansion 's story focuses on a Confederate colony during the course of the first campaign of StarCraft . As in StarCraft , the player takes control of each race in three separate campaigns . In the first campaign , Terran colonists attempt to defend themselves from the Zerg invasion of the sector as well as from a rising insurgency . The second campaign has the player directing a Protoss task force sent to clear the Zerg infestation of the colony by any means necessary . In the final campaign the player assumes the role of a Zerg cerebrate , whose goal is to crush all opposition on the surface . The expansion contains 30 new campaign missions and over 100 new multiplayer maps , although it does not include new content such as units and graphical terrain tilesets . Insurrection was criticized by reviewers for lacking the quality of the original game and it is not widely available . Although the add @-@ on is authorized by Blizzard Entertainment , they offer no comment on support or availability of the game . 
 Retribution is the second of the two authorized add @-@ on packs released for StarCraft . The add @-@ on was developed by Stardock and published by <unk> Software . It was released for the PC in late 1998 . The game is set during the second campaign in StarCraft , revolving around the acquisition of a crystal of immense power connected to the Xel 'Naga . Divided into three campaigns , the player assumes the roles of a Protoss fleet executor , the commander of a Dominion task force and a Zerg cerebrate , all tasked with retrieving the crystal from a Dominion colony and getting it off the planet as quickly as possible . As with its predecessor , Retribution does not include any new gameplay features beyond its single player campaigns and an abundance of multiplayer levels . The add @-@ on was not well received by reviewers , and instead was regarded as average but at least challenging . Retribution is not widely available , and Blizzard Entertainment offers no comment regarding support or the availability of Retribution despite authorizing the add @-@ on . 
 StarCraft : Ghost is a tactical stealth game for consoles developed under supervision of Blizzard Entertainment . Announced in 2002 , the game was constantly delayed due to various issues , most notably including a change of development team from Nihilistic Software to Swingin ' Ape Studios in July 2004 . As updates for the game became less frequent and the graphics and game mechanics more outdated , suspicion began to grow that Blizzard would cancel the game . On March 24 , 2006 , Blizzard indefinitely postponed the game 's development . The story of the game is based around Nova , a psychic assassin in the employ of the Terran Dominion . Although frequently used as an example of development hell , Blizzard Entertainment 's Rob Pardo has indicated that he would like the game to be completed in the future , and Blizzard Entertainment refuses to list the game as having been canceled . 
 On August 23 , 2014 in an interview with Polygon about the cancellation of Blizzard 's next gen MMO Titan Chris Metzen confirmed that StarCraft : Ghost was also cancelled . " It was hard when we canceled Warcraft Adventures . It was hard when we canceled StarCraft : Ghost , " he said . " But it has always resulted in better @-@ quality work . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Blizzard Entertainment began planning development on StarCraft in 1995 , shortly after the beginning of development for Diablo . The development was led by Chris Metzen and James Phinney , who also created the game 's fictional universe . Using the Warcraft II : Tides of Darkness game engine as a base , StarCraft made its debut at E3 1996 . The game 's success led to the development of two authorized add @-@ ons , which were both released in 1998 . However , neither of the two add @-@ ons were particularly well received by critics . StarCraft also marked the debut of Blizzard Entertainment 's film department . Previously , cinematic cut scenes were seen as simply gap fillers that often deviated from the game , but with StarCraft and later Brood War introducing high quality cinematics integral to the storyline of the series , Blizzard Entertainment is cited as having changed this perception and became one of the first game companies to raise the standard regarding such cut scenes . 
 StarCraft 's success also inspired third @-@ party developer Microstar Software to release an unauthorized add @-@ on , entitled Stellar Forces , in May 1998 . Blizzard Entertainment consequently filed a lawsuit against Microstar for selling the add @-@ on , arguing that as the product was unauthorized and created using StarCraft 's level editing software , it was a breach of the end user license agreement . 
 In November 1998 , Blizzard Entertainment won the court case against Microstar Software . In the settlement , Microstar agreed to pay an undisclosed amount in punitive damages and to destroy all remaining copies of Stellar Forces in its possession , as well as to formally apologize to Blizzard Entertainment . 
 After the release of the first two add @-@ on packs , Blizzard Entertainment announced the official expansion pack to StarCraft , entitled Brood War . Most of the team at Blizzard Entertainment responsible for StarCraft returned to work on Brood War . Development on Brood War began shortly after StarCraft 's release , and Blizzard Entertainment were assisted by members of Saffire , who were contracted for a variety of tasks consisting of programming and design for levels , visuals and audio effects . 
 In 2001 , StarCraft : Ghost began development under Nihilistic Software , with the aim of releasing the game for the Xbox , PlayStation 2 and Nintendo GameCube during late 2003 . Unlike previous real @-@ time strategy StarCraft titles , Ghost was to be a tactical third @-@ person action game . Although the press was positive about the video game console direction taken by Ghost , the game was consistently delayed , and during the third quarter of 2004 , Nihilistic Software discontinued their work with the project . Blizzard stated that Nihilistic Software had completed the tasks it had been contracted for and that the game would be delivered on time . The game was never released . 
 StarCraft II was announced on May 19 , 2007 , nearly a decade after the original , at the Blizzard Worldwide Invitational in Seoul , South Korea . StarCraft II was being developed , under the codename Medusa , for concurrent release on Windows XP , Windows Vista and Mac OS X. Blizzard announced a release date for July 27 , 2010 . Development on the game began in 2003 , shortly after Warcraft III : The Frozen Throne was released . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Novelizations = = = 
 The StarCraft series is supported by eight novelizations , with at least two more in the works , all published by Simon & Schuster . At BlizzCon 2007 , Chris Metzen stated that he hoped to novelize the entirety of StarCraft and Brood War into a definitive text @-@ based story . The first novel , StarCraft : Uprising , was written by Micky Neilson , a Blizzard Entertainment employee , and originally released only as an e @-@ book in December 2000 . The novel follows the origins of the character Sarah Kerrigan . The second novel , entitled StarCraft : Liberty 's Crusade , serves as an adaptation of the first campaign of StarCraft , following on a journalist following a number of the key Terran characters in the series . Written by Jeff Grubb and published in March 2001 , it was the first StarCraft novel to be released in paperback . StarCraft : Shadow of the Xel 'Naga , published in July 2001 is the third novel , written by Kevin Anderson under the pseudonym Gabriel Mesta . It serves as a link between StarCraft and Brood War . The fantasy author Tracy Hickman was brought in to write the fourth novel , StarCraft : Speed of Darkness , which was published in June 2002 . Speed of Darkness is written from the viewpoint of a Confederate marine during the early stages of StarCraft . The first four novels , including the e @-@ book Uprising , were later re @-@ released as a single anthology entitled The StarCraft Archive in November 2007 . 
 A fifth novel entitled StarCraft : Queen of Blades was published in June 2006 . Written by Aaron S. Rosenberg , it is a novelization of the second campaign in StarCraft from the perspective of Jim Raynor . This was followed in November 2006 by StarCraft Ghost : Nova , a book focusing on the early origins of the character of Nova from the postponed StarCraft : Ghost game . Written by Keith R.A. DeCandido , the novel was meant to accompany the release of StarCraft : Ghost , but was continued despite the postponement of the game . In 2007 Christie Golden , an author whose previous work included novels in Blizzard 's Warcraft series , was brought in to write a trilogy entitled the StarCraft : The Dark Templar Saga . The trilogy acts as a link between StarCraft and its sequel StarCraft II . The first installment , Firstborn being published in May 2007 and Shadow Hunters , the second novel , being published in November 2007 . The final part of the trilogy , Twilight was released in June 2009 . I , Mengsk was publish in 2009 , a novel that was written by Graham McNeill which focuses on the origins of the characters in the Mengsk family . Last January 2010 Keith R.A. DeCandido and David Gerrold authored the " StarCraft : Ghost Academy " to elaborate the training of Nova as an espionage agent and in September 2011 , Simon & Schuster published the " StarCraft Ghost : Spectres " as a sequel to the novel " StarCraft Ghost : Nova " . Timothy Zahn will release an unnamed Starcraft novel in 2016 . 
 In addition to these , Blizzard Entertainment authorized two short stories in Amazing Stories magazine , entitled StarCraft : Revelations and StarCraft : Hybrid . Revelations was authored by series creator Chris Metzen and Sam Moore , a Blizzard employee , and was featured on the cover of the 1999 spring edition with art by Blizzard 's art director Samwise Didier . Hybrid was written by Micky Neilson and again was accompanied by artwork by Didier ; the short story was published in the spring edition of 2000 . At New York Comic @-@ Con in 2008 , TokyoPop announced that they would be producing a number of StarCraft graphic novels . Two series were announced : StarCraft : Frontline , which is a series of short story anthologies that spanned four volumes , and StarCraft : Ghost Academy , which was written by Keith R.A. DeCandido and follows several characters , such as Nova , during their training as the psychic assassins called " ghosts " . There was a Starcraft graphic novel released in 2010 , produced by Wildstorm and DC Comics , which features outlaws working on a last job , the assassination of Jim Raynor . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 A number of action figures and collectable statues based upon the characters and units in StarCraft have been produced by ToyCom . A number of model kits , made by Academy Hobby Model Kits , were also produced , displaying 1 / 30 scale versions of the marine and the hydralisk . In addition , Blizzard Entertainment teamed up with Fantasy Flight Games to create a board game based in the StarCraft universe . Blizzard Entertainment also licensed Wizards of the Coast to produce an <unk> based game entitled StarCraft Adventures . 
 = = Reception and cultural impact = = 
 The StarCraft series has been a commercial success . After its release , StarCraft became the best @-@ selling PC game for that year , selling over 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . In the next decade , StarCraft sold over 9 @.@ 5 million copies across the globe , with 4 @.@ 5 million of these being sold in South Korea . Since the initial release of StarCraft , Blizzard Entertainment reported that its Battle.net online multiplayer service grew by 800 percent . StarCraft remains one of the most popular online games in the world . After its release , StarCraft rapidly grew in popularity in South Korea , establishing a successful pro @-@ gaming scene . Pro @-@ gamers in South Korea are niche media celebrities and StarCraft games broadcast over three television channels dedicated to gaming . StarCraft has won numerous Game of the Year awards , is often described as one of the best real @-@ time strategy games made , and is widely credited with popularizing the use of distinct and unique sides — as opposed to sides of equal ability and strength — in real @-@ time strategy games . 
 Although Insurrection and Retribution were not particularly well received , StarCraft : Brood War generally received very positive reviews , with an aggregate GameRankings score of 95 @.@ 00 % . The magazine PC Zone gave Brood War a short but flattering review , describing it as having " definitely been worth the wait " and also drew note to the cinematic cut scenes , stating that they " actually feel like part of the story rather than an afterthought . " IGN stated that Brood War 's enhancements were " enough to enrich the core gameplay without losing the flavor " while GameSpot noted that the expansion was developed with the same level of care as the full game . 
 The release of StarCraft II : Wings of Liberty performed very well commercially and critically , selling 1 @.@ 8 million copies within the first forty eight hours of release , which breaks the record of best selling strategy game in the history of the gaming industry . It received very positive reviews with an aggregate GameRankings score of 93 % , and was nominated as the " Best PC Game of 2010 " on Gamespot . This success continued with the release of the first expansion pack , StarCraft II : Heart of the Swarm , which had a GameRankings aggregate score of 86 % . The expansion pack sold 1 @.@ 1 million copies within the first two days of its release on March 12 , 2013 , and was the best @-@ selling PC game in that quarter . StarCraft II : Legacy of the Void , the third expansion pack , was similarly well received , having a GameRankings aggregate score of 88 % while selling more than 1 million copies worldwide within the first day of its release . 
 Since the release of StarCraft II a number of tournaments have been hosted in Korea and elsewhere , such as the <unk> Global StarCraft II League ( GSL ) . 
 = Britney and Kevin : Chaotic = 
 Britney and Kevin : Chaotic is an American reality television series created by Anthony E. Zuiker . Starring American recording artist Britney Spears and her then @-@ husband Kevin Federline , the five @-@ episode series aired on UPN from May 17 to June 14 , 2005 . The series chronicles the couple 's relationship from their courtship , engagement and wedding . 
 A majority of the footage was originally shot for Spears ' own reality series to document the European leg of The Onyx Hotel Tour in the spring of 2004 . Spears fell and injured her left knee during the shooting of the music video for " Outrageous " , causing the remainder of the tour and the series to be cancelled . 
 Britney and Kevin : Chaotic was heavily criticized by critics , who considered the series to be career suicide for Spears . Critics noted Spears ' excessive narcissism and criticized the themes of the series as being too explicit . The DVD release of Britney and Kevin : Chaotic included Spears ' first extended play of the same name . 
 = = Background = = 
 MTV News announced in April 2004 that Spears was planning a reality television series to document her backstage life during the European leg of The Onyx Hotel Tour . Pitched as OnTourage , footage from the six @-@ week leg was to be compiled into a six @-@ episode series , with each episode selling for about $ 1 million , " much more than most reality programs " . Spears was to narrate and shoot footage of her with her dancers and handlers . The show was planned to be completed " as early as summer " . 
 On June 8 , Spears was shooting the music video for " Outrageous " in Manhattan , when she fell and injured her left knee . She was taken immediately to a local hospital and underwent arthroscopic surgery the next day . She was forced to remain six weeks with a thigh brace , followed by eight to twelve weeks of rehabilitation , which caused any future concerts to be canceled . As a result , OnTourage was also scrapped . 
 In July , Spears announced her engagement to American dancer Kevin Federline , whom she had met three months before . As Federline had only recently ended his relationship with actress Shar Jackson , who was pregnant with their second child , this engagement was the subject of extensive media coverage . They held a wedding ceremony on September 18 , 2004 , but were not legally married until three weeks later on October 6 due to a delay finalizing the couple 's prenuptial agreement . In October 2004 , the singer announced she would be taking another career break to start a family . 
 = = Development = = 
 After a " fierce bidding war " , on April 5 , 2005 , it was announced that Spears had signed a deal with UPN to air a reality television series documenting her relationship with Federline . The series , which would air in five episodes , was revealed to chronicle the relationship " from the earliest stages of their courtship to their engagement and ultimately , their stroll down the aisle " . In a statement about the series , Spears stated : " From the day that Kevin and I met , there have been constant rumors and inaccurate speculation about our lives together . I feel that last year , the tabloids ran my life , and I am really excited about showing my fans what really happened , rather than all the stories , which have been misconstrued by journalists in the past . As I mentioned before , I am now going to be expressing my personal life through art " . 
 The series was initially titled Britney and Kevin : Can You Handle Our Truth ? , before its title was changed to Britney and Kevin : Chaotic , with " Can you handle our truth ? " becoming its tagline . A majority of the footage shot for OnTourage was used for Britney and Kevin : Chaotic . According to Spears , the series helped the couple to know each other more , saying : " I didn 't know [ Kevin ] that well , and when I got the camera out , it made me feel better . It 's really weird because it was like all this tension at first . We were so nervous being together . I 'm really shy , and when I had the camera in my hand , it made me feel more outspoken . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Britney and Kevin : Chaotic was heavily criticized by critics . Taylor <unk> of Flak Magazine considered the series an " insult to common sense and decency " , while commenting that " Britney 's ridiculous behavior in Chaotic confirms the obvious transparency of her status as a ' celebrity product ' and the calculated nature of her success " . He also noted that music critics would " easily open the floodgates for new and creative ways to discuss her offense to pop culture 's attempts at meaningfulness " . Aaron Beierle of DVD Talk reviewed the series as an " absolute disaster of the highest order " , while writing that : " [ Britney & Kevin : Chaotic ] is an absolutely watchable and horrifying train wreck of a series " . Slant Magazine writer Ed Gonzalez noted that " the show 's extreme shooting style makes it especially hard to stare at what is — no more no less — a totem to the pop singer 's narcissism " . He stated that the views Spears expresses in the series suggest that she is " someone who believes they 're the only person on the face of the earth " . 
 Josh Wolk of Entertainment Weekly felt that Britney and Kevin : Chaotic was Spears ' " career suicide by <unk> " , commenting , " the truth is not only that she 's vapid , but that she 's self @-@ obsessed to a dangerous degree " . Wolk also noted " many intersecting things wrong on this show and with Britney that I can 't possibly prioritize them " . Laura Fries of Variety perceived the series as " a visual assault of nauseating camera angles , likely to upset even the most desensitized TV viewer " . Hayley Butler of Jam ! gave the final episode of the series a mixed review , saying it " was full of tear @-@ jerking moments " and " the only episode not full of stupid jokes , childish behaviour and Britney 's thoughts on life " , commenting that Spears and Federline wedding scenes " looked to be a very emotional and touching event " . Butler also wondered " if they feel their show served its purpose " . 
 = = U.S. television ratings = = 
 The first episode of the series was seen by 3 @.@ 7 million viewers , making it UPN 's most @-@ watched piece of regularly scheduled programming in the 9pm Tuesday timeslot since March 2004 . The second episode garnered 3 million viewers , finishing in eighty @-@ first in its timeslot for the week . The third and fourth episode were viewed by 2 @.@ 5 million viewers each , while the final , aired an hour earlier at 8 : 00pm Eastern Standard Time , drew 2 @.@ 1 million viewers . In one month , Britney and Kevin : Chaotic lost 1 @.@ 6 million viewers . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Home media = = 
 Britney & Kevin : Chaotic ... the DVD & More was released on September 27 , 2005 in the United States . The DVD contains the series ' five episodes , as well as unreleased footage and music videos for " Do Somethin ' " ( 2005 ) and " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " ( 2005 ) . Also included is a photo gallery of the couple 's wedding ceremony . Spears ' first extended play of the same name was included as a bonus CD to the DVD release . The presentation is offered in the aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 33 : 1 . In Japan , the DVD peaked at number forty on the Oricon DVD chart , staying on the chart for 4 weeks . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Dean in Mexico = 
 The effects of Hurricane Dean in Mexico were more severe than anywhere else in the storm 's path . Hurricane Dean , the most intense storm of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season , formed in the Atlantic Ocean west of Cape Verde on August 14 , 2007 . The Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane sped through the Caribbean Sea , rapidly intensifying before making landfall on Mexico 's Yucatán Peninsula . Accurate forecasts of the storm 's location and intensity enabled thorough preparations ; nevertheless when the massive storm made landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula as a catastrophic Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale it damaged thousands of homes . 
 Weakening as it crossed the peninsula , Dean emerged into the Bay of Campeche and re @-@ strengthened before making a second landfall in Veracruz . Although the second landfall did not bring winds as intense as the first , it brought more rainfall and caused devastating landslides in the states of Veracruz and Tabasco . Between the two landfalls , Dean caused MXN $ 2 billion ( US $ 184 million ; 2007 dollars ) of damage and killed 13 people . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = First landfall = = = 
 Forecasters and computer models at the Miami @-@ based National Hurricane Center predicted that Hurricane Dean would impact the Yucatán Peninsula a full 6 days before the storm actually arrived . The hurricane 's stable and well predicted path gave all of the countries in the region ample time to prepare for its arrival . On August 17 , at the request of the Quintana Roo state government , which was expecting their state to suffer a direct hit , the Civil Protection Office of Mexico 's federal Interior Ministry declared a state of emergency for the entire state . This included the towns and cities of Cancún , Playa del Carmen , and Chetumal as well as the islands of Cozumel , Isla Mujeres and Holbox . 
 On August 18 authorities began evacuating people from parts of Quintana Roo , moving 2 @,@ 500 people from Holbox Island and a further 80 @,@ 000 tourists from elsewhere in the state . Air @-@ evacuations of tourists were stopped when Dean 's outer rainbands closed almost a dozen Cancún and Cozumel airports on the evening of August 20 . The Campeche airport closed shortly thereafter . The state government set up 530 storm shelters in schools and other public buildings , prepared to hold 73 @,@ 000 people . With 20 @,@ 000 food packages ready , the state of Yucatán , Quintana Roo 's neighbor to the northwest , declared a green alert indicating a low but significant level of danger . 
 World Vision and other international aid agencies prepared blankets , sheets , personal hygiene items and medicines for quick transport to affected areas . The United States pre @-@ positioned a three @-@ person disaster management team into the Yucatán before the storm 's arrival with the intent of helping coordinate disaster management if necessary . The U.S. State Department urged its citizens in Quintana Roo , Yucatán , and Campeche to prepare for the storm and to evacuate if necessary . The department also relocated its non @-@ essential personnel from those states to Mexico City . At 1500 UTC on August 19 a hurricane watch was issued on the Yucatán Peninsula from Chetumal to San Felipe and final preparations were rushed to completion . 
 = = = Second landfall = = = 
 On August 20 , warnings for Dean 's second landfall were issued . The coast from Progreso to Ciudad del Carmen was put under a hurricane warning and the coast from Cancún at the tip of the Yucatán Peninsula west to Progreso . At 0300 UCT , August 21 , a tropical storm watch was issued for the coast from Chilitepec to Veracruz , and a hurricane watch was issued from Chilitepec to Tampico , Tamaulipas . As Dean began to cross the Yucatán Peninsula and maintained its structure better than forecasters had expected , these watches and warnings were expanded . At their peak , a hurricane warning covered the area from Campeche , Campeche , to Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz , and a tropical storm warning stretched from Tampico to La Cruz , Tamaulipas . 
 Residents in Veracruz stocked up on essential supplies , especially food and water , ahead of the storm 's second landfall . At the request of the government of Veracruz , federal Secretary of the Interior Francisco Ramírez Acuña declared a state of emergency for 81 municipalities ahead of Hurricane Dean 's expected landfall in the state . This gave local authorities access to the resources of the Revolving Fund of the National Natural Disaster Fund to take care of the nutrition , health , and shelter their populations should the storm 's damage require it . 
 Although Dean was still a hurricane and was expected to re @-@ strengthen slightly before making its second landfall , the fact that it had weakened caused some residents to let down their guard . As a result , residents of Veracruz and Campeche were much less prepared for the storm than those on the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = First landfall = = = 
 The hurricane hit land near Majahual on the Quintana Roo coast of the Yucatán Peninsula at 0830 UTC on August 21 . Wind gusts of 200 mph ( 320 km / h ) were reported . The state 's tourist cities of Cancún and Cozumel were spared the worst of the storm , but it wreaked havoc in the state capital Chetumal , some 40 mi ( 65 km ) south of landfall , causing significant flooding . Communication with the Mayan communities near the landfall location was initially difficult , but the town of Majahual , which had a population of 200 , was " almost flattened " by the storm . Storm surge and high winds severely damaged or destroyed hundreds of buildings and had the strength to crumple steel girders . About 15 @,@ 000 families were left homeless , primarily in small villages around Quintana Roo . At the Costa Maya cruise port , waves tore away portions of the concrete docks and destroyed the boardwalk . The damage made the port unsuitable for cruise ships , effectively freezing the region 's tourism industry until they could be repaired . The hurricane 's winds damaged 2 @.@ 3 million ha ( 5 @.@ 7 million acres ) of jungle , almost all of it in Quintana Roo , Yucatán , and Campeche . 
 At its first landfall , the bulk of Hurricane Dean 's damage was to agriculture . 12 @,@ 000 producers suffered losses , mostly in the states of Quintana Roo and Yucatán . 30 @,@ 000 ha ( 74 @,@ 000 acre ) of <unk> peppers were destroyed , along with 150 @,@ 000 ha ( 370 @,@ 000 acre ) of corn and 60 @,@ 000 ha ( 150 @,@ 000 acre ) of citrus . Extensive damage to fields planted with bananas , avocados , cucumbers , squash , jalapeño peppers , and other crops were also reported on the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 President Felipe Calderón cut short a visit to Canada to return to Mexico and assess the damage . Hurricane Dean 's Category 5 landfall – the first such landfall in the Atlantic basin in 15 years – took no lives . International organizations , including the United Nations , attributed this to the government 's thorough preparations and forecasters ' ample warning . 
 = = = Second landfall = = = 
 The next day , at 1630 UTC on August 22 , Hurricane Dean made a second landfall , this time near the town of Tecolutla , Veracruz , as a Category 2 hurricane . Following the second landfall on the Veracruz coast , <unk> town saw the Dean ´ s eye , then in a 30 @-@ minute period free clouds and sunny conditions and after that the last strongest eyewall which caused many trees felled and blew roof off ; two rivers in the mountains of the state of Hidalgo overflowed , and rain fell as far west as the Pacific coast . Veracruz Governor Fidel Herrera said there was " a tremendous amount of damage " . Petroleum production was not severely damaged and quickly returned to normal , although its brief interruption was responsible for a 6 % year @-@ on @-@ year decrease in third quarter . 
 Hurricane Dean , at its second landfall , dropped 4 to 8 in ( 100 to 200 mm ) of rainfall across the western states of Jalisco and Nayarit . This rainfall trigged a mudslide in Jalisco which fell on 10 houses and killed one of the occupants . Landslides in Puebla killed five people , and another was crushed when a wall in his house collapsed . One person in Veracruz was electrocuted after touching a power line while repairing his roof . In Michoacán , as the outer bands of the storm swept over the state , a man sheltering under a tree was struck by lightning . Two women died in Hidalgo when heavy rain collapsed their house 's roof . Another man drowned while trying to cross a rain @-@ swollen river in <unk> , Oaxaca . The heavy rains caused dozens of smaller landslides throughout the country , particularly in Veracruz and Tabasco , but most of them caused no fatalities . At least 50 @,@ 000 houses were damaged to varying degrees throughout the country . Although Dean 's rains caused flooding as far inland as Mexico City , where they closed a portion of Puebla @-@ Mexico highway , the damage was concentrated in the states of Quintana Roo and Veracruz . 
 As with its first landfall , Hurricane Dean damaged crops throughout its impact area . In Puebla it destroyed 135 @,@ 000 ha ( 335 @,@ 000 acre ) of corn and more than 22 @,@ 000 ha ( 54 @,@ 000 acre ) of coffee , while in Veracruz 15 @,@ 000 ha ( 37 @,@ 000 acre ) of various crops were lost . Unlike in Belize and the Eastern Caribbean , the storm spared the sugarcane crop in Veracruz . 
 Between the hurricane 's two landfalls , Dean affected an estimated 207 @,@ 800 people in the states of Quintana Roo , Campeche , Veracruz , Hildalgo , Puebla and Tabasco . The storm damaged 85 miles ( 140 km ) of power lines and left more than 100 @,@ 000 people without electricity . Landslides , storm tides , and widespread structural damage combined to compromise water sources throughout the country . The extent of the damage was never calculated at a federal level , but hundreds of villages lost access to fresh water in the days following the storm . Hurricane Dean killed 12 people in Mexico but none of the deaths occurred during its first and most powerful landfall on the Yucatán Peninsula . Between the two landfalls the storm caused a total of Mex $ 2 billion ( US $ 184 million ) of damages . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Post @-@ storm analysis showed that , while less deadly , Dean 's first and more powerful landfall caused significantly more infrastructural damage than its second . Where the landfall occurred at the town of Majahual specifically , and the state of Quintana Roo generally , communities took longer to recover than in the rest of the country . Quintana Roo Governor Félix González Canto reported that although the cleanup in the state capital of Chetumal was completed within three weeks , it took more than six months to fix all of the region 's rural roads . Unable to handle the hurricane 's aftermath , the state government appealed to federal authorities and secured Mex $ 755 million ( US $ 74 @.@ 8 million ) of aid . Combined with the state 's contribution of $ 270 million ( US $ 26 @.@ 7 million ) , a housing @-@ repair fund of over $ 1 @,@ 025 million ( US $ 101 @.@ 5 million ) was established . In the three months immediately following the storm , over 37 @,@ 000 houses were rebuilt or repaired using monies from this fund . 
 In the days following the hurricane , immediate access to clean water was a priority for international aid agencies working in Mexico . The National Commission of Water spent another $ 25 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 47 million ) of federal funds repairing the damaged infrastructure for irrigation and drinking water . 
 Carnival Cruise Lines and Royal Caribbean Cruises , the world 's two largest <unk> operators , diverted their ships away from the damaged cruise port of Puerto Costa Maya . Their plans originally expected diversions until at least 2009 , but the central government was quick to fund rebuilding of the destroyed concrete piers . By June 2008 they were rebuilt to accommodate even larger ships than before , and ships scheduled stops there for September 2008 . 
 The federal government was initially lauded for its swift and thorough preparation to which most observers , including the United Nations , attributed Dean 's low death toll . However , after the storm there were several accusations of political motivation in the distribution of aid . Members of President Felipe Calderón 's Partido <unk> Nacional ( PAN ) distributed bags of bread , funded by the nation 's disaster relief coffers , carrying the party 's logo . In Veracruz Governor Fidel Herrera was accused by both the PAN and his own Partido Revolucionario <unk> ( PRI ) of using state resources , including hurricane relief , to support the campaigns of PRI candidates . 
 = Beautiful Heartache = 
 Beautiful Heartache is a 2009 music album by Russian pianist and singer @-@ songwriter , Oksana Grigorieva , with Mel Gibson as executive producer . Born in <unk> , Russia , Grigorieva studied music in Moscow and Kazan , and at the Royal College of Music in London . She later moved to the U.S. and patented a technique of instructing music notation to children . Grigorieva gained attention as a songwriter in 2006 after a song that she wrote , " Un Dia <unk> " , became popular on the Josh Groban album Awake . 
 Grigorieva signed with Gibson 's music label , and the two began production on her first music album . She composed all songs on the album . Gibson served as co @-@ writer on the song , " Say My Name , " and recorded four music videos for the album 's release . The album was positively received by the media , including ABC News and Reuters . IndieLondon gave the album a rating of 4 out of 5 . 
 = = Musician = = 
 Grigorieva was born in <unk> , Russia . Her parents were music professors . She grew up in Ukraine , and at the age of 15 moved to Moscow to attend university in order to learn piano . She said of her experience of learning music as a child , " Diplomas were everything . It wasn 't unusual for students to play ten hours a day . Our skin would start to crack . We 'd literally have bleeding fingers . " Grigorieva finished conservatoire studies in Kazan , and moved to London where she continued her studies and taught music to others . After studying at the Royal College of Music , she moved to the United States and spent time living in New York and Los Angeles , California . She taught music in the U.S. , and patented a technique of instructing music notation to children . Grigorieva composed and performed music , and produced works for theatre and advertisements . A 2006 song she wrote , " Un Dia <unk> " , became popular on the Josh Groban album , Awake ; this garnered her recognition as a songwriter . 
 = = Production = = 
 Grigorieva had signed with Gibson 's music label prior to the album 's release . The music project was made by the film production company Icon Entertainment , owned by Gibson . She wrote all of the songs on the album , and received a credit as producer with Gibson listed as executive producer . Grigorieva explained the choice of title for the album , in an interview with IndieLondon , " Well , one of the tracks on the album is called Beautiful Heartache ... everybody has a heartbreak at some point in their lives . It ’ s how you deal with it that ’ s important . So , I guess I was drawn to that notion for the album title . " 
 In an interview with The Times , she commented , " I 'm very lucky they offered me the chance to follow my dreams , but also to allow me to produce my own album , which is hardly ever offered to first @-@ time artists . He believes in me that much . I 'm really blessed ... It 's the most incredible gift that Mr Gibson could have given me . " She acknowledged to the Herald Sun that it was helpful to have Gibson 's production company assist with her music career , " If you think about it , every talent needs a serious push and help from somebody who is stronger , because it 's pretty much impossible for anybody to succeed in this industry . So I 've become very lucky , and I 'm very grateful . You don 't control the situations or the people you meet . I did not plan this . I 'm just doing what I 've always been doing . It 's not like I 've changed my goals at all . " 
 Gibson contributed lyrics to multiple tracks on the album . The track , " Say My Name " , was co @-@ written by Grigorieva and Gibson . Grigorieva described " Say My Name " , stating , " It is naked , intimate , raw emotion . It is the first and one of the simplest songs on the album , but also one of the most intimate . " She characterized it as , " little more than piano and voice as if it is a cry from the soul " . Gibson provided guest vocals for two tracks on the album . Grigorieva stated of Gibson 's singing on the album , " Mel is an incredible artist . He has a great voice . He is a visionary . He enabled me to produce this , for my music to live . " 
 Gibson served as director of four music videos intended to accompany the release of the album . The music videos were filmed over a seven @-@ day period in Mexico . Grigorieva stated of working with Gibson as a music video director , " I kept asking him , ' Please , give me directions ! ' I said , ' You can yell at me if you want to ' . But he said , ' No , you 're doing just fine . You 're a good actor ' . He was very much into his own world , painting pictures with the camera . " In describing the music videos , she observed , " They 're like dramatic miniature films a whirlpool of different , exciting , bright images . " Grigorieva toured to promote her album , during October 2009 . The first single from the album , " Say My Name " , was released in June 2009 on the website <unk> as a listening exclusive . Beautiful Heartache was released on November 2 , 2009 . It was made available in 2009 on iTunes , and via download on the musician 's official website , at <unk> 
 = = Contents = = 
 Beautiful Heartache was marketed as " grown @-@ up , piano @-@ led pop , heavy on classical motifs " . The first single released for the album was titled , " Say My Name " . A music video for the second single released from the album featured Grigorieva on the piano , as well as portraying an assistant to a knife @-@ thrower . The album includes a title track , " Beautiful Heartache " , with lyrics including : " I love the way you wear your skin . " The music video for the track , " Beautiful Heartache " , focused on a tango theme . The song " Angel " was named for her son with Timothy Dalton , Alexander . 
 = = Reception = = 
 ABC News reported that Beautiful Heartache garnered the singer " rave reviews " from music critics . Reuters commented of the album , " ' Beautiful Heartache ' features a collection of wistful love songs , blending shimmering string arrangements with pop and jazz @-@ influenced arrangements that showcase Grigorieva 's soulful voice . " In a review of the album , Jack Foley of IndieLondon gave it a rating of 4 out of 5 , and observed , " throughout , she displays a keen ear for melody , for honest emotional simplicity and classic values . She ’ s well worth taking the time to check out " . The track from the album co @-@ written with Mel Gibson , " Say My Name " , was not generally well received by music critics , and received negative comments from listeners at the website E ! Online . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Oksana Grigorieva ; , all music composed by Oksana Grigorieva ; " Say My Name " co @-@ written with Mel Gibson . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Composition 
 Oksana Grigorieva – writing , composition 
 Mel Gibson – co @-@ writer , " Say My Name " 
 Accompaniment 
 Matt Chamberlain – drums 
 Paul Bushnell – bass 
 Lyle Workman – guitar 
 Greg <unk> – guitar 
 Jamie Muhoberac – keyboard 
 David Campbell – string arrangements and conducting 
 = Great Reality TV Swindle = 
 The Great Reality TV Swindle ( also known as Project MS @-@ 2 ) was a con perpetrated in 2002 by Nik Russian , a British man who , at the time , was working at an entry @-@ level position in a branch of the UK book chain Waterstone 's . Russian placed advertisements in major publications that invited people to audition for a year @-@ long reality television programme where they could potentially win a prize of GB £ 100 @,@ 000 . After receiving hundreds of responses , he auditioned some of them on Raven 's Ait in London , then selected 30 successful auditionees to take part , without informing them that no actual programme had been commissioned . Telling them that the show would last for an entire year , Russian instructed the participants to leave their homes , quit their jobs and then meet him in London on 10 June , where they would be divided into teams of ten and set their challenge for the next twelve months . 
 The challenge was to make £ 1 million in a single year . Realising that they would essentially be making their own prize money , most contestants quit the show within two days . One group stayed together for slightly longer : sleeping on the floor of their cameraman 's flat , they attempted to create their own TV show about themselves . Having also given up his flat and job , Russian was also homeless , and was forced to stay with the contestants he had manipulated . After the programme failed , Russian went into hiding , and was unable to be contacted . He was eventually tracked down by one of his victims to an address in Richmond upon Thames , where he was forced to apologise on camera . As he had not taken any money from his victims , a criminal case against Russian was not pursued — a civil case was also not pursued due to a lack of funds . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Nik Russian = = = 
 Nikita " Nik " Russian was born Keith Anthony Gillard in Surrey in 1977 . Raised in Farnham , he legally changed his name to Jack Lister in his early twenties , then changed it again to Nikita Russian . He studied English at Goldsmiths , University of London , but dropped out before the exams . He had set up businesses and written unpublished novels before taking a job working at a branch of Waterstone 's in London — he subsequently decided that he wanted to produce his own reality television programme . 
 = = = Reality television = = = 
 Reality TV was a popular genre of television programming in the UK in 2002 . The third series of the UK version of Big Brother — which was showing while Russian 's con took place — attracted audience figures of approximately 5 @.@ 8 million . Most British reality TV programmes at the time centred on a team of people trying to accomplish a specific goal or target . For example , the 2000 series Jailbreak challenged a group to escape from a mock prison , while the 2001 series The Mole gave the contestants the task of discovering which of them was sabotaging their attempts to win money . Most reality TV shows offered a cash reward to successful participants — both Jailbreak and the first series of The Mole offered a prize of £ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Several reality TV contestants were able to become celebrities in their own right after raising their profiles on television . Craig Phillips and Brian Dowling , the winners of the first two series of Big Brother , both created successful media careers . Phillips had been featured as a DIY expert on programmes such as BBC 's Trading Up and ITV 's Renovation Street , while Dowling became the UK 's first openly gay children 's TV presenter when he hosted the Saturday morning programme SMTV Live . Ben Fogle , a contestant on the BBC reality series Castaway 2000 , went on to become a television presenter for several programmes , and hosted his own series called Extreme Dreams . 
 = = Swindle = = 
 = = = Auditions = = = 
 In early 2002 , Nik Russian placed advertisements for a year @-@ long television programme in publications such as The Stage and the Evening Standard , which invited " characterful , resourceful and energetic " people to apply for the chance to " raise [ their ] profile " and potentially win £ 100 @,@ 000 . Russian was e @-@ mailed more than a thousand applications and auditioned some of them on the Raven 's Ait island in London . Some had applied simply for the prize money ; others hoped that exposure from the programme could help them to achieve some of their dreams , such as working as a television presenter or launching a fashion label . 
 The auditionees were told that the show was being created by the production company Nikita Russian Productions ( NRP ) . For the purposes of the auditions , Russian enlisted the help of his friends to take on roles such as psychoanalysts and runners — his girlfriend , whom he had met on a university access course , acted as a psychological assessor , while his friend Mike was a cameraman . The auditionees were then divided into small groups and given practical and psychological tests to complete , such as baking a cake in under an hour without a kitchen or ingredients . From these auditionees , 30 people were selected to star in Russian 's programme , which he had dubbed " Project MS @-@ 2 " . 
 The winning candidates were informed of their success in an e @-@ mail from NRP and were also sent various contracts to sign and return . They were told that the project would last for a year , so most of them gave up their flats and jobs . The contracts stated that their food , accommodation and leisure money would be provided , and that they were to meet in London on 10 June 2002 for the programme to begin filming . Each contestant was also told to set up a new bank account to which Russian could have access and to arrive without money or credit cards on the launch day . 
 = = = Launch day = = = 
 The 30 contestants were divided into three teams of ten named Team 1 , Team 2 and Team 3 , and each group met in a different London location on 10 June , the day of the programme 's launch . To record what each team did , Russian hired unpaid trainee cameramen . Once the teams were assembled , they were given their challenge : in a year , they had to make £ 1 million . Their first task was to find accommodation for themselves for free for a week . The contestants slowly realised that , despite what their contracts had claimed , they would have to find their own food and accommodation , and would essentially be making their own prize money . Some contestants demanded to meet with Russian , who eventually revealed to them that no television channel had actually commissioned his show . Teams 1 and 3 disbanded within two days . 
 Team 2 remained together for slightly longer — sleeping on the floor of the flat in Dalston that belonged to their cameraman Tim Eagle , they decided to film their own reality TV programme about themselves , and set up a " diary room " to discuss their thoughts about Russian and his show . Having also given up his home and job , Russian had nowhere to stay either , and he too was forced to sleep on Eagle 's floor with Team 2 . On 12 June , Eagle contacted the local news station , London Tonight , and the group locked Russian in the flat , forcing him to speak with the journalists once they had arrived . After their story made the local news , Team 2 stayed together until 14 June before they also split up . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Having believed that they would be participating in Russian 's television programme for an entire year , most contestants had given up their homes , jobs and partners — most had to find new employment and some were forced to move in with their parents . Russian went into hiding and was unable to be reached by his victims . On 13 June 2002 , Debbie Leigh Driver , one of Russian 's contestants , contacted Caz Gorham and Frances Dickenson of the independent production company Christmas TV & Film and told them about the hoax . Gorham and Dickenson produced a genuine TV programme to document the story of the con and how the participants were now trying to get their lives back together , which was shown on Channel 4 in December 2002 . 
 Some participants tried to track Russian down to have their questions answered . One contestant , Louise Miles , discovered that Russian 's production company , NRP , did not actually exist and that the woman who had been answering their phone calls was really Russian 's mother , Margaret . Another participant , Daniel Pope , managed to track Russian down to an address in Richmond upon Thames and convinced him to be interviewed by Christmas TV and apologise on camera . As Russian had not actually taken money from his victims , he had not committed a crime , and a civil case was not pursued due to a lack of funds . 
 = = Media reaction = = 
 Much of the mainstream media 's reaction to the con was published in December 2002 , around the time that Christmas TV 's documentary was shown on Channel 4 . Although most commentators placed the blame for the swindle on Russian himself by denouncing him as a manipulative con man , others were more sympathetic . Writing for The Daily Mail , Peter Paterson contrasted Russian with Humphry Berkeley , a British politician who committed a similar con in 1948 under the pseudonym H. Rochester Sneath . Paterson observed that , while Berkeley had derived " considerable fun " from his con , Russian had conversely been in a " deep gloom " following his . Similarly , Rupert Smith of The Guardian described Russian as a " tragic figure " . 
 Some critics placed blame on the contestants ' overly trusting nature and desire for fame , calling them gullible wannabes . Others noted the irony in how the con had , ultimately , put them on television , which Gorham described as " a happy ending " . In another article for The Guardian , Smith remarked : " These are not stupid people . In archive footage from the fake show , they look like any other post @-@ Big @-@ Brother buffoons ; but in the sombre , reflective interviews after the event they come across as likable , wounded individuals . " 
 Other commentators speculated that Russian 's physical appearance may have helped him perpetrate his con . Critics described him as " beautiful " and " Byronic " , and noted that he " appeared every inch the cocky TV producer he aspired to be " . Some felt that the con represented an indictment on how reality television had altered the public 's notion of celebrity . Paterson called the genre a " Pied Piper call of fleeting TV fame " that had become " as powerful as any religious cult " , while Paul English of The Daily Record noted that the swindle reflected a " fascination with reality TV – and how the draw of being on telly can turn us into gullible fools " . Both of Christmas TV 's producers agreed . Gorham called the con " a fantastic wake @-@ up call for reality TV " ; Dickenson remarked : " I hope [ the swindle ] shows those who may be interested in these programmes that they should be careful . " 
 = Discovery Expedition = 
 The British National Antarctic Expedition , 1901 – 04 , generally known as the Discovery Expedition , was the first official British exploration of the Antarctic regions since James Clark Ross 's voyage sixty years earlier . Organized on a large scale under a joint committee of the Royal Society and the Royal Geographical Society ( RGS ) , the new expedition aimed to carry out scientific research and geographical exploration in what was then largely an untouched continent . It launched the Antarctic careers of many who would become leading figures in the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration , including Robert Falcon Scott who led the expedition , Ernest Shackleton , Edward Wilson , Frank Wild , Tom Crean and William Lashly . 
 Its scientific results covered extensive ground in biology , zoology , geology , meteorology and magnetism . The expedition discovered the existence of the only snow @-@ free Antarctic valleys , which contain Antarctica 's longest river . Further achievements included the discoveries of the Cape Crozier emperor penguin colony , King Edward VII Land , and the Polar Plateau ( via the western mountains route ) on which the South Pole is located . The expedition did not make a serious attempt on the South Pole itself , with the principal southern journey travelling only as far as the Farthest South mark at a reported 82 ° 17 ′ S. 
 As a <unk> for later ventures , the Discovery Expedition was a landmark in British Antarctic exploration history . After its return home it was celebrated as a success , despite having needed an expensive relief mission to free Discovery and its crew from the ice , and later disputes about the quality of some of its scientific records . It has been asserted that the expedition 's main failure was its inability to master the techniques of efficient polar travel using skis and dogs , a legacy that persisted in British Antarctic expeditions throughout the Heroic Age . 
 = = Background to the expedition = = 
 = = = Forerunners = = = 
 Between 1839 and 1843 Royal Naval Captain James Clark Ross , commanding his two ships HMS Erebus and HMS Terror , completed three voyages to the Antarctic continent . During this time he discovered and explored a new sector of the Antarctic that would provide the field of work for many later British expeditions . 
 Ross established the general geography of this region , and named many of its features ; the Ross Sea , the Great Ice Barrier ( later renamed the Ross Ice Shelf ) , Ross Island , Cape Adare , Victoria Land , McMurdo Sound , Cape Crozier and the twin volcanoes Mount Erebus and Mount Terror . He returned to the Barrier several times , hoping to penetrate it , but was unable to do so , achieving his Farthest South in a small Barrier inlet at 78 ° 10 ′ , in February 1842 . Ross suspected that land lay to the east of the Barrier , but was unable to confirm this . 
 After Ross there were no recorded voyages into this sector of the Antarctic for fifty years . Then , in January 1895 , a Norwegian whaling trip made a brief landing at Cape Adare , the northernmost tip of Victoria Land . Four years later Carsten Borchgrevink , who had participated in that landing , took his own expedition to the region , in the Southern Cross . This expedition was financed by a donation of £ 35 @,@ 000 from British publishing magnate Sir George Newnes , on condition that the venture be called the " British Antarctic Expedition " . Borchgrevink landed at Cape Adare in February 1899 , erected a small hut , and spent the 1899 winter there . The following summer he sailed south , landing at Ross 's inlet on the Barrier . A party of three then sledged southward on the Barrier surface , and reached a new Furthest South at 78 ° 50 ′ . 
 The Discovery Expedition was planned during a surge of international interest in the Antarctic regions at the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries . A German expedition under Erich von Drygalski was leaving at about the same time as Discovery , to explore the sector of the continent south of the Indian Ocean . The Swedish explorer Otto Nordenskiöld was leading an expedition to Graham Land , and a French expedition under Jean @-@ Baptiste Charcot was going to the Antarctic Peninsula . Finally , the Scottish scientist William Speirs Bruce was leading a scientific expedition to the Weddell Sea . 
 = = = Royal Navy , Markham and Scott = = = 
 Under the influence of John Barrow , Second Secretary to the Admiralty , polar exploration had become the province of the peacetime Royal Navy after the Napoleonic War . Naval interest diminished after the disappearance in 1845 of the Franklin expedition , and the many fruitless searches that followed . After the problems encountered by the 1874 – 76 North Pole expedition led by George Nares , and Nares 's own declaration that the North Pole was " impracticable " , the Admiralty decided that further polar quests would be dangerous , expensive and futile . 
 However , the Royal Geographical Society 's Secretary ( and later President ) Sir Clements Markham was a former naval man who had served on one of the Franklin relief expeditions in 1851 . He had accompanied Nares for part of the 1874 – 76 expedition , and remained a firm advocate for the navy 's resuming its historic role in polar exploration . An opportunity to further this ambition arose in November 1893 , when the prominent biologist Sir John Murray , who had visited Antarctic waters as a biologist with the Challenger Expedition in the 1870s , addressed the RGS . Murray presented a paper entitled " The Renewal of Antarctic Exploration " , and called for a full @-@ scale expedition for the benefit of British science . This was strongly supported , both by Markham and by the country 's premier scientific body , the Royal Society . A joint committee of the two Societies was established to decide the form which the expedition should take . Markham 's vision of a full @-@ blown naval affair after the style of Ross or Franklin was opposed by sections of the joint committee , but his tenacity was such that the expedition was eventually moulded largely to his wishes . His cousin and biographer later wrote that the expedition was " the creation of his brain , the product of his persistent energy " . 
 It had long been Markham 's practice to take note of promising young naval officers who might later be suitable for polar responsibilities , should the opportunity arise . He had first observed Midshipman Robert Falcon Scott in 1887 , while the latter was serving with HMS Rover in St Kitts , and had remembered him . Thirteen years later , Scott , by now a Torpedo Lieutenant on HMS Majestic , was looking for a path to career advancement , and a chance meeting with Sir Clements in London led him to apply for the leadership of the expedition . Scott had long been in Markham 's mind , though by no means always his first choice , but other favoured candidates had either become in his view too old , or were no longer available . With Markham 's determined backing , Scott 's appointment was secured by 25 May 1900 , followed swiftly by his promotion to Commander . 
 = = = Science versus adventure = = = 
 The command structure of the expedition had still to be settled . Markham had been determined from the beginning that its overall leader should be a naval officer , not a scientist . Scott , writing to Markham after his appointment , reiterated that he " must have complete command of the ship and landing parties " , and insisted on being consulted over all future appointments . However , the Joint Committee had , with Markham 's acquiescence , secured the appointment of John Walter Gregory , Professor of Geology at the University of Melbourne and former assistant geologist at the British Museum , as the expedition 's scientific director . Gregory 's view , endorsed by the Royal Society faction of the Joint Committee , was that the organisation and command of the land party should be in his hands : " ... The Captain would be instructed to give such assistance as required in dredging , tow @-@ netting etc . , to place boats where required at the disposal of the scientific staff . " In the dispute that followed , Markham argued that Scott 's command of the whole expedition must be total and unambiguous , and Scott himself was insistent on this to the point of resignation . Markham 's and Scott 's view prevailed , and Gregory resigned , saying that the scientific work should not be " subordinated to naval adventure " . 
 This controversy soured relations between the Societies , which lingered after the conclusion of the expedition and was reflected in criticism of the extent and quality of some of the published results . Markham claimed that his insistence on a naval command was primarily a matter of tradition and style , rather than indicating disrespect for science . He had made clear his belief that , on its own , the mere attainment of higher latitude than someone else was " unworthy of support . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Markham had hoped for a fully @-@ fledged Royal Naval expedition , but was warned by the Admiralty that " the present exigencies of the Naval Service [ would ] prevent them from lending officers ... " However , the Admiralty agreed to release Scott and Charles Royds , and later allowed Michael Barne and Reginald Skelton to join the expedition . The remaining officers were from the Merchant Marine , including Albert Armitage , the second @-@ in @-@ command , who had experience with the Jackson – Harmsworth Arctic expedition , 1894 – 97 , and Ernest Shackleton , designated Third Officer in charge of holds , stores and provisions , and responsible for arranging the entertainments . The Admiralty also released around twenty petty officers and seamen , the rest of the crew being from the merchant service , or from civilian employment . Among the lower deck complement were some who became Antarctic veterans , including Frank Wild , William Lashly , Thomas Crean ( who joined the expedition following the desertion of a seaman in New Zealand ) , Edgar Evans and Ernest Joyce . Although the expedition was not a formal Navy project , Scott proposed to run the expedition on naval lines , and secured the crew 's voluntary agreement to work under the Naval Discipline Act . 
 The scientific team was inexperienced . Dr George Murray , Gregory 's successor as chief scientist , was due to travel only as far as Australia ( in fact he left the ship at Cape Town ) , using the voyage to train the scientists , but with no part to play in the detailed work of the expedition . The only scientist with previous Antarctic experience was Louis Bernacchi , who had been with Borchgrevink as magnetic observer and meteorologist . The geologist , Hartley Ferrar , was a 22 @-@ year @-@ old recent Cambridge graduate who Markham thought " might be made into a man . " Marine biologist Thomas Vere Hodgson , from Plymouth Museum , was a more mature figure , as was the senior of the two doctors , Reginald Koettlitz , who , at 39 , was the oldest member of the expedition . He , like Armitage , had been with the Jackson – Harmsworth expedition . The junior doctor and zoologist was Edward Wilson , who became close to Scott and provided the qualities of calmness , patience and detachment that the captain reportedly lacked . 
 = = Organisation and objectives = = 
 = = = Finance = = = 
 The total cost of the expedition was estimated at £ 90 @,@ 000 ( 2009 equivalent about £ 7 @.@ 25 million ) , of which £ 45 @,@ 000 was offered by the British Government provided that the two Societies could raise a matching sum . They achieved this , thanks largely to a donation of £ 25 @,@ 000 from wealthy RGS member Llewellyn W. Longstaff . The RGS itself contributed £ 8 @,@ 000 , its largest single contribution to any expedition to that date , and £ 5 @,@ 000 came from Alfred Harmsworth , later Lord Northcliffe , who had earlier financed the Jackson @-@ Harmsworth expedition to the Arctic , 1894 – 97 . The rest was raised from smaller donations . The expedition also benefited from significant commercial sponsorship : Colman 's provided mustard and flour , Cadbury 's gave 3 @,@ 500 lb ( 1 @,@ 600 kg ) of chocolate , Bird 's donated baking and custard powders , Evans , Lescher & Webb provided all the lime juice . Jaeger gave a 40 % discount on special clothing , Bovril supplied beef extract , and others made significant contributions . 
 = = = Ship = = = 
 The expedition 's ship was built by the Dundee Shipbuilders Company as a specialist research vessel designed for work in Antarctic waters , and was one of the last three @-@ masted wooden sailing ships built in Britain . The construction cost was £ 34 @,@ 050 ( 2009 = £ 2 @.@ 7 million ) , plus £ 10 @,@ 322 ( £ 830 @,@ 000 ) for the engines , and the final cost after all modifications was £ 51 @,@ 000 ( £ 4 @.@ 1 m ) . The name had historic naval associations , most recently as one of the ships used in the Nares expedition , and certain features of this older vessel were incorporated into the design of the new ship . She was launched by Lady Markham on 21 March 1901 as <unk> Discovery ( the Royal Research Ship designation was acquired in the 1920s ) . 
 As she was not a Royal Naval vessel the Admiralty would not allow Discovery to fly the White Ensign . She eventually sailed under the Merchant Shipping Act , flying the RGS house flag and the Blue Ensign and burgee of the Royal Harwich Yacht Club . 
 = = = Dogs = = = 
 Scott contacted Fridtjof Nansen in Oslo , whom he trusted more than his own " quarrelling " committee in London , and followed his advice on equipment . Subsequently , Armitage ordered 25 Siberian sledge @-@ dogs via a Scots dog and ski expert based in Archangel , Russia . According to Huntford however , this expert was not invited to join the expedition . 
 = = = Objectives = = = 
 The Discovery Expedition , like those of Ross and Borchgrevink before it , was to work in the Ross Sea sector of Antarctica . Other areas of the continent had been considered , but the principle followed was that " in going for the unknown they should start from the known " . The two main objectives of the expedition were summarised in the joint committee 's " Instructions to the Commander " as : " to determine , as far as possible , the nature , condition and extent of that portion of the south polar lands which is included in the scope of your expedition " , and " to make a magnetic survey in the southern regions to the south of the fortieth parallel and to carry out meteorological , oceanographic , geological , biological and physical investigations and researches " . The instructions stipulated that " neither of these objectives was to be sacrificed to the other " . 
 The instructions concerning the geographical objective became more specific : " The chief points of geographical interest are [ ... ] to explore the ice barrier of Sir James Ross to its eastern extremity ; to discover the land which was believed by Ross to flank the barrier to the eastward , or to ascertain that it does not exist [ ... ] If you should decide to winter in the ice ... your efforts as regards geographical exploration should be directed to [ ... ] an advance to the western mountains , an advance to the south , and an exploration of the volcanic region " . 
 = = Expedition = = 
 = = = First years = = = 
 = = = = Outward journey = = = = 
 Discovery left Isle of Wight on 6 August 1901 , and arrived in New Zealand via Cape Town on 29 November after a detour below 40 ° S for a magnetic survey . Quail Island in Lyttelton Harbour was used as the quarantine station for the expedition 's dogs . After three weeks of final preparation she was ready for the journey south . On 21 December , as the ship was leaving Lyttelton to the cheers of large crowds , a young able seaman , Charles Bonner , fell to his death from the top of the mainmast , which he had climbed so as to return the crowd 's applause . He was buried at Port Chalmers , two days later . 
 Discovery then sailed south , arriving at Cape Adare on 9 January 1902 . After a brief landing and examination of the remains of Borchgrevink 's camp , the ship continued southwards along the Victoria Land coast . At McMurdo Sound Discovery turned eastward , touching land again at Cape Crozier where a pre @-@ arranged message point was set up so that relief ships would be able to locate the expedition . She then followed the Barrier to its eastern extremity where , on 30 January , the land predicted by Ross was confirmed , and named King Edward VII Land . 
 On 4 February , Scott landed on the Barrier and unpacked an observation balloon which he had acquired for aerial surveys . Scott climbed aboard and rapidly ascended to above 600 feet ( 180 m ) in the firmly tethered balloon . Shackleton followed with a second flight . All either could see was unending Barrier surface . Wilson privately thought the flights " perfect madness " . 
 = = = = Winter Quarters Bay = = = = 
 Discovery then proceeded westward in search of permanent quarters . On 8 February she entered McMurdo Sound and later that day anchored in a spot near its southern limit which was afterwards christened Winter Quarters Bay . Wilson wrote : " We all realized our extreme good fortune in being led to such a winter quarter as this , safe for the ship , with perfect shelter from all ice pressure . " Stoker Lashly , however , thought it looked " a dreary place . " Work began ashore with the erection of the expedition 's huts on a rocky peninsula designated Hut Point . Scott had decided that the expedition should continue to live and work aboard ship , and he allowed Discovery to be frozen into the sea ice , leaving the main hut to be used as a storeroom and shelter . 
 Of the entire party , none were skilled skiers and only Bernacchi and Armitage had any experience with dog @-@ sledges . The results of the men 's early efforts to master these techniques were not encouraging , and tended to reinforce Scott 's preference for man @-@ hauling . The dangers of the unfamiliar conditions were confirmed when , on 11 March , a party returning from an attempted journey to Cape Crozier became stranded on an icy slope during a blizzard . In their attempts to find safer ground , one of the group , Able Seaman George Vince , slid over the edge of a cliff and was killed . His body was never recovered ; a cross with a simple inscription , erected in his memory , still stands at the summit of the Hut Point promontory . 
 During the winter months of May – August the scientists were busy in their laboratories , while elsewhere equipment and stores were prepared for the next season 's work . For relaxation there were amateur theatricals , and educational activities in the form of lectures . A newspaper , the South Polar Times , was edited by Shackleton . Outside pursuits did not cease altogether ; there was football on the ice , and the schedule of magnetic and meteorological observations was maintained . As winter ended , trial sledge runs resumed , to test equipment and rations in advance of the planned southern journey which Scott , Wilson and Shackleton were to undertake . Meanwhile , a party under Royds travelled to Cape Crozier to leave a message at the post there , and discovered an emperor penguin colony . Another group , under Armitage , reconnoitred in the mountains to the west , returning in October with the expedition 's first symptoms of scurvy . Armitage later blamed the outbreak on Scott 's " sentimental objection " to the slaughter of animals for fresh meat . The entire expedition 's diet was quickly revised , and the trouble was thereafter contained . 
 = = = = Southern journey = = = = 
 Scott , Wilson and Shackleton left on 2 November 1902 with dogs and supporting parties . Their goal was " to get as far south in a straight line on the Barrier ice as we can , reach the Pole if possible , or find some new land " . The first significant milestone was passed on 11 November , when a supporting party passed Borchgrevink 's Farthest South record of 78 ° 50 ′ . However , the lack of skill with dogs was soon evident , and progress was slow . After the support parties had returned , on 15 November , Scott 's group began relaying their loads ( taking half loads forward , then returning for the other half ) , thus travelling three miles for every mile of southward progress . Mistakes had been made with the dogs ' food , and as the dogs grew weaker , Wilson was forced to kill the weakest as food for the others . The men , too , were struggling , afflicted by snow blindness , frostbite and symptoms of early scurvy , but they continued southwards in line with the mountains to the west . Christmas Day was celebrated with double rations , and a Christmas pudding that Shackleton had kept for the occasion , hidden with his socks . On 30 December 1902 , without having left the Barrier , they reached their Furthest South at 82 ° 17 ′ S. Troubles multiplied on the home journey , as the remaining dogs died and Shackleton collapsed with scurvy . Wilson 's diary entry for 14 January 1903 acknowledged that " we all have slight , though definite symptoms of scurvy " . Scott and Wilson struggled on , with Shackleton , who was unable to pull , walking alongside and occasionally carried on the sledge . The party eventually reached the ship on 3 February 1903 after covering 960 miles ( 1 @,@ 540 km ) including relays , in 93 days ' travel at a daily average of just over 10 miles ( 16 km ) . 
 = = = Arrival of relief ship = = = 
 During the southern party 's absence the relief ship Morning arrived , bringing fresh supplies . The expedition 's organisers had assumed that the Discovery would be free from the ice in early 1903 , enabling Scott to carry out further seaborne exploration and survey work before winter set in . It was intended that Discovery would return to New Zealand in March or April , then home to England via the Pacific , continuing its magnetic survey en route . Morning would provide any assistance that Scott might require during this period . 
 This plan was frustrated , as Discovery remained firmly icebound . Markham had privately anticipated this , and Morning 's captain , William Colbeck , was carrying a secret letter to Scott authorising another year in the ice . This now being inevitable , the relief ship provided an opportunity for some of the party to return home . Among these , against his will , was the convalescent Shackleton , who Scott decided " ought not to risk further hardships in his present state of health " . Stories of a Scott @-@ Shackleton rift date from this point , or from a supposed falling @-@ out during the southern journey which had provoked an angry exchange of words . Some of these details were supplied by Armitage , whose relationship with Scott had broken down and who , after Scott , Wilson and Shackleton were all dead , chose to reveal details which tended to show Scott in a poor light . Other evidence indicates that Scott and Shackleton remained on generally good terms for some while ; Shackleton met the expedition on its return home in 1904 , and later wrote a very cordial letter to Scott . 
 = = = Second year = = = 
 After the 1903 winter had passed , Scott prepared for the second main journey of the expedition : an ascent of the western mountains and exploration of the interior of Victoria Land . Armitage 's reconnaissance party of the previous year had pioneered a route up to altitude 8 @,@ 900 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) before returning , but Scott wished to march west from this point , if possible to the location of the South Magnetic Pole . After a false start due to faulty sledges , a party including Scott , Lashly and Edgar Evans set out from Discovery on 26 October 1903 . 
 Ascending a large glacier , which they named after the party 's geologist Ferrar , they reached a height of 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) before being held in camp for a week by blizzards . This prevented them from reaching the glacier summit until 13 November . They then marched on beyond Armitage 's furthest point , discovered the Polar Plateau and became the first party to travel on it . After the return of geological and supporting parties , Scott , Evans and Lashly continued westward across the featureless plain for another eight days , covering a distance of about 150 miles to reach their most westerly point on 30 November . Having lost their navigational tables in a gale during the glacier ascent , they did not know exactly where they were , and had no landmarks to help them fix a position . The return journey to the Ferrar Glacier was undertaken in conditions which limited them to no more than a mile an hour , with supplies running low and dependent on Scott 's rule of thumb navigation . On the descent of the glacier Scott and Evans survived a potentially fatal fall into a crevasse , before the discovery of a snow @-@ free area or dry valley , a rare Antarctic phenomenon . Lashly described the dry valley as " a splendid place for growing <unk> " . The party reached Discovery on 24 December , after a round trip of seven hundred miles covered in 59 days . Their daily average of over 14 miles on this man @-@ hauling journey was significantly better than that achieved with dogs on the previous season 's southern journey , a fact which further strengthened Scott 's prejudices against dogs . Polar historian David Crane calls the western journey " one of the great journeys of polar history " . 
 Several other journeys were completed during Scott 's absence . Royds and Bernacchi travelled for 31 days on the Barrier in a SE direction , observing its uniformly flat character and making further magnetic readings . Another party had explored the Koettlitz Glacier to the south @-@ west , and Wilson had travelled to Cape Crozier to observe the emperor penguin colony at close quarters . 
 = = = Second relief expedition = = = 
 Scott had hoped on his return to find Discovery free from the ice , but she remained held fast . Work had begun with ice saws , but after 12 days ' labour only two short parallel cuts of 450 feet ( 140 m ) had been carved , with the ship still 20 miles ( 32 km ) from open water . On 5 January 1904 the relief ship Morning returned , this time with a second ship , the Terra Nova . Colbeck was carrying firm instructions from the Admiralty that , if Discovery could not be freed by a certain date she was to be abandoned and her complement brought home on the two relief ships . This ultimatum resulted from Markham 's dependence on the Treasury for meeting the costs of this second relief expedition , since the expedition 's coffers were empty . The Admiralty would foot the bill only on their own terms . The deadline agreed between the three captains was 25 February , and it became a race against time for the relief vessels to reach Discovery , still held fast at Hut Point . As a precaution Scott began the transfer of his scientific specimens to the other ships . Explosives were used to break up the ice , and the sawing parties resumed work , but although the relief ships were able to edge closer , by the end of January Discovery remained icebound , two miles ( approx . 3 km ) from the rescuers . On 10 February Scott accepted that he would have to abandon her , but on 14 February most of the ice suddenly broke up , and Morning and Terra Nova were at last able to sail alongside Discovery . A final explosive charge removed the remaining ice on 16 February , and the following day , after a last scare when she became temporarily grounded on a shoal , Discovery began the return journey to New Zealand . 
 = = Homecoming and Results = = 
 On its return to Britain the expedition 's reception was initially muted . Markham was present to meet the ship in Portsmouth when Discovery docked there on 10 September 1904 , but no dignitaries greeted the party when it arrived in London a few days later . However , there was considerable public enthusiasm for the expedition , and official recognition followed . Scott was quickly promoted to Captain , and invited to Balmoral Castle to meet King Edward VII , who invested him as a Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( CVO ) . He also received a cluster of medals and awards from overseas , including the French Légion d 'honneur . Polar Medals and promotions were given to other officers and crew members . 
 The main geographical results of the expedition were the discovery of King Edward VII Land ; the ascent of the western mountains and the discovery of the Polar Plateau ; the first sledge journey on the plateau ; the Barrier journey to a Furthest South of 82 ° 17 ′ S. The island nature of Ross Island was established , the Transantarctic Mountains were charted to 83 ° S , and the positions and heights of more than 200 individual mountains were calculated . Many other features and landmarks were also identified and named , and there was extensive coastal survey work . 
 There were also discoveries of major scientific importance . These included the snow @-@ free Dry Valleys in the western mountains , the emperor penguin colony at Cape Crozier , scientific evidence that the Ice Barrier was a floating ice shelf , and a leaf fossil discovered by Ferrar which helped to establish Antarctica 's relation to the Gondwana super @-@ continent . Thousands of geological and biological specimens had been collected and new marine species identified . The location of the South Magnetic Pole had been calculated with reasonable accuracy . On the medical side , Wilson discovered the anti @-@ scorbutic effects of fresh seal meat , which resolved the lethal threat of scurvy to this and subsequent expeditions . 
 A general endorsement of the scientific results from the navy 's Chief Hydrographer ( and former Scott opponent ) Sir William Wharton was encouraging . However , when the meteorological data were published their accuracy was disputed within the scientific establishment , including by the President of the Physical Society of London , Dr Charles Chree . Scott defended his team 's work , while privately acknowledging that Royds 's paperwork in this field had been " dreadfully slipshod " . 
 The expedition succeeded in combating incipient scurvy through a fresh seal meat diet , and Scott recommended it for future polar expeditions . This was despite the medical profession being ignorant of the causes of the disease . At that time it was known that a fresh meat diet could provide a cure , but not that lack of fresh meat or other fresh food containing the as yet undiscovered vitamin C was a cause . Thus , fresh seal meat was taken on the southern journey " in case we find ourselves attacked by scurvy " , On his 1907 – 09 Nimrod expedition Shackleton also avoided the disease through careful dietary provision , including extra penguin and seal meat . However , Lieutenant Edward Evans almost died of presumably self @-@ inflicted scurvy during the 1910 – 13 Terra Nova expedition , and scurvy was particularly devastating to Shackleton 's marooned Ross Sea party during 1915 – 16 . It remained a danger until its causes were finally established , some 25 years after the Discovery expedition . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Scott was given leave from the Navy to write the official expedition account , The Voyage of the Discovery ; this was published in 1905 , and sold well . However , Scott 's account in the book of Shackleton 's breakdown during the southern journey led to disagreement between the two men , particularly over Scott 's version of the extent to which his companion had been carried on the sledge . The implication was that Shackleton 's breakdown had caused the relatively unimpressive southern record . 
 Scott eventually resumed his naval career , first as an assistant to the Director of Naval Intelligence and then , in August 1906 , as Flag @-@ captain to Rear @-@ Admiral George Egerton on HMS Victorious . He had by this time become a national hero , despite his aversion to the limelight , and the expedition was being presented to the public as a triumph . This euphoria was not conducive to objective analysis , or to thoughtful appraisal of the expedition 's strengths and weaknesses . In particular , the glorification by Scott of man @-@ hauling as something intrinsically more noble than other ice travel techniques led to a general distrust of methods involving ski and dogs , a mindset that was carried forward into later expeditions . This mystified seasoned ice travellers such as Fridtjof Nansen , whose advice on such matters was usually sought , but often set aside . 
 The Discovery Expedition launched the Antarctic careers of several who became stalwarts or leaders of expeditions in the following fifteen years . Apart from Scott and Shackleton , Frank Wild and Ernest Joyce from the lower deck returned repeatedly to the ice , apparently unable to settle back into normal life . William Lashly and Edgar Evans , Scott 's companions on the 1903 western journey , aligned themselves with their leader 's future plans and became his regular sledging partners . Tom Crean followed both Scott and Shackleton on later expeditions . Lieutenant " Teddy " Evans , first officer on the relief ship Morning , began plans to lead an expedition of his own , before teaming up with Scott in 1910 . 
 Soon after resuming his naval duties , Scott revealed to the Royal Geographical Society his intention to return to Antarctica , but the information was not at that stage made public . Scott was forestalled by Shackleton , who early in 1907 announced his plans to lead an expedition with the twin objectives of reaching the geographic and magnetic South Poles . Under duress , Shackleton agreed not to work from McMurdo Sound , which Scott was claiming as his own sphere of work . In the event , unable to find a safe landing elsewhere , Shackleton was forced to break this promise . His expedition was highly successful , its southern march ending at 88 ° 23 ′ , less than 100 geographical miles from the South Pole , while its northern party reached the location of the South Magnetic Pole . However , Shackleton 's breach of his undertaking caused a significant break in relations between the two men , with Scott dismissing his former companion as a liar and a rogue . 
 Scott 's plans gradually came to fruition – a large @-@ scale scientific and geographical expedition with the conquest of the South Pole as its principal objective . Scott was anxious to avoid the amateurism that had been associated with the Discovery Expedition 's scientific work . He appointed Edward Wilson as his chief scientist , and Wilson selected an experienced team . The expedition set off in June 1910 in Terra Nova , one of Discovery 's relief ships . Its programme was complicated by the simultaneous arrival in the Antarctic of Roald Amundsen 's Norwegian expedition . Amundsen 's party reached the South Pole on 14 December 1911 and returned safely . Scott and four companions , including Wilson , arrived at the Pole on 17 January 1912 ; all five perished on the return journey . 
 = Italian battleship Caio Duilio = 
 Caio Duilio was an Italian Andrea Doria @-@ class battleship that served in the Regia Marina during World War I and World War II . She was named after the Roman fleet commander Gaius <unk> . Caio Duilio was laid down in February 1912 , launched in April 1913 , and completed in May 1916 . She was initially armed with a main battery of thirteen 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , but a major reconstruction in the late 1930s replaced these with ten 320 mm ( 13 in ) guns . Caio Duilio saw no action during World War I owing to the inactivity of the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet during the conflict . She cruised the Mediterranean in the 1920s and was involved in the Corfu incident in 1923 . 
 During World War II , she participated in numerous patrols and sorties into the Mediterranean , both to escort Italian convoys to North Africa and in attempts to catch the British Mediterranean Fleet . In November 1940 , the British launched an air raid on Taranto ; Caio Duilio was hit by one torpedo launched by a Fairey Swordfish torpedo bomber , which caused significant damage . Repairs lasted some five months , after which the ship returned to convoy escort duties . A fuel shortage immobilized the bulk of the Italian surface fleet in 1942 , and Caio Duilio remained out of service until the Italian surrender in September 1943 . She was thereafter interned at Malta until 1944 , when the Allies permitted her return to Italian waters . She survived the war , and continued to serve in the post @-@ war Italian navy , primarily as a training ship . Caio Duilio was placed in reserve for a final time in 1953 ; she remained in the Italian navy 's inventory for another three years before she was stricken from the naval register in late 1956 and sold for scrapping the following year . 
 = = Design = = 
 Caio Duilio was 176 meters ( 577 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 28 m ( 92 ft ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 4 m ( 31 ft ) . At full combat load , she displaced up to 24 @,@ 715 metric tons ( 24 @,@ 325 long tons ; 27 @,@ 244 short tons ) . She had a crew of 35 officers and 1 @,@ 198 enlisted men . She was powered by four Parsons steam turbines , with steam provided by eight oil @-@ fired and twelve coal and oil burning Yarrow boilers . The boilers were trunked into two large funnels . The engines were rated at 30 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 22 @,@ 000 kW ) , which provided a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . She had a cruising radius of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of thirteen 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) 46 @-@ caliber guns in three triple turrets and two twin turrets . The secondary battery comprised sixteen 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) 45 @-@ caliber guns , all mounted in casemates clustered around the forward and aft main battery turrets . Caio Duilio was also armed with thirteen 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) 50 @-@ caliber guns and six 76 @-@ mm anti @-@ aircraft guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she was equipped with three submerged 450 mm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . She was protected with Krupp cemented steel manufactured by U.S. Steel . The belt armor was 254 mm ( 10 @.@ 0 in ) thick and the main deck was 98 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The conning tower and main battery turrets were protected with 280 mm ( 11 in ) worth of armor plating . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 Caio Duilio was heavily rebuilt in 1937 – 1940 at Genoa . Her forecastle deck was extended further aft , until it reached the mainmast . The stern and bow were rebuilt , increasing the length of the ship to 186 @.@ 9 m ( 613 ft ) , and the displacement grew to 28 @,@ 882 t ( 28 @,@ 426 long tons ; 31 @,@ 837 short tons ) . Her old machinery was replaced with more efficient equipment and her twenty boilers were replaced with eight oil @-@ fired models ; the new power plant was rated at 75 @,@ 000 shp ( 56 @,@ 000 kW ) and speed increased to 26 kn ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) . The ship 's amidships turret was removed and the remaining guns were bored out to 320 mm ( 13 in ) . Her secondary battery was completely overhauled ; the 152 mm guns were replaced with twelve 135 mm ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) guns in triple turrets amidships . The anti @-@ aircraft battery was significantly improved , to include ten 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns , fifteen 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and sixteen 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) guns . Later , during World War II , four more 37 mm guns were installed and two of the 20 mm guns were removed . After emerging from the modernization , Caio Duilio 's crew numbered 35 officers and 1 @,@ 450 enlisted men . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Caio Duilio was laid down at the Regio Cantieri di Castellammare di Stabia on 24 February 1912 . She was launched on 24 April 1913 , and completed on 10 May 1916 . She saw no action in World War I , given the fact that the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , Italy 's main naval rival , remained in port for the duration of the conflict . In addition , Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and minelayers could operate too effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic . The threat from these underwater weapons to his capital ships was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . Meanwhile , Revel 's battleships would be preserved to confront the Austro @-@ Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement . 
 As a result , Caio Duilio only went on four patrols during the war , and was operational for a total of 70 hours . She was based at Taranto starting in November 1918 to April 1919 , but during that time , she deployed to Corfu , from 10 November 1918 to 26 January 1919 . On 26 April 1919 , Caio Duilio was sent to Smyrna to help mediate a dispute over ownership of the area . While there , she had a confrontation with the Greek armored cruiser Georgios Averof , but this was defused when the Greeks landed troops to occupy Smyrna . On 9 June , she was relieved by the old pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Roma , allowing her to move to Constantinople . 
 During her deployment to Turkey , Caio Duilio entered the Black Sea to support the White Russians in the Russian Civil War , from 23 June to 13 July . During this period , she was transferred to the Levant Squadron of the Italian Navy . She returned to Izmir after completing her deployment to the Black Sea , and remained there until 9 September , when she was relieved by the battleship Giulio Cesare . She returned to Taranto on 12 September , and was placed in reserve . Placed back into service in 1920 , Caio Duilio went to Albania on 30 June to support the Italian Army contingent occupying the country , and participated in their withdrawal on 5 September . The following year , she was assigned to the Dodecanese Squadron and cruised in the eastern Mediterranean . She returned to Constantinople as part of an Allied fleet from 27 July to 10 November 1921 . 
 During the 1923 Corfu incident with Greece , the Italian Navy , including Caio Duilio , was deployed to the island to secure a Greek apology following the murder of Enrico Tellini and four others . Later that year , she escorted the battleship Dante Alighieri on a state visit to Spain . A magazine explosion on 8 April 1925 wrecked the No. 3 turret 's barbette hoist . The ship went into reserve while repairs were effected in La Spezia , which lasted until April 1928 . She underwent refitting at Taranto from 18 March to 15 June 1930 . She again went into reserve on 11 August 1932 until 11 August 1933 , when she was made the flagship of the Commanding Officer , Reserve Fleet . Starting on 19 March 1937 , she was taken to Genoa where an extensive reconstruction began at the Cantieri del Tirreno shipyard . The work was completed on 15 July 1940 , at which point she was recommissioned into the 5th Division of the 1st Squadron , based in Taranto . 
 Caio Duilio 's first wartime patrol took place on 31 August . She and the rest of the fleet sailed to intercept the British battleship HMS Valiant , which was steaming to Alexandria , and a convoy sailing to Malta . The Italian fleet did not have sufficient aerial reconnaissance , which , along with bad weather , prevented the Italians from locating the British forces . They put back in to Taranto on 1 September . Caio Duilio again put to sea on 7 September , in an attempt to catch the British Force H , but the Italian intelligence was faulty , as Force H was in the process of attacking Dakar . Caio Duilio returned to Taranto , where she remained until early November . 
 = = = Attack at Taranto = = = 
 On the night of 10 – 11 November , the British Mediterranean Fleet launched a surprise air raid on the harbor in Taranto . Twenty @-@ one Swordfish torpedo bombers launched from the aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious attacked the Italian fleet in two waves . They scored one hit on Caio Duilio , three hits on Littorio , and one on Conte di Cavour . The torpedo hit Caio Duilio on her starboard side ; it tore an 11 @-@ by @-@ 7 @-@ meter ( 36 by 23 ft ) hole in the hull and flooded the forward main battery magazines . A water tanker and several smaller craft pushed the battleship aground in shallow water to prevent her from sinking in the harbor . Temporary repairs were effected , and in January 1941 , she was refloated and sent to Genoa for permanent repairs , which began on 26 January . 
 While Caio Duilio was in dock for repairs , the British Force H departed from its normal role as a convoy escort in the western Mediterranean in early February to attack Genoa . Admiral James Somerville 's surface ships fired over a thousand shells at the port , and aircraft of the carrier HMS Ark Royal dropped magnetic mines in the harbor . Five ships were sunk , but Caio Duilio was not hit in the attack . During the attack , Caio Duilio 's anti @-@ aircraft battery fired some 8 @,@ 000 rounds at the British spotter aircraft . Repair work was completed by May , and on 16 May she was back in Taranto in the 1st Squadron . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 Caio Duilio , now the flagship of the Italian fleet , sailed on 29 November to cover an Italian convoy to North Africa . She was escorted by the cruiser Giuseppe Garibaldi and six destroyers . She sailed again on 13 December , to cover the convoy M41 ; the Italian fleet was forced to break off the convoy escort after Vittorio Veneto was torpedoed . Caio Duilio returned to port on the 14th , and departed to cover the convoy M42 two days later . She was stationed south of Messina with three cruisers and four destroyers . During the convoy operation , British forces attacked , resulting in the First Battle of Sirte , but Caio Duilio 's group was too far away to engage the Royal Navy . She returned to Taranto on 19 December . She escorted convoy M43 on 3 – 6 January 1942 , which successfully reached Tripoli unmolested . Convoy <unk> followed on 22 – 5 January , and four of the five transports in the convoy reached Tripoli . 
 Caio Duilio 's next operation was a sortie against the British convoy MW 9 bounded from Alexandria to Malta in February . She departed from Taranto on 14 February with a pair of light cruisers and seven destroyers , but the force could not locate the British ships , and so returned to port . Her mere presence at sea , however , forced the British escort to scuttle the transport Rowallan Castle , previously disabled by German aircraft . On the 21st , she escorted the convoy K7 from Messina and Corfu to Taranto . By this point in 1942 , the Italian fleet began to suffer a severe shortage of fuel , which curtailed its operations . The situation was so bad that Caio Duilio had to be placed in reserve and drained of fuel , in order to keep the escort craft operational . She was at Taranto when Italy surrendered to the Allies in September 1943 , and on 9 September she was taken to Malta , where she was interned with the rest of the Italian fleet . 
 In June 1944 , the Allies allowed Caio Duilio to return to Italian ports ; she spent the rest of the war in Taranto , Syracuse , and Augusta . She survived the war , and continued to serve in the Italian navy ; she was the fleet flagship from 1 May 1947 until 10 November 1949 , based in Taranto . She was moved to La Spezia in 1953 and removed from active service . Caio Duilio remained there until she was stricken from the naval register on 15 September 1956 . She was sold for scrapping the following year . 
 = Hawker Siddeley Harrier = 
 The Hawker Siddeley Harrier , developed in the 1960s , was the first of the Harrier Jump Jet series of aircraft . It was the first operational close @-@ support and reconnaissance fighter aircraft with vertical / short takeoff and landing ( V / STOL ) capabilities and the only truly successful V / STOL design of the many that arose in that era . The Harrier was developed directly from the Hawker Siddeley Kestrel prototype aircraft , following the cancellation of a more advanced supersonic aircraft , the Hawker Siddeley P.1154. The British Royal Air Force ( RAF ) ordered the Harrier GR.1 and GR.3 variants in the late 1960s . It was exported to the United States as the AV @-@ 8A , for use by the US Marine Corps ( USMC ) , in the 1970s . 
 During the Harrier 's service the RAF positioned the bulk of the aircraft in West Germany to defend against a potential invasion of Western Europe by the Warsaw Pact forces ; the unique abilities of the Harrier allowed the RAF to disperse their forces away from vulnerable airbases . The USMC used their Harriers primarily for close air support , operating from amphibious assault ships , and , if needed , forward operating bases . Harrier squadrons saw several deployments overseas . The Harrier 's ability to operate with minimal ground facilities and very short runways allowed it to be used at locations unavailable to other fixed @-@ wing aircraft . The Harrier received criticism for having a high accident rate and for a time @-@ consuming maintenance process . 
 In the 1970s the British Aerospace Sea Harrier was developed from the Harrier for use by the Royal Navy ( RN ) on Invincible @-@ class aircraft carriers . The Sea Harrier and the Harrier fought in the 1982 Falklands War , in which the aircraft proved to be crucial and versatile . The RN Sea Harriers provided fixed @-@ wing air defence while the RAF Harriers focused on ground @-@ attack missions in support of the advancing British land force . The Harrier was also extensively redesigned as the AV @-@ 8B Harrier II and British Aerospace Harrier II by the team of McDonnell Douglas and British Aerospace . The innovative Harrier family and its Rolls @-@ Royce Pegasus engines with thrust vectoring nozzles have generated long @-@ term interest in V / STOL aircraft . Similar V / STOL operational aircraft include the contemporary Soviet Yakovlev Yak @-@ 38 . The F @-@ 35B V / STOL variant of the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II is under development . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The Harrier 's design was derived from the Hawker <unk> Prior to developing the P.1127 Hawker Aircraft had been working on a replacement for the Hawker Hunter , the Hawker <unk> The <unk> was cancelled after the release of the British Government 's 1957 Defence White Paper , which advocated a policy shift away from manned aircraft and towards missiles . This policy resulted in the termination of the majority of aircraft development projects then underway for the British military . Hawker sought to quickly move on to a new project and became interested in Vertical Take Off / Landing ( VTOL ) aircraft , which did not need runways . According to Air Chief Marshal Sir Patrick Hine this interest may have been stimulated by the presence of Air Staff Requirement 345 , which sought a V / STOL ground attack fighter for the Royal Air Force . 
 Design work on the P.1127 was formally started in 1957 by Sir Sydney Camm , Ralph Hooper of Hawker Aircraft , and Stanley Hooker ( later Sir Stanley Hooker ) of the Bristol Engine Company . The close cooperation between Hawker , the airframe company , and Bristol , the engine company , was viewed by project engineer Gordon Lewis as one of the key factors that allowed the development of the Harrier to continue in spite of technical obstacles and political setbacks . Rather than using rotors or a direct jet thrust , the P.1127 had an innovative vectored thrust turbofan engine , the Pegasus . The Pegasus I was rated at 9 @,@ 000 pounds ( 40 kN ) of thrust and first ran in September 1959 . A contract for two development prototypes was signed in June 1960 and the first flight followed in October 1960 . Of the six prototypes built three crashed — including one during an air display at the 1963 Paris Air Show . 
 = = = Tripartite evaluation = = = 
 In 1961 the United Kingdom , United States and West Germany jointly agreed to purchase nine aircraft developed from the P.1127 , for the evaluation of the performance and potential of V / STOL aircraft . These aircraft were built by Hawker Siddeley and were designated Kestrel FGA.1 by the UK . The Kestrel was strictly an evaluation aircraft and to save money the Pegasus 5 engine was not fully developed as intended , only having 15 @,@ 000 pounds ( 67 kN ) of thrust instead of the projected 18 @,@ 200 pounds ( 81 kN ) . The Tripartite Evaluation Squadron numbered ten pilots ; four each from the UK and US and two from West Germany . The Kestrel 's first flight took place on 7 March 1964 . 
 A total of 960 sorties had been made during the trials , including 1 @,@ 366 takeoffs and landings , by the end of evaluations in November 1965 . One aircraft was destroyed in an accident and six others were transferred to the United States , assigned the US designation XV @-@ 6A Kestrel , and underwent further testing . The two remaining British @-@ based Kestrels were assigned to further trials and experimentation at RAE Bedford with one being modified to use the uprated Pegasus 6 engine . 
 = = = P.1154 = = = 
 At the time of the development of the P.1127 Hawker and Bristol had also undertaken considerable development work on a supersonic version , the Hawker Siddeley P.1154 , to meet a North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) requirement issued for such an aircraft . The design used a single Bristol Siddeley <unk> engine with four swivelling nozzles , in a fashion similar to the P.1127 , and required the use of plenum chamber burning ( PCB ) to achieve supersonic speeds . The P.1154 won the competition to meet the requirement against strong competition from other aircraft manufacturers such as Dassault Aviation 's Mirage IIIV . The French government did not accept the decision and withdrew ; the NATO requirement was cancelled shortly after in 1965 . 
 The Royal Air Force and the Royal Navy planned to develop and introduce the supersonic P.1154 independently of the cancelled NATO requirement . This ambition was complicated by the conflicting requirements between the two services — while the RAF wanted a low @-@ level supersonic strike aircraft , the Navy sought a twin @-@ engine air defence fighter . Following the election of the Labour Government of 1964 the P.1154 was cancelled , as the Royal Navy had already begun procurement of the McDonnell Douglas Phantom II and the RAF placed a greater importance on the BAC TSR @-@ 2 's ongoing development . Work continued on elements of the project , such as a supersonic PCB @-@ equipped Pegasus engine , with the intention of developing a future Harrier variant for the decades following cancellation . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Following the collapse of the P.1154 's development the RAF began considering a simple upgrade of the existing subsonic Kestrel and issued Requirement ASR 384 for a V / STOL ground attack jet . Hawker Siddeley received an order for six pre @-@ production aircraft in 1965 , designated P.1127 ( RAF ) , of which the first made its maiden flight on 31 August 1966 . An order for 60 production aircraft , designated as Harrier GR.1 , was received in early 1967 . The aircraft was named for the Harrier , a small bird of prey . 
 The Harrier GR.1 made its first flight on 28 December 1967 . It officially entered service with the RAF on 18 April 1969 when the Harrier Conversion Unit at RAF Wittering received its first aircraft . The aircraft were built in two factories — one in Kingston upon Thames , southwest London , and the other at Dunsfold Aerodrome , Surrey — and underwent initial testing at Dunsfold . The ski @-@ jump technique for launching Harriers from Royal Navy aircraft carriers was extensively trialled at RNAS Yeovilton from 1977 . Following these tests ski @-@ jumps were added to the flight decks of all RN carriers from 1979 onwards , in preparation for the new variant for the navy , the Sea Harrier . 
 In the late 1960s the British and American governments held talks on producing Harriers in the United States . Hawker Siddeley and McDonnell Douglas formed a partnership in 1969 in preparation for American production , but Congressman Mendel Rivers and the House Appropriations Committee held that it would be cheaper to produce the AV @-@ 8A on the pre @-@ existing production lines in the United Kingdom — hence all AV @-@ 8A Harriers were purchased from Hawker Siddeley . Improved Harrier versions with better sensors and more powerful engines were developed in later years . The USMC received 102 AV @-@ 8A and 8 TAV @-@ 8A Harriers between 1971 and 1976 . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The Harrier was typically used as a ground attack aircraft , though its manoeuvrability also allows it to effectively engage other aircraft at short ranges . The Harrier is powered by a single Pegasus turbofan engine mounted in the fuselage . The engine is fitted with two air intakes and four vectoring nozzles for directing the thrust generated : two for the bypass flow and two for the jet exhaust . Several small reaction nozzles are also fitted , in the nose , tail and wingtips , for the purpose of balancing during vertical flight . It has two landing gear units on the fuselage and two outrigger landing gear units , one near each wing tip . The Harrier is equipped with four wing and three fuselage pylons for carrying a variety of weapons and external fuel tanks . 
 The Kestrel and the Harrier were similar in appearance , though approximately 90 per cent of the Kestrel 's airframe was redesigned for the Harrier . The Harrier was powered by the more powerful Pegasus 6 engine ; new air intakes with auxiliary blow @-@ in doors were added to produce the required airflow at low speed . Its wing was modified to increase area and the landing gear was strengthened . Several hardpoints were installed , two under each wing and one underneath the fuselage ; two 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) ADEN cannon gun pods could also be fitted to the underside of the fuselage . The Harrier was outfitted with updated avionics to replace the basic systems used in the Kestrel ; a navigational @-@ attack system incorporating an inertial navigation system , originally for the P.1154 , was installed and information was presented to the pilot by a head @-@ up display and a moving map display . 
 The Harrier 's VTOL abilities allowed it to be deployed from very small prepared clearings or <unk> as well as normal airfields . It was believed that , in a high @-@ intensity conflict , air bases would be vulnerable and likely to be quickly knocked out . The capability to scatter Harrier squadrons to dozens of small " alert pads " on the front lines was highly prized by military strategists and the USMC procured the aircraft because of this ability . Hawker Siddeley noted that STOL operation provided additional benefits over VTOL operation , saving fuel and allowing the aircraft to carry more ordnance . 
 " I still don 't believe the Harrier . Think of the millions that have been spent on <unk> in America and Russia , and quite a bit in Europe , and yet the only vertical take @-@ off aircraft which you can call a success is the Harrier . When I saw the Harrier hovering and flying backwards under control , I reckoned I 'd seen everything . And it 's not difficult to fly . " <unk> Sopwith 
 The Harrier , while serving for many decades in various forms , has been criticised on multiple issues ; in particular a high accident rate , though Nordeen notes that several conventional single @-@ engine strike aircraft like the Douglas A @-@ 4 Skyhawk and LTV A @-@ 7 Corsair II had worse accident rates . The Los Angeles Times reported in 2003 that the Harrier " ... has amassed the highest major accident rate of any military plane now in service . Forty @-@ five Marines have died in 148 noncombat accidents " . Colonel Lee <unk> of the USMC declared the maintenance of a Harrier to be a " challenge " ; the need to remove the wings before performing most work upon the engine , including engine replacements , meant the Harrier required considerable man @-@ hours in maintenance , more than most aircraft . <unk> noted however that the maintenance difficulties were unavoidable in order to create a V / STOL aircraft . 
 = = = Engine = = = 
 The Pegasus turbofan jet engine , developed in tandem with the P.1127 then the Harrier , was designed specifically for V / STOL manoeuvring . Bristol Siddeley developed it from their earlier conventional Orpheus turbofan engine as the core with Olympus compressor blades for the fan . The engine 's thrust is directed through the four rotatable nozzles . The engine is equipped for water injection to increase thrust and takeoff performance in hot and high altitude conditions ; in normal V / STOL operations the system would be used in landing vertically with a heavy weapons load . The water injection function had originally been added following the input of US Air Force Colonel Bill Chapman , who worked for the Mutual Weapons Development Team . Water injection was necessary in order to generate maximum thrust , if only for a limited time , and was typically used during landing , especially in high ambient temperatures . 
 The aircraft was initially powered by the Pegasus 6 engine which was replaced by the more powerful Pegasus 11 during the Harrier GR.1 to GR.3 upgrade process . The primary focus throughout the engine 's development was on achieving high performance with as little weight as possible , tempered by the amount of funding that was available . Following the Harrier 's entry to service the focus switched to improving reliability and extending engine life ; a formal joint US – UK Pegasus Support Program operated for many years and spent a £ 3 @-@ million annual budget to develop engine improvements . Several variants have been released ; the latest is the Pegasus 11 – 61 ( Mk 107 ) , which provides 23 @,@ 800 lbf ( 106 kN ) thrust , more than any previous engine . 
 = = = Controls and handling = = = 
 The Harrier has been described by pilots as " unforgiving " . The aircraft is capable of both forward flight ( where it behaves in the manner of a typical fixed @-@ wing aircraft above its stall speed ) , as well as VTOL and STOL manoeuvres ( where the traditional lift and control surfaces are useless ) requiring skills and technical knowledge usually associated with helicopters . Most services demand great aptitude and extensive training for Harrier pilots , as well as experience in piloting both types of aircraft . Trainee pilots are often drawn from highly experienced and skilled helicopter pilots . 
 In addition to normal flight controls , the Harrier has a lever for controlling the direction of the four vectoring nozzles . It is viewed by senior RAF officers as a significant design success , that to enable and control the aircraft 's vertical flight required only a single lever added in the cockpit . For horizontal flight , the nozzles are directed rearwards by shifting the lever to the forward position ; for short or vertical takeoffs and landings , the lever is pulled back to point the nozzles downwards . 
 The Harrier has two control elements not found in conventional fixed @-@ wing aircraft : the thrust vector and the reaction control system . The thrust vector refers to the slant of the four engine nozzles and can be set between 0 ° ( horizontal , pointing directly backwards ) and 98 ° ( pointing down and slightly forwards ) . The 90 ° vector is normally deployed for VTOL manoeuvring . The reaction control is achieved by manipulating the control stick and is similar in action to the cyclic control of a helicopter . While irrelevant during forward flight mode , these controls are essential during VTOL and STOL manoeuvres . 
 The wind direction is a critical factor in VTOL manoeuvres . The procedure for vertical takeoff involves facing the aircraft into the wind . The thrust vector is set to 90 ° and the throttle is brought up to maximum , at which point the aircraft leaves the ground . The throttle is trimmed until a hover state is achieved at the desired altitude . The short @-@ takeoff procedure involves proceeding with normal takeoff and then applying a thrust vector ( less than 90 ° ) at a runway speed below normal takeoff speed ; usually the point of application is around 65 knots ( 120 km / h ) . For lower takeoff speeds the thrust vector is greater . The reaction control system involves a thrusters at key points in the aircraft 's fuselage and nose , also the wingtips . Thrust from the engine can be temporarily <unk> to control and correct the aircraft 's pitch and roll during vertical flight . 
 Rotating the vectored thrust nozzles into a forward @-@ facing position during normal flight is called vectoring in forward flight , or " <unk> " . This is a dog @-@ fighting tactic , allowing for more sudden braking and higher turn rates . Braking could cause a chasing aircraft to overshoot and present itself as a target for the Harrier it was chasing , a combat technique formally developed by the USMC for the Harrier in the early 1970s . 
 = = = Differences between versions = = = 
 The two largest users of the Harrier were the Royal Air Force and the United States Marine Corps ( USMC ) . The exported model of the aircraft operated by the USMC was designated the AV @-@ 8A Harrier , which was broadly similar to the RAF 's Harrier GR.1. Changes included the removal of all magnesium components , which corroded quickly at sea , and the integration of American radios and Identification Friend or Foe ( IFF ) systems ; furthermore the outer pylons , unlike the RAF aircraft , were designed from delivery to be equipped with self @-@ defence AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder heat @-@ seeking air @-@ to @-@ air missiles . Most of the AV @-@ 8As had been delivered with the more powerful Pegasus engine used in the GR.3 instead of the one used in the earlier GR.1. Two @-@ seat Harriers were operated for training purposes ; the body was stretched and a taller tail fin added . The RAF trained in the T.2 and T.4 versions , while <unk> and T.8 were training versions the Navy 's Sea Harrier , with appropriate fittings . The US and Spain flew the TAV @-@ 8A and TAV @-@ 8S , respectively . 
 All RAF <unk> and the initial AV @-@ 8As were fitted with the Ferranti <unk> inertial navigation / attack suite , but these were replaced in the USMC Harriers by a simpler Interface / Weapon Aiming Computer to aid quick turnaround between missions . The Martin @-@ Baker ejection seats were also replaced by the <unk> <unk> @-@ 3A in the American aircraft . The RAF had their GR.1 aircraft upgraded to the GR.3 standard , which featured improved sensors , a nose @-@ mounted laser tracker , the integration of electronic countermeasure ( ECM ) systems and a further upgraded Pegasus Mk 103 . The USMC upgraded their AV @-@ 8As to the AV @-@ 8C configuration ; this programme involved the installation of ECM equipment and adding a new inertial navigation system to the aircraft 's avionics . Substantial changes were the Lift Improvement Devices , to increase VTOL performance ; at the same time several airframe components were restored or replaced to extend the life of the aircraft . Spain 's Harriers , designated AV @-@ 8S or <unk> Matador for the single @-@ seater and TAV @-@ 8S or <unk> for the two @-@ seater , were almost identical to USMC Harriers differing only in the radios fitted . 
 The Royal Navy 's Fleet Air Arm ( FAA ) operated a substantially modified variant of the Harrier , the British Aerospace Sea Harrier . The Sea Harrier was not intended for ground @-@ attack duties and , unlike the standard Harrier , was equipped with radar and Sidewinder missiles for air combat duties and fleet air defence . The Sea Harrier was also fitted with navigational aids for carrier landings , modifications to reduce corrosion and a raised bubble @-@ canopy for greater visibility . The aircraft were later equipped to use AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM beyond @-@ visual @-@ range anti @-@ aircraft missiles and the more advanced Blue Vixen radar for longer range air @-@ to @-@ air combat , as well as Sea Eagle missiles for conducting anti @-@ ship missions . 
 The McDonnell Douglas AV @-@ 8B Harrier II is the latest Harrier variant , a second @-@ generation series to replace the first generation of Harrier jets already in service ; all the above variants of the Harrier have mainly been retired with the Harrier II taking their place in the RAF , USMC and FAA . In the 1970s the United Kingdom considered two options for replacing their existing Harriers : joining McDonnell Douglas ( MDD ) in developing the BAE Harrier II , or the independent development of a " Big Wing " Harrier . This proposal would have increased the wing area from 200 to 250 square feet ( 19 to 23 m2 ) , allowing for significant increases in weapons load and internal fuel reserves . The option of cooperation with MDD was chosen in 1982 over the more risky isolated approach . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Royal Air Force = = = 
 The first RAF squadron to be equipped with the Harrier GR.1 , No. 1 Squadron , started to convert to the aircraft at RAF Wittering in April 1969 . An early demonstration of the Harrier 's capabilities was the participation of two aircraft in the Daily Mail Transatlantic Air Race in May 1969 , flying between St Pancras railway station , London and downtown Manhattan with the use of aerial refuelling . The Harrier completed the journey in 6 hours 11 minutes . Two Harrier squadrons were established in 1970 at the RAF 's air base in Wildenrath to be part of its air force in Germany ; another squadron was formed there two years later . In 1977 , these three squadrons were moved forward to the air base at Gütersloh , closer to the prospective front line in the event of an outbreak of a European war . One of the squadrons was disbanded and its aircraft distributed between the other two . 
 In RAF service , the Harrier was used in close air support ( CAS ) , reconnaissance , and other ground @-@ attack roles . The flexibility of the Harrier led to a long @-@ term heavy deployment in West Germany as a conventional deterrent and potential strike weapon against Soviet aggression ; from camouflaged rough bases the Harrier was expected to launch attacks on advancing armour columns from East Germany . Harriers were also deployed to bases in Norway and Belize , a former British colony . No. 1 Squadron was specifically earmarked for Norwegian operations in the event of war , operating as part of Allied Forces Northern Europe . The Harrier 's capabilities were necessary in the Belize deployment , as it was the only RAF combat aircraft capable of safely operating from the airport 's short runway ; British forces had been stationed in Belize for several years due to tensions over a Guatemalan claim to Belizean territory ; the forces were withdrawn in 1993 , two years after Guatemala recognized the independence of Belize . 
 In the Falklands War in 1982 , 10 Harrier GR.3s of No. 1 Squadron operated from the aircraft carrier HMS Hermes . As the RAF Harrier GR.3 had not been designed for naval service , the 10 aircraft had to be rapidly modified prior to the departure of the task force . Special sealants against corrosion were applied and a new deck @-@ based inertial guidance aid was devised to allow the RAF Harrier to land on a carrier as easily as the Sea Harrier . Transponders to guide aircraft back to the carriers during night @-@ time operations were also installed , along with flares and chaff dispensers . 
 As there was little space on the carriers , two requisitioned merchant container ships , Atlantic Conveyor and Atlantic Causeway , were modified with temporary flight decks and used to carry Harriers and helicopters to the South Atlantic . The Harrier GR.3s focused on providing close air support to the ground forces on the Falklands and attacking Argentine positions ; suppressing enemy artillery was often a high priority . Sea Harriers were also used in the war , primarily conducting fleet air defence and combat air patrols against the threat of attacking Argentine fighters . However , both Sea Harriers and Harrier GR.3s were used in ground @-@ attack missions against the main airfield and runway at Stanley . 
 If most of the Sea Harriers had been lost , the GR.3s would have replaced them in air patrol duties , even though the Harrier GR.3 was not designed for air defence operations ; as such the GR.3s quickly had their outboard weapons pylons modified to take air @-@ to @-@ air Sidewinder missiles . From 10 to 24 May 1982 , prior to British forces landing in the Falklands , a detachment of three GR.3s provided air defence for Ascension Island until three F @-@ 4 Phantom IIs arrived to take on this responsibility . During the Falklands War , the greatest threats to the Harriers were deemed to be surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles ( SAMs ) and small arms fire from the ground . In total , four Harrier GR.3s and six Sea Harriers were lost to ground fire , accidents , or mechanical failure . More than 2 @,@ 000 Harrier sorties were conducted during the conflict — equivalent to six sorties per day per aircraft . 
 Following the Falklands war , British Aerospace explored the Skyhook , a new technique to operate Harriers from smaller ships . Skyhook would have allowed the launching and landing of Harriers from smaller ships by holding the aircraft in midair by a crane ; secondary cranes were to hold weapons for rapid re @-@ arming . This would potentially have saved fuel and allowed for operations in rougher seas . The system was marketed to foreign customers , and it was speculated that Skyhook could be applied to large submarines such as the Russian Typhoon class , but the system attracted no interest . 
 The first generation of Harriers did not see further combat with the RAF after the Falklands War , although they continued to serve for years afterwards . As a deterrent against further Argentine invasion attempts , No. 1453 Flight RAF was deployed to the Falkland Islands from August 1983 to June 1985 . However the second generation Harrier IIs saw action in Bosnia , Iraq , and Afghanistan . The first generation Hawker Siddeley airframes were replaced by the improved Harrier II , which had been developed jointly between McDonnell Douglas and British Aerospace . 
 = = = United States Marine Corps = = = 
 The United States Marine Corps began showing a significant interest in the aircraft around the time the first RAF Harrier squadron was established in 1969 , and this motivated Hawker Siddeley to further develop the aircraft to encourage a purchase . Although there were concerns in Congress about multiple coinciding projects in the close air support role , the Marine Corps were enthusiastic about the Harrier and managed to overcome efforts to obstruct its procurement . 
 The AV @-@ 8A entered service with the Marine Corps in 1971 , replacing other aircraft in the Marines ' attack squadrons . The service became interested in performing ship @-@ borne operations with the Harrier . Admiral Elmo Zumwalt promoted the concept of a Sea Control Ship , a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ ton light carrier equipped with Harriers and helicopters , to supplement the larger aircraft carriers of the US Navy . An amphibious assault ship , USS Guam , was converted into the Interim Sea Control Ship and operated as such between 1971 and 1973 with the purpose of studying the limits and possible obstacles for operating such a vessel . Since then the Sea Control Ship concept has been subject to periodic re @-@ examinations and studies , often in the light of budget cuts and questions over the use of supercarriers . 
 Other exercises were performed to demonstrate the AV @-@ 8A 's suitability for operating from various amphibious assault ships and aircraft carriers , including a deployment of 14 Harriers aboard USS Franklin D. Roosevelt for six months in 1976 . The tests showed , amongst other things , that the Harrier was capable of performing in weather where conventional carrier aircraft could not . In support of naval operations , the USMC devised and studied several methods to further integrate the Harrier . One result was Arapaho , a stand @-@ by system to rapidly convert civilian cargo ships into seagoing platforms for operating and maintaining a handful of Harriers , to be used to augment the number of available ships to deploy upon . 
 When the reactivation of the Iowa @-@ class battleships was under consideration , a radical design for a battleship @-@ carrier hybrid emerged that would have replaced the ship 's rear turret with a flight deck , complete with a hangar and two ski jumps , for operating several Harriers . However , the USMC considered the need for naval gunfire support to be a greater priority than additional platforms for carrier operations , while the cost and delay associated with such elaborate conversions was significant , and the concept was dropped . 
 The Marines Corps ' concept for deploying the Harriers in a land @-@ based expeditionary role focused on aggressive speed . Harrier forward bases and light maintenance facilities were to be set up in under 24 hours on any prospective battle area . The forward bases , containing one to four aircraft , were to be located 20 miles ( 32 km ) from the forward edge of battle ( <unk> ) , while a more established permanent airbase would be located around 50 miles ( 80 km ) from the <unk> . The close proximity of forward bases allowed for a far greater sortie rate and reduced fuel consumption . 
 The AV @-@ 8A 's abilities in air @-@ to @-@ air combat were tested by the Marine Corps by conducting mock dogfights with McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom IIs ; these exercises trained pilots to use the vectoring @-@ in @-@ forward @-@ flight ( <unk> ) capability to outmanoeuvre their opponents and showed that the Harriers could act as effective air @-@ to @-@ air fighters at close range . The success of Harrier operations countered scepticism of V / STOL aircraft , which had been judged to be expensive failures in the past . Marine Corps officers became convinced of the military advantages of the Harrier and pursued extensive development of the aircraft . 
 Starting in 1979 the USMC began upgrading their AV @-@ 8As to the AV @-@ 8C configuration — the work focused mainly on extending useful service lives and improving VTOL performance . The AV @-@ 8C and the remaining AV @-@ 8A Harriers were retired by 1987 . These were replaced by the Harrier II , designated as the AV @-@ 8B , which was introduced into service in 1985 . The performance of the Harrier in USMC service led to calls for the United States Air Force to procure Harrier IIs in addition to the USMC 's own plans , but these never resulted in Air Force orders . Since the late 1990s , the AV @-@ 8B has been slated to be replaced by the F @-@ 35B variant of the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II , a more modern V / STOL jet aircraft . 
 Like the next generation AV @-@ 8Bs , nevertheless , the AV @-@ 8A / C Harriers suffered many accidents , with around 40 aircraft lost and some 30 pilots killed during ' 70 and ' 80s . 
 = = = Other operators = = = 
 Due to the Harrier 's unique characteristics it attracted a large amount of interest from other nations , often as attempts to make their own V / STOL jets were unsuccessful , such as in the cases of the American XV @-@ 4 Hummingbird and the German VFW VAK <unk> . Operations by the USMC aboard USS Nassau in 1981 and by British Harriers and Sea Harriers in the Falklands War proved that the aircraft were highly effective in combat . These operations also demonstrated that " Harrier Carriers " provided a powerful presence at sea without the expense of big deck carriers . 
 Following the display of Harrier operations from small carriers , the navies of Spain and later Thailand bought the Harrier for use as their main carrier @-@ based fixed @-@ wing aircraft . Spain 's purchase of Harriers was complicated by long @-@ standing political friction between the British and Spanish governments of the era ; even though the Harriers were manufactured in the UK they were sold to Spain with the US acting as an intermediary . During tests in November 1972 , the British pilot John Farley showed that the wooden deck of Daedalus was able to withstand the temperature of the gases generated by the Harrier . Since 1976 , the Spanish Navy operated the AV @-@ 8S Matador from their aircraft carrier <unk> ( formerly the USS Cabot ) ; the aircraft provided both air defence and strike capabilities for the Spanish fleet . Spain later purchased five Harriers directly from the British government to replace losses . 
 Hawker Siddeley aggressively marketed the Harrier for export . At one point the company was holding talks with Australia , Brazil , Switzerland , India and Japan . Of these only India became a customer , purchasing the Sea Harrier . At one point China came very close to becoming an operator of the first generation Harrier . Following an overture by the UK in the early 1970s , when relations with the West were warming , China became interested in the aircraft as it sought to modernise its armed forces ; British Prime Minister James Callaghan noted significant hostility from the USSR over the sales bid . The deal was later cancelled by the UK as part of a diplomatic backlash after China invaded Vietnam in 1979 . 
 The Spanish Navy , Thai Navy , Royal Air Force , and United States Marine Corps have all retired their first @-@ generation Harriers . Spain sold seven single @-@ seat and two twin @-@ seat Harriers to Thailand in 1998 . The Royal Thai Navy 's AV @-@ 8S Matadors were delivered as part of the air wing deployed on the new light aircraft carrier <unk> Chakri <unk> . The Thai Navy had from the start significant logistical problems keeping the Harriers operational due to a shortage of funds for spare parts and equipment , leaving only a few Harriers serviceable at a time . In 1999 , two years after being delivered , only one airframe was in airworthy condition . Around 2003 , Thailand considered acquiring former Royal Navy Sea Harriers , which were more suitable for maritime operations and better equipped for air defence , to replace their AV @-@ 8S Harriers ; this investigation did not progress to a purchase . The last first @-@ generation Harriers were retired by Thailand in 2006 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Harrier GR.1 , <unk> , GR.3 
 Single @-@ seat versions for the RAF . The RAF ordered 118 of the GR.1 / GR.3 series , with the last production aircraft delivery in December 1986 . 122 built . 
 AV @-@ 8A , AV @-@ 8C Harrier 
 Single @-@ seat versions for the US Marine Corps . The USMC ordered 102 AV @-@ 8As ( company designation : Harrier Mk . 50 ) . The AV @-@ 8C was an upgrade to the AV @-@ 8A . 110 built . 
 AV @-@ 8S Matador 
 Export version of the AV @-@ 8A Harrier for the Spanish Navy , who designated them as VA @-@ 1 Matador . 10 built . 
 Harrier T.2 , <unk> , T.4 , <unk> 
 Two @-@ seat training versions for the RAF , with a stretched body and taller tail fin . 25 built . 
 Harrier <unk> , T.8 , <unk> 
 Two @-@ seat training versions for the Royal Navy and Indian Navy with avionics based on the Sea Harrier . 
 TAV @-@ 8A Harrier 
 Two @-@ seat training version for the USMC , powered by a Pegasus Mk 103 . 
 TAV @-@ 8S Matador 
 Two @-@ seat training version for the Spanish Navy and later sold to the Royal Thai Navy . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Thailand 
 Royal Thai Navy 
 India 
 Indian Navy 
 Spain 
 Spanish Navy 
 United Kingdom 
 Royal Air Force 
 Royal Navy 
 United States 
 United States Marine Corps 
 = = Aircraft on display = = 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 AV @-@ 8A 
 <unk> - Canada Aviation and Space Museum , Ottawa , Ontario . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 GR.1 
 <unk> - Luftwaffenmuseum der Bundeswehr , Gatow . 
 GR.3 
 <unk> - <unk> Leo Junior at Hermeskeil . 
 = = = Poland = = = 
 GR.3 
 <unk> - Polish Aviation Museum , Kraków , Poland . 
 = = = New Zealand = = = 
 GR.3 
 <unk> - Ashburton Aviation Museum , Ashburton , New Zealand . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 GR.1 
 <unk> - National Museum of Flight , East Fortune . 
 GR.3 
 <unk> - Tangmere Military Aviation Museum , Chichester , West Sussex . 
 <unk> - Yorkshire Air Museum , Elvington . 
 <unk> - Gatwick Aviation Museum , Surrey . 
 <unk> - South Yorkshire Aircraft Museum , Doncaster , South Yorkshire . 
 <unk> - Classic Air Force , St Mawgan , Newquay , Cornwall . 
 <unk> - RAF Wittering ( Gate Guardian ) . 
 <unk> - Imperial War Museum , Duxford . 
 <unk> - <unk> Collection , Norfolk . 
 <unk> - RAF Museum , Hendon . 
 <unk> - Bentwaters Cold War Museum , Suffolk . 
 <unk> G @-@ VTOL 
 <unk> - Brooklands Museum , Surrey . 
 T.2 
 <unk> - <unk> Aviation Museum Caernarfon Wales 
 T.4 
 <unk> - Farnborough Air Sciences Trust , Farnborough , Hampshire . 
 AV @-@ 8A 
 <unk> - Imperial War Museum North 
