 = = = United States = = = 
 AV @-@ 8A 
 <unk> - Air Park , Yuma MCAS , Yuma , Arizona . 
 <unk> - San Diego Air and Space Museum , San Diego , California . 
 <unk> - Craven County Regional Airport , Grantham , North Carolina . 
 <unk> - City of Havelock , Havelock , North Carolina . 
 TAV @-@ 8A 
 <unk> - Oakland Aviation Museum , Oakland , California . 
 <unk> - Pima Air & Space Museum , Tucson , Arizona . 
 AV @-@ 8C 
 <unk> - Flying Leatherneck Aviation Museum , Marine Corps Air Station Miramar , San Diego , California . 
 <unk> - Quonset Air Museum , North Kingstown , Rhode Island . 
 <unk> - Pacific Coast Air Museum , Santa Rosa , California . 
 <unk> - National Naval Aviation Museum , NAS Pensacola , Pensacola , Florida . 
 <unk> - Museum of Flight , Seattle , Washington . 
 <unk> - Intrepid Sea , Air & Space Museum , New York City , New York . 
 <unk> - Hangar 25 Museum , Webb AFB ( formerly ) , Big Spring , Texas . 
 <unk> - Pima Air & Space Museum , Tucson , Arizona . 
 <unk> - Naval Inventory Control Point ( <unk> ) Philadelphia , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . 
 <unk> - United States Naval Museum of Armament and Technology , NCC China Lake ( North ) , Ridgecrest , California . 
 = = Specifications ( Harrier GR.3 ) = = 
 Data from Jane 's All The World 's Aircraft 1988 – 89 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : One 
 Length : 46 ft 10 in ( 14 @.@ 27 m ) 
 Wingspan : 25 ft 3 in ( 7 @.@ 70 m ) 
 Height : 11 ft 11 in ( 3 @.@ 63 m ) 
 Wing area : 201 @.@ 1 ft ² ( 18 @.@ 68 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 13 @,@ 535 lb ( 6 @,@ 140 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 25 @,@ 200 lb ( 11 @,@ 430 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Rolls @-@ Royce Pegasus 103 turbofan with four swivelling nozzles , 21 @,@ 500 lbf ( 95 @.@ 6 kN ) Four vertical flight puffer jets use engine bleed air , mounted in the nose , wingtips , and tail . 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 730 mph ( 635 knots , 1 @,@ 176 km / h ) at sea level 
 Combat radius : 230 mi ( 200 nmi , 370 km ) lo @-@ lo @-@ lo with 4 @,@ 400 lb ( 2 @,@ 000 kg ) payload 
 Ferry range : 2 @,@ 129 mi ( 1 @,@ 850 nmi , 3 @,@ 425 km ) 
 Endurance : 1 hr 30 min ( combat air patrol – 115 mi ( 185 km ) from base ) 
 Service ceiling : 51 @,@ 200 ft ( 15 @,@ 600 m ) 
 Time to climb to 40 @,@ 000 ft ( 12 @,@ 200 m ) : 2 min 23 s 
 Armament 
 Guns : 2 × 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 18 in ) ADEN cannon pods under the fuselage 
 Hardpoints : 4 × under @-@ wing & 1 × under @-@ fuselage pylon stations with a capacity of 5 @,@ 000 lb ( 2 @,@ 268 kg ) and provisions to carry combinations of : 
 Rockets : 4 × Matra rocket pods with 18 × SNEB 68 mm rockets each 
 Missiles : 2 × AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinders Air @-@ to @-@ air missiles 
 Bombs : A variety of unguided iron bombs , BL755 cluster bombs or laser @-@ guided bombs 
 Others : 
 1 × Reconnaissance pod 
 2 × drop tanks for extended range / loitering time 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 = New York State Route 104 = 
 New York State Route 104 ( NY 104 ) is a 182 @.@ 41 @-@ mile ( 293 @.@ 56 km ) long east – west state highway in Upstate New York in the United States . It spans six counties and enters the vicinity of four cities — Niagara Falls , Lockport , Rochester , and Oswego — as it follows a routing largely parallel to that of the southern shoreline of Lake Ontario , along a ridge of the old shoreline of Glacial Lake Iroquois . The western terminus of NY 104 is at an intersection with NY 384 in Niagara Falls , Niagara County , while its eastern terminus is at a junction with NY 13 in the town of Williamstown , Oswego County . The portion of NY 104 between Rochester and the village of Webster east of the city is a limited @-@ access highway known as the Keeler Street Expressway west of NY 590 and the Irondequoit – Wayne County Expressway east of NY 590 ; from Williamson to Oswego , NY 104 is a super two highway . 
 The majority of Ridge Road and modern NY 104 from the village of Red Creek to the town of Mexico were originally designated as part of Route 30 , an unsigned legislative route , early in the 20th century . All of Ridge Road and its continuation through Oswego to the hamlet of Maple View gained a signed designation by 1926 and became part of U.S. Route 104 ( US 104 ) , a United States Numbered Highway extending from Niagara Falls to Maple View , c . 1935 . US 104 , which never connected to US 4 , its implied parent route , was redesignated as NY 104 c . 1972 . As part of the redesignation , NY 104 was extended east to NY 13 in Williamstown over what had been New York State Route 126 . 
 Over time , the 104 designation , whether it be US 104 or NY 104 , has been shifted from surface streets to expressways and super twos , particularly from Rochester east to Oswego . The first such realignment occurred in the 1940s in Wayne County and was completed by the realignment of NY 104 onto the Irondequoit – Wayne County Expressway near Webster in the 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Niagara County = = = 
 NY 104 begins near the Rainbow Bridge at the intersection of First Street and Niagara Street ( NY 384 ) in downtown Niagara Falls . The Seaway Trail crosses over NY 384 and follows NY 104 north on First Street for one block to the Robert Moses State Parkway , where the byway and NY 104 veer onto Main Street . NY 104 follows Main Street through the largely commercial west side of the city and intersects the northern or eastern terminus for both US 62 ( Ferry Avenue and Walnut Avenue ) and US 62 Business ( Pine Avenue ) . North of US 62 Business , the area becomes more residential as NY 104 meets NY 182 southeast of the Whirlpool Rapids Bridge . To the north , the name of NY 104 changes to Lewiston Road as it passes by the south campus of Niagara University . Near the northern extent of the campus , NY 104 intersects the western terminus of NY 31 , here named College Avenue . At the city limits , NY 104 meets the northbound Robert Moses State Parkway by way of a half @-@ interchange . The portion of NY 104 between Third Street and the Lewiston town line is maintained by the city of Niagara Falls , and is the only part of NY 104 that is not maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation . 
 Now in the town of Lewiston , NY 104 comes within view of the Niagara River gorge and begins to run along its eastern rim . NY 104 meets the northernmost point of NY 61 at the northern campus of Niagara University . Past NY 61 , the route passes by the Niagara Power Visitors Center and over the Robert Moses Niagara Power Plant . On the opposite side of the plant , NY 104 connects with Interstate 190 ( I @-@ 190 ) at exit 25 via Upper Mountain Road and passes under the eastern approach to the Lewiston – Queenston Bridge , which links I @-@ 190 with Ontario 's Highway 405 . 
 Past I @-@ 190 , NY 104 begins to deviate from the Niagara River . It heads through a small neighborhood situated between the Moses Parkway and NY 104 and intersects the northern end of NY 265 . North of this junction , NY 104 curves northeast to descend the Niagara Escarpment . As it heads downward in elevation , it intersects the western terminus of NY 18 by way of an interchange . As part of the same exit , NY 104 meets the parkway one more time as well as the southern terminus of NY 18F near the village of Lewiston . Here , the Seaway Trail leaves NY 104 to follow NY 18F . East of the exit , NY 104 intersects NY 18 again by way of another interchange . 
 East of Lewiston village , NY 104 follows Ridge Road through a sparsely populated area of Niagara County . Much of this portion of NY 104 is bordered on its southern end by the Tuscarora Indian Reservation . At the Lewiston hamlet of <unk> , the extents of the reservation head south , and development along NY 104 increases slightly . NY 104 meets the northern terminus of NY 429 at the Lewiston – Cambria town line and crosses over NY 425 at Streeters Corners . Just east of this location is an intersection with NY 93 in the community of Molyneaux Corners . The two routes form a concurrency east to Warrens Corners , a hamlet situated on the Cambria – Lockport town line , where NY 93 turns south to serve the city of Lockport . 
 NY 104 heads northeast through the extreme northwest corner of the town of Lockport to the town line , where it turns eastward to straddle the boundary between the towns of Lockport and Newfane . As it approaches the hamlet of Wrights Corners , the amount of development along NY 104 increases substantially with the level of development peaking at the junction of NY 104 and NY 78 . The two routes join for roughly 0 @.@ 35 miles ( 0 @.@ 56 km ) into the town of Newfane before splitting north of the hamlet . Ridge Road continues northeast through a residential district , which gives way to open fields once more at Ridgewood . NY 104 turns east here , passing through the town of Hartland and intersecting the southern terminus of NY 148 and the northern terminus of NY 271 . The route crosses into Orleans County at a junction with the southern terminus of NY 269 , which straddles the county line . 
 = = = Orleans and Monroe counties = = = 
 The route heads northeast through the town of Ridgeway to the hamlet of the same name , where NY 104 meets NY 63 . NY 63 joins NY 104 east along Ridge Road for about 300 yards ( 270 m ) before continuing north toward Lake Ontario . NY 104 , meanwhile , continues through the rural towns of Ridgeway and Gaines to a junction with NY 279 north of Albion . Not far to the east , NY 104 intersects NY 98 , the primary north – south highway through Albion , in the hamlet of Childs . Just past the intersection on the north side of the road are two of the three cobblestone buildings of the <unk> Historic District , a National Historic Landmark . 
 Farther east , Ridge Road enters the town of Murray , where it meets the northern terminus of NY 387 and intersects NY 237 in the hamlet of Murray . The two routes join for just under a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before NY 237 breaks away to the south toward Holley . NY 104 exits Orleans County 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) later in the same fashion as it entered : by intersecting a state highway . After meeting the southern terminus of NY 272 , NY 104 crosses into Monroe County and becomes West Ridge Road as it heads through the town of Clarkson . In the densely populated hamlet of Clarkson Corners , NY 104 intersects NY 19 . The open fields return east of the hamlet , and largely surround Ridge Road as NY 104 intersects NY 260 . NY 104 heads onward into Parma , where it widens to four lanes and has a junction with NY 259 in Parma Corners . 
 East of Parma Corners , development on NY 104 steadily increases as it heads toward the town of Greece . By the Parma – Greece town line , where NY 104 intersects the southern terminus of NY 261 , Ridge Road is lined with commercial properties of varying size . Continuing east , NY 104 meets the northern terminus of NY 386 . Here , NY 104 widens to a six @-@ lane divided highway . Between NY 386 and NY 390 exit 24 , NY 104 passes by several large shopping malls , the largest of which is The Mall at Greece Ridge at the intersection of NY 104 and Long Pond Road . At NY 390 , NY 104 continues to be a six @-@ lane divided highway as it heads toward Rochester . It enters the city limits upon meeting Mount Read Boulevard at an interchange . 
 In Rochester , NY 104 passes through an area known as Kodak Park , the large industrial complex owned by Eastman Kodak that occupies an entire neighborhood . In the middle of the complex , NY 104 crosses the Rochester and Southern Railroad and the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Charlotte Running Track and intersects the eastern terminus of NY 18 . Continuing east , NY 104 crosses the Genesee River gorge on the Veterans Memorial Bridge . On the opposite bank , it loses the name West Ridge Road and becomes a limited @-@ access highway known as the Keeler Street Expressway . 
 North of the first exit with St. Paul Street , Ridge Road resurfaces as East Ridge Road , which parallels the expressway to the north . NY 104 continues through Rochester and Irondequoit , connecting to North Clinton Avenue , Seneca Avenue , Hudson Avenue , Carter Street , Portland Avenue , North Goodman Street and Culver Road by way of interchanges . Between the Goodman Street and Culver Road exits , NY 104 passes the former Medley Centre . East of Culver , NY 104 encounters NY 590 and connects to NY 590 southbound by way of an interchange . East Ridge Road runs through the middle of this interchange , although there are no connections between Ridge and NY 104 . There is also no access from NY 104 eastbound to NY 590 northbound ; eastbound traffic must take Culver Road in order to go north toward Sea Breeze . Just east of the NY 590 interchange , NY 104 becomes the Irondequoit – Wayne County Expressway and crosses the Irondequoit Bay by way of the Irondequoit Bay Bridge . An access road between NY 104 just west of the bridge and NY 590 at Titus Avenue was once planned . Although entrance and exit ramps were built for the connection along NY 104 , the rest of the link was never built , leaving no access from NY 104 westbound to NY 590 northbound and from NY 590 southbound to NY 104 eastbound . 
 On the other side of the bridge in the town of Webster , NY 104 has exits leading to Bay Road , Five Mile Line Road , Hard Road , and Holt Road prior to entering the village of Webster . Within the village , NY 104 meets NY 250 ( North Avenue ) and Phillips Road by way of interchanges before exiting the village . The expressway loosely parallels the southern edge of the primary Xerox campus to an exit with Salt Road , where it downgrades to a divided highway as it continues east to Basket Road and the Monroe – Wayne county line , partially delimited by NY 404 . 
 = = = Wayne and Cayuga counties = = = 
 As Ridge Road follows to the south , NY 104 continues east through Ontario , where it meets the northern terminus of NY 350 in Ontario Center . The four @-@ lane divided highway continues east to Williamson , where the median separating the two directions of NY 104 comes to an end west of the hamlet of Williamson . In the center of the hamlet , NY 104 intersects the northern terminus of NY 21 . NY 104 narrows to two lanes east of Williamson as development along the route declines once more , giving way to open fields and thick forests . 
 Near the center of the county in the town of Sodus , NY 104 serves as the northern terminus of NY 88 northwest of the village of Sodus . While NY 88 heads east into the village , NY 104 bypasses Sodus to the north . East of the village , Ridge Road and NY 104 intersect as Ridge Road flips to the north side of NY 104 . The two highways follow parallel routings southeast toward Alton , where NY 104 intersects NY 14 . East of Alton , the gap between the two widens as Ridge Road veers north to access Sodus Bay . NY 104 , meanwhile , follows a nearly linear routing into the town of Huron , where it intersects the northern terminus of NY 414 . 
 NY 104 continues on the eastward routing to the vicinity of the village of Wolcott , where it connects to the northern terminus of NY 89 via a half @-@ diamond interchange south of the village . Northeast of this location in the town of Wolcott , Ridge Road intersects NY 104 once again , returning to the south side of the route . The two roads follow parallel routings once more to a junction south of Red Creek . At this rural intersection , NY 104 acts as the southern and northern ( western ) terminus of both NY 104A and NY 370 , respectively , both occupying an extension of Ridge Road . Just east of the intersection is the Wayne – Cayuga county line . Only 7 miles ( 11 km ) of the route are situated in Cayuga County , and the only junction of note within the county is with NY 38 , which it meets in the Sterling hamlet of <unk> . East of the junction , NY 104 turns sharply to the northeast and enters Oswego County . 
 = = = Oswego County = = = 
 The route continues northeast through the town of Hannibal to the village of the same name . Instead of entering the community , NY 104 bypasses it to the east . It intersects NY 3 east of Hannibal and heads north toward Lake Ontario . In the town of Oswego , NY 104 meets the northern terminus of NY 104A and assumes its northeasterly routing . It is here that the Seaway Trail rejoins NY 104 . NY 104 heads along the Lake Ontario shoreline to the lake @-@ side city of Oswego , the first location with significant development along the route since Williamson . The route intersects Sweet Road , a connector leading to the campus of SUNY Oswego , just west of the city limits . 
 NY 104 enters the city as the two @-@ laned West Seneca Street . At Baylis Street , the road widens to four lanes separated by a median . After seven blocks , NY 104 veers onto West Bridge Street , a four @-@ lane street with no median . NY 104 continues along Bridge Street into downtown , where it intersects the northern terminus of NY 48 on the west bank of the Oswego River and the northern terminus of NY 481 on the east bank . As NY 104 heads through eastern Oswego , it separates from East Bridge Street and curves east to follow a more inland routing . The route reverts to two lanes as it exits the city limits . 
 The high level of development along NY 104 continues to the <unk> hamlet of the same name , where it begins to become more sporadic and give way to fields and dense forests . NY 104 heads northeast to New Haven and the western terminus of NY 104B . While NY 104B heads northeast toward the lake shore as part of the Seaway Trail , NY 104 cuts southeast to serve the village of Mexico . In the village center , NY 104 briefly overlaps NY 3 and intersects the western terminus of NY 69 . The route continues due east through the rural town of Mexico to the small hamlet of Maple View , centered around the junction between NY 104 and US 11 . Just outside the hamlet , NY 104 meets I @-@ 81 at exit 34 . Past I @-@ 81 , NY 104 heads east and southeast for nine miles ( 14 km ) through the predominantly rural towns of Albion and Williamstown to its eastern terminus at a junction with NY 13 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early designations = = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature established Route 30 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Niagara Falls , Niagara County in the southwest to Rouses Point , Clinton County , in the northeast . From Rochester to Red Creek , Route 30 was assigned to Ridge Road . Between Red Creek and the hamlet of Union Square ( now Maple View ) in the town of Mexico , it included most of modern NY 104 . At the same time , the roadway alongside the Niagara River between Ridge Road in Lewiston and Pine Avenue in downtown Niagara Falls was designated , but not signed , as part of Route 18 . By 1914 , Route 30 was amended to also include the section of Ridge Road from Porter ( modern NY 429 ) to Ridgeway ( NY 63 ) . In 1914 , another section — from Ridgeway to the Orleans – Monroe county line — was also included in Route 30 's definition as a spur route . The spur route became part of Route 30 on March 1 , 1921 , when the mainline route was realigned to follow Ridge Road between Ridgeway and Rochester . 
 When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , the segments of Route 30 from Rochester to Red Creek and from Oswego to Maple View became part of NY 3 . Between Red Creek and Oswego , NY 3 was routed on what is now NY 104A . Farther west , the portion of Route 18 from Niagara Falls to Lewiston was included as part of NY 34 . By 1926 , all of legislative Route 30 west of Rochester was designated as part of NY 31 . In the late 1920s , however , NY 31 was realigned to follow Ridge Road west from Porter to Lewiston . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 34 became part of an extended NY 18 while NY 3E was assigned to the portion of former legislative Route 30 between Red Creek and Oswego . NY 3E was renumbered to NY 3F c . 1932 . 
 = = = Establishment of US 104 = = = 
 US 104 was assigned across Upstate New York in April 1935 , extending from Niagara Falls to Maple View via Lewiston , Rochester , and Oswego . It overlapped NY 18 from Niagara Falls to Lewiston and replaced NY 3 and NY 31 from Lewiston to Maple View ( except from Red Creek to Oswego , where US 104 followed NY 3F instead ) . As a result , NY 31 was shifted south onto most of its modern alignment while NY 3 was rerouted south of Watertown to follow what had been NY 3D . Although US 104 was technically a child route of US 4 , it did not connect to US 4 . A highway extending eastward from US 11 and US 104 at Maple View to NY 13 in Williamstown was designated as NY 126 c . 1940 . 
 When it was first assigned , US 104 dipped south to serve downtown Rochester instead of bypassing it to the north . US 104 left Ridge Road at Lake Avenue and followed Lake Avenue and State Street south to Main Street in downtown . It followed Main Street and Winton Road to Empire Boulevard , where it turned east to rejoin Ridge Road in Webster . It was rerouted c . 1937 to continue east on Ridge Road over the Veterans Memorial Bridge and through Irondequoit to Culver Road . US 104 turned here , following Culver Road south to Empire Boulevard and the latter east to Winton Road , where it reconnected to its original routing through the city . The realignment created a significant overlap with NY 18 , which joined US 104 in the vicinity of Kodak Park and separated at Culver Road , where it headed north instead . 
 = = = Conversion to expressways = = = 
 Work began in the 1940s on new super two alignments for US 104 in Wayne , Cayuga , and Oswego counties . The new highway was built on a routing parallel to that of Ridge Road and served as a bypass of the communities along Ridge Road . The first portion of the super two , extending from the Monroe – Wayne county line at Union Hill to west of Sodus , was built in the mid @-@ 1940s and completed by 1947 . An extension of the highway around Sodus to NY 414 in Huron was constructed in the mid @-@ 1960s and opened by 1968 . In between the end of the super two and Ridge Road , US 104 was routed on Lake Bluff Road . The remainder of the super two between Huron and Red Creek was finished by 1974 . East of the super two , a bypass was constructed around the village of Hannibal during the early 1960s and opened to traffic by 1964 . 
 Similar conversion projects were also conducted elsewhere . In Irondequoit , the portion of the Sea Breeze Expressway ( now NY 590 ) from Empire Boulevard to Culver Road opened in the late 1950s . US 104 and NY 18 were extended eastward along East Ridge Road to meet the expressway at what is now exit 11 . Both designations entered the freeway ; however , NY 18 followed the roadway north to Culver Road while US 104 progressed south to Empire Boulevard , where it rejoined its former surface alignment towards Webster . The 0 @.@ 71 miles ( 1 @.@ 14 km ) of Empire Boulevard between the Rochester city line and the Sea Breeze Expressway remains state @-@ maintained to this day as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , construction began on the Keeler Street Expressway , a limited @-@ access highway extending across Irondequoit from the Genesee River ( at the Veterans Memorial Bridge ) to the Sea Breeze Expressway . The first section from North Goodman Street to the Sea Breeze Expressway was completed by 1968 while the remainder opened in late 1969 . The name of the expressway was derived from Keeler Street , a small residential street that originally connected to East Ridge Road and St. Paul Street by way of a traffic circle on the east bank of the Genesee River . The street was turned into a dead @-@ end street as a result of the expressway 's construction . US 104 was moved from East Ridge Road to the expressway , which remains known , albeit infrequently , as the Keeler Street Expressway to this day . NY 18 remained on East Ridge Road , however , reducing the overlap between US 104 and NY 18 to just the portion on the Veterans Bridge . NY 18 was truncated to its current eastern terminus c . 1973 , eliminating the overlap entirely . 
 The first segment of an eastward extension of the Keeler Street Expressway , named the Irondequoit – Wayne County Expressway , opened c . 1971 between the Sea Breeze Expressway ( at this point designated as part of NY 47 ) and Five Mile Line Road . In between , US 104 crossed Irondequoit Bay by way of the Irondequoit Bay Bridge . US 104 's former surface alignment between NY 47 and Five Mile Line Road was redesignated NY 404 while US 104 was temporarily realigned onto Five Mile Line Road between the expressway and Ridge Road to connect to its former alignment . 
 = = = <unk> and completion = = = 
 The segment of I @-@ 81 through central New York was built on an alignment that closely paralleled US 11 from the Pennsylvania state line northward to the city of Watertown . The portion of I @-@ 81 near Maple View was completed in late 1961 , at which time US 104 was extended 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) eastward over NY 126 to meet the new highway . NY 126 was truncated on its west end to the I @-@ 81 interchange as a result . US 104 was redesignated as NY 104 c . 1972 , making the route the third to bear the NY 104 designation . As part of the change , NY 104 was extended east to NY 13 , completely supplanting NY 126 . 
 By 1978 , the frontage roads between Five Mile Line Road and NY 250 in Webster were completed . NY 104 was rerouted eastward along the roadways while NY 404 was extended over NY 104 's old alignment to NY 250 in Webster . The section from NY 250 to the existing expressway at the Wayne County line was built in the late 1970s while the main carriageway of NY 104 between Five Mile Line Road and NY 250 was completed in the early 1980s . NY 404 was extended east along the former alignment of NY 104 to the county line upon the total completion of the Five Mile Line Road – NY 250 segment . 
 = = Suffixed routes = = 
 NY 104 has two suffixed routes , both of which were assigned c . 1935 . 
 NY 104A ( 17 @.@ 38 miles or 27 @.@ 97 kilometres ) is an alternate route of NY 104 between Red Creek , Wayne County , and the town of Oswego , Oswego County . 
 NY 104B ( 6 @.@ 07 miles or 9 @.@ 77 kilometres ) is a spur in Oswego County that extends from NY 104 in New Haven to NY 3 in Texas . 
 = = NY 104 Truck = = 
 New York State Route 104 Truck is a 1 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) long truck route of NY 104 through the city of Rochester and town of Irondequoit in Monroe County . The route , which exists in the eastbound direction only , extends from the ramps connecting NY 104 to St. Paul Street east along East Ridge Road to Hudson Avenue , where it turns south to access NY 104 . A 0 @.@ 9 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) long segment of NY 104 Truck follows the former alignment of US 104 east along East Ridge Road from St. Paul Street to Hudson Avenue . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = White House FBI files controversy = 
 The White House FBI files controversy of the Clinton Administration , often referred to as Filegate , arose in June 1996 around improper access in 1993 and 1994 to Federal Bureau of Investigation security @-@ clearance documents . Craig Livingstone , director of the White House 's Office of Personnel Security , improperly requested , and received from the FBI , background reports concerning several hundred individuals without asking permission . The revelations provoked a strong political and press reaction because many of the files covered White House employees from previous Republican administrations , including top presidential advisors . Under criticism , Livingstone resigned from his position . Allegations were made that senior White House figures , including First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton , may have requested and read the files for political purposes , and that the First Lady had authorized the hiring of the underqualified Livingstone . 
 The matter was investigated by the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee , the Senate Judiciary Committee , and the Whitewater Independent Counsel . In 1998 , Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr exonerated President Bill Clinton and First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton of any involvement in the matter . In 2000 Independent Counsel Robert Ray issued his final report on Filegate , stating that there was no credible evidence of any criminal activity by any individual in the matter and no credible evidence that senior White House figures or the First Lady had requested the files or had acted improperly or testified improperly regarding Livingstone 's hiring . A separate lawsuit on the matter brought by Judicial Watch , a conservative watchdog group , lingered on for years and was dismissed by a federal judge in 2010 . 
 = = Improper use of files issue = = 
 " Filegate " began on June 5 , 1996 , when Republican Pennsylvania Congressman William F. Clinger , Jr . , chair of the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight , announced that the committee had found , during their ongoing " Travelgate " investigations , that FBI background reports on Travelgate figure Billy Dale had been delivered to the White House . The following day , the White House delivered to the committee hundreds of other such files related to White House employees of the Reagan Administration and George H. W. Bush Administration , for which Craig Livingstone , director of the White House 's Office of Personnel Security , had improperly requested and received background reports from the FBI in 1993 and 1994 , without asking permission of the subject individuals . Estimates ranged from 400 to 700 to 900 unauthorized file disclosures . The incident caused an intense burst of criticism because many of the files covered White House employees from previous Republican administrations , including top figures such as James Baker , Brent Scowcroft , and Marlin <unk> . 
 Initial White House explanations for what had happened varied , but generally characterized it as a series of mistakes made without bad intent and offered apologies to those affected . President Clinton said that , " It appears to have been a completely honest bureaucratic snafu . " However his Republican opponent in the ongoing 1996 presidential election , Senator Bob Dole , compared it to the enemies list kept by the Nixon administration . Republicans made other charges , including that the White House was trying to dig up damaging information about Republicans in general and that the file transfer was motivated by a desire to slander Dale and other White House Travel Office officials , thereby justifying their dismissal . 
 On June 18 , 1996 , Attorney General Janet Reno asked the FBI to look into it ; FBI Director Louis Freeh acknowledged that both the FBI and especially the White House had committed " egregious violations of privacy " ( in some cases the background reports contained information about extramarital affairs , <unk> with the law , and medical issues ) . On June 21 Reno decided it was a conflict of interest for the U.S. Department of Justice to further investigate the matter , and thus recommended that it be folded into the overall umbrella of the Whitewater investigations , under charge of Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr . In any case , Starr had already begun looking into it . 
 On June 26 , 1996 , Clinger 's Government Reform and Oversight Committee held hearings on the matter . Livingstone , who announced his resignation at the start of his testimony that day , and his assistant , Anthony Marceca , insisted during the committee 's hearings that the mishandled files were a result of a bureaucratic mixup and that no improper motivations were behind it . They said that when the George H. W. Bush administrative staff left the White House in January 1993 , they had taken all the files of the Office of Personnel Security with them for use in the Bush Library , as they were permitted to do under law . The OPS staff were trying to rebuild these records to include those of permanent White House employees who remained to work in the Clinton administration ; Marceca , a civilian investigator for the Army , had been hired for this task . In doing so , they received an outdated list from the Secret Service of White House employees , which included many names who were no longer employees . This list was then given to the FBI and the personnel background files returned as a result . Lisa <unk> , another assistant , testified that she discovered the mistake in mid @-@ 1994 and destroyed the request list . 
 Also called to testify were former White House counsel Bernard Nussbaum and former associate counsel William Kennedy III . Livingstone , Nussbaum , and Kennedy all offered apologies to those whose files had been obtained . On September 24 , 1996 , the Government Reform and Oversight Committee approved , on party lines , an interim report on the affair , blasting the Clinton Administration for a " cavalier approach " towards sensitive security procedures and saving that further investigation was necessary to determine if the events surrounding the files handling were " a blunder , the result of colossal incompetence , or whether they are established to be more serious or even criminal . " The Committee does not seem to have ever issued a final report . 
 The Senate Judiciary Committee was also involved in investigating the matter , holding hearings beginning June 29 , 1996 , and focussing on allegations that White House was engaged in a " dirty tricks " operation reminiscent of the Nixon administration . Looking into accusations that senior White House officials or First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton may have inappropriately perused the files , in October 1996 Republican committee chair Orrin Hatch requested that the FBI do a fingerprint analysis of them . On November 3 , 1996 , the FBI informed the committee that no fingerprints of either the First Lady or any other named senior official were on the files . 
 = = Who hired Livingstone issue = = 
 A secondary question of the Filegate controversy revolved around what the Office of Personnel Security was , who had authorized the hiring of Livingstone , and whether he was qualified for the job . The Office was not responsible for actual White House security , as that was the charge of the United States Secret Service , nor did it perform background checks on potential White House employees , a task done by the FBI , nor did it keep the regular personnel files of employees , which were held in a different office within the White House . Rather , its role was to keep track of who was employed by the White House , make sure their security clearances were up to date , and give security briefings to new hires . Nevertheless , Livingstone seemed to lack qualifications for even this position ; he had worked on a number of Democratic Party campaigns and transitions , including being an advance man for the Clinton @-@ Gore 1992 campaign , and his only prior job in the " security " field was that of a local bar bouncer at a Washington , D.C. , night club . ( At the congressional hearings , Livingstone objected to " false and unfair caricatures of who I am . [ ... ] I have worked hard for little or no pay in political campaigns for candidates who I felt would make this country a better place to live . " In later years Livingstone would continue to maintain on the Internet that he had been qualified for the position , that the First Lady had signed off on hiring him , and that his character had been maligned by the general media . ) Clinton opponents stated that Livingstone had the highest level of security clearances in the U.S. government . White House officials could not explain why Livingstone was hired , nor who had hired him . 
 An FBI document suggested that Livingstone had been given his position because First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton was a friend of Livingstone 's mother and recommended him . Hillary Clinton stated that while she was once photographed with the mother in a large group , she did not know her . Hillary Clinton was briefly deposed at the White House by the Independent Counsel regarding this matter on January 14 , 1998 . ( That same day , the same Office of the Independent Counsel staff were listening to taped conversations of Linda Tripp and Monica Lewinsky ; the Lewinsky scandal was soon to break . ) In 1999 , Clinton gave a sworn statement that she had nothing to do with Livingstone 's hiring . Livingstone also stated under oath there was no truth to the supposed hiring relationship . Hillary Clinton would later refer to the whole files matter as a " <unk> " . 
 = = Official findings = = 
 On November 19 , 1998 , Independent Counsel Starr testified before the House Judiciary Committee in connection with the Impeachment of Bill Clinton over charges related to the Lewinsky scandal . Here , for the first time , Starr exonerated both President Clinton and the First Lady of complicity in the FBI files matter , saying " while there are outstanding issues that we are attempting to resolve with respect to one individual [ we ] found no evidence that anyone higher [ than Livingstone or Marceca ] was in any way involved in ordering the files from the FBI . Second , we have found no evidence that information contained in the files of former officials was used for an improper purpose . " ( Starr also chose this occasion to clear President Clinton in the Travelgate matter , and to say that he had not committed impeachable wrongdoing in the Whitewater matter ; Democrats on the committee immediately criticized Starr for withholding all these findings until after the 1998 Congressional elections . ) 
 In March 2000 , Independent Counsel Robert Ray , Starr 's successor , issued the office 's final report on the matter , as part of a concerted effort to wrap up all Whitewater @-@ related cases before the end of Bill Clinton 's term . Ray determined that there was no credible evidence of any criminal activity by any individual in the matter . It attributed the improper collection of the files by Marceca due to his having an outdated Secret Service list of White House passes , as Marceca had originally claimed . It stated that even though Marceca 's statements were sometimes " contradictory and misleading " , they were " sufficiently transparent " and there was insufficient evidence to prove that Anthony Marceca had made false statements to Congress during his testimony . The report ascribed the FBI files matter to " a failure of process at many levels , " saying that the Secret Service had provided critically erroneous data , and that this was compounded by the White House 's informal process of requesting sensitive information by " inexperienced , untrained , and unsupervised personnel with backgrounds as political operatives . " 
 Based on an investigation that included the prior fingerprint analysis , the report further stated that : 
 there was no substantial and credible evidence that any senior White House official , or First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton , was involved in seeking confidential Federal Bureau of Investigation background reports of former White House staff from prior administrations of President Bush and President Reagan . 
 Ray 's report also concluded that there was no credible evidence that Bernard Nussbaum testified falsely about not having discussed Livingstone 's hiring with the First Lady , and found as well that there was no personal relationship between the First Lady and Livingstone that had formed the basis for his hiring . 
 = = Judicial Watch lawsuit = = 
 Separately from the Independent Counsel investigation , Judicial Watch , a conservative watchdog group , engaged in long @-@ running litigation over the White House personnel file controversy . Judicial Watch 's Cara Leslie Alexander et al. vs. Federal Bureau of Investigation et al. class action lawsuit , filed on behalf of several members of the Reagan and George H. W. Bush Administrations , alleged that Livingstone , along with Anthony Marceca and William Kennedy , obtained the files and then rifled through them . Judicial Watch founder and Clintons antagonist <unk> Larry Klayman attracted enough attention with the case to have the recurring Larry Claypool character modeled after him on the television series The West Wing . As late as January 2000 , Judicial Watch was filing affidavits in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia under Judge Royce C. Lamberth related to the case . In their $ 90 million lawsuit , they claimed that the First Lady did , despite her denials , know Livingstone – indeed , that Livingstone had bragged to associates he was very close to both the president and his wife – and that Clinton had personally hired him for the security job . ( White House defenders pointed out that Livingstone had a long history of exaggerating his importance and connections . ) Judicial Watch also said they had five sources who claimed Livingstone had been hired by and worked under the First Lady , and also discovered some photographs of Livingstone in the vicinity of the First Lady ( but not talking with him ) . In December 2002 Judicial Watch obtained a ruling from Judge Lamberth that recently uncovered White House e @-@ mails be searched for possible evidence in the lawsuit . Klayman said , " Hillary Clinton was the mastermind of Filegate . She will not escape justice . " Klayman and Judicial Watch had a severe falling out in 2003 , however , and several years went by with little or nothing happening in the lawsuit . 
 On March 9 , 2010 , Judge Lamberth dismissed the case . The judge asserted that the plaintiffs , despite years of opportunity , had failed to provide any evidence that the affair was a grand conspiracy rather than a bureaucratic mistake , and said that " this court is left to conclude that with the lawsuit , to quote Gertrude Stein , ' there 's no there there . ' " Nussbaum , one of the defendants , derisively said " No kidding " when informed of the dismissal . Media reports concluded that , fourteen years after the initial events were set in motion , Filegate was finally over . In May 2010 , Judicial Watch filed an appeal of the dismissal with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit , but the Court of Appeals affirmed the dismissal on November 14 , 2011 , finally bringing the case to an end . 
 = Pug = 
 The Pug is a breed of dog with a wrinkly , short @-@ muzzled face and curled tail . The breed has a fine , glossy coat that comes in a variety of colours , most often fawn or black , and a compact square body with well @-@ developed muscles . 
 Pugs were brought from China to Europe in the sixteenth century and were popularized in Western Europe by the House of Orange of the Netherlands , and the House of Stuart . In the United Kingdom in the nineteenth century Queen Victoria developed a passion for Pugs which she passed on to other members of the Royal family . 
 Pugs are known for being sociable and gentle companion dogs . The breed remains popular into the twenty @-@ first century , with some famous celebrity owners . A Pug was judged Best in Show at the World Dog Show in 2004 . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 While the Pugs that are depicted in eighteenth century prints tend to be long and lean , modern breed preferences are for a square <unk> body , a compact form , a deep chest , and well @-@ developed muscle . Their smooth and glossy coats can be fawn , apricot fawn , silver fawn or black . The markings are clearly defined and there is a trace of a black line extending from the occiput to the tail . The tail normally curls tightly over the hip . 
 Pugs have two distinct shapes for their ears , " rose " and " button " . " Rose " ears are smaller than the standard style of " button " ears , and are folded with the front edge against the side of the head . Breeding preference goes to " button " style ears . 
 Pugs ' legs are very strong , straight , of moderate length , and are set well under . Their shoulders are moderately laid back . Their ankles are strong , their feet are small , their toes are well split @-@ up , and their nails are black . The lower teeth normally protrude further than their upper , resulting in an under @-@ bite . 
 = = = Temperament = = = 
 The breed is often described by the Latin phrase <unk> in <unk> , or " much in little " or " a lot of dog in a small space " , alluding to the Pug 's remarkable and charming personality , despite its small size . Pugs are strong willed but rarely aggressive , and are suitable for families with children . The majority of the breed is very fond of children and sturdy enough to properly play with them . Depending on their owner 's mood , they can be quiet and docile but also vivacious and teasing . Pugs tend to be intuitive and sensitive to the moods of their owners and are usually eager to please them . Pugs tend to have a somewhat lazy nature and spend a lot of time napping . They are often called " shadows " because they follow their owners around and like to stay close to the action , craving attention and affection from their owners . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Chinese origins = = = 
 In ancient times , Pugs were bred to be companions for ruling families in China . The pet Pugs were highly valued by Chinese Emperors , and the royal dogs were kept in luxury and guarded by soldiers . Pugs later spread to other parts of Asia . In Tibet , Buddhist monks kept Pugs as pets in their monasteries . The breed has retained its affectionate devotion to its owners since ancient times . 
 The early history of the Pug is not attested to in detail ; it is accepted that modern Pugs are descended from dogs imported to Europe from China in the 16th century . Similar dogs were popular in the Imperial court during the Song Dynasty . 
 = = = 16th and 17th centuries = = = 
 Pugs were popular at European courts , and reportedly become the official dog of the House of Orange in 1572 after a Pug named Pompey saved the life of the Prince of Orange by alerting him to the approach of assassins . 
 A Pug travelled with William III and Mary II when they left the Netherlands to accept the throne of England in 1688 . During this period , the Pug may have been bred with the old type King Charles spaniel , giving the modern King Charles Spaniel its Pug characteristics . 
 The breed eventually became popular in other European countries as well . Pugs were painted by Goya in Spain , and in Italy they rode up front on private carriages , dressed in jackets and pantaloons that matched those of the coachman . They were used by the military to track animals and people , and were also employed as guard dogs . 
 = = = 18th century to present day = = = 
 The English painter William Hogarth was the devoted owner of a series of Pugs . His 1745 self @-@ portrait , which is now in London 's Tate Gallery , includes his Pug , Trump . The Pug was also well known in Italy . In 1789 , a Mrs. Piozzi wrote in her journal , " The little Pug dog or Dutch mastiff has quitted London for Padua , I perceive . Every carriage I meet here has a Pug in it . " The popularity of the Pug continued to spread in France during the eighteenth century . Before her marriage to Napoleon Bonaparte , Joséphine had her Pug Fortune carry concealed messages to her family while she was confined at Les <unk> prison , it having alone been given visiting rights . 
 In nineteenth century England , the breed flourished under the patronage of Queen Victoria . Her many Pugs , which she bred herself , included Olga , Pedro , Minka , Fatima and Venus . Her involvement with dogs in general helped to establish the Kennel Club , which was formed in 1873 . Queen Victoria favoured apricot and fawn colours . Queen Victoria 's passion for Pugs was passed on to many other members of the Royal family , including her grandson King George V and his son King Edward VIII . Many responded to the breed 's image of anti @-@ functionalism and diminutive size during this period . 
 In paintings and engravings of the 18th and 19th centuries , Pugs usually appear with longer legs and noses than today , and sometimes with cropped ears . The modern Pug 's appearance probably changed after 1860 when a new wave of Pugs were imported directly from China . These Pugs had shorter legs and the modern @-@ style Pug nose . The British aristocrat Lady Brassey is credited with making black Pugs fashionable after she brought some back from China in 1886 . Ear cropping was made illegal in 1895 . 
 Pugs arrived in the United States during the nineteenth century and were soon making their way into the family home and the show ring . The American Kennel Club recognized the breed in 1885 . The Pug Dog Club of America was founded in 1931 and was recognised by the American Kennel Club that same year . In 1981 , the Pug <unk> Favorite <unk> won the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show in the United States , the only Pug to have won there since the show began in 1877 . The World Champion , or Best in Show at the 2004 World Dog Show held in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , was a Pug named Double D <unk> 's Masterpiece . 
 = = Health problems = = 
 Since Pugs lack longer snouts and prominent skeletal brow ridges , they are susceptible to eye injuries such as <unk> , scratched corneas , and painful entropion . They also have compact breathing passageways , leaving many prone to breathing difficulties or unable to efficiently regulate their temperature through evaporation from the tongue by panting . A Pug 's normal body temperature is between 101 ° F ( 38 ° C ) and 102 ° F ( 39 ° C ) . If this temperature rises to 105 ° F ( 41 ° C ) , oxygen demand is greatly increased and immediate cooling is required . If body temperature reaches 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) , organ failure can occur . Their breathing problems can be worsened by the stresses of travelling in air cargo , which may involve high temperatures . Following the deaths of Pugs and other brachycephalic breeds , several airlines either banned their transport in cargo or enacted seasonal restrictions . 
 Pugs that live a mostly sedentary life can be prone to obesity , though this is avoidable with regular exercise and a healthy diet . The median life span of Pugs is 11 years , which is in line with other breeds of the same size . 
 = = = Common conditions = = = 
 Pugs , like other short @-@ snouted breeds , have elongated palates . When excited , they are prone to " reverse sneezing " which causes them to quickly ( and seemingly laboriously ) gasp and snort . The veterinary name for this is pharyngeal gag reflex and it is caused by fluid or debris getting caught under the palate and irritating the throat or limiting breathing . Reverse sneezing episodes are usually not harmful , and massaging the dog 's throat or covering its nose in order to make it breathe through its mouth can often shorten a sneezing fit . 
 Some pugs are also born with stenotic nares which can also inhibit their breathing . In serious cases , the pinched nostrils make breathing even more difficult for this breed and put added pressure on the larynx . In some cases , the dog could pass out from blocked airways . If this happens , one should inquire with their veterinarian whether or not surgery is needed to modify the breathing passages . 
 Eye prolapse is a common problem among Pugs and other brachycephalic breeds ( see <unk> syndrome ) and can be caused by a trauma to the head or neck , or even by the owner using a tight leash instead of a harness . While the eye can usually be pushed back into its socket by the owner or by a vet , veterinary attention is usually advisable . If the prolapse happens on a regular basis , the Pug might require surgery . 
 Pugs have many wrinkles in their faces , so owners will often clean inside the creases to avoid irritation and infection . If this is not done , the dog may develop a condition known as skin fold dermatitis . 
 An abnormal formation of the hip socket , known as hip dysplasia , affected nearly 64 % of Pugs in a survey performed by the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals ; the breed was ranked the second worst @-@ affected by this condition out of 157 breeds tested . 
 Pugs are one of several breeds that are more susceptible than other dogs to <unk> mange , also known as " <unk> " . This condition is caused when parasitic mites , that are often present in a dog 's skin without causing symptoms , are allowed to do damage because their host has a weakened immune system . It is a problem for many young Pugs , although not usually a major one , and is easily treatable , but some are especially susceptible and present with a systemic form of the condition . This vulnerability is thought to be genetic and breeders will avoid producing puppies from adults who have this condition . In 2008 , an investigative documentary carried out by the BBC found significant inbreeding between pedigree dogs , with a study by Imperial College , London , showing that the 10 @,@ 000 Pugs in the UK are so inbred that their gene pool is the equivalent of only 50 individuals . 
 = = = Serious issues = = = 
 Pugs can suffer from necrotizing meningoencephalitis ( NME ) , also known as Pug dog encephalitis ( <unk> ) , an inflammation of the brain and meninges . NME also occurs in other small dogs , such as the Yorkshire Terrier , Maltese , and Chihuahua . There is no known cure for NME , which is believed to be an inherited disease . Dogs usually die or have to be put to sleep within a few months of onset , which , in those susceptible to this condition , is typically between six months and seven years of age . 
 This breed , along with other brachycephalic dogs ( e.g. , boxers , bulldogs ) , are also prone to <unk> . The curled tail of a British bulldog is an example of a <unk> , but when it occurs not in the <unk> vertebrae but in other areas of the spine , it can cause paralysis . The condition occurs when two parts of a spinal vertebra do not fuse properly while a young Pug is still growing , resulting in an irregularly shaped spinal cavity which can put pressure on the spinal cord . 
 = = Historical depictions of Pugs = = 
 = Svalbard and Jan Mayen = 
 Svalbard and Jan Mayen ( Norwegian : Svalbard og Jan Mayen , ISO 3166 @-@ 1 alpha @-@ 2 : SJ , ISO 3166 @-@ 1 alpha @-@ 3 : <unk> , ISO 3166 @-@ 1 numeric : 744 ) is a statistical designation defined by ISO 3166 @-@ 1 of two parts of Norway under separate jurisdictions — Svalbard and Jan Mayen . While the two are combined for the purposes of the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) category , they are not administratively related . This has further resulted in the country code top @-@ level domain .sj being issued for Svalbard and Jan Mayen , and ISO 3166 @-@ 2 : SJ . The United Nations Statistics Division also uses this code , but has named it Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands . 
 Svalbard is an archipelago in the Arctic Ocean under the full sovereignty of Norway , but is subject to the special status granted by the Svalbard Treaty . Jan Mayen is a remote island in the Arctic Ocean ; it has no permanent population and is administrated by the County Governor of Nordland . Svalbard and Jan Mayen have in common that they are the only integrated parts of Norway not allocated to counties . While a separate ISO code for Svalbard was proposed by the United Nations , it was the Norwegian authorities who took initiative to include Jan Mayen in the code . It 's Official Language Is Norwegian . 
 = = Constituents = = 
 = = = Svalbard = = = 
 Svalbard is an archipelago in the Arctic about midway between mainland Norway and the North Pole . The group of islands range from 74 ° to 81 ° north latitude , and from 10 ° to 35 ° east longitude . The area is 61 @,@ 022 square kilometres ( 23 @,@ 561 sq mi ) and there were 2 @,@ 572 residents in 2009 . Spitsbergen is the largest island , followed by Nordaustlandet and Edgeøya . The administrative center is Longyearbyen , and other settlements , in addition to research outposts , are the Russian mining community of Barentsburg , the research community of Ny @-@ Ålesund and the mining outpost of Sveagruva . 
 The Svalbard Treaty of 1920 recognizes Norwegian sovereignty , and the 1925 Svalbard Act made Svalbard a full part of the Kingdom of Norway . The archipelago is administrated by the Governor of Svalbard , which is subordinate to the Norwegian Ministry of Justice and the Police . Unlike the rest of Norway ( including Jan Mayen ) , Svalbard is a free economic zone and a demilitarized zone , and is not part of the Schengen Area nor the European Economic Area . 
 = = = Jan Mayen = = = 
 Jan Mayen is a volcanic island in the Arctic Ocean located at the border of the Norwegian Sea and the Greenland Sea . The single island covers an area of 377 square kilometres ( 146 sq mi ) and is dominated by the 2 @,@ 277 @-@ metre ( 7 @,@ 470 ft ) tall Beerenberg volcano . The island 's only population is a combined military and meteorological outpost that operates a LORAN @-@ C transmitter at Olonkinbyen . The Norwegian Meteorological Institute annexed the island for Norway in 1922 . On 27 February 1930 , the island was made de jure a part of the Kingdom of Norway . Since 1994 , the island has been administrated by the County Governor of Nordland , with some authority delegated to the station commander . 
 = = Application = = 
 The ISO designation is congruent with an equivalent United Nations Statistics Division category and users of these classification systems may in some cases report separately for " Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands " instead of rolling up this information into the " Norway " category . Neither Svalbard nor Jan Mayen have their own flag or coat of arms , and the flag of Norway is used for both of them , both alone and as a group . 
 An attempt to change the ISO code to just " Svalbard " has previously failed because of opposition from the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs . However , for statistics use within population and trade , " Svalbard and Jan Mayen " essentially means just " Svalbard " . 
 = = = ISO 3166 @-@ 2 = = = 
 ISO 3166 @-@ 2 : SJ is the entry for Svalbard and Jan Mayen in ISO 3166 @-@ 2 , a system for assigning codes to subnational administrative divisions . However , further subdivision for Svalbard and Jan Mayen occurs under Norway 's entry , ISO 3166 @-@ 2 : NO : 
 NO @-@ 21 Svalbard 
 NO @-@ 22 Jan Mayen 
 The hierarchical administrative subdivision codes for Svalbard is <unk> and for Jan Mayen is <unk> 
 = = = Top @-@ level domain = = = 
 By virtue of the ISO 3166 @-@ 1 alpha @-@ 2 code SJ , Svalbard and Jan Mayen were grouped together and allocated the Internet country code top @-@ level domain ( ccTLD ) .sj. Norid , who also administrated the Norway 's .no ccTLD , was given the responsibility for the .sj and Bouvet Island 's .bv domain in 1997 . Policy prohibits any registration with either of the domains , as institutions connected to Svalbard can use the .no domain . Norwegian authorities do not want to commercialize the domain resources , and therefore .sj will not be sold to a third party . 
 = The Eleventh Hour ( Doctor Who ) = 
 For other series with this name , see The Eleventh Hour . 
 " The Eleventh Hour " is the first episode of the fifth series of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who , first broadcast on BBC One and BBC HD on 3 April 2010 . The episode saw a complete change in cast and production crew . The episode was written by new head writer and executive producer Steven Moffat and directed by Adam Smith . 
 In the episode , the newly regenerated Doctor ( Matt Smith ) crashes his time and space machine , the TARDIS , into the small English village of Leadworth , where he meets a young Scottish girl named Amelia Pond ( Caitlin Blackwood ) . The Doctor is forced to leave , but promises Amelia he will return in five minutes . However , he arrives twelve years late and is confronted by the grown @-@ up Amelia , now known as Amy ( Karen Gillan ) , who does not trust him . He attempts to gain her trust to help return the shape @-@ shifting alien Prisoner Zero to the galactic police , the Atraxi , before they destroy the planet . 
 The episode is the debut of Smith as the eleventh incarnation of the Doctor and Gillan as his new companion . It also introduced Arthur Darvill as Amy 's boyfriend Rory Williams , who would later become a main cast member . The show 's tradition is for the Doctor to rest after he regenerates , but Moffat decided to have him save the world instead . The episode sets up the main story arc of the series by introducing the cracks in the universe . " The Eleventh Hour " was seen by 10 @.@ 08 million viewers in the UK , the highest rated premiere since " Rose " . It also attracted popularity on the online BBC iPlayer and on BBC America in the United States . The episode received positive reviews from critics , who welcomed Smith and Gillan into the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Continuing from the end of " The End of Time , Part 2 " , the newly regenerated Doctor crash @-@ lands his damaged TARDIS in Leadworth , in 1996 . He meets seven @-@ year @-@ old Amelia Pond . While waiting for the TARDIS to self @-@ repair , he explores his new face , and discovers that while he has a distaste for many foods , his new body likes the taste of " fish custard " ( a dish he invented which consists of fish fingers and custard ) . Amelia then shows the Doctor a scary crack in her bedroom wall . The Doctor discovers it is a crack in time and space itself , briefly opening it to discover an Atraxi prison . The Atraxi send a psychic message to the Doctor that " Prisoner Zero has escaped " . Then the TARDIS 's cloister bell is heard ; the Doctor races back to his machine , needing to travel in time to prevent its systems from overheating , and promises Amelia that he will return in five minutes . Amelia hastily packs a suitcase and waits near where the TARDIS had previously landed . 
 The Doctor lands the TARDIS outside Amelia 's house , unaware 12 years have passed . On searching the house , he is knocked out and wakes up handcuffed and without his sonic screwdriver . He discovers his assailant is a much older Amelia , now going by the name Amy . Her fascination in waiting for his return led her to create toys and stories about him , and she was ridiculed by other villagers . The Doctor then reveals to Amy that Prisoner Zero has been hiding in a room in her house that she had never noticed , due to a perception filter . After venturing into the room , she frees the Doctor and grants him his sonic screwdriver . They dodge an attack by Prisoner Zero and flee the house . 
 Shortly afterwards , the Atraxi arrive in orbit , alerted by the Doctor 's arrival , and issue an ultimatum : if Prisoner Zero does not " vacate the human residence " , meaning the Earth , " the human residence will be incinerated " . Meeting Amy 's boyfriend Rory , the Doctor realises that Prisoner Zero , a multiform that can take the form of any unconscious being by forming a telepathic link with them , is borrowing the forms of a nearby hospital 's coma patients . The Doctor uses a laptop to gatecrash an online meeting of scientific experts discussing the Atraxi situation and send instructions to them . 
 The Doctor races to the hospital , just in time to save Amy and Rory from Prisoner Zero . The Doctor reveals his plan : he has created a computer virus that will broadcast the number " zero " across the world . It is tied to Rory 's phone , which contains images of the coma patients , identifying Prisoner Zero in whatever form it may take . Prisoner Zero reveals it has one more form that is not on Rory 's phone . Prisoner Zero knocks out Amy and transforms into the Doctor and young Amelia , whom he was able to link with during the years of the Doctor 's absence . The Doctor realises that Amy can hear him speaking and manipulates her subconscious to remember the form of Prisoner Zero she had seen in her house . This forces Prisoner Zero to revert to his true form ; it is identified by the Atraxi and captured . Before being transported away , Prisoner Zero warns the Doctor that " Silence , Doctor ... silence will fall . " The Atraxi fleet leaves , but the Doctor , invoking the Shadow Proclamation , orders their return and reprimands them for threatening the planet . The Doctor shows the Atraxi images of the many past alien invaders who have attempted to seize or destroy the Earth , but who have been defeated by his past incarnations , causing the Atraxi to take him at his word , and " run . " 
 The Doctor finds the TARDIS and departs before Amy or Rory can catch up . The Doctor later returns to Amy 's house , finding that another two years have passed . Though Amy is still upset , she readily accepts his offer to travel together , as long as he can return her the next day . In response to why he chose her , he declares that he is lonely , although he is shown analyzing the crack and possibly wants to monitor his new companion . As the TARDIS dematerialises , the viewer is shown Amy 's bedroom , where , alongside her toys and drawings of the " raggedy Doctor , " lies her wedding dress . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and casting = = = 
 " The Eleventh Hour " , marked several production changes . Steven Moffat succeeded Russell T Davies as executive producer and head writer . Piers Wenger and Beth Willis replaced Julie Gardner as executive producer . A new logo was incorporated into a new title sequence with a new variation of the theme tune , composed by Murray Gold . By the end of " The Eleventh Hour " , the Doctor has a new sonic screwdriver and the TARDIS sported a new interior and exterior , similar to the one used from 1963 @-@ 1966 . The previous TARDIS interior was shown at the beginning of " The Eleventh Hour " ; the Time Rotor on the console had to be rebuilt due to the explosive special effects that were used in The End of Time . 
 The End of Time saw the end of David Tennant 's tenure of the Doctor and his regeneration into Matt Smith . Moffat was originally looking to cast a middle @-@ aged actor , but he and Wenger went with the 26 @-@ year @-@ old Smith in what they considered an easy decision . Karen Gillan was cast as the Doctor 's new companion Amy Pond ; she had previously appeared in the fourth series episode " The Fires of Pompeii " and was suggested to Moffat by casting director Andy Pryor . Gillan auditioned for the role in both her natural Scottish and English accents . Only after Gillan was cast was Amy made Scottish . 
 The young Amy , known as Amelia , was played by Karen Gillan 's real @-@ life cousin Caitlin Blackwood . Though Gillan recommended Blackwood , the young actor first had to undergo rigorous auditions , lacking any formal acting experience . " The Eleventh Hour " was also the debut of Arthur Darvill as Rory Williams , who became a regular in the sixth series . Moffat stated that what stood out about Darvill 's audition was " just how funny " he was . EastEnders star Nina Wadia was chosen for the part of the doctor at the Leadworth Hospital . Wadia speculated that she was cast because she had worked with Adam Smith before . Patrick Moore appears as himself in the video conference with a brief speaking part , though not all his lines survived the final cut . The man above Moore is the brother of Adam Smith . Marcello Magni , who played a man Prisoner Zero impersonates that barks like his dog , had already worked as a canine impersonator . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The title of the episode is a play on words , referring both to the introduction of the eleventh Doctor and to the fact that he was nearly too late , the connotation of the phrase . In the DVD commentary , Moffat said it was originally titled The Doctor Returns , and that it was the most difficult script he had ever written , as he had to introduce a new Doctor , a new companion , convince the audience that it was both a new and an old show , and deliver a fast @-@ paced story . While traditionally the Doctor rests after he regenerates , Moffat thought it would be fun to make him save the world instead . He described it as a comedy of a man whose day keeps getting worse and worse . Believing that London and companions from London had become a cliché and the audience had become bored with it , Moffat set the episode in the fictional village of Leadworth . Moffat , a Scot , debated whether to locate the episode in a village in Scotland . He ultimately decided on England , in keeping with the notion of Amelia as an unconventional girl . 
 Throughout the episode , the Doctor behaves erratically , as he gradually gets used to his new body and tastes while developing a new personality . Willis stated that he " finally clicks into place " after picking out his new outfit . " The rooftop scene was not in the original script ; the Doctor simply ran away from the ward and returned to the TARDIS . Moffat felt that he did not really have a formal introduction , and that more could be made of the costume , as many previous Doctors had picked theirs out quietly . The main story arc is the Doctor meeting the grown @-@ up Amy . Moffat felt that over time the relationships between the Doctor and his companions had become too adult . He wanted to create a childlike relationship like that between Peter Pan and Wendy , rather than boyfriend and girlfriend . He believed this was the kind of relationship viewers had with the Doctor , regardless of their age . When the Doctor returns for Amy , she is a very different person from the seven @-@ year @-@ old he had met before . Moffat explains that she developed a tough element and had become distrustful and cynical due to him not returning as promised , forcing her to accept that he was an imaginary friend . Rory was completely in love with Amy , but Amy wanted adventures before admitting she loved him , too . Moffat described Rory as someone who had grown up in the shadow of Amy 's imaginary Doctor . 
 Moffat was inspired by a crack in his son 's bedroom wall and developed the idea into the main story arc for the fifth series . He thought that a child might think that something interesting lived inside such a crack . The hidden room in Amelia 's house was based on Moffat 's recurring childhood dream of a nonexistent hidden room in his grandmother 's house . Moffat was keen to give the monster a giant eyeball , and commented that the Atraxi 's design — a giant eyeball on a star — was easy for children to draw , as he used to draw Doctor Who monsters as a child . These aspects reflect Doctor Who 's " domestically @-@ scaled menace " principle . Moffat wrote a scene that explained Prisoner Zero 's crime , but cut it because he figured no one would care . 
 The opening sequence , in which the Doctor barely hangs onto the crashing TARDIS as it flies over London , was later added to the script to bridge from the conclusion of The End of Time to the TARDIS 's crash into Amy 's garden . Moffat thought it would be funny if they showed him hanging out of the TARDIS and nearly crashing into London , which would start an episode set in a small town in a big way . Moffat also referenced the scene from A.A. Milne 's The House at Pooh Corner , where Tigger claims to like everything , but then proceeds to reject all food offered to him until he finally finds that he likes extract of malt . Moffat 's variant had the newly regenerated Doctor reject a variety of foods , with the exception of fish fingers with custard , offered to him by the young Amy . Moffat felt that appealing to children was important to the show 's success . The scene where the Doctor creates the virus using Jeff 's laptop was originally set in a classroom where the Doctor used the students ' computers ; this was changed for production reasons . In the episode , the Doctor snaps his fingers to open the TARDIS , a trick his previous incarnation learned from River Song in " Silence in the Library " / " Forest of the Dead " . He also repeats the lines " <unk> @-@ <unk> , timey @-@ wimey " and " some cowboys in here " from the Moffat @-@ written episodes " Blink " and " The Girl in the Fireplace " . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 The read @-@ through for the episode took place in September 2009 . Though it is the first episode of the series , " The Eleventh Hour " was not the first to be shot . It was filmed in the third production block , after the completion of episodes 2 @-@ 5 . As Smith was aware of how his Doctor would act in the following episodes , he used this one to establish the character . The plan was to retain traces of Smith 's predecessor , but the executive producers wanted Smith to be " stranger " . The episode was directed by Adam Smith , who was attracted to the " brilliant script " and working with Matt Smith after seeing him on stage . Smith was asked to direct " the same but make it a bit different – the producers didn 't want it to be radically different , but they did want it to be different " . The goal was to make it more " cinematic " and magical , and Smith took inspiration from E.T. and Tim Burton 's work . 
 Amelia 's house was designed to appear " spooky but ordinary " and reminiscent of a castle . Most scenes based in Leadworth were filmed in Llandaff village in Cardiff on 29 September , 5 – 7 October , and 20 November 2009 . Photographs were taken on 5 October for the stop @-@ frame animation sequence representing the Doctor 's thought process . As the stills were taken by members of the crew and not computers the result was not perfect , which Adam Smith thought provided an " organic " feel . Plagued by torrential rain , the crew returned on 20 November to shoot the final Leadworth scenes . The production crew heavily dressed the area , adding flowers , street signs and souvenirs specific to Leadworth . 
 The Doctor hanging out of the TARDIS was filmed with Smith in front of a greenscreen , while the aerial footage of London was achieved with a helicopter . Smith stated that the scene was hard to visualise as it relied heavily on computer @-@ generated images . Nearly every scene in the sequence is a visual effects shot , including a 3 @-@ D TARDIS flying over London and a CG Doctor hanging out of the TARDIS in the aerial shots . Moffat realised that the Millennium Dome was visible in the final footage , and so the scene could not be set in 1996 before it had been built . Instead of a reshoot , Moffat explained that the TARDIS could be just about to go back in time and materialise in Amelia 's garden . In post @-@ production , 30 tracks of sound effects , music composed by Murray Gold specifically for the sequence , and Smith 's " grunting and groaning " were added . The primarily music @-@ led sequence was produced by Nikki Wilson , who receives a " special thanks " credit . 
 While Amelia waits for the Doctor in the garden , the camera returns to her house where something , presumably Prisoner Zero , darts past the camera . It is actually Smith in footage intended for the finale , " The Big Bang " , but when it did not fit into that episode it was recycled here . Originally the scene where the Doctor confirms that he is the man she remembers by showing her the apple she gave him that day was cut due to pacing issues and that the fact had been established in a previous scene . The previous scene was then cut and the apple scene returned . Due to the rain , the scene where the Doctor tries to gain the Atraxi 's attention with his sonic screwdriver had to be simplified . Adam Smith based the style of the confrontation on a Western film . The destruction of the sonic screwdriver shortly after was achieved with a spark effect concealed inside the screwdriver , activated by an electrical charge that reached the screwdriver by an electrical wire that ran up Smith 's sleeve and connected to a receiver . Special effects head Danny Hargreaves then used a remote control to activate the device . Contrary to reports , the effect did not injure Smith . The " fish fingers and custard " scene was shot in 12 takes . The fish fingers were actually a breaded coconut @-@ flavored food item ; Smith estimated that he had eaten some 14 of them . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Eleventh Hour " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 3 April 2010 . Overnight figures reported that 8 million watched the episode on BBC One and the simulcast on BBC HD . Final consolidated figures rose to 9 @.@ 59 million on BBC One and 494 @,@ 000 on BBC HD , making the final rating for the episode 10 @.@ 08 million viewers , the most @-@ watched premiere since " Rose " and the eighth highest rated episode since Doctor Who 's 2005 return . The episode was second for the entire week on BBC One and number four for the week across all channels . The episode earned an Appreciation Index of 86 , considered " excellent " . 
 The episode was also popular on BBC 's online iPlayer . Within one week of broadcast , " The Eleventh Hour " received 1 @.@ 27 million hits on BBC 's online iPlayer service , the record for most requests in a week . It went on to become the most requested episode of 2010 with 2 @.@ 241 million views ; Doctor Who was named the most watched programme of the year on the service . 
 " The Eleventh Hour " was first broadcast in the US on BBC America on 17 April 2010 and in Canada on the same date on Space . It set a record for BBC America , with an average of 1 @.@ 2 million viewers and 0 @.@ 9 million in the adults aged 25 – 54 demographic . The episode aired in Australia on 18 April on ABC1 . It could also be viewed on ABC 's website iView two days prior to the television air date , on 16 April . The show was broadcast two weeks after airing in Britain , as the BBC required a fortnight to edit down the Doctor Who Confidential : Cut Down . There was no room for the accompanying Doctor Who Confidential due to the hour @-@ long running time , but ABC holds the rights and has made it available on iView . The episode aired in New Zealand on 2 May on Prime . 
 " The Eleventh Hour " was released in Region 2 on DVD and Blu @-@ ray with the following episodes " The Beast Below " and " Victory of the Daleks " on 7 June 2010 . It was then re @-@ released as part of the complete series five DVD on 8 November 2010 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " The Eleventh Hour " received positive reviews from critics . The Mail on Sunday reviewer Sinclair McKay called " The Eleventh Hour " a " deft first episode " that was " packed with one @-@ liners and an even more fantastical feel than of late . But it had that old reassuring combination of intense Britishness , quirkiness and a sense of the macabre " . He also praised Gillan 's " winning " performance and Smith 's adaption to the role , concluding , " Smith might turn out to be one of the best Time Lords of the lot " . Benji Wilson , for The Daily Telegraph , wrote " It was ridiculous but it felt right : mad , alien , brand @-@ new but very old . A + to the casting director . A + to Smith " . He also said that Gillan " 110 per cent nailed it " . Though he compared Prisoner Zero 's low @-@ budget CGI makeup to a " draught excluder " , he said that Moffat " turned a weakness into a strength " by having Prisoner Zero take the form of humans . 
 Daniel Martin of The Guardian called " The Eleventh Hour " " an absolute triumph " and the fact that " the story wisely doesn 't waste too much time with an unstable regeneration " . Though he praised Smith , he commented he was " still not feeling " the " Geronimo ! " catchphrase . Radio Times reviewer Patrick Mulkern believed it was " obvious " that Smith 's Doctor would be " up there with the greatest " and also praised Gillan , though he was unsure of the rescored theme tune . He also praised Moffat 's script for " [ offering ] funny lines ... directorial flourishes and a host of blink @-@ and @-@ miss star turns " . Zap2it 's Sam McPherson gave the episode an A + , saying that it was " definitely " his favourite and praised the debut of Smith , Gillan and the redesigned TARDIS . Paul <unk> , also of the site , praised Adam Smith for " [ handling ] the episode beautifully " , the depth in Amy 's character , and Matt Smith 's take on the role . However , he thought the downside to the episode were the " slightly poor effects " and " somewhat lightweight story " , and while he called the new title sequence " absolutely beautiful " , he was unsure of the new variation of the theme tune . 
 Dave Golder of SFX magazine gave " The Eleventh Hour " five out of five stars , thinking that Moffat captured " the way children perceive the Doctor " and praising the debuts of Smith and Gillan . The A.V. Club reviewer Keith Phipps gave the episode an A- , explaining that he liked Smith " a lot " but was not sure if the Eleventh Doctor was separate enough from the Tenth yet . He called Gillan " instantly winning " and that the story was " no exception " from Moffat 's typical " exceptionally strong narratives , keen sense of character , and efficient plotting " . Maureen Ryan of The Chicago Tribune stated that the episode " works " as an introduction , though it could be " almost too jokey at times " . Though she felt the series was in good hands with Smith and Gillan , she derided the Atraxi for being " alarmingly static and ultimately uninteresting " and the story 's " little substance " . IGN 's Matt Wales rated the episode 8 out of 10 , praising it for easily fitting into the show 's continuity , especially with Smith 's portrayal of the Doctor . However , he thought the " calamity plot " was the " weakest link in an otherwise superb opening episode " and the " whole bunch of disparate elements ... never [ gelled ] into a satisfying whole " . Though he said it was not perfect with " a saggy midsection and slightly naff CGI effects " , he thought it was still " wondrous in so many ways " . New York Times reviewer Mike Hale wrote that the episode worked like " a well @-@ oiled piece of machinery " , but it came across as " routine " with " none of the over @-@ the @-@ top exuberance " of Davies ' run . While he noted that Gillan " looks promising " , he felt that Smith was too much like Tennant and would " [ need ] to start shaping his own take on the role " . 
 Den of Geek selected the episode as Doctor Who 's highlight in their " Best TV Episodes of 2010 " article . In 2011 , after the airing of the next series , Digital Spy called the episode " still Smith and Moffat 's finest hour " . Digital Spy also named " The Eleventh Hour " the seventh best episode of the entire programme in 2013 . 
 The episode attracted some criticism from viewers who complained that Amy 's character and occupation as a kissogram was " too sexy " for a family programme . Gillan defended her character , claiming that girls Amy 's age often wore short skirts and it showed the character had confidence , while executive producer Piers Wenger said , " The whole kissogram thing played into Steven 's desire for the companion to be feisty and outspoken and a bit of a number . Amy is probably the wildest companion that the Doctor has travelled with , but she isn 't promiscuous " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Eleventh Hour " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Mariah Carey ( album ) = 
 Mariah Carey is the self @-@ titled debut studio album by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey , released on June 12 , 1990 by Columbia Records . Its music incorporates a range of contemporary genres with a mix of slow ballads and dance tracks . Originally , Carey wrote four songs with Ben Margulies , which solely constituted her demo tape . While altered and partially re @-@ sung after being signed to Columbia , all four songs made the final cut for the album . Aside from Margulies , Carey worked with a range of professional writers and producers , all of whom were hired by Columbia CEO , Tommy Mottola . Mariah Carey featured production and writing from Rhett Lawrence , Ric Wake and Narada Michael Walden , all of whom were top record producers at the time . Together with Carey , they conceived the album and reconstructed her original demo tape . 
 Upon release , the album received generally positive reviews from music critics , who complimented Carey 's voice and technique , as well as the album 's content . It became a commercial success as well , topping the Billboard 200 album chart for eleven consecutive weeks . Mariah Carey was certified nine @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of nine million copies in the United States . The album experienced similar success in Canada , where it topped the charts and was certified seven @-@ times platinum . Mariah Carey fared well in other worldwide territories , reaching the top ten in the Netherlands , Australia , New Zealand , Norway , Sweden and United Kingdom . Worldwide , the album has sold more than 15 million copies . 
 Five singles were released from the album , four of which became number @-@ one hits on the Hot 100 . " Vision of Love " was chosen as the album 's lead single , topping the charts in Canada , New Zealand , and the United States . The song was critically lauded , and was regarded as one of the strongest debut singles by a female singer . The album 's second single , " Love Takes Time " was also well received and peaked the charts in Canada and the US . With the following two singles , " Someday " and " I Don 't Wanna Cry " reaching number one in the US , Carey became the first artist since The Jackson 5 to have their first four singles top the charts in the United States . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1988 , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old Carey moved out of her mother 's house in Long Island , and into a small apartment in Manhattan . She had a demo tape consisting of four songs , which she had written during her high school years with Ben Margulies . As 1988 unfolded , Carey , still without a record deal , struggled to draw the attention of record executives in New York . While working several jobs , she continued writing and producing music with Margulies , making changes and additions to the demo . After months of difficulty , Carey met with singer Brenda K. Starr , and soon began singing back @-@ up for her . Eventually , Starr began hearing what she described as " glimpses " of Carey 's voice throughout sessions , and noticed her " gifted voice " . She realized Carey was capable of achieving success , but only needed help to break through into mainstream music . 
 One night , Starr took Carey to a record industry gala , attempting to convince a record label executive to listen her demo . Jerry L. Greenberg , president of Atlantic Records took notice of her . As Carey handed him the record , Tommy Mottola quickly grabbed the tape , insisting that he would deal with " the project " . As Mottola got into his limousine later that evening , he played Carey 's demo and quickly realized the talent that he had just discovered . He quickly returned to the event , but a discouraged Carey had already left . 
 After a week of tracking her down through Starr 's management , Mottola got in touch with Carey and brought her over to Columbia Records . After meeting with Carey and her mother Patricia for the first time , Mottola said , " When I heard and saw Mariah , there was absolutely no doubt that she was in every way destined for super @-@ stardom . " After a few brief meetings , Carey was signed to Columbia in December 1988 . 
 Mottola had assumed the top position at Sony , the parent label of Columbia , and began taking the company through various stages of change . One he felt was very important for the label 's success was to discover a young and very talented female vocalist , to rival Whitney Houston from Arista Records , or a pop star to match Madonna , who was signed to Sire Records at the time . He felt that Carey represented both . Mottola 's confidence in Carey led him to hire a range of talented and well @-@ known musicians and songwriters to assist with Carey 's demo , as well as to create new material . Among them were Ric Wake , Narada Michael Walden and Rhett Lawrence . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 Carey and Ben Margulies began writing prior to Carey 's signing , and had composed over fourteen songs ; seven of which earned a place on the album . Originally , Carey and Margulies planned to produce the entire album as well , an idea her label did not permit . On the album , Carey worked with a range of producers and writers , including from Ben Margulies , Rhett Lawrence , Narada Michael Walden , Ric Wake and Walter Afanasieff ; the latter would continue working extensively working with Carey on future projects . As production for the album began , Carey worked with Walden in New York , where they produced " I Don 't Wanna Cry " . While he described Carey as " very shy , " he noted how professional she was for someone her age . Additionally , Carey wrote " There 's Got to Be a Way " during her first recording session with Wake . During the session , they wrote four songs , but they only produced the latter song for the album . After flying to New York and working with Carey , Walden was astonished by her voice . Together , they collaborated on transforming many of the demo 's songs into more commercial recordings , which took place in Tarpan Studios in San Rafael , California . For her work with Lawrence , Carey traveled to New York once again . In the studio , she presented him with the demo of " Vision of Love " which she had written with Margulies years prior . Lawrence saw " potential " in the song , but he did not think much of it in its early stages . He described the song 's sound as having a " fifties sort of shuffle " . According to Lawrence , Carey needed a more contemporary sound , so they met in the studio alongside Margulies and producer Chris Toland . They added a new arrangement to the original chord progression , while Carey changed the song 's melody and key . Afterwards , Margulies added few drum notes to the arrangement , including additional guitar and bass notes . 
 When Carey worked with Walden on " I Don 't Wanna Cry " , they worked on several other songs . Together , they decided to " slow down the tempo " and create a " crying type of ballad , " one which according to him , featured a direct inspiration from gospel genres . After they completed the song , Lawrence noted how much of a perfectionist Carey was . He said that after finishing the song , she returned to the studio the following week , all in order to correct " one line " that troubled her . As one of the four original songs she gave to Mottola , " Someday " became Wake 's favorite from the start , " I loved that song right from the beginning ... Then Mariah called me one day and said ' I 'd love to do it if you want to do it . ' It was great , I 'm glad she called me . " During its recording , Carey revealed how the song came into existence . She had been working on the demo with Margulies in his studio . As he began playing different notes on the electric keyboard , Carey directed him on the chord changes , while providing the chorus , lyrics and melody . In " All in Your Mind " , Carey does a great vocal performance , doing <unk> up to F7 . According to the artist , her voice " split " while doing those ornaments . While she thought to remove it from the song 's recording , Wake and Walden were very impressed by the vocal flips , claiming that it would fit in perfectly . 
 The debut album was completed and being mastered when Carey wrote " Love Takes Time " with Ben Margulies . Margulies said , " It was sort of a <unk> thing I was improvising , then we began working on it . It was on a work tape that we had ... and we recorded a very quick demo . It was just a piano vocal demo - I played live piano , and she sang it . " Carey was on a mini @-@ tour of ten states , playing acoustically with a piano player and three back @-@ up singers . While on a company plane , she played the demo of " Love Takes Time " for Columbia Records president Don Ienner . " All the important guys were on the plane , " Margulies said . " Tommy Mottola , Ienner , and Bobby Colomby . " Carey was told the song was a " career @-@ maker , " and that it had to go on the first album . She protested - her album was already being mastered , and she intended this ballad for her next release . 
 The demo was sent to producer Afanasieff . When Carey flew west to work with Narada Michael Walden on some tracks for her first album , Tommy Mottola and Don Ienner were impressed with Afanasieff 's work and gave him an executive staff producer job with the label . " I guess to see if he made the right choice , ( Tommy ) called me up one day , " remembers Afanasieff . " He said , ' We 've got this Mariah Carey album done , but there 's a song that she and Ben Margulies wrote that is phenomenal , and I want to try everything we can to put it on the album . ' I said , ' What do you want me to do ? ' and he said , ' You only have a couple of days , but are you ready to cut it ? ' I couldn 't believe the opportunity that it was . I 'd never produced anything by myself up until that time . " 
 The demo was very close to what Mottola wanted the finished product to be , according to Afanasieff . " We cut the song and the music and the basics in about a day - and the only reason is this deadline . It was do it or we were gonna miss out on the whole thing . We got the tape and recorded everything and we got on the plane and went to New York ( and ) did her vocals . She did all the backgrounds , practically sang all night ... We came back to the studio that afternoon , and we had to fix one line very quickly , and then ( engineer ) Dana ( Jon Chapelle ) and I got back on the plane with the tape , went back to the studio in Sausalito , and mixed it . So it was a three @-@ day process : a day and a half for music , kind of like a day for vocals , and a day for mixing . " 
 Afanasieff heard from Columbia executives as soon as they received the mix . They wanted Carey 's vocal a little louder , so a remix was quickly completed . The producer asked if the song would still make the debut album , and was told , " We 're going to do our best . " 
 On the first copies of the album that were printed , " Love Takes Time " was not listed on the cassette or compact disc liner notes , even though the song was on the cassette or CD itself . " ( On ) some of the original first copies of the record , they didn 't have time to print the name of the song , " Margulies laughs . " And so the song 's on there , but it doesn 't say that it 's on there . It was a song that actually was strong enough to stop the pressing ... I don 't know if they had to throw away a few hundred copies . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Ashley S. Battel from AllMusic called the album " extremely impressive " and described the songs as " smooth @-@ sounding ballads and uplifting dance / R & B cuts . " Battel concluded her review with " With this collection of songs acting as a springboard for future successes , Carey establishes a strong standard of comparison for other breakthrough artists of this genre . " Many critics expressed how Mariah Carey was one of the most impressive debuts of the year , praising its songs , lyrics and Carey 's voice and songwriting . 
 Billboard gave the album a very positive review calling it an " impressive debut , " and writing " Carey convincingly seizes many opportunities to display her incredible vocal range on such memorable tracks as the popular ' Vision of Love . ' " Rolling Stone gave the album praise writing " Carey debuted with an album of uplifting dance pop and R & B ballads , each song 's composition co @-@ credited to Carey and each providing an opportunity to unleash her wide vocal range . " American critic Robert Christgau gave the album a mixed review , writing , " She gets too political in her brave , young , idealistic attack on ' war , destitution and sorrow ' : ' Couldn 't we accept each other / Can 't we make ourselves aware . ' Elsewhere she sticks to what she doesn 't know — <unk> 
 Mariah Carey was nominated for the 1991 Grammy Award for Album of the Year , while " Vision of Love " received nominations in the categories of Song of the Year , Record of the Year and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . Carey won for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance and also received the award for Best New Artist . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Mariah Carey entered the US Billboard 200 at number 80 , and reached the top 20 in its fourth week . The album topped the chart in its 36th week , due to Carey 's exposure at the 33rd Annual Grammy Awards , and stayed there for 11 consecutive weeks ; to date , it is the longest stay at number one in Carey 's career . It remained in the top 20 for 65 weeks and on the Billboard 200 for 113 weeks . Mariah Carey was certified nine @-@ times platinum by the RIAA on December 15 , 1999 . The album has sold 4 @,@ 885 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan , which began counting sales after January 1 , 1991 . It became the best @-@ selling album of 1991 in the United States . 
 In Canada , the album peaked at number one on the Canadian RPM Albums Chart during the week of April 20 , 1991 . To date , Mariah Carey is certified seven @-@ times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , denoting shipments of 700 @,@ 000 copies . The album peaked at number six in Australia , where it went double platinum and finished sixth on the ARIA Charts end of 1991 top 50 albums . During the week of September 15 , 1990 , Mariah Carey entered the UK Albums Chart at its peak of number six . After spending 40 weeks fluctuating in the chart , the album was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting shipments of 300 @,@ 000 copies . As of November 2010 , the album has sold 15 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Vision of Love " was the first single released from the album and became one of the most popular and critically praised songs of Carey 's career . Additionally , " Vision of Love " is credited with bringing the use of melisma to the 1990s and inspiring various future talents . " Vision of Love " was nominated for three 1991 Grammy Awards : Best Female Pop Vocal Performance ( which it won ) , Record of the Year and Song of the Year . The song received the Soul Train Music Award for Best R & B / Soul Single , Female and a Songwriter Award at the BMI Pop Awards . In the United States , it peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , during the week of August 2 , 1990 , staying atop the chart for four consecutive weeks . " Vision of Love " topped the singles chart in Canada and New Zealand as well , and appeared within the top ten in Australia , Ireland , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . Aside from its chart success , the song was lauded by music critics . In a retrospective review on the album in 2005 , Entertainment Weekly called the song " inspired " and complimented Carey 's use of the whistle register in the song . Additionally , Rolling Stone said that " the fluttering strings of notes that decorate songs like ' Vision of Love ' , inspired the entire American Idol vocal school , for better or worse , and virtually every other female R & B singer since the nineties . " Bill Lamb from About.com said that " ' Vision of Love ' is one of the best songs of Mariah 's recording career [ ... ] It is simply one of the most stunning debut releases ever by a pop recording artist . " 
 " Love Takes Time " served as the album 's second single . The song became Carey 's second single to top the singles chart in the United States , and third chart topper in Canada . While the song achieved strong success stateside , " Love Takes Time " barely charted inside the top ten in New Zealand and outside the top 20 in Germany , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . " Someday " ( the album 's third single ) followed a similar pattern as " Love Takes Time , " topping the chart in the US and Canada . In Australia , it peaked outside the top 40 , and hit number 38 in France and the UK . " I Don 't Wanna Cry " , the album 's fourth single , also topped the charts in the United States . The song became Carey 's fourth chart topper in the US , finishing number 25 on Billboard 's year @-@ end chart . Aside from peaking at number two in Canada , it charted at number 49 in Australia . A fifth single , " There 's Got to Be a Way " , was released in the United Kingdom , where it peaked at number fifty @-@ four . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Aside from the heavy marketing and promotional campaign held by Sony Music , Carey performed on several television programs and award ceremonies , stateside and throughout Europe . Carey 's first televised appearance was at the 1990 NBA Playoffs where she sang " America the Beautiful " . Soon after , she performed " Vision of Love " back @-@ to @-@ back on both The Arsenio Hall Show and The Tonight Show . In September 1990 , Carey appeared on Good Morning America where she performed an a cappella version of " Vision of Love , " alongside the Billy T. Scott Ensemble . " Vision of Love " was performed on various other American television shows such as the 1991 Grammy Awards and The Oprah Winfrey Show , as well as European programs such as The Veronica Countdown ( The Netherlands ) and the Wogan Show ( United Kingdom ) . Carey has performed " Vision of Love " on most of her tours , up until her Angels Advocate Tour in 2010 , where it remained absent from the set @-@ list . 
 Promotion for the album continued with Carey 's follow up singles . " Love Takes Time " was performed on " The Arsenio Hall Show " as well as Carey 's televised performance at " The Tattoo Club . " The third single from Mariah Carey , " Someday " , was performed at the 1991 American Music Awards which helped it reach number one in the United States . Carey 's fourth single " I Don 't Wanna Cry " , reached the top of the Hot 100 without any immediate promotion , as Carey had not performed the song until her Music Box Tour in 1993 . As promotion for Mariah Carey ended , Sony released a fifth single " There 's Got to Be a Way " , in the UK . Most of the albums singles were performed live throughout Carey 's short Music Box Tour . Both " Vision of Love " and " I Don 't Wanna Cry " were performed on Carey 's Asian and European Daydream World Tour ( 1996 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Montacute House = 
 Montacute House is a late Elizabethan mansion with garden in Montacute , South Somerset . 
 All parts are maintained by the National Trust ( NT ) which subsidise entry fees . Its Long Gallery , the longest in England serves as a South @-@ West outpost of the National Portrait Gallery displaying a skilful and well @-@ studied range of old oils and watercolours . 
 An example of English architecture during a period that was moving from the medieval Gothic to the Renaissance Classical , and one of few prodigy houses to survive almost unchanged from the Elizabethan era , the house has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building , and Scheduled Ancient Monument . It was visited by 125 @,@ 442 people in 2013 . Designed by an unknown architect , possibly the mason William Arnold , the three @-@ storey mansion , constructed of the local Ham Hill stone , was built in about 1598 by Sir Edward Phelips , Master of the Rolls and the prosecutor during the trial of the Gunpowder Plotters . 
 The house and its gardens have been a filming location for several films and a setting for television costume dramas and literary adaptations . 
 Sir Edward Phelips ' descendants occupied the house until the early 20th century . Following a brief period , when the house was let to tenants , one of whom was Lord Curzon who lived at the house with his mistress , the novelist Elinor Glyn , it was acquired by the NT in 1927 . 
 = = History = = 
 Montacute House was built in about 1598 by Sir Edward Phelips , whose family had lived in the Montacute area since at least 1460 , first as yeomen farmers before rising in status . The site was bought from the Cluniac Montacute Priory by Thomas Phelips and passed to his grandson , also called Thomas , who started planning the house , but died before it was built and left the completion of the work to his son Edward . Edward Phelips was a lawyer who had been in Parliament since 1584 . He was knighted in 1603 and a year later became Speaker of the House . James I appointed him Master of the Rolls and Chancellor to his son and heir Henry , Prince of Wales . Phelips remained at the hub of English political life , and his legal skills were employed when he became opening prosecutor during the trial of the Gunpowder Plotters . 
 Sir Edward 's choice of architect is unknown , although it has been attributed to the mason William Arnold , who was responsible for the designs of Cranborne Manor and Wadham College , Oxford , and had worked at Dunster Castle , also in Somerset . Dunster has architectural motifs similar to those found at Montacute . Phelips chose as the site for his new mansion a spot close by the existing house , built by his father . The date work commenced is undocumented , but is generally thought to be c . 1598 / 9 , based on dates on a fireplace and in stained glass within the house . The date 1601 , engraved above a doorcase , is considered to be the date of completion . 
 Sir Edward Phelips died in 1614 , leaving his family wealthy and landed ; he was succeeded by his son , Sir Robert Phelips , who represented various West Country constituencies in Parliament . Robert Phelips has the distinction of being arrested at Montacute . A staunch Protestant , he was subsequently imprisoned in the Tower of London as a result of his opposition to the " Spanish Match " between the Prince of Wales and a Catholic Spanish Infanta . 
 The family 's fame and notoriety were to be short @-@ lived . Subsequent generations settled down in Somerset to live the lives of county gentry , representing Somerset in Parliament and when necessary following occupations in the army and the church . This peaceful existence was jolted when the estate was inherited by William Phelips ( 1823 – 89 ) , who in his early days made many improvements and renovations to Montacute . He was responsible for the Base Court , a low service range adjoining the south side of the <unk> and the restoration of the Great Chamber , which he transformed into a library . Later , he was to become insane ; an addicted gambler , he was eventually incarcerated for his own good . Sadly for his family , this was after he had gambled away the family fortune and vast tracts of the Montacute Estate . In 1875 , when his son William Phelips ( 1846 – 1919 ) took control of the estate , agricultural rents from what remained of the mortgaged estate were low , and the house was a drain on limited resources . Selling the family silver and art works delayed the inevitable by a few years , but in 1911 the family were forced to let the house , for an annual sum of £ 650 , and move out . The <unk> never returned . 
 By 1915 , the original tenant , Robert Davidson , had departed and the house was let to George Curzon , 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston . A later tenant was the American writer Henry Lane Eno , who died at the house in 1928 . 
 The house was never to be a private residence again . It was offered for sale in 1929 , and at a time when many country houses were being demolished was given a scrap value of £ 5 @,@ 882 . With the exception of the Phelips family portraits , the historic contents and furnishing were disposed of , and the house , an empty shell , remained on the market for two years . 
 Finally , in 1931 , the house was sold to the philanthropist Ernest Cook , who presented it to the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings , and from that Society , it passed to the National Trust . It was one of the Trust 's first great houses . The following year , in 1932 , it opened to the public for the first time . Bare of furnishing and without sufficient funds to maintain it , James Lees @-@ Milne , the secretary of the Trust 's country house committee , described the mansion as an " empty and rather embarrassing white elephant " . 
 During the Second World War , Montacute was requisitioned by the army , and American soldiers were billeted in the surrounding parkland before the Normandy landings . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Built in what came to be considered the English Renaissance style , the east front , the intended principal façade , is distinguished by its Dutch gables decorated with clambering stone monkeys and other animals . 
 Architecture during the early English Renaissance was far less formal than that of mainland Europe and drew from a greater selection of motifs both ancient and modern , with less emphasis placed on the strict observance of rules derived from antique architecture . This has led to an argument that the style was an evolution of Gothic rather than an innovation imported from Europe . This argument is evident at Montacute , where Gothic pinnacles , albeit obelisk in form , are combined with Renaissance gables , pediments , classical statuary , ogee roofs and windows appearing as bands of glass . This profusion of large , mullioned windows , an innovation of their day , give the appearance that the principal façade is built entirely of glass ; a similar fenestration was employed at Hardwick Hall in Derbyshire . However , despite the Dutch gables , a feature of the English Renaissance acquired as the style spread from France across the Low Countries to England , and the Gothic elements , much of the architectural influence is Italian . 
 The windows of the second @-@ floor Long Gallery are divided by niches containing statues , an Italian Renaissance feature exemplified at the Palazzo degli Uffizi in Florence ( 1560 – 81 ) , which at Montacute depict the Nine Worthies dressed as Roman soldiers ; the bay windows have shallow segmented pediments – a very early and primitive occurrence of this motif in England – while beneath the bay windows are curious circular hollows , probably intended for the reception of terracotta medallions , again emulating the palazzi of Florence . Such medallions were one of the Renaissance motifs introduce to English Gothic architecture when Henry VIII was rebuilding Hampton Court and supporting the claim that the English Renaissance was little more than Gothic architecture with Renaissance ornament . At Montacute , however , the Renaissance style is not confined to ornament , the house also has perfect symmetry . Paired stair towers stand in the angles between the main body of the house and the wings that project forward , a sign of modern symmetry in the plan of the house as well as its elevation , and a symptom of the times , in that the hall no longer had a " high end " of greater state . 
 Montacute , like many Elizabethan mansions , is built in an ' E ' shape , a much @-@ used plan in this era . On the ground floor was the great hall , kitchens and pantries , on the upper floors , retiring rooms for the family and honoured guests . Over the centuries , the layout and use of rooms changed : drawing and dining rooms evolved on the ground floor . 
 The original approach to the house would have been far more impressive than the picturesque approach today . The east front was then the entrance façade and faced onto a large entrance court . The two remaining pavilions flanked a large gatehouse ; this long @-@ demolished structure contained secondary lodgings . In turn , the entrance court and gatehouse were approached through a larger outer court . The courts were however not fortified , but bordered by ornate balustrading , which with the ogee roofs of the pavilions , which in reality were follies , were a purely ornamental and domestic acknowledgement of the fortified courts and approaches found in earlier medieval English manors and castles . 
 As in all houses of the Elizabethan era , Montacute had no corridors : the rooms led directly from one to another . This changed in 1787 when stonework from a nearby mansion at Clifton Maybank ( which was being partly demolished ) was purchased by Edward Phelips ( 1725 – 97 ) and used to rebuild Montacute 's west front . This provided the much @-@ needed corridor giving privacy to the ground @-@ floor rooms and first @-@ floor bedrooms . Now , with the new frontage in place , the house was virtually turned around : the " Clifton Maybank " façade became the front entrance , and the impressive former front elevation now overlooked a lawn surrounded by flower borders , rather than the original entrance courtyard . The small pavilions with ogee domed roofs that flanked the demolished gatehouse still remain . They may have been intended as banqueting houses , but by the 1630s were used as bedrooms . 
 = = Interior = = 
 = = = Ground floor = = = 
 The addition of the Clifton Maybank corridor , built in the 18th century from stone obtained from another house then undergoing alteration , allowed the principal ground- and first @-@ floor rooms to have some privacy from the servants ' areas and linked the two staircases . It also allowed the house to be turned around by creating a new entrance façade facing west . 
 The Great Hall , leading off from the corridor , was the most important communal eating and living room , but by the time Montacute was completed the traditional Great Hall was largely an anachronism . Such halls continued to be built , however , albeit as at Montacute on a smaller scale . For the first few years after its completion , the servants continued to dine in the hall , but the family and honoured guests now ate in the Great Chamber above . The hall now served as a room to receive and also for processions to commence to the grander rooms above . 
 Leading off from the Great Hall are the family 's private Drawing Room and Parlour . In the 16th and early 17th centuries , in a house such as Montacute , the Parlour was where the family would dine , possibly with some of their upper servants . It allowed them not only privacy from dining publicly in the hall , but also less state and pomp than if dining in the Great Chamber above . Like its grander cousin above , the Parlour also had an adjoining principal bed chamber , now the Drawing Room , originally known as the White Chamber and later as the Round Parlour . As fashions and uses changed , and privacy from servants became desirable , like the later Baroque state apartments , these ground @-@ floor rooms lost their original purpose and became a series of seemingly meaningless drawing rooms . The National Trust installed an incongruous 18th @-@ century fireplace from Coleshill House in the Drawing Room in the mid @-@ 20th century . It is now furnished in 18th @-@ century style . 
 The room on the opposite side of the Clifton Maybank corridor from the Great Hall was originally two rooms comprising the " pannetry " ( sic ) and " buttery . " In a large household the buttery and " pannetry " were part of the offices pertaining to the kitchen , and as at Montacute they were generally close to the Great Hall . The buttery was traditionally the place from which the yeoman of the buttery served beer and candles to those lower members of the household not entitled to drink wine . Montacute 's buttery is typical , as it had a staircase to the beer cellar below . The " pannetry " was the room from which the yeoman of the pantry served bread . By the time of Montacute 's completion , upper servants often dined and entertained visiting servants in the pantry . This layout was a medieval concept and later , as custom dictated that servants withdraw from the principal areas of the house , these rooms became used by the family as reception and private dining rooms . Eventually , in the early 20th century , Lord Curzon amalgamated the two rooms to create the grand , and socially necessary , dining room , which Montacute had lacked since the Great Chamber had been abandoned more than 100 years earlier . 
 The Servant 's Hall , from which a staircase in the bay window descends to the basement , became the servant 's dining room at the beginning of the 18th century . Outside , the six Doric columns on the East Terrace originally had decorative finials , now replaced by lamps . 
 = = = First floor = = = 
 The first floor contains one of the grandest rooms in the house , the Library . The room was formerly known as the Great Chamber ; in a 16th @-@ century mansion , such as Montacute , this room was the epicentre of all ceremony and state : hence , its position at the head of the principal staircase , making it the finale of a processional route . Here , the most important guests would have been received , and where the Phelips dined formally with their guests and where musical entertainments and dancing would take place . The Great Chamber at Montacute contains the finest chimney @-@ piece in the house ; however , its classical statuary depicting nudes are long gone , victims of Victorian prudery . During the 18th century the room was shut up and used a store and permitted to decay ; this explains why in the 19th century it was completely restored in " Elizabethan style . " The strapwork ceiling , panelling and bookcases all date from this period . The only original features remaining are the heraldic stained glass in the windows and the Portland stone chimney @-@ piece . The room contains an ornate carved wooden porch ; installed in the library in the 1830s , it was originally in the parlour below . 
 At the head of the principal staircase an <unk> divides the former Great Chamber from what would have been the main bedroom . During the 19th century , this room was furnished as an armoury . The adjoining bedroom , the Garden Chamber , was used as a bedroom by Lord Curzon during the early 20th century , and as such was equipped with a plumbed bath hidden in a wardrobe , one of the few in the house . 
 Further rooms on this floor include the Crimson Chamber , which together with its small adjoining dressing room formed one room accessed from the Great Chamber . Described in 1638 the " <unk> <unk> " , it was used by the family to withdraw from the more public ceremonies held in the Great Chamber and also could be used to form a suite with the neighbouring bedroom , the Hall Chamber , when eminent guests were entertained in the house . 
 The Hall Chamber was another of the principal bedrooms ; the adjoining Crimson Chamber originally served as the Hall Chamber 's " <unk> <unk> . " as the room was described in 1638 . As a suite , the rooms were intended to be accessed by a now @-@ blocked door in the Great Chamber . In this way , if an extremely high ranking guest was being entertained , they would then take over the entire suite including the Great Chamber . Although Montacute was equipped for a visiting sovereign , by the time it was completed Elizabeth I was dead and the family 's prominence was waning . 
 The floor has numerous other smaller rooms . As elsewhere in the house their usage frequently changed according to the requirements of the mansion 's occupants , and room names therefore often changed according to their use and decoration . 
 = = = Second floor = = = 
 A notable feature of the house is the 172 @-@ foot ( 52 m ) second @-@ floor Long Gallery , spanning the entire top floor of the house ; it is the longest surviving long gallery in England . The gallery is lit by a continuous wall of glass on its eastern side while its length is extended by oriel windows at each end , which from the exterior appear to cling perilously to the wall , supported only by a small corbel to the masonry . 
 Long galleries were a feature of large 16th- and 17th @-@ century houses and had many purposes , from entertaining to exercising during inclement weather ; the Phelips children would lead their ponies up these stairs to ride in the gallery . Today , it is used by the National Portrait Gallery to display part of its collection . 
 Various former bedrooms lead from the Long Gallery , and like the gallery are now hung with paintings on loan from the National Portrait Gallery . 
 The attic floor above the second floor , which is not open to the public , contains some garret rooms that would always have been secondary bedchambers . It is likely that in the 16th and 17th centuries they would have been occupied by the senior servants ; the lower servants would have slept in any vacant corner or space on the ground or basement floors . 
 = = Gardens = = 
 The gardens were well established by 1633 , and by 1667 several walled gardens and courts had been added with established orchards . They were accompanied by stone gate lodges , which were removed in the 18th century . 
 The garden planting , laid out within the former forecourt and in the slightly sunken grassed parterre square , was the work of Mrs Ellen Phelips , who lived at Montacute from the 1840s to her death in 1911 , and her gardener , Mr Pridham , who had worked for her at Coker Court . The avenue of clipped yews that reinforces the slightly gappy mature avenue of trees stretching away from the outer walls of the former forecourt to end in fields , and the clipped yews that outline the grassed parterre date from that time , though the famous " melted " shape of the giant hedge was inspired by the effects of a freak snowfall in 1947 . The sunken parterre garden design , with its Jacobean @-@ style central fountain , designed by Robert <unk> Balfour ( 1869 – 1942 ) , is of 1894 ; Balfour 's dated design is conserved in the library of the Royal Institute of British Architects . Mixed borders in the East court were replanted by Phyllis Reiss of Tintinhull in powerful hot colours when the earlier tender colour scheme laid down by Vita Sackville @-@ West proved insipid to modern taste . 
 There are around 106 hectares ( 260 acres ) of parkland and 4 hectares ( 9 @.@ 9 acres ) of more formally laid out gardens . These are the remains of the 121 hectares ( 300 acres ) of parkland that previously surrounded the house . The gardens and parkland are listed , Grade I , on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England . 
 = = Present day = = 
 During the last quarter of the 20th century the gardens and grounds were restored and replanted . The house and village have often featured as locations for films . Several scenes of the 1995 film version of Jane Austen 's novel Sense and Sensibility were filmed at Montacute , as were scenes from the 2004 film The Libertine . The house used as Baskerville Hall for a version of The Hound of the Baskervilles filmed in 2000 for Canadian television . In May – June 2014 the house was used as one of the locations for the BBC 's adaption of Hilary Mantel novel Wolf Hall 
 In 1975 London 's National Portrait Gallery formed the first of its regional partnerships , a partnership that marries empty large antique spaces with the many paintings the gallery has insufficient space to display . This has seen Montacute 's Long Gallery redecorated and restored and hung with an important collection of 16th- and 17th @-@ century old master portraits . 
 The Wallace and Gromit short film for 2012 is set at a house that seems to be based on Montacute House . The short was created in celebration of the National Trust and is titled " A Jubilee Bunt @-@ A @-@ Thon " . The fictional location for the earlier Wallace and Gromit film The Curse of the Were @-@ Rabbit , Tottington Hall , was also based on Montacute House . 
 From March to October each year the house and grounds are open to the public . 
 = Oyster Burns = 
 Thomas P. " Oyster " Burns ( September 6 , 1864 – November 11 , 1928 ) was a professional baseball player whose career spanned 15 seasons , 11 of which were spent with the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) Wilmington Quicksteps ( 1884 ) , Baltimore Orioles ( 1884 – 85 , 1887 – 88 ) , Brooklyn Bridegrooms ( 1888 – 95 ) , and New York Giants ( 1895 ) . Burns , who predominately played as an outfielder , also played as a shortstop , second baseman , third baseman and as a pitcher . Over his career , Burns compiled a career batting average of .300 with 870 runs scored , 1 @,@ 392 hits , 224 doubles , 129 triples , 65 home runs , and 834 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 1 @,@ 188 games played . Although the majority of his career was spent in the major leagues , Burns also played in minor league baseball . He made his MLB debut at the age of 19 and was listed as standing 5 feet 8 inches ( 173 cm ) and weighing 183 pounds ( 83 kg ) . 
 Burns , nicknamed " Oyster " because he sold shellfish in the off @-@ season , was described as a " loudmouth " and having " an irritating voice and personality " . Nevertheless , Burns led the Bridegrooms to an American Association championship in 1889 and a National League pennant in 1890 . After retiring from baseball , Burns died on November 11 , 1928 in Brooklyn , New York . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Thomas P. Burns was born on September 6 , 1864 , in Philadelphia . His parents , Patrick and Mary Burns , were both Irish immigrants . 
 In 1883 , Burns began his professional baseball career as a pitcher with Harrisburg of the minor @-@ league Interstate Association . On the year , Burns posted an earned run average ( ERA ) of 2 @.@ 30 over 20 games pitched , 15 of which were starts . When he wasn 't pitching , Burns played second and third base . 
 Burns began the 1884 season playing for the Wilmington Quicksteps , but left the team after they joined the Union Association , and joined the Baltimore Orioles . Burns — the youngest player on the Orioles and the seventh youngest player in the American Association — batted .298 . Despite playing in only 35 games on the season , Burns recorded a team @-@ leading six home runs over 141 plate appearances . He continued his career with the Orioles in 1885 , batting .231 with five home runs and 37 RBI , and pitching to a 7 – 4 win – loss record . His offensive struggles led him to be demoted to the Newark Domestics for the 1886 season , where he helped the Domestics win the Eastern League pennant . By 1887 , Burns had reentered the majors for the Orioles and became the team captain until he threw a baseball at an opposing pitcher following a groundout ; he was later fined $ 25 ( $ 658 in 2011 ) . On the season , he recorded nine home runs — good for third in the American Association . Burns 's 19 triples were enough to tie him with five others for the league lead , and his 140 games played were tied for the league lead with teammate Blondie Purcell . 
 After playing in 79 games for Baltimore , Burns was transferred to the Brooklyn Bridegrooms by Harry Von der Horst , the owner of both clubs . While he was playing for the Bridegrooms , the New York Clipper described Burns as " the noisiest man that ever played on the Brooklyn team . His voice reminds one of a buzz @-@ saw . " Burns remained with the Bridegrooms for the 1889 season . He recorded team highs in on @-@ base percentage , batting average , and home runs hit while the Bridegrooms , with an 89 – 48 record , became American Association champions . In the World Series , the Bridegrooms played the New York Giants of the National League . Burns hit a three @-@ run home run to win the fourth game of the series , giving Brooklyn a 3 – 1 series lead . However , the Giants would take the World Series after winning five straight games . 
 In 1890 , the Bridegrooms had moved to the National League . Burns , now 26 , led the league in home runs ( 13 ) and RBI ( 128 ) . He hit for the cycle on August 1 , 1890 — becoming the first <unk> to do so . The team won the National League pennant , and faced the Louisville Colonels in the 1890 World Series . The series ended in a 3 – 3 – 1 tie : bad weather led to the cancellation of more games . After the 1891 season , Burns 's 1892 RBI total was third in the league , and his hits , doubles , triples , and batting average marks were the second highest on the Brooklyn team , now named the Grooms . In 1893 , between games of a doubleheader , a teammate of Burns , Tom Daly , was sleeping in center field when Burns stabbed Daly with a penknife . Daly awoke and turned on the knife , leading to a severed tendon which kept Daly out for two weeks . Burns ' 1894 batting average ( .355 ) was the highest of his career ; his hit and run totals were also the second highest in his career . Burns continued to play for the club until 1895 , when he played for the New York Giants . In his final MLB year , Burns batted a combined .258 over 25 games . 
 After the 1895 season , Burns 's contract was purchased by the minor @-@ league Newark Colts . The Colts would win the Atlantic League division with an 82 – 61 record , two games above the Hartford Bluebirds . The next season , Burns served as a player @-@ coach for the Bluebirds , where he led the team in doubles and batting average . In his final managerial year , Burns coached Portland , Maine of the New England League . 
 After retiring from baseball , Burns lived in Brooklyn until his death on November 11 , 1928 . He was buried in Holy Cross Cemetery in North Arlington , New Jersey . 
 = Mascarene grey parakeet = 
 The Mascarene grey parakeet or Thirioux ’ s grey parrot ( Psittacula bensoni ) , is an extinct species of parrot which was endemic to the Mascarene islands of Mauritius and Réunion in the western Indian Ocean . It has been classified as a member of the tribe Psittaculini , along with other parrots from the islands . 
 Subfossil bones of the Mascarene grey parakeet found on Mauritius were first described in 1973 as belonging to a smaller relative of the broad @-@ billed parrot in the genus Lophopsittacus . Apart from their size , the bones were very similar to those of other Mascarene parrots . The subfossils were later connected with 17th- and 18th @-@ century descriptions of small grey parrots on Mauritius and Réunion , together with a single illustration published in a journal describing a voyage in 1602 , and the species was instead reassigned to the genus Psittacula . 
 The Mascarene grey parakeet was grey , had a long tail , and was larger than other species of the Psittacula genus , which are usually green . The grey parrots were said to be easy to hunt , as the capture of one would result in its calling out to summon the whole flock . They were also considered to be crop pests and being such easy prey meant that they were extensively hunted . Coupled with deforestation , this pushed them into extinction . This had happened by the 1730s on Réunion and by the 1760s on Mauritius . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1973 , English ornithologist Daniel T. Holyoak described some small parrot bones that he had discovered among a collection of broad @-@ billed parrot ( Lophopsittacus mauritianus ) subfossils in the Zoology Museum of Cambridge University . These remains had been collected by Louis Etienne Thirioux in the early 20th century , who had found them in a cave on Le Pouce mountain , on the Mascarene island of Mauritius . They were placed in the zoology museum by 1908 . Apart from their size and robustness , Holyoak did not find the bones to be distinct from those of the Mascarene parrot genera Lophopsittacus , Mascarinus ( the Mascarene parrot ) , Necropsittacus ( the Rodrigues parrot ) , and Psittacula ( which had two or three other species inhabiting the Mascarene islands ) . Because of their similarities , Holyoak considered all these genera to be closely related . 
 Holyoak provisionally placed the new species in the same genus as the broad @-@ billed parrot , naming it Lophopsittacus bensoni ; the name honours the English ornithologist Constantine W. Benson , for his work on birds from the Indian Ocean , and in classifying bird collections at Cambridge . Holyoak also mentioned the possibility that the remains could represent a small subspecies of Necropsittacus or a wide @-@ beaked form of Mascarinus , but maintained that they were best considered as belonging to a distinct species . The holotype specimen is a mandibular symphysis , with the specimen number UMZC <unk> . Other known remains include upper mandibles , a palatine bone , and <unk> . The species has since been excavated from the Mare aux Songes swamp on Mauritius , from which subfossils of most of the other endemic bird species have been identified as well . 
 Old , vague accounts of several different now @-@ extinct Mascarene parrots have created much confusion for the scientists who subsequently examined them . In 1967 , American ornithologist James Greenway speculated that 17th- and 18th @-@ century reports of then @-@ unidentified grey parrots on Mauritius referred to the broad @-@ billed parrot . In 1987 , English ecologist Anthony S. Cheke correlated the L. bensoni subfossils with the grey parrots reported from Mauritius and Réunion , which had previously been ignored , or considered references to broad @-@ billed parrots . Further study of contemporary accounts indicates that the broad @-@ billed parrot was not grey , but had multiple colours . 
 In 2007 , the English palaeontologist Julian P. Hume reclassified L. bensoni as a member of the genus Psittacula , as he found it to be generically distinct from Lophopsittacus , but morphologically similar to the Alexandrine parakeet ( Psittacula eupatria ) . Hume also pointed out that an engraving accompanying the 1648 published version of Dutch Captain Willem Van West @-@ Zanen 's journal may be the only definite depiction of this species . The engraving shows the killing of dodos ( depicted as penguin @-@ like ) , a dugong , and parrots on Mauritius in 1602 ; the depicted method of catching parrots matches that used on Mascarene grey parakeets according to contemporary accounts . Hume coined the new common name " Thirioux 's grey parrot " in honour of the original collector . The IOC World Bird List instead used the common name " Mascarene grey parakeet " . 
 The population of grey parrots described from the island of Réunion ( referred to as Psittacula cf. bensoni by Hume ) is thought to have been conspecific with that on Mauritius . Until subfossils of P. bensoni are found on Réunion , it cannot be confirmed whether the grey parrots of the two islands belonged to the same species . In the 1860s , French naturalists Charles Coquerel and Auguste Vinson suggested these could have been parrots of the genus Coracopsis , but fossils of neither that genus nor Psittacula have ever been found on Réunion . Whilst Coracopsis parrots are known to have been introduced to that island in the 1700s , a population did not become established . While no live or dead Mascarene grey parakeets are known with certainty to have been exported , Hume has suggested that a brown parrot specimen — once housed in Cabinet du Roi but now lost — may have been a discoloured old Mascarene grey parakeet , or perhaps a lesser vasa parrot ( Coracopsis nigra ) . This specimen was described by Comte de Buffon in 1779 . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Based on morphological features , the Alexandrine parakeet has been proposed as the founder population for all Psittacula species on Indian Ocean islands , with new populations settling during the species 's southwards colonisation from its native South Asia . Features of that species gradually disappear in species further away from its range . Many endemic Mascarene birds , including the dodo , are descended from South Asian ancestors , and Hume has proposed that this may also be the case for all the parrots there . Sea levels were lower during the Pleistocene , so it was possible for species to colonise some of these less isolated islands . 
 Although most extinct parrot species of the Mascarenes are poorly known , subfossil remains show that they shared common features such as enlarged heads and jaws , reduced pectoral bones , and robust leg bones . Hume has suggested that they all have a common origin in the radiation of the Psittaculini tribe , basing this theory on morphological features and the fact that Psittacula parrots have managed to colonise many isolated islands in the Indian Ocean . The Psittaculini could have invaded the area several times , as many of the species were so specialised that they may have evolved significantly on hotspot islands before the Mascarenes emerged from the sea . Other members of the Psittacula genus from the Mascarenes include the extant echo parakeet ( Psittacula eques echo ) of Mauritius , as well as the extinct Réunion parakeet ( Psittacula eques eques ) , and Newton 's parakeet ( Psittacula exsul ) of Rodrigues . A 2011 genetic study found that the Mascarene parrot ( Mascarinus mascarinus ) of Réunion was most closely related to the lesser vasa parrot from Madagascar and nearby islands , and therefore unrelated to the Psittacula parrots , undermining the theory of their common origin . A 2015 genetic study by Jackson et al. found the other Mascarene Psittacula taxa to group within a clade of rose @-@ ringed parakeet ( Psittacula krameri ) subspecies from Asia and Africa . 
 = = Description = = 
 Contemporary accounts describe the Mascarene grey parakeet as a grey , long @-@ tailed parrot . Subfossils show that its beak was about 30 % longer than that of the sympatric echo parakeet , and that it had a comparatively broad beak . Members of the Psittacula genus commonly have large , red beaks , and long tail feathers , with the central ones being the longest . It also differed from its congeners in other osteological details . It was skeletally similar to the Alexandrine parakeet , but some of its bones were larger and more robust . Its colouration also separated it from all other members of Psittacula , the majority of which are green or partially green . 
 Based on subfossils , the Mascarene grey parakeet was smaller than the broad @-@ billed parrot and the Rodrigues parrot , but similar in size to the Mascarene parrot , though with a wider beak . The mandibular symphysis ( central jaw ridge ) was 2 @.@ 7 – 2 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 11 – 0 @.@ 11 in ) thick along the mid @-@ line , the palatine ( part of the palate ) was 31 @.@ 1 mm ( 1 @.@ 22 in ) , and the tarsometatarsus ( bone in the lower leg ) was 22 – 22 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 87 – 0 @.@ 89 in ) . The grey parrots from Réunion were described as being larger than the sympatric Réunion parakeet . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 According to Anthony S. Cheke and Julian Hume , the anatomy of the Mascarene grey parakeet suggests that its habits were largely terrestrial . Like the extinct Mauritian duck and the Mascarene coot , it appears that the Mascarene grey parakeet inhabited both Mauritius and Réunion . Both populations were said to be easy to hunt by capturing one individual and making it call out , which would summon an entire flock . 
 Willem van West @-@ Zanen , who visited Mauritius in 1602 , was the first to mention grey parrots there , and he also described the hunting methods used : 
 ... some of the people went bird hunting . They could grab as many birds as they wished and could catch them by hand . It was an entertaining sight to see . The grey parrots are especially tame and if one is caught and made to cry out , soon hundreds of the birds fly around ones ’ ears , which were then hit to the ground with little sticks . 
 The Dutch sailor Willem Ysbrandtszoon Bontekoe was on Réunion in 1618 , and described the same behaviour , in the first account of the grey parrots there : 
 Coming further inland we found [ a ] great number of geese , doves , grey parrots and other birds , also many land @-@ turtles ... And what we most did marvel at , when we held one of the parrots and other birds and squeezed it till it screamed , there came all the others from thereabout as if they would free it and let themselves be caught as well , so we had enough of them to eat . 
 In 1705 , Jean Feuilley gave a more detailed description of the parrots of Réunion and their ecology : 
 There are several sorts of parrot , of different sizes and colours . Some are the size of a hen , grey , the beak red [ Mascarene parrot ] ; others the same colour the size of a pigeon [ Mascarene grey parakeet ] , and yet others , smaller , are green [ Réunion parakeet ] . There are great quantities , especially in the Sainte @-@ Suzanne area and on the mountainsides . They are very good to eat , especially when they are fat , which is from the month of June until the month of September , because at that time the trees produce a certain wild seed that these birds eat . 
 Many other endemic species of Mauritius and Réunion were lost after the arrival of humans , so that the ecosystems of these islands are severely damaged and hard to reconstruct . Before humans arrived , the islands were entirely covered in forests , very little of which remains today , because of deforestation . The surviving endemic fauna is still seriously threatened . On Mauritius , the Mascarene grey parakeet lived alongside other recently extinct birds such as the dodo , the red rail , the broad @-@ billed parrot , the Mauritius blue pigeon , the Mauritius owl , the Mascarene coot , the Mauritian shelduck , the Mauritian duck , and the Mauritius night heron . On Réunion , it lived alongside the Réunion ibis , the hoopoe starling , the Mascarene parrot , the Réunion parakeet , the Réunion swamphen , the Réunion owl , the Réunion night heron , and the Réunion pink pigeon . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 To the sailors who visited the Mascarene islands from 1598 onwards , the fauna was mainly interesting from a culinary standpoint . Of the eight or so parrot species endemic to the Mascarenes , only the echo parakeet has survived . The others likely all vanished due to a combination of extensive hunting and deforestation . Due to being easily caught , the Mascarene grey parakeet was often hunted in abundance by early visitors to Mauritius and Réunion . As they fattened themselves from June to September , they were particularly sought after at this time of the year . An account by Admiral Steven van der Hagen from 1606 even suggests that the grey parrots of Mauritius were sometimes killed for amusement . 
 In the 1720s , Sieur Dubois stated that the grey parrots on Réunion were especially sought after during their fat season , and also claimed they were crop @-@ pests : 
 Grey parrots , as good [ to eat ] as the pigeons ... All the birds of this island have their season at different times , being six months in the low country and six months in the mountains , when returning , they are very fat and good to eat ... The sparrows [ <unk> ] , grey parrots , pigeons and other birds , bats [ Pteropus sp . ] , cause plenty of damage , some to cereals others to fruit . 
 The fact that they were said to damage crops probably contributed to them being hunted . The French settlers began to clear forests using the slash @-@ and @-@ burn technique for deforestation in the 1730s , which in itself would have had a large effect on the parrot population and on the other animals that nest in tree cavities . 
 The grey parrots appear to have been common on Mauritius until the 1750s in spite of the pressure from humans , but since they were last mentioned by Charpentier de Cossigny in 1759 ( published in 1764 ) , they had probably become extinct shortly after this time . The grey parrots of Réunion were last mentioned in 1732 , also by Cossigny . This final account gives an insight as to how he regarded the culinary quality of parrots from Réunion : 
 The woods are full of parrots , either completely grey [ Mascarene grey parrot ] or completely green [ Réunion parakeet ] . They were eaten a lot formerly , the grey especially , but both are always lean and very tough whatever sauce one puts on them . 
 The 1648 engraving possibly depicting this species was captioned with a Dutch poem , here in English naturalist Hugh Strickland 's 1848 translation : 
 = Marge Be Not Proud = 
 " Marge Be Not Proud " is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 17 , 1995 . In the episode , Marge refuses to buy Bart the new video game Bonestorm , so he steals it from a local discount store . Bart ends up being estranged from his mother when he gets caught , and fearing that he has lost her love , he decides he must regain it . 
 The episode was written by Mike Scully and directed by Steven Dean Moore . Scully got the inspiration for it from an experience in his childhood when he shoplifted . Lawrence Tierney guest starred in the episode as Don Brodka . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from fans and television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 5 , and was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Christmas is approaching , and Bart wants nothing more than the new , must @-@ have video game Bonestorm . However , Marge refuses to buy it , due to the violence and potential distraction from Bart 's schoolwork . Discouraged , Bart makes attempts to buy the game himself but with no luck and upon discovering Milhouse has the game , Bart visits the local Try @-@ N @-@ Save discount store where Jimbo Jones and Nelson Muntz convince him to steal a copy of the game . On his way out of the store , Bart is caught by the store 's strict security guard , Don Brodka , who leave 's Homer and Marge a message about the incident and tells Bart to leave and never return or risk spending " Christmas in juvenile hall " . 
 Despite Bart 's efforts to keep the shoplifting a secret , Marge takes the family to the same store to get their annual Christmas picture taken ( still unaware of Bart 's shoplifting ) . Bart tries to avoid detection and trouble , but is spotted by Brodka , who shows a disbelieving Marge and Homer the security tape of Bart shoplifting . Disappointed by Bart 's actions and concerned that she may be mothering him too much , Marge decides that he is old enough to make his own decisions and becomes distant with him . Bart is left out of family activities , such as decorating the Christmas tree and making snow statues , and he ends up spending time with Milhouse 's mom for motherly comfort . When Milhouse 's mom has had enough of this and fearing he has lost Marge 's love , Bart decides he must regain it . 
 Bart then returns home with a bulge in his coat . Marge confronts him , believing he was shoplifting again , and she finds Bart has hidden a picture of himself bought as a Christmas present for her . Marge is overjoyed , and in gratitude for receiving this early Christmas gift , gives Bart his — the new game that a store salesman told her " all the kids want " , the golf simulator Lee <unk> 's Putting Challenge . Though profoundly underwhelmed , Bart looks into his mother 's expectant face and thanks her . 
 = = Production = = 
 Mike Scully , the writer of the episode , based it on experience in his childhood . Scully was twelve years old when he paid a visit to the <unk> discount department store in West Springfield , Massachusetts . A " bunch of guys " were shoplifting at the store and they " pressured " Scully into doing it as well . He ended up getting caught outside , and " had one of the most traumatic moments " of his life . " To this day it still terrifies me , " Scully said . He jokingly told Variety , " It 's great to be paid for reliving the horrors of your life . " 
 The episode was directed by Steven Dean Moore . The show runner of The Simpsons at the time , Bill Oakley , thinks this is one of the most " beautifully " directed episodes of the show . He called the " hand @-@ colouring " very " vivid " and " bright " . The episode is the first Christmas episode the producers had done since the first episode of the show , " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " . Oakley said that nobody in the writing staff wanted to " try on Christmas " because it was " so famous " as being the first episode . 
 Lawrence Tierney guest starred in the episode as Don Brodka . Another former show runner , Josh Weinstein , called Tierney 's appearance " the craziest guest star experience we ever had " . In addition to yelling at and intimidating employees of the show , Tierney made unreasonable requests such as abandoning his distinctive voice to do the part in a southern accent and refusing to perform lines if he did not " get the jokes " . Despite this , Oakley and Weinstein thought Tierney did a good job . Weinstein said , " He certainly delivered and he 's one of my favorite characters we have had [ on the show ] . " After Tierney 's death , the episode " The Old Man and the Key " was dedicated to him . 
 " Marge Be Not Proud " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 17 , 1995 . The episode was selected for release in a 1999 video collection of selected episodes , titled : Bart Wars . Other episodes included in the collection set were " Mayored to the Mob " , " Dog of Death " , and " The Secret War of Lisa Simpson " . The episode was again included in the 2005 DVD release of the Bart Wars set . The episode was included in The Simpsons season 7 DVD set , which was released on December 13 , 2005 . Oakley , Weinstein , Scully , Moore , and Silverman participated in the DVD 's audio commentary . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Marge Be Not Proud " finished 47th in the ratings for the week of December 11 to December 17 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 5 . The episode was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following a boxing match , Fox NFL Sunday , and The X @-@ Files . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " A Christmas special in all but name , and a touching look at the relationship between Marge and her growing Bart. " Dave Foster of DVD Times said that " thanks to the keen eye of the writers and the rarely shown good side of Bart , this episode works very well as both an amusing insight to the way a child ’ s mind works and as a strong relationship building episode between Bart and Marge . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said that despite being one of the " <unk> " episodes at times , it " still packs some terrific laughs " . Jacobson commented that he " absolutely lost it when Homer ’ s drawing of a robot grilling a hot dog was seen - it ’ s funnier if you see it - and Lawrence Tierney ’ s guest turn as the store detective adds hilarious grit to the show . " He added that the episode does not " fall into the classic " category , " but it offers more than enough entertainment to satisfy . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best part of the episode to be when a depressed Bart makes a snowman from the dirty , leftover snow under the car . She called the scene " amazingly pathetic " . The website concluded its review by giving the episode a grade of B. In 2011 , Richard Lawson of The Atlantic Wire cited it as the best Christmas episode of The Simpsons , noting that " it 's very sweet and there are some funny videogame jokes . " He added that the episode " features a terrific guest starring voice performance from the late Lawrence Tierney . " The author Charlie <unk> , author of the online book Zombie Simpsons : How the Best Show Ever Became the Broadcasting Undead and creator of the blog Dead Homer Society , claims that it is the " one bad episode " in season 7 , due to being an example of a very special episode ; however , he claims that it is only bad by the " towering " standards of the earlier seasons . 
 = HMS Defender ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Defender was a D @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . The ship was initially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet before she was transferred to the China Station in early 1935 . She was temporarily deployed in the Red Sea during late 1935 during the Abyssinia Crisis , before returning to her assigned station where she remained until mid @-@ 1939 . Defender was transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet just before World War II began in September 1939 . She briefly was assigned to West Africa for convoy escort duties in 1940 before returning to the Mediterranean . The ship participated in the Battles of Calabria , Cape Spartivento , and Cape Matapan over the next year without damage . Defender assisted in the evacuations from Greece and Crete in April – May 1941 , before she began running supply missions to Tobruk , Libya in June . The ship was badly damaged by a German bomber on one of those missions and had to be scuttled by her consort on 11 July 1941 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Defender displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 890 long tons ( 1 @,@ 920 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Defender carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 870 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 870 km ; 6 @,@ 760 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Diamond had a single 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) ) gun between her funnels and two 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mark II guns mounted on the side of her bridge . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Career = = 
 Ordered on 2 February 1932 under the 1930 Naval Programme , Defender was laid down at the Vickers Armstrongs yard in Barrow as Yard Number 674 on 22 June 1931 , and launched on 7 April 1932 . She was completed on 31 October 1932 having cost a total of £ 223 @,@ 979 , excluding the Admiralty supplied equipment such as guns , ammunition and wireless outfits . The ship was initially assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla in the Mediterranean and made a brief deployment to the Persian Gulf and Red Sea in September – November 1933 . 
 Defender was refitted at Devonport Dockyard between 3 September and 23 October 1934 for service on the China Station with the 8th ( later the 21st ) Destroyer Flotilla and arrived at Hong Kong in January 1935 . The ship was attached to the Mediterranean Fleet in the Red Sea from November 1935 to June 1936 during the Abyssinian Crisis and then visited ports in East Africa for a month before returning to the China Station . Her boilers had to be retubed at Singapore between 5 November 1938 and 26 January 1939 and her superheaters were repaired at Hong Kong from 31 January to 14 March . 
 With the outbreak of war , Defender was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet and arrived in Alexandria on 19 September . She was assigned to contraband control duties until she was transferred to Gibraltar in January 1940 . The ship patrolled the Portuguese coast until she was transferred to Freetown in mid @-@ February to escort convoys off the West African coast . Defender was transferred back to Gibraltar in April , escorting the light cruiser Neptune en route , and arrived there on 23 April 1940 . The next month , she joined the 10th Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet and escorted Convoy US @-@ 2 carrying Australian and New Zealand troops to the Middle East through the Red Sea from 12 to 17 May . 
 On 27 June , together with the destroyers Dainty and Ilex , she sank the Italian submarine Console Generale Liuzzi south east of Crete . Defender participated in the Battle of Calabria on 9 July as an escort for the heavy ships of Force C and unsuccessfully engaged Italian destroyers without suffering any damage . Together with her sisters Dainty and Diamond , the Australian destroyer Stuart , and the light cruisers Capetown and Liverpool , she escorted Convoy AN.2 from Egypt to various ports in the Aegean Sea in late July . 
 On 6 November , Defender , together with the destroyers Decoy , Hasty , Havock , Hereward , Hero , Hyperion , Ilex , Janus , Jervis , Mohawk , and Nubian screened the capital ships of the Mediterranean Fleet , which provided distant cover for the passage of Convoy <unk> from Egypt to Malta and Convoy ME3 from Malta as part of Operation MB8 . During Operation Collar in late November , Defender , the anti @-@ aircraft cruiser Coventry and four other destroyers sailed from Alexandria to rendezvous with a convoy coming from Gibraltar . After reaching Malta on 26 November , the destroyers joined the battleship Ramillies , and the light cruisers Berwick and Newcastle of Force D and sailed to rendezvous with Force H , also coming from Gibraltar . The next day , after the British forces had combined , they were spotted by the Italians and the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento was fought . 
 On 7 January 1941 , Defender escorted Convoy <unk> with her sister Diamond and the anti @-@ aircraft cruiser Calcutta from Alexandria to Malta during Operation Excess . The ship was refitted in Malta from 4 February to 19 March and participated in the Battle of Cape Matapan on 27 – 29 March . During Operation Demon , the evacuation of Allied troops from Greece , she escorted Convoy <unk> on 29 – 30 April from Souda Bay , Crete , to Alexandria . An Italian destroyer and two torpedo boats attacked the convoy at night as it was transiting <unk> Strait east of Crete , but were rebuffed by the defenders without inflicting any damage . The following month Defender assisted in the evacuation of troops from Crete to Egypt after the Germans invaded on 22 May ( Operation Merkur ) . 
 On 10 June , Defender , and the other three ships of the 10th Destroyer Flotilla , arrived off the Lebanese coast to reinforce Royal Navy forces supporting Operation Exporter , the invasion of Vichy French @-@ controlled Syria and Lebanon , but the ship was not engaged during her time off Lebanon and Syria . Later that month , she began escorting convoys to and from Tobruk and on 29 June the Australian destroyer Waterhen was badly damaged by Italian Junkers Ju 87 " Stuka " dive bombers off Tobruk . Defender took Waterhen in tow , but the next day she capsized and sank . 
 = = = Loss = = = 
 On 11 July 1941 , Defender was returning from Tobruk in company with the Australian destroyer Vendetta . They were attacked by a single Junkers Ju 88 bomber of I. / Lehrgeschwader 1 piloted by Gerhard Stamp on a reconnaissance flight along the coast before dawn . The bomber scored a near @-@ miss on Defender which detonated under the ship , just forward of the engine room . The shock broke the ship 's back and flooded the engine room , although there were no casualties among her crew or passengers . Vendetta took Defender in tow , leaving a skeleton crew aboard the damaged ship , but she started to break up and Vendetta was forced to scuttle her with a torpedo and gunfire off Sidi Barrani about five hours later . 
 = Humphrey Marshall ( politician ) = 
 Humphrey Marshall ( 1760 – July 3 , 1841 ) was a politician from the U.S. states of Virginia and Kentucky . He served in the state legislatures of both states and represented Kentucky in the United States Senate from 1795 to 1801 . He was a member of the Marshall political family which included his cousins Chief Justice of the United States John Marshall , federal judge James Markham Marshall , and noted educator Louis Marshall . All the prominent members of this family were Federalists . Marshall was also the father of Congressman Thomas Alexander Marshall and the grandfather of Congressman and Confederate General Humphrey Marshall . 
 During the Revolutionary War , Marshall served with the Virginia State Regiment of Artillery . After the war , he moved to the Kentucky District of Virginia where he became extremely wealthy as a farmer and surveyor . He was a delegate to two of the ten Kentucky statehood conventions and was one of only three delegates from the Kentucky District to vote in favor of ratifying the U.S. Constitution at the 1788 Virginia Ratifying Convention . After Kentucky gained statehood in 1792 , Marshall was elected to the state legislature despite the fact that he was a Federalist and zealously antireligious – both of which made him unpopular with many Kentuckians . The Federalist cause received a slight boost when federal forces were successful in quashing the Whiskey Rebellion and ending the Indian threat at the Battle of Fallen Timbers . As a result , the General Assembly elected Marshall to the U.S. Senate in 1794 . As a senator , Marshall clung to Federalist principles , supporting the Alien and Sedition Acts and voting to ratify the Jay Treaty . For the latter action , his constituents stoned him and tried to throw him in the Kentucky River . In 1801 , he was defeated for reelection by John Breckinridge . He would once again be elected to the state legislature in 1807 , 1808 , and 1823 . During the 1809 legislative session , a disagreement between him and Henry Clay led to a duel between the two men in which both were slightly wounded . 
 As early as 1786 , Marshall had been implicating several prominent Kentucky politicians in a scheme to take Kentucky out of the Union and into alliance with Spain . After the expiration of his Senate term , he resumed these charges through the pages of the Western World newspaper . His allegations resulted in a legislative investigation of Kentucky Court of Appeals judge Benjamin Sebastian , who was found to be receiving a pension from Spain and resigned from the bench . Federal judge Harry Innes was also a target of Marshall 's allegations , and the two became embroiled in a legal battle that lasted almost a decade . Innes hired William Littell to write and publish a book giving Innes ' version of his dealings with Spain . Marshall countered by publishing his History of Kentucky in 1812 . Although blatantly partisan , it became the most widely read history of the state at the time . Marshall and Innes ended their legal battle with an agreement , signed in 1815 , that neither would publish anything negative about the other again . Innes upheld his part of the agreement , but in 1824 , years after Innes ' death , Marshall published an updated edition of his History of Kentucky which was just as vitriolic as the previous version had been . Marshall faded from public life during his later years . He died at the home of his son in Lexington , Kentucky on July 3 , 1841 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Humphrey Marshall was born in Orlean , Virginia in 1760 . He was the son of John and Mary ( Quisenberry ) Marshall and apparently named in honor of his maternal grandfather , Humphrey Quisenberry . Marshall 's father was a man of meager means despite being a member of a prominent Virginia family . Little is known of Marshall 's early years , but one tradition holds that he had no formal education during his childhood and that his cousin Mary ( later , his wife ) taught him to read . Eventually , John sent Humphrey to live with his brother , Thomas Marshall , and to be educated by the same Scottish tutors that educated Thomas ' children . Among Thomas ' children ( Humphrey 's cousins ) were John Marshall , future Chief Justice of the United States ; James Markham Marshall , future federal judge ; and Louis Marshall , a noted educator . In addition , one of Thomas ' daughters , Nancy Marshall , married Joseph Hamilton Daveiss , a future U.S. Attorney . After receiving his education , Marshall became a surveyor . 
 On January 4 , 1778 , Marshall enlisted as a cadet for a three @-@ year term in the Virginia State Regiment of Artillery for service in the Revolutionary War . The unit was under the command of his uncle Thomas , who held the rank of colonel . Marshall was assigned to the company of Captain Elisha Edwards . Most of his service records have been lost , but according to his pension application , he held the rank of third lieutenant later in 1778 , first lieutenant in 1779 , and on December 18 , 1789 , he was promoted to the rank of captain lieutenant . When the three @-@ year commitment of Marshall and his fellow soldiers expired , their unit was disbanded ; on February 6 , 1781 , Marshall was designated a supernumerary officer . He ended his military service in 1782 , and was rewarded with 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 600 ha ) of land on the western frontier . 
 In 1782 , Marshall moved to present @-@ day Kentucky and became deputy surveyor of Fayette County , again serving under his uncle Thomas . Settling in Lexington , he purchased a lot in 1783 . On September 18 , 1784 , he married his cousin , Anna Maria ( " Mary " ) Marshall , Thomas ' daughter , . The couple had two sons , Thomas Alexander Marshall , who became a US Congressman ; and John Jay Marshall , father of Congressman and Confederate general Humphrey Marshall . They also had a daughter who was killed in infancy by lightning . 
 Shortly after the creation of Woodford County , Marshall moved within its borders and was appointed county surveyor by Virginia Governor Beverley Randolph . In this capacity , he surveyed and claimed significant additional tracts of land , becoming one of Kentucky 's most wealthy citizens . According to tradition , Marshall was known to boast that he could ride from Frankfort to Versailles , a distance of some 20 miles ( 32 km ) , and never enter a tract of land that he didn 't own . He was also supposed to have boasted that he measured his silver coinage by the peck , not having time to count the individual coins . 
 Marshall did not believe in rule by the masses , frequently expressing his disdain for the common people . His sharp wit and lack of tact in writing did little to endear him to his neighbors . Like most of the members of his family , he subscribed to Federalist principles , although the majority of Kentuckians were affiliated with the Democratic @-@ Republicans . He was also ostracized by many of his neighbors for being zealously antireligious . He wrote pamphlets denouncing religion of all kinds and published them at his own expense . His later descendants were so embarrassed of his anti @-@ religious writings that they had his personal papers burned . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 A 1788 letter in the Kentucky Gazette indicated that Marshall had unsuccessfully sought election to the Virginia General Assembly , although the year of the contest is not given . The letter continued that the defeat convinced Marshall that he could not win elected office in Fayette County and that he subsequently lobbied for the creation of Bourbon County , hoping that he might gain an office in that new county . When the county was created in 1785 , he immediately applied to become the county lieutenant , but that office had apparently already been promised to someone else . Marshall applied for appointment as deputy lieutenant , and received the appointment . 
 Although it is not known when Marshall began studying law , nor who his tutor was , he was practicing as early as 1785 . In that year , he discovered a flaw in the original 1774 survey of the town of Frankfort . Due to the flaw , several choice acres of land in the northern part of Frankfort remained unclaimed , and Marshall quickly entered claims for them at the land office . Marshall also gained membership in the Kentucky Society for Promoting Useful Knowledge , a Danville @-@ based society dedicated to disseminating information to farmers , mechanics , and other common citizens . He apparently was not accepted for membership in the Danville Political Club , although some sources report that he was accepted as a member after initially being rejected . 
 Around 1786 , Marshall gained public attention by expressing his suspicions about James Wilkinson 's negotiations with Spain for free use of the Mississippi River and the possibility of Kentucky 's secession from the United States to affiliate with Spanish possessions . For the remainder of his life , he vigorously opposed Wilkinson and anyone else he suspected of being involved with the Spanish Conspiracy . 
 Marshall was a delegate to a 1787 convention in Danville to consider separating Kentucky from Virginia . There were , at that time , two primary positions with regard to the question of separation . The first favored an immediate separation with or without Virginia 's consent , while the other favored waiting for legal approval from Virginia and the U.S. Congress . Marshall was among the latter group , and his uncle Thomas was the primary spokesman for this position . Biographer Anderson Chenault Quisenberry notes , " As to Humphrey Marshall 's prominence in the Danville convention , or as to what notable part he acted there , nothing is said by the historians . " 
 In 1788 , Marshall announced his candidacy to be a delegate to the Virginia Ratifying Convention . The proposed constitution was very unpopular in all parts of Kentucky except Jefferson County , but Marshall openly favored its ratification . Hoping to wreck Marshall 's candidacy , a man named Jordan Harris charged that Marshall had , in a letter to John Crittenden , Sr. , acknowledged himself to be a liar . In the pages of the Kentucky Gazette , Marshall called on Harris to publish the letter . Harris was so insulted by Marshall 's demand that he threatened to cane him . At their next meeting , Harris fired two pistols at Marshall . Neither shot injured Marshall , who retaliated by beating Harris with a stick severely enough to force his retreat from the encounter . 
 Despite his favorable position toward the proposed federal constitution , Marshall was chosen as a delegate to the convention from Fayette County . On June 25 , 1788 , he joined Jefferson County delegates Robert Breckinridge and Rice Bullock in voting for ratification . Ten other Kentucky delegates opposed ratification and one abstained . The final convention vote was 89 – 79 in favor of ratification . It was reported that even the Jefferson County delegates were beginning to waver in their commitment to the proposed constitution , but that Marshall steeled their resolve and also influenced several delegates from other parts of Virginia to favor it . 
 In 1789 Marshall was elected again to a convention to consider separation from Virginia . After Kentucky 's separation from Virginia in 1792 , he was elected to represent Woodford County in the Kentucky House of Representatives . The most notable piece of legislation he authored was an act that simplified the classification and taxation of land . He was reelected to his position in 1794 . He opposed allocating men or supplies for George Rogers Clark 's proposed attack upon the Spanish at New Orleans . The attack was promoted by Edmond @-@ Charles Genêt , and Marshall accused sitting governor Isaac Shelby of complicity in the matter . 
 = = U.S. Senate = = 
 Partly as a result of Marshall 's attacks on prominent Democratic @-@ Republicans such as Governor Shelby , the Federalists gained influence in the state legislature . The Federalist cause was also bolstered by the quashing of the Whiskey Rebellion by federal forces in 1794 , and the federal victory over the Northwest Indians at the Battle of Fallen Timbers on August 20 , 1794 . Later that year , the Federalists in the General Assembly nominated Marshall for the United States Senate . On the first ballot , Marshall garnered 18 votes , compared with 16 for Democratic @-@ Republican John Breckinridge , 8 for John Fowler , and 7 for incumbent John Edwards . On the runoff ballot that followed , Marshall defeated Breckinridge by a vote of 28 – 22 . 
 Shortly after Marshall departed for Philadelphia , the temporary national capital , George Muter and Benjamin Sebastian , both justices of the Kentucky Court of Appeals , published a pamphlet stating that Marshall had perjured himself in a Court of Appeals case between himself and James Wilkinson . No known copies of the pamphlet are extant , and related surviving documents do not relate the exact nature of the charges . Marshall , being out of the state , was unable to reply immediately to the charges , and his enemies in the General Assembly drafted a memorial to the U.S. Senate requesting an investigation of the charges . On December 16 , 1795 , the memorial was approved by the General Assembly and transmitted to the Senate . The Senate appointed a committee to recommend action on the memorial , and the committee found that the charges against Marshall were not specific , that the authors had provided no evidence upon which to evaluate the charges , that no one was empowered to prosecute the charges in the Senate , and that further action by the Senate was inappropriate . On March 22 , 1796 , the Senate approved the committee 's report by a vote of 16 – 8 . Muter and Sebastian never filed formal charges against Marshall for perjury . 
 Although Marshall was not frequently active in debate on the Senate floor , he was a strong advocate of nearly every Federalist measure considered in that body . Many of these were unpopular in Kentucky , including the Alien and Sedition Acts . Marshall 's vote in favor of the Jay Treaty was particularly unpopular with his constituents , and when he returned home after the vote , a mob of angry citizens in Frankfort stoned him . Next , the mob tried to throw Marshall into the Kentucky River . Marshall appealed to the Baptists in the crowd , declaring , " Now allow me to say that according to Baptist rules , it is irregular to administer baptism before the receiver gives his experience . If you are determined to proceed , let the exercise be performed in decent order . Let me give my experience first . " The thought of hearing a religious testimony from Marshall , a noted atheist , so humored the mob that it disbanded in a fit of laughter , and Marshall escaped . In the subsequent senatorial election , however , Breckinridge defeated Marshall for his seat . 
 = = Later political career = = 
 After the expiration of his Senate term in 1801 , Marshall returned to his farm and his law practice , seldom acting in the realm of public affairs . In 1806 , however , he resumed his attacks on suspected participants in the Spanish Conspiracy . His articles in the newly founded Frankfort Western World newspaper – written under the pseudonym " Observer " – prompted the Kentucky House of Representatives to form a select committee to investigate his charges . The committee found that Benjamin Sebastian had received a pension of $ 2 @,@ 000 a year from Spain in return for his involvement in the Conspiracy . Federal judge Harry Innes , a frequent object of Marshall 's suspicions , testified against Sebastian before the committee . Sebastian resigned his position on the Court , and the House declined to pursue further action against him . Marshall also unsuccessfully lobbied through his brother @-@ in @-@ law , U.S. Attorney Joseph Hamilton Daveiss , for a grand jury to indict Aaron Burr for attempting to enlist Kentuckians to participate in the Burr conspiracy . Marshall 's intensified attacks on Judge Harry Innes in the pages of the Western World became so severe that they prompted Innes to sue both Marshall and Western World co @-@ founder Joseph M. Street for libel . Both cases dragged on for several years in the courts . 
 Buoyed by his involvement in the exposure of Benjamin Sebastian , Marshall declared his candidacy for a seat in the Kentucky House in 1807 . Friends of Innes and others implicated by Marshall in the Spanish Conspiracy recruited Nathaniel Richardson , a lawyer turned farmer , to oppose Marshall . Approximately 1 @,@ 100 votes were cast , and Marshall was elected by a majority of 11 votes . Marshall 's biographer records that " the records of Humphrey Marshall 's services in the Legislature at this time are scanty , the journals of the session being not in existence , as it is believed ; or , at any rate , extremely rare . " He is believed to have introduced a measure that reduced the limitation on <unk> from twenty years to seven . 
 = = = Duel with Henry Clay = = = 
 Marshall sought reelection in 1808 and defeated his opponent , John M. Scott , by a majority of 11 votes , identical to his margin the previous year . Expectations of a confrontation between Marshall and fellow representative Henry Clay were high during the session , owing to tensions between the two dating back to Clay 's defense of Aaron Burr during the Burr conspiracy . George D. Prentice , in his biography of Clay , records that some of Clay 's allies in the House refused to vote for him for Speaker of the House so that Clay would remain on the chamber floor , from whence he was better able to counter Marshall . Clay 's chair in the chamber was separated from Marshall 's only by that of General Christopher Riffe , the representative from Lincoln County , who was described as " a burly German of almost gigantic size and herculean strength " . 
 A few minor quarrels passed between Marshall and Clay early in the session , but the relative peace dissolved in December 1808 when Clay introduced a resolution calling for all members of the General Assembly to wear " homespun " garments as a means of encouraging local manufacturing and reducing British imports . Although Clay typically wore finer garments than Marshall , for the duration of the debate on his motion , Clay wore simple homemade clothes . Marshall regarded the measure as demagoguery and employed a tailor to make him a suit of British broadcloth to wear on the House floor . The two men exchanged insults on the House floor and would have commenced a physical altercation if not for Riffe 's intervention . Instead , on January 4 , 1809 , Clay challenged Marshall to a duel , which he quickly accepted . 
 The duel took place in Indiana on January 19 , 1809 , just across the Ohio River from Shippingport , Kentucky . Joseph Hamilton Daveiss provided the pistols . On the first shot , Marshall missed and Clay lightly grazed Marshall 's stomach . Marshall missed again on the second shot , and Clay 's pistol misfired . Marshall 's third shot lightly wounded Clay in the thigh , while Clay missed Marshall entirely . Clay insisted that the two each take another shot , but Marshall declined on grounds that Clay 's injury put him on unequal footing with his adversary , and the matter was ended . 
 = = = Expulsion from and reelection to the House = = = 
 Tensions between Marshall and Innes continued during Marshall 's tenure in the legislature . When Innes , acting on a recommendation from an advisory jury , dismissed an unrelated fraud case brought by Marshall in Innes ' district court , Marshall retaliated by convincing Congressman John Rowan to file an impeachment petition against Innes in the House of Representatives . Innes countered by having his son @-@ in @-@ law , Thomas Bodley , pursue a censure of Marshall in the state House . Rowan 's petition against Innes failed , but Bodley 's against Marshall succeeded , and Marshall was expelled from the House in 1808 , only to be re @-@ elected the following year . 
 Marshall sought reelection in 1810 , but was defeated by George Adams by a margin of 76 votes . From 1812 to 1813 , he served on the Board of Trustees for the city of Frankfort . He made another unsuccessful run for the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1813 , losing to John Arnold . 
 After a long absence from politics , Marshall was called to one final act of public service . Upon the death of Martin D. Hardin who had been elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1823 but died before he could take office , Marshall pursued an abbreviated campaign for the vacant seat and defeated <unk> Dudley by a margin of 3 votes . The primary issue of the day was the Old Court – New Court controversy , an attempt by the legislature to abolish the extant Court of Appeals and replace it with a new court in retaliation for overturning a replevin law passed in a previous legislative session . Marshall enjoyed a higher level of support in this election by virtue of his support for the Old Court , which was the prevailing sentiment in his district . His actions in the session , however , appear to have been unremarkable , and he did not seek reelection at the end of his term . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After his political career , Marshall became more interested in writing . He frequently contributed content to the state 's newspapers and occasionally wrote poetry . He founded the American Republic , the only Federalist newspaper in the state , and published its first issue on June 26 , 1810 . Newspapers sympathetic to the Democratic @-@ Republicans soon derided the American Republic as " The Snake " . Undaunted , Marshall added a rattlesnake and the inscription " Tread Not On Me . For My Country . " to the paper 's masthead . Marshall soon changed the name of the paper to the Harbinger , and eventually sold it to Patrick Darby in 1825 . Darby immediately changed the name of the newspaper again , dubbing it the Constitutional Advocate . 
 = = = Resolution of legal disputes = = = 
 Harry Innes ' libel suit against Joseph Street was not fully adjudicated in the Jessamine County Circuit Court until 1811 . The jury found in Innes ' favor and awarded $ 750 in damages , although Innes ' counsel , Henry Clay and Robert Wickliffe , insisted that Innes only desired the vindication of a guilty verdict against Street and would not collect the damages . Soon after , Street shuttered the Western World and moved to Illinois . 
 As the libel suit against Marshall dragged on in Mercer County Circuit Court , Innes and his allies hired author William Littell to publish Innes ' version of his interactions with Spain . Marshall countered by publishing his History of Kentucky in 1812 . Although blatantly partisan , it became the most popular history of Kentucky at the time . When Street returned to Kentucky to give a deposition in the case in 1814 , Innes swore out a writ against him to collect the damages awarded in his case against Street . Unable to pay , Street was imprisoned . 
 Innes ' case against Marshall ended in a hung jury in 1814 . Rather than retry the case , Marshall and Innes signed an agreement to end the legal battle in 1815 . The agreement stipulated that neither man would write or publish anything that was disrespectful of the other . Innes upheld his part of the agreement , but in 1824 , eight years after Innes ' death , Marshall published an updated two @-@ volume version of his History of Kentucky that was even more critical of Innes and others he suspected of participating in the Spanish Conspiracy . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Marshall retired from public life altogether after selling the Harbinger in 1825 . His wife had died the previous year , and soon after selling his newspaper , he became paralyzed by a palsy on one side . Thus disabled , he soon moved to Lexington to live with his son , Thomas , then a professor at Transylvania University . He died at his son 's home on July 3 , 1841 . A slaveholder for his entire life , Marshall 's will dictated that all of his slaves be emancipated upon his death . He was buried at Glen Willis , his estate in <unk> , Kentucky . No marker was erected above his grave . In 1888 , the General Assembly allocated $ 300 to rebury Marshall 's remains in Frankfort Cemetery and place a marker above the grave , but his family members asked that his remains be undisturbed . 
 = Kenshiro Abbe = 
 Kenshiro Abbe ( <unk> <unk> , Abe <unk> , 15 December 1915 – 1 December 1985 ) was a prominent Japanese master of judo , aikido , and kendo . He introduced aikido to the United Kingdom in 1955 , and founded the <unk> system . Abbe was a graduate of the Budo Senmon Gakko , having studied judo and kendo there . Following an illustrious early career in the martial arts , he served in the Imperial Japanese Army before and during World War II . He then trained in aikido under its founder , Morihei Ueshiba , for a decade . Abbe held dan ranks in several martial arts , most notably 8th dan in judo , 6th dan in aikido , and 6th dan in kendo . After introducing aikido to the UK , he established several Japanese martial arts councils there during the late 1950s . He returned to Japan in 1964 and remained there for most of the remainder of his life . There are contradictory accounts of Abbe 's final years , but it appears that he was in poor spirits and poor health towards the end . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Abbe was born on 15 December 1915 in a village in Tokushima Prefecture , on the island of Shikoku , Japan . He was the son of <unk> Abbe , who was the local school 's headmaster and a kendo instructor , and his wife , Kote Abbe . The couple had four sons and five daughters , and Abbe was the youngest child in the family . On 4 September 1919 , when Abbe was not yet four years old , his father drowned in a flash flood while training in the mountains . A young schoolteacher , <unk> Hino , subsequently became a father figure for the young boy and introduced him to the martial arts , including sumo . Abbe went on to become a local school champion in sumo . 
 In 1929 , Abbe began learning judo from <unk> Nakamoto , a former police officer . That same year , he was promoted to the rank of 1st dan in the art and , unusually , he reached 2nd dan the next year , and 3rd dan the year after that . Thus , at the age of 16 , he became the youngest judo student ever promoted to 3rd dan — an honour he received directly from Shohei Hamano , an instructor of the Dai Nippon Butoku Kai ( abbreviated to ' Butoku Kai ' or ' <unk> ' ) , which was the official governing body for Japanese martial arts . Abbe also became champion of the Tokushima High School Judo League that year . During his fifth year at the school , Abbe entered a regional tournament involving 30 towns , serving as captain for the team from the town of Kawashima . His speed and agility helped him to many victories , and he received the nickname ' Pegasus ' accordingly . 
 At his 1st dan judo examination , Abbe had caught the attention of Shotaro Tobata from the Butoku Kai , who had been refereeing at the event . Tobata had suggested to Nakamoto and Abbe that the young man should apply for entry to the renowned Budo Senmon Gakko ( abbreviated to ' Busen , ' and sometimes referred to as ' Busen College ' ) , a specialist college for martial artists . With the additional help of a teacher named Nakano , Abbe now prepared for the entrance examination in Kyoto . Out of all the candidates , of which there were around 300 that year , 20 would be accepted into the judo programme and 20 into the kendo programme . Abbe performed well and was accepted into both programmes . 
 = = Budo Senmon Gakko training = = 
 In 1934 , Abbe moved to Kyoto with his mother and his sister <unk> so that he could attend Busen , training in both the judo and kendo programmes . Abbe learned kendo under the direction of Busen 's head sword instructor , <unk> Ogawa , a master who held the rank of 10th dan . He recalled that his instructor , at the age of 75 years , was so skilled that he could not be touched by any of the students or younger instructors . Every Saturday afternoon at Busen , following tradition , judo tournaments were held . Abbe fought five opponents in succession with each contest lasting five minutes , and he won all or almost all of these matches . In his first year at Busen , he was promoted to 4th dan in judo . In the autumn of his second year there , he was promoted to 5th dan , by which time he was reported to have been fighting 20 opponents in succession . 
 In May 1935 , Abbe competed in the 5th dan division championship and defeated Masahiko Kimura . This match was one of only four professional career losses for Kimura , who was already well known as one of the best judo competitors in Japan , and would later gain further fame for defeating Hélio Gracie of Brazilian Jiu @-@ Jitsu . According to biographers Keith Morgan and Henry Ellis , Kimura was heard to remark after the match that fighting Abbe was " like fighting a shadow . " Abbe was listed at 5 ' 5 " ( 168 cm ) in height and 156 lb . ( 71 kg ) in weight at the time ; Kimura was only an inch taller , but much heavier at 187 lb . ( 85 kg ) . Two years later , during which time Kimura trained hard , he sought Abbe out at the Kodokan and soundly defeated him in a 20 @-@ minute practice session . 
 While at Busen , Abbe also enrolled in Hajime Tanabe 's philosophy class at Kyoto University ( then known as Kyoto Teikoku Daigaku , or ' Kyoto Imperial University ' ) . During this period , his sister <unk> began studying <unk> @-@ ryū <unk> under a female instructor named <unk> Chiyo ( in Japan , arts focusing on the handling of <unk> have been practiced almost exclusively by women since the Edo period ) , and she would continue practicing that art for the rest of her life . 
 Following graduation from Busen , Abbe became an instructor in judo at the college , as well as taking instructor positions with the Osaka police force and a high school in Kyoto . The Butoku Kai promoted him to 6th dan in judo in 1937 . 
 = = Military service = = 
 In June 1937 , Abbe enlisted in the Imperial Japanese Army , and was subsequently posted to a garrison in Manchuria . He served there for four years , during which time he was unable to continue training in judo but was able to practise kendo . While abroad , he began formulating his <unk> philosophy . His tour of duty ended in 1941 , and he returned to Kyoto , where he met and married his wife Keiko . Abbe did not remain a civilian for long , however , since Japan entered World War II near the end of that year . 
 Abbe was assigned to a training unit in Tokushima Prefecture , where he studied and mastered jūkendō ( bayonet ) . It was around this time that he first met Morihei Ueshiba , founder of aikido , who had also trained in jūkendō . Ueshiba was around 60 years old at this time , around twice Abbe 's age . Rogers , Ellis , and Eastman ( 2004 ) give the following account of their first meeting : 
 It was during a train journey in Japan that Abbe first met Ueshiba . Abbe didn 't know who he was and he reacted to Ueshiba looking at him , saying : " What are you staring at , old man ? " Ueshiba replied : " I know who you are , " to which Abbe modestly retorted : " Everyone knows me , I am Kenshiro Abbe , Champion of All Japan . " Ueshiba then introduced himself as the Founder of Aikido , and was told by Abbe that he didn 't look strong enough to be a martial arts master . Ueshiba then offered Abbe his little finger , and said : " But young man , you look very strong indeed . Please break my finger . " Abbe at first declined , but eventually accepted the challenge , presumably to shut the old man up . Abbe claimed that , as he took hold of the old man 's finger and tried to break it , he found himself on the floor of the carriage and totally immobilised . Whilst on the floor Abbe asked Ueshiba for permission to study under him . 
 Morgan and Ellis ( 2006 ) give a slightly different account : 
 While travelling on a train Abbe noticed an older man staring at him who then asked if he was a 5th Dan Judo . Abbe replied “ Why yes , how did you know that ? ” “ Because you have the build of a 5th Dan . So who are you ? “ Kenshiro replied : “ Everyone knows who I am , I am Kenshiro Abbe , Judo champion of all Japan ! “ Yes , I can see that , “ the old man replied . The old man continued to talk to Kenshiro much to his annoyance as he wanted to get some sleep . Eventually , the old man put a finger in Kenshiro ’ s face , “ You are so powerful , break my finger ! ” Kenshiro was only too happy to oblige . He took the finger , expecting to snap it like a twig , and wham ! He found himself on the carriage floor under the full control of the old man . The old man allowed Kenshiro to get back into his seat . “ Who are you ? ” Kenshiro Abbe asked . “ I am Morihei Ueshiba , the founder of Aikido . ” Kenshiro Abbe was astounded at the technique of the old man and requested that he become his student . 
 Abbe studied aikido under Ueshiba for 10 years , eventually reaching the rank of 6th dan in that art . During this period , the Abbes had two daughters : Junko and Noriko . 
 In 1945 , the Butoku Kai promoted Abbe to 7th dan in judo and 6th dan in kendo . Following the end of World War II , however , the Butoku Kai and Busen were both closed down . Abbe took up the position of a judo teacher for the Kyoto Prefectural Police Department . He became Chief Instructor of judo for the Kyoto police , and also taught at <unk> University in that city . After the Abbes had a third daughter , Yayoi , Abbe resigned from the Kyoto police . During this period , he felt that judo in Japan was declining , and ended his association with the Kodokan in the 1950s . 
 = = Europe = = 
 In 1955 , Abbe travelled to the United Kingdom . He went at the invitation of the London Judo Society ( LJS ) , and was the first master to teach aikido in the UK . That year , he demonstrated aikido at the LJS and at the Royal Albert Hall in London . Abbe came to experience two problems at the LJS : first , he felt that the students there were more concerned with competition than his theories , and second , he felt that the students did not treat him with the appropriate respect for someone of his rank and experience in the martial arts . According to the International Budo Council ( IBC ) , he founded the IBC in 1955 . 
 Abbe proceeded to teach aikido at his own dojo ( training hall ) , affectionately known as ' The Hut , ' which was located behind a pub in Hillingdon , London . Training was rigorous and , due to Abbe 's poor command of English , he would often make corrections by using a shinai ( practice sword ) to hit the body part that was out of place ; Ellis recalled that Abbe would say , " My English is poor but my shinai speaks fluently . " Abbe 's approach to self @-@ defence matched his no @-@ nonsense approach to training , and was demonstrated when three youths tried to rob him one evening . Geoff Thomson ( 1998 ) wrote : 
 He was walking down a quiet suburban street on his way home after his usual evening teaching session . He noticed three youths hovering several yards away on the opposite side of the street . When they approached him he was ready . " Give us your money , or you 'll get hurt " said the leader of the three . Abbe looked at each one in turn , then casually took his wallet out of his jacket pocket , throwing it on the floor between himself and the antagonists . He pointed to the wallet and said , " I am prepared to die for that wallet , what about you ? " The three would @-@ be attackers looked at the wallet on the floor , then at Abbe and then at each other and then moved away . Abbe picked up his wallet and calmly walked home . 
 Speaking about the incident , Ellis said , " Not a lot of love and harmony from Abbe sensei , simply an attitude and language these thugs understood . " 
 In 1958 , Abbe founded the British Judo Council ( BJC ) , and he went on to establish the British Aikido Council , British Karate Council , British Kendo Council , and British <unk> Council . At this stage , he was travelling extensively through the UK and Europe , and also invited Japanese martial art masters to teach in the UK ; these included <unk> Harada ( Shotokan karate ) and Tadashi Abe ( aikido ) . During this period , Abbe 's family remained in Japan . Robinson ( 2007 ) wrote , " [ he ] did invite his family to live with him in London however they refused , apparently not at all attracted by the life style that Kenshiro offered them in England . " 
 Abbe was involved in a car accident in 1960 which left him with severe neck injuries that had lasting effects on his health . While the precise date is unclear , Abbe had been promoted to 8th dan by late 1960 . Independent sources from the late 1960s include this rank with his name . In addition to his ranks in judo , aikido , and kendo , he held the rank of 5th dan in karate and dan ranks in <unk> and jūkendō . 
 In 1964 , Abbe returned to Japan for the Summer Olympics in Tokyo . While in his homeland , he met with Ueshiba , updated him on the progress of aikido in the UK , and asked him to send another instructor to the UK to continue teaching the art . In 1966 , Ueshiba sent Kazuo ( T. K. ) Chiba to the UK to continue the work Abbe had begun . Henry O <unk> ( 2009 ) has stated that during Abbe 's absence from the UK , a dismissed BJC senior executive and several senior instructors misappropriated his financial and organisational resources and set up their own BJC group . In 1969 , Abbe returned to the UK , but was distraught by the situation with this group that he had not authorised . When he asked former colleagues to help him rebuild the organisation , they refused ; he subsequently left the UK , never to return . 
 = = Later life = = 
 There are contradictory accounts of Abbe 's last years in Japan . Morgan and Ellis ( 2006 ) state that he lived with his family for the remainder of his life , while Cavalcanti ( 2004 ) and Bagot ( 2007 ) claim that there were problems and that he ended up living apart from his family . Sources appear to agree , however , that Abbe was in poor spirits and poor health towards the end of his life . He suffered a stroke on 17 November 1985 , and was hospitalised . 
 Abbe died on 1 December 1985 in Japan . According to at least two sources , he had chosen to donate his body for medical education at Saitama University , so it was not immediately laid to rest . Abbe 's funeral was held on 10 June 1986 at <unk> Temple , located south of Mount <unk> in Tokushima , and he was buried or commemorated at the family grave there . Robinson ( 2007 ) wrote , " Abbe was the master who introduced Kendo , Aikido , Karate , Kyodo , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> to Europe yet he died almost totally alone and forgotten by most . " 
 = Apt Pupil ( film ) = 
 Apt Pupil is a 1998 American thriller film directed by Bryan Singer and starring Ian McKellen and Brad Renfro . It is based on the 1982 novella of the same name by Stephen King . In the 1980s in southern California , high school student Todd Bowden ( Renfro ) discovers fugitive Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander ( McKellen ) living in his neighborhood under the pseudonym Arthur Denker . Bowden , obsessed with Nazism and acts of the Holocaust , persuades Dussander to share his stories , and their relationship stirs malice in each of them . 
 The novella was first published in King 's 1982 collection Different Seasons . Producer Richard Kobritz sought to adapt the novella into a film during the 1980s , but two actors he invited to play Dussander died . When filming began in 1987 , a loss of financing led to the production being shut down . Forty minutes of usable footage existed , but production was never revived . In 1995 , when rights to the novella returned to King , Bryan Singer petitioned the author for an opportunity to film the novella . With King 's support , Singer filmed Apt Pupil with McKellen and Renfro in Altadena , California , in 1997 . The director shortened the novella 's storyline , reduced its violence , and changed the ending . Singer called Apt Pupil " a study in cruelty " with Nazism only serving as a vehicle for the capacity of evil . 
 During the $ 14 million production , a lawsuit was filed by several extras who alleged that they were told to strip naked during a shower scene , but the lawsuit was determined to be without merit . The film was released in the United States and Canada in October 1998 to mixed reviews and made under $ 9 million . The main actors won several minor awards for their performances . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Southern California in 1984 , 16 @-@ year @-@ old high school student Todd Bowden ( Renfro ) discovers that his elderly neighbor , Arthur Denker ( McKellen ) , is in reality Kurt Dussander — a former Sturmbannführer in the SS who is now a fugitive war criminal hiding from justice . Todd blackmails Dussander by threatening to turn him in to the police . However , the teenager is fascinated with Nazi atrocities perpetrated during World War II , and forces Dussander to share disturbing stories of what it was like working at Nazi extermination camps , and how it felt to participate in genocide . 
 To complicate things even further , Todd even purchases an SS uniform from a costume shop , and forces Dussander to wear it . When he spends more time with the old man , his grades suffer , he loses interest in his girlfriend , and he conceals his bad grades from his parents . In turn , the Nazi blackmails the young boy into studying to restore his grades , threatening to expose the boy 's subterfuge and his dalliance with Nazism to his parents . Dussander even poses as Todd 's grandfather and goes to an appointment with Todd 's school counselor Edward French ( David Schwimmer ) . Talking about the war crimes affects both the old man and the young boy , and an intoxicated Dussander attempts to kill a cat in his gas oven but fails when it attacks him and escapes . Dussander also takes great pride in Todd 's unbelievable turnaround , going from near dropout to straight A 's in a matter of weeks . 
 One night , Dussander tries to kill a hobo who earlier had seen him in the uniform . When Dussander has a heart attack , he calls Todd , who finishes the job , cleans up , and calls an ambulance for Dussander . At the hospital , Dussander is recognized by a death camp survivor sharing his room and he is arrested , prior to being extradited to Israel . Todd graduates as his school 's valedictorian and gives a speech about Icarus , saying , " All great achievements arose from dissatisfaction . It is the desire to do better , to dig deeper , that propels civilization to greatness . " The scene is juxtaposed in a montage with Dussander 's home being searched and the hobo 's corpse being found in the basement . 
 Todd is briefly questioned about his relationship with Dussander , but he manages to convince the police that he knew nothing of the old man 's true identity . At the hospital , Dussander hears a group of Neo @-@ Nazis demonstrating outside the hospital ; realizing his identity has been hopelessly compromised , he commits suicide by giving himself an air embolism . When French learns that the man who met Todd at school was not Todd 's grandfather but a war criminal , he confronts Todd , who then blackmails him into silence by threatening to accuse him of making inappropriate sexual advances towards him , and to thereby expose him publicly as a homosexual and pederast . 
 = = Cast = = 
 McKellen stars as Kurt Dussander , a Nazi war criminal who hides in America under the pseudonym Arthur Denker . Screenwriter Brandon Boyce described Dussander as being " a composite of these ghosts of World War II " but not based on any real @-@ life individual . McKellen was attracted to the role because he was impressed with Singer 's The Usual Suspects and saw the role of Dussander as " a nice , meaty part and difficult " . Singer , who enjoyed McKellen in John Schlesinger 's 1995 film Cold Comfort Farm , invited the actor to take the role . The character 's language was written originally for " a very stoic German " , but Singer felt that McKellen 's " complex " personality could contribute to the character . The director said of choosing McKellen , " I felt if I could combine his complexity , his <unk> , to the stoic German character it would create a character that , although evil , would garner more sympathy and would be more enjoyable for the audience to watch . " 
 Renfro stars alongside McKellen as Todd Bowden , a 16 @-@ year @-@ old who discovers Denker 's criminal past . Singer auditioned a couple hundred young men and chose 14 @-@ year @-@ old Renfro , saying of him , " Brad was the brightest , the most intense and the most real . Not only could he have the intensity when we wanted , there was a hollowness that he could convey , and by the end of the picture he had to become this empty vessel . " Portraying a manipulative character temporarily influenced Renfro , who said that people around him were worried about his state of mind . Renfro said of his performance , " It 's a trip I have to take . People just kind of have to leave me alone when I 'm doing it . It 's my job . " Singer described his impression of the character : 
 I don 't believe for one minute that [ Todd Bowden ] was pure as the driven snow . The capacity to blackmail an old man — obviously there 's a search for something going on that 's a good hard step beyond innocence . I think he had it within him , some emptiness that needed fulfillment and taken to a new place , a new direction . His school , his parents , his environment weren 't doing it for him . This particular individual came along before some other , but it perhaps could have been drugs , it could have been rape . Todd was probably not a very good guy . But that kind of bad guy can exist within a lot more people than we realize . 
 Schwimmer plays Edward French , Todd Bowden 's high school guidance counselor . Before Schwimmer , Kevin Pollak was attached to the role . While Schwimmer was known for his comedic role on the television show Friends , Singer was impressed by the actor 's performance in a Los Angeles stage production and decided to cast him as the counselor . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 = = = Obsession with Nazism and the Holocaust = = = 
 The obsession with Nazism and the Holocaust that unfolds in Apt Pupil is the result of the paternal bond between Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander and high school student Todd Bowden . Such bonds are common themes in Stephen King 's works : " King 's portrayal of evil most often appears to require an active , illicit bond between a male ( often in the role of a father or father surrogate ) and a younger , formerly innocent individual ( often in the role of a biological or surrogate progeny ) who is initiated into sin " . In the film , the year 1984 highlights , in addition to Orwellian overtones , the time in American history in which the Holocaust is treated as a week @-@ long course with little time " to be tempered with self @-@ questioning as to the motivations behind it " . Bowden 's obsession with the Holocaust is a key plot device " wherein the past has this unbreakable hold on the present " . The film 's opening sequence shows how Bowden treats this history as a simulacrum in which the history becomes his own , as evidenced by his head 's brief overlapping with the Nazis he is studying . Though history becomes alive for Bowden , he perceives it through the perpetrators ( namely Dussander ) and not through the victims , characterizing Bowden as " apt " in the sense of " a natural tendency to ... undesirable behavior " . 
 Language serves as " a vehicle for corruption " , as Dussander tells Bowden horrific stories of his service at the fictional Death Camp of <unk> . Bowden , in listening to the stories , becomes " a vampiric extension of the evil " that Dussander exhibits . The sharing of stories lead both Dussander and Bowden to have nightmares , and for Bowden , the nightmares are " a past that is becoming ever more present " . One of the key motifs of the film is that " a door was opened that could not be shut " , referring to Dussander 's confession about following orders and being unable to hold back . The motif is also conveyed in the scene in which Bowden forces Dussander to put on a Schutzstaffel uniform and to march to Bowden 's commands . Dussander continues marching despite Bowden 's <unk> to stop , emulating the premise of the poem The Sorcerer 's Apprentice in which the untrained apprentice uses magic to enchant brooms and lacks the skill to stop them . The scene is " the figurative and literal turning point in the film " . 
 = = = Sadomasochism , homoeroticism , and homophobia = = = 
 Sadomasochism , homoeroticism , and homophobia are highlighted in Bryan Singer 's retelling of Stephen King 's novella . The face of evil is represented in the film as Nazism , oft labeled as " quintessentially innate [ and ] supernaturally crafty " , but also " in a more subterranean way , dangerously blurring ... the boundaries between homoeroticism and homosexuality " . The Nazi monstrosity in Apt Pupil is structured through sexual " abnormality " , where a series of binary dichotomies are introduced : " normal versus monstrous , heterosexual versus homosexual , and healthy versus sick " . An additional dichotomy , victimizer ( masculinized ) versus victim ( feminized ) , reflects the film 's " hidden tensions " in which Bowden and Dussander 's roles of powers are reversible . While the " set of perversions " that unfold in the novella are misogynistic , the film unfolds the set as " ambivalently homoerotic and homophobic " . The film removes the novella 's misogyny and leaves intact the underlying homoeroticism of the central characters . The film also expounds the connection between homophobia and how male Holocaust victims are portrayed . 
 The central characters Todd Bowden and Kurt Dussander are onscreen most of the time , and they are frequently framed in close proximity , " [ intensifying ] a homoerotic intimacy [ which is ] punctuated by dread of contact with the monstrous " . <unk> in Apt Pupil is further demonstrated by the focus on Todd 's body . In the opening scene in which Bowden is in his bedroom during a stormy night , " the ever @-@ encroaching camera and the lighting fetishize Todd 's youthful body " , similar to the fetishism of the female body in films like Psycho ( 1960 ) . This depiction creates a dualism in which " he is now simultaneously dangerous and endangered " in his homophobic and homoerotic ties to Nazism . 
 When Bowden gives Dussander an SS uniform to wear and in which to march under Bowden 's orders , the student 's demands are more heightened in the film as " more dominant and voyeuristic " . Bowden tells Dussander , " I tried to do this the nice way , but you don 't want it . So fine , we 'll do this the hard way . You will put this on , because I want to see you in it . Now move ! " The editing style of the Nazi march scene juxtaposes Dussander marching in the uniform and Bowden reacting to the march . Shots of Bowden 's reaction are from a low angle , which reflects " the sexual difference between the characters " ; Bowden is masculinized as " the bearer of the [ sexual ] gaze " , and Dussander is feminized as " the object of the gaze " . The cutting between Bowden and Dussander " corroborates a homoerotic arrangement of images " which visualizes the latent homoeroticism of the scene from the novella . When Dussander speeds up his march and Bowden tells him to stop , the sped @-@ up shot reverse shot " radically [ ruptures ] the structure of power " , where Bowden loses " control of his sadistic power over Dussander " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Previous production attempt = = = 
 When Stephen King 's novella Apt Pupil was published as part of his collection Different Seasons in 1982 , producer Richard Kobritz optioned feature film rights to the novella . Kobritz met with actor James Mason to play the novella 's war criminal Kurt Dussander , but Mason died in July 1984 before production as a result of a heart attack . The producer also approached Richard Burton for the role , but Burton also died in August that same year . By 1987 production on the film began with Nicol Williamson cast as Kurt Dussander , and 17 @-@ year @-@ old Rick Schroder was cast as Todd Bowden . In that year , Alan Bridges began direction of the film with a script co @-@ written by Ken Wheat and his brother Jim Wheat . After ten weeks of filming , the production suffered from a lack of funds from its production company Granat Releasing , and the film had to be placed on hold . <unk> sought to revive production , but when the opportunity came a year later , Schroder had aged too considerably for the film to work . Forty minutes of usable footage was abandoned . 
 = = = Direction under Bryan Singer = = = 
 Bryan Singer first read Apt Pupil when he was 19 years old , and when he became a director , he wanted to adapt the novella into a film . In 1995 , Singer asked his friend and screenwriter Brandon Boyce to write a spec script adapting the novella . Boyce recalled the writing process , " I thought it was a great stageplay , actually ... two people , pretty much in a house talking . My script was completely on spec , so , if it didn 't work out , at least I 'd have a writing sample . " When the original option to the novella expired in 1995 , Stephen King sued to get the rights back . Singer and Boyce then provided to King a first draft of their script and a copy of Singer 's film The Usual Suspects ( 1995 ) , which had yet to be publicly released . Impressed with Singer , King optioned the rights to the director for $ 1 , arranging to be compensated when the film was released . Singer said of King 's ultimate response to the film , despite some changes made to the source material , " Stephen loved it . He seemed to think I captured the mood of the piece . " The director appreciated being able to make a Stephen King horror film but with less supernatural terror and more character @-@ driven terror . Singer spoke of his goal : " There have been a lot of fun horror movies like Nightmare on Elm Street and Scream , and I Know What You Did Last Summer . But I miss movies like The Shining , The Exorcist , and The Innocents by Jack Clayton , so this is a movie sort of in the spirit of the real horror movie . " 
 Singer described the Apt Pupil 's premise as a " study in cruelty " . He prepared for the film by reading books like the 1996 history book Hitler 's Willing Executioners , which confirmed his beliefs that Nazi war criminals felt " guiltless and matter @-@ of @-@ fact about what they did " . He referred to how young Todd Bowden 's interactions with Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander start to affect him : " I liked the idea of the infectious nature of evil ... The notion that anybody has the capacity within them to be cruel if motivated properly is , I think , a scary concept . " The director also perceived the film as not about the Holocaust , believing that the Nazi war criminal could have been replaced by one of Pol Pot 's executioners or a mass murderer from Russia . " It wasn 't about fascism or National Socialism . It was about cruelty and the ability to do awful deeds , to live with them and be empowered by them , " Singer said . To this end , the director sought to avoid overt use of swastikas and other Nazi symbols . He was also attracted to the film as " [ an ] idea that the collective awfulness of this terrible thing that happened decades ago in Europe had somehow crept up across the ocean and through time , like a golem , into this beautiful Southern California suburban neighborhood " . 
 Singer turned down directing opportunities with films like The Truman Show and The Devil 's Own after the success of The Usual Suspects . He instead pursued Apt Pupil : " It was a very dark subject matter , and it was something that came from passion . " He acknowledged in retrospect that Apt Pupil " wasn 't really supposed to be a big success " . Singer was financially supported by producer Scott Rudin and the production company Spelling Films . Ian McKellen was cast as Dussander , and Brad Renfro was cast as Bowden . With $ 1 million paid toward pre @-@ production , filming was scheduled to begin in June 1996 . Due to financial disagreements between Singer and Rudin , the start date was pushed back and subsequently canceled . Singer and his production team stayed together while producer Don Murphy and his partner Jane Hamsher sought refinancing . Mike Medavoy , a former chairman of TriStar Pictures , rescued the production with the financial backing of his production company Phoenix Pictures . The company provided filmmakers with $ 14 million to produce Apt Pupil . Filming took place on location in Altadena , California . Singer related to how Todd Bowden rebelled against his suburban environment . The director used the name of his high school football team , the Pirates , and the green @-@ and @-@ gold team colors in the film , saying , " I just projected my own childhood right out to Southern California . " 
 = = = Editing and composing = = = 
 John Ottman served as both film editor and music composer for Apt Pupil . When he edited the film , he found it a challenge to create the proper musical score . Ottman recalled , " Normally , an editor will score scenes with temporary music from CDs , and so forth , and nothing I could find worked for this film . " The composer sought a mix between the scores of the science fiction film 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) and the military @-@ based comedy 1941 ( 1979 ) to create an " otherworldly pastiche " . Ottman said of his approach : 
 When you throw a cat in the oven , it 's easy to have someone in the orchestra slam a hammer down on an anvil , scaring the hell out of everyone . The hard part is manipulating the story and accenting the characters . In the beginning , when Todd is laying down the rules , there 's a certain repetitive thematic idea you hear . You hear the same music when Dussander is turning the tables on Todd , which makes you remember the first scene ... You hope people are subliminally making the connection that the tables are turning back and forth . 
 Another scene in which Ottman meshed his editing and composing duties was when Dussander wakes up in the hospital with the television show The Jeffersons playing in the background . Ottman explained his intent for the scene , " I used The Jeffersons as this innocuous thing — going between him and the television — so that when he does open his eyes , it scares the hell out of you ... I added this deafening Bartok <unk> , which is when all the violins pluck their strings really loud and they create this gnarly , unsettling sound . " Ottman recorded the film 's score with the Seattle Symphony . 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 For Apt Pupil , Bryan Singer filmed a shower scene in which Todd Bowden , saturated with horrific stories from Kurt Dussander , imagines his fellow showering students as Jewish prisoners in gas chambers . The scene was filmed at Eliot Middle School in Altadena , California on April 2 , 1997 , and two weeks later , a 14 @-@ year @-@ old extra filed a lawsuit alleging that Singer forced him and other extras to strip naked for the scene . Two boys , 16 and 17 years old , later supported the 14 @-@ year @-@ old 's claim . The boys claimed trauma from the experience , seeking charges against the filmmakers including infliction of emotional distress , negligence , and invasion of privacy . Allegations were made that the boys were filmed for sexual gratification . The local news shows and national tabloid programs stirred the controversy . A sexual crimes task force that included local , state , and federal personnel investigated the incident . The Los Angeles District Attorney 's office determined that there was no cause to file criminal charges , stating , " The suspects were intent on completing a professional film as quickly and efficiently as possible . There is no indication of lewd or abnormal sexual intent . " The civil case was dismissed due to insufficient evidence . The scene was filmed again with adult actors so the film could finish on time . 
 The lawsuit reflected " a recent cultural concern " about nudity in showers being connected to " sexual or erotic forms of gazing " . The journal Body & Society wrote , " The ways in which the accusation that the director and other crew members identified as gay is seen to collapse gay identity into gay sexual behaviour , but the wholesale collapse of nudity into sexuality . " The incident reflected the cultural trend that being gazed upon while naked would cause different forms of distress , threatening the " stability of the self as subject " . This undermines the subject 's ability to perform and as a result of the discomfort , brings more into question what the displayed nakedness is for . 
 = = Differences between novella and film = = 
 Stephen King 's novella Apt Pupil begins in 1974 , when Todd Bowden is in junior high , and it ends with him graduating from high school . In Bryan Singer 's film , the story takes place fully in 1984 , when Todd Bowden is in his last year in high school . In the novella , for three years leading to the end of the story , Todd Bowden and discovered Nazi war criminal Kurt Dussander independently murder a large number of hobos and transients , whereas in the film , the murders are condensed to Dussander 's attempt to kill the hobo Archie . Singer sought to reduce the novella 's violence , not wanting it to appear " exploitative or repetitive " . Unlike in the novella , animosity toward Jews was not explicitly displayed by the characters in the film . The novella 's dream sequence in which Bowden rapes a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Jewish virgin as a laboratory experiment under Dussander 's guidance was replaced by the film 's dream sequence in which Bowden sees three shower @-@ gas chamber scenes unfold . Reduced in the film was Todd 's encounter with the schoolgirl Betty ( named Becky in the film ) . In the novella , he dreams of Betty as a concentration camp inmate who he can rape and torture . In the film , he has a brief encounter with Becky where he finds himself unable to perform sexually . 
 In the novella , Bowden 's high school counselor Edward French confronts the student with suspicions that Dussander is not really Bowden 's grandfather , and Bowden murders French in cold blood . Bowden then embarks on a shooting spree from a tree overlooking a freeway , which results in his death five hours later . Singer felt unable to accomplish King 's ending : " I told [ King ] the ending reads so beautifully . I could never measure up to it ; I would have killed it . " In the film , Bowden intimidates French , who suspects Dussander 's false relationship to the student , by threatening to destroy him with " rumor and innuendo " . Stanley <unk> , author of The Complete Stephen King Universe , wrote , " As depicted on screen , Todd is much more consciously evil , in his way , than in the book . This switch , while making the ending less brutal , perhaps , achieves the impossible : it also makes the ending even darker . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Bryan Singer previewed Apt Pupil at the Museum of Tolerance 's L.A. Holocaust Center to assess feedback from rabbis and others about referencing the Holocaust . With a positive response , the director proceeded with the film 's release . Apt Pupil was originally scheduled to be released in February 1998 , but the film 's distributor moved the release date to autumn , feeling that it belonged " alongside other more serious @-@ minded films " . It premiered at the Venice Film Festival in September 1998 . It was then commercially released on October 23 , 1998 in 1 @,@ 448 theaters in the United States and Canada , grossing $ 3 @.@ 6 million on its opening weekend and placing ninth at the weekend box office . The film went on to gross $ 8 @.@ 9 million in the United States and Canada . Apt Pupil was considered a critical and commercial disappointment . The film was less successful than Singer 's previous film The Usual Suspects , with critics describing it as " a somewhat disturbing movie that works as a suspenseful thriller , yet isn 't completely satisfying " . 
 Roger Ebert , reviewing for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , wrote that the film was well @-@ made by Bryan Singer and well @-@ acted , especially by Ian McKellen , but that " the film reveals itself as unworthy of its subject matter " . The critic felt that the offensive material lacked a " social message " or an " overarching purpose " and found the film 's later scenes to be " exploitative " . Janet Maslin of The New York Times applauded the production value of Bryan Singer 's direction , liking Newton Thomas Sigel 's " handsomely shot " cinematography and John Ottman 's " stunningly edited " work . Maslin wrote of McKellen and Renfro 's performances , " Both actors play their roles so <unk> that tensions escalate until the horror grows unimaginatively gothic . " The critic felt that as the film approached the end , " the story 's cleverness is noticeably on the wane " . 
 Kathleen Murphy of Film Comment called McKellen and Renfro 's performances " skin @-@ crawling " but felt that it did not complete the film . Murphy wrote , " [ The acting ] makes you wish Apt Pupil had the art and the courage actually to look into evil 's awful abyss . " The critic perceived that Apt Pupil came off as a conventional horror film , that it had Stephen King 's " characteristically unsavory " touches , and that Singer 's " inept " direction " trivialize [ s ] the characters and the subject matter " . Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly saw Apt Pupil as not a " hunted @-@ Nazi thriller " nor a " full @-@ tilt Stephen King thriller " , but as a " student @-@ teacher parable " that comes off as " disturbing " . Schwarzbaum felt that Singer told " a story with serious moral resonance " , though patience was needed to get past Singer 's " more baroque cinematic touches " of " visual <unk> ... and aural gimmicks " in the film , citing as examples Dussander watching Mr. Magoo on television or the musical piece Liebestod being <unk> during a bloody scene . 
 Jay Carr of the Boston Globe called Apt Pupil " most compelling for its moral dimension " , enjoying the " duet between Renfro 's smooth @-@ cheeked latter @-@ day Faust and McKellen 's reawakened Mephistopheles " . While Carr found the film 's framework to be realistic , he noted the change of pace , " Perhaps sensing a narrative slackening and a smothering claustrophobia ... ' Apt Pupil ' veers into melodramatic devices that yank the film out of its disquieting amorality and turn it into something much more ordinary and mundane . " The critic concluded , " It maintains a bleak integrity by not pretending to arrive at remorse . Never is there any discussion . " Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune described Apt Pupil as " a good shocker that misses the ultimate horror " , finding the film 's weakness to be the " contrived " bond between Dussander and Bowden . Wilmington called the plot " overly slick " , asking , " How can Todd not only conveniently find a Nazi war criminal in his hometown but also instantly coerce and control him ? " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Renfro won the Best Actor award at the Tokyo International Film Festival for his performance in Apt Pupil . Ian McKellen won a Critics ' Choice Award for Best Actor and a Florida Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor for his performance in both Apt Pupil and Gods and Monsters . The Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films awarded a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor to McKellen for his performance and awarded the film a Saturn Award for Best Horror Film of 1998 . 
 = Elgin , Illinois , Centennial half dollar = 
 The Elgin , Illinois , Centennial half dollar was a fifty @-@ cent commemorative coin issued by the United States Bureau of the Mint in 1936 , part of the wave of commemoratives authorized by Congress and struck that year . Intended to commemorate the centennial of the founding of Elgin , the piece was designed by local sculptor Trygve Rovelstad . The obverse depicts an idealized head of a pioneer man . The reverse shows a grouping of pioneers , and is based upon a sculptural group that Rovelstad hoped to build as a memorial to those who settled Illinois , but which was not erected in his lifetime . 
 Rovelstad had heard of other efforts to gain authorization for commemorative coins , which were sold by the Mint to a designated group at face value and then retailed to the public at a premium . In 1935 , through his congressman , he had legislation introduced into the House of Representatives for a commemorative coin in honor of Elgin 's centennial that year . Rovelstad hoped that the proposed coin would both depict and be a source of funds for his memorial to the pioneers . Texas coin dealer L.W. Hoffecker heard of the effort and contacted Rovelstad to offer his assistance — Hoffecker had been a force behind the Old Spanish Trail half dollar , issued in 1935 and distributed by him . 
 The bill for the Elgin coin did not pass until 1936 . Hoffecker was able to sell about 20 @,@ 000 coins , four @-@ fifths of the issue : the remaining 5 @,@ 000 were returned to the Mint for melting . Unlike many commemorative coins of that era , the piece was not bought up by dealers and speculators , but was sold directly to collectors at the issue price . Art historian Cornelius Vermeule considered the Elgin coin among the most outstanding American commemoratives . 
 = = Inception = = 
 Elgin , Illinois , is located on the Fox River about 30 miles ( 48 km ) west of Chicago . The community was founded in 1835 by James and Hezekiah Gifford , who named it . It became a village in 1847 and a city in 1854 . In the latter year , a watch company was founded there , and the city became well known for the firm 's timepieces ; it also was notable for the production of tools , shoes , wood products , and weekly church bulletins . 
 Sculptor Trygve Rovelstad ( 1903 – 1990 ) , born to Norwegian immigrants in the United States , sought to erect a statue in his hometown of Elgin as a monument to those pioneers who had settled Illinois . The city leaders approved , and in 1934 , a foundation was laid for the statue in Davidson Park , the site of the Giffords ' first cabin . Rovelstad was unable to raise the money to construct and erect the statue , but having learned of recent commemorative coin issues , decided this would be a good means of funding the statue . The sculptor had a bill introduced in Congress in May 1935 to authorize a half dollar to celebrate Elgin 's centennial and to honor the pioneer . Nevertheless , the bill initially was not considered . 
 News of the bill appeared in the July 1935 The Numismatist ( the journal of the American Numismatic Association [ ANA ] ) , and on July 11 , L.W. Hoffecker wrote to the Elgin Centennial Monumental Committee , inquiring how the coins would be distributed . Hoffecker , an El Paso , Texas , coin dealer , was then leading the committee in his hometown that was selling the Old Spanish Trail half dollar to the public . Although some recent commemoratives had sparked outcry from collectors that speculators had been allowed to buy up quantities of the new issues , Hoffecker would gain praise for equitably distributing the Old Spanish Trail piece . 
 In the correspondence between the two men , Hoffecker gave Rovelstad a number of tips about how to deal with Congress . Even though the bill was still mired in committee , Hoffecker advised what to do once the bill was signed . He did not know yet that Rovelstad was a sculptor , and wrote to him in September 1935 about the models to be submitted for approval , " These should also be 10 [ inches , or 25 @.@ 4 cm ] in diameter , and this is where your trouble commences . These sculptors all want to incorporate their own ideas in the design and ask anywhere from $ 400 @.@ 00 to $ 1 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 for their work , telling you what trouble it is to get the approval of the Commission of Fine Arts and many other things which do not exist . " Hoffecker also offered to handle the issue for the committee ; he proposed to advance the money necessary to purchase the new coins from the government and to handle the distribution . He stated that he had enjoyed the distribution of the Old Spanish Trail piece , though he lied to Rovelstad , stating he was not a coin dealer — the letterhead that Hoffecker used to write to Rovelstad said " Loans and <unk> " under his name . He also warned Rovelstad , " It would not be good for either of us if the word got out you had disposed of the entire issue to me . " 
 In October 1935 , Hoffecker made a formal offer , based on the bill , which called for 10 @,@ 000 half dollars : he would pay the Elgin committee $ 12 @,@ 000 and sell the coins at $ 2 @.@ 00 each . He would advance the face value of the coins to the Mint , as well as engraving and shipping charges . In selling the coins , he would try to distribute them to as many collectors as possible , leaving dealers and speculators for later . Rovelstad agreed by letter in November . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Illinois Representative Chauncey Reed had introduced the Elgin coin legislation at Rovelstad 's behest , and both the sculptor and Hoffecker worked with him to advance the bill through Congress . In February 1936 , Hoffecker , who had been appointed by ANA President T. James Clarke to lead a committee against abuses in the issuance of commemorative coins , went to Washington , passing through Chicago on his way to visit Rovelstad . The two men had hoped to keep the mintage to 10 @,@ 000 , to be able to sell the coins at a higher price . Congress , however , was not minded to create a low @-@ mintage commemorative , as there had been several issues which had been struck in small numbers only to sell at high prices , and the bill was amended to provide for 25 @,@ 000 half dollars . Hoffecker hoped to lower the number , urging the sculptor to lobby for a decrease . Hoffecker noted it would be much more work to sell 25 @,@ 000 , and they could not command as high a price . There were a large number of commemorative coin bills in Congress in 1936 , and the dealer feared that President Franklin D. Roosevelt would start vetoing them . Hoffecker visited Washington twice more in May , once meeting Rovelstad there , where they lobbied members of Congress . 
 The bill finally passed , and was signed by President Roosevelt on June 16 , 1936 . The bill required the coins to be struck at a single mint and to bear the date " 1936 " regardless of when they were struck . All 25 @,@ 000 would have to be paid for by the chairman of the Elgin committee ( that is , Rovelstad ) at one time ; a lesser quantity could not be issued . The pieces were " in commemoration of the one @-@ hundredth anniversary of the founding of the city of Elgin , Illinois , and the erection of the heroic Pioneer Memorial " — Rovelstad 's statue . 
 Hoffecker suggested that Rovelstad seek to have the mintage divided among the three mints , but conceded that unless Congress had erred in the enacted language , this gambit was not likely to succeed . He also told Rovelstad to get in touch with Assistant Mint Director Mary M. O 'Reilly and seek to have the coins struck at the Denver Mint , as the closest mint to El Paso , to minimize shipping charges . Nothing came of either proposal ; all of the coins would be struck at the Philadelphia Mint . 
 After Rovelstad submitted his designs for the coin to the Mint , they were sent to the Commission of Fine Arts for its opinion . The designs arrived on July 15 , 1936 , and were approved two days later , with the request that the head of the pioneer on the obverse , in three @-@ quarter view ( facing forward and to one side ) as submitted by Rovelstad , be in profile instead . The sculptor complied , and submitted plaster models by mid @-@ August ; photographs were sent to the commission by the Mint on August 15 . Two days later , commission chairman Charles Moore wrote to O 'Reilly , stating that the sculptor member of the commission , Lee Lawrie , had viewed the designs , and complained he could not see what the object was behind the pioneers , and that the gun appeared to be held awkwardly . Lawrie also stated that some of the lettering should be strengthened , but if the Mint director , Nellie Tayloe Ross , was not disturbed by these things , the coin should go forward . Moore indicated that he had no desire to delay the coin , and forwarded the commission 's recommendation , on condition that the Mint do what it could to address these concerns . With the exception of possible work on the lettering , no changes were made . 
 Once the commission had approved the designs , they were immediately sent to the Medallic Art Company of New York , which reduced the designs to furnish hubs from which coinage dies could be made . In early October 1936 , the Philadelphia Mint struck 25 @,@ 000 coins , with 15 extra for inspection by the 1937 Assay Commission . Rovelstad went to Philadelphia to witness the initiation of production and stayed at the home of Mint Chief Engraver John R. Sinnock . The first ten pieces were handed to the sculptor , who placed them in paper envelopes and took them home to Illinois . According to his wife , Gloria , he was offered a job at the Mint by Sinnock but declined . 
 = = Design = = 
 The obverse of the Elgin Centennial half dollar depicts a pioneer , attested to by the legend above him . The bearded visage had been previously sculpted by Rovelstad and appears , slightly modified , as the head of the rifleman on the left of the group on the reverse . The year " 1673 " on the obverse marks the year explorers Louis Jolliet and Jacques Marquette entered what is now Illinois . Although the coin was issued for Elgin 's centennial , neither the date of founding ( 1835 ) nor that of the anniversary appears . 
 The reverse side depicts a group of pioneers ( four adults and a baby in its mother 's arms ) . The grouping is a bas relief of the model for the memorial that Rovelstad hoped to build . The child is the second baby to be implied , but not fully seen , on a US coin – one is sketched with the mother inside the Conestoga wagon on the Oregon Trail Memorial half dollar , first struck in 1926 . One would be more fully depicted on the Roanoke Island half dollar in 1937 . The grouping had also appeared on Rovelstad 's 1935 medal for Elgin 's centennial . Rovelstad placed , both on the medal and on the base for the statue , the words , " To the men who have blazed the trails , who have conquered the soil , and who have built an empire in the land of the Illini . " Inclusion of the various mottos required by statute , such as " In God We Trust " , meant that not even part of this dedication could be placed on the coin . The name of the city was not in the original models that Rovelstad sent Hoffecker for his comments ; the numismatist wrote on July 15 , 1936 , " I would not overlook putting the word ' Elgin ' on your coin , as it would be a good ad for your city " . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his volume on the artistry of American coins , had high praise for the coin and its sculptor : " it is more difficult to find a more aesthetically satisfying , technically superior commemorative half @-@ dollar than the Elgin , Illinois , Centennial of 1936 . " Vermeule observed that the figures on the reverse appear almost three @-@ dimensional . He noted that the technique of spacing out the letters of the word " Pioneer " above the head presages that used by later Chief Engraver Gilroy Roberts on the obverse of the Kennedy half dollar . According to Vermeule , Rovelstad " has produced one of the major documents of sculptural plasticity and vibrant relief in the series of commemorative coins . His obverse is worthy of a Roman medallion , and his reverse rivals the great Neoclassic dies of England or Bavaria in the nineteenth century . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Once the authorizing legislation was enacted , Hoffecker and Rovelstad came to a new agreement . Hoffecker would advance the money for the new coins and pay for the die making and shipping costs , which were the committee 's responsibility under the legislation . The coins would be sold at $ 1 @.@ 50 each ; Hoffecker would take 35 cents per coin as commission . The coins were to remain on sale through Hoffecker until January 1 , 1937 or until they were sold out , whichever came first . The agreement provided that Hoffecker " use every ethical means known to him to push the sale of these coins " . Coin dealer B. Max Mehl , in his 1937 pamphlet on commemorative coins , stated that he considered the price of $ 1 @.@ 50 too high when there was an issue of 25 @,@ 000 struck . 
 On July 1 , 1936 , Hoffecker sent 3 @,@ 500 letters offering the new coins , which had not yet been struck , to people who were on his mailing list or had enquired . He claimed to have 7 @,@ 000 orders already , and urged collectors not to delay . His bank offered to have the coins shipped there and to carry the coins as part of its cash on hand , which would allow him to pay for them as orders came in , but Hoffecker preferred to pay for the coins at the start . Hoffecker stated in letters that other coin dealers had offered to buy the entire issue , but he had declined . At this time , there was a boom in commemorative coins , and dealers were trying to get all the special issues they could . 
 The Philadelphia Mint shipped 24 @,@ 990 coins ( the authorized mintage less the first ten pieces , which Rovelstad had taken ) to Hoffecker on October 7 , 1936 ; they were received in El Paso four days later . Hoffecker wrote to Frank Duffield , editor of The Numismatist , stating that he had the envelopes for already @-@ ordered pieces all prepared , and hoped to mail the last of them out by the evening of October 13 ; the editor commented , " This sounds like real service " . Several hundred pieces had been ordered through banks in Elgin ; they received several consignments and eventually sold over a thousand . The Elgin Watch Company purchased 100 coins . 
 By November 1936 , 16 @,@ 170 pieces had been sold . Only about 2 @,@ 000 more were sold in the next four months ; Hoffecker 's statement for March 1937 shows 18 @,@ 790 sold with an additional 330 on consignment to the First National Bank of Elgin . Rovelstad had received $ 8 @,@ 680 @.@ 00 and Hoffecker $ 6 @,@ 576 @.@ 50 . At this point , discussion turned to what to do with the remaining pieces , some 5 @,@ 620 ( a few hundred pieces were given away or otherwise disposed of ) . Rovelstad agreed to allow the coin dealer to purchase 250 pieces at $ 1 each ; he was still selling them in 1948 . Other dealers were uninterested in large purchases as the direct sale to collectors meant that few who wanted and could afford the Elgin coin lacked it . With demand at a standstill , Hoffecker feared that the remaining pieces would wind up in the hands of speculators . Five thousand pieces were returned to the Mint for melting . 
 = = Aftermath and collecting = = 
 Rovelstad used the profits from the half dollar to continue work on his statuary group . He sought direct funding from the federal government in 1938 and from the Illinois Legislature the following year ; both attempts failed . Through the half century that followed , he progressed on the statues , and by the time of his death in 1990 , he had completed the group in plaster of Paris , that still needed to be bronzed before display . Shortly before his death , he told his wife , " I 've lived a full life and have no regrets . The Pioneer Memorial is now completed . I 've done all I could . Now it 's up to others to see it erected . I can do no more . " Rovelstad 's tenant , Steve <unk> , established a foundation to raise money to complete the project . It raised $ 456 @,@ 000 , exceeding the actual cost by nearly ten percent , and the memorial was completed and dedicated in 2001 . 
 Hoffecker served as president of the ANA from 1939 to 1941 ; he died January 13 , 1955 at the age of 86 . According to the 2014 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins , the Elgin Centennial half dollar lists at $ 250 in Almost Uncirculated ( AU @-@ 50 ) condition , rising to $ 550 in near @-@ pristine MS @-@ 66 . According to numismatic historian Q. David Bowers , " nothing untoward was associated with the distribution of the Elgin Centennial half dollars , and certainly at the Illinois end of the deal sculptor Trygve A. Rovelstad 's intentions and ethics were of the highest order . L.W. Hoffecker distributed the pieces in a skillfully orchestrated publicity campaign and did as well as anyone could have done at the time . " 
 = ScienTOMogy = 
 ScienTOMogy was a New Zealand @-@ based parody site lampooning actor Tom Cruise 's involvement with Scientology . Initially hosted at the domain name scientomogy.info , the site was created in 2005 in response to the extensive media publicity surrounding Cruise 's appearances on The Oprah Winfrey Show and The Today Show . 
 ScienTOMogy gained press attention after the site proprietor was contacted by the Church of Scientology with a cease and desist letter , alleging copyright infringement by claiming the word " <unk> " was too close to the word " Scientology . " The proprietor initially agreed to relent to the Church 's demands , but then decided to keep the site after consulting with attorneys . Internet traffic to the site later increased dramatically as a result of the media attention surrounding the Church of Scientology 's allegations of copyright infringement . 
 = = Development = = 
 New Zealand webmaster Glen Stollery created scientomogy.info in July 2005 , after Tom Cruise appeared on The Today Show in an interview speaking about " the dangers of prescription drugs , " and following the incident where he jumped the couch over his love for Katie Holmes during an interview on The Oprah Winfrey Show . The site 's stated goal was " exposing Tom Cruise 's moronic behavior in his relentless crusade to promote the Church of Scientology . " 
 The site was mainly used to store parody and satire material , including depictions of Cruise and Holmes in straight jackets , as well as a video showing Cruise shooting lightning at Oprah Winfrey . To clarify its position as a parody site , ScienTOMogy contained a disclaimer , which it requested that the reader " understand and agree to .. before continuing . " The site 's disclaimer stated : " Obviously <unk> has <unk> NO connection whatsoever with the Church of Scientology , it ’ s [ sic ] affiliated organizations or , needless @-@ to @-@ say , Tom Cruise . It is designed for commentary and criticism within the limits of Free Speech . All content should be treated as opinion and all trademarks / copyrighted material herein are owned by their respective trademark owners . The Scientology site is here . Thank you . You may continue .. " On the site , a fake Cruise claims that the Church of Scientology should refer to itself as " ScienTOMogy " instead of Scientology , in order to clear up public relations problems . The parody version of Cruise states " It 's kind of like the word gummy bears . Bears by themselves are scary , but if you just add the word gummy to it , it now becomes a fun , enjoyable treat . " 
 = = Church of Scientology 's response = = 
 The Web site drew media attention when the Church of Scientology 's attorneys Moxon & Kobrin contacted Stollery , claiming the ScienTOMogy domain name was an infringement of their trademark , despite being a different word by one letter . In September 2005 , the Church of Scientology issued a cease and desist order to Stollery demanding he shut down the site and transfer ownership to the Church , threatening him with a $ 100 @,@ 000 lawsuit . The Church 's law firm stated that " ScienTOMogy " would cause a likelihood of confusion with " Scientology , " violating the Lanham Act , 15 U.S.C. 1125 ( a ) . The Church of Scientology 's letter stated : " You are hereby on notice that the registration and use of this domain name in this fashion has caused your name to be falsely associated with our client ’ s registered mark , <unk> .. The fact that you have changed one letter .. does not protect you from trademark infringement . " Helena Kobrin , a lawyer for the Church of Scientology , was quoted as saying : " You can 't use somebody 's trademark , regardless of what you 're saying , if you haven 't been given permission . " 
 The site responded with a statement : " The site is purely satirical and is for entertainment . It contains no fact nor claims to do so . The site clearly states in its header , ' This site has absolutely no connection whatsoever with the Church of Scientology , it 's affiliated organisations or , needless to say , Tom Cruise ' . " Stollery originally relented and agreed to change the domain name to " <unk> " on October 13 , 2005 , which E ! News took to be a parody of the film The Passion of the Christ . 
 After consulting with his lawyers in October 2005 , Stollery responded to the Church with a far more aggressive stance . Now believing the accusation to be completely frivolous , Stollery publicly refused , challenging the Church with : " I 'm keeping my domain , see you in court . " Again in an interview with ONE News , Stollery reiterated that he was going to retain rights to " ScienTOMogy " , and not transfer the URL to the Church of Scientology , as they had requested . After the media attention , Stollery said he began to receive " annoying calls " from local Scientologists . " The first few I was stupid enough to answer , but now they just call and call and call . When I did speak to ' a church member here in Auckland ' he kept insisting over and over that we meet to talk about my ' vendetta ' with the church . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The threats gave the Web site a cult following of its own , taking its normal traffic from one hundred hits per day to one million in a matter of hours . The Wall Street Journal carried reports commenting on the irony of the situation , noting the site 's message that the press exposure due to the threats from the Church of Scientology had increased its traffic over tenfold . Mel Gibson has not raised objections to use of the parody term " <unk> " . E ! News reported that though Stollery had originally agreed to take down the site , it was still running and accessible as of July 2006 , when the United Nations ' World Intellectual Property Organization awarded Cruise rights to the domain name " <unk> " over claims of a <unk> . 
 In addition to hosting the original cease and desist letter , the Berkman Center for Internet & Society also gives legal commentary on various issues pertaining to the " ScienTOMogy " controversy at a page provided by the organization Chilling Effects . They discuss " trademark <unk> " , which may occur if a non @-@ owner of a trademark uses the work in an " activity that is likely to offend the average person . " However , the page also notes that the <unk> would be non @-@ actionable if the usage was non @-@ commercial or parody . The Church of Scientology has not since filed a lawsuit or opened litigation on " <unk> , " though at present the site scientomogy.info was inactive . Internet Archive 's Wayback Machine last version of the site is from July 8 , 2007 . 
 = Nomenclature of monoclonal antibodies = 
 The nomenclature of monoclonal antibodies is a naming scheme for assigning generic , or <unk> , names to monoclonal antibodies . An antibody is a protein that is produced in B cells and used by the immune system of humans and other vertebrate animals to identify a specific foreign object like a bacterium or a virus . Monoclonal antibodies are those that were produced in identical cells , often artificially , and so share the same target object . They have a wide range of applications including medical uses . 
 This naming scheme is used for both the World Health Organization ’ s International Nonproprietary Names ( INN ) and the United States Adopted Names ( USAN ) for pharmaceuticals . In general , word stems are used to identify classes of drugs , in most cases placed word @-@ finally . All monoclonal antibody names end with the stem -mab . Unlike most other pharmaceuticals , monoclonal antibody nomenclature uses different preceding word parts ( morphemes ) depending on structure and function . These are officially called substems and sometimes erroneously infixes , even by the USAN Council itself . 
 = = Components = = 
 = = = Stem = = = 
 The stem -mab is used for monoclonal antibodies as well as for their fragments , as long as at least one variable domain ( the domain that contains the target binding structure ) is included . This is the case for antigen binding fragments and single @-@ chain variable fragments , among other artificial proteins . Other antibody parts ( such as Fc regions ) and antibody mimetics use different naming schemes . 
 = = = <unk> for origin / source = = = 
 The substem preceding the stem denotes the animal from which the antibody is obtained . The first monoclonal antibodies were produced in mice ( substem <unk> , yielding the ending <unk> ; usually Mus musculus , the house mouse ) or other non @-@ human organisms . Neither INN nor USAN has ever been requested for antibodies from rats ( theoretically -a- ) , hamsters ( <unk> ) and primates ( <unk> ) . 
 These non @-@ human antibodies are recognized as foreign by the human immune system and may be rapidly cleared from the body , provoke an allergic reaction , or both . To avoid this , parts of the antibody can be replaced with human amino acid sequences , or pure human antibodies can be engineered . If the constant region is replaced with the human form , the antibody is termed chimeric and the substem used is <unk> . Part of the variable regions may also be substituted , in which case it is called humanized and <unk> is used ; typically , everything is replaced except the complementarity determining regions ( CDRs ) , the three loops of amino acid sequences at the outside of each variable region that bind to the target structure . Partly chimeric and partly humanized antibodies use <unk> . These three substems do not indicate the foreign species used for production . Thus , the human / mouse chimeric antibody <unk> ends in <unk> just as the human / macaque antibody <unk> . Pure human antibodies use <unk> . 
 Rat / mouse hybrid antibodies can be engineered with binding sites for two different antigens . These drugs , termed trifunctional antibodies , have the substem <unk> . 
 = = = <unk> for target = = = 
 The substem preceding the source of the antibody refers to the medicine 's target . Examples of targets are tumors , organ systems like the circulatory system , or infectious agents like bacteria or viruses . The term target does not imply what sort of action the antibody exerts . Therapeutic , prophylactic and diagnostic agents are not distinguished by this nomenclature . 
 In the naming scheme as originally developed , these substems mostly consist of a consonant , a vowel , then another consonant . The final letter may be dropped if the resulting name would be difficult to pronounce otherwise . Examples include <unk> ( r ) - for the circulatory system , -li ( m ) - for the immune system ( lim stands for lymphocyte ) and <unk> ( r ) - for the nervous system . The final letter is usually omitted if the following source substem begins with a consonant ( such as <unk> or <unk> ) , but not all target substems are used in their shortened form . <unk> , for example , is never reduced to -mu- because no chimeric or humanized antibodies targeting the musculoskeletal system ever received an INN . Combination of target and source substems results in endings like <unk> ( immune system , human ) or <unk> ( circulatory system , chimeric , consonant r dropped ) . 
 New and shorter target substems were adopted in 2009 . They mostly consist of a consonant , plus a vowel which is omitted if the source substem begins with a vowel . For example , human antibodies targeting the immune system receive names ending in <unk> instead of the old <unk> . Some endings like <unk> remain unchanged . The old system employed seven different substems for tumor targets , depending on the type of tumor . Because many antibodies are investigated for several tumor types , the new convention only has -t ( u ) - . 
 = = = Prefix = = = 
 The prefix carries no special meaning . It should be unique for each medicine and contribute to a well sounding name . This means that antibodies with the same source and target substems are only distinguished by their prefix . Even antibodies targeting exactly the same structure are differently prefixed , such as the adalimumab and <unk> , both of which are TNF inhibitors but differ in their chemical structure . 
 = = = Additional words = = = 
 A second word following the name of the antibody indicates that another substance is attached , which is done for several reasons . 
 An antibody can be PEGylated ( attached to molecules of polyethylene glycol ) to slow down its degradation by enzymes and to decrease its immunogenicity ; this is shown by the word pegol as in <unk> pegol . 
 A cytotoxic agent can be linked to an anti @-@ tumor antibody for drug targeting purposes . The word <unk> , for example , stands for monomethyl <unk> E which is toxic by itself but predominantly affects cancer cells if used in conjugates like <unk> <unk> . 
 A chelator for binding a radioisotope can be attached . <unk> , a derivative of <unk> acid , is used for example in <unk> <unk> to chelate indium @-@ 111 . If the drug contains a radioisotope , the name of the isotope precedes the name of the antibody . Consequently , indium ( <unk> ) <unk> <unk> is the name for the above example including indium @-@ 111 . 
 = = History = = 
 Emil von Behring and Kitasato Shibasaburō discovered in 1890 that diphtheria and tetanus toxins were neutralized in the bloodstream of animals by substances they called <unk> , which were specific for the respective toxin . Behring received the first Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their find in 1901 . A year after the discovery , Paul Ehrlich used the term antibodies ( German Antikörper ) for these <unk> . 
 The principle of monoclonal antibody production , called hybridoma technology , was published in 1975 by Georges Köhler and César Milstein , who were awarded the 1984 Medicine Nobel Prize for their discovery together with Niels Kaj Jerne . <unk> @-@ CD3 was the first monoclonal antibody to be approved for clinical use in humans , in 1986 . 
 The World Health Organization ( WHO ) introduced the system of International Nonproprietary Names in 1950 , with the first INN list being published three years later . The stem -mab for monoclonal antibodies was proposed around 1990 , and the current system with target and source substems was developed between 1991 and 1993 . Due to the collaboration between the WHO and the United States Adopted Names Council , antibody <unk> have the same structure and are largely identical to <unk> . Until 2009 , more than 170 monoclonal antibodies received names following this nomenclature . 
 In October 2008 , the WHO convoked a working group to revise the nomenclature of monoclonal antibodies , to meet challenges discussed in April the same year . This led to the adoption of the new target substems in November 2009 . In spring 2010 , the first new antibody names were adopted . 
 = = Examples = = 
 = = = New convention = = = 
 <unk> is an antineoplastic . Its name is composed of the components <unk> @-@ t @-@ u @-@ mab . This shows that the drug is a human monoclonal antibody acting against tumors . 
 The name of <unk> , a drug designed for the treatment of asthma , has the components <unk> @-@ li @-@ zu @-@ mab , marking it as a humanized antibody acting on the immune system . 
 = = = Old convention = = = 
 <unk> is a drug targeting TNF alpha . Its name can be broken down into <unk> @-@ lim @-@ u @-@ mab . Therefore , the drug is a human monoclonal antibody targeting the immune system . If adalimumab had been named after 2009 , it would have been <unk> . 
 <unk> is a commonly used medication to prevent platelets from clumping together . Broken down into ab @-@ ci @-@ xi @-@ mab , its name shows the drug to be a chimeric monoclonal antibody used on the cardiovascular system . This and the following two names would look the same if the new convention were applied . 
 The name of the breast cancer medication trastuzumab can be analyzed as <unk> @-@ tu @-@ zu @-@ mab . Therefore , the drug is a humanized monoclonal antibody used against a tumor . 
 <unk> pegol is a PEGylated humanized antibody targeting the circulatory system . 
 Technetium ( 99mTc ) <unk> and technetium ( 99mTc ) <unk> <unk> are <unk> antibodies , <unk> being a chelator that links the antibody <unk> to the radioisotope technetium @-@ 99m . 
 <unk> is a polyclonal antibody . Broken down into <unk> @-@ lim @-@ u @-@ <unk> , its name shows the drug to be a human polyclonal antibody acting on the immune system . The suffix <unk> shows it is a polyclonal antibody . 
 = = = Deviations = = = 
 The monoclonal antibody <unk> @-@ CD3 , approved for clinical use in 1986 , was named before these conventions took effect , and consequently its name does not follow them . Instead , it is a contraction from " murine monoclonal antibody targeting CD3 " . 
 = Where No One Has Gone Before = 
 " Where No One Has Gone Before " is the sixth episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , ( episode 1 - ' Encounter at Farpoint ' is a two part episode ) originally aired October 26 , 1987 , in broadcast syndication in the United States . A high @-@ definition , remastered version of the episode received limited theatrical release for one day ( with the episode " Datalore " ) to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the series on July 23 , 2012 . The story was originally developed with the title " Where None Have Gone Before " and was based on Diane Duane 's book , The Wounded Sky . Duane and Michael Reaves pitched the idea to David Gerrold and Gene Roddenberry , and then submitted a script . Their script was subsequently rewritten by Maurice Hurley , whose first effort was poorly received ; however , his rewritten version was filmed . The episode was the first of the series directed by Rob Bowman , who went on to direct twelve more episodes . 
 Set in the 24th century , Star Trek : The Next Generation follows the adventures of the crew aboard the Starfleet Starship Enterprise @-@ D. In " Where No One Has Gone Before " , the Enterprise is visited by Mr. Kosinski ( Stanley Kamel ) and an alien known as the Traveler ( Eric Menyuk ) . The Traveler sends the Enterprise to distant parts of the universe , and help is required from Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) to bring the ship back home . 
 In this episode , Menyuk made the first of three appearances as the Traveler . Biff Yeager made his first appearance as the longest @-@ running chief engineer of the first season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise meets the USS Fearless to bring aboard Mr. Kosinski ( Stanley Kamel ) , a Starfleet propulsion expert who plans to run tests on the warp engines to improve their efficiency . With Kosinski is his assistant , an alien being from Tau Alpha C known as the Traveler ( Eric Menyuk ) . As Kosinski and the Traveler explain the tests to the engineering crew , Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) quickly grasps what the tests are designed to accomplish and the Traveler expresses admiration for his problem @-@ solving abilities . The test quickly goes awry when the Enterprise speeds up , surpassing the known capabilities of warp engines . Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) orders the ship stopped , and the crew find themselves on the far side of the M33 Galaxy ( more than 2 @.@ 7 million light years from the Milky Way , the Enterprise 's home galaxy ) . Although Kosinski is pleased with the results , he is reprimanded by Picard and asked to simply redo the process to return home . Crusher attempts to warn Commander Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) that during the warp test , the Traveler appeared to drift out of reality , but Riker dismisses him without listening . However , after Kosinski begins the second test , Crusher and Riker both observe the Traveler again drifting out , appearing more tired . The Enterprise again experiences a burst of speed , and when it stops , the crew cannot determine their position . Picard demands that Kosinski get the crew home . 
 While Kosinski , the Traveler and the engineering crew work on reversing the process , the rest of the crew begin experiencing lifelike visions of their past ( an effect of the strange space around them ) . After having a vision of his mother ( Herta Ware ) , Picard surmises that they have arrived at the theoretical Outer Rim of the universe , and issues a red alert to awaken the crew from their visions . Finding Picard at the spot where he saw his mother , Riker suggests that Kosinski may have had nothing to do with the warp jumps , which were more likely to be a result of the Traveler 's illness ; Trying to determine this theory , Picard has the alien moved to sick bay . Dr. Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) however cannot evaluate the Traveler 's alien biology , and is unable to treat him . When Picard visits him in sick bay , the Traveler explains his ability to channel pure thought into reality . He brought the crew of the Enterprise to the Outer Rim , triggering similar effects in anyone within it to ascertain if they were ready to experience thought as reality . The Traveler confides to Picard that he looks for scientific prodigies such as the young Crusher , and Picard should nurture him . When he returns to the engineering section , the Traveler asks Crusher to assist him in returning the Enterprise to known space . As they concentrate , beginning to return the ship home , the Traveler again phases out and finally disappears . The Enterprise suddenly stops , and the crew is relieved to find themselves back in Federation space . After the incident , Picard finally promotes Crusher to acting ensign ( following his own unspoken suggestion in " The Naked Now " ) on the Enterprise for his performance . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The original story for " Where No One Has Gone Before " was developed before the start of Star Trek : The Next Generation , with Michael Reaves and Diane Duane invited to pitch story ideas . Duane did not belong to the Writers Guild of America ( a requirement to write for the show at the time ) , and doubted she would be asked to write a script . Duane and Reaves worked together on several ideas ; after a week , Reaves informed Duane that he developed an idea based on her Star Trek novel The Wounded Sky and asked her to collaborate with him . She worked on the story idea with Reaves , and they expanded the story slightly from Reaves ' original idea . One version of the script involved the Enterprise causing the birth of a new universe , with a play on the Genesis creation narrative . 
 They pitched the story to story editor David Gerrold , who brought them to Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry . Gene favored the story idea , suggesting changes which Reaves and Duane incorporated into a second draft . The episode was now entitled " Where None Have Gone Before " , differing significantly from the final version : Kosinski roomed with Picard at Starfleet Academy , fathering a son at that time . The ship 's travel differed ; the Traveller was replaced by a " <unk> booster " with a miniature black hole . In this version , the situation was resolved with a second miniature Enterprise imagined and pushed into the black hole on the full @-@ sized ship . The interaction of the two black holes ( and an even @-@ smaller black hole on the miniature Enterprise ) returns the full @-@ sized ship near the location where it began to travel . After Duane and Reaves turned in the first version of the script based on that premise , nothing was heard from the TNG staff for two weeks . 
 The script was given to Maurice Hurley to rewrite . He took six weeks for the rewrite , and his initial version was received poorly by TNG executives . Hurley later said , " they absolutely hated it , I think they wanted to fire me , and they would have if I didn 't have a guaranteed contract " . He rewrote the script , and this version was filmed . Hurley was pleased with the result , saying that " everything about that episode worked " . The final version differed significantly from the original Reaves @-@ Duane script ; Duane later said that only two scenes remained : where Picard sees his mother , and where he nearly falls out of the turbolift into space . Reaves later said that the episode " came together much better on the screen than we thought it would when we read the script . We were lucky , because it was out of our hands " . 
 = = = Direction and casting = = = 
 Donald Petrie was originally signed to direct the episode , but dropped out to direct the film Mystic Pizza . Executive producer Robert Justman brought in Rob Bowman to direct his first Star Trek episode . Justman later said that this was one of his most @-@ significant achievements on The Next Generation . Bowman worked on storyboards and set blocking for twenty days before shooting the episode . He was initially nervous about working on the show , and felt he had to prove himself because of his relative inexperience as a director . Bowman said that after the second day of filming it became easier , and credited the crew with making him feel welcome . He went on to direct twelve more episodes of The Next Generation . 
 Eric Menyuk was cast as the Traveler . The actor had previously been runner @-@ up for the role of Data several weeks earlier ( the role went to Brent Spiner ) . He was a Star Trek fan since age six , and would later return as the Traveler twice more : in " Remember Me " and " Journey 's End " . Menyuk 's return in " Journey 's End " would also mark the last on @-@ screen appearance of Wesley Crusher . Biff Yeager made his Next Generation debut in " Where No One Has Gone Before " as Chief Engineer Argyle , who would become the most @-@ frequently @-@ appearing chief engineer of the first season ( appearing twice ) . Geordi La Forge took over that role in the first episode of season two , " The Child " . Stuntman " Dangerous " Dennis Madalone also made his series debut as the ensign threatened by his own ( imagined ) fire . From season three onwards he was stunt coordinator for The Next Generation , and continued to portray a number of crew members . Viewers learned Picard 's mother 's first name in " Chain of Command " ; she was played in " Where No One Has Gone Before " by Herta Ware , who appeared in the 1985 science @-@ fiction film Cocoon . 
 = = = Visual effects and makeup = = = 
 Some effects in the episode were created in Robert Legato 's basement with water reflections and Christmas tree lights . The script was vague about what was seen at the end of the universe , so Legato played with the effects of water reflections on his basement wall . Shooting through <unk> film , he created multiple images which were layered over one another for the final effect ( which Legato described as " peculiar and bizarre " ) . Christmas tree lights were suspended and moved , to create the blinking effect seen on screen . 
 The Klingon Targ was created by dressing a tamed wild boar ( named Emmy Lou ) in an outfit created by costume designer William Ware Theiss . Executive producer Robert Justman later recalled , " That pig smelled horrid . A sweet @-@ sour , extremely pungent odor . I showered and showered , and it took me a week to get rid of it ! " To appear as the Traveler , Eric Menyuk wore a prosthetic piece ( created by Michael Westmore ) on his forehead which ran into his hairline . He also wore a pair of false three @-@ fingered hands , which were sold in the " It 's A Wrap ! " auction after the end of Star Trek : Enterprise . His Traveler costume was also sold at the auction . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 " Where No One Has Gone Before " was the second episode scored by Ron Jones . Some themes in the soundtrack were rearrangements of Jerry Goldsmith 's score from Star Trek : The Motion Picture . In the piece " Talk with Mom " ( played during Picard 's meeting with his mother ) , Jones tried to create an effect identical to the finale of Aaron Copland 's 1944 Appalachian Spring . Alexander Courage 's themes from The Original Series are included in a seven @-@ note ostinato in the pieces " Log " , " Visitors " and " Fly @-@ By " . 
 The score was recorded with a forty @-@ piece orchestra . Jones formatted the orchestra to generate a bigger sound than normally heard on television soundtracks to make it sound more like Goldsmith 's The Motion Picture score . Keyboards were used to make the cellos more prominent , and other changes included an increase in the mid @-@ range of the string section . The soundtrack to " Where No One Has Gone Before " was released ( as part of The Ron Jones Project box set of Star Trek : The Next Generation scores ) in a limited run of 5 @,@ 000 copies in 2010 by Film Score Monthly . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Where No One Has Gone Before " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing October 24 , 1987 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 5 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was the highest ratings received by the series since " The Naked Now " three episodes earlier . 
 Several reviewers revisited the episode after the end of the series . Cast member Wil Wheaton later described the episode as " the first time The Next Generation really started to come together " . However , the episode was flawed in dialogue and in Picard 's changes in tone : " I 'm not sure if that was a deliberate choice , so he would appear as a conflicted man , or if it was Patrick Stewart 's natural warmth and kindness coming through the gruff demeanour Picard was written to have . " When reviewing the show in 2006 for AOL TV , he gave it an overall score of B @-@ plus . Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com , praising the guest actors ; Stanley Kamel was " magnificent " and " ooze [ d ] arrogance , overconfidence , and bull in equal measure " , while Herta Ware brought " tremendous gravitas " to her role . He described the episode as the best of the first season , with strong performances from the main cast , and gave it an overall score of eight ( out of ten ) . 
 Zack Handlen reviewed the episode for The A.V. Club , saying that while it was an improvement on earlier episodes he had reservations about the use of Wesley Crusher . He called the " thoughts made flesh concept " a " cliche " , but was " gratified to see the series actually trying for something a little beyond their reach , this early in the game " . As for Wesley , Handlen thought that it was imposing a " Chosen One narrative " that brought " an unlikable character even further to the forefront of the action simply because some writer didn 't get enough pats on the head growing up " and gave the episode a B @-@ minus . Jamahl Epsicokhan , on his website Jammer 's Reviews , said that it was the first time in the series that space itself generated " awe and wonder " ; however , he thought the " fresh and intriguing " nature of the episode faded as it went along . He criticized Wesley Crusher , describing him as a " cloying geek " and " you just want to strangle him " . He gave the episode a score of 2 @.@ 5 ( out of 4 ) . 
 In Richard Hanley 's book The Metaphysics of Star Trek the appearance of the Traveler in " Where No One has Gone Before " was described as a continuation of intellectually @-@ advanced aliens in Star Trek , beginning in The Original Series with Apollo in " Who Mourns for Adonais ? " and Gary Mitchell in " Where No Man Has Gone Before " . Metaphysics is referenced in this episode by Wesley Crusher , who asks if thought is the basis of existence . 
 = = Home media and theatrical release = = 
 The first home @-@ media release of " Where No One Has Gone Before " was on VHS cassette on April 1 , 1992 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season @-@ one DVD box set released in March 2002 . 
 The most @-@ recent release was as part of the season @-@ one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . To celebrate the 25th anniversary of Star Trek : The Next Generation and promote the release of the first season on Blu @-@ ray , the episodes " Where No One Has Gone Before " and " Datalore " received a theatrical release in the United States on July 23 , 2012 in nearly 500 theaters . " Where No One Has Gone Before " was chosen by Star Trek experts Mike and Denise Okuda because of the unusual space special effects . 
 = P. G. Wodehouse = 
 Sir Pelham Grenville Wodehouse , KBE ( / <unk> / ; 15 October 1881 – 14 February 1975 ) was an English author and one of the most widely read humorists of the 20th century . Born in Guildford , the son of a British magistrate based in Hong Kong , Wodehouse spent happy teenage years at Dulwich College , to which he remained devoted all his life . After leaving school he was employed by a bank but disliked the work and turned to writing in his spare time . His early novels were mostly school stories , but he later switched to comic fiction , creating several regular characters who became familiar to the public over the years . They include the feather @-@ brained Bertie Wooster and his sagacious valet , Jeeves ; the immaculate and loquacious Psmith ; Lord Emsworth and the Blandings Castle set ; the Oldest Member , with stories about golf ; and Mr Mulliner , with tall tales on subjects ranging from <unk> bishops to megalomaniac movie moguls . 
 Although most of Wodehouse 's fiction is set in England , he spent much of his life in the US and used New York and Hollywood as settings for some of his novels and short stories . During and after the First World War , together with Guy Bolton and Jerome Kern , he wrote a series of Broadway musical comedies that were an important part of the development of the American musical . He began the 1930s writing for MGM in Hollywood . In a 1931 interview , his naïve revelations of incompetence and extravagance at Hollywood studios caused a furore . In the same decade , his literary career reached a new peak . 
 In 1934 Wodehouse moved to France for tax reasons ; in 1940 he was taken prisoner at Le Touquet by the invading Germans and interned for nearly a year . After his release he made six broadcasts from German radio in Berlin to the US , which had not yet entered the war . The talks were comic and apolitical , but his broadcasting over enemy radio prompted anger and strident controversy in Britain , and a threat of prosecution . Wodehouse never returned to England . From 1947 until his death he lived in the US , taking dual British @-@ American citizenship in 1955 . He was a prolific writer throughout his life , publishing more than ninety books , forty plays , two hundred short stories and other writings between 1902 and 1974 . He died in 1975 , at the age of 93 , in Southampton , New York . 
 Wodehouse worked extensively on his books , sometimes having two or more in preparation simultaneously . He would take up to two years to build a plot and write a scenario of about thirty thousand words . After the scenario was complete he would write the story . Early in his career he would produce a novel in about three months , but he slowed in old age to around six months . He used a mixture of Edwardian slang , quotations from and allusions to numerous poets , and several literary techniques to produce a prose style that has been compared with comic poetry and musical comedy . Some critics of Wodehouse have considered his work flippant , but among his fans are former British prime ministers and many of his fellow writers . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Wodehouse was born in Guildford , Surrey , the third son of Henry Ernest Wodehouse ( 1845 – 1929 ) , a magistrate resident in the British colony of Hong Kong , and his wife , Eleanor ( 1861 – 1941 ) , daughter of the Rev John Bathurst Deane . The Wodehouses , who traced their ancestry back to the 13th century , belonged to a collateral branch of the family of the earls of Kimberley . Eleanor Wodehouse was also of ancient aristocratic ancestry . She was visiting her sister in Guildford when Wodehouse was born there prematurely . 
 The boy was baptised at the Church of St Nicolas , Guildford , and was named after his godfather , Pelham von Donop . Wodehouse wrote in 1957 , " If you ask me to tell you frankly if I like the name Pelham Grenville Wodehouse , I must confess that I do not . ... I was named after a godfather , and not a thing to show for it but a small silver mug which I lost in 1897 . " The first name was rapidly elided to " Plum " , the name by which Wodehouse became known to family and friends . 
 Mother and son sailed for Hong Kong , where for his first two years Wodehouse was raised by a Chinese amah ( nurse ) , alongside his elder brothers Peveril ( 1877 – 1951 ) and Armine ( 1879 – 1936 ) . When he was two , the brothers were brought to England , where they were placed under the care of an English nanny in a house adjoining that of Eleanor 's father and mother . The boys ' parents returned to Hong Kong and became virtual strangers to their sons . Such an arrangement was then normal for middle @-@ class families based in the colonies . The lack of parental contact , and the harsh regime of some of those in loco parentis , left permanent emotional scars on many children from similar backgrounds , including the writers Thackeray , Saki , Kipling and Walpole . Wodehouse was more fortunate ; his nanny , Emma Roper , was strict but not unkind , and both with her and later at his different schools Wodehouse had a generally happy childhood . His recollection was that " it went like a breeze from start to finish , with everybody I met understanding me perfectly " . The biographer Robert McCrum suggests that nonetheless Wodehouse 's isolation from his parents left a psychological mark , causing him to avoid emotional engagement both in life and in his works . Another biographer , Frances Donaldson , writes , " Deprived so early , not merely of maternal love , but of home life and even a stable background , Wodehouse consoled himself from the youngest age in an imaginary world of his own " . 
 In 1886 the brothers were sent to a dame @-@ school in Croydon , where they spent three years . Peveril was then found to have a " weak chest " ; sea air was prescribed , and the three boys were moved to Elizabeth College on the island of Guernsey . In 1891 Wodehouse went on to Malvern House Preparatory School in Kent , which concentrated on preparing its pupils for entry to the Royal Navy . His father had planned a naval career for him , but the boy 's eyesight was found to be too poor for it . He was unimpressed by the school 's narrow curriculum and zealous discipline ; he later parodied it in his novels , with Bertie Wooster recalling his early years as a pupil at a " penitentiary ... with the outward guise of a prep school " called Malvern House . 
 Throughout their school years the brothers were sent to stay during the holidays with various uncles and aunts from both sides of the family . In the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , Iain Sproat counts twenty aunts and considers that they played an important part not only in Wodehouse 's early life , but , thinly disguised , in his mature novels , as the formidable aunts who dominate the action in the Wooster , Blandings , and other stories . The boys had fifteen uncles , four of whom were clergymen . Sproat writes that they inspired Wodehouse 's " pious but fallible curates , vicars , and bishops , of which he wrote with friendly irreverence but without mockery " . 
 At the age of twelve in 1894 , to his great joy , Wodehouse was able to follow his brother Armine to Dulwich College . He was entirely at home there ; Donaldson comments that Dulwich gave him , for the first time , " some continuity and a stable and ordered life " . He loved the camaraderie , distinguished himself at cricket , rugby and boxing , and was a good , if not consistently diligent , student . The headmaster at the time was A.H. Gilkes , a respected classicist , who was a strong influence on Wodehouse . In a study of Wodehouse 's works , Richard Usborne argues that " only a writer who was himself a scholar and had had his face ground into Latin and Greek ( especially Thucydides ) as a boy " could sustain the complex sequences of subordinate clauses sometimes found in Wodehouse 's comic prose . 
 Wodehouse 's six years at Dulwich were among the happiest of his life : " To me the years between 1894 and 1900 were like heaven . " In addition to his sporting achievements he was a good singer and enjoyed taking part in school concerts ; his literary leanings found an outlet in editing the school magazine , The <unk> . For the rest of his life he remained devoted to the school . The biographer Barry Phelps writes that Wodehouse " loved the college as much as he loved anything or anybody " . 
 = = = Reluctant banker ; budding writer : 1900 – 08 = = = 
 Wodehouse expected to follow Armine to the University of Oxford , but the family 's finances took a turn for the worse at the crucial moment . Ernest Wodehouse had retired in 1895 , and his pension was paid in rupees ; fluctuation against the pound reduced its value in Britain . Wodehouse recalled , " The wolf was not actually whining at the door and there was always a little something in the kitty for the butcher and the grocer , but the finances would not run to anything in the nature of a splash " . Instead of a university career , in September 1900 Wodehouse was engaged in a junior position in the London office of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank . He was unsuited to it and found the work baffling and uncongenial . He later wrote a humorous account of his experiences at the bank , but at the time he longed for the end of each working day , when he could return to his rented lodgings in Chelsea and write . At first he concentrated , with some success , on serious articles about school sports for Public School Magazine . In November 1900 his first comic piece , " Men Who Missed Their Own Weddings " , was accepted by Tit @-@ Bits . A new magazine for boys , The Captain , provided further well @-@ paid opportunities , and during his two years at the bank , Wodehouse had eighty pieces published in a total of nine magazines . 
 In 1901 , with the help of a former Dulwich master , William Beach Thomas , Wodehouse secured an appointment — at first temporary and later permanent — writing for The Globe 's popular " By the Way " column . He held the post until 1909 . At around the same time his first novel was published — a school story called The <unk> , serialised incomplete in Public School Magazine in early 1902 , and issued in full in hardback in September . He resigned from the bank that month to devote himself to writing full @-@ time . 
 Between the publication of The <unk> 1902 and that of Mike in 1909 , Wodehouse wrote eight novels and co @-@ wrote another two . The critic <unk> French writes that , of Wodehouse 's work from this period , almost all that deserves to survive is the school fiction . Looking back in the 1950s Wodehouse viewed these as his apprentice years : " I was practically in swaddling clothes and it is extremely creditable to me that I was able to write at all . " 
 From his boyhood Wodehouse had been fascinated by America , which he conceived of as " a land of romance " ; he " yearned " to visit the country , and by 1904 he had earned enough to do so . In April he sailed to New York , which he found greatly to his liking . He noted in his diary : " In New York gathering experience . Worth many guineas in the future but none for the moment " . This prediction proved correct : few British writers had first @-@ hand experience of the US , and his articles about life in New York brought him higher than usual fees . He later recalled that " in 1904 anyone in the London writing world who had been to America was regarded with awe and looked upon as an authority on that terra incognita . ... After that trip to New York I was a man who counted . ... My income rose like a rocketing pheasant . " 
 Wodehouse 's other new venture in 1904 was writing for the stage . Towards the end of the year the librettist Owen Hall invited him to contribute an additional lyric for a musical comedy Sergeant Brue . Wodehouse had loved theatre since his first visit , aged thirteen , when Gilbert and Sullivan 's Patience had made him " drunk with ecstasy " . His lyric for Hall , " Put Me in My Little Cell " , was a Gilbertian number for a trio of comic crooks , with music by Frederick Rosse ; it was well received and launched Wodehouse on a career as a theatre writer that spanned three decades . 
 Although it made little impact on its first publication , the 1906 novel Love Among the Chickens contained what French calls the author 's first original comic creation : Stanley <unk> <unk> . The character , an amoral , bungling opportunist , is partly based on Wodehouse 's Globe colleague Herbert Westbrook . The two collaborated between 1907 and 1913 on two books , two music hall sketches , and a play , Brother Alfred . Wodehouse would return to the character in short stories over the next six decades . 
 In early 1906 the actor @-@ manager Seymour Hicks invited Wodehouse to become resident lyricist at the Aldwych Theatre , to add topical verses to newly imported or long @-@ running shows . Hicks had already recruited the young Jerome Kern to write the music for such songs . The first Kern @-@ Wodehouse collaboration , a comic number for The Beauty of Bath titled " Mr [ Joseph ] Chamberlain " , was a show @-@ stopper and was briefly the most popular song in London . 
 = = = Psmith , Blandings , Wooster and Jeeves : 1908 – 15 = = = 
 Wodehouse 's early period as a writer came to an end in 1908 with the serialisation of The Lost Lambs , published the following year in book form as the second half of the novel Mike . The work begins as a conventional school story , but Wodehouse introduces a new and strikingly original character , Psmith , whose creation both Evelyn Waugh and George Orwell regarded as a watershed in Wodehouse 's development . Wodehouse said that he based Psmith on the hotelier and impresario Rupert D 'Oyly Carte — " the only thing in my literary career which was handed to me on a silver plate with watercress around it " . Wodehouse wrote in the 1970s that a cousin of his who had been at school with Carte told him of the latter 's monocle , studied suavity , and stateliness of speech , all of which Wodehouse adopted for his new character . Psmith featured in three more novels : Psmith in the City ( 1910 ) , a burlesque of banking ; Psmith , Journalist ( 1915 ) set in New York ; and Leave It to Psmith ( 1923 ) , set at Blandings Castle . 
 In May 1909 Wodehouse made his second visit to New York , where he sold two short stories to Cosmopolitan and Collier 's for a total of $ 500 , a much higher fee than he had commanded previously . He resigned from The Globe and stayed in New York for nearly a year . He sold many more stories , but none of the American publications offered a permanent relationship and guaranteed income . Wodehouse returned to England in late 1910 , rejoining The Globe and also contributing regularly to The Strand Magazine . Between then and the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 he revisited America frequently . 
 Wodehouse was in New York when the war began . Ineligible for military service because of his poor eyesight , he remained in the US throughout the war , detached from the conflict in Europe and absorbed in his theatrical and literary concerns . In September 1914 he married Ethel May Wayman , née Newton ( 1885 – 1984 ) , an English widow . The marriage proved happy and lifelong . Ethel 's personality was in contrast with her husband 's : he was shy and impractical ; she was gregarious , decisive and well organised . In Sproat 's phrase , she " took charge of Wodehouse 's life and made certain that he had the peace and quiet he needed to write " . There were no children of the marriage , but Wodehouse came to love Ethel 's daughter Leonora ( 1905 – 1944 ) and legally adopted her . 
 Wodehouse experimented with different genres of fiction in these years ; his Psmith , Journalist , mixing comedy with social comment on slum landlords and racketeers , was published in 1915 . In the same year The Saturday Evening Post paid $ 3 @,@ 500 to serialise Something New , the first of what became a series of novels set at Blandings Castle . It was published in hardback in the US and the UK in the same year ( the British edition being retitled Something Fresh ) . It was Wodehouse 's first farcical novel ; it was also his first best @-@ seller , and although his later books included some gentler , lightly sentimental stories , it was as a <unk> that he became known . Later in the same year " <unk> Young Gussie " , the first story about Bertie and Jeeves , was published . These stories introduced two sets of characters about whom Wodehouse wrote for the rest of his life . The Blandings Castle stories , set in an English stately home , depict the attempts of the placid Lord Emsworth to evade the many distractions around him , which include successive pairs of young lovers , the machinations of his exuberant brother Galahad , the demands of his domineering sisters and super @-@ efficient secretaries , and anything detrimental to his prize sow , the Empress of Blandings . The Bertie and Jeeves stories feature an amiable young man @-@ about @-@ town , regularly rescued from the consequences of his idiocy by the benign interference of his valet . 
 = = = Broadway : 1915 – 19 = = = 
 A third milestone in Wodehouse 's life came towards the end of 1915 : his old songwriting partner Jerome Kern introduced him to the writer Guy Bolton , who became Wodehouse 's closest friend and a regular collaborator . Bolton and Kern had a musical , Very Good Eddie , running at the Princess Theatre in New York . The show was successful , but they thought the song lyrics weak and invited Wodehouse to join them on its successor . This was Miss Springtime ( 1916 ) , which ran for 227 performances — a good run by the standards of the day . The team produced several more successes , including Leave It to Jane ( 1917 ) , Oh , Boy ! ( 1917 – 18 ) and Oh , Lady ! Lady ! ! ( 1918 ) , and Wodehouse and Bolton wrote a few more shows with other composers . In these musicals Wodehouse 's lyrics won high praise from critics as well as fellow lyricists such as Ira Gershwin . 
 Unlike his original model , Gilbert , Wodehouse preferred the music to be written first , fitting his words into the melodies . Donaldson suggests that this is the reason why his lyrics have largely been overlooked in recent years : they fit the music perfectly , but do not stand on their own in verse form as Gilbert 's do . Nonetheless , Donaldson adds , the book and lyrics for the Princess Theatre shows made the collaborators an enormous fortune and played an important part in the development of the American musical . In the Grove Dictionary of American Music Larry Stempel writes , " By presenting naturalistic stories and characters and attempting to integrate the songs and lyrics into the action of the libretto , these works brought a new level of intimacy , cohesion , and sophistication to American musical comedy . " The theatre writer Gerald Bordman calls Wodehouse " the most observant , literate , and witty lyricist of his day " . The composer Richard Rodgers wrote , " Before Larry Hart , only P.G. Wodehouse had made any real assault on the intelligence of the song @-@ listening public . " 
 = = = 1920s = = = 
 In the years after the war , Wodehouse steadily increased his sales , polished his existing characters and introduced new ones . Bertie and Jeeves , Lord Emsworth and his circle , and <unk> appeared in novels and short stories ; Psmith made his fourth and last appearance ; two new characters were the Oldest Member , narrating his series of golfing stories , and Mr Mulliner , telling his particularly tall tales to fellow patrons of the bar at the Angler 's Rest . Various other young men @-@ about @-@ town appeared in short stories about members of the Drones Club . 
 The Wodehouses returned to England , where they had a house in London for some years , but Wodehouse continued to cross the Atlantic frequently , spending substantial periods in New York . He continued to work in the theatre . During the 1920s he collaborated on nine musical comedies produced on Broadway or in the West End , including the long @-@ running Sally ( 1920 , New York ) , The Cabaret Girl ( 1922 , London ) and Rosalie ( 1928 , New York ) . He also wrote non @-@ musical plays , including The Play 's the Thing ( 1926 ) , adapted from Ferenc Molnár , and A Damsel in Distress ( 1928 ) , a dramatisation of his 1919 novel . 
 Though never a naturally gregarious man , Wodehouse was more sociable in the 1920s than at other periods . Donaldson lists among those with whom he was on friendly terms writers including A.A. Milne , Ian Hay , Frederick Lonsdale and E. Phillips Oppenheim , and stage performers including George Grossmith , Jr . , Heather Thatcher and Dorothy Dickson . 
 = = = Hollywood : 1929 – 31 = = = 
 There had been films of Wodehouse stories since 1915 , when A Gentleman of Leisure was based on his 1910 novel of the same name . Further screen adaptations of his books were made between then and 1927 , but it was not until 1929 that Wodehouse first went to Hollywood , where Bolton was then working as a highly paid writer for Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) . Ethel was taken with both the financial and social aspects of Hollywood life , and she negotiated a contract with MGM on her husband 's behalf under which he would be paid $ 2 @,@ 000 a week . This large salary was particularly welcome because the couple had lost considerable sums in the Wall Street Crash of 1929 . 
 The contract started in May 1930 , but the studio found little for Wodehouse to do , and he had spare time to write a novel and nine short stories . He commented , " It 's odd how soon one comes to look on every minute as wasted that is given to earning one 's salary . " Even when the studio found a project for him to work on , the interventions of committees and constant rewriting by numerous contract authors meant that his ideas were rarely used . In a 2005 study of Wodehouse in Hollywood , Brian Taves writes that Those Three French Girls ( 1930 ) was " as close to a success as Wodehouse was to have at MGM . His only other credits were minimal , and the other projects he worked on were not produced . " 
 When Wodehouse 's contract ended after a year it was not renewed . At MGM 's request , he gave an interview to The Los Angeles Times . Wodehouse , who was described by Herbert Warren Wind as " politically naive [ and ] fundamentally unworldly " , caused a sensation by saying publicly what he had already told his friends privately about Hollywood 's inefficiency , arbitrary decision @-@ making and waste of expensive talent . The interview was reprinted in The New York Times , and there was much editorial comment about the state of the film industry . Many writers have considered that the interview precipitated a radical overhaul of the studio system , but Taves believes it to have been " a storm in a teacup " , and Donaldson comments that in the straitened post @-@ crash era the reforms would sooner or later have been inevitable . 
 Wind 's view of Wodehouse 's naïveté is not universally held . Biographers including Donaldson , McCrum and Phelps suggest that his unworldliness was only part of a complex character , and that in some respects he was highly astute . He was unsparing of the studio owners in his early @-@ 1930s short stories set in Hollywood , which contain what Taves considers Wodehouse 's sharpest and most biting satire . 
 = = = Best @-@ seller : 1930s = = = 
 During the 1930s Wodehouse 's theatrical work tailed off . He wrote or adapted four plays for the West End ; Leave it to Psmith ( 1930 ) , which he adapted in collaboration with Ian Hay , was the only one to have a long run . The reviewer in The Manchester Guardian praised the play , but commented : " It is Mr Wodehouse 's own inimitable narrative comments and descriptions in his own person of the antics of his puppets that one misses . They cannot be got into a play and they are at least half the fun of the novels . " In 1934 Wodehouse collaborated with Bolton on the book for Cole Porter 's Anything Goes ( Porter wrote his own lyrics ) , but at the last minute their version was almost entirely rewritten by others at the instigation of the producer , who disliked the original script . Concentrating on writing novels and short stories , Wodehouse reached the peak of his productivity in this decade , averaging two books each year , and grossing an annual £ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 His practice of dividing his time between Britain and America caused Wodehouse difficulties with the tax authorities of both countries . Both the UK Inland Revenue and the US Internal Revenue Service sought to tax him as a resident . After lengthy negotiations the matter was settled , but the Wodehouses decided to change their residential status beyond doubt by moving to France , where they bought a house near Le Touquet in northern France . 
 In 1936 Wodehouse created the last of his regular cast of principal characters , Lord Ickenham , otherwise known as Uncle Fred , who , in Usborne 's words , " leads the dance in four novels and a short story ... a whirring dynamo of misrule " . His other books from the decade include Right Ho , Jeeves , which Donaldson judged his best work , Uncle Fred in the Springtime , which the writer Bernard Levin considered the best , and Blandings Castle , which contains " Lord Emsworth and the Girl Friend " , which Rudyard Kipling thought " one of the most perfect short stories I have ever read " . 
 Other leading literary figures who admired Wodehouse were A.E. Housman , Max Beerbohm and Hilaire Belloc ; on the radio and in print Belloc called Wodehouse " the best writer of our time : the best living writer of English ... the head of my profession " . Wodehouse regarded Belloc 's plaudit as " a gag , to get a rise out of serious @-@ minded authors whom he disliked " . Wodehouse was never sure that his books had literary merit as well as popular appeal , and , Donaldson suggests , must have been overwhelmed when the University of Oxford conferred an honorary doctorate of letters on him in June 1939 . His visit to England for the awarding ceremony was the last time he set foot in his native land . 
 = = = Second World War : internment and broadcasts = = = 
 At the start of the Second World War Wodehouse and his wife remained at their Le Touquet house , where , during the Phoney War , he worked on Joy in the Morning . With the advance of the Germans , the nearby Royal Air Force base withdrew ; Wodehouse was offered the sole spare seat in one of the fighter aircraft , but he turned down the opportunity as it would have meant leaving behind Ethel and their dog . On 21 May 1940 , with German troops advancing through northern France , the Wodehouses decided to drive to Portugal and fly from there to the US . Two miles from home their car broke down , so they returned and borrowed a car from a neighbour ; with the routes blocked with refugees , they returned home again . 
 The Germans occupied Le Touquet on 22 May 1940 and Wodehouse had to report to the authorities daily . After two months of occupation the Germans interned all male enemy nationals under 60 , and Wodehouse was sent to a former prison in Loos , a suburb of Lille , on 21 July ; Ethel remained in Le Touquet . The internees were placed four to a cell , each of which had been designed for one man . One bed was available per cell , which was made available to the eldest man — not Wodehouse , who slept on the granite floor . The prisoners were not kept long in Loos before they were transported in cattle trucks to a former barracks in Liège which was run as a prison by the SS . After a week the men were transferred to Huy in Liège , Belgium , where they were incarcerated in the local citadel . They remained there until September 1940 , when they were transported to Tost in Upper Silesia ( then Germany , now <unk> in Poland ) . 
 Wodehouse 's family and friends had not had any news of his location after the fall of France , but an article from an Associated Press reporter who had visited Tost in December 1940 led to pressure on the German authorities to release the novelist . This included a petition from influential people in the US ; Senator W. Warren Barbour presented it to the German ambassador . Although his captors refused to release him , Wodehouse was provided with a typewriter and , to pass the time , he wrote Money in the Bank . Throughout his time in Tost , he sent postcards to his US literary agent asking for $ 5 to be sent to various people in Canada , mentioning his name . These were the families of Canadian prisoners of war , and the news from Wodehouse was the first indication that their sons were alive and well . Wodehouse risked severe punishment for the communication , but managed to evade the German censor . 
 On 21 June 1941 , while he was in the middle of playing a game of cricket , Wodehouse received a visit from two members of the Gestapo . He was given ten minutes to pack his things before he was taken to the Hotel Adlon , a top luxury hotel in Berlin . He stayed there at his own expense ; royalties from the German editions of his books had been put into a special frozen bank account at the outset of the war , and Wodehouse was permitted to draw upon this money he had earned whilst staying in Berlin . He was thus released from internment a few months before his sixtieth birthday — the age at which civilian internees were released by the Nazis . Shortly afterwards Wodehouse was , in the words of Phelps , " cleverly trapped " into making five broadcasts to the US via German radio , with the Berlin @-@ based correspondent of the Columbia Broadcasting System . The broadcasts — aired on 28 June , 9 , 23 and 30 July , and 6 August — were titled How to be an <unk> Without Previous Training , and comprised humorous anecdotes about Wodehouse 's experiences as a prisoner , including some gentle mocking of captors . The German propaganda ministry arranged for the recordings to be broadcast to Britain in August . The day after Wodehouse recorded his final programme , Ethel joined him in Berlin , having sold most of her jewellery to pay for the journey . 
 = = = Aftermath : reactions and investigation = = = 
 The reaction in Britain to Wodehouse 's broadcasts was hostile , and he was " reviled ... as a traitor , collaborator , Nazi propagandist , and a coward " , although , Phelps observes , many of those who decried his actions had not heard the content of the programmes . A front page article in The Daily Mirror stated that Wodehouse " lived luxuriously because Britain laughed with him , but when the laughter was out of his country 's heart , ... [ he ] was not ready to share her suffering . He hadn 't the guts ... even to stick it out in the internment camp . " In the House of Commons Anthony Eden , the Foreign Secretary , regretted Wodehouse 's actions . Several libraries removed Wodehouse novels from their shelves . 
 On 15 July the journalist William Connor , under his pen name Cassandra , broadcast a postscript to the news programme railing against Wodehouse . According to The Times , the broadcast " provoked a storm of complaint ... from listeners all over the country " . Wodehouse 's biographer , Joseph Connolly , thinks the broadcast " inaccurate , spiteful and slanderous " ; Phelps calls it " probably the most vituperative attack on an individual ever heard on British radio " . The broadcast was made at the direct instruction of Duff Cooper , the Minister of Information , who overruled strong protests made by the BBC against the decision to air the programme . Numerous letters appeared in the British press , both supporting and criticising Wodehouse . The letters page of The Daily Telegraph became a focus for censuring Wodehouse , including one from Wodehouse 's friend , A.A. Milne ; a reply from their fellow author Compton Mackenzie in defence of Wodehouse was not published because the editor claimed a lack of space . Most of those defending Wodehouse against accusations of disloyalty , including Sax Rohmer , Dorothy L. Sayers and Gilbert <unk> , conceded that he had acted stupidly . Some members of the public wrote to the newspapers to say that the full facts were not yet known and a fair judgment could not be made until they were . The management of the BBC , who considered Wodehouse 's actions no worse than " ill advised " , pointed out to Cooper that there was no evidence at that point whether Wodehouse had acted voluntarily or under compulsion . 
 When Wodehouse heard of the furore the broadcasts had caused , he contacted the Foreign Office — through the Swiss embassy in Berlin — to explain his actions , and attempted to return home via neutral countries , but the German authorities refused to let him leave . In Performing Flea , a 1953 collection of letters , Wodehouse wrote , " Of course I ought to have had the sense to see that it was a loony thing to do to use the German radio for even the most harmless stuff , but I didn 't . I suppose prison life saps the intellect " . The reaction in America was mixed : the left @-@ leaning publication P.M. accused Wodehouse of " play [ ing ] Jeeves to the Nazis " , but the Department of War used the interviews as an ideal representation of anti @-@ Nazi propaganda . 
 The Wodehouses remained in Germany until September 1943 , when Allied bombing led to the couple being allowed to move back to Paris . They were living there when the city was liberated on 25 August 1944 ; Wodehouse reported to the American authorities the following day , asking them to inform the British of his whereabouts . He was subsequently visited by Malcolm Muggeridge , recently arrived in Paris as an intelligence officer with MI6 . The young officer quickly came to like Wodehouse and considered the question of treasonable behaviour as " ludicrous " ; he summed up the writer as " ill @-@ fitted to live in an age of ideological conflict " . On 9 September Wodehouse was visited by an MI5 officer and former barrister , Major Edward <unk> , who formally investigated him , a process that stretched over four days . On 28 September <unk> filed his report , which states that in regard to the broadcasts , Wodehouse 's behaviour " has been unwise " , but advised against further action . On 23 November Theobald Matthew , the Director of Public Prosecutions , decided there was no evidence to justify prosecuting Wodehouse . 
 In November 1944 Duff Cooper was appointed British ambassador to France and was provided accommodation at the Hôtel Le Bristol , where the Wodehouses were living . Cooper complained to the French authorities , and the couple were moved to a different hotel . They were subsequently arrested by French police and placed under preventive detention , despite no charges being presented . When Muggeridge tracked them down later , he managed to get Ethel released straight away and , four days later , ensured that the French authorities declared Wodehouse unwell and put him in a nearby hospital , which was more comfortable than where they had been detained . While in this hospital , Wodehouse worked on his novel Uncle Dynamite . 
 While still detained by the French , Wodehouse was again mentioned in questions in the House of Commons in December 1944 when MPs wondered if the French authorities could repatriate him to stand trial . Eden stated that the " matter has been gone into , and , according to the advice given , there are no grounds upon which we could take action " . Two months later George Orwell wrote the essay " In Defence of P.G. Wodehouse " , where he stated that " it is important to realise that the events of 1941 do not convict Wodehouse of anything worse than stupidity " . Orwell 's rationale was that Wodehouse 's " moral outlook has remained that of a public @-@ school boy , and according to the public @-@ school code , treachery in time of war is the most unforgivable of all the sins " , which was compounded by his " complete lack — so far as one can judge from his printed works — of political awareness " . 
 On 15 January 1945 the French authorities released Wodehouse , but they did not inform him , until June 1946 , that he would not face any official charges and was free to leave the country . 
 = = = American exile : 1946 – 75 = = = 
 Having secured American visas in July 1946 , the Wodehouses made preparations to return to New York . They were delayed by Ethel 's insistence on acquiring suitable new clothes and by Wodehouse 's wish to finish writing his current novel , The Mating Season , in the peace of the French countryside . In April 1947 they sailed to New York , where Wodehouse was relieved at the friendly reception he received from the large press contingent awaiting his arrival . Ethel secured a comfortable penthouse apartment in Manhattan 's Upper East Side , but Wodehouse was not at ease . The New York that he had known before the war was much changed . The magazines that had paid lavishly for his stories were in decline , and those that remained were not much interested in him . He was sounded out about writing for Broadway , but he was not at home in the post @-@ war theatre ; he had money problems , with large sums temporarily tied up in Britain , and for the first time in his career he had no ideas for a new novel . He did not complete one until 1951 . 
 Wodehouse remained unsettled until he and Ethel abandoned the city . Bolton and his wife lived in the prosperous hamlet of Remsenburg , part of the Southampton resort area of Long Island , 77 miles ( 124 km ) east of Manhattan . Wodehouse stayed with them frequently , and in 1952 he and Ethel bought a house nearby . They lived at Remsenburg for the rest of their lives . Between 1952 and 1975 he published more than twenty novels , as well as two collections of short stories , a heavily edited collection of his letters , a volume of memoirs , and a selection of his magazine articles . He continued to hanker after a revival of his theatrical career . A 1959 off @-@ Broadway revival of the 1917 Bolton @-@ Wodehouse @-@ Kern Leave It to Jane was a surprise hit , running for 928 performances , but his few post @-@ war stage works , some in collaboration with Bolton , made little impression . 
 Although Ethel made a return visit to England in 1948 to shop and visit family and friends , Wodehouse never left America after his arrival in 1947 . It was not until 1965 that the British government indicated privately that he could return without fear of legal proceedings , and by then he felt too old to make the journey . The biographers Benny Green and Robert McCrum both take the view that this exile benefited Wodehouse 's writing , helping him to go on depicting an idealised England seen in his mind 's eye , rather than as it actually was in the post @-@ war decades . 
 In 1955 Wodehouse became an American citizen , though he remained a British subject , and was therefore eligible for UK state honours . He was considered for the award of a knighthood three times from 1967 , but the honour was twice blocked by British officials . In 1974 the British prime minister , Harold Wilson , intervened to secure a knighthood ( KBE ) for Wodehouse , which was announced in January 1975 , in the same New Year Honours list in which Charlie Chaplin became Sir Charles . The Times commented that Wodehouse 's honour signalled " official forgiveness for his wartime indiscretion . ... It is late , but not too late , to take the sting out of that unhappy incident . " 
 The following month Wodehouse entered Southampton Hospital , Long Island , for treatment of a skin complaint . While there , he suffered a heart attack and died on 14 February 1975 at the age of 93 . He was buried at Remsenburg Presbyterian Church four days later . Ethel outlived him by more than nine years ; Leonora had predeceased him , dying suddenly in 1944 . 
 = = Writing = = 
