 Early in his career , James Russell Lowell 's writing was influenced by Swedenborgianism , a Spiritualism @-@ infused form of Christianity founded by Emanuel Swedenborg , causing Frances Longfellow ( wife of the poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow ) to mention that " he has been long in the habit of seeing spirits . " He composed his poetry rapidly when inspired by an " inner light " but could not write to order . He subscribed to the common nineteenth @-@ century belief that the poet was a prophet but went further , linking religion , nature , and poetry , as well as social reform . Evert Augustus Duyckinck and others welcomed Lowell as part of Young America , a New York @-@ based movement . Though not officially affiliated with them , he shared some of their ideals , including the belief that writers have an inherent insight into the moral nature of humanity and have an obligation for literary action along with their aesthetic function . Unlike many of his contemporaries , including members of Young America , Lowell did not advocate for the creation of a new national literature . Instead , he called for a natural literature , regardless of country , caste , or race , and warned against provincialism which might " put farther off the hope of one great brotherhood . " He agreed with his neighbor Longfellow that " whoever is most universal , is also most national . " As Lowell said : 
 I believe that no poet in this age can write much that is good unless he gives himself up to [ the radical ] tendency ... The proof of poetry is , in my mind , that it reduces to the essence of a single line the vague philosophy which is floating in all men 's minds , and so render it portable and useful , and ready to the hand ... At least , no poem ever makes me respect its author which does not in some way convey a truth of philosophy . 
 A scholar of linguistics , Lowell was one of the founders of the American Dialect Society . He used this interest in his writing , particularly in The Biglow Papers , presenting a heavily ungrammatical phonetic spelling of the Yankee dialect . In using this vernacular , Lowell intended to get closer to the common man 's experience and was rebelling against more formal and , as he thought , unnatural representations of Americans in literature . As he wrote in his introduction to The Biglow Papers , " few American writers or speakers wield their native language with the directness , precision , and force that are common as the day in the mother country . " Though intentionally humorous , this accurate presentation of the dialect was pioneering work in American literature . For example , Lowell 's character Hosea Biglow says in verse : 
 Lowell is considered one of the Fireside Poets , a group of writers from New England in the 1840s who all had a substantial national following and whose work was often read aloud by the family fireplace . Besides Lowell , the main figures from this group were Longfellow , Holmes , John Greenleaf Whittier , and William Cullen Bryant . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 Although he was an abolitionist , Lowell 's opinions on African @-@ Americans wavered . Though Lowell advocated suffrage for blacks , he noted that their ability to vote could be troublesome . Even so , he wrote , " We believe the white race , by their intellectual and traditional superiority , will retain sufficient ascendancy to prevent any serious mischief from the new order of things . " Freed slaves , he wrote , were " dirty , lazy & lying . " Even before his marriage to the abolitionist Maria White , Lowell wrote : " The abolitionists are the only ones with whom I sympathize of the present extant parties . " After his marriage , Lowell at first did not share White 's enthusiasm for the cause but was eventually pulled in . The couple often gave money to fugitive slaves , even when their own financial situation was not strong , especially if they were asked to free a spouse or child . Even so , he did not always fully agree with the followers of the movement . The majority of these people , he said , " treat ideas as ignorant persons do cherries . They think them unwholesome unless they are swallowed , stones and all . " Lowell depicted Southerners very unfavorably in his second collection of The Biglow Papers but , by 1865 , admitted that Southerners were " guilty only of weakness " and , by 1868 , said that he sympathized with Southerners and their viewpoint on slavery . Enemies and friends of Lowell alike questioned his vacillating interest in the question of slavery . Abolitionist Samuel Joseph May accused Lowell of trying to quit the movement because of his association with Harvard and the Boston Brahmin culture : " Having got into the smooth , dignified , self @-@ complacent , and change @-@ hating society of the college and its Boston circles , Lowell has gone over to the world , and to ' respectability ' . " 
 Lowell was also involved in other reform movements . He urged for better conditions for factory workings , opposed capital punishment , and supported the temperance movement . His friend Longfellow was especially concerned about his fanaticism for temperance , worrying that Lowell would ask him to destroy his wine cellar . There are many references to Lowell 's drinking during his college years and part of his reputation in school was based on it . His friend Edward Everett Hale denied these allegations and , even then , Lowell considered joining the " Anti @-@ Wine " club and later , during the early years of his first marriage , became a teetotaler . However , as Lowell gained notoriety , he became popular in social circles and clubs and , away from his wife , he drank rather heavily . When he drank , he had wild mood swings , ranging from euphoria to frenzy . 
 = = Criticism and legacy = = 
 In 1849 , Lowell said of himself , " I am the first poet who has endeavored to express the American Idea , and I shall be popular by and by . " Poet Walt Whitman said : " Lowell was not a grower — he was a builder . He built poems : he didn 't put in the seed , and water the seed , and send down his sun — letting the rest take care of itself : he measured his poems — kept them within formula . " Fellow Fireside Poet John Greenleaf Whittier praised Lowell by writing two poems in his honor and calling him " our new Theocritus " and " one of the strongest and manliest of our writers – a republican poet who dares to speak brave words of unpopular truth . " British author Thomas Hughes referred to Lowell as one of the most important writers in the United States : " Greece had her Aristophanes ; Rome her Juvenal ; Spain has had her Cervantes ; France her Rabelais , her Molière , her Voltaire ; Germany her Jean Paul , her Heine ; England her Swift , her Thackeray ; and America has her Lowell . " Lowell 's satires and use of dialect were an inspiration for writers like Mark Twain , William Dean Howells , H. L. Mencken , and Ring Lardner . 
 Contemporary critic and editor Margaret Fuller wrote , " his verse is stereotyped ; his thought sounds no depth , and posterity will not remember him . " Duyckinck thought Lowell was too similar to other poets like William Shakespeare and John Milton . Ralph Waldo Emerson noted that , though Lowell had significant technical skill , his poetry " rather expresses his wish , his ambition , than the uncontrollable interior impulse which is the authentic mark of a new poem ... and which is felt in the pervading tone , rather than in brilliant parts or lines . " Even his friend Richard Henry Dana Jr . , questioned Lowell 's abilities , calling him " very clever , entertaining & good humored ... but he is rather a trifler , after all . " In the twentieth century , poet Richard Armour dismissed Lowell , writing : " As a Harvard graduate and an editor for the Atlantic Monthly , it must have been difficult for Lowell to write like an illiterate oaf , but he succeeded . " The poet Amy Lowell featured her relative James Russell Lowell in her poem A Critical Fable ( 1922 ) , the title mocking A Fable for Critics . Here , a fictional version of Lowell says he does not believe that women will ever be equal to men in the arts and " the two sexes cannot be ranked counterparts . " Modern literary critic Van Wyck Brooks wrote that Lowell 's poetry was forgettable : " one read them five times over and still forgot them , as if this excellent verse had been written in water . " Nonetheless , in 1969 the Modern Language Association established a prize named after Lowell , awarded annually for " an outstanding literary or linguistic study , a critical edition of an important work , or a critical biography . " 
 Lowell 's poem " The Present Crisis , " an early work that addressed the national crisis over slavery leading up to the Civil War , has had an impact in the modern civil rights movement . The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People named its newsletter The Crisis after the poem , and Martin Luther King , Jr. frequently quoted the poem in his speeches and sermons . The poem was also the source of the hymn Once to Every Man and Nation . 
 = = List of selected works = = 
 Poetry collections 
 A Year 's Life ( 1841 ) 
 Miscellaneous Poems ( 1843 ) 
 The Biglow Papers ( 1848 ) 
 A Fable for Critics ( 1848 ) 
 Poems ( 1848 ) 
 The Vision of Sir <unk> ( 1848 ) 
 Under the Willows ( 1869 ) 
 The Cathedral ( 1870 ) 
 <unk> and Rue ( 1888 ) 
 Essay collections 
 Conversations on the Old Poets ( 1844 ) 
 Fireside Travels ( 1864 ) 
 Among My Books ( 1870 ) 
 My Study Windows ( 1871 ) 
 Among My Books ( second collection , 1876 ) 
 Democracy and Other Addresses ( 1886 ) 
 Political Essays ( 1888 ) 
 = Jean Keene = 
 Jean Keene ( October 20 , 1923 – January 13 , 2009 ) , also known as the Eagle Lady , was a former rodeo trick rider who became the subject of national attention due to her feeding of wild bald eagles on the Homer Spit in Homer , Alaska . Although she had many supporters for the feedings , she was also criticized for drawing a large population of eagles to the area . After her death , the city of Homer passed a law prohibiting the feeding of predatory birds . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jean Marie <unk> was born on October 20 , 1923 in Aitkin County , Minnesota . The eldest of three sisters and one brother , she grew up on a dairy farm in Aitkin , where she helped with farm chores including herding , feeding , and milking cows . She learned to ride horses and became a talented horse breaker and trainer . 
 In 1952 , she was recruited by the traveling rodeo outfit Red River Rodeo as a trick rider , and by the mid @-@ 1950s was anticipating an upcoming appearance at with Red River at Madison Square Garden . However , her rodeo career was abruptly cut short in a riding accident during a performance at Olympia Arena in Detroit , Michigan . While performing a trick called the " death drag " , she missed a handhold after leaning back too far in her saddle . She fell from her horse and was knocked unconscious when her head hit the arena wall . Her foot was still caught in the stirrup , and she was dragged around the arena , tangled in the horse 's legs , until other rodeo personnel were able to stop the horse . She suffered 15 fractures in her left knee . After surgery to repair her knee , she spent several months in recovery encased from the waist down in a plaster cast . After the cast was removed , she was still able to walk and ride , but not with the facility necessary to perform in the rodeo . 
 For a time she worked as a professional truck driver hauling cattle . In the late 1950s she married , and gave birth to a son , Lonnie , before divorcing . By the early 1960s she was a single mother . She opened up a dog and cat grooming business and also raised and bred cocker spaniels . She later became the owner and operator of Jolly Chef Truck Stop in Minneapolis , Minnesota . 
 Keene came to Alaska for the first time in the early 1970s to attend a cousin 's wedding . Attracted by the state 's beauty , she returned for several visits before making the decision in 1977 to move there — alone . Her son Lonnie was deemed old enough to make his own decisions , and he chose to remain in Minnesota . Keene took a week to drive from Minnesota to Alaska in a secondhand motorhome , ending in Homer , where she parked the motorhome at the end of Homer Spit in the Homer Spit Campground , where it remained for many years . She took a job at a fish processing facility on the Spit , the Icicle <unk> subsidiary Seward Fisheries , in the spring of 1977 , where she later became a foreman . 
 = = Feeding the eagles = = 
 Keene 's career as the " Eagle Lady " began shortly after her arrival in Homer , when one morning she noticed two bald eagles on the beach near her motorhome . Keene saw offering food to the eagles as a natural extension of her practice of keeping bird feeders filled with sunflower seeds for wild songbirds . She began to bring home surplus fish in a bucket from her job , and each morning would throw some fish to the eagles over the short driftwood fence she had made around her motorhome . By the end of that spring , a half @-@ dozen eagles were showing up for breakfast . The eagles departed with the arrival of summer , when the Spit became more active with human visitors , but they returned in the winter when tourist season had ended , and Keene resumed the daily feeding . 
 Within ten years , over 200 bald eagles were visiting during winter and early spring each day , and the job of feeding them became more involved . To have enough fish to last through the winter , she would begin in August to stockpile fish scraps and freezer burned fish donated by her employer and by other local companies . The fish was sometimes supplemented by moose meat that Keene salvaged when she heard of a road @-@ killed moose on the highway . She began feeding the eagles at about December 1 of each year , a job that took up to three hours ' work each morning . Keene obtained permission from her employer to use a company forklift to move the large containers of stockpiled fish scraps and freezer @-@ burned salmon , halibut , rockfish , cod , and herring out of the company 's large freezers . She then transferred the fish by hand into barrels or garbage cans , which she loaded up in her pickup truck . Then she would drive the load to her motorhome , about 100 yards ( 91 m ) from the Seward Fisheries plant , and cut the fish into fist @-@ sized pieces to be thrown out to the eagles . If the fish was fully frozen , she would use an axe , chainsaw , or blowtorch to break the fish down into smaller chunks , or might even have to lug the large garbage cans into her motorhome to thaw . " I don 't know if anyone else would do this , " she told a reporter in 1986 . " My motorhome smells like fish . My yard is fish . My truck is fish . I am fish . It gets kind of gross sometimes , especially when you 're handling a lot of slimy carcasses . " 
 Keene had been persistent in her efforts . In 1985 she broke her leg , but managed to keep to the feeding schedule even on crutches . In the winter of 1994 she was diagnosed with breast cancer and on her doctor 's advice underwent a mastectomy . She hired a friend to conduct feeding operations in her absence , but was back to do it herself three days after surgery . 
 On July 1 , 1998 , an ammonia leak and explosion at the Seward Fisheries plant caused a fire that led to the evacuation of Homer Spit and the ultimate destruction of the facility , which until then had been the major supplier of fish remains for Keene 's feeding operation . But Keene was able to report when winter came that she had found other sources and was ready for the eagles when they returned . 
 Although the number of visiting eagles fluctuated , about 200 to 300 eagles would show up each day during the months of winter and early spring . Crows and gulls were also attracted to the area . Keene fed them an estimated 500 pounds ( 227 kg ) of fish per day , about 50 @,@ 000 pounds ( 22 @,@ 680 kg ) per year . Her fish supply included surplus and freezer @-@ burned fish from fish processing facilities still on the Spit , her own purchases using her limited funds from Social Security or retirement benefits , or fish contributed by her supporters . Visitors could come and watch the eagles Keene fed on the Spit at no cost , but were asked to stay in their cars for their own safety and for the safety of the eagles . 
 = = Public attention = = 
 Keene 's work has been publicized in Reader 's Digest , National Geographic , The Washington Post , People , Life , " Ripley 's Believe It or Not ! " , and on The Rush Limbaugh Show . A 2004 book , The Eagle Lady by Alaska author and photographer Cary Anderson , documents Keene 's life and her relationship with the eagles . Keene received the 2004 Lifetime Meritorious Service Award from the Bald Eagle Foundation . Many of Keene 's strongest supporters were local hotel owners who got extra business in the normally sluggish winter season , and photographers who were able to use clever framing of shots in order to make it appear they were photographing eagles in the wild . These photographers made enough money from these works that they bought Keene a new house with some of the profits . The news satire program The Daily Show reported on its April 17 , 2006 edition that Homer had been overpopulated by bald eagles due in large part to Keene 's activities . A crew from the show spent two days in March 2006 shooting footage for the show , including a feeding session and interview with Keene and interviews with other Homer residents about Keene and the controversy then in progress about feeding eagles . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Some environmentalists were concerned with the large population of eagles drawn to Homer by Keene . They believed some eagles have been harmed due to their familiarity with people . Others were worried about the spread of disease or the change in the birds ' natural migrations . Allegedly , some other bird populations in the area , such as sandhill cranes , loons , and kittiwakes , have been driven out or killed by eagles , though there is no direct evidence . In fact , kittiwakes have increased in the area to the degree of founding a new colony close to Keene 's home . According to an ABC News broadcast , many Homer residents now consider the birds a " menace " , as they have been known to cause car accidents and steal pets . In a few cases , the birds have been shot at . An ordinance passed by the Homer City Council in 2006 prohibits the feeding of eagles within the city limits ; however , the city council granted Keene an exemption , giving her special permission to continue feeding bald eagles within city limits until April 2010 , at which time Keene would have been 86 . 
 = = Death = = 
 Keene died at home on January 13 , 2009 , aged 85 , from a respiratory condition . After her death , the Homer city council passed a new resolution banning the feeding of eagles , crows , ravens and other predatory and scavenger birds by any person , effective March 19 , 2009 . The resolution 's effective date was delayed until spring out of concern that the birds would either die of starvation or become highly aggressive if the feeding ended in the middle of winter . A memorial to Keene is planned at a nearby hotel that was a favorite dining spot of Keene 's and supplied much of her fish . 
 = Breathe on Me = 
 " Breathe on Me " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her fourth studio album In the Zone ( 2003 ) . It was written by Stephen Lee , Steve Anderson and Lisa Greene and produced by Mark Taylor . " Breathe on Me " is a dance and pop song that incorporates trip hop influences with sensual lyrics that use heavy breathing as a metaphor for sex , as a woman begs a man to " breathe on me " ; it culminates in a bridge resembling sexual climax . 
 " Breathe on Me " received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics , some of whom praised the song 's production while others criticized Spears ' Lolita persona . It drew comparisons to the work of Janet Jackson , Madonna , and Kylie Minogue . Despite not being released as a single , official remixes of the song were commissioned and released . Spears performed the song at Rain Nightclub ahead of the album 's release . It was also performed on The Onyx Hotel Tour ( 2004 ) , The M + M 's Tour ( 2007 ) , The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) , and Spears ' revamped Las Vegas residency show , Britney : Piece of Me ( 2016 – 17 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the Dream Within a Dream Tour in support of Britney finalized in July 2002 , Spears announced she would take a break from her career for six months . In November 2002 , she revealed that she had started working on her next studio album . She explained , " Well , actually , I just said that I wanted two or three weeks off . [ .... ] And the whole world was like , ' <unk> , [ sic ] she 's gone ... " When asked by The Hollywood Reporter about the direction of the record , Spears responded it was an organic evolution , adding , " It should just happen naturally from the way you feel . [ ... ] Whatever happens , happens " . Steve Anderson , Lisa Greene and Stephen Lee wrote " Breathe on Me " at Metrophonic Studios in London , England . Before meeting with the other writers , Anderson thought of two concepts for songs specifically for Spears : one he had worked on " for ages " , and " Breathe on Me " , which he drafted on the morning of the sessions . Greene and Lee did not like the first concept , and they wrote " Breathe on Me " with Anderson . The song was produced by Mark Taylor , who kept most of the programming done by Anderson . With Taylor , Spears recorded " Breathe on Me " and " And Then We Kiss " , which did not make the album . 
 Spears described " Breathe on Me " as " very vibe @-@ y , trance @-@ y , " explaining that the song " is basically about being with a guy and not even having to really be with each other , but just the intensity and the anxiety between not saying anything . You don 't even have to touch me , just breathe on me . " Britney 's " Lolita persona is revived " on the track . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Breathe on Me " is a dance and pop song with trip hop influences that lasts for a duration of three minutes and forty @-@ three seconds ( 3 : 43 ) . The track " includes moaning and heavy breathing . " Britney pleads , " Boy , don 't stop , ' cause I 'm half way there / It 's not complicated , we 're just syncopated . " The " sexy thump " of the song is briefly interrupted as Spears whispers , " Monogamy is the way to go / Just put your lips together and blow , " a reference to Lauren Bacall in the 1944 film To Have and Have Not . The song was described as Spears exploring " the eroticism of restraint . " The track has " swirling beats and pounding bass . " The lyrics are " a thinly veiled reference to oral sex " , in particular cunnilingus . 
 Jennifer Vineyard of MTV News wrote , " Of the songs on In the Zone , " Breathe on Me " most earns the trip @-@ hop comparisons . " The song received comparisons to Australian singer Kylie Minogue , a frequent collaborator of Steve Anderson , particularly her songs " Breathe " and " Confide in Me " ( the latter of which was co @-@ written by Anderson ) . " Breathe on Me " was also likened to the work of Madonna , who Spears collaborated with on " Me Against the Music " , and Janet Jackson , with a review saying " Britney clearly learned from the greats , Janet and Madonna , and positioned herself neatly as a legend alongside them . " 
 = = Remixes = = 
 " Breathe on Me " was intended to be released as a single in 2004 , but the In the Zone era was cut short due to a knee injury Spears received on the set of " Outrageous " music video . Official remixes of " Breathe on Me " were commissioned by Jive Records . James Holden produced remixes of the song . Bradley Stern of MuuMuse wrote , " The remix takes the throbbing trance perfection of the original and brings it to somewhat spookier new heights , stretching and distorting the singer ’ s sexy moans into lonesome cries on top of spaced @-@ out synthesizers and bright flourishes of electronica . " Stuart Price also produced the Jacques Lu Cont remixes of the song ; the Jacques Lu Cont Mix appeared on the bonus remix disk of Greatest Hits : My Prerogative in 2004 and Jacques Lu Cont 's Thin White Duke Mix appeared on B in the Mix : The Remixes in 2005 . The former was described as " faster and brighter , with a looped Giorgio Moroder @-@ style beat " while the latter " is half as long even though it slows the beat down to something slinky and lounge @-@ y , even slightly off @-@ key , making the song darker and dirtier . " Official remixes were also commissioned for Junior Vasquez , but even though his remixes have circulated on the internet , they remain unreleased . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Breathe on Me " received generally favorable reviews from contemporary critics . Tom Bishop of BBC News described the track as " a sumptuous seduction bearing the stamp of Kylie collaborator Steve Anderson . " Louis <unk> of AfterElton.com labeled it one of Britney 's most underrated songs , and a highlight from In the Zone . He said the song is a " sinister triumph " and " a steamy , yet icy affair that recalls the naughtiness of Kylie . " Linda McGee of RTÉ.ie compared " Breathe on Me " favorably to Madonna , commenting that " the pop princess treads , convincingly , on the territory of the Queen of Pop . " Additionally , " Breathe on Me " also drew comparisons to Janet Jackson . Jane Stevenson of Jam ! called the track a " throbbing " and " sexy , sweaty dance tune . " It was labeled an " album highlight and stellar pop song " with its " pulsing electronic beat and overwhelming sexuality . " MuuMuse referred to " Breathe on Me " as " the single that never was , " while PopEater named the song the best Britney Spears song that " you probably don 't know . " 
 The song , however , drew criticism for the revival of Spears ' Lolita persona . Elysa Gardner of USA Today wrote , " <unk> and moaning through overheated numbers such as Breathe on Me and Early Mornin ' , she still sounds creepily like a little girl trying to excite the older boys . " Bernard Zuel of the Sydney Morning Herald pinpointed " Breathe on Me " as a weaker track from the album : " Breathe on Me is breathy tosh that sounds frighteningly like Kylie . " Matthew Wilder of City Pages felt that moments of the song " access that queer @-@ o @-@ centric , cool @-@ to @-@ cold club sound of ' Vogue ' -era Madonna , but with a poignant difference . Britney is too thick , too slow , too homecoming queen to get over in Boys ' Town . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Breathe on Me " was performed for the first time as part of a surprise thirty @-@ minute set at Rain Nightclub at the Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas , Nevada on September 14 , 2003 . Spears and her dancers crawled on the floor , onto a <unk> , and pretended to make out with one another . One of the dancers ripped Spears ' top off , exposing her red bra . The song was also performed as part of Spears ' headlining set at Staples Center in Los Angeles , California for the annual KIIS @-@ FM Jingle Ball . 
 Spears performed the song on The Onyx Hotel Tour in support of In the Zone in 2004 . Following a costume change , Spears reappeared on a mini platform where she descended to the main stage on a pole . She wore pink lingerie and " cavorted on one of the stage 's two beds with a male dancer , thrashing her sizable blonde mane to and fro . " It was described as " easily the raciest in the oversexed show . " 
 On 2007 's The M + M 's Tour , which included six secret shows at House of Blues venues , Spears " seductively gyrated on the chair before her dancers returned and pulled a male fan from the audience to be serenaded by Spears . " The song was performed on 2009 's The Circus Starring Britney Spears tour alongside " Touch Of My Hand " . Spears stripped " down to panties and a barely @-@ there sheer top with strategically placed cones , and sang while suspended inside a giant picture frame that slowly spun around center stage . Landing on a couch adorned with men , she donned a blindfold and ascended halfway to the rafters again . Finally , it was just her grinding away with a <unk> . " 
 In the revamped concerts of Spears 's residency , Britney : Piece of Me ( 2016 @-@ 2017 ) , the song was added to the setlist , again , alongside " Touch Of My Hand " . Both songs were also performed in a medley at the 2016 Billboard Music Awards . 
 = Interstate 205 ( California ) = 
 Interstate 205 ( abbreviated I @-@ 205 ) is a short auxiliary Interstate Highway that connects Interstate 5 with Interstate 580 in the San Joaquin Valley in the U.S. state of California . Along with those highways , I @-@ 205 forms the north side of a triangle around the city of Tracy . The route provides access from the San Francisco Bay Area to the northern San Joaquin Valley . It is officially designated as the Robert T. Monagan Freeway after the California legislator who represented the area from 1961 to 1973 . 
 When I @-@ 205 opened in December 1970 , it replaced 11th Street , which passed through downtown Tracy , as part of the primary all @-@ land connection between the Bay Area and Sacramento until the Carquinez Bridge opened in 1927 , and carried the Lincoln Highway and later U.S. Route 50 . 11th Street is now signed as Interstate 205 Business . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Interstate 205 begins at the bottom of I @-@ 580 's eight @-@ lane descent from Altamont Pass into the San Joaquin Valley . Here I @-@ 580 turns southeast to a junction with I @-@ 5 , paralleling the California Aqueduct and Delta @-@ Mendota Canal along the foothills , while I @-@ 205 continues east as a six @-@ lane roadway , immediately crossing both waterways . The first interchange is with Mountain House Parkway , formerly Patterson Pass Road , which serves the planned community of Mountain House . Next is a split with Business 205 , a business loop that follows 11th Street through Tracy . As I @-@ 205 curves east @-@ northeast and back east through the northern part of Tracy , it has interchanges with Grant Line Road ( County Route J4 towards Antioch ) , Tracy Boulevard ( County Route <unk> through downtown Tracy ) , and MacArthur Drive . After several miles without an interchange , the highway ends at a merge with I @-@ 5 , where traffic can continue northeast to the junction with SR 120 near <unk> and then east on SR 120 towards Yosemite National Park or north on I @-@ 5 towards Stockton . 
 As it connects to I @-@ 580 , I @-@ 205 is a frequently @-@ congested major commuter route to the Bay Area . Signs on eastbound I @-@ 580 instruct travelers to take I @-@ 205 , SR 120 , and SR 99 to reach Modesto instead of using the direct , but non @-@ freeway , route SR 132 . I @-@ 205 also serves to connect the Bay Area with popular weekend destinations such as Yosemite , Reno , and Lake Tahoe . The Altamont Commuter Express provides commuters with an alternate route over Altamont Pass to San Jose and San Francisco , the latter through a transfer to BART . 
 = = History = = 
 When the Department of Engineering laid out the initial state highway system after the state 's voters approved a bond issue to pay for it in 1910 , they included Route 5 , connecting Santa Cruz and Oakland with Stockton via Altamont Pass . San Joaquin County paved the portion near Tracy with asphalt with their own bond issue , passed in 1909 , and the state later resurfaced it with concrete . In addition , the new concrete road bypassed Banta , which the old county road had passed through via Banta Road , F Street , and Grant Line Road . Otherwise , the road was relatively direct , coming down from Altamont Pass onto Grant Line Road , following Byron Highway into Tracy , and leaving east and northeasterly on 11th Street to the San Joaquin River at the <unk> Crossing . The Lincoln Highway Association chose this route in 1913 for their transcontinental highway , where it remained until the Carquinez Bridge opened in 1927 , creating a shorter route via Vallejo . In 1926 , the American Association of State Highway Officials designated the Stockton @-@ Bay Area route as US 48 , which was absorbed by an extension of US 50 by the early 1930s . 
 A 1938 four @-@ lane bypass of the old road around Altamont Pass was extended east to Tracy as a four @-@ lane expressway on November 16 , 1954 . By then , the entire route between the Bay Area and Stockton was four or more lanes , following the present I @-@ 580 ( eastbound lanes where they separate ) , I @-@ 205 , 11th Street , and I @-@ 5 from Livermore through Tracy to Stockton . During early planning for the Interstate Highway System , the main north @-@ south route through California ( now I @-@ 5 ) was to use SR 99 through the San Joaquin Valley ; a connection to the Bay Area split near Modesto and roughly followed US 50 . The Bureau of Public Roads approved a move to the proposed Westside Freeway in May 1957 , and in November they added a North Tracy Bypass that would connect I @-@ 5 and I @-@ 580 . Construction began in the late 1960s , incorporating part of the 1954 expressway and a new alignment bypassing Tracy to the north , and the $ 14 million road opened to traffic on December 21 , 1970 . ( A short piece at the west end , including the bridge over the California Aqueduct , was upgraded several years earlier when I @-@ 580 and I @-@ 5 to the south were built . ) 
 Since 1970 , I @-@ 205 has seen few changes . The largest have been widening from four to six lanes west of Business 205 in 1999 , and converting two diamond interchanges to partial cloverleafs — Grant Line Road in about 1997 and Mountain House Parkway in 2007 ( including ramp meters ) . As of Summer 2009 , I @-@ 205 has been widened to six lanes ( three in each direction ) for its entire route . Also , the 1970s concrete pavement has been resurfaced with fresh asphalt from the junction of I @-@ 5 to due east of the 11th street connector ramp . 
 = = Future = = 
 Caltrans has plans to improve merging distances by constructing auxiliary lanes between the interchanges , and to add new interchanges at Lammers Road and Paradise Road . 
 = = Tracy business loop = = 
 Interstate 205 Business is a locally maintained business route . It locally follows 11th Street , the historic four @-@ lane alignment of U.S. Route 50 , through Tracy . The route begins at a split with I @-@ 205 west of the city . After passing through downtown Tracy , it curves northeast at a junction with former SR 33 , which has been truncated to the south at I @-@ 5 . The final stretch of Interstate 205 Business runs diagonally to a merge with I @-@ 5 , which comes from the south and continues northeast along the former US 50 alignment . The east end of Interstate 205 Business is about 3 / 4 mile ( 1 km ) southwest of the end of I @-@ 205 ; normally Interstate 205 Business would return to I @-@ 205 at both ends , but here I @-@ 205 and Interstate 205 Business both end at I @-@ 5 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = Philip Humber 's perfect game = 
 Philip Humber of the Chicago White Sox pitched a perfect game against the Seattle Mariners by retiring all 27 batters he faced on April 21 , 2012 , as the White Sox defeated the Mariners 4 – 0 . It was the 21st perfect game in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) history and the third by a member of the White Sox . It was Humber 's first career complete game , although he had come close to achieving no @-@ hitters on several occasions at several levels of organized baseball . The game was played in Seattle and broadcast regionally by Fox Sports in the two teams ' metropolitan areas . 
 Humber , a top pitching prospect from a Texas high school , attended Rice University , where he had a successful career . A high draft pick by the New York Mets , he debuted in MLB for the Mets before headlining a group of four prospects traded to the Minnesota Twins for Johan Santana . After two ineffective seasons with the Twins , Humber pitched a season for the Kansas City Royals . Acquired on waivers by the Chicago White Sox in 2011 , Humber had his first successful season in an MLB starting rotation . The perfect game , Humber 's 30th career start and his second of the 2012 season , totaled 96 pitches . 
 = = Background = = 
 Humber was named 2001 Texas High School Class 4A Player of the Year and enrolled at Rice University for the next season . Humber flirted with a no @-@ hitter in college , pitching for the Rice Owls baseball team . On April 6 , 2002 he held a no @-@ hitter going into the eighth inning against the San Jose State Spartans baseball team . In that contest , he surrendered a pinch hit single in the eighth , but did not allow any runs until a ninth @-@ inning home run . 
 The New York Mets drafted Humber with the third overall draft choice in that year 's amateur draft . After pitching in the minor leagues , he pitched in five games for the Mets during the 2006 and 2007 seasons . He also came close to a no hitter in minor league baseball . On August 22 , 2007 he pitched eight and one @-@ third no @-@ hit innings for the Class @-@ AAA New Orleans Zephyrs of the Pacific Coast League against the Iowa Cubs . Humber ended up with a no decision . 
 The Mets traded Humber along with Carlos Gómez , Kevin Mulvey , and <unk> Guerra for two @-@ time Cy Young Award @-@ winning pitcher Johan Santana that offseason . Humber pitched for the Twins in 2008 and 2009 and then signed a minor league contract with the Kansas City Royals after the 2009 season . After pitching for Kansas City for 2010 , the Oakland Athletics claimed him on waivers from the Royals , but waived him a week later , at which point he was taken by the Chicago White Sox . 
 Humber nearly achieved a no hitter for the 2011 Chicago White Sox twice . On April 25 , 2011 , in the sixth start of his career , he took a no @-@ hitter into the seventh inning against the New York Yankees at Yankee Stadium but , with one out , Alex Rodriguez singled up the middle , leaving Humber to finish with seven scoreless innings . Later that year he took a no @-@ hitter into the sixth inning against the Washington Nationals on June 26 , but ended up earning a 2 – 1 loss when he surrendered a seventh inning home run to Danny Espinosa . In that contest , Jerry Hairston , Jr. broke up the no @-@ hitter leading off the sixth after Roger <unk> earned a hit by pitch to break up the perfect game in the fourth . 
 In 2011 Humber pitched a career @-@ high 163 innings , but expected to pitch more and build on his success with the departure of Mark Buehrle from the White Sox . Although the 2012 Chicago White Sox ' rotation was said to be made up of five number three starters , Humber was the number five starter entering the season , of which his perfect game was Humber 's second start . Humber was scheduled to make his 2012 season debut for the White Sox on April 10 , but the game was rained out . He was then made available for middle relief . In his season debut , on April 16 , Humber allowed one run and ten baserunners in 5 1 ⁄ 3 innings , throwing 115 pitches . 
 = = The game = = 
 Humber 's second start of the season took place on the road in Safeco Field in Seattle , Washington on April 21 , 2012 and was played in front of a crowd of 22 @,@ 472 people . The White Sox ' catcher was A. J. Pierzynski and Humber 's mound opponent , Blake Beavan , was a 2007 Texas high school player of the year . The home plate , first , second , and third base umpires were Brian Runge , Marvin Hudson , Tim McClelland , and Ted Barrett respectively . The game was broadcast on Fox , with Mariners ' broadcaster Dave Sims and Eric Karros on the call and its duration was two hours , seventeen minutes . Eric Karros , before the game , describing Humber 's previous few games , remarked , " Gotta be a little better today . " 
 Beavan threw a quality start for Seattle , while Humber retired all 27 batters he faced , as his fastball reached 92 miles per hour ( 148 km / h ) . The closest a batter got to a hit was Dustin Ackley 's fourth inning line drive over the head of right fielder Alex Ríos , which resulted in a warning track leaping catch . The Mariners began talking about Humber 's dominance in the fifth inning as they sought to break up the perfect game . Humber recorded the final out on a check @-@ swing strikeout of Brendan Ryan . The ball got away from catcher Pierzynski , but home plate umpire Runge ruled that Ryan had failed to check his swing . Ryan took steps toward first base but , when he saw that Pierzynski had successfully gathered the ball and thrown to first , he argued the call with Runge . The FOX Sports broadcast never showed any angle which definitively proved whether Ryan had successfully checked his swing , but many fans and media members felt the call was incorrect . Ryan himself refused to discuss the play after the game and offered nothing but praise for Humber . 
 Humber finished the game with nine strikeouts ; the other batters were retired with five groundouts and 13 <unk> . Humber threw only 96 pitches , making this the first perfect game thrown in under 100 pitches since David Cone 's perfect game on July 18 , 1999 . Humber had only started 29 Major League games prior to throwing his perfect game , making him the pitcher with the second fewest starts prior to throwing a perfect game , behind fellow White Sox player Charlie Robertson . MLB.com has made available the video of the last out . 
 The game was only available on television in the Chicago and Seattle markets , because a game between the New York Yankees and the Boston Red Sox at Fenway Park , also on the network , was broadcast by more affiliates . Games between those two rivals generate a great deal of interest and receive extensive media coverage , including being broadcast on national television . Fox did , however , cut away from Yankees – Red Sox game , which was already in the seventh inning , to show the final three outs of Humber 's perfect game , even in the Boston and New York markets . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 It was the 21st perfect game in MLB history and the first since Roy Halladay 's perfect game on May 29 , 2010 . It was the third perfect game in White Sox history ( tying them with the Yankees for most perfect games ) after Charlie Robertson 's ( who threw the only other perfect game in April in MLB history ) on April 30 , 1922 and Mark Buehrle 's on July 23 , 2009 , and the 18th no @-@ hitter in White Sox history ( tying them with the Red Sox for second most no @-@ hitters ) . It was Humber 's second start of the 2012 season and first career complete game . 
 Humber went 1 – 0 with a 0 @.@ 63 ERA in 14 1 ⁄ 3 innings while striking out 16 over two starts that week , including the perfect game , resulting in his selection as American League Player of the Week for the week ending April 22 . He received a congratulatory phone call from President Barack Obama , a noted White Sox fan , and received news that his perfect game would be memorialized with a plaque at the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum . Humber made an appearance on the Late Show with David Letterman on April 23 , where he read the Top Ten List . 
 Humber became the seventh former member of the Mets to go on to throw a no @-@ hitter for another team . The other six are Nolan Ryan , Tom Seaver , Mike Scott , Dwight Gooden , Hideo Nomo and David Cone . The New York Mets , at the time of Humber 's perfect game , had never had a no @-@ hitter thrown by a player in the 50 @-@ year history of the franchise ( Johan Santana has since accomplished this feat ) . 
 The Mariners went hitless for the third time in franchise history and this was the first time that no Mariner reached base . However , they went on to pitch two no @-@ hitters in 2012 , both of which took place at Safeco Field and winning both games 1 @-@ 0 . One of them was the first perfect game in franchise history , by Félix Hernández , making them the first team to be on both the losing and winning end of a perfect game in the same season , and marking the first time two perfect games were thrown in the same park in the same season . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Chicago White Sox 4 , Seattle Mariners 0 , April 21 , 2012 
 = = = Line score = = = 
 = = = Box score = = = 
 = Norway Airlines = 
 Norway Airlines A / S was a Norwegian airline which operated between 1988 and 1992 . Focusing on charter , the airline operated two Boeing 737 @-@ 300 aircraft from 1988 to 1992 , after which it operated two McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 80 aircraft , one MD @-@ 83 and one MD @-@ 87 . The airline flew a single scheduled route , between Oslo Airport , Fornebu and London Gatwick Airport , at first on contract with Air Europe and from 1991 at its own expense . At its peak , Norway Airlines had 196 employees . The company struggled financially and lost more than 100 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) before terminating operations , having never made a profit . 
 The airline was established by Trøndelag @-@ based investors on 2 April 1987 , having been originally intended to operate charter flights to the Mediterranean area . Ansett Australia was an early investor , but soon sold out . The company suffered with its main contractor , Sun Tours , going bankrupt in 1988 , after which the airline moved to the British charter market . Air Europe 's holding company bought a third of Norway Airlines in October 1989 ; this allowed the Norwegian company to start flying Air Europe 's route between Oslo and Gatwick as a wet lease operation , in addition to several international destinations from London . Air Europe went bankrupt in March 1991 , causing Norway Airlines to temporarily halt operations . 
 Sterling Airways came in as a new strategic minority owner , and the two airlines started an alliance along with Transwede . Their key goal was to secure concessions to fly between the Scandinavian capital cities of Oslo , Stockholm and Copenhagen , but no permission was ever granted . Instead Norway Airlines started its own service between Oslo and London . Operations ceased on 14 October 1992 after the board had filed for bankruptcy . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 Norway Airlines was established on 2 April 1987 by Kjell <unk> and his holding company Hell Holding , along with several other investors from Trøndelag — the largest of which was Lyng Industrier . The business model was to operate charter flights from Norway to the Mediterranean ; eighty percent of the market was carried out with foreign airlines and <unk> believed that Norwegians not only would prefer a Norwegian carrier , but would be willing to pay more for one . The company had an initial share capital of NOK 10 million and established its head office and main base at Stavanger Airport , Sola . Separate companies , organized as <unk> , <unk> established to own each aircraft and lease them to the airline . The aircraft owner companies paid 28 @.@ 7 million United States dollars for each Boeing 737 @-@ 300 , which were delivered new from Boeing Commercial Airplanes . Shares in the aircraft owning companies was offered to the public with a four @-@ percent annual return on investment . Part of the investment model was based on tax advantages . 
 The share capital was expanded to NOK 20 million in September 1987 . Among the purchasers was Ansett Australia , who bought a twenty @-@ percent stake . Ragnar Lyng replaced <unk> as chairman and Johan H. Gedde @-@ Dahl was hired as managing director . Original plans were to start operations on 24 October 1987 , but this had to be postponed due to late delivery of the aircraft . Revenue flights commenced in February 1988 , after delivery of the airline 's first 148 @-@ passenger Boeing 737 @-@ 300 , City of Trondheim . The airline 's second 737 @-@ 300 , City of Stavanger , was delivered the same month , but was leased to Monarch Airlines . About sixty percent of the company 's initial business was flying on contract with Sun Tours . 
 Gedde @-@ Dahl was replaced by Kristian <unk> in March 1988 . The company lost NOK 15 million in 1987 and budgeted with a deficit of NOK 13 million the following year . To cover the losses , the airline issued a private placement for NOK 12 million and a public issue of NOK 18 million . The airline retained only a single aircraft in operation until late 1989 and the staff of 50 to 60 employees was too much for the revenue form a single aircraft to cover . The airline planned to acquire a third aircraft in 1990 and budgeted with a profit of NOK 7 million in 1989 and NOK 32 million in 1990 . Sun Tours filed for bankruptcy in late May 1988 . However , <unk> stated that the bankruptcy " came at a convenient time " as in the short term Norway Airlines would fly back Sun Tours customers at the expense of the Norwegian Travel Guarantee Fund and that there was a deficit of aircraft on the European charter market . Within a week , Norway Airlines had signed a contract to fly with both aircraft for Britannia Airways out of London Gatwick Airport . A new issue of shares for NOK 25 to 30 million took place in June 1988 and the company stated its intent to list itself on the Trondheim Stock Exchange . Nils Erik Christensen had by then been appointed chairman . 
 = = = Air Europe = = = 
 The airline was by September again in need of new capital . The contracts with Britannia ended on 1 November . While there was a high demand for 737 @-@ 300 aircraft , aviation regulations hindered Norway Airlines from wet <unk> the aircraft ( with full crew ) and limited them to dry <unk> ( without crew ) , which jeopardized the jobs of 86 employees . There were speculations in mid @-@ October that Air Europe was planning to purchase Norway Airlines . Lyng had by then bought Ansett 's share and held a 55 @-@ percent ownership . Norway Airlines announced on 25 October that they would lease both their aircraft to Air Europe on a five @-@ year contract , one aircraft from November 1988 and one from March 1989 . The airline would have to continue with ad @-@ hoc charters for the one aircraft until March . The deal also involved that the United Kingdom @-@ based International Leisure Group ( ILG ) would purchase a 33 @-@ percent share of Norway Airlines through a private placement of NOK 25 million . 
 Air Europe announced on 6 December 1988 that they would start a scheduled service between Oslo @-@ Fornebu and London @-@ Gatwick and intended to offer cheaper flights than the incumbents Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) and British Airways . Operations started on 15 May , using Norway Airline 's 737 @-@ 300 , which was reconfigured to seat 142 passengers in a two @-@ class layout . Norway Airlines announced that they would take the brand name Air Europe Scandinavia and would paint their aircraft in the Air Europe livery , albeit with the Flag of Norway . Air Europe simultaneously started services from Copenhagen and Stockholm to London . The Oslo – London route immediately achieved an eighty @-@ percent cabin factor , with about twenty percent of its sales in business class . The capacity was doubled from November to two daily round trips . Other routes flown on behalf of Air Europe were from London to Rome , Gibraltar and Malta , although occasionally the aircraft could be used on other services . The London routes had after a year achieved a twenty @-@ percent market share . Norway Airlines had by July 1990 lost an accumulated NOK 75 million and new shares worth NOK 40 million were issued to finance continued operations . 
 Norway Airlines applied in 1990 for permission to operate a charter route from Oslo to Penang , Malaysia , using a Boeing 757 . The application was dismissed by the Ministry of Transport and Communications to protect SAS ' route from Copenhagen to Singapore . The Penang route was necessary for Norway Airlines to procure a third aircraft , which according to the company was necessary to generate a profit , and would have created 100 new jobs . In the mean time , <unk> Reiser sent their charter passengers with scheduled flights to London and onwards with British carriers to Malaysia . The dismissal was appealed to Minister of Transport and Communications , Lars Gunnar Lie of the Christian Democratic Party . The issue became a political issue within Syse 's Cabinet , as the Conservative Party and the Progress Party were both in favor of increased deregulation of the airline industry . The issue was complicated by the common aviation policy of the three Scandinavian counties , which had largely been established to protect SAS ' interest on international services . The cabinet therefore opened for discussion a further deregulation with the governments of Sweden and Denmark . The Conservative Party stated that this was in part a response to Danish and Swedish authorities allowing charter services to Phuket , Thailand , which could be seen as competing to SAS ' route to Bangkok . Syse 's <unk> resigned on 3 November over issues regarding Norway and the European Union , before a reply to the application could be made . 
 The airline reached a non @-@ public settlement with Thor Tjøntveit on 10 September regarding the latter 's right to purchase one of Norway Airline 's aircraft . Norway Airlines lost NOK 12 million in 1990 . In January 1991 , the airline won the contract to fly personnel the Norwegian Armed Forces , as the airline priced half a million krone lower than Busy Bee . Operations started in April and secured sufficient business that the airline could order its third aircraft , along with a contract from Gullivers Reiser for additional charter flights . Within a week it received concession to operate scheduled flights between Oslo , Copenhagen and Stockholm to London . A similar concession was also granted to Braathens SAFE , but they stated that the intense competition on the route would make it difficult for them to start a service . However , the five @-@ year concession required that Norway Airlines not have any foreign citizens in the board ; as two representatives for ILG sat on the board , they would have to resign for the concession to be valid . The Progress Party called for the law to be changed . Norway Airlines also applied for a route from Bergen and Stavanger to London . 
 Air Europe fell under financial distress in 1991 and terminated all its Gatwick operations on 8 March . This resulted in Norway Airlines having to ground both its aircraft . Before operations could commence , the two creditors of the aircraft , Fokus Bank and Christiania Bank , had to refinance the two holding companies . As the aircraft remained grounded when the military contract started on 1 April , Norway Airlines had to lease aircraft externally to operate the charters . The aircraft were freed up towards the end of April , allowing the services with Gullivers Reiser to commence on 28 April . Originally the leases on the aircraft expired 1 April 1993 and 1994 , respectively , but Norway Airlines renegotiated them to both expire 1 April 1994 . The Gullivers Reiser contract involved flying from Norway to Greece , Spain , Portugal and Turkey . Air Europe 's bankruptcy cost Norway Airlines NOK 6 million and required the company to reduce its staff from 196 to 106 employees . One aircraft was fully utilized , although the second was occasionally operated for Star Tour , <unk> and British Airways . 
 = = = Nordic cooperation = = = 
 Denmark 's Sterling Airways bought ILG 's share of Norway Airlines in mid July . The airlines announced a partnership , which also included Transwede . The Wallenberg @-@ controlled NRT owned a 48 @-@ percent stake in Sterling and 66 percent of Transwede — the remaining third owned by Sterling . The three airlines applied for concessions to operate on the capital triangle between Oslo , Copenhagen and Stockholm . SAS held a monopoly on these routes and the airlines intended to capture the leisure market between the capital regions . Both ILG and Sterling were hindered in owning more than a third of Norway Airlines because of Norwegian corporate legislation . Fokus Bank had gradually become the largest shareholder in Norway Airline and owned 40 @.@ 6 percent of the company in July 1991 . At a shareholders meeting in July , Stein Øxseth was appointed chairman and all non @-@ Norwegian board members were replaced . 
 In September 1991 , the government changed the policy for the military 's procurement of air transport from 1 April 1992 . This involved that the transport of 200 @,@ 000 people annually would be transferred to scheduled services , resulting in Norway Airlines losing the opportunity to extend its engagement with the military . The route from Oslo to London was introduced on 3 October , at first with four weekly services , increasing to nine from 23 October . The three partner airlines launched their alliance as the <unk> Group and would use a bowler hat as their common symbol . However , the routes arrived so late in the evening that the last flights from Fornebu to Trondheim , Bergen , Stavanger and Tromsø had all departed . After five months the airline had achieved a 55 @-@ percent cabin factor on the London route . The ministry rejected in December 1991 the airline 's application for flying to Stockholm and Copenhagen . By December the British airline Dan @-@ Air had also established itself on the Oslo – London route . To meet the price competition , SAS launched discounted business class tickets . In the course of twelve months from late 1991 to late 1992 , the capacity between Oslo and London doubled , as also Norsk Air introduced a service from Sandefjord Airport , Torp . 
 Norway Airlines lost NOK 32 to 33 million in 1991 . Norway Airlines replaced its two 737 @-@ 300 aircraft with two McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 80 aircraft leased from Transwede , one MD @-@ 83 and one MD @-@ 87 . For the owners of the Boeing aircraft the move meant that they had to find a new lessee in a marketed where leasing prices had fallen from US $ 250 @,@ 000 to US $ 150 – 180 @,@ 000 per month . An interlining agreement was signed by Norway Airlines in March with British Airways and 25 other airlines at Gatwick . Norway Airlines announced on 15 March that it would take over the 25 Sterling employees in Norway in October . <unk> Group started negotiations in June with Braathens SAFE , Maersk Air and Conair of Scandinavia for them to join the alliance . Prior to the roll @-@ out of Amadeus reservation system in July 1992 , Norway Airlines had not been included in the default searched of travel agents , who had to phone the airline to get a price quote . 
 Foreign airlines were from 1 April 1992 permitted to fly passengers between the Scandinavian capitals , and both TAP Portugal and Delta Air Lines started flying passengers as extensions to their existing routes . This was negotiated as part of bilateral agreements and intra @-@ Scandinavian agreements continued to hinder Norway Airlines from flying any of the routes . As of May , the Ministry of Transport and Communications had received applications to operate from Oslo to the other Scandinavian capitals by six airlines : Norway Airlines , Braathens SAFE , Transwede , Sterling , Maersk Air and Conair . 
 Norway Airline 's board voted on 14 October 1992 to file for bankruptcy , and all aircraft were grounded on 15 October 1992 . The official reason was " the crisis in the airline industry and unacceptable profitability " , combined with Norwegian authorities ' lack of willingness to grant the airline concessions . The airline had lost more than NOK 100 million by the start of the year and had failed to make a profit during 1992 . Norway Airlines entered negotiations with Air Holland for the latter to purchase the airline , but the deal fell through on 1 December . Within days of the bankruptcy , Dan @-@ Air also terminated operations . Braathens SAFE therefore decided to start flying the Fornebu – Gatwick route . Six days after Dan @-@ Air 's closure , the first schedules were published in the newspaper ; slots and British permission was granted three days after that . The service started another two days later . 
 = = Organization = = 
 When established , the company was based at <unk> in Sola outside Stavanger and had its main operative base at Stavanger Airport , Sola . The head office was later moved to Fornebu in Bærum outside Oslo , and the main base moved to Oslo Airport , Fornebu . At its peak the company had 196 employees , of which 144 were based in Norway . At the time of bankruptcy , the company had 120 employees , of which 78 were flight staff . Air Europe 's CEO Rod Lynch stated that Air Europe , and in extension Norway Airlines , had forty percent lower operating costs than Lufthansa and twenty percent lower than British Airways . Lynch emphasized the lack of trade unions as a key to holding costs down . Air Europe claimed a thirty @-@ four percent market share on passengers between Oslo and London . 
 Norway Airlines had a single @-@ class service on their route and in their marketing claimed that they offered " business class service to everyone " . The airline served a warm in @-@ flight meal and drinks at the level of business class on other airlines . The airline hoped to attract business travelers to travel at a more reasonable fare , while attracting leisure travelers with better service . Norway Airlines pioneered smoke @-@ free flights from Norway . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 Norway Airlines only operated a single scheduled service , between Oslo and London . The route was flown nine times per week , two round trips per day on Thursdays , Fridays and Sundays , and one round trip per day on Mondays , Tuesdays and Wednesdays . The route saw an average 60 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 passengers per year . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 Norway Airlines operated the following aircraft : 
 = Ted Kennedy = 
 Edward Moore " Ted " Kennedy ( February 22 , 1932 – August 25 , 2009 ) was a United States Senator from Massachusetts and a member of the Democratic Party . He was the second most senior member of the Senate when he died and was the fourth @-@ longest @-@ serving senator in United States history , having served there for almost 47 years . The most prominent living member of the Kennedy family for many years , he was the last surviving son of Joseph P. Kennedy , Sr. and Rose Kennedy ; the youngest brother of President John F. Kennedy and Senator Robert F. Kennedy , both victims of assassination ; and the father of Congressman Patrick J. Kennedy . 
 Kennedy entered the Senate in a November 1962 special election to fill the seat once held by his brother John . He was elected to a full six @-@ year term in 1964 and was reelected seven more times . The Chappaquiddick incident on July 18 , 1969 , resulted in the death of his automobile passenger , Mary Jo Kopechne . Kennedy pleaded guilty to a charge of leaving the scene of an accident ; the incident and its aftermath hindered his chances of ever becoming President of the United States . His one attempt , in the 1980 presidential election , resulted in a Democratic primary campaign loss to incumbent President Jimmy Carter . 
 Kennedy was known for his charisma and oratorical skills . His 1968 eulogy for his brother Robert and his 1980 rallying cry for modern American liberalism were among his best @-@ known speeches . He became recognized as " The Lion of the Senate " through his long tenure and influence . More than 300 bills that Kennedy and his staff wrote were enacted into law . <unk> liberal , Kennedy championed an interventionist government emphasizing economic and social justice , but was also known for working with Republicans to find compromises between senators with disparate views . Kennedy played a major role in passing many laws , including laws addressing immigration , cancer research , health insurance , apartheid , disability discrimination , AIDS care , civil rights , mental health benefits , children 's health insurance , education and volunteering . During the 2000s , he led several unsuccessful immigration reform efforts . Over the course of his Senate career and continuing into the Obama administration , Kennedy continued his efforts to enact universal health care , which he called the " cause of my life . " 
 In May 2008 , Kennedy was hospitalized after suffering a seizure and was diagnosed with a malignant brain tumor , which limited his appearances in the Senate . He died on August 25 , 2009 , at his Hyannis Port , Massachusetts home . By the later years of his life , he had come to be viewed as a major figure and spokesman for American progressivism . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Edward Moore Kennedy was born in St. Margaret 's Hospital on February 22 , 1932 , in the Dorchester section of Boston , Massachusetts . He was the youngest of nine children of Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. and Rose Fitzgerald , who were members of prominent Irish American families in Boston , and who constituted one of the wealthiest families in the nation . His elder siblings included Joseph Jr . , John , Eunice , and Robert . John asked to be the newborn 's godfather , a request his parents honored , though they did not agree to his request to name the baby George Washington Kennedy ( the newborn had entered the world on the first president 's 200th birthday ) ; they named him after Joseph Sr. ' s assistant instead . 
 Frequently uprooted as a child as his family moved among Bronxville , New York , Hyannis Port , Massachusetts , Palm Beach , Florida , and the Court of St. James 's in London , England , Ted attended ten different schools by the age of eleven , with his education suffering as a result . At age seven , he received his First Communion from Pope Pius XII in the Vatican . He spent sixth and seventh grades in the Fessenden School , where he was a mediocre student , and eighth grade at Cranwell Preparatory School , both in Massachusetts . His parents were affectionate toward him as the youngest child , but also compared him unfavorably with his older brothers . Between the ages of eight and sixteen , Ted suffered the traumas of Rosemary 's failed lobotomy and the deaths of Joseph Jr. and Kathleen in airplane crashes . An early political and personal influence was Ted 's affable maternal grandfather , John F. " Honey Fitz " Fitzgerald , a former mayor of Boston and congressman . Ted spent his four high school years at Milton Academy prep school in Massachusetts , where his grades were B 's and C 's and he finished 36th in a class of 56 when he graduated in 1950 . Ted did well at high school football there , playing on the varsity his last two years ; the school 's headmaster later described his play as : " absolutely fearless ... he would have tackled an express train to New York if you asked ... he loved contact sports " . He also played on the tennis team and was in the drama , debate , and glee clubs . 
 = = College , military service , and law school = = 
 Like his father and brothers before him , Ted attended Harvard College , and in his spring semester was assigned to the athlete @-@ oriented Winthrop House , where his brothers had also lived . He was an offensive and defensive end on the freshman football team , with his play characterized by his large size and fearless style . In his first semester , Kennedy and his friends arranged to copy answers from another student during the final examination for a science class . At the end of his second semester in May 1951 , anxious about maintaining his eligibility for athletics for the next year , he had a friend take his place at a Spanish language examination . The ruse was immediately discovered and both students were expelled for cheating . In a standard Harvard treatment for serious disciplinary cases , they were told they could apply for readmission within a year or two , after demonstrating good behavior . 
 Kennedy enlisted in the United States Army in June 1951 , signing up for an optional four @-@ year term , which was shortened to the minimum two years after his father intervened . Following basic training at Fort Dix in New Jersey , he requested assignment to Fort Holabird in Maryland for Army Intelligence training , but was dropped after a few weeks without explanation . He went to Camp Gordon in Georgia for training in the Military Police Corps . In June 1952 , Kennedy was assigned to the honor guard at SHAPE headquarters in Paris , France . His father 's political connections ensured that he was not deployed to the ongoing Korean War . While stationed in Europe , he traveled extensively on weekends and climbed the Matterhorn in Switzerland . He was discharged after 21 months in March 1953 as a private first class . 
 Kennedy re @-@ entered Harvard in summer 1953 and improved his study habits ; his brother John was by then a U.S. senator and the family was attracting more public attention . Ted joined The Owl final club in 1954 and was also chosen for the Hasty Pudding Club and the Pi Eta fraternity . On athletic probation during his sophomore year , Kennedy returned as a second @-@ string two @-@ way end for the Crimson during his junior year and barely missed earning his varsity letter . Nevertheless , he received a recruiting feeler from Green Bay Packers head coach Lisle <unk> , asking about his interest in playing professionally . Kennedy demurred , saying he had plans to attend law school and to " go into another contact sport , politics . " Kennedy became a starter at end for Harvard in his senior season in 1955 , working hard to improve his blocking and tackling to complement his 6 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) , 200 lb ( 91 kg ) size . In the season @-@ ending Harvard @-@ Yale game in the snow at the Yale Bowl on November 19 , which Yale won 21 – 7 , Kennedy caught a pass to score Harvard 's only touchdown ; the team finished the season with a 3 – 4 – 1 record . Academically , Kennedy received mediocre grades for his first three years , improved to a B average for his senior year , and finished barely in the top half of his class . At age 24 , Kennedy graduated from Harvard in 1956 with an A.B. in history and government . 
 Not accepted by Harvard Law School due to his grades , Kennedy followed his brother Bobby and enrolled in the University of Virginia School of Law in 1956 . That acceptance was controversial among faculty and alumni who judged Kennedy 's past cheating episode incompatible with the University of Virginia 's honor code and it took a full faculty vote to admit him . Kennedy also attended the Hague Academy of International Law during one summer . At Virginia , Kennedy felt that he had to study " four times as hard and four times as long " as other students to keep up with them . His grades were mostly C 's ; he was in the middle of the class ranking , but was the winner of the prestigious William Minor Lile Moot Court Competition . He was elected head of the Student Legal Forum and via his family connections brought many prominent speakers to the campus . While there , his fast automotive habits were curtailed when he was charged with reckless driving and driving without a license . While attending law school , he was officially named as manager of his brother John 's 1958 Senate re @-@ election campaign ; Ted 's ability to connect with ordinary voters on the street helped bring a record @-@ setting victory margin that gave credibility to John 's presidential aspirations . Ted graduated from law school in 1959 . 
 = = Family and early career = = 
 Early in his second year of law school in October 1957 , Kennedy met Virginia Joan Bennett at Manhattanville College , following a dedication speech for a gymnasium that his family donated at the campus in Purchase , New York . Bennett was a senior there , had worked as a model and won beauty contests , but was unfamiliar with the world of politics . After their engagement , she grew nervous about marrying someone she did not know that well , but his father insisted that the wedding should proceed . They were married by Cardinal Francis Spellman on November 29 , 1958 , at St. Joseph 's Church in Bronxville , New York , with the reception being held at the nearby Siwanoy Country Club . Together they had three children : Kara ( February 27 , 1960 – September 16 , 2011 ) , Ted , Jr . ( born September 26 , 1961 ) , and Patrick J. ( born July 14 , 1967 ) . By the mid @-@ 1960s , their marriage was in trouble due to Ted 's womanizing and Joan 's growing alcoholism . 
 Kennedy was admitted to the Massachusetts Bar in 1959 . In 1960 , John ran for President of the United States and Ted managed his campaign in the Western states . Ted learned to fly and during the Democratic primary campaign he barnstormed around the western states , meeting with delegates and bonding with them by trying his hand at ski jumping and bronc riding . The seven weeks he spent in Wisconsin helped his brother win the first contested primary of the season there and a similar time spent in Wyoming was rewarded when a unanimous vote from that state 's delegates put his brother over the top at the 1960 Democratic National Convention . 
 Following his victory in the presidential election , John vacated his seat as U.S. Senator from Massachusetts , but Ted was not eligible to fill the vacancy until February 22 , 1962 , when he would turn thirty . Initially Ted wanted to stay out West and do something other than run for office right away ; he said , " The disadvantage of my position is being constantly compared with two brothers of such superior ability . " His brothers were not in favor of his running immediately either , but Ted coveted the Senate seat as an accomplishment to match his brothers ' and their father overruled them . Therefore , John asked Massachusetts Governor Foster <unk> to name Kennedy family friend Ben Smith as interim senator for John 's unexpired term , which he did in December 1960 . This kept the seat available for Ted . Meanwhile , Ted started work in February 1961 as an assistant district attorney for Suffolk County , Massachusetts ( for which he took a nominal $ 1 salary ) , where he first developed a hard @-@ nosed attitude towards crime . He took many overseas trips , billed as fact @-@ finding tours with the goal of improving his foreign policy credentials . On a nine @-@ nation Latin American trip in 1961 , FBI reports from the time showed Kennedy meeting with Lauchlin Currie , an alleged former Soviet spy , together with locals in each country whom the reports deemed left @-@ wingers and Communist sympathizers . Reports from the FBI and other sources had Kennedy renting a brothel and opening up bordellos after hours during the tour . The Latin American trip helped to formulate Kennedy 's foreign policy views , and in subsequent Boston Globe columns he warned that the region might turn to Communism if the U.S. did not reach out to it in a more effective way . Kennedy also began speaking to local political clubs and organizations . 
 In the 1962 U.S. Senate special election in Massachusetts , Kennedy initially faced a Democratic Party primary challenge from Edward J. McCormack , Jr . , the state Attorney General . Kennedy 's slogan was " He can do more for Massachusetts " , the same one John had used in his first campaign for the seat ten years earlier . McCormack had the support of many liberals and intellectuals , who thought Kennedy inexperienced and knew of his suspension from Harvard , a fact which later became public during the race . Kennedy also faced the notion that with one brother President and another U.S. Attorney General , " Don 't you think that Teddy is one Kennedy too many ? " But Kennedy proved to be an effective street @-@ level campaigner . In a televised debate , McCormack said " The office of United States Senator should be merited , and not inherited , " and said that if his opponent 's name was Edward Moore , not Edward Moore Kennedy , his candidacy " would be a joke " . Voters thought McCormack 's performance overbearing , and with the family political machine 's finally getting fully behind him , Kennedy won the September 1962 primary by a two @-@ to @-@ one margin . In the November special election , Kennedy defeated Republican George Cabot Lodge II , product of another noted Massachusetts political family , gaining 55 percent of the vote . 
 = = United States Senator = = 
 = = = First years and assassinations of two brothers = = = 
 Kennedy was sworn in to the Senate on November 7 , 1962 . He maintained a deferential attitude towards the older , seniority @-@ laden Southern members when he first entered the Senate , avoiding publicity and focusing on committee work and local issues . Compared to his brothers in office , he lacked John 's sophistication and Robert 's intense , sometimes grating drive , but was more affable than either of them . 
 On November 22 , 1963 , while Kennedy was presiding over the Senate — a task given to junior members — an aide rushed in to tell him that his brother , President John F. Kennedy , had been shot ; his brother Robert soon told him that the President was dead . Ted , with his sister Eunice Kennedy Shriver , flew to the family home in Hyannis Port , Massachusetts , to tell his father ( afflicted by a stroke suffered in December 1961 ) the news . 
 On June 19 , 1964 , Kennedy was a passenger in a private Aero Commander 680 airplane flying in bad weather from Washington to Massachusetts . It crashed into an apple orchard in the western Massachusetts town of Southampton on the final approach to the Barnes Municipal Airport in Westfield . The pilot and Edward Moss , one of Kennedy 's aides , were killed . Kennedy was pulled from the wreckage by fellow Senator Birch Bayh and spent months in a hospital recovering from a severe back injury , a punctured lung , broken ribs and internal bleeding . He suffered chronic back pain for the rest of his life . Kennedy took advantage of his long convalescence to meet with academics and study issues more closely , and the hospital experience triggered his lifelong interest in the provision of health care services . His wife Joan did the campaigning for him in the regular 1964 U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts , and he defeated his Republican opponent by a three @-@ to @-@ one margin . 
 Kennedy returned to the Senate in January 1965 , walking with a cane and employing a stronger and more effective legislative staff . He took on President Lyndon B. Johnson and almost succeeded in amending the Voting Rights Act of 1965 to explicitly ban the poll tax at the state and local level ( rather than just directing the Attorney General to challenge its constitutionality there ) , thereby gaining a reputation for legislative skill . He was a leader in pushing through the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 , which ended a quota system based upon national origin and which , despite Kennedy 's predictions , would have a profound effect on the demographic makeup of the United States . He played a role in creation of the National Teachers Corps . 
 Following in the Cold Warrior path of his fallen brother , Kennedy initially said he had " no reservations " about the expanding U.S. role in the Vietnam War , acknowledging that it would be a " long and enduring struggle " . Kennedy held hearings on the plight of refugees in the conflict , which revealed that the U.S. government had no coherent policy for refugees . Kennedy also tried to reform " unfair " and " inequitable " aspects of the draft . By the time of a January 1968 trip to Vietnam , Kennedy was disillusioned by the lack of U.S. progress , and suggested publicly that the U.S. should tell South Vietnam , " Shape up or we 're going to ship out . " 
 Ted initially advised his brother Robert against challenging the incumbent President Johnson for the Democratic nomination in the 1968 presidential election . Once Eugene McCarthy 's strong showing in the New Hampshire primary led to Robert 's presidential campaign starting in March 1968 , Ted recruited political leaders for endorsements to his brother in the Western states . Ted was in San Francisco as his brother Robert won the crucial California primary on June 4 , 1968 ; and then after midnight , Robert was shot in Los Angeles and died a day later . Ted Kennedy was devastated by this death , as he was closest to Robert among those in the Kennedy family ; Kennedy aide Frank Mankiewicz said of seeing Ted at the hospital where Robert lay mortally wounded : " I have never , ever , nor do I expect ever , to see a face more in grief . " Ted Kennedy delivered a eulogy at Robert 's funeral , which included the oft @-@ quoted : 
 My brother need not be idealized , or enlarged in death beyond what he was in life ; to be remembered simply as a good and decent man , who saw wrong and tried to right it , saw suffering and tried to heal it , saw war and tried to stop it . Those of us who loved him and who take him to his rest today , pray that what he was to us and what he wished for others will some day come to pass for all the world . As he said many times , in many parts of this nation , to those he touched and who sought to touch him : " Some men see things as they are and say why . I dream things that never were and say why not . " 
 At the chaotic 1968 Democratic National Convention in August , Mayor of Chicago Richard J. Daley and some other party factions feared that Hubert Humphrey could not unite the party , and so encouraged Ted Kennedy to make himself available for a draft . The 36 @-@ year @-@ old Kennedy was seen as the natural heir to his brothers , and " Draft Ted " movements sprang up from various quarters and among delegates . Thinking that he was only being seen as a stand @-@ in for his brother and that he was not ready for the job himself , and getting an uncertain reaction from McCarthy and a negative one from Southern delegates , Kennedy rejected any move to place his name before the convention as a candidate for the nomination . He also declined consideration for the vice @-@ presidential spot . George McGovern remained the symbolic standard @-@ bearer for Robert 's delegates instead . 
 After the deaths of his brothers , Ted Kennedy took on the role of a surrogate father for his 13 nephews and nieces . By some reports , he also negotiated the October 1968 marital contract between Jacqueline Kennedy and Aristotle Onassis . 
 Following Republican Richard Nixon 's victory in November , Kennedy was widely assumed to be the front @-@ runner for the 1972 Democratic nomination . In January 1969 , Kennedy defeated Louisiana Senator Russell B. Long by a 31 – 26 margin to become Senate Majority Whip , the youngest person to attain that position . While this further boosted his presidential image , he also appeared conflicted by the inevitability of having to run for the position . The reluctance was in part due to the danger ; Kennedy reportedly observed , " I know that I 'm going to get my ass shot off one day , and I don 't want to . " Indeed , there were a constant series of death threats made against Kennedy for much of the rest of his career . 
 = = = Chappaquiddick incident = = = 
 On the night of July 18 , 1969 , Kennedy was on Martha 's Vineyard 's Chappaquiddick Island at a party he gave for the " Boiler Room Girls " , a group of young women who had worked on his brother Robert 's presidential campaign the year before . Kennedy left the party , driving a 1967 Oldsmobile <unk> 88 with one of the women , 28 @-@ year @-@ old Mary Jo Kopechne , and later drove off Dike Bridge into the <unk> Pond inlet , a tidal channel on Chappaquiddick Island . Kennedy escaped the overturned vehicle , and , by his description , dove below the surface seven or eight times , vainly attempting to reach Kopechne . Ultimately , he swam to shore and left the scene . He contacted authorities the next morning , but Kopechne 's body had already been discovered . 
 On July 25 , Kennedy pleaded guilty to leaving the scene of an accident and was given a sentence of two months in jail , suspended . That night , he gave a national broadcast in which he said , " I regard as indefensible the fact that I did not report the accident to the police immediately , " but denied driving under the influence of alcohol and denied any immoral conduct between him and Kopechne . Kennedy asked the Massachusetts electorate whether he should stay in office or resign ; after getting a favorable response in messages sent to him , Kennedy announced on July 30 that he would remain in the Senate and run for re @-@ election the next year . 
 In January 1970 , an inquest into Kopechne 's death was held in Edgartown , Massachusetts . At the request of Kennedy 's lawyers , the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ordered the inquest be conducted in secret . The presiding judge , James A. Boyle , concluded that some aspects of Kennedy 's story of that night were not true , and that negligent driving " appears to have contributed to the death of Mary Jo Kopechne " . A grand jury on Martha 's Vineyard conducted a two @-@ day investigation in April 1970 but issued no indictment , after which Boyle made his inquest report public . Kennedy deemed its conclusions " not justified " . Questions about the Chappaquiddick incident generated a large number of articles and books over the next several years . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 At the end of 1968 , Kennedy had joined the new Committee for National Health Insurance at the invitation of its founder , United Auto Workers president Walter Reuther . In May 1970 , Reuther died and Senator Ralph Yarborough , chairman of the full Senate Labor and Public Welfare Committee and its Health subcommittee , lost his primary election , propelling Kennedy into a leadership role on the issue of national health insurance . In August 1970 , Kennedy introduced a bipartisan bill for universal national health insurance with no cost sharing , paid for by payroll taxes and general federal revenue . 
 Kennedy easily won re @-@ election to another term in the Senate in November 1970 with 62 percent of the vote against underfunded Republican candidate Josiah Spaulding , although he received about 500 @,@ 000 fewer votes than in 1964 . 
 In January 1971 , Kennedy lost his position as Senate Majority Whip when he lost the support of several members and was defeated by Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia , 31 – 24 . He would later tell Byrd that the defeat was a blessing , as it allowed him to focus more on issues and committee work , where his best strengths lay and where he could exert influence independently from the Democratic party apparatus , and began a decade as chairman of the Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research of the Senate Labor and Public Welfare Committee . 
 In February 1971 , President Nixon proposed health insurance reform — an employer mandate to offer private health insurance , federalization of Medicaid , and support for health maintenance organizations . Hearings on national health insurance were held in 1971 , but no bill had the support of House Ways and Means and Senate Finance Committee chairmen Wilbur Mills and Russell Long . Kennedy sponsored and helped pass the limited Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973 . He also played a leading role , with Senator Jacob Javits , in the creation and passage of the National Cancer Act of 1971 . 
 In October 1971 , Kennedy made his first speech about The Troubles in Northern Ireland : he said that " Ulster is becoming Britain 's Vietnam " , demanded that British troops leave the northern counties , called for a united Ireland , and declared that Ulster Unionists who could not accept this " should be given a decent opportunity to go back to Britain " ( a position he backed away from within a couple of years ) . Kennedy was harshly criticized by the British , and formed a long political relationship with Irish Social Democratic and Labour Party founder John Hume . In scores of anti @-@ war speeches , Kennedy opposed President Richard Nixon 's policy of Vietnamization , calling it " a policy of violence [ that ] means more and more war " . In December 1971 , Kennedy strongly criticized the Nixon administration 's support for Pakistan and its ignoring of " the brutal and systematic repression of East Bengal by the Pakistani army " . He traveled to India and wrote a report on the plight of the 10 million Bengali refugees . In February 1972 , Kennedy flew to Bangladesh and delivered a speech at the University of Dhaka , where a killing rampage had begun a year earlier . 
 Chappaquiddick had greatly damaged Kennedy 's future presidential prospects and he had declared , shortly after the incident , that he would not be a candidate in the 1972 U.S. presidential election . Nevertheless , polls in 1971 suggested he could win the nomination if he tried , and Kennedy gave some thought to running . In May of that year he decided not to , saying he needed " breathing time " to gain more experience and to take care of the children of his brothers and that in sum , " It feels wrong in my gut . " Nevertheless , in November 1971 , a Gallup Poll still had him in first place in the Democratic nomination race with 28 percent . Once George McGovern was near clinching the Democratic nomination in June 1972 , various anti @-@ McGovern forces tried to get Kennedy to enter the contest at the last minute , but he declined . At the 1972 Democratic National Convention McGovern repeatedly tried to recruit Kennedy as his vice presidential running mate , but was turned down . When McGovern 's choice of Thomas Eagleton stepped down soon after the convention , McGovern again tried to get Kennedy to take the nod , again without success . McGovern instead chose Kennedy 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Sargent Shriver . 
 In 1973 , Kennedy 's son Edward Kennedy , Jr . , was discovered to have <unk> ; his leg was amputated and he underwent a long , difficult , experimental two @-@ year drug treatment . The case brought international attention both among doctors and in the general media , as did the young Kennedy 's return to the ski slopes half a year later . Son Patrick was suffering from severe asthma attacks . The pressure of the situation mounted on Joan Kennedy , who several times entered facilities for alcoholism and emotional strain and was arrested for drunk driving after a traffic accident . 
 In February 1974 , President Nixon proposed more comprehensive health insurance reform — an employer mandate to offer private health insurance and replacement of Medicaid by state @-@ run health insurance plans available to all with income @-@ based premiums and cost sharing . In April 1974 , Kennedy and Mills introduced a bill for near @-@ universal national health insurance with benefits identical to the expanded Nixon plan , both of which were criticized by labor and senior citizen organizations because of their substantial cost sharing . In August 1974 , after Nixon 's resignation and President Ford 's call for health insurance reform , Mills tried to advance a compromise based on Nixon 's plan , but gave up when the conservative half of his committee instead backed the American Medical Association 's limited voluntary tax credit plan . 
 In the wake of the Watergate scandal , Kennedy pushed campaign finance reform ; he was a leading force behind passage of the Federal Election Campaign Act Amendments of 1974 , which set contribution limits and established public financing for presidential elections . In April 1974 , Kennedy travelled to the Soviet Union , where he met with leader Leonid Brezhnev and advocated a full nuclear test ban as well as relaxed emigration , gave a speech at Moscow State University , met with Soviet dissidents , and secured an exit visa for famed cellist Mstislav Rostropovich . Kennedy 's Subcommittee on Refugees and Escapees continued to focus on Vietnam , especially after the Fall of Saigon in 1975 . 
 Kennedy had initially opposed busing schoolchildren across racial lines , but grew to support the practice as it became a focal point of civil rights efforts . After federal judge W. Arthur Garrity ordered the Boston School Committee in 1974 to racially integrate Boston 's public schools via busing , Kennedy made a surprise appearance at a September 1974 anti @-@ busing rally in City Hall Plaza to express the need for peaceful dialogue and was met with extreme hostility . The predominantly white crowd yelled insults about his children and hurled tomatoes and eggs at him as he retreated into the John F. Kennedy Federal Building and went so far as to push against one of its glass walls and break it . 
 Kennedy was again much talked about as a contender in the 1976 U.S. presidential election , with no strong front @-@ runners among the other possible Democratic candidates . But Kennedy 's concerns about his family were strong , and Chappaquiddick was still in the news , with The Boston Globe , The New York Times Magazine , and Time magazine all reassessing the incident and raising doubts about Kennedy 's version of events . In September 1974 , Kennedy announced that for family reasons he would not run in the 1976 election , declaring that his decision was " firm , final , and unconditional . " The eventual Democratic nominee , Jimmy Carter , built little by way of a relationship with Kennedy during his primary campaign , the convention , or the general election campaign . Kennedy was up for Senate re @-@ election in 1976 ; he defeated a primary challenger angry at his support for school busing in Boston , then won the general election with 69 percent of the vote . 
 The Carter administration years were difficult for Kennedy ; he had been the most important Democrat in Washington ever since his brother Robert 's death , but now Carter was , and Kennedy at first did not have a full committee chairmanship with which to wield influence . Carter in turn sometimes resented Kennedy 's status as a political celebrity . Despite generally similar ideologies , their priorities were different . Kennedy expressed to reporters that he was content with his congressional role and viewed presidential ambitions as almost far @-@ fetched . 
 Kennedy and his wife Joan separated in 1977 , although they still staged joint appearances at some public events . He held Health and Scientific Research Subcommittee hearings in March 1977 that led to public revelations of extensive scientific misconduct by contract research organizations , including Industrial Bio @-@ Test Laboratories . Kennedy visited China on a goodwill mission in late December 1977 , meeting with leader Deng Xiaoping and eventually gaining permission for a number of Mainland Chinese nationals to leave the country ; in 1978 , he also visited the Soviet Union and Brezhnev and dissidents there again . During the 1970s , Kennedy also showed interest in nuclear disarmament , and as part of his efforts in this field even visited Hiroshima in January 1978 and gave a public speech to that effect at Hiroshima University . He became chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee in 1978 , by which time he had amassed a wide @-@ ranging Senate staff of a hundred . 
 As a candidate , Carter had proposed health care reform that included key features of Kennedy 's national health insurance bill , but in December 1977 , President Carter told Kennedy his bill must be changed to preserve a large role for private insurance companies , minimize federal spending ( precluding payroll tax financing ) , and be phased @-@ in so as to not interfere with Carter 's paramount domestic policy objective — balancing the federal budget . Kennedy and labor compromised and made the requested changes , but broke with Carter in July 1978 when he would not commit to pursuing a single bill with a fixed schedule for phasing @-@ in comprehensive coverage . Frustrated by Carter 's budgetary concerns and political caution , in a December 1978 speech on national health insurance at the Democratic midterm convention , Kennedy said regarding liberal goals overall that " sometimes a party must sail against the wind " and in particular should provide health care as " a basic right for all , not just an expensive privilege for the few . " 
 In May 1979 , Kennedy proposed a new bipartisan universal national health insurance bill — choice of competing federally regulated private health insurance plans with no cost sharing financed by income @-@ based premiums via an employer mandate and individual mandate , replacement of Medicaid by government payment of premiums to private insurers , and enhancement of Medicare by adding prescription drug coverage and eliminating premiums and cost sharing . In June 1979 , Carter proposed more limited health insurance reform — an employer mandate to provide catastrophic private health insurance plus coverage without cost sharing for pregnant women and infants , federalization of Medicaid with extension to all of the very poor , and enhancement of Medicare by adding catastrophic coverage . Neither plan gained any traction in Congress , and the failure to come to agreement represented the final political breach between the two . ( Carter wrote in 1982 that Kennedy 's disagreements with Carter 's proposed approach " ironically " thwarted Carter 's efforts to provide a comprehensive health @-@ care system for the country . In turn , Kennedy wrote in 2009 that his relationship with Carter was " unhealthy " and that " Clearly President Carter was a difficult man to convince – of anything . " ) 
 = = = 1980 presidential campaign = = = 
 Kennedy finally decided to seek the Democratic nomination in the 1980 presidential election by launching an unusual , insurgent campaign against the incumbent Carter , a member of his own party . A midsummer 1978 poll had shown Democrats preferring Kennedy over Carter by a 5 @-@ to @-@ 3 margin . During spring and summer 1979 , as Kennedy deliberated whether to run , Carter was not intimidated despite his 28 percent approval rating , saying publicly : " If Kennedy runs , I 'll whip his ass . " Carter later asserted that Kennedy 's constant criticism of his policies was a strong indicator that Kennedy was planning to run for the presidency . Labor unions urged Kennedy to run , as did some Democratic party officials who feared that Carter 's unpopularity could result in heavy losses in the 1980 congressional elections . By August 1979 , when Kennedy decided to run , polls showed him with a 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 advantage over Carter , and Carter 's approval rating slipped to 19 percent . Kennedy formally announced his campaign on November 7 , 1979 , at Boston 's Faneuil Hall . He had already received substantial negative press from a rambling response to the question " Why do you want to be President ? " during an interview with Roger Mudd of CBS News broadcast a few days earlier . The Iranian hostage crisis , which began on November 4 , and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , which began on December 27 , prompted the electorate to rally around the president and allowed Carter to pursue a Rose Garden strategy of staying at the White House , which kept Kennedy 's campaign out of the headlines . 
 Kennedy 's campaign staff were disorganized and Kennedy was initially an ineffective campaigner . The Chappaquiddick incident emerged as a more significant issue than the staff had expected , with several newspaper columnists and editorials criticizing Kennedy 's answers on the matter . In the January 1980 Iowa caucuses , which initiated the primaries season , Carter demolished Kennedy by a 59 – 31 percent margin . Kennedy 's fundraising immediately declined and his campaign had to downsize , but he remained defiant , saying " [ Now ] we 'll see who is going to whip whose what . " Nevertheless , Kennedy lost three New England contests . Kennedy did form a more coherent message about why he was running , saying at Georgetown University : " I believe we must not permit the dream of social progress to be shattered by those whose premises have failed . " However , concerns over Chappaquiddick and issues related to personal character prevented Kennedy from gaining the support of many people who were disillusioned with Carter . During a St. Patrick 's Day Parade in Chicago , Kennedy had to wear a bullet @-@ proof vest due to assassination threats , and hecklers yelled " Where 's Mary Jo ? " at him . In the key March 18 primary in Illinois , Kennedy failed to gain support of Catholic voters , and Carter crushed him , winning 155 of 169 delegates . 
 With little mathematical hope of winning the nomination , and polls showing another likely defeat in the New York primary , Kennedy prepared to withdraw from the race . However , partially due to Jewish voter unhappiness with a U.S. vote at the United Nations against Israeli settlements in the West Bank , Kennedy staged an upset and won the March 25 vote by a 59 – 41 percent margin . Carter responded with an advertising campaign that attacked Kennedy 's character in general without explicitly mentioning Chappaquiddick , but Kennedy still managed a narrow win in the April 22 Pennsylvania primary . Carter won 11 of 12 primaries held in May , while on the June 3 Super Tuesday primaries , Kennedy won California , New Jersey , and three smaller states out of eight contests . Overall , Kennedy had won 10 presidential primaries against Carter , who won 24 . 
 Although Carter now had enough delegates to clinch the nomination , Kennedy carried his campaign on to the 1980 Democratic National Convention in August in New York , hoping to pass a rule there that would free delegates from being bound by primary results and open the convention . This move failed on the first night of the convention , and Kennedy withdrew . On the second night , August 12 , Kennedy delivered the most famous speech of his career . Drawing on allusions to and quotes of Martin Luther King , Jr . , Franklin Delano Roosevelt , and Alfred Lord Tennyson to say that American liberalism was not passé , he concluded with the words : 
 For me , a few hours ago , this campaign came to an end . For all those whose cares have been our concern , the work goes on , the cause endures , the hope still lives , and the dream shall never die . 
 The Madison Square Garden audience reacted with wild applause and demonstrations for half an hour . On the final night , Kennedy arrived late after Carter 's acceptance speech and while he shook Carter 's hand , he failed to raise Carter 's arm in the traditional show of party unity . Carter 's difficulty in securing Kennedy supporters during the election campaign was a contributory factor that led to his defeat in November by Ronald Reagan . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 The 1980 election saw the Republicans capture not just the presidency but control of the Senate as well , and Kennedy was in the minority party for the first time in his career . Kennedy did not dwell upon his presidential loss , but instead reaffirmed his public commitment to American liberalism . He chose to become the ranking member of the Labor and Public Welfare Committee rather than of the Judiciary Committee , which he would later say was one of the most important decisions of his career . Kennedy became a committed champion of women 's issues and of gay rights , and established relationships with select Republican senators to block Reagan 's actions and preserve and improve the Voting Rights Act , funding for AIDS treatment , and equal funding for women 's sports under Title IX . To combat being in the minority , he worked long hours and devised a series of hearings @-@ like public forums to which he could invite experts and discuss topics important to him . Kennedy could not hope to stop all of Reagan 's <unk> of government , but was often nearly the sole effective Democrat battling him . 
 In January 1981 , Ted and Joan Kennedy announced they were getting a divorce . The proceedings were generally amicable , and she received a reported $ 4 million settlement when the divorce was granted in 1982 . Later that year , Kennedy created the Friends of Ireland organization with Senator Daniel Moynihan and House Speaker Tip O 'Neill to support initiatives for peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland . 
 Kennedy easily defeated Republican businessman Ray <unk> to win re @-@ election in 1982 . Senate leaders granted him a seat on the Armed Services Committee , while allowing him to keep his other major seats despite the traditional limit of two such seats . Kennedy became very visible in opposing aspects of the foreign policy of the Reagan administration , including U.S. intervention in the Salvadoran Civil War and U.S. support for the Contras in Nicaragua , and in opposing Reagan @-@ supported weapons systems , including the B @-@ 1 bomber , the MX missile , and the Strategic Defense Initiative . Kennedy became the Senate 's leading advocate for a nuclear freeze and was a critic of Reagan 's confrontational policies toward the Soviet Union . A 1983 memorandum from KGB Chairman Viktor Chebrikov to General Secretary Yuri Andropov noted this stance and asserted that Kennedy , through former Senator John Tunney 's discussions with Soviet contacts , had suggested that U.S.-Soviet relations might be improved if Kennedy and Andropov could meet in person to discuss arms control issues and if top Soviet officials , via Kennedy 's help , were able to address the American public through the U.S. news media . Andropov was unimpressed by the idea . 
 Kennedy 's staff drew up detailed plans for a candidacy in the 1984 presidential election that he considered , but with his family opposed and his realization that the Senate was a fully satisfying career , in late 1982 he decided not to run . Kennedy campaigned hard for Democratic presidential nominee Walter Mondale and defended vice presidential nominee Geraldine Ferraro from criticism over being a pro @-@ choice Catholic , but Reagan was re @-@ elected in a landslide . 
 Kennedy staged a tiring , dangerous , and high @-@ profile trip to South Africa in January 1985 . He defied both the apartheid government 's wishes and militant anti @-@ white <unk> demonstrators by spending a night in the Soweto home of Bishop Desmond Tutu and also visited Winnie Mandela , wife of imprisoned black leader Nelson Mandela . Upon returning , Kennedy became a leader in the push for economic sanctions against South Africa ; collaborating with Senator Lowell Weicker , he secured Senate passage , and the overriding of Reagan 's veto , of the Comprehensive Anti @-@ Apartheid Act of 1986 . Despite their many political differences , Kennedy and Reagan had a good personal relationship , and with the administration 's approval Kennedy traveled to the Soviet Union in 1986 to act as a go @-@ between in arms control negotiations with reformist Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev . The discussions were productive , and Kennedy also helped gain the release of a number of Soviet Jewish <unk> , including Anatoly <unk> . 
 Although Kennedy was an accomplished legislator , his personal life was troubled during this time . His weight fluctuated wildly , he drank heavily at times – although not when it would interfere with his Senate duties – and his cheeks became blotchy . Kennedy later acknowledged , " I went through a lot of difficult times over a period in my life where [ drinking ] may have been somewhat of a factor or force . " He chased women frequently , and also was in a series of more serious romantic relationships but did not want to commit to anything long @-@ term . He often <unk> with fellow Senator Chris Dodd ; twice in 1985 they were in drunken incidents in Washington restaurants , with one involving unwelcome physical contact with a waitress . In 1987 Kennedy and a young female lobbyist were surprised in the back room of a restaurant in a state of partial undress . 
 After again considering a candidacy for the 1988 presidential election , influenced by his personal difficulties and family concerns , and content with remaining in the Senate , in December 1985 Kennedy publicly cut short any talk that he might run . He added : " I know this decision means I may never be president . But the pursuit of the presidency is not my life . Public service is . " Kennedy used his legislative skills to achieve passage of the COBRA Act , which extended employer @-@ based health benefits after leaving a job . Following the 1986 congressional elections , the Democrats regained control of the Senate and Kennedy became chair of the Labor and Public Welfare Committee . By now Kennedy had become what colleague Joe Biden termed " the best strategist in the Senate , " who always knew when best to move legislation . Kennedy continued his close working relationship with ranking Republican Senator Orrin Hatch , and they were close allies on many health @-@ related measures . 
 One of Kennedy 's biggest battles in the Senate came with Reagan 's July 1987 nomination of Judge Robert Bork to the U.S. Supreme Court . Kennedy saw a possible Bork appointment as leading to a dismantling of civil rights law that he had helped put into place , and feared Bork 's originalist judicial philosophy . Kennedy 's staff had researched Bork 's writings and record , and within an hour of the nomination – which was initially expected to succeed – Kennedy went on the Senate floor to announce his opposition : 
 Robert Bork 's America is a land in which women would be forced into back @-@ alley abortions , blacks would sit at segregated lunch counters , rogue police could break down citizens ' doors in midnight raids , schoolchildren could not be taught about evolution , writers and artists could be censored at the whim of the Government , and the doors of the Federal courts would be shut on the fingers of millions of citizens ... 
 The incendiary rhetoric of what became known as the " Robert Bork 's America " speech enraged Bork supporters , who considered it slanderous , and worried some Democrats as well . But the Reagan administration was unprepared for the assault , and the speech froze some Democrats from supporting the nomination and gave Kennedy and other Bork opponents time to prepare the case against him . When the September 1987 Judiciary Committee hearings began , Kennedy challenged Bork forcefully on civil rights , privacy , women 's rights , and other issues . Bork 's own demeanor hurt him , and the nomination was defeated both in committee and the full Senate . The tone of the Bork battle changed the way Washington worked – with controversial nominees or candidates now experiencing all @-@ out war waged against them – and the ramifications of it were still being felt two decades later . 
 During the 1988 presidential election , Kennedy supported the eventual Democratic nominee , Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis , from the start of the campaign . In the fall , Dukakis lost to George H. W. Bush , but Kennedy won re @-@ election to the Senate over Republican Joseph D. Malone in the easiest race of his career . Kennedy remained a powerful force in the Senate . In 1988 Kennedy co @-@ sponsored an amendment to the Fair Housing Act of 1968 , which prohibits discrimination in the rental , sale , marketing , and financing of the nation 's housing ; the amendment strengthened the ability of the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity to enforce the Act and expanded the protected classes to include disabled persons and families with children . After prolonged negotiations during 1989 with Bush chief of staff John H. Sununu and Attorney General Richard Thornburgh to secure Bush 's approval , he directed passage of the landmark Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 . Kennedy had personal interest in the bill due to his sister Rosemary 's condition and his son 's lost leg , and he considered its enactment one of the most important successes of his career . In the late 1980s Kennedy and Hatch staged a prolonged battle against Senator Jesse Helms to provide funding to combat the AIDS epidemic and provide treatment for low @-@ income people affected ; this would culminate in passage of the Ryan White Care Act . In late November 1989 , Kennedy traveled to see first @-@ hand the newly fallen Berlin Wall ; he spoke at John @-@ <unk> @-@ Platz , site of the famous " Ich bin ein Berliner " speech in 1963 , and said " Emotionally , I just wish my brother could have seen it . " 
 = = = Fall and rise = = = 
 Kennedy 's personal life came to dominate his image . In 1989 the European paparazzi stalked him on a vacation there and photographed him having sex on a motorboat . In February 1990 , Michael Kelly published his long , thorough profile " Ted Kennedy on the Rocks " in GQ magazine . It captured Kennedy as " an aging Irish <unk> clutching a bottle and <unk> a blonde , " portrayed him as an out @-@ of @-@ control Regency rake , and brought his behavior to the forefront of public attention . The death from cancer of brother @-@ in @-@ law Stephen Edward Smith in August 1990 left Kennedy emotionally bereft at the loss of a close family member and troubleshooter . Kennedy pushed on , but even his legislative successes , such as the Civil Rights Act of 1991 , which expanded employee rights in discrimination cases , came at the cost of being criticized for compromising with Republicans and Southern Democrats . 
 On Easter weekend 1991 , Kennedy was at a get @-@ together at the family 's Palm Beach , Florida , estate when , restless and maudlin after reminiscing about his brother @-@ in @-@ law , he left for a late @-@ night visit to a local bar , getting his son Patrick and nephew William Kennedy Smith to accompany him . Patrick Kennedy and Smith returned with women they met there , Michelle <unk> and Patricia Bowman . <unk> said that Ted Kennedy subsequently walked in on her and Patrick , dressed only in a nightshirt and with a weird look on his face . Smith and Bowman went out on the beach , where they had sex that he said was consensual and she said was rape . The local police made a delayed investigation ; soon Kennedy sources were feeding the press with negative information about Bowman 's background and several mainstream newspapers broke a taboo by publishing her name . The case quickly became a media frenzy . While not directly implicated in the case , Kennedy became the frequent butt of jokes on The Tonight Show and other late @-@ night television programs . Time magazine said Kennedy was being perceived as a " Palm Beach boozer , lout and tabloid grotesque " while Newsweek said Kennedy was " the living symbol of the family flaws . " 
 Along with Bork , the other most contentious Supreme Court nomination in United States history has been the one for Clarence Thomas . When the Thomas hearings began in September 1991 , Kennedy pressed Thomas on his unwillingness to express an opinion about Roe v. Wade , but the nomination appeared headed for success . But when the sexual harassment charges by Anita Hill broke the following month , and the nomination battle dominated public discourse , Kennedy was hamstrung by his past reputation and the ongoing developments in the William Kennedy Smith case . He said almost nothing until the third day of the Thomas – Hill hearings , and when he did it was criticized by Hill supporters for being too little , too late . 
 Biographer Adam Clymer rates Kennedy 's silence during the Thomas hearings as the worst moment of his Senate career . Writer Anna Quindlen said " [ Kennedy ] let us down because he had to ; he was muzzled by the facts of his life . " On the day before the full Senate vote , Kennedy gave an impassioned speech against Thomas , declaring that the treatment of Hill had been " shameful " and that " [ t ] o give the benefit of the doubt to Judge Thomas is to say that Judge Thomas is more important than the Supreme Court . " He then voted against the nomination . Thomas was confirmed by a 52 – 48 margin , the narrowest ever for a successful nomination . 
 Due to the Palm Beach media attention and the Thomas hearings , Kennedy 's public image suffered . A Gallup Poll gave Kennedy a very low 22 percent national approval rating . A Boston Herald / WCVB @-@ TV poll found that 62 percent of Massachusetts citizens thought Kennedy should not run for reelection , by a 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 margin thought Kennedy had misled authorities in the Palm Beach investigation , and had Kennedy losing a hypothetical Senate race to Governor William Weld by 25 points . Meanwhile , at a June 17 , 1991 , dinner party , Kennedy saw Victoria Anne Reggie , a Washington lawyer at Keck , Mahin & Cate , a divorced mother of two , and the daughter of an old Kennedy family ally , Louisiana judge Edmund Reggie . They began dating and by September were in a serious relationship . In a late October speech at the John F. Kennedy School of Government , Kennedy sought to begin a political recovery , saying : " I am painfully aware that the criticism directed at me in recent months involves far more than disagreements with my positions ... [ It ] involves the disappointment of friends and many others who rely on me to fight the good fight . To them I say , I recognize my own shortcomings — the faults in the conduct of my private life . I realize that I alone am responsible for them , and I am the one who must confront them . " In December 1991 , the William Kennedy Smith rape trial was held ; it was nationally televised and the most watched until the O. J. Simpson murder case three years later . Kennedy 's testimony at the trial seemed relaxed , confident , and forthcoming , and helped convince the public that his involvement had been peripheral and unintended . Smith was acquitted . 
 Kennedy and Reggie continued their relationship and he was devoted to her two children , Curran and Caroline . They became engaged in March 1992 , and were married by Judge A. David <unk> on July 3 , 1992 , in a civil ceremony at Kennedy 's home in McLean , Virginia . She would gain credit with stabilizing his personal life and helping him resume a productive career in the Senate . 
 With no presidential ambitions left , Kennedy formed a good relationship with Democratic President Bill Clinton upon the latter taking office in 1993 , despite his having initially backed former fellow Massachusetts Senator Paul Tsongas in the 1992 Democratic presidential primaries . Kennedy floor @-@ managed successful passage of Clinton 's National and Community Service Trust Act of 1993 that created the AmeriCorps program , and despite reservations supported the president on the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) . On the issue Kennedy cared most about , national health insurance , he supported but was not much involved in formation of the Clinton health care plan , which was run by First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and others . It failed badly and damaged the prospects for such legislation for years to come . In 1994 , Kennedy 's strong recommendation of his former Judiciary Committee staffer Stephen Breyer played a role in Clinton appointing Breyer to the U.S. Supreme Court . During 1994 Kennedy became the first senator with a home page on the World Wide Web ; the product of an effort with the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory , it helped counter the image of Kennedy as old and out of touch . 
 In the 1994 U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts , Kennedy faced his first serious challenger , the young , telegenic , and very well @-@ funded Mitt Romney . Romney ran as a successful entrepreneur and Washington outsider with a strong family image and moderate stands on social issues , while Kennedy was saddled not only with his recent past but the 25th anniversary of Chappaquiddick and his first wife Joan seeking a renegotiated divorce settlement . By mid @-@ September 1994 , polls showed the race to be even . Kennedy 's campaign ran short on money , and belying his image as endlessly wealthy , he was forced to take out a second mortgage on his Virginia home . Kennedy responded with a series of attack ads , which focused both on Romney 's shifting political views and on the treatment of workers at a paper products plant owned by Romney 's Bain Capital . Kennedy 's new wife Vicki proved to be a strong asset in campaigning . Kennedy and Romney held a widely watched late October debate without a clear winner , but by then Kennedy had pulled ahead in polls and stayed ahead afterward . In the November election , despite a very bad outcome for the Democratic Party nationally , Kennedy won re @-@ election by a 58 percent to 41 percent margin , the closest re @-@ election race of his career . 
 Kennedy 's mother Rose died in January 1995 at the age of 104 . Kennedy intensified practice of his Catholicism from then on , often attending Mass several times a week . 
 = = = Carrying on = = = 
 Kennedy 's role as a liberal lion in the Senate came to the fore in 1995 , when the Republican Revolution took control and legislation intending to fulfill the Contract with America was coming from Newt Gingrich 's House of Representatives . Many Democrats in the Senate and the country overall were depressed , but Kennedy rallied forces to combat the Republicans . By the beginning of 1996 , the Republicans had overreached ; most of the Contract had failed to pass the Senate ; and the Democrats could once again move forward with legislation , almost all of it coming out of Kennedy 's staff . 
 In 1996 , Kennedy secured an increase in the minimum wage law , a favorite issue of his ; there would not be another increase for ten years . Following the failure of the Clinton health care plan , Kennedy went against his past strategy and sought incremental measures instead . Kennedy worked with Republican Senator Nancy Kassebaum to create and pass the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act in 1996 , which set new marks for portability of insurance and confidentiality of records . The same year , Kennedy 's Mental Health Parity Act forced insurance companies to treat mental health payments the same as others with respect to limits reached . In 1997 , Kennedy was the prime mover behind the State Children 's Health Insurance Program , which used increased tobacco taxes to fund the largest expansion of taxpayer @-@ funded health insurance coverage for children in the U.S. since Medicaid began in the 1960s . Senator Hatch and First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton also played major roles in SCHIP passing . 
 Kennedy was a stalwart backer of President Clinton during the 1998 Lewinsky scandal , often trying to cheer up the president when he was gloomiest and getting him to add past Kennedy staffer Greg Craig to his defense team , which helped improve the president 's fortunes . In the trial after the 1999 impeachment of Bill Clinton , Kennedy voted to acquit Clinton on both charges , saying " Republicans in the House of Representatives , in their partisan vendetta against the President , have wielded the impeachment power in precisely the way the framers rejected , recklessly and without regard for the Constitution or the will of the American people . " 
 On July 16 , 1999 , tragedy struck the Kennedy family again when a Piper Saratoga light aircraft crashed into the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Martha 's Vineyard . The accident killed its pilot John F. Kennedy , Jr . , and also his wife and sister @-@ in @-@ law . As patriarch , Ted consoled his extended family along with President Clinton at the public memorial service . He paraphrased William Butler Yeats by saying of his nephew : " We dared to think , in that other Irish phrase , that this John Kennedy would live to comb gray hair , with his beloved Carolyn by his side . But like his father , he had every gift but length of years . " Ted now served as a role model for Maria Shriver , Kerry Kennedy Cuomo , Robert F. Kennedy , Jr . , Joseph Patrick Kennedy II , and other family members . The Boston Globe wrote of the changed role : " It underscored the evolution that surprised so many people who knew the Kennedys : Teddy , the baby of the family , who had grown into a man who could sometimes be dissolute and reckless , had become the steady , indispensable patriarch , the one the family turned to in good times and bad . " 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Kennedy had an easy time with his re @-@ election to the Senate in 2000 , as Republican lawyer and entrepreneur Jack E. Robinson III was sufficiently damaged by his past personal record that Republican state party officials refused to endorse him . Kennedy got 73 percent of the general election vote , with Robinson splitting the rest with Libertarian Carla Howell . During the long , disputed post @-@ presidential election battle in Florida in 2000 , Kennedy supported Vice President Al Gore 's legal actions . After the bitter contest was over , many Democrats in Congress did not want to work with incoming President George W. Bush . Kennedy , however , saw Bush as genuinely interested in a major overhaul of elementary and secondary education , Bush saw Kennedy as a potential major ally in the Senate , and the two partnered together on the legislation . Kennedy accepted provisions governing mandatory student testing and teacher accountability that other Democrats and the National Education Association did not like , in return for increased funding levels for education . The No Child Left Behind Act was passed by Congress in May and June 2001 and signed into law by Bush in January 2002 . Kennedy soon became disenchanted with the implementation of the act , however , saying for 2003 that it was $ 9 billion short of the $ 29 billion authorized . Kennedy said , " The tragedy is that these long overdue reforms are finally in place , but the funds are not , " and accused Bush of not living up to his personal word on the matter . Other Democrats concluded that Kennedy 's penchant for cross @-@ party deals had gotten the better of him . The White House defended its spending levels given the context of two wars going on . 
 Kennedy was in his Senate offices meeting with First Lady Laura Bush when the September 11 , 2001 , attacks took place . Two of the airplanes involved had taken off from Boston , and in the following weeks , Kennedy telephoned each of the 177 Massachusetts families who had lost members in the attacks . He pushed through legislation that provided healthcare and grief counseling benefits for the families , and recommended the appointment of his former chief of staff Kenneth Feinberg as Special Master of the government 's September 11th Victim Compensation Fund . Kennedy maintained an ongoing bond with the Massachusetts 9 / 11 families in subsequent years . 
 In reaction to the attacks , Kennedy was a supporter of the American @-@ led 2001 overthrow of the Taliban government in Afghanistan . However , Kennedy strongly opposed the Iraq War from the start , and was one of 23 senators voting against the Iraq War Resolution in October 2002 . As the Iraqi insurgency grew in subsequent years , Kennedy pronounced that the conflict was " Bush 's Vietnam . " In response to losses of Massachusetts service personnel to roadside bombs , Kennedy became vocal on the issue of Humvee vulnerability , and co @-@ sponsored enacted 2005 legislation that sped up production and Army procurement of up @-@ armored Humvees . 
 Despite the strained relationship between Kennedy and Bush over No Child Left Behind spending , the two attempted to work together again on extending Medicare to cover prescription drug benefits . Kennedy 's strategy was again doubted by other Democrats , but he saw the proposed $ 400 billion program as an opportunity that should not be missed . However , when the final formulation of the Medicare Prescription Drug , Improvement , and Modernization Act contained provisions to steer seniors towards private plans , Kennedy switched to opposing it . It passed in late 2003 , and led Kennedy to again say he had been betrayed by the Bush administration . 
 In the 2004 Democratic Party presidential primaries , Kennedy campaigned heavily for fellow Massachusetts Senator John Kerry and lent his chief of staff , Mary Beth Cahill , to the Kerry campaign . Kennedy 's appeal was effective among blue collar and minority voters , and helped Kerry stage a come @-@ from @-@ behind win in the Iowa caucuses that propelled him on to the Democratic nomination . 
 After Bush won a second term in the 2004 general election , Kennedy continued to oppose him on Iraq and many other issues . However , Kennedy sought to partner with Republicans again on the matter of immigration reform in the context of the ongoing United States immigration debate . Kennedy was chair of the United States Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration , Border Security , and Refugees , and in 2005 , Kennedy teamed with Republican Senator John McCain on the Secure America and Orderly Immigration Act . The " McCain @-@ Kennedy bill " did not reach a Senate vote , but provided a template for further attempts at dealing comprehensively with legalization , guest worker programs , and border enforcement components . Kennedy returned again with the Comprehensive Immigration Reform Act of 2007 , which was sponsored by an ideologically diverse , bipartisan group of senators and had strong support from the Bush administration . The bill aroused furious grassroots opposition among talk radio listeners and others as an " amnesty " program , and despite Kennedy 's last @-@ minute attempts to salvage it , failed a cloture vote in the Senate . Kennedy was philosophical about the defeat , saying that it often took several attempts across multiple Congresses for this type of legislation to build enough momentum for passage . 
 In 2006 , Kennedy released a children 's book from the view of his dog Splash , My Senator and Me : A Dog 's @-@ Eye View of Washington , D.C. Also in 2006 , Kennedy released a political history entitled America Back on Track . 
 Kennedy again easily won re @-@ election to the Senate in 2006 , winning 69 percent of the vote against Republican language school owner Kenneth Chase , who suffered from very poor name recognition . 
 = = = Illness and a new president = = = 
 Kennedy initially stated that he would support John Kerry again should he run for president in 2008 , but in January 2007 , Kerry said he would not . Kennedy then remained neutral as the 2008 Democratic nomination battle between Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton and Senator Barack Obama intensified , as his friend Chris Dodd was also running . After the initial caucuses and primaries had been split between the two and Dodd had withdrawn , Kennedy became dissatisfied with the tone of the Clinton campaign and what he saw as racially tinged remarks by Bill Clinton . Kennedy gave an endorsement to Obama on January 28 , 2008 , despite appeals by both Clintons not to do so . In a move that was seen as a symbolic passing of the torch , Kennedy said that it was " time again for a new generation of leadership , " and compared Obama 's ability to inspire with that of his fallen brothers . In return Kennedy gained a commitment from Obama to make universal health care a top priority of his administration if elected . Kennedy 's endorsement was considered among the most influential that any Democrat could get , and raised the possibility of improving Obama 's vote @-@ getting among unions , Hispanics , and traditional base Democrats . It dominated the political news , and gave national exposure to a candidate who was still not well known in much of the country , as the Super Tuesday primaries across the nation approached . 
 On May 17 , 2008 , Kennedy suffered a seizure , and then another one as he was rushed from the Kennedy Compound to Cape Cod Hospital and then by helicopter to Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston . Within days , doctors announced that Kennedy had a malignant glioma , a type of cancerous brain tumor . The grim diagnosis brought reactions of shock and prayer from many senators of both parties and from President Bush . 
 Doctors initially told Kennedy the tumor was inoperable , but he looked around for other opinions and decided on the most aggressive and exhausting course of treatment possible . On June 2 , 2008 , Kennedy underwent brain surgery at Duke University Medical Center in an attempt to remove as much of the tumor as possible . The 3 ½ -hour operation , conducted by Dr. Allan Friedman while Kennedy was conscious to minimize any permanent neurological effects , was deemed successful in its goals . Kennedy left the hospital a week later to begin a course of chemotherapy and radiation treatment . Opinions varied regarding Kennedy 's prognosis : the surgery typically only extended survival time by a matter of months , but sometimes people lived for years . 
 The operation and follow @-@ up treatments left Kennedy thinner , prone to seizures , weak and short on energy , and hurt his balance . Kennedy made his first post @-@ illness public appearance on July 9 , when he surprised the Senate by showing up to supply the added vote to break a Republican filibuster against a bill to preserve Medicare fees for doctors . Though additionally ill from an attack of kidney stones and against the advice of some associates , Kennedy insisted on appearing during the first night of the 2008 Democratic National Convention on August 25 , 2008 , where a video tribute to him was played . Introduced by his niece , Caroline Kennedy , the senator said , " It is so wonderful to be here . Nothing – nothing – is going to keep me away from this special gathering tonight . " He then delivered a speech to the delegates ( which he had to memorize , as his impaired vision left him unable to read a teleprompter ) in which , reminiscent of his speech at the 1980 Democratic National Convention , he said , " this November , the torch will be passed again to a new generation of Americans . So , with Barack Obama and for you and for me , our country will be committed to his cause . The work begins anew . The hope rises again . And the dream lives on . " The dramatic appearance and speech electrified the convention audience , as Kennedy vowed that he would be present to see Obama inaugurated . 
 On September 26 , 2008 , Kennedy suffered a mild seizure while at his home in Hyannis Port , for which he was examined and released from hospital on the same day . Doctors believed that a change in his medication triggered the seizure . Kennedy relocated to Florida for the winter , continuing his treatments , sailing a lot , and staying in touch with legislative matters via telephone . In his absence , many senators wore blue " <unk> " bracelets . 
 On January 20 , 2009 , Kennedy attended Barack Obama 's presidential inauguration in Washington , but then suffered a seizure at the luncheon immediately afterwards . He was taken via wheelchair from the Capitol building and then by ambulance to Washington Hospital Center . The following morning , he was released from the hospital to his home in Washington , as doctors attributed the episode to " simple fatigue " . 
 As the 111th Congress began , Kennedy dropped his spot on the Senate Judiciary Committee to focus all his attentions on health care issues , which he regarded as " the cause of my life " . He saw the characteristics of the Obama administration and the Democratic majorities in Congress as representing the third and best great chance for universal health care , following the lost 1971 Nixon and 1993 Clinton opportunities , and as his last big legislative battle . Kennedy made another surprise appearance in the Senate to break a Republican filibuster against the Obama stimulus package . As spring arrived , Kennedy appeared on Capitol Hill more frequently , although staffers often did not announce his attendance at committee meetings until they were sure Kennedy was well enough to appear . On March 4 , 2009 , Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Gordon Brown announced that Kennedy had been granted an honorary knighthood by Queen Elizabeth II for his work in the Northern Ireland peace process , and for his contribution to UK – US relations , although the move caused some controversy in the UK due to his connections with Gerry Adams of the Irish republican political party Sinn Féin . Later in March , a bill <unk> and expanding the AmeriCorps program was renamed the Edward M. Kennedy Serve America Act by Senator Hatch in Kennedy 's honor . Kennedy threw the ceremonial first pitch at Fenway Park before the Boston Red Sox season opener in April , echoing what his grandfather " Honey Fitz " – a member of the Royal Rooters – had done to open the park in 1912 . Even when his illness prevented him from being a major factor in health plan deliberations , his symbolic presence still made him one of the key senators involved . 
 However , by spring 2009 , Kennedy 's tumor had spread and treatments clearly were not going to cure it , although this was not disclosed publicly . By June 2009 Kennedy had not cast a Senate vote in three months , and his health had forced him to retreat to Massachusetts , where he was undergoing another round of chemotherapy . In his absence , premature release of his health committee 's expansive plan resulted in a poor public reception . Kennedy 's friend Chris Dodd had taken over his role on the Health , Education , Labor and Pensions Committee , but Republican senators and other observers said that the lack of Kennedy 's physical presence had resulted in less consultation with them and was making successful negotiation more difficult . Democrats also missed Kennedy 's ability to smooth divisions on the health proposals . Kennedy did cut a television commercial for Dodd , who was struggling early on in his 2010 re @-@ election bid . In July , HBO began showing a documentary tribute to Kennedy 's life , Teddy : In His Own Words . A health care reform bill was voted out of the committee with content Kennedy favored , but still faced a long , difficult process before having a chance at becoming law . At the end of July 2009 , Kennedy was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom . He could not attend the ceremony to receive this medal , and attended a private service but not the public funeral when his sister Eunice Kennedy Shriver died at age 88 in mid @-@ August . By the end , Kennedy was in a wheelchair and had difficulty speaking , but consistently said that " I 've had a wonderful life . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Fifteen months after his original diagnosis , Kennedy succumbed to his disease on August 25 , 2009 , at age 77 at his home in Hyannis Port . He was survived by his former wife Joan , his wife Vicki , his sister Jean , his three children , two stepchildren , four grandchildren , in @-@ laws Edmund and Doris Reggie , and many nieces and nephews . In a statement , Kennedy 's family thanked " everyone who gave him care and support over this last year , and everyone who stood with him for so many years in his tireless march for progress toward justice " . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 President Obama said that Kennedy 's death marked the " passing of an extraordinary leader " and that he and First Lady Michelle Obama were " heartbroken " to learn of Kennedy 's death , while Vice President Biden said " today we lost a truly remarkable man , " and that Kennedy " changed the circumstances of tens of millions of Americans " . Mitt Romney , former Massachusetts Governor and Kennedy 's opponent in the 1994 senate race , called Kennedy " the kind of man you could like even if he was your adversary " and former First Lady Nancy Reagan said she was " terribly saddened " . She went on , " Given our political differences , people are sometimes surprised how close Ronnie and I have been to the Kennedy family . ... I will miss him . " Senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia , the President pro tempore of the Senate , issued a statement on Kennedy 's death in which he said " My heart and soul weeps at the loss of my best friend in the Senate , my beloved friend , Ted Kennedy . " ( Byrd had broken down on the Senate floor and cried uncontrollably when Kennedy 's cancer diagnosis was made public the previous year . ) Upon his death , his sister Jean is the only one still living of the nine Kennedy siblings . 
 There were also tributes from outside politics as well , including a moment of peace in the fierce rivalry between the New York Yankees and the Boston Red Sox as both teams observed a moment of silence . Flags at Fenway Park were flown at half @-@ staff and " Taps " was performed as players stood along the baselines before a Red Sox game . The Yankees observed a moment of silence for Kennedy before a game at Yankee Stadium as well . 
 = = = Funeral services = = = 
 Kennedy 's body traveled a 70 @-@ mile ( 110 km ) journey from the Kennedy Compound in Hyannis Port , past numerous landmarks named after his family , to the John F. Kennedy Library in Boston , Massachusetts , where it lay in repose and where over 50 @,@ 000 members of the public filed by to pay their respects . On Saturday , August 29 , a procession traveled from the library to the Our Lady of Perpetual Help Basilica in Boston , for a funeral Mass . Present at the funeral service were President Obama and former Presidents Jimmy Carter , Bill Clinton , and George W. Bush ( also representing his father , former President George H. W. Bush , who decided not to attend ) , along with Vice President Biden , three former Vice Presidents , 58 senators , 21 former senators , many members of the House of Representatives , and several foreign dignitaries . President Obama delivered the eulogy . 
 The funeral service also drew celebrities and other notables from outside politics from Boston , Washington , and across the United States , including singers Tony Bennett and Plácido Domingo , actors Jack Nicholson and Brian Stokes Mitchell , cellist Yo @-@ Yo Ma , actress Lauren Bacall , presidents and chancellors of Boston @-@ area colleges and universities including Harvard University President Drew G. Faust and University of Massachusetts President Jack M. Wilson , and sports figures including Boston Celtics legend Bill Russell and the top management of the Red Sox . 
 Kennedy 's body was returned to Washington , D.C. , for burial at Arlington National Cemetery , near the graves of his assassinated brothers . Kennedy 's grave marker is identical to his brother Robert 's : a white oak cross and a white marble foot marker bearing his full name , year of birth , and death . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 True Compass , the memoir that Kennedy worked on throughout his illness , was published three weeks after his death . It debuted atop the New York Times Best Seller list and by mid @-@ December 2009 had total sales of some 400 @,@ 000 copies . 
 A special election was scheduled for January 19 , 2010 , for the U.S. Senate seat from Massachusetts left vacant by Kennedy 's death . Shortly before his death , Kennedy had written to Democratic Governor of Massachusetts Deval Patrick and the Massachusetts legislature to change state law to allow an appointee to fill a U.S. Senate vacancy , for a term expiring upon the special election . ( Kennedy had been instrumental in the prior 2004 alteration of this law to prevent Governor Mitt Romney from appointing a Republican senator should John Kerry 's presidential campaign succeed . ) The law was amended , and on September 24 , 2009 , Paul G. Kirk , former Democratic National Committee chairman and former aide to Kennedy , was appointed to occupy the Senate seat until the completion of the special election . Kirk announced that he would not be a candidate in the special election . In that election , Republican State Senator Scott Brown won the seat in a stunning upset , ending Democratic control of it going back to 1953 . 
 Brown 's victory ended the 60 @-@ vote supermajority in the Senate that the Democrats had held since mid @-@ 2009 , and appeared to spell the end for health care reform legislation . But Democrats rallied and passed the measure ; Speaker Nancy Pelosi , who was instrumental in doing so , credited Kennedy 's life work in her final remarks on the House floor before the final vote . Kennedy 's widow Vicki attended the signing of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , at which both she and President Obama wore blue " <unk> " bracelets . Congressman Patrick Kennedy brought a copy of a national health insurance bill his father had introduced in 1970 as a gift for the president . Patrick Kennedy then laid a note on his father 's grave that said , " Dad , the unfinished business is done . " ( Patrick 's earlier decision not to seek re @-@ election meant that in January 2011 , a 64 @-@ year streak of a Kennedy holding elective office in Washington came to an end , but it resumed with the November 2012 election of Ted 's great @-@ nephew , Joseph P. Kennedy III , to the House . Democratic control of Kennedy 's Senate seat was also regained following Brown 's 2012 loss to Elizabeth Warren . ) 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Political scientists gauge ideology in part by comparing the annual ratings by the Americans for Democratic Action ( ADA ) with the ratings by the American Conservative Union ( ACU ) . Kennedy had a lifetime liberal 90 percent score from the ADA through 2004 , while the ACU awarded Kennedy a lifetime conservative rating of 2 percent through 2008 . Using another metric , Kennedy had a lifetime average liberal score of 88 @.@ 7 percent , according to a National Journal analysis that places him ideologically as the third @-@ most liberal senator of all those in office in 2009 . A 2004 analysis by political scientists Joshua D. Clinton of Princeton University and Simon Jackman and Doug Rivers of Stanford University examined some of the difficulties in making this kind of analysis , and found Kennedy likely to be the 8th @-@ to @-@ 15th @-@ most liberal Senator during the 108th Congress . The Almanac of American Politics rates congressional votes as liberal or conservative on the political spectrum , in three policy areas : economic , social , and foreign . For 2005 – 2006 , Kennedy 's average ratings were as follows : the economic rating was 91 percent liberal and 0 percent conservative , the social rating was 89 percent liberal and 5 percent conservative , and the foreign rating was 96 percent liberal and 0 percent conservative . 
 Various interest groups gave Kennedy scores or grades as to how well his votes aligned with the positions of each group . The American Civil Liberties Union gave him an 84 percent lifetime score as of 2009 . During the 1990s and 2000s , NARAL Pro @-@ Choice America and Planned Parenthood typically gave Kennedy ratings of 100 percent , while the National Right to Life Committee typically gave him a rating of less than 10 percent . The Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence gave Kennedy a lifetime rating of 100 percent through 2002 , while the National Rifle Association gave Kennedy a lifetime grade of ' F ' ( failing ) as of 2006 . 
 = = Cultural and political image = = 
 When he died , Kennedy was the second @-@ most senior member of the Senate , after President pro tempore Robert Byrd of West Virginia , and the third longest @-@ serving senator of all time , behind Byrd and Strom Thurmond of South Carolina ( he was passed later in 2009 by Daniel Inouye ) . 
 Following his presidential bid , Kennedy became one of the most recognizable and influential members of the party , and was sometimes called a " Democratic icon " as well as " The Lion of the Senate " . Kennedy and his Senate staff authored around 2 @,@ 500 bills , of which more than 300 were enacted into law . Kennedy co @-@ sponsored another 550 bills that became law after 1973 . Kennedy was known for his effectiveness in dealing with Republican senators and administrations , sometimes to the irritation of other Democrats . During the 101st Congress under President George H. W. Bush , at least half of the successful proposals put forward by the Senate Democratic policy makers came out of Kennedy 's Labor and Human Resources Committee . During the 2000s , almost every bipartisan bill signed during the George W. Bush administration had significant involvement from Kennedy . A late 2000s survey of Republican senators ranked Kennedy first among Democrats in bipartisanship . Kennedy strongly believed in the principle " never let the perfect be the enemy of the good , " and would agree to pass legislation he viewed as incomplete or imperfect with the goal of improving it down the road . In April 2006 , Kennedy was selected by Time as one of " America 's 10 Best Senators " ; the magazine noted that he had " amassed a titanic record of legislation affecting the lives of virtually every man , woman and child in the country " and that " by the late 1990s , the liberal icon had become such a prodigious cross @-@ aisle dealer that Republican leaders began pressuring party colleagues not to sponsor bills with him " . In May 2008 , soon @-@ to @-@ be Republican presidential nominee John McCain said , " [ Kennedy ] is a legendary lawmaker and I have the highest respect for him . When we have worked together , he has been a skillful , fair and generous partner . " Republican Governor of California and Kennedy relative Arnold Schwarzenegger described " Uncle Teddy " as " a liberal icon , a warrior for the less fortunate , a fierce advocate for health @-@ care reform , a champion of social justice here and abroad " and " the rock of his family " . At the time of Kennedy 's death , sociologist and Nation board member Norman Birnbaum wrote that Kennedy had come to be viewed as the " voice " and " conscience " of American progressivism . 
 Despite his bipartisan legislative practices , for many years Kennedy was a polarizing symbol of American liberalism . Republican and conservative groups long viewed Kennedy as a reliable " bogeyman " to mention in fundraising letters , on a par with Hillary Rodham Clinton and similar to Democratic and liberal appeals mentioning Newt Gingrich . The famous racially motivated " Hands " negative ad used in North Carolina Senator Jesse Helms 's 1990 re @-@ election campaign against Harvey Gantt accused Gantt of supporting " Ted Kennedy 's racial quota law " . University of California , San Diego political science professor Gary Jacobson 's 2006 study of partisan polarization found that in a state @-@ by @-@ state survey of job approval ratings of the state 's senators , Kennedy had the largest partisan difference of any senator , with a 57 percentage point difference in approval between Massachusetts 's Democrats and Republicans . The Associated Press wrote that , " Perhaps because it was impossible , Kennedy never tried to shake his image as a liberal titan to admirers and a left @-@ wing caricature to detractors . " 
 Ted Kennedy was , from 1968 on , the most prominent living member of the Kennedy family , and was the last surviving son of Joseph P. Kennedy and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy . John F. Kennedy had said in 1957 , " Just as I went into politics because Joe died , if anything happened to me tomorrow , my brother Bobby would run for my seat in the Senate . And if Bobby died , Teddy would take over for him . " However , Ted was never able to carry on the " Camelot " mystique in the same way that both of his fallen brothers had , with much of it disappearing during his failed 1980 presidential bid . The loss of life at Chappaquiddick and Kennedy 's well @-@ documented later personal problems further tarnished his image in relation to the Kennedy name , and Chappaquiddick significantly damaged Ted 's chances of ever becoming president . The Associated Press wrote that , " Unlike his brothers , Edward M. Kennedy has grown old in public , his victories , defeats and human contradictions played out across the decades in the public glare . " But Kennedy 's legislative accomplishments remained , and as The Boston Globe wrote , " By the early 21st century , the achievements of the younger brother would be enough to rival those of many presidents . " His death prompted the realization that the " Camelot era " was truly over . Kennedy 's New York Times obituary described him via a character sketch : " He was a Rabelaisian figure in the Senate and in life , instantly recognizable by his shock of white hair , his florid , oversize face , his booming Boston brogue , his powerful but pained stride . He was a celebrity , sometimes a self @-@ parody , a hearty friend , an implacable foe , a man of large faith and large flaws , a melancholy character who persevered , drank deeply and sang loudly . He was a Kennedy . " 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Senator Kennedy received many awards and honors over the years . These include an honorary knighthood bestowed by Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom , the Order of the Aztec Eagle from Mexico , the U.S. Presidential Medal of Freedom , the Order of the Merit of Chile , and honorary degrees from a number of institutions including Harvard University . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = = Writings = = 
 Kennedy , Edward M. , ed . ( 1965 ) . The <unk> Bough ( Collected essays on Joseph P. Kennedy ) . privately published . 
 Kennedy , Edward M. ( 1968 ) . Decisions for a Decade : Policies and Programs for the 1970s . Doubleday . 
 Kennedy , Edward M. ( 1972 ) . In Critical Condition : The Crisis in America 's Health Care . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Kennedy , Edward M. , ed . ( 1979 ) . Our Day and Our Generation : The Words of Edward M. Kennedy . Simon & Schuster . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 671 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Kennedy , Edward M. ; Hatfield , Mark ( 1982 ) . Freeze ! : How You Can Prevent Nuclear War . Bantam Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 553 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Kennedy , Edward M. ( 2006 ) . America Back On Track . Viking Adult . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Kennedy , Edward M. ( 2006 ) . My Senator and Me : A Dog 's @-@ Eye View of Washington , D.C. Small , David ( illus . ) . Scholastic Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 439 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Kennedy , Edward M. ( 2009 ) . True Compass . Twelve . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 446 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 = Management of multiple sclerosis = 
 Multiple sclerosis ( MS ) is a chronic inflammatory demyelinating disease that affects the central nervous system ( CNS ) . Several therapies for exist , although there is no known cure . 
 The most common initial course of the disease is the relapsing @-@ remitting subtype , which is characterized by unpredictable attacks ( relapses ) followed by periods of relative remission with no new signs of disease activity . After some years , many of the people who have this subtype begin to experience neurologic decline without acute relapses . When this happens it is called secondary progressive multiple sclerosis . Other , less common , courses of the disease are the primary progressive ( decline from the beginning without attacks ) and the progressive @-@ relapsing ( steady neurologic decline and superimposed attacks ) . Different therapies are used for patients experiencing acute attacks , for patients who have the relapsing @-@ remitting subtype , for patients who have the progressive subtypes , for patients without a diagnosis of MS who have a demyelinating event , and for managing the various consequences of MS. 
 The primary aims of therapy are returning function after an attack , preventing new attacks , and preventing disability . As with any medical treatment , medications used in the management of MS may have several adverse effects , and many possible therapies are still under investigation . At the same time different alternative treatments are pursued by many people , despite the fact that there is little supporting , comparable , replicated scientific study . Stem cell therapy is being studied . 
 This article focuses on therapies for standard MS ; borderline forms of MS have particular treatments that are excluded . 
 = = Acute attacks = = 
 Administration of high doses of intravenous corticosteroids , such as methylprednisolone , is the routine therapy for acute relapses . This is administered over a period of three to five days , and has a well @-@ established efficacy in promoting a faster recovery from disability after an attack . There is however insufficient evidence to indicate any significant impact on long @-@ term disability of corticosteroid treatments . Steroids administered orally have a similar effectiveness and safety profile at treating MS symptoms as intravenous treatment . Consequences of severe attacks which do not respond to corticosteroids might be treated by plasmapheresis . 
 = = Disease @-@ modifying treatments = = 
 As of June 2016 , ten disease @-@ modifying treatments have been approved by regulatory agencies of different countries , including the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) , the European Medicines Agency ( EMEA ) and the Japanese <unk> . 
 Medications approved by the FDA include two interferons , beta @-@ 1a and beta @-@ 1b , three monoclonal antibodies : natalizumab , <unk> and daclizumab and five immunomodulators : glatiramer acetate , mitoxantrone , fingolimod , teriflunomide , dimethyl fumarate . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 In 1993 interferon beta @-@ 1b was the first drug to ever be approved for MS , being soon followed by interferon beta @-@ 1a and glatiramer acetate . 
 Interferon beta @-@ 1a is injected either weekly ( intramuscular injection ) or three times a week ( subcutaneous injection ) depending on commercial formulations , while interferon beta @-@ 1b is injected subcutaneously every second day . In 2014 , a pegylated form of interferon beta @-@ 1a was introduced with the brand name <unk> , which is available as a subcutaneous injection . This peginterferon beta 1 @-@ a attaches polyethylene glycol to the interferon molecules allowing longer lasting biological effects in the body while decreasing the frequency of administration to once every two weeks . Interferon beta balances the expression of pro- and anti @-@ inflammatory agents in the brain , and reduces the number of inflammatory cells that cross the blood – brain barrier . Overall , therapy with interferon beta leads to a reduction of neuron inflammation . Moreover , it is also thought to increase the production of nerve growth factor and consequently improve neuronal survival . 
 <unk> acetate is a mixture of random polymers of four amino acids which is <unk> similar to the myelin basic protein , a component of the myelin sheath of nerves with which it competes for presentation to T cells . It is injected subcutaneously on a daily basis . 
 Mitoxantrone is an immunosuppressant also used in cancer chemotherapy which was approved for MS in the year 2000 ; whereas natalizumab is a monoclonal antibody that was initially approved in 2004 . Both are given by intravenous infusion at monthly intervals in the case of natalizumab and every three months in the case of mitoxantrone . 
 In 2010 fingolimod , a sphingosine @-@ 1 @-@ phosphate receptor modulator , became the first oral drug approved by the FDA , being followed in 2012 by teriflunomide , a drug that inhibits the synthesis of pyrimidine and disrupts the interaction of T cells with antigen presenting cell . <unk> and teriflunomide are taken through a daily single dose . In 2013 one further oral drug , dimethyl fumarate <unk> <unk> ( which is an improved version of fumaric acid , an already existing drug ) , was approved by the FDA . Dimethyl fumarate is taken twice daily . 
 Another oral drug , <unk> , was approved in Russia and Australia in 2010 . Its application was rejected by the FDA and EMEA in 2011 due to safety concerns in spite of the promising efficacy of the drug . This led the pharmaceutical to discontinue commercialization and withdraw all marketing applications . 
 Most of these drugs are approved only for Relapsing @-@ <unk> multiple sclerosis ( RRMS ) . 
 = = = = Side effects = = = = 
 Both the interferons and glatiramer acetate are available only in injectable forms , and both can cause skin reactions at the injection site , specially with subcutaneous administration . Skin reactions vary greatly in their clinical presentation and may include bruising , erythema , pain , pruritus , irritation , swelling and in the most extreme cases cutaneous necrosis . They usually appear within the first month of treatment albeit their <unk> and importance diminish after six months of use . Mild skin reactions usually do not impede treatment whereas <unk> appear in around 5 % of patients and lead to the discontinuation of the therapy . Also over time , a visible dent at the injection site due to the local destruction of fat tissue , known as <unk> , may develop . 
 Interferons , a subclass of cytokines , are produced in the body during illnesses such as influenza in order to help fight the infection . They are responsible of many of the symptoms of influenza infections , including fever , muscle aches , fatigue , and headaches . Many patients report influenza @-@ like symptoms hours after taking interferon @-@ beta that usually improve within 24 hours , being such symptoms related to the temporary increase of cytokines . This reaction tends to disappear after 3 months of treatment and its symptoms can be treated with over @-@ the @-@ counter nonsteroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs , such as ibuprofen , that reduce fever and pain . Another common transient secondary effect with interferon @-@ beta is a functional deterioration of already existing symptoms of the disease . Such deterioration is similar to the one produced in MS patients due to heat , fever or stress ( Uhthoff 's phenomenon ) , usually appears within 24 hours of treatment , is more common in the initial months of treatment , and may last several days . A symptom specially sensitive to worsening is spasticity . Interferon @-@ beta can also reduce numbers of white blood cells ( leukopenia ) , lymphocytes ( <unk> ) and neutrophils ( neutropenia ) , as well as affect liver function . In most cases these effects are non @-@ dangerous and reversible after cessation or reduction of treatment . Nevertheless , recommendation is that all patients should be monitored through laboratory blood analyses , including liver function tests , to ensure safe use of interferons . 
 <unk> acetate is generally well tolerated . The most common secondary effect with glatiramer acetate after skin problem is a post @-@ injection reaction manifested by flushing , chest tightness , heart palpitations , breathlessness , and anxiety , which usually lasts less than thirty minutes and does not require additional treatment . 
 Mitoxantrone therapy may be associated with immunosuppressive effects and liver damage ; however its most dangerous side effect is its dose @-@ related cardiac toxicity . Careful adherence to the administration and monitoring guidelines is therefore essential ; this includes obtaining an echocardiogram and a complete blood count before treatment to decide whether the therapy is suitable for the patient or the risks are too great . It is recommended that mitoxantrone be discontinued at the first signs of heart damage , infection or liver dysfunction during therapy . Heart problems ( mainly systolic dysfunction ) appear in over 10 % of patients , while leukemia prevalence is 0 @.@ 8 % . 
 Soon after its approval natalizumab was withdrawn from the market by its manufacturer after it was linked with three cases of the rare but hazardous neurological condition called progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy ( PML ) . PML is an opportunistic infection with neurological progressive symptoms caused by the replication of the JC virus in the glial cells of the brain . All 3 initial cases were taking natalizumab in combination with interferon beta @-@ 1a . After a safety review the drug was returned to the market in 2006 as a monotherapy for MS under a special prescription program . As of May 2011 , over 130 cases of PML had been reported , all in patients who had taken natalizumab for more than a year . While none of them had taken the drug in combination with other disease @-@ modifying treatments , previous use of MS treatments increases the risk of PML between 3 and 4 @-@ fold . The estimated prevalence of PML is 1 @.@ 5 cases per thousand natalizumab users . Around 20 % of MS patients with PML die , while most of the remaining are importantly disabled . 
 During clinical trials fingolimod gave rise to side effects such as hypertension and bradycardia , macular edema , elevated liver enzymes or reduction in <unk> levels . <unk> is considered a very safe drug . Nevertheless , there have been reports of liver failure , and PML . <unk> is also known to be dangerous for fetal development . Most common secondary effects of dimethyl fumarate during clinical trials were flushing and gastrointestinal problems . These problems were generally mild and occurred more frequently during the first month of treatment . While dimethyl fumarate leads to a reduction in white blood cell count and levels should be monitored in patients , there were no reported cases of opportunistic infections during the clinical trials . Moreover , fumaric acid is also used to treat psoriasis , another <unk> disorder , and there is long term safety data from over 14 years of use without any indication of further dangerous secondary effects . 
 = = = Clinically isolated syndrome = = = 
 The earliest clinical presentation of RRMS is the clinically isolated syndrome ( CIS ) , that is , a single attack of a single symptom . During a CIS , there is a subacute attack suggestive of demyelination but the patient does not fulfill the criteria for diagnosis of multiple sclerosis . Treatment with interferons or glatiramer acetate after an initial attack decreases the risk of developing clinical definite MS. 
 = = = Relapsing @-@ remitting MS = = = 
 Medications are modestly effective at decreasing the number of attacks in RRMS and in reducing the accumulation of brain lesions , which is measured using gadolinium @-@ enhanced magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) . Interferons and glatiramer acetate are roughly equivalent , reducing relapses by approximately 30 % and their safe profile make them the first @-@ line treatments . Nevertheless , not all the patients are responsive to these therapies . It is known that 30 % of MS patients are non @-@ responsive to Beta interferon . One of the factors related to non @-@ <unk> is the presence of high levels of interferon beta neutralizing antibodies . Interferon therapy , and specially interferon beta @-@ 1b , induces the production of neutralizing antibodies , usually in the second 6 months of treatment , in 5 to 30 % of treated patients . Moreover , a subset of RRMS patients with specially active MS , sometimes called " rapidly worsening MS " are normally non @-@ responders to immunomodulators and are treated with either mitoxantrone or natalizumab . 
 Natalizumab and mitoxantrone are considered highly effective both in terms of relapse rate reduction and halting disability progression , however , they are related to dangerous side @-@ effects that have led them to be considered second @-@ line treatments . Natalizumab halves the risk of suffering relapses when compared to interferons , having an overall efficacy of over 70 % . Moreover , mitoxantrone is also highly useful to reduce attacks and disability , but it is generally not considered as a long @-@ term therapy due to its severe cardiac toxicity . 
 There are no official guidelines yet on the use of disease @-@ modifying oral treatments due to their recent development . While some believe that they will probably reduce the usage of first @-@ line treatments the long @-@ term safety of interferons and glatiramer acetate will probably slow this trend . It has been recommended that at the moment oral treatments should be mainly offered in those cases where patients do not use existing treatments due to needle phobia or other reasons such as perceived inefficacy of interferons and glatiramer acetate . They could also be used in patients taking natalizumab who have developed JC virus antibodies and are therefore at an increased risk of PML . Dimethyl fumarate is potentially one of the most interesting oral drugs due to the long term data from use in psoriasis which points towards a very good safety profile . 
 While more studies of the long @-@ term effects of the drugs are needed , specially for the newest treatments , existing data on the effects of interferons and glatiramer acetate indicate that early @-@ initiated long @-@ term therapy is safe and it is related to better outcomes . 
 Oral contraceptive pills have contradictory results from different studies regarding any effect of decreasing relapse rate in women with multiple sclerosis . Certain medications for MS symptoms , such as carbamazepine ( used to treat spasms and pain ) and modafinil ( used to treat fatigue ) can make oral contraceptive pills less effective . 
 Even with appropriate use of medication , to varying degrees most patients with relapsing @-@ remitting MS still suffer from some attacks and many suffer subsequent disability . 
 = = = Secondary progressive MS and progressive relapsing MS = = = 
 Treatment of advanced forms of MS is more difficult than relapsing @-@ remitting MS. A wide range of medications have been used to try to slow the progression of the disease , with results that have been at best fair . 
 Mitoxantrone has shown positive effects in people with a secondary progressive and progressive relapsing courses . It is moderately effective in reducing the progression of the disease and the frequency of relapses in people after two years . In 2007 it was the only medication approved in the USA for both secondary progressive and progressive relapsing multiple sclerosis ; however , it causes dose @-@ dependent cardiac toxicity which limits its long @-@ term use . It is also not approved in Europe . Natalizumab has shown efficacy and has been approved for secondary progressive MS with relapses . Studies on the use of Interferon @-@ beta @-@ 1b in secondary progressive and progressive relapsing MS do not support that it slows progression of the disease , although it is effective in reducing the number of relapses . 
 = = = Primary progressive MS = = = 
 Treatment of primary progressive multiple sclerosis ( PPMS ) is problematic as many patients do not respond to any available therapy , and no treatment has been approved specifically for use in this form of the disease . There have been several trials investigating the efficacy of different drugs for PPMS without positive results . Drugs tested include interferon beta , mitoxantrone , glatiramer acetate or <unk> . People with PPMS have also been included in trials of azathioprine , methotrexate , intravenous immunoglobulin , cyclophosphamide and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation . 
 = = Managing the effects of MS = = 
 Disease @-@ modifying treatments only reduce the progression rate of the disease but do not stop it . As multiple sclerosis progresses , the symptoms tend to increase . The disease is associated with a variety of symptoms and functional deficits that result in a range of progressive impairments and handicap . Management of these deficits is therefore very important . 
 = = = Rehabilitation = = = 
 = = = = Physical therapy = = = = 
 Symptoms of MS that can be improved include fatigue , spasticity , depression , bladder dysfunction , and neurological symptoms . These symptoms can be improved by physical therapy and medication . Physical therapists can show strengthening exercises and ways to stretch ; ultimately making daily tasks easier and reduces fatigue while muscle strength increases as flexibility increases . Medications can help fatigue , muscle tightness ( spasticity ) , depression , bladder dysfunction , and neurological symptoms . All symptoms are common amongst MS patients . 
 Both drug therapy and <unk> have shown to ease the burden of some symptoms , even though neither influence disease progression . For other symptoms the efficacy of treatments is still very limited . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Although there are relatively few studies of rehabilitation in MS , its general effectiveness , when conducted by a team of specialists , has been clearly demonstrated in other diseases such as stroke or head trauma . As for any patient with neurologic deficits , a multidisciplinary approach is key to limiting and overcoming disability ; however there are particular difficulties in specifying a ' core team ' because people with MS may need help from almost any health profession or service at some point . <unk> are mainly involved in the diagnosis and ongoing management of multiple sclerosis , and any exacerbations . The comprehensive rehabilitation process for patients with multiple sclerosis is generally managed by <unk> . Allied treatments such as physiotherapy , speech and language therapy or occupational therapy can also help to manage some symptoms and maintain quality of life . Treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms such as emotional distress and clinical depression should involve mental health professionals such as therapists , psychologists , and psychiatrists , while neuropsychologists can help to evaluate and manage cognitive deficits . Multidisciplinary approaches have been shown to be effective in increasing activity levels and participation in multiple sclerosis . Due to the paucity of randomized controlled studies , there is limited evidence of the overall efficacy of individual therapy disciplines , though there is good evidence that specific approaches , such as exercise , psychology therapies , particularly cognitive behavioral approaches and energy conservation instruction are effective . More specifically psychological interventions seem useful in the treatment of depression , while evidence on effectiveness for other uses such as the treatment of cognitive impairments or vocational counseling is less strong . It is difficult to be specific about what types of rehabilitation will be most beneficial because therapies are tailored to meet the individual 's specific needs . 
 In regards to well @-@ being , physical therapy focused on gait training can be vital to maximizing MS patient participation via reduction of fatigue during walking and activities of daily living ( ADLs ) . Most gait training is performed over @-@ ground ( i.e. , in a gym room or outside on uneven ground ) , on treadmills or , less commonly , using robotic @-@ assisted devices . Robotic @-@ assisted body weight @-@ supported treadmill training may be an effective therapeutic option in MS patients with severe walking impairments . In contrast , over @-@ ground gait training may be most effective in improving gait speed in MS patients with less severe impairments . Equine @-@ assisted therapies such as therapeutic horseback riding and <unk> are additional treatments that can positively influence gait , balance and quality of life in people with MS. 
 Historically , individuals with MS were advised against participation in physical activity due to worsening symptoms . However , under the direction of an expert , participation in physical activity can be safe and has been proven beneficial for persons with MS. Research has supported the rehabilitative role of physical activity in improving muscle power , mobility , mood , bowel health , general conditioning and quality of life . Depending on the person , activities may include resistance training , walking , swimming , yoga , tai chi , and others . Determining an appropriate and safe exercise program is challenging and must be carefully individualized to each person being sure to account for all contraindications and precautions . 
 An elevated core temperature , leading to increased symptom presentation has been noted during exercise , due to variations in circadian body temperature throughout the day , and due to heat exposure including warm temperatures , warm showers , sun bathing , etc . Care should be taken not to overheat a person with MS during the course of exercise . There is some evidence that cooling measures are effective in allowing a greater degree of exercise : cold showers , cold water limb immersion , applying ice packs , and drinking cold beverages . These strategies are effective when attempting to decrease core temperature post @-@ exercise , and as a method of pre @-@ cooling prior to physical activity or heat exposure . The interaction between an elevated core temperature and the pathological demyelination can cause a transient nerve conduction block that leads to temporarily impaired physical and cognitive function . These effects translate to reduced patient safety and performance of ADLs , however there are viable prevention strategies . Behavioral strategies to minimize heat exposure include performing outdoor physical activity when temperatures are cooler , or installing an air conditioner . 
 = = = Medical treatments for symptoms = = = 
 Multiple sclerosis can cause a variety of symptoms including changes in sensation ( <unk> ) , muscle weakness , abnormal muscle spasms , impaired movement , difficulties with coordination and balance , problems in speech ( known as dysarthria ) or swallowing ( dysphagia ) , visual problems ( nystagmus , optic neuritis , or diplopia ) , fatigue and acute or chronic pain syndromes , bladder and bowel difficulties , cognitive impairment , or emotional symptoms ( mainly depression ) . At the same time for each symptom there are different treatment options . Treatments should therefore be individualized depending both on the patient and the physician . 
 <unk> : <unk> of the urinary tract is common in MS. Treatments for bladder problems vary depending on the origin or type of dysfunction but can mainly divided into treatment of bladder control and incontinence , and of urinary tract infections . Regarding bladder control , some examples of medications used are desmopressin for <unk> and anticholinergic drugs such as <unk> and <unk> for urinary urgency . Non @-@ pharmacological management includes pelvic floor muscle training , stimulation , <unk> , bladder retraining , changes to daily life habits such as clothing , use of external urine collection devices for men and incontinence pads for women ; and sometimes intermittent urinary catheterization . Regarding long term catheterization , it is associated to urinary tract infections and should be avoided whenever possible . Some of these recommendations do not come from specific studies in MS but are general recommendations for those who have neurogenic bladder . 
 Bowel : bowel problems affect around 70 % of the patients , with around 50 % of the patients suffering from constipation and up to 30 % from fecal incontinence . Cause of bowel impairments in MS patients is usually either a reduced gut motility or an impairment in neurological control of defecation . The former is commonly related to <unk> or secondary effects from drugs used in the treatment of the disease . Pain or problems with defecation can be helped with a diet change which includes among other changes an increased fluid intake , oral laxatives or suppositories and enemas when habit changes and oral measures are not enough to control the problems . 
 Cognitive and emotional : neuropsychiatric symptomatology is common in the course of the disease . Depression and anxiety appear in up to 80 % of patients , . Emotional lability leading to uncontrollable crying is also common . These symptoms can be treated with antidepressants and cognitive behavioral therapy ; however , high quality studies on efficacy are lacking . For example , in the specific case of antidepressants and depression , only two studies were considered worth considering as of 2011 by the Cochrane collaboration and they only showed a trend towards efficacy . Other neuropsychiatric symptoms are euphoria and disinhibition . Cognitive impairment is a frequent complication of MS even after the introduction of disease @-@ modifying treatments in the last 20 years . Although the disease is usually the primary cause of cognitive problems , other factors such as medications , relapses or depression may be enhancing them so a correct evaluation of the deficits and factors exacerbating them is important . Regarding primary deficits , data point towards administration of L @-@ amphetamine and methylphenidate being useful , whereas memantine and <unk> drugs such as donepezil — commonly used in Alzheimer disease — are not considered effective in improving cognitive functions . Effectiveness of cognitive rehabilitation therapy is more controverted . For those patients with MS who have <unk> affect ( PBA ) , characterized by uncontrollable episodes of crying and / or laughing , or other emotional displays , <unk> / <unk> can be considered as treatment as it is the only FDA approved drug for treatment for PBA , though other medications such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors , tricyclic antidepressants have been used in clinical practice . 
 <unk> and dysarthria : dysphagia is a difficulty with eating and swallowing which may cause choking and aspiration of food or liquid into the lungs , while dysarthria is a neurological motor speech disorder characterized by poor control over the subsystems and muscles responsible for speech ( " articulation " ) . A speech and language therapist may give advice on specific swallowing techniques , on adapting food consistencies and dietary intake , on techniques to improve and maintain speech production and clarity , and on alternative communication approaches . In the case of advanced dysphagia , food can be supplied by a nasogastric tube , which is a tube that goes through the nose directly to the stomach ; or a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy ( PEG ) , which is a procedure for placing a tube into the stomach and therefore administering food directly to it . This second system , although more invasive , has better results in the long term than nasogastric intake . 
 <unk> dysfunction : erectile dysfunction is common in male patients with MS. There is some evidence indicating that sildenafil citrate may be a useful treatment . 
 Fatigue : fatigue is very common and disabling in MS , and at the same time it has a close relationship with depressive symptomatology . When depression is reduced fatigue also tends to improve , so patients should be evaluated for depression before other therapeutic approaches are used . In a similar way , other factors such as disturbed sleep , chronic pain , poor nutrition , or even some medications can contribute to fatigue ; medical professionals are therefore encouraged to identify and modify them . A few medications have been studied to treat MS @-@ related fatigue , such as amantadine pemoline ( which is a psychostimulant also used for attention @-@ deficit hyperactivity disorder and narcolepsy ) , or modafinil , as well as psychological interventions of energy conservation , but the effects of all of them are small . Fatigue is therefore a very difficult symptom to manage for which no drugs are recommended . 
 Pain : acute pain is mainly due to optic neuritis ( with corticosteroids being the best treatment available ) , as well as trigeminal neuralgia , Lhermitte 's sign , or dysesthesias . <unk> pain is usually secondary to the disease and can be a consequence of spending too long in the same position , urinary retention , and infected skin ulcers , amongst others . Treatment will depend on cause . Chronic pain is very common and harder to treat as its most common cause is dysesthesias . Acute pain due to trigeminal neuralgia is usually successfully treated with anticonvulsants such as carbamazepine or phenytoin . Both Lhermitte 's sign and painful dysesthesias usually respond to treatment with carbamazepine , clonazepam , or amitriptyline . <unk> is approved for treatment of pain in MS in different countries , but due to its derivation from cannabis , it is currently not available in others , such as the USA . This medication is also being investigated for the management of other MS symptoms , such as spasticity , and has shown long @-@ term safety and efficacy . 
 Spasticity : spasticity is characterized by increased stiffness and slowness in limb movement , the development of certain postures , an association with weakness of voluntary muscle power , and with involuntary and sometimes painful spasms of limbs . A physiotherapist can help to reduce spasticity and avoid the development of contractures with techniques such as passive stretching . <unk> is safe and effective for relieving <unk> . There is evidence , albeit limited , of the clinical effectiveness of baclofen , <unk> , diazepam , and <unk> . In the most complicated cases intrathecal injections of baclofen can be used . There are also palliative measures like castings , splints or customized <unk> . 
 Vision : different drugs as well as optic compensatory systems and prisms can be used to improve the symptoms of nystagmus or diplopia ( double vision ) . Surgery can also be used in some cases . 
 Walking : <unk> ( <unk> ) is a broad @-@ spectrum potassium channel blocker . It is approved by the FDA to treat walking difficulties in MS. It has been shown to increase walking speed , although its high cost ( over 1000 dollars a month ) limits its usage . 
 Unfortunately , other symptoms , such as ataxia , tremor or sensory losses , do not have proven treatments . 
 = = Research = = 
 Research directions on MS treatments include investigations of MS pathogenesis and heterogeneity ; research of more effective , convenient , or tolerable new treatments for RRMS ; creation of therapies for the progressive subtypes ; neuroprotection strategies ; and the search for effective symptomatic treatments . 
 Advances during the last decades has led to the recent approval of several oral drugs . These drugs are expected to gain in popularity and frequency of use at the expense of previously existing therapies . Further oral drugs are still under investigation , the most notable example being <unk> , which was announced in August 2012 to be the focus of a third phase III trial after mixed results in the previous ones . Similarly , Other studies are aimed to improve efficacy and ease of use of already existing therapies through the use of novel preparations . Such is the case the PEGylated version of interferon @-@ β @-@ 1a , that has a longer life than normal interferon and therefore it is being studied if given at less frequent doses has a similar efficacy than the existing product . With the completion of a robust two @-@ year study , it is shown that the PEGylated interferon beta @-@ 1a has greater efficacy in decreasing relapse rate and disability progression compared to placebo for MS patients . 
 Monoclonal antibodies , which are drugs of the same family as natalizumab , have also raised high levels of interest and research . <unk> , daclizumab and <unk> monoclonal antibodies such as rituximab , <unk> and <unk> have all shown some benefit and are under study as potential treatments for MS. Nevertheless , their use has also been accompanied by the appearance of potentially dangerous adverse effects , most importantly opportunistic infections . Related to these investigations is the recent development of a test against JC virus antibodies which might help to predict what patients are at a greater risk of developing progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy when taking natalizumab . While monoclonal antibodies are probably going to have some role in the treatment of the disease in the future , it is believed that it will be small due to the risks associated to them . 
 Another research strategy is to evaluate the combined effectiveness of two or more drugs . The main rationale for <unk> in MS is that the involved treatments target different mechanisms of the disease and therefore their use is not necessarily exclusive . Moreover , synergies , in which a drug potentiates the effect of another are also possible . Nevertheless , there can also appear important drawbacks such as antagonizing mechanisms of action or potentiation of deleterious secondary effects . While there have been several clinical trials of combined therapy none has shown positive enough effects to merit the consideration as a viable treatment for MS. 
 Finally , regarding neuroprotective and specially regenerative treatments , such as stem cell therapy , while their research is considered of high importance at the moment they are only a promise of future therapeutic approaches . Likewise , there are not any effective treatments for the progressive variants of the disease . Many of the newest drugs as well as those under development are probably going to be evaluated as therapies for PPMS or SPMS , and their improved effectiveness when compared with previously existing drugs may eventually lead to a positive result in these groups of patients . 
 In 2008 , vascular surgeon Paolo Zamboni suggested that MS involves a vascular process he referred to as chronic cerebrospinal venous insufficiency ( CCSVI ) , in which veins from the brain are constricted . He found CCSVI in all patients with MS in his study , performed a surgical procedure , later called in the media " liberation procedure " to correct it and claimed that 73 % of participants improved . This theory received important attention in the media and among MS patients , specially in Canada . Concern has been raised with Zamboni 's research as it was neither blinded nor controlled , and additionally its assumptions about the <unk> of the disease may not be backed by known data . Also further studies have either not found a relationship or found a much less strong one . This has raised serious objections to the hypothesis of CCSVI originating MS. The " liberation procedure " has been criticized for possibly resulting in serious complications and deaths while its benefits have not been proven . Currently it is recommended not to use the proposed treatment unless its effectiveness is confirmed by controlled studies . Research on CCSVI has been fast tracked but researchers have been unable to confirm whether CCSVI has a role in causing MS. 
 = = Alternative treatments = = 
 Over 50 % of MS patients may use complementary and alternative medicine , although numbers vary greatly depending on the definition of alternative medicine used . In the United States , it is estimated that 75 % of the MS patient populations use at least one complementary and alternative medicine for treatment and symptomatic control . The evidence for effectiveness for such treatments in most cases is weak or absent . Examples of treatments used by patients include dietary supplementation and regimens such as vitamin D , calcium , vitamin B12 , and antioxidants . The rationale behind the use of Vitamin D supplementation is that studies show an association between vitamin D deficiency and increasing progression of MS , as well as the anti @-@ inflammatory effects of vitamin D. 
 For antioxidant therapy , studies have shown that reactive oxidative species lead to the formation of multiple sclerosis lesions in which antioxidants can help induce neuroprotective and <unk> effects . Probably the most clear disease modifying factor ( for worse ) is smoking , and therefore to quit smoking should be considered . 
 Other alternative treatments include relaxation techniques such as yoga , herbal medicine ( including the use of medical cannabis ) , hyperbaric oxygenation , self @-@ infection with hookworm ( known generally as <unk> therapy ) and bee venom therapy , reflexology or acupuncture . Regarding the characteristics of users , they are more frequently women , have had MS for a longer time and tend to be more disabled . Moreover , they also have lower levels of satisfaction with conventional healthcare . 
 = The Body ( Buffy the Vampire Slayer ) = 
 " The Body " is the sixteenth episode of the fifth season of the supernatural drama television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer ( 1997 – 2003 ) . It was written and directed by series creator Joss Whedon and originally aired on the WB network in the United States on February 27 , 2001 . In the series , Buffy Summers is a teenager chosen by mystical forces and endowed with superhuman powers to defeat vampires , demons , and other evils in the fictional town of Sunnydale . She is supported in her struggles by a close circle of friends and family , nicknamed the Scooby Gang . In " The Body " , Buffy is powerless as she comes upon her lifeless mother , who has died of a brain aneurysm . 
 Although Buffy and her friends deal with death every week , often in very gruesome and fantastic ways , in this episode they are bewildered by the natural death of Joyce Summers , the divorced mother of Buffy and her sister Dawn and occasionally a mother figure to their friends . They struggle to comprehend what the loss means to each of them and to the group . Buffy must begin to face her life and her duties as the Slayer without parental support and comfort . 
 The episode was stripped of all music — a regular staple of the Buffy series — and disorienting effects were included to convey the sense of displacement and loss associated with the death of a close family member . For its frank depiction of grief and coping with a very realistic death when the show usually used monsters or demons as figurative symbols , " The Body " has been described by multiple critics as one of the best television episodes ever broadcast . 
 = = Background = = 
 Buffy ( Sarah Michelle Gellar ) is assisted from season one by her close friends , who collectively refer to themselves as the Scooby Gang : Xander Harris ( Nicholas Brendon ) , whose primary strength is his devotion to Buffy , and Willow Rosenberg ( Alyson Hannigan ) , who begins dabbling in witchcraft and grows progressively more powerful . They are mentored by Rupert Giles ( Anthony Stewart Head ) , Buffy 's " Watcher " , and joined by Xander 's girlfriend Anya Jenkins ( Emma Caulfield ) , who was a vengeance demon until her powers were taken away . Anya is often at a loss to know how to communicate with humans , and her speech is frequently abrupt . In the fourth season , Willow became romantically involved with Tara Maclay ( Amber Benson ) , also a witch . 
 Each season of Buffy the Vampire Slayer ( often simplified as Buffy ) presents an overall theme episodes tie into . Roz Kaveney identifies family and belonging as the overall theme of the fifth season . Buffy 's mother Joyce ( Kristine Sutherland ) begins experiencing headaches at the beginning of the season , once collapsing and requiring hospitalization . She subsequently has a brain tumor removed . She has been recovering well . In the previous episode , she receives flowers from a male suitor , which Buffy finds at the end of that episode . The fifth season also introduces Dawn ( Michelle Trachtenberg ) , Buffy 's 14 @-@ year @-@ old sister . Each season has a primary antagonist called the Big Bad ; in the fifth season this takes the form of a powerful goddess named Glory ( Clare Kramer ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Beginning where the previous episode left off , Buffy arrives home and sees the flowers sent from Joyce 's suitor . She calls out to her mother and hears no answer . Buffy sees Joyce lying lifeless on the sofa , staring at the ceiling . 
 The credits appear over a flashback to a Christmas dinner where all the Scoobies are present , having a typical lighthearted conversation as Joyce and Buffy discuss a pie that drops on the floor . The scene snaps back to Buffy in the living room , shaking Joyce and screaming at her . She calls for an ambulance and attempts CPR , accidentally snapping a rib in the process , but to no avail . Buffy calls Giles . The paramedics arrive and work on Joyce and she revives , the paramedics declare it a miracle in the ambulance , and Joyce , Buffy , and Dawn rejoice in the hospital . The scene snaps back to the living room where the paramedics continue to work on Joyce until they stop and tell Buffy that Joyce is dead . They leave , and Buffy goes into the hall and vomits . Giles arrives and Buffy tells him not to move the body , shocking herself by using that word . 
 At school , Dawn is crying in the bathroom upset that a girl called her a freak . In art class she talks with a boy as they sketch , and the two share a moment of understanding about being troubled . Buffy arrives and pulls Dawn out of class into the hall . Through the windows of the art room , the class watches Buffy tell her that Joyce has had an accident . The rest of the conversation is muffled . Dawn collapses in the hall , sobbing . 
 In Willow 's dormitory room , Tara tries to help Willow find a shirt to wear . Xander and Anya arrive and double @-@ park . Willow panics , rejecting shirt after shirt , not knowing how to appear for Buffy and Dawn . She asks why her clothes are stupid and she is childish , weeping until Tara kisses and calms her . Anya asks Xander what she is supposed to do ; he cannot answer . Willow changes her shirt again and Xander expresses his desire to find Glory and exact justice , then complains about Joyce 's negligent doctors . Anya asks if they will see the body , then if the body will be cut open , and Willow responds angrily . Anya tearfully says she does not understand how to behave , or why Joyce cannot go back into her own body , unable to understand human death , she states that it is all " stupid and mortal " , and no one will tell her why things are happening . Xander puts his fist through the wall , making him bleed but feel oddly better . As the group leaves to visit Buffy at the hospital , Xander gets a parking ticket . 
 In the waiting room outside the morgue , the doctor tells Buffy that Joyce died of an aneurysm suddenly and painlessly . Left alone with Buffy , Tara tells her that her own mother died when she was 17 and she went through something similar . Dawn goes alone to the morgue to see Joyce 's body . While she is there , one of the bodies , now a vampire , gets up . After noticing Dawn has not come back , Buffy goes to look for her and finds her in the morgue , being attacked by the vampire . As Buffy fights and kills the vampire , the sheet falls from Joyce 's face . Looking at her mother , Dawn asks where she went , as she reaches out to touch her cheek . 
 = = Production and writing = = 
 From the start of writing the Buffy series , Joss Whedon asserted that it would never have a " very special episode " as in contemporary series Beverly Hills , 90210 , The Wonder Years , or Party of Five , where the core cast of characters addresses a single issue ( AIDS , drug abuse , or alcoholism , for example ) and resolve all the problems at the end . Whedon was not interested in finding a life @-@ affirming lesson for " The Body " . Rather , he wanted to capture the isolation and boredom involved in the minutes and hours after finding a loved one has died , what he termed " the black ashes in your mouth numbness of death " . He did not intend to resolve any religious or existential questions about the end of life , but wanted to examine the process in which a person becomes a mere body . Whedon 's mother , a teacher , also died of a cerebral aneurysm , and he drew on his own experiences , and those of friends and other writers , in constructing the episode . He tried to achieve an " unlovely physicality " in " The Body " to portray the upsetting minutiae involved in attempting to comprehend what is incomprehensible . 
 Small details became significant : to protect her dignity Buffy pulls the hem of Joyce 's skirt down after it rode up when she attempted CPR ; the camera focuses on a breeze through wind chimes while Buffy vomits ; to emphasize Buffy 's isolation , the scene has no exterior establishing shots of the house . 
 The opening sequence of " The Body " was also the closing scene of the previous episode , " I Was Made to Love You " ; this is the only episode in the series that was first aired without a " Previously on Buffy " lead @-@ in . The Christmas dinner scene was used both to contrast the stark reality of the rest of the episode , and to avoid having the credits appear over the beginning scenes where Buffy is trying to revive her mother . 
 The episode is presented in four acts , each beginning in total silence and with a close @-@ up shot of Joyce 's pale , staring face . Shooting the first act was difficult for Gellar ( Buffy ) . Whedon shot the scene where she finds her mother as one long take , showing her move through the house and calling the paramedics , about seven times . The rest of the scenes in the act were shot in sequence . At the end , Giles arrives and also attempts to revive Joyce , but Buffy blurts , " We 're not supposed to move the body ! " Both Gellar and Trachtenberg ( Dawn ) were raised by single women , and Gellar later spoke about the experience of acting something that was very real and close to her , stating , " you try to separate it as best you can and at the same time it adds that extra layer " . As soon as the scene was finished with Gellar " at a fever pitch " , they restarted it where she comes in the door happily , which Whedon regretted for the emotional range Gellar was required to endure . 
 Kristine Sutherland ( Joyce ) was informed during the third season that her character would be killed off , which she accepted because she intended to spend time in Europe . She is absent from most of the fourth season because she was traveling . She reported that the atmosphere on the set of " The Body " was strange and tense because she had been a regular character through the series and she was suddenly playing a corpse . She found the part difficult to play , not only for the stillness , but getting into the make @-@ up , and lying on the morgue table with other bodies . 
 The most difficult scene for Whedon to film was Willow panicking in her dormitory room . Her obsession about what to wear to visit Buffy was inspired by Whedon 's own experiences when he was at a loss for what tie to wear for a friend 's funeral . He praised Alyson Hannigan 's acting , saying that she was able to be consistently emotional in every take and make him and the crew cry every time . Whedon acknowledged his difficulty speaking on the DVD commentary while watching Hannigan in the scene . 
 Whedon 's rejection of the " very special episode " format impelled him to address the physicality of Willow and Tara 's relationship within " The Body " . Before this episode , they had held hands and danced on screen , but they had not kissed . A genre of television specials dealing with female homosexuality developed as the " lesbian kiss episode " in the 1990s , where a female character kissed another female but no relationship is further explored . Whedon set out to acknowledge Willow 's and Tara 's affection without making it the primary focus of the show . For attempting this , he received resistance from the airing network , the WB . Whedon informed them that the kiss between Willow and Tara was " not negotiable " . According to Whedon , the conversation about the kiss was approached by the network executives , who were concerned with the number of gay relationships on the network . Whedon countered that the kiss was " true to character " and said he would quit the show if the network forbade it . It was the only time during the series he threatened to do so . 
 When Willow and Tara first met in the fourth season , the writers did not intend the relationship to be romantic but the actors had such chemistry that , two episodes later , Whedon and the writing team took Alyson Hannigan and Amber Benson aside to inform them where it would go . For the rest of the season , the sexual relationship between Willow and Tara was represented metaphorically by witchcraft , and none of the WB executives realized it . In the end , Whedon praised the way the WB handled the display of affection in " The Body " , saying " They raised an eyebrow , but they 've been great . I give the WB props when it came to the [ characters ' first ] kiss . What I want to show is real affection , and ' The Body ' turned out to be the perfect place to put it in . To the network 's credit , they not only aired it , but they did not advertise it . I thought that was pretty classy . " Stephen Tropiano in Prime Time Closet : A History of Gays and Lesbians on TV writes that this approach was " truly groundbreaking " ; no long speech , no huge discovery : " Like Willow , we 're made to feel as if her love for Tara is the most natural thing in the world " . Tropiano calls it " A simple kiss . A quiet , simple moment . Two lovers kissing . Just like lovers do . " 
 Audiences reacted more emotionally than Whedon expected to Emma Caulfield 's performance . Anya 's blunt innocence was similar to a plot twist , as viewers did not expect the depth of sensitivity that she portrayed in her monologue , which Whedon considers " the heart of the experience " and critic Noel Murray reiterates as the " whole point of the episode in bolded , capital letters " . Xander 's punching the wall and hurting his hand served to give the four in this scene something to concentrate on , to redirect their helplessness , which was another facet of the physicality of dealing with the crisis . Whedon used another long tracking shot from Joyce 's face in the morgue following the doctor down the hall to speak with Buffy and the Scoobies to cement the reality of their being so close in proximity , as opposed to cutting shots to give the possibility that it was part of another set located somewhere else . The vampire that attacks Dawn in the morgue was a touch many viewers took to be out of place for the episode . This scene contrasts the more fantasy @-@ related deaths common in the series with Joyce 's realistic death . Furthermore , similar to Xander 's parking ticket and the sounds of life outside Buffy 's house , in Sunnydale vampires are a normal experience , and it was intended to show that life for Buffy continues . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Grief = = = 
 In Nikki Stafford 's analysis , the reactions of Buffy , Dawn , Xander , Willow , Anya , and Tara represent stages of Elisabeth Kübler @-@ Ross ' five stages of grief in different parts . Joss Whedon stated on the DVD commentary how surprised he was at the response from viewers who wrote to say that the episode allowed them to accept the death of a close family member , even if they had not acknowledged it for months or years . Joyce 's death was the first by natural causes in the series . 
 In The Psychology of Joss Whedon , two academic psychologists identify the source of Buffy 's strength as her mother , paired with Giles ' mentorship . Joyce did not know all along that Buffy was a Slayer and had difficulty accepting what her daughter was called to do . She was nonetheless always attentive and available when Buffy 's confidence was shaken , and both Joyce 's and Giles ' devotion to her " gave her the self @-@ assurance to wield her power to its full potential " . Joyce served as a parent figure to all of Buffy 's friends , whose home lives were often unstable or unloving , thus making her death more poignant to all of them . Willow mentions her parents several times throughout the series , but her father is never seen . Her mother is portrayed only once in " Gingerbread " , at first as an academic so preoccupied with her career that she is unable to communicate with Willow , and then — with Joyce — under the spell of a demon and in the throes of moral panic , attempting to burn her own daughter at the stake for being involved in witchcraft . Xander 's parents are described by him and those who have been to his house as alcoholic and verbally abusive . Even Anya , severely wanting in social graces , has lost someone she admires and trusts . Giles also grieves for the loss of a friend and — in one episode when the adults fall under a spell making them retreat into an adolescent state — a lover . Lorna Jowett in Sex and the Slayer writes that Joyce represents stability and normality . For the Scoobies , her death destroys the illusion that normal life is trouble @-@ free ; it is just as challenging as encountering supernatural forces . 
 Finding her mother 's body , Buffy at first denies what she sees , to the point of imagining alternate realities . Whedon stated that these mini dream sequences were like documentaries ; people who find their loved ones dead are desperate to imagine a different , better outcome , and they create fantasies that cause much more pain when they are forced to return to the harshness of reality . Later in the hospital , Buffy imagines what she might have been able to do to save Joyce , although the doctor tells her there was nothing to be done . Willow and Xander express anger and helplessness . Anya , new to mortality and human connections , is childlike in her innocence and questions . Xander 's anger and Anya 's confusion allow them to be mothered somewhat by Willow , who needs to take care of someone . Dawn is deeply in denial , unable to understand that the woman she thought she had known all her life was gone . Tara , who has gone through the ordeal before , represents the acceptance phase , soothing and helping the others to work through what they are experiencing . Buffy toward the end also begins to see acceptance when she tells Dawn that the body in the morgue is not their mother ; Joyce is gone . 
 The episode also emphasizes another theme of the season : Buffy 's response to forces that she cannot fight . Throughout the season she encounters the much more powerful goddess Glory , but Joyce 's death leaves her feeling the most helpless . In Joyce 's death there is no evil force to combat ; she simply dies , and Buffy , with all her power , is ill @-@ equipped to grasp the enormity of her situation . In her shock , Buffy retreats to a childlike state of confusion , calling to her mother when she does not answer : " Mom ? ... Mom ? ... Mommy ? " Emma Caulfield was also given the direction for her voice to rise to a childlike pitch at the end of her speech to give the same effect . According to Buffy scholar Rhonda Wilcox , the themes of maturation and facing adult responsibilities begin with the departure of Buffy 's boyfriend Riley Finn six episodes before , and crystallize in the preceding episode in which Buffy realizes she does not need a boyfriend to be fulfilled . At the end of that episode she is confronted with Joyce 's death , which is fully explored in " The Body " . Facing responsibilities became the major theme of the sixth season . One critic writes , " Drastic as it was , killing off Joyce was the logical way to bring Buffy and Dawn closer together , sever Buffy 's last ties to girlhood and emphasize Buffy 's inability to accept the limits of her power , a recurring theme this season . " 
 = = = Reality = = = 
 Whedon uses several disorienting effects to heighten the reality of the situations in the episode to the point that they seem surreal . The long opening shot of Buffy coming home and finding Joyce was filmed with one hand @-@ held camera in constant movement as she walks through the house to the phone and back to her mother again . The buttons on Buffy 's phone are abnormally large , an effect that Whedon added because he experienced it when his mother died . Buffy is so bewildered by the paramedic telling her that Joyce is dead that she can only focus on his mouth in an attempt to understand what he is saying . The camera uses her perspective and only the bottom part of the paramedic 's face is in view . Instead of a normal " over @-@ the @-@ shoulder " view , Buffy is shot at the same height as the paramedic 's shoulder , barely squeezed into the frame as if to portray her , according to Whedon , as trapped by reality . Kristine Sutherland stated that the script was " amazing " , specifically at capturing the detachment : " It 's not something you can process . I mean mortality is just not part of your vocabulary when you 're that age . " 
 In the hospital , as Buffy listens to the doctor confirm how Joyce died , the doctor says something , but the words " I have to lie to you to make you feel better " are spoken <unk> , as though , according to cinema scholar Katy Stevens , Buffy " constructs what she believes to be an unmentionable truth — her culpability in her mother 's death " . In the same scene , Dawn is shot with a hand @-@ held camera that drifts , giving her a slightly unreal moment as she struggles to believe , unlike what Buffy already knows , that her mother 's body is down the hall on a steel table . The scene with Buffy and Tara sitting in the waiting room was noted by Rhonda Wilcox for its reality in showing Gellar as ragged and distinctly unglamorous , particularly because she had been presented in a specific way to attract male viewers and was a spokeswoman for Maybelline while Buffy aired . Buffy sits with circles under her eyes , unflattering hair , and slumped posture next to Tara , who had been criticized for being too heavy , despite her body type being more typical of women her age . 
 Foremost of the disorienting effects , to critics and scholars , is Whedon 's use of sound and silence . While Buffy performs CPR , she cracks one of Joyce 's ribs with a startling snap . After Buffy vomits on the floor , she stands in the back doorway listening to life carrying on : children playing , someone practicing a trumpet , and birds singing . Long pauses between dialogue create gaps that turn awkward as the characters try to think of what to say , made especially notable in a series famous for its rapid banter . The transition between the Christmas dinner scene and the living room scene is abrupt , and the sound of Buffy and Joyce shouting because they dropped a pie on the floor carries over into the silence of Joyce 's lifeless face and Buffy standing alone in the living room . This effect is also used when shifting between Buffy 's alternate version of her mother being " good as new " in the hospital and the paramedics trying to revive her . In the car on the way to Willow 's dormitory , Anya is shot by a camera mounted on the front bumper , separated from the audience by the windshield . Xander , driving , faces the other way ; neither of them speak and only the sound of the car can be heard . Joyce Millman at Salon.com writes of the sound issues , " The effect was almost <unk> in its starkness . The spooky stillness and the long , spacey pauses in conversation as characters struggled to articulate their feelings exaggerated the sense of time elongating and standing still . " 
 Katy Stevens notes that the dialogue in " The Body " was recorded with microphones very close to the actors , making variations in their voices — cracks , rises , and whispers — more prominent to the audience , to close the distance between the actors and the viewer . Conversely , the scene in which Dawn is told of Joyce 's death was shot through a large classroom window , muffling Dawn 's emotional reaction , to isolate Buffy and Dawn from the class and the audience . Several moments of silence follow this scene . Whedon shot the conversation up close several times , filming over @-@ the @-@ shoulder and reaction shots , but eventually went with a more distanced point of view . Michelle Trachtenberg later said of this effect , " obviously you know in the end result there was no sound and I thought that was actually one of the most brilliant ideas [ he 's ] ever had because it allows everyone to sort of attach their own emotional plug into whatever might have happened in your life . I think it allowed the audience to really connect with Dawn for the first time . " 
 Presenting the episode without music was Whedon 's way of denying the audience any comfort , forcing them to discern their own meanings from the characters ' actions and words . As two musicologists write about this absence , " Without music 's acoustic balm , all our empathetic attention is on the characters and their state of bewilderment ... Music would provide a conceptualization and a catharsis ... but a catharsis at this point would in some measure trivialize the loss . " Television critic Gareth McLean writes that this decision is " a move that makes it more courageous than , for instance , ER . There were no soaring strings or plaintive piano to trigger an emotional response . Instead the soundtrack took in the ambient noises of wind chimes , doors squeaking , footsteps on carpets . Conversations were stilted and awkward , but the spaces in between always mattered . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critics praised the episode , and have continued to count it as one of the finest episodes of television ever broadcast . David Bianculli in the New York Daily News commends the acting abilities of Sarah Michelle Gellar , Michelle Trachtenberg , Alyson Hannigan , and Amber Benson . " The Body " , according to Bianculli is " Emmy @-@ worthy ... It also will haunt you — but not in the normal way associated with this still @-@ evolving , still @-@ achieving series . " Television critic Alesia Redding and editor Joe Vince of the South Bend Tribune write , " I was riveted by this show ... This isn 't just one of the best Buffy episodes of all time . It 's one of the best episodes of TV of all time . " Redding adds , " If you watch this incredible episode and don 't recognize it as great TV , you 're hopeless ... A ' fantasy ' show delivers the most stark and realistic take on death I 've ever seen , deftly depicting how a loved one who dies suddenly becomes ' the body ' . " 
 Gareth McLean in The Guardian rejects the notion that Buffy is similar to other " schmaltzy American teen show ( s ) " like Dawson 's Creek : " This episode was a brave , honest and wrenching portrayal of death and loss . The way this was handled by Joss Whedon ... was ingenious . Time slowed down and the feeling of numbness was palpable as Buffy and her gang tried to come to terms with Joyce 's death . " McLean especially appreciated the small details of Buffy protecting Joyce 's dignity and the confusion shown by the characters . He concludes , " Joyce may be dead but long live Buffy the Vampire Slayer . " Joe Gross in the Austin American @-@ Statesman calls the episode " devastatingly calm " and states that " the entire cast and crew should have received some sort of Emmy for ' The Body ' " . 
 At Salon.com , Joyce Millman writes , " there hasn 't been a finer hour of drama on TV this year than ... ' The Body ' ... You have to hand it to the writers ; Joyce 's demise came as a complete surprise . In that instant , Buffy 's childhood officially ends . Even if Buffy gets stiffed in every other Emmy category this year , ' The Body ' should convince the nominating committee that Gellar is for real ... I can 't remember the last time I saw a more wrenching portrayal of the shock of loss . " Andrew Gilstrap at PopMatters declares it " possibly the finest hour of television I 've seen , bar none ... It is an incredibly moving episode , one that finally admits that you don 't walk away from death unscathed . It also shows that , for all the group 's slaying experience , they really weren 't prepared for death when it stole a loved one . " Gilstrap went on to say the series did not again address death and grief of this magnitude until , in another shocking turn of events , Tara dies of a stray gunshot in the sixth season . Jerry McCormick in The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune agrees , rating Joyce 's death as having the same emotional impact as Tara 's in " Seeing Red " , both of which he listed as the saddest in the series . 
 Kira Schlechter in The Patriot @-@ News declares " The Body " " one of the finest episodes of any series ever " , stating that the silence and novel cinematography are " remarkable and the writing is brilliant " . Buffy and Dawn 's conversation at her school , Schlechter says , is " positively wrenching " . When the series ended in 2003 , Amy <unk> in the Boston Herald and <unk> <unk> of the New Orleans Times @-@ Picayune both rated the best Buffy episodes giving " The Body " equal billing at the top with " Hush " and " Once More , with Feeling " , <unk> designating the episode an " instant classic " . Jonathan Last in The Weekly Standard lists " The Body " eighth out of the ten best Buffy episodes , writing that it is " the series ' most difficult episode because it 's real — and not real in the way ER or The Practice or Law & Order , all hyper @-@ versions of reality , are real . At some point , most of us will experience a day like Buffy has in ' The Body ' and we sense that the writers have gotten nearly every detail of that day — right down to the absence of a musical score — right . " In the A.V. Club , Noel Murray also finds small details compelling , such as the camera 's focus on the paper towel Buffy uses to cover the vomit on the carpet . He does , however , write that some of the shots " come off a little gimmicky , but the ones that work are so effective that it seems petty to complain that Whedon overdoes it at times . ( Besides , different moments are likely to move different people . ) " 
 In addition to praising Gellar 's often under @-@ appreciated acting , Buffy scholar Ian Shuttleworth comments on the cast and the nuanced numbness and confusion of the characters , paired with the moments of silence in the episode : " It is simply one of the finest pieces of television drama , and the single finest depiction of bereavement in any medium , that I have ever seen . " Nikki Stafford , author of Bite Me ! The Unofficial Guide to Buffy the Vampire Slayer , calls " The Body " " an absolute masterpiece " , explaining that it is " hands down the single most terrifying , heart @-@ breaking , painful , and amazing hour of television I have ever seen " . She praises the entire cast equally , but highlights Gellar , Alyson Hannigan , and Emma Caulfield . Stafford also praised Kristine Sutherland — as did Whedon — for having to lie motionless with her eyes open for hours upon hours over eight days of filming . 
 In 2015 , Gavin Hetherington of SpoilerTV looked back at the episode fourteen years later . Upon reviewing the episode , he called it " one of the best hours of television " he had ever seen and went on to say " I don 't think any other supernatural show has ever had a more beautiful episode than The Body " . 
 When the episode was originally broadcast in the United States on the WB network on February 27 , 2001 , it received a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 5 and a share of 5 , and was watched by 6 million viewers . The episode placed fifth in its timeslot , and 82nd among broadcast television for the week of February 26 – March 4 , 2001 . It was the most watched program on the WB that night , and the second most watched program that week , trailing 7th Heaven . This was a slight increase from a 3 @.@ 4 rating and 87th position achieved by the previous episode . The episode was released on DVD on October 28 , 2002 in Region 2 , and December 9 , 2003 in Region 1 . Although the episode received positive reviews , it was not nominated for any Emmy awards . Rhonda Wilcox attributes this to the Emmys being a " bastion of conservative popular taste " , automatically rejecting television shows in the fantasy / science fiction genres . The script was nominated for a Nebula Award , given for excellence in science fiction / fantasy writing . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 858 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 858 ( designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR <unk> ) is a 16 @.@ 465 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 26 @.@ 498 km ) state highway located in Susquehanna County in Pennsylvania . The southern terminus is at PA 706 in Rush Township . The northern terminus is the New York state line in Little Meadows . The route from there continues as Tioga County Route 41 . The route was assigned in 1928 , completed a year later , and has remained the same since , with an exception of its southern terminus changing designations from Pennsylvania Route 67 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 858 begins at an intersection with PA 706 in the Rush Township community of Rushville . The highway begins its long trek in Susquehanna County by progressing northward in a patch of forests . PA 858 , which runs west of a creek , is sparsely populated and homes are rare . PA 858 winds its way in and out of forests , heading on a northeast direction . Soon after , there is an intersection with <unk> Hill Road , a locally maintained highway . After <unk> Hill Road , PA 858 heads back into a dense patch of trees . In the forest , is an intersection with C. Warner Road , and soon after comes one for <unk> Road . 
 Although the dense forest ends , trees continue to surround the highway . The route turns a short drift off its alignment at an intersection with Miller Road . The route turns from the northward direction it was heading to a northwestern direction and intersects eventually with <unk> Road . The dense forestry returns , and Route 858 begins winding its way along . Residential homes have all but disappeared from the route , with trees showing the way into Middletown Center . PA 858 passes a pond to the east , intersecting with the former alignment of PA 859 , now a locally maintained highway known as Vet Davis Road and Camp Corby Road . 
 After leaving Middletown Center , PA 858 continues northward and sometimes northeastward . After Middletown Center , PA 858 is surrounded by nothing but trees . There is a break in the trees when PA 858 intersects with an unnamed road , which serves as a connector to Township Road 768 . The state traffic route continues to the northwest , intersecting with Township Road 687 . As PA 858 continues , it enters <unk> Township , where the dense forestry begins to break , and homes begin to show the way . After a short pond is passed , the highway enters Little Meadows . At Maple Avenue , PA 858 runs on its final stretch , passing homes all the way to the New York state line . There , PA 858 ends and becomes County Route 41 upon entering Tioga County , New York . 
 = = History = = 
 PA 858 was first assigned in the mass numbering of state traffic routes in Pennsylvania in 1928 . However , the southern terminus of the highway was not an intersection with Pennsylvania Route 706 . Instead , it was an intersection with PA 67 . When it was assigned , it only ran from U.S. Route 106 to Town House Road , since the rest had not been completed yet . The final , already paved segment of SR 858 was completed by the next year . In 1932 , the route south of Town House Road was paved . In 1972 , PA 67 was decommissioned , and the route at the southern terminus became PA 706 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Susquehanna County . 
 = Circumcision = 
 Male circumcision is the removal of the foreskin from the human penis . In the most common procedure , the foreskin is opened , adhesions are removed , and the foreskin is separated from the glans . After that , the circumcision device ( if used ) is placed , and then the foreskin is removed . Topical or locally injected anesthesia is occasionally used to reduce pain and physiologic stress . For adults and children , general anesthesia is an option , and the procedure may be performed without a specialized circumcision device . The procedure is most often an elective surgery performed on babies and children for religious and cultural reasons . In other cases it may be done as a treatment for a condition or for preventative reasons . Medically , it is a treatment option for problematic cases of phimosis , balanoposthitis that does not resolve with other treatments , and chronic urinary tract infections ( UTIs ) . It is contraindicated in cases of certain genital structure abnormalities or poor general health . 
 The positions of the world 's major medical organizations range from considering elective circumcision of babies and children as having no benefit and significant risks to having a modest health benefit that outweighs small risks . No major medical organization recommends either universal circumcision for all males ( aside from the recommendations of the World Health Organization ( WHO ) for areas with high rates of HIV ) , or banning the procedure . Ethical and legal questions regarding informed consent and human rights have been raised over the circumcision of babies and children for non @-@ medical reasons , and for that reason the procedure is controversial . 
 Evidence supports that male circumcision reduces the risk of HIV infection among heterosexual men in sub @-@ Saharan Africa . Therefore , The WHO recommends considering circumcision as part of a comprehensive HIV prevention program in areas with high rates of HIV , such as Sub Saharan Africa . However , evidence for a health benefit against HIV for men who have sex with men is less clear . Additionally , the effectiveness of using circumcision to prevent HIV in the developed world is also unclear . Circumcision in general is associated with reduced rates of cancer causing forms of HPV and risk of both UTIs and cancer of the penis . Prevention of those conditions , however , is not a justification for routine circumcision of infants . Studies of its potential protective effects against other sexually transmitted infections have been unclear . A 2010 review of literature found circumcisions performed by medical providers to have a typical complication rate of 1 @.@ 5 % for babies and 6 % for older children , with few cases of severe complications . Bleeding , infection and the removal of either too much or too little foreskin are the most common complications cited . Complication rates are higher when the procedure is performed by an inexperienced operator , in unsterile conditions , or when the child is at an older age . Circumcision does not appear to have a negative impact on sexual function . 
 An estimated one @-@ third of males worldwide are circumcised . The procedure is most common in the Muslim world and Israel ( where it is near @-@ universal for religious reasons ) , the United States , and parts of Southeast Asia and Africa . It is relatively rare in Europe , Latin America , parts of Southern Africa , and most of Asia . The origin of circumcision is not known with certainty ; the oldest documented evidence for it comes from ancient Egypt . Various theories have been proposed as to its origin , including as a religious sacrifice and as a rite of passage marking a boy 's entrance into adulthood . It is part of religious law in Judaism and is an established practice in Islam , Coptic Christianity , and the Ethiopian Orthodox Church . The word circumcision is from Latin <unk> , meaning " to cut around " . 
 = = Indications and contraindications = = 
 = = = Routine or elective = = = 
 Neonatal circumcision is usually elected by the parents for non @-@ medical reasons , such as religious beliefs or personal preferences , possibly driven by societal norms . Outside the parts of Africa with high prevalence of HIV / AIDS , the positions of the world 's major medical organizations on non @-@ therapeutic neonatal circumcision range from considering it as having a modest net health benefit that outweighs small risks to viewing it as having no benefit with significant risks for harm . No major medical organization recommends universal neonatal circumcision , and no major medical organization calls for banning it either . The Royal Dutch Medical Association , which expresses some of the strongest opposition to routine neonatal circumcision , does not call for the practice to be made illegal out of their concern that parents who insist on the procedure would turn to poorly trained practitioners instead of medical professionals . This argument to keep the procedure within the purview of medical professionals is found across all major medical organizations . In addition , the organizations advise medical professionals to yield to some degree to parental preferences , which are commonly based upon cultural or religious views , in their decision to agree to circumcise . 
 Owing to the HIV / AIDS epidemic there , sub @-@ Saharan Africa is a special case . The finding that circumcision significantly reduces female @-@ to @-@ male HIV transmission has prompted medical organizations serving the affected communities to promote circumcision as an additional method of controlling the spread of HIV . The World Health Organization ( WHO ) and UNAIDS ( 2007 ) recommend circumcision as part of a comprehensive program for prevention of HIV transmission in areas with high endemic rates of HIV , as long as the program includes " informed consent , confidentiality , and absence of coercion " . 
 = = = Medical indications = = = 
 Circumcision may be used to treat pathological phimosis , refractory balanoposthitis and chronic , recurrent urinary tract infections ( UTIs ) . The World Health Organization promotes circumcision as a preventive measure for sexually active men in populations at high risk for HIV . Circumcision is also recommended for HIV prevention by the International Antiviral Society @-@ USA for all sexually active heterosexual males and is recommended that it be discussed with MSM who engage in primarily <unk> anal sex with other men , especially in areas where HIV is common . 
 = = = Contraindications = = = 
 Circumcision is contraindicated in infants with certain genital structure abnormalities , such as a misplaced urethral opening ( as in hypospadias and <unk> ) , curvature of the head of the penis ( <unk> ) , or ambiguous genitalia , because the foreskin may be needed for reconstructive surgery . Circumcision is contraindicated in premature infants and those who are not clinically stable and in good health . If an individual , child or adult , is known to have or has a family history of serious bleeding disorders ( hemophilia ) , it is recommended that the blood be checked for normal coagulation properties before the procedure is attempted . 
 = = Technique = = 
 The foreskin extends out from the base of the glans and covers the glans when the penis is flaccid . Proposed theories for the purpose of the foreskin are that it serves to protect the penis as the fetus develops in the mother 's womb , that it helps to preserve moisture in the glans , and that it improves sexual pleasure . The foreskin may also be a pathway of infection for certain diseases . Circumcision removes the foreskin at its attachment to the base of the glans . 
 = = = Removal of the foreskin = = = 
 For infant circumcision , devices such as the <unk> clamp , <unk> and <unk> clamp are commonly used in the USA . These follow the same basic procedure . First , the amount of foreskin to be removed is estimated . The practitioner opens the foreskin via the preputial orifice to reveal the glans underneath and ensures it is normal before bluntly separating the inner lining of the foreskin ( preputial epithelium ) from its attachment to the glans . The practitioner then places the circumcision device ( this sometimes requires a dorsal slit ) , which remains until blood flow has stopped . Finally , the foreskin is amputated . For adults , circumcision is often performed without clamps , and non @-@ surgical alternatives such as the elastic ring controlled radial compression device or the Shang ring are available . 
 = = = Pain management = = = 
 The circumcision procedure causes pain , and for neonates this pain may interfere with mother @-@ infant interaction or cause other behavioral changes , so the use of analgesia is advocated . Ordinary procedural pain may be managed in pharmacological and non @-@ pharmacological ways . Pharmacological methods , such as localized or regional pain @-@ blocking injections and topical analgesic creams , are safe and effective . The ring block and dorsal penile nerve block ( <unk> ) are the most effective at reducing pain , and the ring block may be more effective than the <unk> . They are more effective than <unk> ( eutectic mixture of local anesthetics ) cream , which is more effective than a placebo . Topical creams have been found to irritate the skin of low birth weight infants , so penile nerve block techniques are recommended in this group . 
 For infants , non @-@ pharmacological methods such as the use of a comfortable , padded chair and a sucrose or non @-@ sucrose pacifier are more effective at reducing pain than a placebo , but the American Academy of Pediatrics ( AAP ) states that such methods are insufficient alone and should be used to supplement more effective techniques . A quicker procedure reduces duration of pain ; use of the <unk> clamp was found to result in a shorter procedure time and less pain @-@ induced stress than the use of the <unk> clamp or the <unk> . The available evidence does not indicate that post @-@ procedure pain management is needed . For adults , general anesthesia is an option , and the procedure requires four to six weeks of abstinence from masturbation or intercourse to allow the wound to heal . 
 = = Effects = = 
 = = = Sexually transmitted diseases = = = 
 = = = = Human immunodeficiency virus = = = = 
 There is strong evidence that circumcision reduces the risk of HIV infection in heterosexual men in high @-@ risk populations . Evidence among heterosexual men in sub @-@ Saharan Africa shows an absolute decrease in risk of 1 @.@ 8 % which is a relative decrease of between 38 percent and 66 percent over two years , and in this population studies rate it cost effective . Whether it is of benefit in developed countries is undetermined . 
 There are plausible explanations based on human biology for how circumcision can decrease the likelihood of female @-@ to @-@ male HIV transmission . The superficial skin layers of the penis contain Langerhans cells , which are targeted by HIV ; removing the foreskin reduces the number of these cells . When an uncircumcised penis is erect during intercourse , any small tears on the inner surface of the foreskin come into direct contact with the vaginal walls , providing a pathway for transmission . When an uncircumcised penis is flaccid , the pocket between the inside of the foreskin and the head of the penis provides an environment conducive to pathogen survival ; circumcision eliminates this pocket . Some experimental evidence has been provided to support these theories . 
 The WHO and the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV / AIDS ( UNAIDS ) state that male circumcision is an efficacious intervention for HIV prevention , but should be carried out by well @-@ trained medical professionals and under conditions of informed consent ( parents ' consent for their infant boys ) . The WHO has judged circumcision to be a cost @-@ effective public health intervention against the spread of HIV in Africa , although not necessarily more cost @-@ effective than condoms . The joint WHO / UNAIDS recommendation also notes that circumcision only provides partial protection from HIV and should not replace known methods of HIV prevention . 
 The available evidence does not indicate that circumcision provides HIV protection for heterosexual women . Data is lacking regarding the effect circumcision may have on the transmission rate of men who engage in anal sex with a female partner . It is undetermined whether circumcision benefits men who have sex with men . 
 = = = = Human papillomavirus = = = = 
 Human papillomavirus ( HPV ) is the most commonly transmitted sexually transmitted infection , affecting both men and women . While most infections are asymptomatic and are cleared by the immune system , some types of the virus cause genital warts , and other types , if untreated , cause various forms of cancer , including cervical cancer and penile cancer . Genital warts and cervical cancer are the two most common problems resulting from HPV . 
 Circumcision is associated with a reduced prevalence of oncogenic types of HPV infection , meaning that a randomly selected circumcised man is less likely to be found infected with cancer @-@ causing types of HPV than an uncircumcised man . It also decreases the likelihood of multiple infections . No strong evidence indicates that it reduces the rate of new HPV infection , but the procedure is associated with increased clearance of the virus by the body , which can account for the finding of reduced prevalence . 
 Although genital warts are caused by a type of HPV , there is no statistically significant relationship between being circumcised and the presence of genital warts . 
 = = = = Other infections = = = = 
 Studies evaluating the effect of circumcision on the incidence of other sexually transmitted infections have reached conflicting conclusions . A 2006 meta @-@ analysis found that circumcision was associated with lower rates of syphilis , <unk> and possibly genital herpes . A 2010 review found that circumcision reduced the incidence of HSV @-@ 2 ( herpes simplex virus , type 2 ) infections by 28 % . The researchers found mixed results for protection against <unk> vaginalis and chlamydia trachomatis and no evidence of protection against gonorrhea or syphilis . Among men who have sex with men , reviews have found poor evidence for protection against sexually transmitted infections other than HIV , with the possible exception of syphilis . 
 = = = Phimosis , balanitis and balanoposthitis = = = 
 Phimosis is the inability to retract the foreskin over the glans penis . At birth , the foreskin cannot be retracted due to adhesions between the foreskin and glans , and this is considered normal ( physiological phimosis ) . Over time the foreskin naturally separates from the glans , and a majority of boys are able to retract the foreskin by age three . Less than one percent are still having problems at age 18 . If the inability to do so becomes problematic ( pathological phimosis ) circumcision is a treatment option . This pathological phimosis may be due to scarring from the skin disease balanitis <unk> obliterans ( <unk> ) , repeated episodes of balanoposthitis or forced retraction of the foreskin . Steroid creams are also a reasonable option and may prevent the need for surgery including in those with mild <unk> . The procedure may also be used to prevent the development of phimosis . Phimosis is also a complication that can result from circumcision . 
 An inflammation of the glans penis and foreskin is called balanoposthitis , and the condition affecting the glans alone is called balanitis . Most cases of these conditions occur in uncircumcised males , affecting 4 – 11 % of that group . The moist , warm space underneath the foreskin is thought to facilitate the growth of pathogens , particularly when hygiene is poor . Yeasts , especially Candida albicans , are the most common penile infection and are rarely identified in samples taken from circumcised males . Both conditions are usually treated with topical antibiotics ( metronidazole cream ) and <unk> ( clotrimazole cream ) or low @-@ potency steroid creams . Circumcision is a treatment option for refractory or recurrent balanoposthitis , but in recent years the availability of the other treatments have made it less necessary . 
 = = = Urinary tract infections = = = 
 A UTI affects parts of the urinary system including the urethra , bladder , and kidneys . There is about a one percent risk of UTIs in boys under two years of age , and the majority of incidents occur in the first year of life . There is good but not ideal evidence that circumcision reduces the incidence of UTIs in boys under two years of age , and there is fair evidence that the reduction in incidence is by a factor of 3 – 10 times . Prevention of UTIs does not justify routine use of the procedure , however . Circumcision is most likely to benefit boys who have a high risk of UTIs due to anatomical defects , and may be used to treat recurrent UTIs . 
 There is a plausible biological explanation for the reduction in UTI risk after circumcision . The orifice through which urine passes at the tip of the penis ( the urinary meatus ) hosts more urinary system disease @-@ causing bacteria in uncircumcised boys than in circumcised boys , especially in those under six months of age . As these bacteria are a risk factor for UTIs , circumcision may reduce the risk of UTIs through a decrease in the bacteria population . 
 = = = Cancers = = = 
 Circumcision has a protective effect against the risks of penile cancer in men , and cervical cancer in the female sexual partners of heterosexual men . Penile cancer is rare , with about 1 new case per 100 @,@ 000 people per year in developed countries , and higher incidence rates per 100 @,@ 000 in sub @-@ Saharan Africa ( for example , 1 @.@ 6 in Zimbabwe , 2 @.@ 7 in Uganda and 3 @.@ 2 in Swaziland ) . Penile cancer development can be detected in the carcinoma in situ ( CIS ) cancerous precursor stage and at the more advanced invasive squamous cell carcinoma stage . Childhood or adolescent circumcision is associated with a reduced risk of invasive squamous cell carcinoma in particular . There is an association between adult circumcision and an increased risk of invasive penile cancer ; this is believed to be from men being circumcised as a treatment for penile cancer or a condition that is a precursor to cancer rather than a consequence of circumcision itself . Penile cancer has been observed to be nearly eliminated in populations of males circumcised <unk> . 
 Important risk factors for penile cancer include phimosis and HPV infection , both of which are mitigated by circumcision . The mitigating effect circumcision has on the risk factor introduced by the possibility of phimosis is secondary , in that the removal of the foreskin eliminates the possibility of phimosis . This can be inferred from study results that show uncircumcised men with no history of phimosis are equally likely to have penile cancer as circumcised men . Circumcision is also associated with a reduced prevalence of cancer @-@ causing types of HPV in men and a reduced risk of cervical cancer ( which is caused by a type of HPV ) in female partners of men . Because penile cancer is rare ( and may get more rare with increasing HPV vaccination rates ) , and circumcision has risks , the practice is not considered to be valuable solely as a prophylactic measure against penile cancer in the United States . 
 A 2015 meta @-@ analysis found a non @-@ statistically significant reduced risk of prostate cancer associated with circumcision , but that this reduction was significant among blacks and in studies looking at post @-@ PSA and <unk> groups . 
 = = Adverse effects = = 
 Neonatal circumcision is generally safe when done by an experienced practitioner . The most common acute complications are bleeding , infection and the removal of either too much or too little foreskin . These complications occur in approximately 0 @.@ 12 % of procedures , and constitute the vast majority of all acute circumcision complications in the United States . Minor complications are reported to occur in three percent of procedures . Severe complications are rare . A specific complication rate is difficult to determine due to scant data on complications and inconsistencies in their classification . Complication rates are greater when the procedure is performed by an inexperienced operator , in unsterile conditions , or when the child is at an older age . Significant acute complications happen rarely , occurring in about 1 in 500 newborn procedures in the United States . Severe to catastrophic complications , including death , are so rare that they are reported only as individual case reports . Other possible complications include buried penis , <unk> , phimosis , skin bridges , urethral fistulas , and <unk> stenosis . These complications may be avoided with proper technique , and are most often treatable without requiring a hospital visit . 
 = = = Pain = = = 
 The circumcision procedure may carry the risks of heightened pain response for newborns and dissatisfaction with the result . Newborns that experience pain due to being circumcised have different responses to vaccines given afterwards , with higher pain scores observed . 
 = = = Sexual effects = = = 
 Circumcision does not appear to decrease the sensitivity of the penis , harm sexual function or reduce sexual satisfaction . A 2013 systematic review found that circumcision did not appear to adversely affect sexual desire , pain with intercourse , premature ejaculation , time until ejaculation , erectile dysfunction or difficulties with orgasm . However , the study found that the existing evidence is not very good . Another 2013 systematic review found that the highest @-@ quality studies reported no adverse effects of circumcision on sexual function , sensitivity , sensation or satisfaction . 
 = = = Psychological effects = = = 
 Behavioral effects have been observed following infant circumcision including changes in sleep patterns , irritability , changes in feeding , and parental bonding . Some men who were circumcised as an infant involuntary , described their feelings about the procedure using the terms " violation , torture , mutilation and sexual assault " . 
 = = Prevalence = = 
 Circumcision is one of the world 's most widely performed procedures . Approximately 37 % to 39 % of males worldwide are circumcised , about half for religious or cultural reasons . It is most often practiced between infancy and the early twenties . The WHO estimated in 2007 that 664 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 males aged 15 and over were circumcised ( 30 – 33 % global prevalence ) , almost 70 % of whom were Muslim . Circumcision is most prevalent in the Muslim world , Israel , South Korea , the United States and parts of Southeast Asia and Africa . It is relatively rare in Europe , Latin America , parts of Southern Africa and Oceania and most of Asia . Prevalence is near @-@ universal in the Middle East and Central Asia . Non @-@ religious circumcision in Asia , outside of the Republic of Korea and the Philippines , is fairly rare , and prevalence is generally low ( less than 20 % ) across Europe . Estimates for individual countries include Taiwan at 9 % and Australia 58 @.@ 7 % . Prevalence in the United States and Canada is estimated at 75 % and 30 % respectively . Prevalence in Africa varies from less than 20 % in some southern African countries to near universal in North and West Africa . 
 The rates of routine neonatal circumcision over time have varied significantly by country . In the United States , hospital discharge surveys estimated rates at 64 @.@ 7 % in the year 1980 , 59 @.@ 0 % in the year 1990 , 62 @.@ 4 % in the year 2000 , and 58 @.@ 3 % in the year 2010 . These estimates are lower than the overall circumcision rates , as they do not account for non @-@ hospital circumcisions , or for procedures performed for medical or cosmetic reasons later in life ; community surveys have reported higher neonatal circumcision . Canada has seen a slow decline since the early 1970s , possibly influenced by statements from the AAP and the Canadian Pediatric Society issued in the 1970s saying that the procedure was not medically indicated . In Australia , the rate declined in the 1970s and 80s , but has been increasing slowly as of 2004 . In the United Kingdom , rates are likely to have been 20 – 30 % in the 1940s , but declined in the late 40s . One possible reason may have been a 1949 British Medical Journal article which stated that there was no medical reason for the general circumcision of babies . The overall prevalence of circumcision in South Korea has increased markedly in the second half of the 20th century , rising from near zero around 1950 to about 60 % in 2000 , with the most significant jumps in the last two decades of that time period . This is probably due to the influence of the United States , which established a trusteeship for the country following World War II . 
 Medical organizations can affect the neonatal circumcision rate of a country by influencing whether the costs of the procedure are borne by the parents or are covered by insurance or a national health care system . Policies that require the costs to be paid by the parents yield lower neonatal circumcision rates . The decline in the rates in the UK is one example ; another is that in the United States , the individual states where insurance or Medicaid covers the costs have higher rates . Changes to policy are driven by the results of new research , and moderated by the politics , demographics , and culture of the communities . 
 = = History = = 
 Circumcision is the world 's oldest planned surgical procedure , suggested by anatomist and hyperdiffusionist historian Grafton Elliot Smith to be over 15 @,@ 000 years old , pre @-@ dating recorded history . There is no firm consensus as to how it came to be practiced worldwide . One theory is that it began in one geographic area and spread from there ; another is that several different cultural groups began its practice independently . In his 1891 work History of Circumcision , physician Peter Charles <unk> suggested that it began as a less severe form of emasculating a captured enemy : <unk> or castration would likely have been fatal , while some form of circumcision would permanently mark the defeated yet leave him alive to serve as a slave . 
 The history of the migration and evolution of the practice of circumcision is followed mainly through the cultures and peoples in two separate regions . In the lands south and east of the Mediterranean , starting with Sudan and Ethiopia , the procedure was practiced by the ancient Egyptians and the Semites , and then by the Jews and Muslims , with whom the practice travelled to and was adopted by the Bantu Africans . In Oceania , circumcision is practiced by the Australian Aborigines and Polynesians . There is also evidence that circumcision was practiced among the Aztec and Mayan civilizations in the Americas , but little detail is available about its history . 
 = = = Middle East , Africa and Europe = = = 
 Evidence suggests that circumcision was practiced in the Arabian Peninsula by the 4th millennium BCE , when the Sumerians and the Semites moved into the area that is modern @-@ day Iraq . The earliest historical record of circumcision comes from Egypt , in the form of an image of the circumcision of an adult carved into the tomb of Ankh @-@ <unk> at Saqqara , dating to about 2400 – 2300 BCE . Circumcision was done by the Egyptians possibly for hygienic reasons , but also was part of their obsession with purity and was associated with spiritual and intellectual development . No well @-@ accepted theory explains the significance of circumcision to the Egyptians , but it appears to have been endowed with great honor and importance as a rite of passage into adulthood , performed in a public ceremony emphasizing the continuation of family generations and fertility . It may have been a mark of distinction for the elite : the Egyptian Book of the Dead describes the sun god Ra as having circumcised himself . 
 Though secular scholars consider the story to be literary and not historical , circumcision features prominently in the Hebrew Bible . The narrative in Genesis chapter 17 describes the circumcision of Abraham and his relatives and slaves . In the same chapter , Abraham 's descendants are commanded to circumcise their sons on the eighth day of life as part of a covenant with God . 
 In addition to proposing that circumcision was taken up by the Israelites purely as a religious mandate , scholars have suggested that Judaism 's patriarchs and their followers adopted circumcision to make penile hygiene easier in hot , sandy climates ; as a rite of passage into adulthood ; or as a form of blood sacrifice . 
 Alexander the Great conquered the Middle East in the 4th century BCE , and in the following centuries ancient Greek cultures and values came to the Middle East . The Greeks abhorred circumcision , making life for circumcised Jews living among the Greeks ( and later the Romans ) very difficult . Antiochus Epiphanes outlawed circumcision , as did Hadrian , which helped cause the Bar Kokhba revolt . During this period in history , Jewish circumcision called for the removal of only a part of the prepuce , and some Hellenized Jews attempted to look uncircumcised by stretching the extant parts of their <unk> . This was considered by the Jewish leaders to be a serious problem , and during the 2nd century CE they changed the requirements of Jewish circumcision to call for the complete removal of the foreskin , emphasizing the Jewish view of circumcision as intended to be not just the fulfillment of a Biblical commandment but also an essential and permanent mark of membership in a people . 
 A narrative in the Christian Gospel of Luke makes a brief mention of the circumcision of Jesus , but the subject of physical circumcision itself is not part of the received teachings of Jesus . Paul the Apostle reinterpreted circumcision as a spiritual concept , arguing the physical one to be no longer necessary . The teaching that physical circumcision was unnecessary for membership in a divine covenant was instrumental in the separation of Christianity from Judaism . Although it is not explicitly mentioned in the Quran ( early 7th century CE ) , circumcision is considered essential to Islam , and it is nearly universally performed among Muslims . The practice of circumcision spread across the Middle East , North Africa and Southern Europe with Islam . 
 Genghis Khan , and the following Yuan Emperors in China forbade Islamic practices such as halal butchering and circumcision . This led Chinese Muslims to eventually take an active part in rebelling against the Mongols and installing the more tolerant Ming Dynasty . 
 The practice of circumcision is thought to have been brought to the Bantu @-@ speaking tribes of Africa by either the Jews after one of their many expulsions from European countries , or by Muslim Moors escaping after the 1492 conquest of Spain . In the second half of the 1st millennium CE , inhabitants from the North East of Africa moved south and encountered groups from Arabia , the Middle East and West Africa . These people moved south and formed what is known today as the Bantu . Bantu tribes were observed to be upholding what was described as Jewish law , including circumcision , in the 16th century . Circumcision and elements of Jewish dietary restrictions are still found among Bantu tribes . 
 = = = Indigenous peoples of Australia , the Pacific and Americas = = = 
 Circumcision is practised by some groups amongst Australian Aboriginal peoples , Polynesians , and Native Americans . Little information is available about the origins and history of circumcision among these peoples , compared to circumcision in the Middle East . 
 For Aboriginal Australians and Polynesians , circumcision likely started as a blood sacrifice and a test of bravery , and became an initiation rite with attendant instruction in manhood in more recent centuries . Often seashells were used to remove the foreskin , and the bleeding was stopped with eucalyptus smoke . 
 Christopher Columbus reported circumcision being practiced by Native Americans . It was also practiced by the Incas , Aztecs , and Mayans . It probably started among South American tribes as a blood sacrifice or ritual mutilation to test bravery and endurance , and its use later evolved into a rite of initiation . 
 = = = Modern times = = = 
 Circumcision did not become a common medical procedure in the Anglophone world until the late 19th century . At that time , British and American doctors began recommending it primarily as a deterrent to masturbation . Prior to the 20th century , masturbation was believed to be the cause of a wide range of physical and mental illnesses including epilepsy , paralysis , impotence , gonorrhea , tuberculosis , <unk> , and insanity . In 1855 , motivated in part by an interest in promoting circumcision to reduce masturbation , English physician Jonathan Hutchinson published his findings that Jews had a lower prevalence of certain venereal diseases . While pursuing a successful career as a general practitioner , Hutchinson went on to advocate circumcision for health reasons for the next fifty years , and eventually earned a knighthood for his overall contributions to medicine . In America , one of the first modern physicians to advocate the procedure was Lewis Sayre , a founder of the American Medical Association . In 1870 , Sayre began using circumcision as a purported cure for several cases of young boys diagnosed with paralysis or significant motor problems . He thought the procedure ameliorated such problems based on a " reflex neurosis " theory of disease , which held that excessive stimulation of the genitals was a disturbance to the equilibrium of the nervous system and a cause of systemic problems . The use of circumcision to promote good health also fit in with the germ theory of disease during that time , which saw the foreskin as being filled with infection @-@ causing <unk> ( a mixture of shed skin cells and oils ) . Sayre published works on the subject and promoted it energetically in speeches . Contemporary physicians picked up on Sayre 's new treatment , which they believed could prevent or cure a wide @-@ ranging array of medical problems and social ills . Its popularity spread with publications such as Peter Charles <unk> 's History of Circumcision . By the turn of the century , in both America and Great Britain , infant circumcision was near universally recommended . 
 After the end of World War II , Britain moved to a nationalized health care system , and so looked to ensure that each medical procedure covered by the new system was cost @-@ effective and the procedure for non medical reasons was not covered by the national health care system . Douglas Gairdner 's 1949 article " The Fate of the <unk> " argued that the evidence available at that time showed that the risks outweighed the known benefits . Circumcision rates dropped in Britain and in the rest of Europe . In the 1970s , national medical associations in Australia and Canada issued recommendations against routine infant circumcision , leading to drops in the rates of both of those countries . The United States made similar statements in the 1970s , but stopped short of recommending against it — simply stating that it has no medical benefit . Since then they have amended their policy statements several times with the current recommendation being that the benefits outweigh the risks , but they do not recommend it routinely . 
 An association between circumcision and reduced heterosexual HIV infection rates was suggested in 1986 . Experimental evidence was needed to establish a causal relationship , so three randomized controlled trials were commissioned as a means to reduce the effect of any confounding factors . Trials took place in South Africa , Kenya and Uganda . All three trials were stopped early by their monitoring boards on ethical grounds , because those in the circumcised group had a lower rate of HIV contraction than the control group . Subsequently , the World Health Organization promoted circumcision in high @-@ risk populations as part of an overall program to reduce the spread of HIV , although some have challenged the validity of the African randomized controlled trials , prompting a number of researchers to question the effectiveness of circumcision as an HIV prevention strategy . The Male Circumcision <unk> website was formed in 2009 by WHO , UNAIDS , <unk> and <unk> to provide current evidence @-@ based guidance , information and resources to support the delivery of safe male circumcision services in countries that choose to scale up the procedure as one component of comprehensive HIV prevention services . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Cultures and religions = = = 
 In some cultures , males are generally required to be circumcised shortly after birth , during childhood or around puberty as part of a rite of passage . Circumcision is commonly practiced in the Jewish and Islamic faiths . 
 = = = = Judaism = = = = 
 Circumcision is very important to most branches of Judaism , with over 90 % of adherents having the procedure performed as a religious obligation . The basis for its observance is found in the Torah of the Hebrew Bible , in Genesis chapter 17 , in which a covenant of circumcision is made with Abraham and his descendants . Jewish circumcision is part of the brit milah ritual , to be performed by a specialist ritual circumciser ( a mohel ) on the eighth day of a newborn son 's life ( with certain exceptions for poor health ) . Jewish law requires that the circumcision leave the glans bare when the penis is flaccid . Converts to Conservative and Orthodox Judaism must also be circumcised ; those who are already circumcised undergo a symbolic circumcision ritual . Circumcision is not required by Judaism for one to be considered Jewish , but some adherents foresee serious negative spiritual consequences if it is neglected . 
 According to traditional Jewish law , in the absence of a grown free Jewish male expert , a woman , a slave , or a child , that has the required skills , is also authorized to perform the circumcision , provided that she or he is Jewish . However , most streams of non @-@ Orthodox Judaism allow female <unk> , called <unk> ( Hebrew : <unk> , plural of <unk> <unk> , feminine of mohel ) , without restriction . In 1984 , Deborah Cohen became the first certified Reform <unk> ; she was certified by the Berit Mila program of Reform Judaism . 
 Some contemporary Jews choose not to circumcise their sons . They are assisted by a small number of Reform and Reconstructionist rabbis , and have developed a welcoming ceremony that they call the brit shalom ( " Covenant [ of ] Peace " ) for such children , also accepted by Humanistic Judaism . 
 This ceremony of brit shalom is not officially approved of by the Reform or Reconstructionist rabbinical organizations , who make the recommendation that male infants should be circumcised , though the issue of converts remains controversial and circumcision of converts is not mandatory in either movement . 
 = = = = Islam = = = = 
 Although there is some debate within Islam over whether it is a religious requirement , circumcision ( called <unk> ) is practiced nearly universally by Muslim males . Islam bases its practice of circumcision on the Genesis 17 narrative , the same Biblical chapter referred to by Jews . The procedure is not explicitly mentioned in the Quran , however it is a tradition established by Islam 's prophet Muhammad directly ( following Abraham ) , and so its practice is considered a sunnah ( prophet 's tradition ) and is very important in Islam . For Muslims , circumcision is also a matter of cleanliness , purification and control over one 's baser self ( <unk> ) . There is no agreement across the many Islamic communities about the age at which circumcision should be performed . It may be done from soon after birth up to about age 15 ; most often it is performed at around six to seven years of age . The timing can correspond with the boy 's completion of his recitation of the whole Quran , with a coming @-@ of @-@ age event such as taking on the responsibility of daily prayer or betrothal . Circumcision may be celebrated with an associated family or community event . Circumcision is recommended for , but is not required of , converts to Islam . 
 = = = = Christianity = = = = 
 The New Testament chapter Acts 15 records that Christianity does not require circumcision ; Christianity does not forbid it either . The Catholic Church currently maintains a neutral position on the practice of non @-@ religious circumcision , although in 1442 it banned the practice of religious circumcision in the 11th Council of Florence . Coptic Christians practice circumcision as a rite of passage . The Ethiopian Orthodox Church calls for circumcision , with near @-@ universal prevalence among Orthodox men in Ethiopia . In South Africa , some Christian churches disapprove of the practice , while others require it of their members . 
 = = = = African cultures = = = = 
 Certain African cultural groups , such as the Yoruba and Igbo of Nigeria , customarily circumcise their infant sons . The procedure is also practiced by some cultural groups or individual family lines in the Sudan , Zaire , Uganda and in southern Africa . For some of these groups , circumcision appears to be purely cultural , done with no particular religious significance or intention to distinguish members of a group . For others , circumcision might be done for purification , or it may be interpreted as a mark of subjugation . Among these groups , even when circumcision is done for reasons of tradition , it is often done in hospitals . It is not clear how many deaths and injuries result from traditional circumcisions which occur outside of hospitals . 
 = = = = Australian cultures = = = = 
 Some Australian Aborigines use circumcision as a test of bravery and self @-@ control as a part of a rite of passage into manhood , which results in full societal and ceremonial membership . It may be accompanied by body scarification and the removal of teeth , and may be followed later by penile <unk> . Circumcision is one of many trials and ceremonies required before a youth is considered to have become knowledgeable enough to maintain and pass on the cultural traditions . During these trials , the maturing youth bonds in solidarity with the men . Circumcision is also strongly associated with a man 's family , and it is part of the process required to prepare a man to take a wife and produce his own family . 
 = = = Filipino culture = = = 
 In the Philippines , circumcision known as " <unk> " is sometimes viewed as a rite of passage . About 93 % of Filipino men are circumcised . 
 = = = Ethical and legal issues = = = 
 There is a long @-@ running and vigorous debate over ethical concerns regarding circumcision , particularly neonatal circumcision for reasons other than intended direct medical benefit . There are three parties involved in the decision to circumcise a minor : the minor as the patient , the parents ( or other guardians ) and the physician . The physician is bound under the ethical principles of beneficence ( promoting well @-@ being ) and non @-@ <unk> ( " first , do no harm " ) , and so is charged with the responsibility to promote the best interests of the patient while minimizing unnecessary harms . Those involved must weigh the factors of what is in the best interest of the minor against the potential harms of the procedure . 
 With a newborn involved , the decision is made more complex due to the principles of respect for autonomy and consent , as a newborn cannot understand or engage in a logical discussion of his own values and best interests . A mentally more mature child can understand the issues involved to some degree , and the physician and parents may elicit input from the child and weigh it appropriately in the decision @-@ making process , although the law may not treat such input as legally informative . <unk> and legal theorists also state that it is questionable for parents to make a decision for the child that precludes the child from making a different decision for himself later . Such a question can be raised for the decision by the parents either to circumcise or not to circumcise the child . 
 Generally , circumcision on a minor is not ethically controversial or legally questionable when there is a clear and pressing medical indication for which it is the accepted best practice to resolve . Where circumcision is the chosen intervention , the physician has an ethical responsibility to ensure the procedure is performed competently and safely to minimize potential harms . Worldwide , most legal jurisdictions do not have specific laws concerning the circumcision of males , but infant circumcision is considered legal under the existing laws in countries such as Australia , Canada , New Zealand , the United Kingdom , and the United States . A few countries have passed legislation on the procedure : Germany allows non @-@ therapeutic circumcision , while routine neonatal circumcision is illegal in Finland , and non @-@ religious routine circumcision is illegal in South Africa and Sweden . 
 Throughout society , circumcision is often considered for reasons other than medical need . Public health advocates of circumcision consider it to have a net benefit , and therefore feel that increasing the circumcision rate is an ethical imperative . They recommend performing the procedure during the neonatal period , when it is less expensive and has a lower risk of complications . While studies show there is a modest epidemiological benefit to circumcision , critics argue that the number of circumcisions that would have be performed would yield an overall negative public health outcome due to the resulting number of complications or other negative effects ( such as pain ) . Pinto ( 2012 ) writes " sober proponents and detractors of circumcision agree that there is no overwhelming medical evidence to support either side . " This type of cost @-@ benefit analysis is highly dependent on the kinds and frequencies of health problems in the population under discussion and how circumcision affects those health problems . 
 Parents are assumed to have the child 's best interests in mind . <unk> , it is imperative that the medical practitioner inform the parents about the benefits and risks of the procedure and obtain informed consent before performing it . Practically , however , many parents come to a decision about circumcising the child before he is born , and a discussion of the benefits and risks of the procedure with a physician has not been shown to have a significant effect on the decision . Some parents request to have their newborn or older child circumcised for non @-@ therapeutic reasons , such as the parents ' desires to adhere to family tradition , cultural norms or religious beliefs . In considering such a request , the physician may consider ( in addition to any potential medical benefits and harms ) such non @-@ medical factors in determining the child 's best interests and may ethically perform the procedure . Equally , without a clear medical benefit relative to the potential harms , a physician may take the ethical position that non @-@ medical factors do not contribute enough as benefits to outweigh the potential harms and refuse to perform the procedure . Medical organization such as the British Medical Association state that their member physicians are not obliged to perform the procedure in such situations . 
 The German Academy for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine ( Deutsche Akademie für Kinder- und <unk> e.V. , <unk> ) recommend against routine non @-@ medical infant circumcision . 
 = = = Economic considerations = = = 
 The cost @-@ effectiveness of circumcision has been studied to determine whether a policy of circumcising all newborns or a policy of promoting and providing inexpensive or free access to circumcision for all adult men who choose it would result in lower overall societal healthcare costs . As HIV / AIDS is an incurable disease that is expensive to manage , significant effort has been spent studying the cost @-@ effectiveness of circumcision to reduce its spread in parts of Africa that have a relatively high infection rate and low circumcision prevalence . Several analyses have concluded that circumcision programs for adult men in Africa are cost @-@ effective and in some cases are cost @-@ saving . In Rwanda , circumcision has been found to be cost @-@ effective across a wide range of age groups from newborn to adult , with the greatest savings achieved when the procedure is performed in the newborn period due to the lower cost per procedure and greater timeframe for HIV infection protection . Circumcision for the prevention of HIV transmission in adults has also been found to be cost @-@ effective in South Africa , Kenya and Uganda , with cost savings estimated in the billions of US dollars over 20 years . <unk> et al . ( 2011 ) estimated that a $ 1 @.@ 5 billion investment in circumcision for adults in 13 high @-@ priority African countries would yield $ 16 @.@ 5 billion in savings . 
 The overall cost @-@ effectiveness of neonatal circumcision has also been studied in the United States , which has a different cost setting from Africa in areas such as public health infrastructure , availability of medications , and medical technology and the willingness to use it . A study by the CDC suggests that newborn circumcision would be societally cost @-@ effective in the United States based on circumcision 's efficacy against the heterosexual transmission of HIV alone , without considering any other cost benefits . The American Academy of Pediatrics ( 2012 ) recommends that neonatal circumcision in the United States be covered by third @-@ party payers such as Medicaid and insurance . A 2014 review that considered reported benefits of circumcision such as reduced risks from HIV , HPV , and HSV @-@ 2 stated that circumcision is cost effective in both the United States and Africa and may result in health care savings . However , A 2014 literature review found that there are significant gaps in the current literature on male and female sexual health that need to be addressed for the literature to be applicable to North American populations . 
 = Liverpool Town Hall = 
 Liverpool Town Hall stands in High Street at its junction with Dale Street , Castle Street , and Water Street in Liverpool , Merseyside , England . It is recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building , and described in the list as " one of the finest surviving 18th @-@ century town halls " . The authors of the Buildings of England series refer to its " magnificent scale " , and consider it to be " probably the grandest ... suite of civic rooms in the country " , and " an outstanding and complete example of late Georgian decoration " . 
 It is not an administrative building but a civic suite , Lord Mayor 's parlour and Council chamber ; local government administration is centred at the nearby Municipal Buildings . The town hall was built between 1749 and 1754 to a design by John Wood the Elder replacing an earlier town hall nearby . An extension to the north designed by James Wyatt was added in 1785 . Following a fire in 1795 the hall was largely rebuilt and a dome designed by Wyatt was built . Minor alterations have subsequently been made . The streets surrounding its site have altered since its initiation , notably when viewed from Castle Street , the south @-@ side , it appears as off @-@ centre . This is because Water Street which ran to the junction with Dale Street , the west @-@ east axis , was continuous and built up across the junction so that the Town Hall was not visible originally from that aspect . The structures were removed 150 years after this to expose the building from this position . 
 The ground floor contains the city 's Council Chamber and a Hall of Remembrance for the Liverpool servicemen killed in the First World War . The upper floor consists of a suite of lavishly decorated rooms which are used for a variety of events and functions . Conducted tours of the building are arranged for the general public , and the hall is licensed for weddings . 
 = = History = = 
 The first recorded town hall in Liverpool was in 1515 and it was probably a thatched building . It was replaced in 1673 by a building slightly to the south of the present town hall . This town hall stood on " pillars and arches of <unk> stone " and under it was the exchange for merchants and traders to carry out their business . 
 Building of the present town hall began in 1749 on a site slightly to the north of its predecessor ; its foundation stone was laid on 14 September . The architect was John Wood the Elder , who has been described as " one of the outstanding architects of the day " . It was completed and opened in 1754 . The ground floor acted as the exchange , and a council room and other offices were on the upper floor . The ground floor had a central courtyard surrounded by Doric colonnades but it was " dark and confined , and the merchants preferred to transact business in the street outside " . Above the building was a large square dome with a cupola . The Town Hall was bombarded by striking seamen during the 1775 Liverpool Seamen 's Revolt . 
 The very last act of the American Civil War was when Captain Waddell walked up the steps of Town Hall in November 1865 with a letter to present to the mayor surrendering his vessel , the CSS Shenandoah , to the British government . 
 Improvements began in 1785 with an extension to the north designed by James Wyatt . Buildings close to the west and north sides were demolished , and John Foster prepared plans for the west façade . In 1786 Wood 's square dome was demolished and plans were made by Wyatt for a new dome over the central courtyard . In 1795 , before the new dome was built , the hall was seriously damaged by a fire . Wyatt 's north extension was not significantly damaged , but Wood 's original building was gutted . The building was reconstructed and Wyatt 's new dome was added . The work was supervised by Foster and completed in 1802 . Under the dome the central courtyard was replaced with a hall containing a staircase . In 1811 a portico was added to the south side . The construction and decoration of the interior was completed by about 1820 . 
 In 1881 an attempt to blow up the town hall by the Fenians was aborted . In 1899 – 1900 the portico on the south face was rebuilt and extended , and the northern extension was enlarged to form a recess in the Council Chamber for the Lord Mayor 's chair . In 1921 a room on the ground floor was made into the Hall of Remembrance to commemorate the military men from Liverpool who died in the First World War . Part of the building was damaged in the Liverpool Blitz of 1941 ; this restored after the end of the Second World War . Further restoration was carried out between 1993 and 1995 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The town hall is built of stone with a slate roof and a lead dome . Its plan consists of a rectangle with a portico extending to the south and Wyatt 's rectangular extension to the north . The extension is slightly narrower than the rest of the building , and also has a projecting portico . The building has two storeys and a basement ; the stonework of the basement and lower storey is rusticated . The south face , overlooking Castle Street , has nine bays . Its central three bays are occupied by the portico . This has three rounded arches on the ground floor , and four pairs of Corinthian columns in the upper storey surrounding a balcony . The east and west faces also have nine bays in the original part of the building , plus an additional three bays to the north on Wyatt 's extension . The middle three bays of the nine original bays project slightly forward and are surmounted by a pediment . The roof of the north face is higher than that of the main building . This face has five bays , with a central portico of three bays . On its first floor are four pairs of Corinthian columns and standing on the roof above these are four statues dating from 1792 by Richard Westmacott ; these statues have been moved from the Irish Houses of Parliament . Above the upper storey windows on all faces are panels containing carvings , some of which relate to Liverpool 's foreign trade . The dome stands on a high drum supported on Corinthian columns . Around the base of the dome are four clock faces , each of which is supported by a lion and unicorn . On the summit of the dome is a statue , representing Minerva . It is 10 feet ( 3 m ) high and was designed by John Charles Felix Rossi . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 = = = = Ground floor = = = = 
 The main door in the south face leads to the Vestibule or Entrance Hall . It has a floor of encaustic tiles which include depictions of the arms of Liverpool and the liver bird . 
 The room is panelled and on the east side is a large wooden fireplace containing 17th @-@ century Flemish carvings . It has a groin @-@ vaulted ceiling , and in the lunettes are murals painted in 1909 depicting events in Liverpool 's history . Below these are brass tablets containing the names of the freemen of Liverpool . Also in the entrance hall are bardic chairs from the two <unk> held in the city . 
 At the rear of the ground floor in Wyatt 's extension is the Council Chamber . This has mahogany @-@ panelled walls and can seat 160 people . Adjacent to the Council Chamber is the Hall of Remembrance . On its wall are panels bearing the names of the military men who lost their lives in the First World War , and eight murals painted by Frank O. Salisbury in 1923 . 
 In the centre of the ground floor is the Staircase Hall described in the Buildings of England series as " one of the great architectural spaces of Liverpool " . A broad staircase rises between two pairs of Corinthian columns to a half @-@ landing , and narrower flights climb from that on each side to the upper floor . On the ground floor on each side of the staircase are display cabinets holding the city 's silver . On the half @-@ landing is a statue of George Canning dated 1832 by Francis Chantrey , and hanging on the wall above this is a portrait of Queen Elizabeth II by Sir Edward Halliday . 
 Above the staircase the dome is carried by four pendentives ; it rises to a height of 106 feet ( 32 m ) and its interior is coffered . Around the base of the dome is inscribed Liverpool 's motto , " Deus Nobis <unk> <unk> Fecit " , and in the pendentives are paintings dated 1902 by Charles Wellington <unk> depicting scenes of dock labour . 
 = = = = Upper floor = = = = 
 All the rooms on this floor are designed for entertainment and they have connecting doors that allow for a complete circuit of the floor . The middle room on the south side of the building is the Central Reception Room . It has a circular ceiling with pendentives , and plasterwork in neoclassical style designed by Francesco Bernasconi . The room leads to the balcony overlooking Castle Street . A door to the right leads to the West Reception Room , with a segmented @-@ vaulted ceiling ; it contains a marble chimneypiece with brass and cast iron fittings . This room leads to the Dining Room which occupies the west side of the building . It has been described as " the most sumptuous room in the building " . Around the room are Corinthian pilasters . The plaster ceiling has moulded compartments , and under these is a frieze decorated with scrolls , urns and crouching dogs . The roundels between the capitals of the pilasters contain paintings of pairs of cupids . 
 The next room on the circuit is a small room which leads into the Large Ballroom . This occupies the whole of Wyatt 's north extension and measures 89 feet ( 27 m ) by 42 feet ( 13 m ) ; the ceiling is 40 feet ( 12 m ) high . Around the room are Corinthian pilasters and on each of the shorter walls is a massive mirror . In the south wall is a niche for musicians , over which is a coffered semi @-@ dome ; on each side of this is a white marble chimneypiece . Hanging from the ceiling are " three of the finest Georgian chandeliers in Europe " ; each is 28 feet ( 9 m ) high , contains 20 @,@ 000 pieces of cut glass crystal , and weighs over one ton . They were made in Staffordshire in 1820 . The floor is a maple sprung dance floor . Most of the east side of the hall is occupied by the Small Ballroom , also known as the East Reception Room or Music Room . This room is surrounded by pilasters and at each end is a shallow apse ; the apse in the north wall has two niches for musicians . Suspended from the ceiling are three 19th @-@ century chandeliers . Completing the circuit is the East Reception Room , similar in style to the West Reception Room . The rooms contain a number of portraits ; one of these is of James Maury , America 's first consul . 
 = = Current use and surroundings = = 
 The city council meets every seven weeks in the Council Chambers to conduct the business of the city . The town hall is open to the general public each month when conducted tours take place . The hall is licensed for weddings and , in addition to providing a venue for the ceremony , catering facilities can be supplied for a reception or a meal . Catering is also available for other events and functions . 
 Immediately to the north of the Town Hall is a paved square known as Exchange Flags ; this is surrounded on all sides by modern office buildings . In the square is the Nelson Monument , celebrating the achievements of Horatio Nelson . It is a Grade II * listed building and is the earliest surviving public monument in the city . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = The International ( 2009 film ) = 
 The International is a 2009 German – American political thriller drama film directed by Tom Tykwer . The film follows an Interpol agent and an American district attorney who investigate corruption within the IBBC , a fictional merchant bank based in Luxembourg . It serves organized crime and corrupt governments as a banker and as an arms broker . The bank 's ruthless managers assassinate potential threats including their own employees . 
 Inspired by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International ( BCCI ) scandal of the 1980s , the film 's script , written by Eric Warren Singer , raises concerns about how global finance affects international politics across the world . Production began in Berlin in September 2008 , including the construction of a life @-@ size replica of the Guggenheim Museum in New York for the film 's climactic shoot @-@ out scene . The film opened the 59th Berlin International Film Festival on 5 February 2009 . Reviews were mixed : some praised the sleek appearance and prescient themes — The Guardian called it a thriller with " brainpower as well as firepower " — but The New Yorker criticised the development of the characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Louis Salinger , of Interpol , and Eleanor Whitman , an Assistant District Attorney from Manhattan , are investigating the International Bank of Business and Credit ( IBBC ) , which funds activities such as money laundering , terrorism , arms trading , and the destabilization of governments . Salinger 's and Whitman 's investigation takes them from Berlin to Milan , where the IBBC assassinates Umberto Calvini , an arms manufacturer who is an Italian prime ministerial candidate . The bank 's assassin diverts suspicion to a local assassin with political connections , who is promptly killed by a corrupt policeman . Salinger and Whitman get a lead on the second assassin , but the corrupt policeman shows up again and orders them out of the country . At the airport they are able to check the security camera footage for clues on the whereabouts on the bank 's assassin , and follow a suspect to New York . 
 In New York , Salinger and Whitman are met by two New York Police Department ( NYPD ) detectives , Iggy Ornelas and Bernie Ward , who have a photograph of the assassin 's face when he arrived in New York airport . Salinger , Ornelas , and Ward locate Dr. Isaacson to whose practice the assassin 's leg brace has been traced . They find the assassin and follow him to the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum . 
 Jonas Skarssen , the chairman of the IBBC , reveals to his senior men White and Wexler that the bank had Calvini killed so that they could deal with his sons to buy missile guidance systems in which the bank has invested . Since the bank knows that Salinger and Whitman are close to finding their assassin , they send a hit team to kill him at a meeting between him and his handler , Wexler . Wexler leaves and is arrested by Ornelas . As Salinger speaks to the assassin , a spectacular gunfight at the Guggenheim erupts when a number of gunmen attempt to kill them with automatic weapons . They escape , but the assassin is mortally wounded . 
 In interrogation , Wexler , a former Stasi colonel , explains to Salinger that the IBBC is practically untouchable because of its utility to terrorist organizations , drug cartels , governments , and powerful corporations of all complexions . Even if he succeeds in bringing the IBBC down there are hundreds of other banks which will replace them . If Salinger wants justice , he needs to go outside the system , and Wexler indicates a willingness to help . In Italy , Salinger tells the Calvini brothers of the IBBC 's responsibility for their father 's murder , prompting them to cancel the deal with the bank and have White killed . 
 Salinger then accompanies Wexler to Istanbul , where Skarssen is buying the crucial components from their only other manufacturer . Salinger attempts to record the conversation so that he can obstruct the deal by proving to the buyers that the missiles will be useless , but he ultimately fails . Both Wexler and Skarssen are then killed by a hitman contracted by Enzo and Mario Calvini to avenge their father 's murder by the bank . Salinger is left stunned , his investigation , pursuit , and determination to bring down the IBBC , have led him to nothing . 
 During the closing credits , it is indicated that the bank is successfully continuing with its operations despite the death of its Chairman — as Skarssen had predicted to Salinger before he was killed . However with the new and more aggressive chairman , it is hinted that the IBBC 's increased expansion and aggression will ultimately lead to its downfall , as shown by the last panel , revealing the beginnings of a United States Senate investigation , headed by Whitman . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Clive Owen as Louis Salinger 
 Naomi Watts as Eleanor Whitman 
 Armin Mueller @-@ Stahl as Wilhelm Wexler 
 Ulrich Thomsen as Jonas Skarssen 
 <unk> F. O 'Byrne as The Consultant 
 Michel <unk> as Viktor Haas 
 Patrick <unk> as Martin White 
 Jay Villiers as Francis <unk> 
 Fabrice Scott as Nicolai <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> as Ahmet <unk> 
 Luca Barbareschi as Umberto Calvini 
 Alessandro <unk> as Inspector Alberto Cerutti 
 Felix Solis as Detective Iggy Ornelas 
 Jack McGee as Detective Bernie Ward 
 <unk> Sun as Detective Gloria Hubbard 
 Steven Randazzo as Al Moody 
 Tibor Feldman as Dr. Isaacson 
 James Rebhorn as New York D.A. 
 Remy Auberjonois as Sam <unk> 
 Ian Burfield as Thomas Schumer 
 Axel <unk> as Klaus Diemer 
 Ben Whishaw as Rene <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 The screenplay was written by Eric Warren Singer after he developed an interest in the banking scandals from the 1980s and 90s , he was looking for " a paranoid thriller vibe " from that period ; " The Godfather III was really the only film up to this point that dealt with the banking scandals , because it was really gangster warfare on a corporate level , and I thought that was the best part of the film . " Later reviewers compared it directly to The Parallax View ( 1974 ) and All The President 's Men ( 1976 ) . Ridley Scott initially expressed an interest in directing the film , and the studio agreed to finance the project , only for Scott to drop out . A year later Tom Tykwer got involved through his agent , but decided a contemporary setting would work better . In April 2007 , Clive Owen agreed to perform in The International . He said the script interested him because he was reminded of " those ' 70s paranoia pictures " and because it combined a factual , intelligent basis with an international thriller plot . The following July , actress Naomi Watts was cast opposite Owen . In August , the film received US $ 5 @.@ 4 million from the German Federal Film Fund toward its budget . The following month its funding increased to $ 7 @.@ 9 million , based on the board 's assessment that two @-@ thirds of The International would be produced in Germany and that a number of Germans were in important roles , such as actors Armin Mueller @-@ Stahl and Axel <unk> , cinematographer Frank <unk> , and production designer Uli <unk> . Filming began in Berlin on 10 September 2007 . Part of the production took place in Babelsberg Studios . 
 Clive Owen called the shoot @-@ out scene " one of the most exquisitely executed sequences I 've been involved in " . Tom Tykwer planned the scene in detail and toured the museum with the principals months in advance . The lobby entrance scene was filmed in the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York , but for the shooting sequences a one hundred and eighteen foot wide , life @-@ size replica , including an audio visual exhibition with works of Julian <unk> , was built in Germany . This set was too large for the studio , so it was instead built in a disused locomotive warehouse outside Berlin ; its construction took ten weeks . Having filmed in the real museum interior and on the sound stage in Germany , the film crew had to track the lights and camera angles carefully throughout to ensure continuity . The scene includes a sequence in which the protagonist sends a huge art @-@ chandelier hanging from the ceiling crashing to the ground ; the entire stunt was created using computer generated imagery . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Clive Owen , discussing the film 's relevance , said it " ultimately does ask questions about whether banks use people 's money appropriately , and if they 're completely sound institutions . " More baldly put , Philip French , reviewing the film in The Observer , surmised the sentiment as " Let 's kill all the bankers " , a modern day version of Dick the Butcher 's " First thing we do , let 's kill all the lawyers " from Shakespeare 's Henry the Sixth , Part II . Salinger 's ( Owen ) central revelation is that the world is governed by anonymous forces , staffed by disposable individuals . The powerlessness of the ordinary citizen is symbolised by the huge , impersonal buildings that the villains inhabit . 
 The film draws on a number of macabre incidents from international banking : the Bank of Credit and Commerce International crisis in 1991 , the murder of Roberto Calvi , an alleged banker to the Sicilian Mafia , in London in 1982 , and the assassination by poisoning of Georgi Markov in London in 1978 . The bank is making large loans to rogue states and simultaneously acting as their munitions broker . The script offers the chilling insight that the creditors are the real winners of any conflict . A.O. Scott commented on the opportunity to make a film critical of international finance , " that multinational weapons manufacturers can be portrayed as more decent , civic @-@ minded and principled than global financiers surely says something about the state of the world . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The International was first screened on 5 February 2009 at the 59th Berlin International Film Festival and was released in the United States and Canada on 13 February 2009 . In a six @-@ week run in America , it earned $ 25 million at the box office . It was released in Australia on 19 February and the United Kingdom on 27 February 2009 . Its total theatrical earnings worldwide were $ 60 @,@ 161 @,@ 391 . 
 It was released in France under the title " L <unk> " ( " The Investigation " ) on 11 March 2009 , it earned € 264 @,@ 054 during a three @-@ week theatrical release . 
 Reviewers called the film " topical " and " remarkably prescient " , due to its release just after the financial crisis of 2007 – 08 during the start of the Great Recession . The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in the United States on 9 June 2009 . It contains a digital copy for portable devices . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The International has received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Based on a sample of 201 reviews the film has a 59 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes and has been certified " Rotten " . The consensus statement reads " The International boasts some electric action sequences and picturesque locales , but is undone by its preposterous plot . " Metacritic gives the film a 52 % rating based on 34 reviews . 
 In his review for The Guardian , Peter Bradshaw wrote , " I felt occasionally that Owen 's rumpled performance is in danger of becoming a little one @-@ note ... but this is still an unexpectedly well – made thriller with brainpower as well as firepower " . Philip French , in his review for The Observer , called the film a " slick , fast @-@ moving conspiracy thriller " and the gunfight in the Guggenheim " spectacular " . In his review for The Independent , Anthony Quinn wrote , " It 's reasonably efficient , passably entertaining , and strenuously playing catch @-@ up with the Bourne movies : flat @-@ footed Owen doesn 't look as good as Matt Damon sprinting through city streets , and the editing doesn 't match Paul Greengrass 's whiplash pace " . The New Yorker magazine 's David Denby wrote , " And there 's a big hole in the middle of the movie : the director , Tom Tykwer , and the screenwriter , Eric Warren Singer , forgot to make their two crusaders human beings " . In his review for The New York Post , Lou Lumenick wrote , " There , an anticlimactic rooftop chase reminds us that Tykwer , the German director who reinvented the Euro thriller with Run , Lola , Run a decade ago , has been far surpassed by Paul Greengrass and the Bourne adventures , yet thankfully lacking the rampant and nonsensical roller @-@ coaster style of editing , where no shot lingers for longer than a nano @-@ second . " . A.O. Scott , in his review for The New York Times , wrote , " The International , in contrast , is so undistinguished that the moments you remember best are those that you wish another , more original director had tackled " . Citing the climatic shoot @-@ out in the Guggenheim , hailed by other critics as spectacular , Scott wonders if another , such as Brian de Palma could have " turned into a fugue of architectural paranoia " ? 
 In his review for the Los Angeles Times , Kenneth Turan wrote , " It 's got some effective moments and aspects , but the film goes in and out of plausibility , and its elements never manage to unify into a coherent whole " . Claudia Puig , in her review for USA Today , wrote , " The dialogue by screenwriter Eric Warren Singer is spotty . There are some great , pithy lines and others whose attempt at profundity ring false " . Roger Ebert gave the film three out of four stars and wrote , " Clive Owen makes a semi @-@ believable hero , not performing too many feats that are physically unlikely . He 's handsome and has the obligatory macho stubble , but he has a quality that makes you worry a little about him " . Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " B – " rating and Lisa Schwarzbaum wrote , " the star of the pic may well be NYC 's Guggenheim Museum and Istanbul 's Grand Bazaar , both of which figure in cool action chase sequences that pay handsome dividends " . 
 The film earned an average rating of three stars from five from French critics according to AlloCiné . Le Monde , which gave the film one star , said that the modern , destructive forces of political fantasy and derivative finance which power the film 's plot should have created sparks , " but in reality , the film trudges along . While the film constituted a thrilling geographic tour of the genre tropes , it forgot to focus on characters and mood . " 
 = 68 @-@ pounder gun = 
 The 68 @-@ pounder cannon was an artillery piece designed and used by the British Armed Forces in the mid @-@ 19th century . The cannon was a smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading gun manufactured in several weights , the most common being 95 long cwt ( 4 @,@ 800 kg ) , and fired projectiles of 68 lb ( 31 kg ) . Colonel William Dundas designed the 112 cwt version in 1841 and it was cast the following year . The most common variant , weighing 95 cwt , dates from 1846 . It entered service with the Royal Artillery and the Royal Navy and saw active service with both arms during the Crimean War . Over 2 @,@ 000 were made and it gained a reputation as the finest smoothbore cannon ever made . 
 The gun was produced at a time when new rifled and breech loading guns were beginning to make their mark on artillery . At first the 68 @-@ pounder 's reliability and power meant that it was retained even on new warships such as HMS Warrior , but eventually new rifled muzzle loaders made all smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading guns obsolete . However , the large surplus stocks of 68 @-@ pounders were given new life when converted to take rifled projectiles ; the cannon remained in service and was not declared obsolete until 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The cannon was designed in response to the need for heavier weaponry as armour on ships of the line improved . Colonel William Dundas , the government 's Inspector of Artillery between 1839 and 1852 , designed the cannon in 1846 . It was cast by the Low Moor Iron Works in Bradford in 1847 and entered service soon after . Like numerous cannon before it , it was a cast iron smoothbore loaded from the muzzle . The cannon was relatively cheap to produce – the Royal Commission on the Defence of the United Kingdom estimated that each cannon cost approximately £ 167 . ( 2010 : £ <unk> ) . Over 2000 were cast before 1861 and its exceptional durability , range and accuracy earned it a reputation as the finest smoothbore cannon ever made . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The gun was a traditional <unk> ; it needed to be loaded from the end of the barrel . Before it could be loaded the bore of the barrel was cleaned with a sponge , after which a propellant charge ( gunpowder in a cloth bag ) was rammed down into the breech . This was followed by a projectile , often encased in wadding . The gun was primed ( using a metal spike inserted through the vent that pierced the charge ) , and fired using a percussion cap ( which ignited the charge and forced the projectile out of the barrel ) . 
 The 68 @-@ pounder had an effective range of approximately 3 @,@ 000 yd ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) , however at its maximum elevation of 15 degrees it had a maximum range of 3 @,@ 620 yd ( 3 @,@ 310 m ) , a distance that the projectile would cover in 15 seconds . With a 16 lb ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) powder charge ( the " far " charge , although the gun was proofed to 25 lb charges ) the cannon fired a 68 lb ( 31 kg ) solid shot at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 579 ft / s ( 481 m / s ) . 
 The cannon could fire solid shot , explosive shells , grapeshot , case shot and " Martins Liquid Iron Shell " ( thin walled shells filled with molten iron , intended to serve as heated shot ) . Although the cannon 's barrel bore was 8 @.@ 12 inches ( 20 @.@ 6 cm ) , both shot and shells were 7 @.@ 92 inches ( 20 @.@ 1 cm ) in diameter . This allowed a windage gap of 0 @.@ 1 in ( 0 @.@ 25 cm ) around the projectile ; enough to aid the loading process , but not enough to seriously diffuse the propellant gasses . 
 The official weight of the shot was listed at 68 lbs but in reality this varied according to the material of the shot itself ; cast iron shot weighed 67 lb ( 30 kg ) , wrought iron shot and steel shot weighed 72 lb ( 33 kg ) , and chilled steel weighed 68 lb 8 oz ( 31 @.@ 1 kg ) . It was estimated that one 68 @-@ pound shot had the destructive power equivalent to five 32 @-@ pound shot . The explosive shells were primed with 4 lb ( 1 @.@ 8 kg ) of gunpowder . They were fitted with simple fuses that were ignited by the flash of the charge – early wooden fuses were eventually replaced by more reliable fuses designed by Captain Edward Boxer in 1849 . The gun crew still had to gauge the best length of fuse for the range they were firing – ideally the shell should explode just before hitting its target . To prevent the shell exploding in the barrel it was fitted with a sabot to ensure the fuse faced away from the charge . 
 On land a minimum crew of nine men ( usually commanded by a non @-@ commissioned officer ) was required to fire the gun , which was normally mounted on a traversing gun carriage . On board a ship the gun crew could be doubled to 18 men who needed to traverse the gun carriage by hand , using hand spikes and rope tackles . The extra crew was on account of the fact that sailing ships usually only fired their cannon from one side of the deck . In the unlikely event of both sides being in action at once , nine men would be detached to man the gun opposite . In both cases the gun was elevated using wooden wedges driven under the breech of the barrel by brute force . It was aimed using an advanced hexagonal sighting mechanism marked with the elevation on one face and the gun 's range ( according to different weights of cartridge charges ) on the other five faces . 
 = = Service = = 
 The cannon was put to use both on land and at sea . It was fitted to numerous Royal Navy warships of different sizes such as HMS Queen , Odin , Victor Emmanuel , Sepoy and the Conqueror @-@ class ships of the line . Several of these ships saw action during the Crimean War where the 68 @-@ pounder was used extensively during the Siege of Sevastopol . Along with 32 @-@ pounders and Lancaster guns they were taken from their ship mountings and dragged up to siege batteries by the Naval Brigade , from where they regularly bombarded Russian positions for the next year . The cannon was also fitted in large numbers to the Aetna @-@ class ironclad floating batteries , although these had little impact on the war . 
 Most notably the 68 @-@ pounder was fitted to the Warrior @-@ class ironclads Warrior and Black Prince . Originally it was intended to fit forty 68 @-@ pounders , primarily on one gun deck , but this specification changed during their building and they were finally equipped with twenty @-@ six 68 @-@ pounders ( 13 on each side ) . Alongside these , the ships were equipped with new rifled breech loading Armstrong guns of two types ; 7 inch and 40 pounders . Although the Armstrong guns represented a new direction in artillery , the breech loading mechanism meant that they were unable to withstand the explosion of a heavy cartridge . Smaller cartridge charges were therefore required and the gun 's muzzle velocity suffered as a result . Ironically the Armstrong Guns were therefore incapable of penetrating the armour fitted to the Warrior @-@ class ships , while the 68 @-@ pounder ( with its high muzzle velocity ) could . As late as 1867 it was planned to fit the new Plover @-@ class <unk> with 68 @-@ pounders , but they were instead completed with a RML 7 inch gun and a RML 64 pounder 64 cwt gun . 
 On land the 68 @-@ pounder was used extensively in British coastal defences constructed during the 1850s - notably at forts like Gomer and Elson defending Portsmouth , and Forts Victoria , Albert and Freshwater Redoubt defending the Needles Passage . The 1859 Royal Commission envisaged arming the numerous new forts they proposed with the 68 @-@ pounder cannon and costed for them accordingly . The introduction of the Armstrong gun initially led many to think that weapon would be used instead , but whilst the forts were being built , the Armstrong gun 's weaknesses were exposed and the military reverted to using muzzle loaded weapons . However , the advantages of rifling and the Armstrong 's wrought iron construction were retained , leading to a new design of artillery piece – rifled muzzle loaders . 
 = = Conversion to rifled muzzle loader = = 
 The introduction of rifled muzzle loaders ( also classed as RMLs ) rendered smoothbore guns largely obsolete . However , the 68 @-@ pounder and other smoothbores still existed in large numbers and various attempts were made to adapt the guns to fire new projectiles . Eventually Captain William Palliser patented a method of boring out the gun barrel and inserting a wrought iron rifled liner . This allowed rifled shot and shells to be fired from old smoothbore cannon and experiments revealed that it made them even more powerful than they had been before . Introduced in 1872 , 68 @-@ pounders adapted in this way had a calibre of 6 @.@ 3 inches ( 16 @.@ 00 cm ) and were known as a RML 68 @-@ pounder , or officially as the RML 80 @-@ pounder 5 ton . With a 10 lb ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) powder charge they could fire an 80 lb ( 36 kg ) projectile at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 240 feet per second ( 380 m / s ) . They were deployed as coast defence and garrison artillery around the British Empire and remained in service until eventually declared obsolete in 1921 . 
 At least two 68 pounders were converted to 7 inch 6 @.@ 5 tons RML guns firing a 115 lb or 150 lb double shot . 
 = = Surviving examples = = 
 Southsea Castle 
 Fort Nelson , Hampshire , Royal <unk> Collection 
 Bradleys Head , Sydney Harbour , Australia 
 Flagstaff Hill Fort , NSW , Australia 
 Two guns at Port Fairy , Victoria , Australia - from Flickr 
 = Attributed arms = 
 Attributed arms are Western European coats of arms given retrospectively to persons real or fictitious who died before the start of the age of heraldry in the latter half of the 12th century . Arms were assigned to the knights of the Round Table , and then to biblical figures , to Roman and Greek heroes , and to kings and popes who had not historically borne arms ( Pastoreau 1997a , 258 ) . Each author could attribute different arms for the same person , but the arms for major figures soon became fixed . 
 Notable arms attributed to biblical figures include the arms of Jesus based on the instruments of the Passion , and the shield of the Trinity . Medieval literature attributed coats of arms to the Nine Worthies , including Alexander the Great , Julius Caesar , and King Arthur . Arms were given to many kings predating heraldry , including Edward the Confessor and William I of England . These attributed arms were sometimes used in practice as quarterings in the arms of their descendants . 
 = = History = = 
 Attributed or imaginary arms appeared in literature in the middle of the 12th century , particularly in Arthurian legends . During the generation following Chrétien de Troyes , about 40 of Arthur 's knights had attributed coats of arms ( Pastoreau 1997a , 259 ) . A second stage of development occurred during the 14th and 15th centuries when Arthurian arms expanded to include as many as 200 attributed coats of arms . 
 During the same centuries , rolls of arms included invented arms for kings of foreign lands ( Neubecker , 30 ) . Around 1310 , Jacques de <unk> wrote the Voeux de Paon ( " Vows of the Peacock " ) , which included a list of nine famous leaders . This list , divided into three groups of three , became known in art and literature as the Nine Worthies ( Loomis 1938 , 37 ) . Each of the Nine Worthies were given a coat of arms . King David , for instance , was assigned a gold harp as a device ( Neubecker , 172 ) . 
 Once coats of arms were the established fashion of the ruling class , society expected a king to be armigerous ( Loomis 1922 , 26 ) . In such an era , it was " natural enough to consider that suitable armorial devices and compositions should be assigned to men of mark in earlier ages " ( Boutell , 18 ) . Each author could attribute different arms for the same person , although regional styles developed , and the arms for major figures soon became fixed ( Turner , 415 ) . 
 Some attributed arms were incorporated into the quarterings of their descendants ' arms . The quarterings for the family of Lloyd of Stockton , for instance , include numerous arms originally attributed to Welsh chieftains from the 9th century or earlier ( Neubecker , 94 ) . In a similar vein , arms were attributed to Pope Leo IX based on the later arms of his family 's descendants ( Turner , 415 ) . 
 In the 16th and 17th centuries , additional arms were attributed to a large number of saints , kings and popes , especially those from the 11th and 12th centuries . Pope Innocent IV ( 1243 – 1254 ) is the first pope whose personal coat of arms is known with certainty ( Pastoreau 1997a , 283 – 284 ) . By the end of the 17th century , the use of attributed arms became more restrained ( Neubecker , 224 ) . 
 The tinctures and charges attributed to an individual in the past provide insight into the history of symbolism ( Pastoreau <unk> , 87 ) . 
 = = Arthurian heraldry = = 
 In the Arthurian legends , each knight of the Round Table is often accompanied by a heraldic description of a coat of arms . Although these arms could be arbitrary , some characters were traditionally associated with one coat or a few different coats . 
 King Arthur was assigned many different arms , but from the 13th century , he was most commonly given three gold crowns on an azure field ( Loomis 1938 , 38 ) . In a 1394 manuscript depicting the Nine Worthies , Arthur is shown holding a flag with three gold crowns ( Neubecker , 172 ) . The reason for the triple @-@ crown symbol is unknown , but it was associated with other pre @-@ Norman kings , with the seal of Magnus II of Sweden , with the relics of the Three Wise Men in Cologne ( which led to the three crowns in the seal of the University of Cologne ) , and with the grants of Edward I of England to towns which were symbolized by three crowns in the towns ' arms . The number of crowns increased to eleven , thirteen and even thirty at times ( Brault , 44 – 46 ) . 
 Other arms were associated with Arthur . In a manuscript from the later 13th century , Arthur 's shield has three gold leopards , a likely heraldic flattery of Edward I of England ( Brault , 22 ) . Geoffrey of Monmouth assigned Arthur a dragon on his helmet and standard , which is possibly canting arms on Arthur 's father 's name , Uther Pendragon ( Brault , 23 ) . Geoffrey also assigned Arthur a shield with an image of the Virgin Mary ( Brault , 24 ) . An illustration of the latter by D. Endean Ivall , based on the battle flag described by Nennius ( a cross and the Virgin Mary ) and including the motto " King Arthur is not dead " in Cornish , can be found on the cover of W. H. Pascoe ’ s 1979 A Cornish Armory . 
 Other characters in the Arthurian legends are described with coats of arms . Lancelot starts with plain white arms but later receives a shield with three bends gules signifying the strength of three men ( Brault 47 ) . <unk> was attributed a variety of arms . His earliest arms , a gold lion rampant on red field , are shown in a set of 13th @-@ century tiles found in Chertsey Abbey ( Loomis 1915 , 308 ) . Thomas of Britain in the 12th century attributed these arms ( Loomis 1938 , 47 ) in what is believed to be heraldic flattery of his patron , either Richard I or Henry II , whose coats of arms contained some form of lion ( Loomis 1922 , 26 ) . In other versions the field is not red , but green . Gottfried von Strassburg attributed to Tristan a silver shield with a black boar rampant ( Loomis 1922 , 24 ; Loomis 1938 , 49 ) . In Italy , however , he was attributed geometric patterns ( argent a bend gules per Loomis 1938 , 59 ) . 
 = = = Plain arms = = = 
 The Arthurian legends contain numerous instances of red knights , black knights or green knights challenging the knights of the Round Table . In most cases , the color was chosen at random and has no symbolic significance ( Brault , 29 ) . Such arms of one tincture create an atmosphere . Plain arms were rare in the 12th century , and were used in literature to suggest a primitive heraldry of a time long past . Geoffrey of Monmouth noted with favor that in the Arthurian age , worthy knights used arms of one color , suggesting 12th century heraldic ornamentation was partly pretence ( Brault , 29 ) . 
 Plain arms also often function as a disguise for major characters . In the Chrétien de Troyes ' Lancelot , the Knight of the Cart , Lancelot bears plain red arms as a disguise . The hero of <unk> competes in a jousting tournament with plain black , green , and red arms on three successive days ( Brault , 30 ) . 
 = = Kings = = 
 Arms were attributed to important pre @-@ heraldic kings . Among the best known are those assigned to the King of the Franks , who was given three toads . The three fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis of France supposedly derive from these ( Neubecker , 225 ) . 
 William the Conqueror , the first Norman king of England , had a coat of arms with two lions . Richard the Lionheart used such a coat of arms with two lions on a red field ( Loomis 1938 , 47 ) , from which the three lions of the coat of arms of England derive . However , there is no proof that William 's arms were not attributed to William after his death ( Boutell , 18 ) . 
 The earlier Saxon Kings were assigned a gold cross on a blue shield , but this did not exist until the 13th century . The arms of Saint Edward the Confessor , a blue shield charged with a gold cross and five gold birds , appears to have been suggested by heralds in the time of Henry III of England ( Boutell , 18 ) based on a coin minted in Edward 's reign ( Neubecker , 30 ) . These arms were later used by Richard II of England out of devotion to the saint ( Fraser , 44 ) . 
 Arms were attributed to the kingdoms of the Anglo @-@ Saxon <unk> . The Kingdom of Essex , for instance , was assigned a red shield with three notched swords ( or " seaxes " ) . This coat was used by the counties of Essex and Middlesex until 1910 , when the Middlesex County Council applied for a formal grant from the College of Arms ( The Times , 1910 ) . Middlesex was granted a red shield with three notched swords and a " Saxon Crown " . The Essex County Council was granted the arms without the crown in 1932 . 
 Even the kings of Rome were assigned arms , with Romulus , the first King of Rome signified by the she @-@ wolf ( Neubecker , 224 – 225 ) . 
 Flags were also attributed . While the King of Morocco was attributed three rooks as arms , which are therefore canting arms ( Neubecker , 224 ) , the whole chessboard was shown in some sources , resulting in the 14th @-@ century checkered version of the Flag of Morocco ( see Flags of the World , 2007 ) . 
 = = Religious figures = = 
 = = = Jesus and Mary = = = 
 Heralds could have attributed to Jesus the harp for arms inherited as a descendant of David . Nevertheless , the cross was regarded as Christ 's emblem , and it was so used by the Crusaders . Sometimes the arms of Christ feature a Paschal lamb as the principal charge . By the 13th century , however , numerous indulgences had brought increased veneration for the instruments of the Passion . These instruments were described in heraldic terms and treated as personal to Christ much as a coat of arms ( Dennys , 96 ) . An early example in a seal from c . 1240 includes the Cross , nails , lance , crown of thorns , sponge and whips . 
 The instruments of the Passion were sometimes split between a shield and crest in the form of an achievement of arms ( Neubecker , 222 ) . The <unk> Roll ( c . 1447 – 1455 ) shows Christ holding an azure shield charged with Veronica 's Veil proper . The heraldry continues with the 15th century jousting helmet , which is covered by the seamless robe as a form of mantling , and the Cross , scepter ( of mockery ) and flagellum ( whip ) as crest . The banner 's long red <unk> is a mark of eminence in German heraldry , but it was omitted when this image was copied into Randle Holme 's Book ( c . 1464 – 1480 ) . The image on the opposing page ( shown above ) includes a shield quartered with the five Wounds of Christ , three jars of ointment , two rods , and the head of Judas Iscariot with a bag of money ( Dennys , 97 – 98 ) . 
 While Christ was associated with the images of the Passion , Mary was associated with images from the prophecy of Simeon the Righteous ( Luke 2 : 34 – 35 ) ; the resulting attributed arms include a winged heart pierced with a sword and placed on a blue field ( Dennys , 102 ) . Mary is also attributed a group of white lily flowers . An example can be found on the lower part of the coat of arms of the College of Our Lady of Eton beside Windsor ( Dennys , 103 ) . 
 = = = Trinity and angels = = = 
 Out of a desire to make the abstract visible , arms were also attributed to the unseen spirits ( Neubecker , 222 ; Dennys , 93 ) . Because anthropomorphic representations of the Trinity were discouraged by the Church during the Middle Ages ( Dennys , 95 ) , the Shield of the Trinity quickly became popular . It was often used in decorating not only churches , but theological manuscripts and rolls of arms . An early example from William <unk> ' Summa <unk> ( c . 1260 ) shows a knight battling the seven deadly sins with this shield . A variation included with the shields of arms in Matthew Paris ' Chronica Majora ( <unk> – 1259 ) adds a cross between the center and bottom circles , accompanied by the words " v <unk> caro f 'm est " ( verbum caro <unk> est , " the word was made flesh " ; John 1 : 14 ) ( Dennys , 94 ) . 
 Saint Michael the Archangel appears often in heraldic settings . In one case , the device from the shield of the Trinity is placed on a blue field and attributed to St. Michael ( Dennys , 95 ) . More usually , he is shown in armour with a red cross on a white shield , slaying the devil depicted as a dragon . These attributed arms were later transferred to Saint George ( Dennys , 109 ) . 
 Heraldry also attributed to Satan , as the commanding general of the fallen angels , arms to identify him in the heat of battle . The Douce Apocalypse portrays him carrying a red shield with a gold fess , and three frogs ( based on Revelation 16 : 13 ) ( Dennys , 112 ) . 
 = Tuatara = 
 Tuatara are reptiles endemic to New Zealand and which , although resembling most lizards , are part of a distinct lineage , the order Rhynchocephalia . Their name derives from the Māori language , and means " peaks on the back " . The single species of tuatara is the only surviving member of its order , which flourished around 200 million years ago . Their most recent common ancestor with any other extant group is with the squamates ( lizards and snakes ) . For this reason , tuatara are of great interest in the study of the evolution of lizards and snakes , and for the reconstruction of the appearance and habits of the earliest diapsids ( the group that also includes dinosaurs ( which include birds ) and crocodilians ) . 
 Tuatara are greenish brown and gray , and measure up to 80 cm ( 31 in ) from head to tail @-@ tip and weigh up to 1 @.@ 3 kg ( 2 @.@ 9 lb ) with a spiny crest along the back , especially pronounced in males . Their dentition , in which two rows of teeth in the upper jaw overlap one row on the lower jaw , is unique among living species . They are even more unusual in having a pronounced photoreceptive eye , the " third eye " , which is thought to be involved in setting circadian and seasonal cycles . They are able to hear , although no external ear is present , and have a number of unique features in their skeleton , some of them apparently evolutionarily retained from fish . Although tuatara are sometimes called " living fossils " , recent anatomical work has shown that they have changed significantly since the Mesozoic era . While mapping its genome , researchers have discovered that the species has between five and six billion base pairs of DNA sequence . 
 The tuatara Sphenodon punctatus has been protected by law since 1895 . A second species , S. guntheri , was recognised in 1989 but since 2009 its use has been discontinued . Tuatara , like many of New Zealand 's native animals , are threatened by habitat loss and introduced predators , such as the Polynesian rat ( Rattus exulans ) . They were extinct on the mainland , with the remaining populations confined to 32 offshore islands , until the first mainland release into the heavily fenced and monitored Karori Sanctuary in 2005 . 
 During routine maintenance work at Karori Sanctuary in late 2008 , a tuatara nest was uncovered , with a hatchling found the following autumn . This is thought to be the first case of tuatara successfully breeding on the New Zealand mainland in over 200 years , outside of captive rearing facilities . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 Tuatara , along with other , now extinct members of the order Sphenodontia , belong to the superorder <unk> , the only surviving taxon within <unk> . <unk> and tuatara both show caudal autotomy ( loss of the tail @-@ tip when threatened ) , and have transverse cloacal slits . The origin of the tuatara probably lies close to the split between the <unk> and the <unk> . Though tuatara resemble lizards , the similarity is superficial , because the family has several characteristics unique among reptiles . The typical lizard shape is very common for the early amniotes ; the oldest known fossil of a reptile , the <unk> , resembles a modern lizard . 
 Tuatara were originally classified as lizards in 1831 when the British Museum received a skull . The genus remained <unk> until 1867 , when Albert Günther of the British Museum noted features similar to birds , turtles , and crocodiles . He proposed the order Rhynchocephalia ( meaning " beak head " ) for the tuatara and its fossil relatives . 
 Many disparately related species were subsequently added to the Rhynchocephalia , resulting in what taxonomists call a " wastebasket taxon " . Williston proposed the Sphenodontia to include only tuatara and their closest fossil relatives in 1925 . Sphenodon is derived from the Greek for " wedge " ( <unk> , <unk> / <unk> ) and " tooth " ( <unk> , <unk> / odontos ) . 
 Tuatara have been referred to as living fossils , which means they retain many basal characteristics from around the time of the <unk> – <unk> split ( 220 MYA ) . However , taxonomic work on Sphenodontia has shown this group has undergone a variety of changes throughout the Mesozoic , and a March 2008 molecular study showed their rate of molecular evolution has been the fastest of any animal yet examined . Many of the niches occupied by lizards today were then held by sphenodontians . There was even a successful group of aquatic sphenodontians known as <unk> , which differed markedly from living tuatara . Tuatara show cold weather adaptations that allow them to thrive on the islands of New Zealand ; these adaptations may be unique to tuatara since their <unk> ancestors lived in the much warmer climates of the Mesozoic . 
 A species of <unk> is known from the Miocene Saint <unk> Fauna . Whereas it is <unk> to Sphenodon proper is not entirely clear , but is assumed to be closely related to tuataras . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 The two extant species are Sphenodon punctatus , or Northern tuatara , and the much rarer Sphenodon guntheri , or Brothers Island tuatara , which is confined to North Brother Island in Cook Strait . The specific name punctatus is Latin for " spotted " , and guntheri refers to German @-@ born British herpetologist Albert Günther . S. punctatus was named when only one species was known , and its name is misleading , since both species can have spots . The Brother 's Island tuatara ( S. guntheri ) has olive brown skin with yellowish patches , while the colour of the other species , ( S. punctatus ) , ranges from olive green through grey to dark pink or brick red , often mottled , and always with white spots . In addition , S. guntheri is considerably smaller . A third , extinct species of Sphenodon was identified in November 1885 by William Colenso , who was sent an incomplete sub @-@ fossil specimen from a local coal mine . Colenso named the new species S. <unk> . Sphenodon punctatus is further divided into two subspecies : the Cook Strait tuatara ( unnamed subspecies ) , which lives on other islands in and near Cook Strait , and the northern tuatara ( Sphenodon punctatus punctatus ) , which lives on the Bay of Plenty , and some islands further north . A 2009 paper re @-@ examined the genetic bases used to distinguish the two species of tuatara , and concluded they only represent geographic variants , and only one species should be recognized . 
 = = Description = = 
 The tuatara is considered the most unspecialised living amniote ; the brain and mode of locomotion resemble those of amphibians and the heart is more primitive than that of any other reptile . The lungs have a single chamber and lack bronchi . Both species are sexually dimorphic , males being larger . Adult S. punctatus males measure 61 cm ( 24 in ) in length and females 45 cm ( 18 in ) . The San Diego Zoo even cites a length of up to 80 cm ( 31 in ) . Males weigh up to 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) , and females up to 0 @.@ 5 kg ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) . Brother 's Island tuatara are slightly smaller , weighing up to 660 g ( 1 @.@ 3 lb ) . 
 The tuatara 's greenish brown colour matches its environment , and can change over its lifetime . Tuatara shed their skin at least once per year as adults , and three or four times a year as juveniles . Tuatara sexes differ in more than size . The spiny crest on a tuatara 's back , made of triangular , soft folds of skin , is larger in males , and can be stiffened for display . The male abdomen is narrower than the female 's . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 In the course of evolution , the skull has been modified in most diapsids from the original version evident in the fossil record . However , all the original features are preserved in that of the tuatara ; it has two openings ( temporal fenestra ) on each side of the skull , with complete arches . In addition , the upper jaw is firmly attached to the skull . This makes for a very rigid , inflexible construction . <unk> ( turtle and tortoise ) skulls , which lack any temporal fenestra ( <unk> condition ) , are sometimes considered to be the most primitive among amniotes , though evidence strongly indicates they may have lost the temporal holes rather than never having had them . 
 The tip of the upper jaw is beak @-@ like and separated from the remainder of the jaw by a notch . There is a single row of teeth in the lower jaw and a double row in the upper , with the bottom row fitting perfectly between the two upper rows when the mouth is closed . This specific tooth arrangement is not seen in any other reptile ; although most snakes have a double row of teeth in their upper jaws , their arrangement and function is different from the tuatara 's . The jaws , joined by ligament , chew with backwards and forwards movements combined with a shearing up and down action . The force of the bite is suitable for shearing chitin and bone . Fossils indicate that this jaw structure began developing about 180 million years ago . The tuatara 's teeth are not replaced , since they are not separate structures like real teeth , but sharp projections of the jaw bone . As their teeth wear down , older tuatara have to switch to softer prey such as earthworms , larvae , and slugs , and eventually have to chew their food between smooth jaw bones . The brain of Sphenodon fills only half of the volume of its endocranium . This proportion has actually been used by paleontologists trying to estimate the volume of dinosaur brains based on fossils . However , the proportion of the tuatara endocranium occupied by its brain may not be a very good guide to the same proportion in Mesozoic dinosaurs since modern birds are surviving dinosaurs but have brains which occupy a much greater relative volume within the endocranium . 
 = = = Sensory organs = = = 
 The eyes can focus independently , and are specialized with a duplex retina that contains two types of visual cells for both day and night vision , and a tapetum lucidum which reflects onto the retina to enhance vision in the dark . There is also a third eyelid on each eye , the nictitating membrane . 
 The tuatara has a third eye on the top of its head called the parietal eye . It has its own lens , cornea , retina with rod @-@ like structures , and degenerated nerve connection to the brain , suggesting it evolved from a real eye . The parietal eye is only visible in hatchlings , which have a translucent patch at the top centre of the skull . After four to six months , it becomes covered with opaque scales and pigment . Its purpose is unknown , but it may be useful in absorbing ultraviolet rays to produce vitamin D , as well as to determine light / dark cycles , and help with thermoregulation . Of all extant tetrapods , the parietal eye is most pronounced in the tuatara . It is part of the pineal complex , another part of which is the pineal gland , which in tuatara secretes melatonin at night . Some salamanders have been shown to use their pineal bodies to perceive polarised light , and thus determine the position of the sun , even under cloud cover , aiding navigation . 
 Together with turtles , the tuatara has the most primitive hearing organs among the amniotes . There is no eardrum and no <unk> , and the middle ear cavity is filled with loose tissue , mostly adipose ( fatty ) tissue . The stapes comes into contact with the quadrate ( which is immovable ) , as well as the hyoid and squamosal . The hair cells are unspecialized , innervated by both afferent and efferent nerve fibres , and respond only to low frequencies . Though the hearing organs are poorly developed and primitive with no visible external ears , they can still show a frequency response from 100 to 800 Hz , with peak sensitivity of 40 dB at 200 Hz . 
 = = = Spine and ribs = = = 
 The tuatara spine is made up of hourglass @-@ shaped amphicoelous vertebrae , concave both before and behind . This is the usual condition of fish vertebrae and some amphibians , but is unique to tuatara within the amniotes . 
 The tuatara has gastralia , rib @-@ like bones also called gastric or abdominal ribs , the presumed ancestral trait of diapsids . They are found in some lizards , where they are mostly made of cartilage , as well as crocodiles and the tuatara , and are not attached to the spine or thoracic ribs . The true ribs are small projections , with small , hooked bones , called uncinate processes , found on the rear of each rib . This feature is also present in birds . The tuatara is the only living tetrapod with well @-@ developed gastralia and uncinate processes . 
 In the early tetrapods , the gastralia and ribs with uncinate processes , together with bony elements such as bony plates in the skin ( osteoderms ) and clavicles ( collar bone ) , would have formed a sort of exoskeleton around the body , protecting the belly and helping to hold in the guts and inner organs . These anatomical details most likely evolved from structures involved in locomotion even before the vertebrates ventured onto land . The gastralia may have been involved in the breathing process in early amphibians and reptiles . The pelvis and shoulder girdles are arranged differently from those of lizards , as is the case with other parts of the internal anatomy and its scales . 
 = = = Tail and back = = = 
 The spiny plates on the back and tail of the tuatara resemble those of a crocodile more than a lizard , but the tuatara shares with lizards the ability to break off its tail when caught by a predator , and then regenerate it . 
