 Like several other chalk figures carved into the English countryside , the Cerne Abbas Giant is often thought of as an ancient creation . However , as with many of the other figures , its history cannot be traced back further than the late 17th century , making an origin during the Celtic , Roman or even Early Medieval periods difficult to demonstrate . Medieval sources refer to the hill on which the giant is located as Trendle Hill – possibly in reference to the nearby landmark known as the Trendle . Joseph Bettey noted that none of the earlier sources for the area , including a detailed 1617 land survey , refer to the giant , suggesting that it may not have been there at the time . In contrast , the Uffington White Horse has been shown to be 3 @,@ 000 years old , and there are references to it across the ages . 
 The earliest known written reference to the giant is a 4 November 1694 entry in the Churchwardens ' Accounts from St Mary 's Church in Cerne Abbas , which reads " for repairing ye Giant , 3 shillings " . In 1734 , The Bishop of Bristol noted and inquired about the giant during a visitation to Cerne Abbas . The bishop 's account , as well as subsequent observations such as those of William Stukeley , were discussed at meetings of the Society of Antiquaries of London in 1764 . Additionally , in 1738 the antiquarian Francis Wise mentioned the giant in a letter . 
 Beginning in 1763 descriptions of the giant appeared in contemporary magazines . The earliest known survey was published in the Royal Magazine in September 1763 . Derivative versions subsequently appeared in the October 1763 St James Chronicle , the July 1764 Gentleman 's Magazine , and the 1764 edition of The Annual Register . The Gentleman 's Magazine account in particular was prominent , and contained the oldest known drawing of the figure . In 1774 , the antiquarian John Hutchins reviewed various previous accounts in his book The History and Antiquities of the County of Dorset . In it , he wrote that the carving had only been done the previous century . 
 The earliest known drawing of the Giant appears in the August 1764 issue of Gentleman 's Magazine . A map referred to as the " 1768 Survey Map of Cerne Abbas by Benjamin Pryce " is held at the Dorset History Centre . However , a record at the National Archives notes that " the cartouche refers to Lord Rivers by that title which he did not acquire until 1776 . Numbers on the map appear to correspond with the survey of 1798 " . By the Victorian period ( after 1837 ) the penis was removed from academic and tourist depictions , 
 Cerne Abbas Giant at different dates 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 There are three main ideas concerning the age of the Giant , and whom he might represent : 
 The first argues that because there is no medieval documentary evidence , then the Giant was created in the 17th century , perhaps by Lord Holles , who resided in Cerne Abbas , and perhaps as a parody of Oliver Cromwell . 
 The second idea is that the Giant dates to the time of the Romans in Britain ( i.e. Romano @-@ British ) , because the Giant resembles the Roman god Hercules , who was based on the Greek god Heracles . 
 The third idea is that the Giant is of Celtic origin , because it is stylistically similar to a Celtic god on a skillet handle found at Hod Hill , Dorset , and dated to around AD 10 to AD 51 . 
 Various studies on the Cerne Abbas Giant have been undertaken . In 1896 the Somersetshire Archaeological and Natural History Society noted the consensus of members that the giant " is of very great antiquity " . Modern scholarship largely rejects this , and argues for an origin shortly before the 18th century . Modern histories of the Cerne Giant have been published by Bettey 1981 , Legg 1990 , and Darvill et al . 1999 . 
 Early antiquarians associated the figure with a Saxon god whose name contained some variant of the element <unk> . This god is attested in several medieval and early modern texts , and was associated with the Cerne Abbas Giant by an editor of a 1789 edition of William Camden 's Britannia and by William Stukeley , who indicated that locals referred to the giant as " <unk> " . A Saxon origin is unlikely , but Stukeley was also the first to hypothesize that the figure was Hercules , a suggestion that has found more support . Some 19th @-@ century sources describe the giant as having " between his legs , three rude letters , scarcely legible , and over them in modern figures , 748 " , ( rude meaning " roughly cut " ) and being the representation of <unk> , the son of Cuthred , King of Wessex . 
 Proponents of a 17th @-@ century origin suggest that the giant was carved during the English Civil War by servants of the Lord of the Manor , Denzil Holles , and was intended as a parody of Oliver Cromwell . Cromwell was sometimes mockingly referred to as " England 's Hercules " by his enemies . The Hercules connection is strengthened by the 1996 discovery of the cloak , as Hercules was often depicted with a cloak made from the Nemean Lion 's skin . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 In 1920 , the giant and the 4 @,@ 000 square metres ( 0 @.@ 99 acres ) site where he stands was donated to the National Trust by its then land @-@ owners , Alexander and George Pitt @-@ Rivers , and it is now listed as a Scheduled Monument . During World War II the giant was camouflaged with brushwood by the Home Guard in order to prevent use as a landmark for enemy aircraft . 
 According to the National Trust , the grass is trimmed regularly and the giant is fully re @-@ chalked every 25 years . Traditionally , the National Trust has relied on sheep from surrounding farms to graze the site . However , in 2008 a lack of sheep , coupled with a wet spring causing extra plant growth , forced a re @-@ chalking of the giant , with 17 tonnes of new chalk being poured in and tamped down by hand . In 2006 , the National Trust carried out the first wildlife survey of the Cerne Abbas Giant , identifying wild flowers including the green @-@ winged orchid , clustered <unk> and autumn gentian , which are uncommon in England . 
 In 1921 Walter Long of Gillingham , Dorset objected to the giant 's nudity and conducted a campaign to either convert it to a simple nude , or to cover its supposed obscenity with a leaf . Long 's protest gained some support , including that of two bishops , and eventually reached the Home Office . The Home Office considered the protest to be in humour , though the chief constable responded to say the office could not act against a protected scheduled monument . 
 = = = Archaeology = = = 
 A 1617 land survey of Cerne Abbas makes no mention of the Giant , suggesting that it may not have been there at the time or perhaps overgrown . The first published survey appeared in the September 1763 issue of Royal Magazine , reprinted in the October 1763 issue of St James Chronicle , and also in the August 1764 edition of Gentleman 's Magazine together with the first drawing that included measurements . 
 Egyptologist and archaeology pioneer Sir Flinders Petrie surveyed the Giant , probably during the First World War , and published his results in a Royal Anthropological Institute paper in 1926 . Petrie says that he made 220 measurements , and records slight grooves across the neck , and from the shoulders down to the armpits . He also notes a row of pits suggesting the place of the spine . He concludes that the Giant is very different from the Long Man of Wilmington , and that minor grooves may have been added from having been repeatedly cleaned . 
 In 1764 , William Stukeley was one of the first people to suggest that the Giant resembles Hercules ( Heracles ) . In 1938 , British archaeologist Stuart Piggott agreed , and like Hercules , should also be carrying a lion @-@ skin . In 1979 , a resistivity survey was carried out , and together with drill samples , confirmed the presence of the lion @-@ skin . Another resistivity survey in 1995 also found evidence of a cloak and changes to the length of the phallus , but did not find evidence ( as rumoured ) of a severed head , horns , or symbols between the feet . 
 = = = = Earthworks = = = = 
 North @-@ east of the head of the Giant is an escarpment called Trendle Hill , on which are some earthworks now called The Trendle or Frying Pan . It is a scheduled monument in its own right . Antiquarian John Hutchins wrote in 1872 that " These remains are of very interesting character , and of considerable extent . They consist of circular and other earthworks , lines of defensive ramparts , an avenue , shallow excavations , and other indications of a British settlement . " 
 Unlike the Giant , the earthworks belong to Lord Digby , rather than the National Trust . Its purpose is unknown , though it is thought to be the site of maypole dancing . It has been considered to be Roman , or perhaps an Iron @-@ Age burial mound containing the tomb of the person represented by the Giant . 
 = = Folklore = = 
 Whatever its origin , the giant has become an important part of the culture and folklore of Dorset . Some folk stories indicate that the image is an outline of the corpse of a real giant . One story says the giant came from Denmark leading an invasion of the coast , and was beheaded by the people of Cerne Abbas while he slept on the hillside . 
 Other folklore , first recorded in the Victorian era , associates the figure with fertility . In the past locals would erect a maypole on the earthwork , around which childless couples would dance to promote fertility . According to folk belief , a woman who sleeps on the figure will be blessed with fecundity , and infertility may be cured through sexual intercourse on top of the figure , especially the phallus . 
 In 1808 , Dorset poet William Holloway published his poem " The Giant of Trendle Hill " , in which the Giant is killed by the locals by piercing its heart . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In modern times the giant has been used for several publicity stunts and as an advertisement . For example , Ann Bryn @-@ Evans of the Pagan Federation recalls that the Giant has been used to promote " ... condoms , jeans and bicycles . " 
 In 1998 , pranksters made a pair of jeans out of plastic mesh with a 21 @-@ metre ( 69 ft ) inside leg , and fitted them to the giant to publicise American Jeans manufacturer Big Smith . In 2002 , the <unk> advertising agency on behalf of " ... the Family Planning Association ( FPA ) as part of its mission to promote condom @-@ wearing [ .. ] donned balaclavas and spent Sunday night rolling the enormous latex sheet down the Giant 's member . " 
 As a publicity stunt for the opening of The Simpsons Movie on 16 July 2007 , a giant Homer Simpson brandishing a doughnut was outlined in water @-@ based biodegradable paint to the left of the Cerne Abbas giant . This act displeased local neopagans , who pledged to perform rain magic to wash the figure away . 
 An August 2007 report in the Dorset Echo said that a man claiming to be the " Purple Phantom " had painted the Giant 's penis purple . It was reported that the man was from Fathers 4 Justice but the group said that they did not know who it was . 
 The Cerne Abbas Giant has appeared in several films and TV programmes , including the title sequence of the 1986 British historical drama film Comrades , a 1996 episode of the Erotic Tales series " The Insatiable Mrs Kirsch " , directed by Ken Russell ( featuring a replica of the Giant ) , in 1997 , the series 6 finale " Sofa " of the comedy series Men Behaving Badly , and the 2000 film Maybe Baby directed by Ben Elton . 
 In 2012 , pupils and members of the local community recreated the Olympic torch on the Giant , to mark the passing of the official torch in the run @-@ up to the 2012 London Olympics . 
 In November 2013 , the National Trust supported Movember , which raises awareness of prostate and testicular cancer . It authorised the temporary placement of a huge grass moustache on the giant . The moustache was 12 metres ( 39 ft ) wide and 3 metres ( 10 ft ) deep according to the designer but both the National Trust and the BBC reported it as being 11 by 27 metres ( 36 by 89 ft ) . 
 = = = Representations = = = 
 In 1980 , Devon artist Kenneth Evans @-@ Loud planned to produce a companion 70 @-@ metre ( 230 ft ) female figure on the opposite hill , featuring Marilyn Monroe in her iconic pose from the film The Seven Year Itch where her dress is blown by a subway grating . 
 In 1989 , Turner Prize winning artist Grayson Perry designed a set of motorbike leathers inspired by the Cerne Abbas Giant . In 1994 , girls from Roedean School painted an 24 @-@ metre ( 79 ft ) replica of the Giant on their playing field , the day before sports day . In 1999 , a plaque was discovered near the nose of the <unk> Man , a modern <unk> discovered a year earlier , " claiming that a clue to its origins are to be found buried in a sealed container near the Cerne Giant " . 
 In 2003 , pranksters created their own 23 @-@ metre ( 75 ft ) version of the Giant on a hill in English Bicknor , but " wearing <unk> , an ear of corn hanging from its mouth and a tankard of ale in its hand " . In 2005 , the makers of Lynx deodorant created a 9 @.@ 300 square metres ( 100 @.@ 10 sq ft ) advert on a field near Gatwick , featuring a copy of the Giant wearing underpants , frolicking with two scantily @-@ clad women . In 2006 , artist Peter John Hardwick produced a painting " The Two Dancers with the Cerne Abbas Giant , with Apologies to Picasso " that is on display at Poole Hospital NHS Foundation Trust . In 2009 , the Giant was given a red nose , to publicize the BBC 's Comic Relief charity event . In 2011 , English animators The Brothers McLeod produced a 15 @-@ second cartoon giving their take on what the Giant does when no one is watching . 
 In 2015 , the giant was used as a character in an online comic book published by Eco Comics ; the giant 's character appeared in various adventures accompanying a character based on St George , though his erect penis was removed from the artwork as many " outlets , particularly in the US , refuse any form of nudity in comic books " . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Rodney <unk> , with a foreword by Rodney Legg , The Cerne Giant , published by Wincanton <unk> , 1996 , ISBN <unk> . 
 Michael A. , Hodges MA . , <unk> , the Cerne Giant , and his links with Christchurch , Christchurch , <unk> , <unk> . 
 Dr. T. William Wake Smart , Ancient Dorset , 1872 , " The Cerne Giant , " p . 319 – 327 . 
 Darvill , T , Barker , K , Bender , B , and Hutton , R. , The Cerne Giant : An Antiquity on Trial , 1999 , . Oxbow . ISBN 1 @-@ 900188 @-@ 94 @-@ 5 , 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 900188 @-@ 94 @-@ 4 , [ 3 ] 
 Legg , R , 1990 , Cerne ; Giant and Village Guide , Dorset Publishing Company , 2nd edition , ISBN <unk> , 978 @-@ <unk> . [ 4 ] 
 Knight , Peter , The Cerne Giant – Landscape , Gods and the Stargate , 2013 , Stone Seeker Publishing . 
 = = = Journal articles = = = 
 Dr Wake Smart , " The Cerne Giant " , Journal of the British Archaeological Association , Volume : 28 , 1872 . 
 Hy . Colley March M.D. <unk> , " The Giant and the Maypole of Cerne " , Proceedings , Dorset Natural History and Archaeological Society , <unk> , 1901 . 
 W. M. F. Petrie , The Hill Figures of England , " III . The Giant of Cerne " , Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland , Occasional Paper No. 7 , 1926 
 O. G. S. Crawford , " The Giant of Cerne and other Hill @-@ figures " , Antiquity , <unk> No.11 , September 1929 , Pages 277 – 282 
 Stuart Piggott , " Notes and News : The name of the giant of Cerne " , Antiquity <unk> , <unk> , June 1932 , pages 214 – 216 . 
 Stuart Piggott , " The Hercules Myth — beginnings and ends " , Antiquity <unk> <unk> , September 1938 , Page : 323 – 331 
 " Editorial : regarding the Home Office file , Obscene Publications : the Cerne Abbas Giant ( PRO HO 45 / <unk> ) " , Antiquity , <unk> <unk> , June 1976 , pages 93 – 94 . 
 Leslie <unk> , " The <unk> Abbas Giant 1764 – 1980 " , Antiquity , <unk> <unk> , March 1980 , pp. 29 – 33 . 
 J. H. Bettey , " The Cerne Abbas giant : the documentary evidence " , Antiquity , <unk> , <unk> , July 1981 , pages 118 – 121 . 
 J. H. Bettey , " Notes and News : The Cerne Giant : another document ? " , Antiquity , <unk> <unk> , March 1982 , pages 51 – 52 
 Temple Willcox , " Hard times for the Cerne Giant : 20th @-@ century attitudes to an ancient monument " ( abstract ) , Antiquity , <unk> <unk> , September 1988 , pages 524 – 526 
 Chris Gerrard , " Cerne Giant " , British Archaeology , Issue no 55 , October 2000 . A review of the book : The Cerne Giant : an Antiquity on Trial by Timothy Darvill , Katherine Barker , Barbara Bender and Ronald Hutton ( eds ) , Oxbow , ISBN 1 @-@ 900188 @-@ 94 @-@ 5 . 
 = = = National Monument Records = = = 
 1979 Resistivity survey by A J Clark , A D H Bartlett and A E U David , which " found evidence for the ' lion skin ' feature over the giant 's left arm " 
 1988 – 1989 Resistivity surveys , testing for the existence of possible additional features , 1988 , 1989 , 1994 
 1995 Resistivity survey finding evidence of a cloak , penis length change , and naval , but , not for a severed head , horns , nor lettering / symbols between the feet 
 " Cerne Giant " , National Monument Records , No . ST 60 SE 39 ( on <unk> ) 
 = Tropical Storm Zeke ( 1992 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Zeke was the final named storm of the record @-@ breaking 1992 Pacific hurricane season . Forming out of a tropical wave on October 25 , Zeke began as a disorganized depression . Tracking west @-@ northwestward , the system gradually developed organized convection and intensified into a tropical storm . However , it soon entered a high wind shear environment , causing Zeke to weaken to a tropical depression . The following day , the storm re @-@ intensified despite unfavorable conditions and later attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on October 29 . Rapid weakening followed shortly thereafter as convection dissipated and the center became exposed . During the afternoon of October 30 , Zeke degenerated into a remnant low pressure system and dissipated several days later several hundred miles south of Baja California Sur . 
 On October 29 , tropical storm watches and warnings were issued for portions of the Mexican coastline ; however , these were canceled the following day due to the storm 's rapid weakening . Although the storm did not move over land , its outer bands brought locally heavy rain and gusty winds to Sinaloa and Jalisco . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Zeke originated from a tropical wave that was first identified off the west coast of Africa on October 6 , 1992 . Initially , well @-@ organized convection was associated with the system as it tracked westward ; however , once over the Caribbean Sea , shower and thunderstorm activity diminished . Between October 21 and 23 , the poorly defined wave moved across Central America and entered the Pacific Ocean . Over the following few days , convection gradually increased and the system became better organized . On October 25 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to classify it as Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Seven @-@ E , at which time the storm was situated roughly 805 mi ( 1 @,@ 295 km ) south of the southern tip of Baja California Sur , Mexico . Upon being classified , the depression was relatively disorganized , but deep convection had maintained itself near the center of circulation . 
 Throughout October 25 , banding features developed and the upper @-@ level outflow became better established . In response to a ridge to the east , the depression tracked in a general west @-@ northwest direction . Intensification was likely as the system was forecast to remain within an environment characterized by low wind shear and warm sea surface temperatures . Later that day , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Zeke , the record @-@ breaking twenty @-@ fourth named storm of the year . Within several hours of being upgraded , Zeke began to degrade for unknown reasons , with convection lessening around the center . Increasing westerly wind shear , associated with a mid to upper @-@ level trough approaching the west coast of the United States , later caused the system to weaken further ; however , Zeke managed to maintain tropical storm intensity until the morning of October 27 . 
 As Zeke continued to be hampered by strong shear , it gradually began to turn towards the north as the trough that caused it to weaken moved further east . Late on October 27 , convection redeveloped over the center of circulation , allowing the storm to re @-@ attain tropical storm intensity . The strengthening followed the passage of a shortwave trough ; however , shear over the system remained strong . Despite the unfavorable conditions , Zeke maintained its intensity , through intermittent bursts of convection , and began to turn towards the northeast . Late on October 29 , a large burst of deep convection over the center of the storm allowed for intensification . Around this time , the storm attained its peak intensity with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) with a barometric pressure of 1000 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) . 
 Not long after attaining its peak intensity , Zeke began to weaken once more due to increasing westerly wind shear . By the early morning of October 30 , the center of circulation became devoid of thunderstorm activity and the system had turned eastward . Later that day , Zeke weakened to a tropical depression before degenerating into a remnant low pressure system . The NHC continued to monitor the low @-@ level swirl of clouds associated with Zeke for several more days as the system meandered several hundred miles south of Baja California Sur . 
 = = Preparations , impact and records = = 
 On October 29 , the forecast track for Zeke produced by the National Hurricane Center indicated that the storm would skirt Baja California before striking the western coast of Mexico as a tropical depression . In response to this , the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning for areas between Cabo San Lázaro and Los Burros . Additionally , a tropical storm watch was raised for areas along mainland Mexico between Los Mochis , Sinaloa and Puerto Vallarta . Roughly 24 hours after these advisories were issued , they were canceled as Zeke rapidly dissipated over open waters . Although the center of the storm never moved over land , the system 's outer bands brought locally heavy rain and gusty winds to parts of Sinaloa and Jalisco . When the National Hurricane Center upgraded Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Seven @-@ E to Tropical Storm Zeke on October 25 , it marked the first time that a storm name beginning with the letter " Z " was used on record in the basin . Zeke also continued to further the record of named storms in a single season in the eastern Pacific , being the 24th tropical storm . 
 = Pope Paul III and His Grandsons = 
 Pope Paul III and His Grandsons ( Italian : Paolo III e i <unk> Alessandro e Ottavio Farnese ) is a painting in oil on canvas by Titian , housed in the Museo di Capodimonte , Naples . It was commissioned by the Farnese family and painted during Titian 's visit to Rome between autumn 1545 and June 1546 . It depicts the thorny relationship between Pope Paul III , born Alessandro Farnese , and two of his grandsons , Ottavio and Alessandro . Ottavio is shown in the act of kneeling , to his left ; Alessandro , wearing a cardinal 's dress , stands behind him to his right . The painting explores the effects of ageing and the manoeuvring behind succession ; Paul was at the time in his late seventies and operating within an uncertain political climate as Charles V , Holy Roman Emperor , came into ascendancy . 
 Paul was not a religious man ; he viewed the papacy as a means to consolidate his family 's position . He appointed Alessandro as cardinal against accusations of nepotism , fathered a number of illegitimate children , and spent large sums of church money collecting art and antiquities . Around 1545 Charles took the political and military advantage , weakening Paul 's hold on the papacy . Aware of the changing tides of influence , Titian abandoned the commission before completion , and for the next 100 years the painting languished unframed in a Farnese cellar . 
 Pope Paul III and His Grandsons ranks as one of Titian 's finest and most penetrating works . Although unfinished and less technically accomplished than his Portrait of Pope Paul III of a few years earlier , it is renowned for its rich colouring ; the deep reds of the tablecloth and the almost spectral whites of Paul 's gown . The panel contains subtle indications of the contradictions in the character of the Pope , and captures the complex psychological dynamic between the three men . 
 = = Background = = 
 Alessandro Farnese , as Paul III , was the last of the popes appointed by the ruling Medici family of Florence . He was socially ambitious , a careerist and not particularly pious . He kept a concubine , fathered four children out of wedlock and viewed the throne as an opportunity to fill his coffers while he placed his relatives in high positions . A talented and cunning political operator , Paul was precisely the sort of man the Florentines needed to assist them in their defence against French and Spanish threats . 
 He became pope in 1534 when he was 66 years old , and immediately appointed members of his family to key positions . He anointed his eldest grandson Alessandro , the eldest child of his illegitimate son Pier Luigi , cardinal at the age of 14 , marking a break with the Farnese tradition of marrying off the first @-@ born to carry on the family name . This move was considered necessary because the next oldest grandson , Ottavio , was then just 10 years old ; such a young cardinal would have been politically unacceptable . Paul 's advanced years meant that the family could ill afford to wait until the younger brother was of age . Thus Alessandro became a cardinal deacon ; this appointment did not necessitate taking major orders , but it compelled him to celibacy and to forgo the rights of primogeniture , which instead went to Ottavio . Alessandro was to bitterly regret the obligations . Paul appointed Ottavio as Duke of Camerino in 1538 , and in the same year married him to Charles V 's daughter , Margaret , later Margaret of Parma . Both of Paul 's grandsons ' advancements were widely criticised as evidence of nepotism . 
 Ottavio 's marriage troubled Alessandro ; he struggled with the burden of chastity and entertained fantasies of marrying a princess . He resented his younger brother 's arrangement ; during the wedding ceremony he " became more deathly pale than death itself , and , so they say , is unable to bear this thing , that he , the first @-@ born , should see himself deprived of such splendid status and of the daughter of an Emperor . " In 1546 Paul gave Pier Luigi the duchies of Parma and Piacenza as papal fiefs , a highly political move by the pope : in doing so he gave titles and wealth to Pier and appointed a lord who was subservient and owed a debt of gratitude , guaranteeing that the duchies would remain under papal control . At the same time , Ottavio was posted to the North of Italy to support Charles . By 1546 Ottavio was 22 years old , married to Margaret of Austria and an accomplished and distinguished individual . In 1547 his father was assassinated and Ottavio claimed the dukedom of Parma and Piacenza against the express wishes of both Charles , his father @-@ in @-@ law , and Paul . In doing so , Ottavio acted in opposition to the pope 's desire to maintain the duchies as papal fiefs , and to Charles , whom he believed responsible for the plot to assassinate Pier Luigi . 
 Titian was a personal friend of Charles ; the commissioning of the portrait was most likely intended by Paul as a signal of allegiance to the emperor . Pressure from reforming monarchs in France and Spain , coupled with a general shift of influence in France 's favour , ended the Farnese hold on the papacy soon after Paul 's death . Ottavio excelled as a military commander and was awarded the Golden Fleece by the emperor . While the post had been given as a means to strengthen the family position , it did not come without cost . His success bred resentment amongst his family , as he began to see himself unaccountable to Rome . 
 At the time of the portrait Paul had convinced Alessandro to retain the post , hinting that he would later succeed him as pope – an aspiration that was ultimately frustrated . As Alessandro realised the emptiness of the promise he lost confidence in both his grandfather 's word and political credibility . 
 = = Commission = = 
 The painting was commissioned in 1546 after Titian had made a number of portraits of Paul . He had already depicted Pier Luigi and three of his children – Vittoria , Alessandro and Ranuccio . Ottavio was perhaps again portrayed by him in 1552 , and most likely commissioned the original Naples panel in Titian 's Danaë series , although Lodovico Dolce believed it was Alessandro who had approached Titian . 
 The artist 's reputation was such that he had already been called to Rome a number of times in the early 1540s ; first by Cardinal Pietro Bembo and then by the Farnese family . By the mid @-@ 1540s Titian was the preferred portraitist for the Farnese . Following a number of earlier portraits of Pier Luigi and Paul , they commissioned a set to mark their ascendancy after Paul 's papacy , all of which were – given their political awareness and ambition – clearly intended as public statements on their social elevation . Paul was aware of Titian 's influence in Venice , and after 1538 allowed only Titian to portray him . 
 Titian disliked travelling and refused the offers . When Paul travelled to northern Italy for negotiations with Charles in 1543 he met Titian for the first time and sat for Portrait of Paul III without a Cap . Around this time , Titian 's son <unk> decided to enter the clergy , and the painter sought to use his contacts with the papacy to gain a church and lands for him . Working through his contacts with Cardinal Alessandro , he asked that in return for the Farnese portraits <unk> be granted the abbey of San Pietro in Colle Umberto , in grounds bordering Titian 's own in <unk> . Charles respected Titian and so the painter had influence in negotiating with the Farnese . When he received their offers of a commission and invitation to Rome , he made it clear he would only undertake the patronage in return for the grant of the benefice . This was at first rejected , but on 20 September 1544 Titian seemed assured enough to send a message to Cardinal Alessandro that he would visit to " paint Your Honor 's illustrious household down to the last cat " . Even so , Titian made no move until October of the following year . When he did finally arrive in Rome , he was treated as the most important guest to the city and given an apartment at the Belvedere . In the end the portrait was not completed . Probably once the benefice was granted , he no longer felt there was any reason to remain in Rome and abandoned the composition . 
 = = Description = = 
 The portrait depicts the tensions and manoeuvrings of 16th century court politics . The deep red background and heavy brushstrokes establish an anxious and tense atmosphere , and the uneasy relationship between the Pope and his suitors . The pope is old , ill and tired , and glares at Ottavio in an accusatory manner . His hat or <unk> cloaks his baldness , but there are tell @-@ tale signs of age in his long nose , dark beady eyes , stooped shoulders and long uneven beard . He is noticeably older than in the second Naples portrait of 1543 . This fact is reinforced by the clock placed on the table beside him , which serves both as a memento mori and a reminder that time is running out . Given this , the presence of his grandsons indicates that the commission was prompted by thoughts of succession . 
 Nevertheless , Paul retains elements of a powerful and alert patriarch . The painting is set at a curious angle , so that although Paul is positioned low in the pictorial space , the viewer still looks upwards towards him as if in respect . He is dressed in full pomp , wearing wide fur @-@ lined sleeves ( a typical Venetian device to convey status ) , and his cape is laid across his upper body to suggest physical presence . 
 The work is often compared to Raphael 's Pope Leo X with Cardinals of 1518 – 19 and the 1511 – 12 portrait of Julius II for its colouring and psychological dynamic . Titian follows the older master in some respects , emphasising the pope 's age and showing him in a naturalistic , rather than reverential , setting , but Titian goes further : while Raphael 's portraits show a high @-@ minded and introspective pope , Titian presents his subject glaring outwards , caught in a moment of fearful but ruthless calculation . His piercing glare has been described by art historian Jill Dunkerton as having captured his " small bright eyes , but ... missed his genius " . 
 The canvas is dramatically divided in two by a diagonal line separated by colour and tone . The lower two @-@ thirds are dominated by heavy red and white pigments ; browns and whites are prominent in the upper right @-@ hand section . This division is delineated by a diagonal reaching from the upper edge of the curtain down to Ottavio 's leggings in the right mid @-@ ground . Other echoes of the colours and patterns include the red of Paul 's robes against the velvet of his chair and the overhanging curtain . This dramatic colour and luminosity can be in part attributed to this design , and to the manner in which Titian reverses the usual painterly technique in building tone : he began with a dark background , then layered the lighter hues before the darker passages . The effect has been described as a " tour de force of symphonic <unk> " , and a high point of his blending of red and ochre pigments . Titian uses a variety of brushstrokes . While the pope 's robes are painted with very broad strokes , his cape ( mozzetta ) , ageing face and visible hand were captured in minute detail with thin brushes , with his hairs rendered at the level of individual strands . 
 Ottavio , shown as tall and muscular , is about to kneel to kiss the Pope 's feet , a contemporary manner of greeting a pope : a guest would make three short bows followed by the kissing of the papal feet . Titian indicates this step in the ceremony by showing Paul 's shoe decorated with a cross , poking from underneath his gown . Ottavio 's head is bowed , but his stern facial expression conveys that he is acting as protocol dictates , rather than with genuine diffidence . 
 The grandsons are depicted in very different styles : Alessandro acts in a formal manner and wears clothes of similar colour and tones to Paul . Ottavio , by contrast , wears the browns of the upper right @-@ hand passage , an area of the painting that cuts him physically from the pope . His pose is awkward and difficult to interpret , but he is rendered in a more naturalistic manner than his brother . Alessandro has a distracted , brooding expression . He holds the knob of Paul 's backrest , in an echo of Raphael 's portrait where Clement VII holds the chair of Leo X as an indicator of his ambitions of succession . Thus Alessandro seems better placed politically , standing to Paul 's right in a pose that recalls traditional depictions of Paul the Apostle , and his hand is raised as if in blessing . In the end , Paul was unable to influence his succession after Charles V weakened the Medici hold on the office . 
 The work is unfinished ; a number of details , most noticeably the pope 's right hand , are missing . Other passages are bland and uniform , with some key areas still blocked by the underdrawing . Many of Titian 's characteristic finishing touches are missing ; Paul 's fur @-@ lined sleeves do not contain the polishing white strokes of the 1543 portrait , or his usual final <unk> or glossing . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Although the work is often thought of as an unflattering and cold look at an ageing pope besieged by cunning and opportunistic relatives , the reality is more complex and the artist 's intention more subtle . It is certainly a very unguarded portrait of one of the most powerful men of his day , and in stark contrast to Titian 's two earlier portraits of Paul , both of which were deferential . It is widely accepted as one of the most politically difficult portrait commissions in art history , requiring an understanding of the interplay of relationships with a depth " worthy of Shakespeare " , in the opinion of art historians Rodolfo Pallucchini and Harold Wethey . However , it was one Titian seems to have resolved ; while the complexity of the relationships is all on the canvas , it may have been intended as an indicator to Charles that Paul retained his position as the dominant patriarch – old and frail but still a man of vitality , and in control of his squabbling descendants . 
 Moreover , working under commission from the Farnese family , Titian would not have sought to portray the sitters in an obviously unsympathetic manner . While Paul is shown as old and frail , he is given a broad chest and cunning eyes that indicate his intelligence and guile . Ottavio is presented as cold and impervious , but this was probably a device to show his strength of character and conviction . Alessandro is favoured by his positioning closest to the Pope , yet x @-@ ray analysis reveals he had originally stood to the left of the pope and was moved , probably on request by Alessandro himself , to a position where his hand was resting on the papal throne , indicating his claim on the papacy . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 Titian abandoned the painting before completion and for the next hundred years it was kept unframed and <unk> in a Farnese cellar . Alessandro 's large collection of art and antiques , which included the Titian portraits commissioned by Paul , was eventually inherited by Elisabetta Farnese ( 1692 – 1766 ) . Elisabetta , who married Philip V of Spain in 1714 , passed on the collection to her son Carlos , who became Duke of Parma and later King of Spain . In 1734 , he conquered the kingdoms of Sicily and Naples , and the collection was transferred to Naples . In 1738 Carlos built the Palace of Capodimonte , which includes the Museo di Capodimonte , in part to house the Farnese art collection . The painting remains there today , hanging in the Farnese Gallery section . The Museo di Capodimonte was designated a national museum in 1950 . 
 = This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) = 
 " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1975 studio album Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) . Harrison wrote the song as a sequel to his popular Beatles composition " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , in response to the personal criticism he had received during and after his 1974 North American tour with Ravi Shankar , particularly from Rolling Stone magazine . " This Guitar " was issued as a single in December 1975 – the final release for Apple Records in its original incarnation – but it failed to chart in either the United States or Britain . 
 The song follows in a tradition established by singers such as Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger , of attributing emotions and actions to a musical instrument . The lyrics also serve as an example of a dialogue that was commonplace during the 1970s between songwriters and music critics . Contributing to Harrison 's sense of injustice in " This Guitar " , he and his tour musicians believed that detractors had ignored the successful aspects of the 1974 shows – which blended rock , jazz , funk and Indian classical music – and had focused instead on his failure to pay due respect to the legacy of the Beatles . Rolling Stone 's scathing assessment of Harrison 's tour and accompanying album , Dark Horse , represented an about @-@ face by the publication , previously one of his most vocal supporters , and led to Harrison 's continued resentment towards the magazine over subsequent decades . 
 Harrison recorded " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " in Los Angeles during April and May 1975 , a period marked by his post @-@ tour despondency . The recording features guitar solos played by Harrison and American musician Jesse Ed Davis . The song serves as a rare guitar @-@ oriented selection on the keyboard @-@ heavy Extra Texture album , although David Foster , Gary Wright and Harrison all contributed keyboard parts to the track . " This Guitar " has traditionally received a mixed reception from reviewers , partly due to the inevitable comparisons with " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " . Harrison re @-@ recorded the song in 1992 with former Eurythmic Dave Stewart , who used it to promote his Platinum Weird project in 2006 . This version appears as a bonus track on the 2014 Apple Years 1968 – 75 reissue of Extra Texture . 
 = = Background = = 
 George Harrison 's stated aim for his North American tour with Indian musician Ravi Shankar , which took place from 2 November to 20 December 1974 , was to offer concert @-@ goers " another kind of experience " from the typical mid @-@ 1970s rock show . With its blending of Western rock , funk and jazz genres with Indian classical music , author Robert Rodriguez describes the result as a musical form " [ that ] one day would be called ' world music ' " . Of the critical reception given to the Harrison – Shankar venture , tour @-@ wide , Rodriguez writes of the " genuine highlights that went mostly unreported " , since : " Smaller press outlets without axes to grind tended to review the shows the best , whereas rock establishment coverage , such as Rolling Stone 's , tended to spin the tour as something close to an unmitigated disaster ... " 
 Along with Harrison and band leader Tom Scott , tour musicians Jim Horn , Jim Keltner and Andy Newmark have each challenged the reliability of these negative reports , Horn declaring the Harrison – Shankar tour " one of the best I 've been on " . Concert @-@ goers likewise questioned their accuracy ; according to author Nicholas Schaffner , Beatles fanzine Strawberry Fields Forever had been " deluged with letters protesting the nasty reviews " . 
 Harrison biographer Simon Leng describes this phenomenon as " one of the stranger episodes in rock music " and writes : " While the majority of reviews were positive , in some cases ecstatic , the ' given ' view of the tour comes from the Rolling Stone articles . " Chief among these was a feature by Ben Fong @-@ Torres , titled " Lumbering in the Material World " , covering the opening , West Coast portion of the tour . Feng @-@ Torres condemned Harrison for refusing to pander to critics ' and the public 's nostalgia for the Beatles , and for the perilous state of his singing voice , after Harrison had contracted laryngitis while rushing to complete his new album during the tour rehearsals . In addition to Scott airing his objections to Fong @-@ Torres ' article for focusing excessively on the uneven opening concert at Vancouver 's Pacific Coliseum , Harrison complained that Rolling Stone had deliberately " edited everything positive out " about the shows , which Fong @-@ Torres later told him had been the case . 
 Leng writes that " Testimony " on the Harrison – Shankar tour , and a " savagely personal " attack on Harrison , came with the magazine 's review for his delayed Dark Horse album . Under the heading " Transcendental mediocrity " , Rolling Stone critic Jim Miller wrote of the " disastrous album " appearing " in the wake of his disastrous tour " – completing what Harrison biographer Elliot Huntley describes as the magazine 's " volte @-@ face " on an artist it had traditionally supported . 
 Harrison never completely forgave Rolling Stone for its treatment of the so @-@ called " Dark Horse Tour " . While members of his 1974 tour group , including future wife Olivia Arias , have spoken of Harrison 's defiant attitude towards the negative reviews , Leng suggests that he " reacted to them as personal attacks " . During a holiday in Hawaii with Arias over Christmas that year , Harrison wrote " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " , a song that , he told Musician magazine in 1987 , " came about because the press and critics tried to nail me on the 1974 – 5 tour , [ and ] got really nasty " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song title is a play on that of his 1968 composition " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , released on the Beatles ' White Album and performed by Harrison throughout the 1974 tour . While concert reviewers had focused on his altering of the lyric to " While my guitar gently smiles " and " ... tries to smile " , Harrison told BBC Radio 1 's Paul Gambaccini in September 1975 that it was a track that was consistently well received by audiences during the tour . Harrison described the new composition as " Son of ' Guitar Gently Weeps ' " . 
 Like the Beatles track , " This Guitar " is structured around short , minor @-@ key verses ( in this case , in the key of G minor ) that conclude with the song title , rather than distinct choruses . Author Ian Inglis also notes the " evident similarity " between the melody of the two compositions . As with Harrison 's lyrics for " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , Inglis writes , " This Guitar " follows in a tradition established by Woody Guthrie , Pete Seeger and Bo Diddley , of attributing emotions and actions to a musical instrument . 
 The song lyrics begin , " Found myself out on a limb / But I 'm happier than I 've ever been " , the second line of which echoes Harrison 's statements to Fong @-@ Torres and other interviewers during the tour , that he had never been as happy as he was now – in a band with Scott , Billy Preston and Willie Weeks , and as a servant of the Hindu god Krishna instead of living out the public 's perception of him as " Beatle George " . Referring to the released recording of the song , Inglis opines that , rather than happiness , " the bitterness in his vocal performance tells a different story . " 
 In his brief discussion of " This Guitar " in his autobiography , Harrison introduces the lyrics to verse two with a mention of the need to " struggle " through adversity , in an effort " to become better human beings " : 
 Learned to get up when I fall 
 Can even climb Rolling Stone walls 
 This guitar can 't keep from crying . 
 Noting that Harrison was " bound to fight back against what he saw as unfair , malicious criticism " , Leng views these and other lines in the song as typical of a dialogue then common in rock music , between artists and critics . Leng cites Joni Mitchell , Neil Young and John Lennon as other singer @-@ songwriters who encouraged this dialogue and in some instances suffered for doing so . 
 Theologian Dale Allison writes of Harrison 's " deep hurt " being reflected in the lyrics to " This Guitar " . The two bridge sections document the " unwarranted abuse that comes his way " , Inglis writes , while typifying the theme that " [ Harrison ] is the guitar " : 
 This here guitar can be quite sad 
 Can be high strung , sometimes gets mad 
 Can 't understand or deal with hate 
 Responds much better to love . 
 After Harrison has named Rolling Stone as the main perpetrator of his anguish , Leng suggests that he is unable to sustain the previous " artifice " , whereby the lyrics ' shift in perspective from first @-@ person to third @-@ person represented the apparently " happy " private man versus the " wounded " musician , as " personified by his guitar " . Instead , Harrison " <unk> his detractors " in the song 's subsequent verses . These final verses contain the rhyming couplets " Thought by now you knew the score / You missed the point just like before " and " While you attack , create offence / I 'll put it down to your ignorance " . Lindsay Planer of AllMusic describes the lines as " suggesting that there is more to Harrison 's music than is being taken into consideration by narrow @-@ minded journalists " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Harrison started recording his follow @-@ up to Dark Horse , Extra Texture ( Read All About It ) , in April 1975 , while in Los Angeles working on business associated with his Dark Horse record label . Leng remarks on Harrison 's " almost unseemly " haste in returning to a studio and suggests that his " bitterness and dismay " post @-@ Dark Horse was evident on much of the recording . Early on in the sessions , during his radio interview with WNEW @-@ FM 's Dave Herman , Harrison bemoaned the abandoning of 1960s idealism within the music industry and related this to the critical backlash he had recently received , from people who were " just dropping apart at the seams with hate " , adding : " I 'm talking about Rolling Stone actually – talking about [ founding editor ] Jann Wenner . " 
 Harrison recorded the basic track for " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " at A & M Studios in Hollywood between 21 April and 7 May . Harrison played 12 @-@ string acoustic guitar , with support from David Foster on piano , and sparse , floor tom @-@ heavy drumming from Jim Keltner . Klaus Voormann , Harrison 's regular bass player and a friend since the Beatles ' Hamburg years , chose to not participate in many of the sessions for Extra Texture , later citing the abundance of cocaine and Harrison 's " frame of mind when he was doing this album " . Harrison overdubbed the song 's bass part using an ARP synthesizer , while Gary Wright provided the ARP strings atmospherics , a sound that characterised his hit album The Dream Weaver around this time . 
 When discussing " This Guitar " with Paul Gambaccini in London , in September , Harrison described the song as " a cheap excuse to play some guitar " . Harrison played the slide guitar parts throughout the track , including the closing solo . Leng identifies both " Pete Drake stylings " and the influence of " raga microtones " in Harrison 's performance . The wah @-@ effected guitar solo midway through the song was performed by Jesse Ed Davis , who , having first supported Harrison at the Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971 , had since mirrored the ex @-@ Beatle 's guitar style on John Lennon 's recent hit song " # 9 Dream " . Davis overdubbed his contribution to " This Guitar " on 5 June , the day before the Foster @-@ arranged orchestrated strings were recorded . 
 = = Release = = 
 Extra Texture was issued on Apple Records in September 1975 , with " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " sequenced as the third track , in between " The Answer 's at the End " and Harrison 's Smokey Robinson tribute " Ooh Baby ( You Know That I Love You ) " . Aside from the well @-@ received lead single , " You " , the album offered little in the way of " hook @-@ laden potential hit [ s ] " , author Bruce Spizer writes . On 8 December , Apple released " This Guitar " as the follow @-@ up single in America , with Apple catalogue number 1885 . The single version of the song was edited down to a running time of 3 : 49 , by fading out early during Harrison 's closing solo . Underlining the paucity of radio @-@ friendly selections on Extra Texture , the B @-@ side was " Māya Love " , taken from the Dark Horse album . The single 's UK release ( as Apple R <unk> ) was delayed until 6 February 1976 . 
 In America and Britain , " This Guitar " was available only in a plain sleeve . The German picture sleeve , featuring black text on a white background , contained a large black @-@ on @-@ red Om symbol , reflecting an aspect of Roy Kohara 's design for Extra Texture , where the symbol appeared in blue on a vivid orange background . The Japanese sleeve incorporated Kohara 's colour scheme from the parent album , surrounding an image of Harrison on stage during the 1974 tour . The picture was taken by tour photographer Henry Grossman , who worked extensively with the Beatles in the 1960s . Harrison did no promotion for the single , but his guest appearance on friend Eric Idle 's Rutland Weekend Television 1975 Christmas special , singing the purpose @-@ written " The Pirate Song " , heralded a return to form for him in 1976 . 
 " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " failed to place on either the US Billboard Hot 100 or the UK 's official singles chart , then just a top 50 . " This Guitar " ' s failure to chart in America was a surprise , since all of Harrison 's previous singles had made the top 40 there . Robert Rodriguez attributes its lack of success to the fact that Apple was " [ r ] <unk> on fumes " by this point and the company 's promotion for the single was therefore nonexistent . By the time the single appeared in Britain , close to five months after the song 's initial release , Harrison 's involvement with Apple was officially over , following his signing with A & M @-@ distributed Dark Horse Records in January 1976 . 
 Despite its commercial failure , " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " is notable as the final release on the original Apple record label . While observing that the song became the first single by a former Beatle not to place on any of the three main US charts , Spizer adds : " It was a sad end and [ a ] far cry from the success of Apple 's first release , ' Hey Jude ' . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his discussion of Extra Texture in The Beatles Forever ( 1977 ) , Nicholas Schaffner wrote of Harrison 's " worldly critics " responding " like bulls to a red flag " to " This Guitar " and other " treatises on how reviewers always ' miss the point ' " . Aside from their objections to the song 's subject matter , Robert Rodriguez observes , " Critics by nature tended to regard the Beatles ' catalog as sacrosanct " and therefore " dissed [ Harrison ] for producing a sequel to ' While My Guitar Gently Weeps ' " . The consensus of critical opinion was that " This Guitar " paled beside the Beatle original , with NME writers Roy Carr and Tony Tyler adding : " The lack of a tune doesn 't help . " Dave Marsh of Rolling Stone dismissed much of the album 's first side as " padded subterfuge " while opining that " there just isn 't compensation here for the failed promise of ' This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) ' " . 
 More recently , AllMusic 's Richard Ginell views the song as an " attractive " sequel to " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " and includes it among Harrison 's best solo compositions . Elliot Huntley has written of reviewers ' derision of the track as a " lame " follow @-@ up : " Harrison made a fatal mistake in making it sound like a sequel . ' This Guitar ( Can 't Keep From Crying ) ' is a good song in its own right , with excellent lead guitar work from the master ... " Author Andrew Grant Jackson features the track in his book Still the Greatest : The Essential Solo Beatles Songs , and admires " the group 's synergy " on the recording , as well as Forster 's " fine string arrangement " . Jackson adds : " Probably no one bitched more about their critics than the solo Beatles until Public Enemy and Eminem came along … [ ' This Guitar ' ] could have been one of the most depressing ex @-@ Beatles tunes ever , but its strange groove compels repeated listening . " 
 Writing in Mojo magazine , John Harris describes " This Guitar " as " a serviceable sequel … in which GH 1 ) does a neat Dylan impression , and 2 ) plays yet another lovely slide solo " . Reviewing the 2014 Apple Years reissues of Harrison 's catalogue , New Zealand Herald journalist Graham Reid considers the track to be " a much better song than it seemed at the time " , while Oregano Rathbone of Record Collector cites it as an example of how each of Harrison 's Apple albums after the acclaimed All Things Must Pass " contains shivery moments of release " . Writing for the website Vintage Rock , Shawn Perry views the track as one of its composer 's " most overshadowed songs " and a highlight of " a creative and introspective album that 's aged well " . 
 Among Harrison biographers , Alan Clayson sees " This Guitar " as the " soundest choice " for a second single off an album that represents Harrison 's " lowest ebb " . Simon Leng describes it as a " harrowing song " , with a " passionate and powerful " Harrison vocal , and draws parallels between " This Guitar " and Neil Young 's similarly anti @-@ journalistic " Ambulance Blues " . Ian Inglis writes of the " gulf " separating Harrison 's 1968 composition from the 1975 song : " While the first was a poignant and satisfying commentary that drew attention to his newfound maturity as a songwriter , this is a petulant and rather arrogant statement in which he appears to want to put himself above criticism ... Both words and music depict a sour and troubled performer , whose resentment is all too clear . " Dale Allison describes " This Guitar " as a " beautiful song " with " ardent lyrics " , and groups it with Harrison compositions such as " Isn 't It a Pity " , " The Light That Has Lighted the World " , " Blow Away " and " Sat Singing " – all songs that " remain close to the hearts of those familiar with them " . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 Harrison 's experiences as a headline performer in 1974 led to him not touring again for seventeen years , when he undertook a short tour of Japan with Eric Clapton 's band in December 1991 . In November that year , during rehearsals at Bray Studios in Berkshire , " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " was one of 35 songs that Harrison considered for the concert setlist , but he did not perform it at any of the shows . 
 Former Eurythmic Dave Stewart recalls recording a version of " This Guitar " with Harrison in London . The recording was made in 1992 , ten years after which Ringo Starr , Dhani Harrison and Kara DioGuardi overdubbed contributions , on drums , acoustic guitar and backing vocals , respectively . The song was then published over the internet to promote Stewart 's Platinum Weird project , in March 2006 – over four years after Harrison 's death from cancer at the age of 58 . Although it did not appear on Platinum Weird 's album , Make Believe , this version of " This Guitar " was included as a bonus track on the 2014 reissue of Extra Texture . Writing for Blogcritics , Seattle @-@ based critic Chaz Lipp views it as a " tighter rock @-@ oriented remake " , while Graham Reid describes the bonus track as " a fascinating undated update " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following musicians played on the original version of " This Guitar ( Can 't Keep from Crying ) " : 
 George Harrison – vocals , 12 @-@ string acoustic guitar , ARP bass , slide guitars 
 Jesse Ed Davis – electric guitar 
 David Foster – piano , string arrangement 
 Gary Wright – ARP strings 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 = McBride & the Ride = 
 McBride & the Ride was an American country music band initially composed of Terry McBride ( lead vocals , bass guitar ) , Ray Herndon ( background vocals , guitar , Dobro ) , and Billy Thomas ( background vocals , drums , percussion ) . The group was founded in 1989 through the assistance of record producer Tony Brown . McBride & the Ride 's first three albums — Burnin ' Up the Road , the gold @-@ certified Sacred Ground , and Hurry Sundown , released in 1991 , 1992 , and 1993 , respectively — were all issued on MCA Nashville . These albums also produced several hits on the Billboard country charts , including the Top 5 hits " Sacred Ground " ( their highest @-@ peaking , at number 2 ) , " Going Out of My Mind " , " Just One Night " , and " Love on the Loose , Heart on the Run " . 
 In 1994 , the label removed Herndon and Thomas from the group , which was renamed Terry McBride & the Ride . McBride remained lead singer , while the other members were replaced with Keith Edwards ( drums ) , Kenny Vaughan ( electric guitar ) , Gary Morse ( steel guitar ) , Jeff Roach ( keyboards ) , and Randy Frazier ( bass guitar ) , who had formerly been a member of the band Palomino Road . Roach and Vaughan were respectively replaced by Rick Gerken and Bob Britt shortly before their fourth album ( 1994 's Terry McBride & the Ride ) , after which McBride & the Ride disbanded . During the hiatus , MCA issued a compilation called Country 's Best , while McBride and Herndon wrote singles for other artists . McBride , Thomas , and Herndon reunited as McBride & the Ride in 2000 , releasing Amarillo Sky on Dualtone Records in 2002 before splitting up again . McBride then joined the backing band for the duo Brooks & Dunn , and co @-@ wrote several of the duo 's singles , while Herndon self @-@ released a solo album . 
 = = History = = 
 McBride & the Ride was created in 1989 when Tony Brown , then the executive vice president of MCA Records , decided to establish a new country music band in order to compete with Alabama , who he thought was falling out of favor with country radio . At the time , guitarist Ray Herndon ( born July 14 , 1960 ) was serving as a backing musician for Lyle Lovett , then a recording artist for MCA . Brown suggested that Herndon join lead vocalist Terry McBride ( born September 16 , 1958 ) , whom Herndon did not yet know , in the new band that Brown had planned . McBride , a musician since childhood , had worked as a backing musician for his father , Dale McBride , and later for Delbert McClinton and Rosie Flores . At the Fan Fair in Nashville , Tennessee , Brown introduced McBride and Herndon to drummer Billy Thomas ( born October 24 , 1953 ) , who had previously played for Emmylou Harris and Mac Davis , and the band 's lineup was in place . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 McBride & the Ride performed its first concert in Detroit , Michigan . In 1990 , the band released its first single , " Felicia , " which peaked at number 74 on the RPM country charts in Canada in 1990 but did not enter the U.S. country charts . Its followup , " Every Step of the Way " , failed to chart in both countries . The band was almost dropped from MCA 's roster due to poor chart performance , until the release of " Can I Count on You " , which peaked at number 15 on the Billboard country charts and was made into a music video . This song 's success led to the release of McBride & the Ride 's 1991 debut album Burnin ' Up the Road , on which McBride co @-@ wrote all but one of the songs . The last single from this album , " Same Old Star , " peaked at number 28 . After the album 's release , the band began touring the United States with The Judds and Highway 101 . Thomas also played drums for The <unk> , a country vocal group featuring former Bread member Jimmy Griffin , on its 1991 debut album Blue Frontier , while Thomas and Herndon sang background vocals on then @-@ labelmate Marty Stuart 's 1991 album Tempted . 
 Sacred Ground , the band 's second album , came out in 1992 . This album was McBride & the Ride 's most successful , with all three of its singles reaching Top 5 on the country charts : " Sacred Ground " at number 2 , followed by " Going Out of My Mind " ( which McBride co @-@ wrote with Kostas ) and " Just One Night , " both at number 5 . " Sacred Ground " was co @-@ written by Kix Brooks , who had previously released the song in 1989 from his self @-@ titled debut album for Capitol Records before joining Ronnie Dunn to form Brooks & Dunn in 1991 . In 1992 , McBride & the Ride received a Best New Vocal Group or Duo nomination from the Country Music Association and Vocal Group of the Year nomination from the Academy of Country Music . More than four years after its release , Sacred Ground was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipping 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 McBride & the Ride 's third album , Hurry Sundown , was released in 1993 . It produced the band 's fourth and final Top 5 hit in the number 3 " Love on the Loose , Heart on the Run " ( which Kostas also co @-@ wrote ) , as well as a Top 20 in its title track , the only other single release . " Hangin ' In and Hangin ' On " , the B @-@ side to " Love on the Loose , Heart on the Run " , was later released by David Ball as a single from his 1996 album Starlite Lounge . In 1994 , the band charted its last Top 40 hit , " No More Cryin ' " , which McBride and Josh Leo co @-@ wrote for the soundtrack to the film 8 Seconds . The same album featured John Anderson 's rendition of the title track to Burnin ' Up the Road . Also that same year , McBride & the Ride recorded a cover version of Southern rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd 's " Saturday Night Special " on the MCA compilation album Skynyrd <unk> , which featured country artists ' renditions of <unk> Skynyrd songs . 
 = = = Change to Terry McBride & the Ride and first disbanding = = = 
 By March 1994 , Herndon and Thomas left the group , as the label had decided to shift the band 's focus to McBride , and Herndon did not want to be " push [ ed ] to the background . " According to Herndon , the members " parted as friends . " A new bass guitarist , Randy Frazier , was brought in , also as part of the label 's decision to focus more on McBride . Frazier had previously been a member of Palomino Road , which recorded one album for Liberty Records in 1992 . Completing the new lineup were Keith Edwards ( drums ) , Kenny Vaughan ( lead guitar ) , Gary Morse ( steel guitar ) , and Jeff Roach ( keyboards ) , who had previously played in McBride & the Ride 's road band . McBride then bought the naming rights to the band and renamed it Terry McBride & the Ride . One album ( also titled Terry McBride & the Ride ) and three singles were released under the new name , with Josh Leo serving as producer . By the time of the album 's release , Rick Gerken had replaced Roach , and Bob Britt had replaced Vaughan . Additionally , only McBride and Morse performed on it , with the rest of the instruments performed by session musicians and Roach . The album 's singles , " Been There " , " High Hopes and Empty Pockets " , and " Somebody Will " , all failed to reach Top 40 , and the band broke up in 1995 . MCA released a compilation package entitled Country 's Best in 1996 , which included their first ten singles , from " Felicia " to " No More Cryin ' " . River Road later released a version of " Somebody Will " from their 1997 self @-@ titled debut album . 
 Herndon and McBride both worked as songwriters during McBride & the Ride 's hiatus . Herndon co @-@ wrote Kenny Chesney 's 1996 single " Me and You " with Skip Ewing , while McBride co @-@ wrote four singles for Brooks & Dunn : the Top Five hits " I Am That Man " , " He 's Got You " and " I Can 't Get Over You " , as well as the Number One " If You See Him / If You See Her " , which featured guest vocals from Reba McEntire . Thomas , meanwhile , worked as a backing musician for Vince Gill , and Vaughan went on to join Trent <unk> & the New Row Mob in 2000 . 
 = = = Reunion and second disbanding = = = 
 In September 2000 , Herndon reunited with McBride and Thomas after meeting them at a party at the <unk> @-@ J Restaurant & Bar in Scottsdale , Arizona , to celebrate the club 's 25th anniversary . After they performed " No More Cryin ' " there , Herndon suggested that they officially reunite as McBride & the Ride , saying " This thing in my gut was telling me that this was the right time for this . " The trio recorded demo tapes and began searching for a record deal , signing to the independent Dualtone Records in 2002 . Working with pianist and record producer Matt Rollings , McBride & the Ride recorded its only album for Dualtone , titled Amarillo Sky , and released it in September of that year . Unlike previous albums , the band wrote most of the songs and played most of the instruments itself because , according to Thomas , " Terry thought this would be even more of a band @-@ like situation if we wrote together more . It would bring us even tighter as a unit . " 
 Lead @-@ off single " Anything That Touches You " reached number 50 on the country charts in 2002 , representing the band 's final chart entry . Following it were the non @-@ charting singles " Squeeze Box " ( a cover of a song made famous by The Who ) and " Amarillo Sky . " The latter was co @-@ written by Big Kenny and John Rich ( who would later form the duo Big & Rich ) , and was later recorded by Jason Aldean on his 2005 self @-@ titled debut album . Aldean 's version was released in late 2006 and peaked at number 4 on the country charts in early 2007 . Also included on Amarillo Sky was the track " Hasta <unk> " , co @-@ written by McBride and previously found on David Ball 's 1999 album Play . 
 McBride & the Ride 's members disbanded a second time after the release of Amarillo Sky . After this disbanding , McBride became the bass guitarist in Brooks & Dunn 's road band . He continued to co @-@ write songs for them , including the Number One hit " Play Something Country " from 2005 , as well as " Proud of the House We Built " , " Cowgirls Don 't Cry " , and several album cuts . McBride also co @-@ wrote Josh <unk> 's 2005 single " Stay with Me ( Brass Bed ) " with Jedd Hughes and Brett James . Herndon self @-@ released a solo album entitled Livin ' the Dream in late 2005 . This album included his own rendition of " Me and You " with background vocals from Sonya Isaacs , and a duet with Clint Black on " Grain of Salt . " McBride has also written for Reba McEntire and Casey James . Meanwhile , Thomas toured with the Little River Band . 
 = = Musical stylings and critical reception = = 
 McBride & the Ride 's sound was defined by close , three @-@ part vocal harmonies . Between their vocal styles and the " crisp , gentle rockers " that the MCA albums contained , McBride & the Ride was compared to other rock @-@ influenced country vocal bands such as Alabama and Southern Pacific . In his book The Encyclopedia of Country Music , writer Paul Kingsbury describes McBride & the Ride as having " found success with a series of middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road singles with tight harmonies . " 
 Ronnie Dunn , with whom McBride collaborated when he wrote songs for Brooks & Dunn , said that he was a fan of the band before McBride joined the duo 's road band . In an interview with CMT , Dunn said , " They 're amazingly tight as a group . I first heard them on the radio in the early ' 90s , shortly after their first single . I liked Terry 's singing style . It had a familiar Texas twang . " Dunn has also said that he enjoys writing with McBride , because both of them are Texas natives with a similar upbringing and musical influences . 
 The band 's albums have received mixed reception from music critics . Entertainment Weekly reviewer Alanna Nash criticized the first two albums for lacking strong material outside of " Sacred Ground " ( a ballad in which the male narrator tries to convince another man not to commit adultery on the narrator 's wife ) , but gave Hurry Sundown a B rating , saying it was " filled with catchy hooks , tight hillbilly harmonies , soulful songs , and [ … ] a collective personality . " Allmusic critic Jason Ankeny gave four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five for both the second and third albums , noting of Hurry Sundown that it " continue [ d ] to hone the group 's close @-@ harmony style . " Amarillo Sky received a three @-@ star review from Allmusic critic Robert L. Doerschuk , who considered it " tight , seamless , [ and ] a bit impersonal " , while About.com critic Matt Bjorke said it was a " wonderful collection of songs " . 
 = = Former members = = 
 Terry McBride – lead vocals , bass guitar ( 1989 – 1995 , 2000 – 2002 ) 
 Ray Herndon – background vocals , electric guitar , Dobro ( 1989 – 1994 , 2000 – 2002 ) 
 Billy Thomas – background vocals , drums ( 1989 – 1994 , 2000 – 2002 ) 
 Keith Edwards – drums ( 1994 – 1995 ) 
 Randy Frazier – bass guitar ( 1994 – 1995 ) 
 Gary Morse – steel guitar ( 1994 – 1995 ) 
 Jeff Roach – keyboards ( 1994 – 1995 ) 
 Kenny Vaughan – electric guitar ( 1994 – 1995 ) 
 Bob Britt — lead guitar ( 1995 ) 
 Rick Gerken — keyboards ( 1995 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = Candide = 
 Candide , ou l <unk> ( / <unk> / ; French : [ kɑ ̃ did ] ) is a French satire first published in 1759 by Voltaire , a philosopher of the Age of Enlightenment . The novella has been widely translated , with English versions titled Candide : or , All for the Best ( 1759 ) ; Candide : or , The Optimist ( 1762 ) ; and Candide : or , Optimism ( 1947 ) . It begins with a young man , Candide , who is living a sheltered life in an Edenic paradise and being indoctrinated with Leibnizian optimism ( or simply " optimism " ) by his mentor , Professor Pangloss . The work describes the abrupt cessation of this lifestyle , followed by Candide 's slow , painful disillusionment as he witnesses and experiences great hardships in the world . Voltaire concludes with Candide , if not rejecting optimism outright , advocating a deeply practical precept , " we must cultivate our garden " , in lieu of the Leibnizian mantra of Pangloss , " all is for the best " in the " best of all possible worlds " . 
 Candide is characterised by its sarcastic tone as well as by its erratic , fantastical and fast @-@ moving plot . A picaresque novel with a story similar to that of a more serious Bildungsroman , it parodies many adventure and romance clichés , the struggles of which are caricatured in a tone that is <unk> matter @-@ of @-@ fact . Still , the events discussed are often based on historical happenings , such as the Seven Years ' War and the 1755 Lisbon earthquake . As philosophers of Voltaire 's day contended with the problem of evil , so too does Candide in this short novel , albeit more directly and humorously . Voltaire ridicules religion , theologians , governments , armies , philosophies , and philosophers through allegory ; most conspicuously , he assaults Leibniz and his optimism . 
 As expected by Voltaire , Candide has enjoyed both great success and great scandal . Immediately after its secretive publication , the book was widely banned because it contained religious blasphemy , political sedition and intellectual hostility hidden under a thin veil of naïveté . However , with its sharp wit and insightful portrayal of the human condition , the novel has since inspired many later authors and artists to mimic and adapt it . Today , Candide is recognized as Voltaire 's magnum opus and is often listed as part of the Western canon ; it is among the most frequently taught works of French literature . The British poet and literary critic Martin Seymour @-@ Smith listed Candide as one of the 100 most influential books ever written . 
 = = Historical and literary background = = 
 A number of historical events inspired Voltaire to write Candide , most notably the publication of Leibniz 's " <unk> " , a short metaphysical treatise , the Seven Years ' War , and the 1755 Lisbon earthquake . Both of the latter catastrophes are frequently referred to in Candide and are cited by scholars as reasons for its composition . The 1755 Lisbon earthquake , tsunami , and resulting fires of All Saints ' Day , had a strong influence on theologians of the day and on Voltaire , who was himself disillusioned by them . The earthquake had an especially large effect on the contemporary doctrine of optimism , a philosophical system which implies that such events should not occur . Optimism is founded on the theodicy of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz that says all is for the best because God is a benevolent deity . This concept is often put into the form , " all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds " ( Fr . Tout est pour le mieux dans le meilleur des mondes possibles ) . Philosophers had trouble fitting the horrors of this earthquake into the optimist world view . 
 Voltaire actively rejected Leibnizian optimism after the natural disaster , convinced that if this were the best possible world , it should surely be better than it is . In both Candide and Poème sur le <unk> de <unk> ( " Poem on the Lisbon Disaster " ) , Voltaire attacks this optimist belief . He makes use of the Lisbon earthquake in both Candide and his Poème to argue this point , sarcastically describing the catastrophe as one of the most horrible disasters " in the best of all possible worlds " . Immediately after the earthquake , unreliable rumours circulated around Europe , sometimes overestimating the severity of the event . Ira Wade , a noted expert on Voltaire and Candide , has analysed which sources Voltaire might have referenced in learning of the event . Wade speculates that Voltaire 's primary source for information on the Lisbon earthquake was the 1755 work Relation historique du <unk> de Terre <unk> à <unk> by Ange <unk> . 
 Apart from such events , contemporaneous stereotypes of the German personality may have been a source of inspiration for the text , as they were for Simplicius Simplicissimus , a 1669 satirical picaresque novel written by Hans Jakob Christoffel von <unk> and inspired by the Thirty Years ' War . The protagonist of this novel , who was supposed to embody stereotypically German characteristics , is quite similar to the protagonist of Candide . These stereotypes , according to Voltaire biographer Alfred Owen Aldridge , include " extreme <unk> or sentimental simplicity " , two of Candide 's , and Simplicius 's , defining qualities . Aldridge writes , " Since Voltaire admitted familiarity with fifteenth @-@ century German authors who used a bold and buffoonish style , it is quite possible that he knew Simplicissimus as well . " 
 A satirical and parodic precursor of Candide , Jonathan Swift 's Gulliver 's Travels ( 1726 ) is one of Candide 's closest literary relatives . This satire tells the story of " a gullible ingenue " , Gulliver , who ( like Candide ) travels to several " remote nations " and is hardened by the many misfortunes which befall him . As evidenced by similarities between the two books , Voltaire probably drew upon Gulliver 's Travels for inspiration while writing Candide . Other probable sources of inspiration for Candide are <unk> ( 1699 ) by François Fénelon and <unk> ( 1753 ) by Louis @-@ Charles <unk> de <unk> . Candide 's parody of the bildungsroman is probably based on <unk> , which includes the prototypical parody of the sagacious tutor on whom Pangloss may have been partly based . Likewise , <unk> 's protagonist undergoes a disillusioning series of travels similar to those of Candide . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Born François @-@ Marie <unk> , Voltaire ( 1694 – 1778 ) , by the time of the Lisbon earthquake , was already a well @-@ established author , known for his satirical wit . He had been made a member of the Académie Française in 1746 . He was a deist , a strong proponent of religious freedom , and a critic of tyrannical governments . Candide became part of his large , diverse body of philosophical , political and artistic works expressing these views . More specifically , it was a model for the eighteenth- and early nineteenth @-@ century novels called the contes philosophiques . This genre , of which Voltaire was one of the founders , included previous works of his such as Zadig and <unk> . 
 It is unknown exactly when Voltaire wrote Candide , but scholars estimate that it was primarily composed in late 1758 and begun as early as 1757 . Voltaire is believed to have written a portion of it while at his house in Ferney and also while visiting Charles Théodore , the Elector @-@ Palatinate at Schwetzingen , for three weeks in the summer of 1758 . Despite solid evidence for these claims , a popular legend persists that Voltaire wrote Candide in three days . This idea is probably based on a misreading of the 1885 work La Vie <unk> de Voltaire aux Délices et à Ferney by Lucien Perey ( real name : Clara Adèle Luce Herpin ) and Gaston <unk> . The evidence indicates strongly that Voltaire did not rush or improvise Candide , but worked on it over a significant period of time , possibly even a whole year . Candide is mature and carefully developed , not impromptu , as the intentionally choppy plot and the aforementioned myth might suggest . 
 There is only one extant manuscript of Candide that was written before the work 's 1759 publication ; it was discovered in 1956 by Wade and since named the La Vallière Manuscript . It is believed to have been sent , chapter by chapter , by Voltaire to the Duke and Duchess La Vallière in the autumn of 1758 . The manuscript was sold to the Bibliothèque de l 'Arsenal in the late eighteenth century , where it remained undiscovered for almost two hundred years . The La Vallière Manuscript , the most original and authentic of all surviving copies of Candide , was probably dictated by Voltaire to his secretary , <unk> , then edited directly . In addition to this manuscript , there is believed to have been another , one copied by <unk> for the Elector Charles @-@ Théodore , who hosted Voltaire during the summer of 1758 . The existence of this copy was first postulated by Norman L. Torrey in 1929 . If it exists , it remains undiscovered . 
 Voltaire published Candide simultaneously in five countries no later than 15 January 1759 , although the exact date is uncertain . Seventeen versions of Candide from 1759 , in the original French , are known today , and there has been great controversy over which is the earliest . More versions were published in other languages : Candide was translated once into Italian and thrice into English that same year . The complicated science of calculating the relative publication dates of all of the versions of Candide is described at length in Wade 's article " The First Edition of Candide : A Problem of Identification " . The publication process was extremely secretive , probably the " most clandestine work of the century " , because of the book 's obviously illicit and irreverent content . The greatest number of copies of Candide were published concurrently in Geneva by Cramer , in Amsterdam by Marc @-@ Michel Rey , in London by Jean Nourse , and in Paris by Lambert . 
 Candide underwent one major revision after its initial publication , in addition to some minor ones . In 1761 , a version of Candide was published that included , along with several minor changes , a major addition by Voltaire to the twenty @-@ second chapter , a section that had been thought weak by the Duke of Vallière . The English title of this edition was Candide , or Optimism , Translated from the German of Dr. Ralph . With the additions found in the Doctor 's pocket when he died at Minden , in the Year of Grace 1759 . The last edition of Candide authorised by Voltaire was the one included in Cramer 's 1775 compilation , l <unk> <unk> , meaning " supervised editions " . 
 Voltaire strongly opposed the inclusion of illustrations in his works , as he stated in a 1778 letter to the writer and publisher Charles Joseph <unk> : 
 Je crois que des <unk> <unk> fort <unk> . Ces <unk> n <unk> jamais été <unk> dans les éditions de <unk> , de <unk> et d <unk> . ( I believe that these illustrations would be quite useless . These baubles have never been allowed in the works of Cicero , Virgil and Horace . ) 
 Despite this protest , two sets of illustrations for Candide were produced by the French artist Jean @-@ Michel Moreau le Jeune . The first version was done , at Moreau 's own expense , in 1787 and included in Kehl 's publication of that year , Oeuvres <unk> de Voltaire . Four images were drawn by Moreau for this edition and were engraved by Pierre @-@ Charles <unk> . The second version , in 1803 , consisted of seven drawings by Moreau which were transposed by multiple engravers . The twentieth @-@ century modern artist Paul Klee stated that it was while reading Candide that he discovered his own artistic style . Klee illustrated the work , and his drawings were published in a 1920 version edited by Kurt Wolff . 
 = = List of characters = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Candide : The title character . Illegitimate son of the sister of the baron of Thunder @-@ ten @-@ Tronckh . In love with Cunégonde . 
 Cunégonde : The daughter of the baron of Thunder @-@ ten @-@ Tronckh . In love with Candide . 
 Professor Pangloss : The royal educator of the court of the baron . Described as " the greatest philosopher of the Holy Roman Empire " . 
 The Old Woman : Cunégonde 's maid while she was the mistress of Don Issachar and the Grand Inquisitor of Portugal . Fled with Candide and Cunégonde to the New World . Illegitimate daughter of Pope Urban X. 
 Cacambo : From a Spanish father and a Peruvian mother . Lived half his life in Spain and half in Latin America . Candide 's valet while in America . 
 Martin : Dutch amateur philosopher and Manichaean . Met Candide in Suriname , travelled with him afterwards . 
 The baron of Thunder @-@ ten @-@ Tronckh : Son of the original Baron ( a secondary character ) and brother of Cunégonde . Thought to have been killed by the Bulgarians . Became a Jesuit in Paraguay . 
 = = = Secondary characters = = = 
 The baron and baroness of Thunder @-@ ten @-@ Tronckh : Father and mother of Cunégonde and the second baron . Both slain by the Bulgarians . 
 The king of the Bulgarians . 
 Jacques the Anabaptist : Saved Candide from a lynching in the Netherlands . Drowned in the port of Lisbon . 
 Don Issachar : Jewish landlord in Portugal . Cunégonde became his mistress , shared with the Grand Inquisitor of Portugal . Killed by Candide . 
 The Grand Inquisitor of Portugal : Sentenced Candide and Pangloss at the auto @-@ da @-@ fé . Cunégonde was his mistress jointly with Don Issachar . Killed by Candide . 
 Don Fernando d <unk> y Figueroa y Mascarenes y <unk> y Souza : Spanish governor of Buenos Aires . Wanted Cunégonde as a mistress . 
 The king of El Dorado , who helped Candide and Cacambo out of El Dorado and made them rich . 
 <unk> <unk> : Dutch ship captain . Offered to take Candide from America to France for 30 @,@ 000 gold coins , but then departed without him , stealing all his riches . 
 The abbot of <unk> : <unk> Candide and Martin , led the police to arrest them ; he and the police officer accepted three diamonds each and released them . 
 The <unk> of <unk> : Parisian wench who took an elaborate title . 
 The scholar : One of the guests of the " <unk> " . <unk> with Candide about art . 
 Paquette : The one who gave Pangloss syphilis . After the slaying by the Bulgarians , worked as a prostitute . Became the property of Friar Giroflée . 
 Friar Giroflée : <unk> friar . In love with the prostitute Paquette . 
 Signor <unk> : A Venetian noble . Candide and Martin visited his estate , where he discussed his disdain of most of the canon of great art . 
 In an inn in Venice , Candide and Martin ate with six foreigners who turned out to be deposed monarchs . They were : 
 Ahmed III 
 Ivan VI of Russia 
 Charles Edward Stuart 
 Augustus III of Poland 
 Stanisław Leszczyński 
 Theodore of Corsica 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Candide contains thirty episodic chapters , which may be grouped into two main schemes : one consists of two divisions , separated by the protagonist 's hiatus in El Dorado ; the other consists of three parts , each defined by its geographical setting . By the former scheme , the first half of Candide constitutes the rising action and the last part the resolution . This view is supported by the strong theme of travel and quest , reminiscent of adventure and picaresque novels , which tend to employ such a dramatic structure . By the latter scheme , the thirty chapters may be grouped into three parts each comprising ten chapters and defined by locale : I – X are set in Europe , XI – XX are set in the Americas , and XXI – XXX are set in Europe and the Ottoman Empire . The plot summary that follows uses this second format and includes Voltaire 's additions of 1761 . 
 = = = Chapters I – X = = = 
 The tale of Candide begins in the castle of the Baron Thunder @-@ ten @-@ Tronckh in Westphalia , home to : the Baron 's daughter , Lady Cunégonde ; his bastard nephew , Candide ; a tutor , Pangloss ; a chambermaid , Paquette ; and the rest of the Baron 's family . The protagonist , Candide , is romantically attracted to Cunégonde . He is a child of " the most unaffected simplicity " , whose face is " the index of his mind " . Dr. Pangloss , professor of " <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> " ( English translation : " <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> " ) and self @-@ proclaimed optimist , teaches his pupils that they live in the " best of all possible worlds " and that " all is for the best " . 
 All is well in the castle until Cunégonde sees Pangloss sexually engaged with Paquette in some bushes . Encouraged by this show of affection , Cunégonde drops her handkerchief next to Candide which entices him to kiss her . For this infraction , Candide is evicted from the castle , at which point he is captured by Bulgar ( Prussian ) recruiters and coerced into military service , where he is flogged , nearly executed , and forced to participate in a major battle between the Bulgars and the <unk> ( an allegory representing the Prussians and the French ) . Candide eventually escapes the army and makes his way to Holland where he is given aid by Jacques , an Anabaptist , who strengthens Candide 's optimism . Soon after , Candide finds his master Pangloss , now a beggar with syphilis . Pangloss reveals he was infected with this disease by Paquette and shocks Candide by relating how Castle Thunder @-@ ten @-@ Tronckh was destroyed by Bulgars , and that Cunégonde and her whole family were killed . Pangloss is cured of his illness by Jacques , losing one eye and one ear in the process , and the three set sail to Lisbon . 
 In Lisbon 's harbor , they are overtaken by a vicious storm which destroys the boat . Jacques attempts to save a sailor , and in the process is thrown overboard . The sailor makes no move to help the drowning Jacques , and Candide is in a state of despair until Pangloss explains to him that Lisbon harbor was created in order for Jacques to drown . Only Pangloss , Candide , and the " brutish sailor " who let Jacques drown survive the wreck and reach Lisbon , which is promptly hit by an earthquake , tsunami and fire that kill tens of thousands . The sailor leaves in order to loot the rubble while Candide , injured and begging for help , is lectured on the optimistic view of the situation by Pangloss . 
 The next day , Pangloss discusses his optimistic philosophy with a member of the Portuguese Inquisition , and he and Candide are arrested for heresy , set to be tortured and killed in an " auto @-@ da @-@ fé " set up to appease God and prevent another disaster . Candide is flogged and sees Pangloss hanged , but another earthquake intervenes and he escapes . He is approached by an old woman , who leads him to a house where Lady Cunégonde waits , alive . Candide is surprised : Pangloss had told him that Cunégonde had been raped and disemboweled . She had been , but Cunégonde points out that people survive such things . However , her rescuer sold her to a Jewish merchant who was then threatened by a corrupt Grand Inquisitor into sharing her . Her owners arrive , find her with another man , and Candide kills them both . Candide and the two women flee the city , heading to the Americas . Along the way , Cunégonde falls into self @-@ pity , complaining of all the misfortunes that have befallen her . The old woman reciprocates by revealing her own tragic life , which included having a buttock cut off in order to feed some starving men . 
 = = = Chapters XI – XX = = = 
 The trio arrives in Buenos Aires , where Governor Don Fernando d <unk> y Figueroa y Mascarenes y <unk> y Alejandro asks to marry Cunégonde . Just then , an alcalde ( a Spanish fortress commander ) arrives , pursuing Candide for killing the Grand Inquisitor . Leaving the women behind , Candide flees to Paraguay with his practical and heretofore unmentioned manservant , Cacambo . 
 At a border post on the way to Paraguay , Cacambo and Candide speak to the commandant , who turns out to be Cunégonde 's unnamed brother . He explains that after his family was slaughtered , the Jesuits ' preparation for his burial revived him , and he has since joined the order . When Candide proclaims he intends to marry Cunégonde , her brother attacks him , and Candide stabs him through with his rapier . After lamenting all the people ( mainly priests ) he has killed , he and Cacambo flee . In their flight , Candide and Cacambo come across two naked women being chased and bitten by a pair of monkeys . Candide , seeking to protect the women , shoots and kills the monkeys , but is informed by Cacambo that the monkeys and women were probably lovers . 
 Cacambo and Candide are captured by Oreillons , or <unk> ; members of the Inca nobility who widened the lobes of their ears , and are depicted here as the fictional inhabitants of the area . Mistaking Candide for a Jesuit by his robes , the Oreillons prepare to cook Candide and Cacambo ; however , Cacambo convinces the Oreillons that Candide killed a Jesuit to procure the robe . Cacambo and Candide are released and travel for a month on foot and then down a river by canoe , living on fruits and berries . 
 After a few more adventures , Candide and Cacambo wander into El Dorado , a geographically isolated utopia where the streets are covered with precious stones , there exist no priests , and all of the king 's jokes are funny . Candide and Cacambo stay a month in El Dorado , but Candide is still in pain without Cunégonde , and expresses to the king his wish to leave . The king points out that this is a foolish idea , but generously helps them do so . The pair continue their journey , now accompanied by one hundred red pack sheep carrying provisions and incredible sums of money , which they slowly lose or have stolen over the next few adventures . 
 Candide and Cacambo eventually reach Suriname , where they split up : Cacambo travels to Buenos Aires to retrieve Lady Cunégonde , while Candide prepares to travel to Europe to await the two . Candide 's remaining sheep are stolen , and Candide is fined heavily by a Dutch magistrate for petulance over the theft . Before leaving Suriname , Candide feels in need of companionship , so he interviews a number of local men who have been through various ill @-@ fortunes and settles on a man named Martin . 
 = = = Chapters XXI – XXX = = = 
 This companion , Martin , is a Manichaean scholar based on the real @-@ life pessimist Pierre Bayle , who was a chief opponent of Leibniz . For the remainder of the voyage , Martin and Candide argue about philosophy , Martin painting the entire world as occupied by fools . Candide , however , remains an optimist at heart , since it is all he knows . As they arrive in England , they see an admiral ( based on Admiral Byng ) being shot for not killing enough of the enemy . Martin explains that Britain finds it necessary to shoot an admiral from time to time " pour l 'encouragement des autres " ( to encourage the others ) . Candide , horrified , arranges for them to leave Britain immediately . After various scenes satirising other European institutions , Candide and Martin meet Paquette , the chambermaid who infected Pangloss with his syphilis , in Venice . She is now a prostitute , and is spending her time with a monk , Brother Giroflée . Although both appear happy on the surface , they reveal their despair : Paquette has led a miserable existence as a sexual object , and the monk detests the religious order in which he was indoctrinated . 
 Later , while Candide and Martin are eating supper , Cacambo returns to Candide and informs him that Cunégonde is in Constantinople , and that she has been enslaved . She is now washing dishes for a prince of Transylvania , and has become ugly . On the way to rescue her , Candide finds Pangloss and Cunégonde 's brother rowing in the galley . Candide buys their freedom and further passage at steep prices . The baron and Pangloss relate how they survived , but despite the horrors he has been through , Pangloss 's optimism remains unshaken : " I still hold to my original opinions , because , after all , I 'm a philosopher , and it wouldn 't be proper for me to recant , since Leibniz cannot be wrong , and since pre @-@ established harmony is the most beautiful thing in the world , along with the plenum and subtle matter . " 
 The travellers arrive on the Ottoman coast where they rejoin Cunégonde and the old woman . Cunégonde has indeed become hideously ugly , but Candide nevertheless buys their freedom and marries Cunégonde to spite her brother ( who is secretly sold back into slavery ) . Paquette and Brother Giroflée , too , are reconciled with Candide on a farm which he just bought with the last of his finances . 
 One day , the protagonists seek out a dervish known as a great philosopher of the land . Pangloss asks him why Man is made to suffer so , and what they all ought to do . The dervish responds by asking rhetorically why Pangloss is concerned about the existence of evil and good . The dervish describes human beings as mice on a ship sent by a king to Egypt ; their comfort does not matter to the king . The dervish then slams his door on the group . Returning to their farm , Candide , Pangloss , and Martin meet a Turk whose philosophy is to devote his life only to simple work and not concern himself with external affairs . He and his four children work a small farm to keep " free of three great evils : boredom , vice and necessity " , or " poverty " as per John Butt 's 1947 translation . Candide , Pangloss , Martin , Cunégonde , Paquette , Cacambo , the old woman , and Brother Giroflée all set to work ( on this " <unk> <unk> " , or " commendable plan " , as the narrator calls it ) on a farm of their own , each to one specific task . Candide ignores Pangloss 's insistence that all turned out for the best by necessity , instead telling him " we must cultivate our garden " . 
 = = Style = = 
 As Voltaire himself described it , the purpose of Candide was to " bring amusement to a small number of men of wit " . The author achieves this goal by combining his sharp wit with a fun parody of the classic adventure @-@ romance plot . Candide is confronted with horrible events described in painstaking detail so often that it becomes humorous . Literary theorist Frances K. Barasch described Voltaire 's matter @-@ of @-@ fact narrative as treating topics such as mass death " as coolly as a weather report " . The fast @-@ paced and improbable plot — in which characters narrowly escape death repeatedly , for instance — allows for compounding tragedies to befall the same characters over and over again . In the end , Candide is primarily , as described by Voltaire 's biographer Ian Davidson , " short , light , rapid and humorous " . 
 Behind the playful façade of Candide which has amused so many , there lies very harsh criticism of contemporary European civilization which angered many others . European governments such as France , Prussia , Portugal and England are each attacked ruthlessly by the author : the French and Prussians for the Seven Years ' War , the Portuguese for their Inquisition , and the British for the execution of John Byng . Organised religion , too , is harshly treated in Candide . For example , Voltaire mocks the Jesuit order of the Roman Catholic Church . Aldridge provides a characteristic example of such anti @-@ clerical passages for which the work was banned : while in Paraguay , Cacambo remarks , " [ The Jesuits ] are masters of everything , and the people have no money at all … " . Here , Voltaire suggests the Christian mission in Paraguay is taking advantage of the local population . Voltaire depicts the Jesuits holding the indigenous peoples as slaves while they claim to be helping them . 
 = = = Satire = = = 
 The main method of Candide 's satire is to contrast ironically great tragedy and comedy . The story does not invent or exaggerate evils of the world — it displays real ones starkly , allowing Voltaire to simplify subtle philosophies and cultural traditions , highlighting their flaws . Thus Candide derides optimism , for instance , with a deluge of horrible , historical ( or at least plausible ) events with no apparent redeeming qualities . 
 A simple example of the satire of Candide is seen in the treatment of the historic event witnessed by Candide and Martin in Portsmouth harbour . There , the duo spy an anonymous admiral , supposed to represent John Byng , being executed for failing to properly engage a French fleet . The admiral is blindfolded and shot on the deck of his own ship , merely " to encourage the others " ( Fr . " pour encourager les autres " ) . This depiction of military punishment trivializes Byng 's death . The dry , pithy explanation " to encourage the others " thus satirises a serious historical event in characteristically Voltairian fashion . For its classic wit , this phrase has become one of the more often quoted from Candide . 
 Voltaire depicts the worst of the world and his pathetic hero 's desperate effort to fit it into an optimistic outlook . Almost all of Candide is a discussion of various forms of evil : its characters rarely find even temporary respite . There is at least one notable exception : the episode of El Dorado , a fantastic village in which the inhabitants are simply rational , and their society is just and reasonable . The positivity of El Dorado may be contrasted with the pessimistic attitude of most of the book . Even in this case , the bliss of El Dorado is fleeting : Candide soon leaves the village to seek Cunégonde , whom he eventually marries only out of a sense of obligation . 
 Another element of the satire focuses on what William F. Bottiglia , author of many published works on Candide , calls the " sentimental foibles of the age " and Voltaire 's attack on them . Flaws in European culture are highlighted as Candide parodies adventure and romance clichés , mimicking the style of a picaresque novel . A number of archetypal characters thus have recognisable manifestations in Voltaire 's work : Candide is supposed to be the drifting rogue of low social class , Cunégonde the sex interest , Pangloss the knowledgeable mentor and Cacambo the skilful valet . As the plot unfolds , readers find that Candide is no rogue , Cunégonde becomes ugly and Pangloss is a stubborn fool . The characters of Candide are unrealistic , two @-@ dimensional , mechanical , and even marionette @-@ like ; they are simplistic and stereotypical . As the initially naïve protagonist eventually comes to a mature conclusion — however noncommittal — the novella is a bildungsroman , if not a very serious one . 
 = = = Garden motif = = = 
 Gardens are thought by many critics to play a critical symbolic role in Candide . The first location commonly identified as a garden is the castle of the Baron , from which Candide and Cunégonde are evicted much in the same fashion as Adam and Eve are evicted from the Garden of Eden in Genesis . Cyclically , the main characters of Candide conclude the novel in a garden of their own making , one which might represent celestial paradise . The third most prominent " garden " is El Dorado , which may be a false Eden . Other possibly symbolic gardens include the Jesuit pavilion , the garden of <unk> , Cacambo 's garden , and the Turk 's garden . 
 These gardens are probably references to the Garden of Eden , but it has also been proposed , by Bottiglia , for example , that the gardens refer also to the Encyclopédie , and that Candide 's conclusion to cultivate " his garden " symbolises Voltaire 's great support for this endeavour . Candide and his companions , as they find themselves at the end of the novella , are in a very similar position to Voltaire 's tightly knit philosophical circle which supported the Encyclopédie : the main characters of Candide live in seclusion to " cultivate [ their ] garden " , just as Voltaire suggested his colleagues leave society to write . In addition , there is evidence in the epistolary correspondence of Voltaire that he had elsewhere used the metaphor of gardening to describe writing the Encyclopédie . Another interpretative possibility is that Candide cultivating " his garden " suggests his engaging in only necessary occupations , such as feeding oneself and fighting boredom . This is analogous to Voltaire 's own view on gardening : he was himself a gardener at his estates in Les Délices and Ferney , and he often wrote in his correspondence that gardening was an important pastime of his own , it being an extraordinarily effective way to keep busy . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 = = = Optimism = = = 
 Candide satirises various philosophical and religious theories that Voltaire had previously criticised . Primary among these is Leibnizian optimism ( sometimes called <unk> after its fictional proponent ) , which Voltaire ridicules with descriptions of seemingly endless calamity . Voltaire demonstrates a variety of irredeemable evils in the world , leading many critics to contend that Voltaire 's treatment of evil — specifically the theological problem of its existence — is the focus of the work . Heavily referenced in the text are the Lisbon earthquake , disease , and the sinking of ships in storms . Also , war , thievery , and murder — evils of human design — are explored as extensively in Candide as are environmental ills . Bottiglia notes Voltaire is " comprehensive " in his enumeration of the world 's evils . He is unrelenting in attacking Leibnizian optimism . 
 Fundamental to Voltaire 's attack is Candide 's tutor Pangloss , a self @-@ proclaimed follower of Leibniz and a teacher of his doctrine . Ridicule of Pangloss 's theories thus ridicules Leibniz himself , and Pangloss 's reasoning is silly at best . For example , Pangloss 's first teachings of the narrative absurdly mix up cause and effect : 
 Il est <unk> , <unk> @-@ il , que les choses ne <unk> être <unk> ; car tout <unk> fait pour une fin , tout est <unk> pour la <unk> fin . <unk> bien que les nez ont été faits pour porter des lunettes ; aussi avons @-@ nous des lunettes . 
 It is demonstrable that things cannot be otherwise than as they are ; for as all things have been created for some end , they must necessarily be created for the best end . Observe , for instance , the nose is formed for spectacles , therefore we wear spectacles . 
 Following such flawed reasoning even more doggedly than Candide , Pangloss defends optimism . Whatever their horrendous fortune , Pangloss reiterates " all is for the best " ( Fr . " Tout est pour le mieux " ) and proceeds to " justify " the evil event 's occurrence . A characteristic example of such theodicy is found in Pangloss 's explanation of why it is good that syphilis exists : 
 c 'était une chose indispensable dans le meilleur des mondes , un <unk> <unk> ; car si Colomb n <unk> pas <unk> dans une <unk> de l 'Amérique cette <unk> qui <unk> la source de la génération , qui <unk> même <unk> la génération , et qui est <unk> l <unk> du grand but de la nature , nous n <unk> ni le chocolat ni la <unk> ; 
 it was a thing unavoidable , a necessary ingredient in the best of worlds ; for if Columbus had not caught in an island in America this disease , which contaminates the source of generation , and frequently impedes propagation itself , and is evidently opposed to the great end of nature , we should have had neither chocolate nor cochineal . 
 Candide , the impressionable and incompetent student of Pangloss , often tries to justify evil , fails , invokes his mentor and eventually despairs . It is by these failures that Candide is painfully cured ( as Voltaire would see it ) of his optimism . 
 Interestingly , this critique of Voltaire 's seems to be directed almost exclusively at Leibnizian optimism . Candide does not ridicule Voltaire 's contemporary Alexander Pope , a later optimist of slightly different convictions . Candide does not discuss Pope 's optimistic principle that " all is right " , but Leibniz 's that states , " this is the best of all possible worlds " . However subtle the difference between the two , Candide is unambiguous as to which is its subject . Some critics conjecture that Voltaire meant to spare Pope this ridicule out of respect , although Voltaire 's Poème may have been written as a more direct response to Pope 's theories . This work is similar to Candide in subject matter , but very different from it in style : the Poème embodies a more serious philosophical argument than Candide . 
 = = = Conclusion = = = 
 The conclusion of the novella , in which Candide finally dismisses his tutor 's optimism , leaves unresolved what philosophy the protagonist is to accept in its stead . This element of Candide has been written about <unk> , perhaps above all others . The conclusion is enigmatic and its analysis is contentious . 
 Voltaire develops no formal , systematic philosophy for the characters to adopt . The conclusion of the novel may be thought of not as a philosophical alternative to optimism , but as a prescribed practical outlook ( though what it prescribes is in dispute ) . Many critics have concluded that one minor character or another is portrayed as having the right philosophy . For instance , a number believe that Martin is treated sympathetically , and that his character holds Voltaire 's ideal philosophy — pessimism . Others disagree , citing Voltaire 's negative descriptions of Martin 's principles and the conclusion of the work in which Martin plays little part . 
 Within debates attempting to decipher the conclusion of Candide lies another primary Candide debate . This one concerns the degree to which Voltaire was advocating a pessimistic philosophy , by which Candide and his companions give up hope for a better world . Critics argue that the group 's reclusion on the farm signifies Candide and his companions ' loss of hope for the rest of the human race . This view is to be compared to a reading that presents Voltaire as advocating a <unk> philosophy and a precept committing the travellers to improving the world through metaphorical gardening . This debate , and others , focuses on the question of whether or not Voltaire was prescribing passive retreat from society , or active industrious contribution to it . 
 = = = Inside vs. outside interpretations = = = 
 Separate from the debate about the text 's conclusion is the " inside / outside " controversy . This argument centers on the matter of whether or not Voltaire was actually prescribing anything . Roy Wolper , professor emeritus of English , argues in a revolutionary 1969 paper that Candide does not necessarily speak for its author ; that the work should be viewed as a narrative independent of Voltaire 's history ; and that its message is entirely ( or mostly ) inside it . This point of view , the " inside " , specifically rejects attempts to find Voltaire 's " voice " in the many characters of Candide and his other works . Indeed , writers have seen Voltaire as speaking through at least Candide , Martin , and the Turk . Wolper argues that Candide should be read with a minimum of speculation as to its meaning in Voltaire 's personal life . His article ushered in a new era of Voltaire studies , causing many scholars to look at the novel differently . 
 Critics such as Lester Crocker , Henry <unk> , and Vivienne Mylne find too many similarities between Candide 's point of view and that of Voltaire to accept the " inside " view ; they support the " outside " interpretation . They believe that Candide 's final decision is the same as Voltaire 's , and see a strong connection between the development of the protagonist and his author . Some scholars who support the " outside " view also believe that the isolationist philosophy of the Old Turk closely mirrors that of Voltaire . Others see a strong parallel between Candide 's gardening at the conclusion and the gardening of the author . Martine Darmon Meyer argues that the " inside " view fails to see the satirical work in context , and that denying that Candide is primarily a mockery of optimism ( a matter of historical context ) is a " very basic betrayal of the text " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Though Voltaire did not openly admit to having written the controversial Candide until 1768 ( until then he signed with a pseudonym : " Monsieur le docteur Ralph " , or " Doctor Ralph " ) , his authorship of the work was hardly disputed . 
 Immediately after publication , the work and its author were denounced by both secular and religious authorities , because the book openly derides government and church alike . It was because of such polemics that Omer @-@ Louis @-@ François Joly de Fleury , who was Advocate General to the Parisian parliament when Candide was published , found parts of Candide to be " contrary to religion and morals " . 
 Despite much official indictment , soon after its publication , Candide 's irreverent prose was being quoted . " Let us eat a Jesuit " , for instance , became a popular phrase for its reference to a humorous passage in Candide . By the end of February 1759 , the Grand Council of Geneva and the administrators of Paris had banned Candide . Candide nevertheless succeeded in selling twenty thousand to thirty thousand copies by the end of the year in over twenty editions , making it a best seller . The Duke de La Vallière speculated near the end of January 1759 that Candide might have been the fastest @-@ selling book ever . In 1762 , Candide was listed in the Index Librorum Prohibitorum , the Roman Catholic Church 's list of prohibited books . 
 <unk> of Candide lasted into the twentieth century in the United States , where it has long been considered a seminal work of Western literature . At least once , Candide was temporarily barred from entering America : in February 1929 , a US customs official in Boston prevented a number of copies of the book , deemed " obscene " , from reaching a Harvard University French class . Candide was admitted in August of the same year ; however by that time the class was over . In an interview soon after Candide 's detention , the official who confiscated the book explained the office 's decision to ban it , " But about ' Candide , ' I 'll tell you . For years we 've been letting that book get by . There were so many different editions , all sizes and kinds , some illustrated and some plain , that we figured the book must be all right . Then one of us happened to read it . It 's a filthy book " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Candide is the most widely read of Voltaire 's many works , and it is considered one of the great achievements of Western literature . However , Candide is not necessarily considered a true " classic " . According to Bottiglia , " The physical size of Candide , as well as Voltaire 's attitude toward his fiction , precludes the achievement of artistic dimension through plenitude , autonomous ' 3D ' vitality , emotional resonance , or poetic exaltation . Candide , then , cannot in quantity of quality , measure up to the supreme classics . " Bottiglia instead calls it a miniature classic , though others are more forgiving of its size . As the only work of Voltaire which has remained popular up to the present day , Candide is listed in Harold Bloom 's The Western Canon : The Books and School of the Ages . It is included in the Encyclopædia Britannica collection Great Books of the Western World . Candide has influenced modern writers of black humour such as Céline , Joseph Heller , John Barth , Thomas Pynchon , Kurt Vonnegut , and Terry Southern . Its parody and picaresque methods have become favourites of black humorists . 
 Charles Brockden Brown , an early American novelist , may have been directly affected by Voltaire , whose work he knew well . Mark <unk> , professor of English , describes the strength of the connection between Candide and Edgar Huntly ; or , Memoirs of a Sleep @-@ Walker ( 1799 ) : " An unusually large number of parallels ... crop up in the two novels , particularly in terms of characters and plot . " For instance , the protagonists of both novels are romantically involved with a recently orphaned young woman . Furthermore , in both works the brothers of the female lovers are Jesuits , and each is murdered ( although under different circumstances ) . Some twentieth @-@ century novels that may have been influenced by Candide are dystopian science @-@ fiction works . Armand Mattelart , a French critic , sees Candide in Aldous Huxley 's Brave New World , George Orwell 's Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four and Yevgeny <unk> 's We , three canonical works of the genre . Specifically , Mattelart writes that in each of these works , there exist references to Candide 's popularisation of the phrase " the best of all possible worlds " . He cites as evidence , for example , that the French version of Brave New World was entitled Le Meilleur des mondes ( <unk> literally " The best of worlds " ) . 
 Readers of Candide often compare it with certain works of the modern genre the Theatre of the Absurd . Haydn Mason , a Voltaire scholar , sees in Candide a few similarities to this brand of literature . For instance , he notes commonalities of Candide and Waiting for Godot ( 1952 ) . In both of these works , and in a similar manner , friendship provides emotional support for characters when they are confronted with harshness of their existences . However , Mason qualifies , " the conte must not be seen as a forerunner of the ' absurd ' in modern fiction . Candide 's world has many ridiculous and meaningless elements , but human beings are not totally deprived of the ability <unk> [ sic ] sense out of it . " John Pilling , biographer of Beckett , does state that Candide was an early and powerful influence on Beckett 's thinking . 
 = = = Derivative works = = = 
 In 1760 , one year after Voltaire published Candide , a sequel was published with the name Candide , ou l <unk> , <unk> partie . This work is attributed both to <unk> de <unk> , a writer unknown today , and Henri Joseph Du Laurens , who is suspected of having habitually plagiarised Voltaire . The story continues in this sequel with Candide having new adventures in the Ottoman Empire , Persia , and Denmark . Part II has potential use in studies of the popular and literary receptions of Candide , but is almost certainly apocryphal . In total , by the year 1803 , at least ten imitations of Candide or continuations of its story were published by authors other than Voltaire . 
 The operetta Candide was originally conceived by playwright Lillian Hellman , as a play with incidental music . Leonard Bernstein , the American composer and conductor who wrote the music was so excited about the project that he convinced Hellman to do it as a " comic operetta " . Many lyricists worked on the show , including James Agee , Dorothy Parker , John Latouche , Richard Wilbur , Leonard and Felicia Bernstein , Stephen Sondheim and Hellman . <unk> Kay orchestrated all the pieces except for the overture , which Bernstein did himself . Candide first opened on Broadway as a musical on 1 December 1956 . The premier production was directed by Tyrone Guthrie and conducted by Samuel <unk> . While this production was a box office flop , the music was highly praised , and an original cast album was made . The album gradually became a cult hit , but Hellman 's libretto was criticised as being too serious an adaptation of Voltaire 's novel . Candide would be more popular seventeen years later with a new libretto by Hugh Wheeler . 
 Candido , <unk> un <unk> <unk> in Sicilia ( 1977 ) or simply Candido is a book by Leonardo Sciascia . It was at least partly based on Voltaire 's Candide , although the actual influence of Candide on Candido is a hotly debated topic . A number of theories on the matter have been proposed . Proponents of one say that Candido is very similar to Candide , only with a happy ending ; supporters of another claim that Voltaire provided Sciascia with only a starting point from which to work , that the two books are quite distinct . 
 The BBC produced a television adaptation for their Play of the Month series in 1973 , with Ian Ogilvy as Candide and Frank Finlay as Voltaire himself , acting as narrator . 
 <unk> <unk> wrote his 2001 novel Le voyage de Candide à Istanbul about a minor passage in Candide during which its protagonist meets Ahmed III , the deposed Turkish sultan . This chance meeting on a ship from Venice to Istanbul is the setting of <unk> 's book . Terry Southern , in writing his popular novel Candy with Mason <unk> adapted Candide for a modern audience and changed the protagonist from male to female . Candy deals with the rejection of a sort of optimism which the author sees in women 's magazines of the modern era ; Candy also parodies pornography and popular psychology . This adaptation of Candide was itself adapted for the cinema by director Christian Marquand in 1968 . 
 In addition to the above , Candide was made into a number of minor films and theatrical adaptations throughout the twentieth century . For a list of these , see Voltaire : Candide ou L <unk> et autres contes ( 1989 ) with preface and commentaries by Pierre <unk> . 
 In May 2009 , a play called " Optimism , " based on Candide opened at the <unk> Malthouse Theatre in Melbourne . It followed the basic storyline of Candide , incorporating anachronisms , music and stand up comedy from comedian Frank Woodley . It toured Australia and played at the Edinburgh International Festival . 
 = Mal Evans = 
 Malcolm Frederick " Mal " Evans ( 27 May 1935 – 5 January 1976 ) was the road manager , assistant , and a friend of the Beatles . 
 In the early 1960s , Evans was employed as a telephone engineer , and also worked part @-@ time as a bouncer at the Cavern Club . The Beatles ' manager , Brian Epstein , later hired Evans as the group 's assistant road manager , in tandem with Neil Aspinall . Peter Brown ( one of Epstein 's staff ) later wrote that Evans was " a kindly , but menacing @-@ looking young man " . Evans contributed to recordings , and appeared in some of the films the group made . After The Beatles stopped touring in 1966 , Evans carried on assisting them until their break @-@ up in 1970 . From 1969 , Evans also found work as a record producer ( most notably with Badfinger 's top 10 hit " No Matter What " ) . 
 Evans was killed by police on 5 January 1976 , at his home in Los Angeles . Officers were called when his girlfriend phoned the police and told them that Evans was confused and had a gun . The police mistook the air rifle Evans was holding for a rifle and shot him dead . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Details of Evans ’ early life are unknown , apart from his birth date . No book has been written about him , although he wrote his memoirs , Living The Beatles ' Legend , from which extracts were released on 20 March 2005 . Anything known about him starts in 1961 , when Evans married a Liverpool girl , Lily , after meeting her at a funfair in New Brighton opposite Liverpool on the Wirral . Their first child , Gary , was born in the same year . The Beatles were the resident group at Liverpool 's Cavern Club , when Evans first heard them perform during his lunch break . He was then living in Hillside Road , Mossley Hill and working as a telephone engineer for the Post Office . He became a committed fan , even though his musical hero at the time was Elvis Presley . 
 He first befriended George Harrison , who put forward Evans ' name to the Cavern Club 's manager , Ray McFall , when he needed a doorman . The 27 @-@ year @-@ old Evans was accepted , even though he wore thick @-@ framed glasses , but mainly because of his burly 6 ft 6in frame ( 1 @.@ 97 m ) , which was an asset when holding back unruly fans at the Cavern 's door . He was later nicknamed the " Gentle Giant " and " Big Mal " . In 1962 , Evans wrote that it was " a wonderful year " , as he had Lily ( his wife ) , his son Gary , a house , a car , and he was working at the Cavern club , which he wrote into a 1963 Post Office Engineering Union diary , which also had information concerning Ohm 's law and Post Office pay rates . 
 = = The Beatles = = 
 Three months after starting at the Cavern Club , Evans was hired by Brian Epstein as a road manager , on 11 August 1962 . Evans and Aspinall 's duties were to drive the van while on tour , and to set up and test the equipment . Mal 's telephone engineering experience was valuable in setting up and maintaining the electrical equipment . The Beatles were being driven back to Liverpool from London by Evans through heavy fog on 21 January 1963 , when the windscreen was hit by a pebble and crazed over , so Evans had to break a large hole in it to see the road ahead . This was in winter , so the group had to lie one on top of the other in the back with a bottle of whisky and try to stay warm in the freezing temperatures ; something McCartney later referred to as a " Beatle sandwich " . 
 Evans had many other duties : as well as acting as a bodyguard , he was sent to buy anything they needed , such as suits , boots , meals , or drinks . If Lennon said " Socks , Mal " , Evans would have to rush to a local store and buy pairs of cotton socks for him . In 1967 , Evans wrote in his diaries that he " bought Ringo [ Starr ] some undies for his visit to the doctor " . Although Beatles ' memorabilia is in continuous demand , a full set of autographs by all four could be forgeries : Evans and Aspinall used to sign many of them when Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Starr were too busy . 
 The Beatles started their first European tour in January 1964 , and Evans was allowed to take his wife and son with him , but was involved in a " big punch @-@ up " with photographers in Paris while protecting them . Epstein ’ s associate , Alistair Taylor , once asked him why he was driving an Austin Princess limousine , rather than a Daimler , a Bentley , or a Rolls @-@ Royce . Evans explained that The Beatles were forced to choose an Austin , because they had tested every car to see how wide the doors would open as they ( literally ) had to " dive into the car " to escape their fans . 
 = = = America and the Philippines = = = 
 The Beatles were introduced to cannabis by Bob Dylan in New York in 1964 . McCartney remembered asking Evans " again and again " to write down McCartney 's newly found cannabis @-@ influenced thoughts about life by repeating " Get [ write ] it down , Mal , get it down ! " Evans was as affected by the drug as everybody else , so took a very long time to find a pencil and a piece of paper . The next morning Evans gave the sheet of paper to McCartney , which read that McCartney had dictated : " There are seven levels ! " ( of life , as he later explained ) . The Beatles attended " The Night of 100 Stars " at the London Palladium on 23 July 1964 , and during the show Evans constantly supplied them with whisky and Coca @-@ Cola , which he delivered to them balanced on a wooden oar he had found backstage . 
 The Beatles were always assisted by Evans on their American tours , and when they played two shows at the Hollywood Bowl in the summer of 1965 Epstein arranged for them all to have a four @-@ day rest in a luxurious horseshoe @-@ shaped house on stilts in Benedict Canyon off Mulholland Drive in Los Angeles . They spent their time there smoking cannabis joints . Evans and Lennon swam in the large outdoor swimming pool with cigarettes in their mouths , to see who could keep them alight the longest . After recording sessions in London , Lennon , Harrison , and Starr would be chauffeured back to their houses in the " stockbroker belt " of southern England , but Evans , Aspinall , and McCartney would drive to a late @-@ night club to eat steak , chips , and mushy peas . The Bag O 'Nails nightclub was one of their favourites , at 8 Kingly Street in Soho , London , as it also presented live music . In his memoirs Evans wrote : 19 January and 20 : " Ended up smashed in Bag O 'Nails with Paul [ McCartney ] and Neil [ Aspinall ] . Quite a number of people attached themselves , oh that it would happen to me ... freak out time baby for Mal . " 
 In July 1966 , The Beatles toured the Philippines , and unintentionally snubbed the nation 's first lady , Imelda Marcos . After the supposed snub was broadcast on Philippine television and radio , all of The Beatles ' police protection disappeared . The group and their entourage had to make their way to Manila airport on their own . At the airport , road manager Evans was beaten and kicked , and the group members were pushed and jostled about by a hostile crowd . Once the group boarded the plane , Tony Barrow and Evans were ordered off , and Evans said , " Tell Lil I love her , " thinking he was about to be jailed or killed . Epstein was forced to give back all the money that the group had earned while they were there before being allowed on the plane . 
 = = = Kenya and Sgt. Pepper = = = 
 The Beatles ' last concert was at Candlestick Park , San Francisco , on 29 August 1966 , but Evans continued to work for them in the studio , and to run errands . After recording Revolver in 1966 , McCartney went by himself on holiday to France , but asked to meet Evans in Bordeaux , at the Grosse <unk> church ( on the corner of cours Victor Hugo and rue St. James ) . At exactly the pre @-@ arranged time of one o 'clock , Evans was standing under the church clock when McCartney arrived . They then drove to Madrid together , but after feeling bored , McCartney phoned Epstein 's office in London and asked to be booked on a safari holiday in Kenya . When they arrived they visited the Amboseli Reserve at the foot of Mount Kilimanjaro , and also stayed at the exclusive <unk> Hotel , where the rooms are built on the branches of trees . 
 They spent their final night in Nairobi at a YMCA , before they returned to London . The Beatles — according to McCartney — needed a new name , so on the flight back to England , Evans and McCartney played with words to see if they could come up with something new . Evans innocently asked McCartney what the letters " S " and " P " stood for on the pots on their meal trays , and McCartney explained that it was for salt and pepper , which led to the Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band name . They arrived back in London on 19 November 1966 . Before the cover of Sgt. Pepper could be completed by Peter Blake , Evans and Aspinall were sent out to find photographs of all of the people that were to be shown on the front cover . 
 In the spring of 1967 — after the album was completed — Evans flew with McCartney to Los Angeles to see McCartney 's then @-@ fiancée , Jane Asher , who was acting there with the Old Vic theatre company . The three of them went on a trip to the Rockies , returning to LA in Frank Sinatra 's jet . Evans : " We left Denver in Frank Sinatra 's Lear Jet , which he very kindly loaned us . A beautiful job with dark black leather upholstery and , to our delight , a well @-@ stocked bar . " When they were back in LA , they were invited to visit the house of Michelle and John Phillips , from the Mamas & the Papas . Brian Wilson was also there , as he was working on the Beach Boys Smile album . Evans wrote about singing " On Top of Old Smokey " with McCartney and Wilson , but was not impressed by Wilson 's avant @-@ garde attitude to music : " Brian [ Wilson ] then put a damper on the spontaneity of the whole affair by walking in with a tray of water @-@ filled glasses , trying to arrange it into some sort of session . " 
 = = = Greece and the Magical Mystery Tour = = = 
 The Beatles and Evans flew to Greece in late 1967 , with encouragement from Greek @-@ born " Magic Alex " , the director of Apple Electronics , to buy an island or a group of islands . The general idea was that The Beatles would live on the islands in their own separate homes , but would be connected to each other by tunnels leading to a central dome . Evans and his family were included in the plan , but it was abandoned as being unworkable after McCartney refused to participate . As McCartney had no housekeeper in 1967 , Evans moved in with him at 7 Cavendish Avenue , St John 's Wood , which is near Abbey Road Studios . It was at Cavendish Avenue that McCartney bought his first Old English Sheepdog , Martha , although Evans often complained about the dog fouling the beds . Evans later bought a house in Sunbury @-@ on @-@ Thames , which was situated between McCartney 's , Lennon 's , Harrison 's and Starr 's houses . 
 While working on the Magical Mystery Tour film , Evans wrote about his work duties : " I would get requests from the four of them to do six different things at one time , and it was always a case of relying on instinct and experience in awarding priorities . They used to be right sods for the first few days , until they realised that everything was going to go smoothly and they could get into the routine of recording . ... Then I would find time between numerous cups of tea and salad sandwiches and baked beans on toast to listen to the recording in the control room . " 
 After the Magical Mystery Tour recordings , Evans flew to Nice with McCartney to shoot " The Fool on the Hill " promotional film , although McCartney set off without luggage or a passport . McCartney got past customs by saying " You know who I am " , but he and Evans were not allowed into a hotel restaurant in Nice because they " didn 't look the part " , and had to eat dinner in Evans ' room . Because the money they had with them had been spent on clothes ( NEMS was supposed to send them more ) , they arranged for credit over two nights in a nightclub . Evans : " We took advantage of our credit standing , as money had still not arrived from England . News about Paul 's [ McCartney ] visit to the club the previous night had spread , and the place was jammed . Now Paul , being a generous sort of person , had built up quite a bar bill , when the manager of the club arrived demanding that we pay immediately . On explaining who Paul was and what had happened , he answered , ' You either pay the bill , or I call the police . ' It certainly looked like we were going to get thrown in jail . It was ironical , sitting in a club with a millionaire , unable to pay the bill . " 
 = = = India and Apple = = = 
 The Beatles flew to India in February 1968 , to visit the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi 's ashram ( after first meeting him on 24 August 1967 , at the London Hilton hotel ) . Evans arrived in India a few days earlier to inspect the ashram , but as soon as Starr got off the plane , he demanded that Evans find a doctor , as his inoculation shots were causing him pain . Evans : “ When we arrived at the local hospital , I tried to get immediate treatment for him [ Starr ] , to be told curtly by the Indian doctor , ' He is not a special case and will have to wait his turn . ' So off we go to pay a private doctor ten rupees for the privilege of hearing him say ' It will be all right ' . " Evans wrote in his diary on 17 February 1968 : " The press really tried kicking down the gates into the Ashram , the Indian people on the Ashram called me half way through , but as soon as an Indian reporter told me " No bloody foreigner is going to stop me in my own country " , I cooled it . " Evans ' diary says that he enjoyed his time in India : " It 's hard to believe that a week has already passed . I suppose the peace of mind and the serenity one achieves through meditation makes the time fly , " and that he also enjoyed the food , unlike Starr , who had brought a suitcase full of baked beans with him . After leaving India , Harrison and Evans flew to New York , visiting Bob Dylan and The Band , who were rehearsing at their Big Pink house / studio , in Woodstock . 
 When Apple was formed in 1968 , Evans was promoted from road manager to personal assistant , although his weekly £ 38 salary remained the same . Evans : " January 13 , 1969 : Paul [ McCartney ] is really cutting down on the Apple staff members . I was elevated to office boy [ Evans was made MD of Apple , but very briefly ] and I feel very hurt and sad inside — only big boys don 't cry . Why I should feel hurt and reason for writing this is ego . ... I thought I was different from other people in my relationship with The Beatles and being loved by them and treated so nice , I felt like one of the family . Seems I fetch and carry . I find it difficult to live on the £ 38 I take home each week and would love to be like their other friends who buy fantastic homes and have all the alterations done by them , and are still going to ask for a rise . I always tell myself — look , everybody wants to take from , be satisfied , try to give and you will receive . After all this time I have about £ 70 to my name , but was content and happy . Loving them as I do , nothing is too much trouble , because I want to serve them . Feel a bit better now — EGO ? " Evans ' financial problems started to become such a problem that he had to ask Harrison for money : " April 24 : " Had to tell George [ Harrison ] — ' I 'm broke ' . Really miserable and down because I 'm in the red , and the bills are coming in , poor old Lil [ his wife ] suffers as I don 't want to get a rise . Not really true don 't want to ask for a rise , fellows are having a pretty tough time as it is . " 
 Evans was the only member of the Apple entourage to be invited to attend ( and be a witness ) when McCartney and Linda Eastman were married at Marylebone Registry Office on 12 March 1969 . Evans wrote in his diary that he was due to be there at 9 @.@ 45 am , but McCartney 's brother , Michael 's train from Birmingham was late . Peter Brown and Evans passed the register office at 9 @.@ 15 , and saw that there were only a few photographers and ardent fans standing in the rain , but when they left , after the wedding at 11 @.@ 30 am , they were mobbed by a crowd of about 1 @,@ 000 people . When the Beatles played on the roof of Apple 's offices in Savile Row , Evans was told to delay the policemen ( who had arrived to stop the concert ) , as long as was possible . Evans was responsible for the signing of Badfinger ( Iveys ) to the Apple label in 1968 . They were the first rock @-@ band to be assigned to the label . Badfinger 's portrait by photographer Les Smithers has now been acquired by the National Portrait Gallery . 
 = = = Allen Klein = = = 
 Evans enjoyed an executive position at Apple until 1969 , when Allen Klein was hired as a manager to reorganise the whole company . Evans was fired by Klein the next year , because Klein complained to Lennon that Aspinall and Evans were " living like kings ; like fucking emperors " . Evans was later reinstated after McCartney , Harrison and Starr complained . On 13 September 1969 , Evans accompanied Lennon , Yoko Ono , Klaus Voorman , Alan White and Eric Clapton to Toronto , Canada , for the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival concert . He later wrote : " I was really enjoying myself . It was the first show I had <unk> for three years and I was really loving every minute of plugging the amps in and setting them up on stage , making sure that everything was right . Everyone wanted the show to go particularly well because Allen Klein , who had flown over , had organised for the whole of John 's performance to be filmed . This was on top of it being video @-@ taped by Dan Richter . " 
 = = = Musical contributions = = = 
 Evans contributed to many recordings , including singing in the chorus of " Yellow Submarine " . He played single organ notes on " You Won 't See Me " , and harmonica on " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! " . McCartney explained that he showed Evans where the notes were on the organ , and then nodded his head when he wanted Evans to play , and shook it when he wanted him to stop . 
 On " A Day in the Life " , Evans controlled an alarm clock ; counting the measures in the original 24 @-@ bar pause , and was one of the five piano players simultaneously hitting the last chord of the song . He played tambourine on " Dear Prudence " , and trumpet on " Helter Skelter " , where he played a double solo with Lennon , even though neither was proficient on the instrument . Evans contributed background vocals , and stirred a bucket of gravel ( as part of the rhythm ) , on " You Know My Name ( Look Up The Number ) " . He also contributed to the White Album out @-@ take , " What 's the New Mary Jane " , and hit an anvil on " Maxwell 's Silver Hammer " , because Starr could not lift the hammer high enough to get the right sound and keep in time with the song . 
 According to Evans ' diaries , he helped to compose songs for the Sgt. Pepper album . He wrote , on 27 January 1967 : " Sgt Pepper . Started writing song with Paul [ McCartney ] upstairs in his room , he on piano " and " Did a lot more of " where the rain comes in " [ a lyric from " Fixing a Hole " ] . Hope people like it . Started Sergeant Pepper " . On 1 February : " Sergeant Pepper sounds good . Paul tells me that I will get royalties on the song — great news , now perhaps a new home . " On 2 February : " Recording voices on Captain [ sic ] Pepper . All six of us doing the chorus in the middle , worked until about midnight . " 
 Keith Badman — author of The Beatles off the Record — referred to a tape recording of Evans speaking shortly before his death , on which Evans reiterated some of the statements made in the diary . According to Badman , Evans was asked at the time if it would be a problem that he was not credited as a writer , because the Lennon – McCartney writing name was " a really hot item " . For reasons unclear , Evans did not receive any royalties and stayed at his £ 38 @-@ a @-@ week pay ( £ 622 in modern currency ) . 
 = = = On film = = = 
 Evans appeared in four ( out of five ) Beatles ' films . During the filming of the Beatles ' first feature film , A Hard Day 's Night , Evans appeared in a cameo role , carrying an upright bass in between John Lennon and Millie in the backstage scene in which Millie mistakes Lennon for someone else . In Help ! , Evans played a confused channel swimmer who pops up through an ice @-@ hole in Austria , and on a beach in the Bahamas . Evans and Aspinall were asked to find and hire the actors that were needed to perform in the Magical Mystery Tour film , and to hire an old 60 @-@ seater coach , on which they were told to paint the Magical Mystery Tour logo , which McCartney had designed . Evans later appeared in the film as one of the magicians , who cast mysterious spells on the passengers of the bus . 
 In the Let It Be film , Evans can be seen playing the anvil during early versions of " Maxwell 's Silver Hammer " , and can be seen talking to police officers on the Savile Row rooftop when they came to stop the performance . Before the concert , Evans placed a camera and a microphone in a corner of Apple 's reception area , so that when the police came in to complain about the noise — which was expected — they could be filmed and recorded . The Beatles were often filmed by Evans during his time with them ( without sound ) , and a collection of his own film recordings was later released on DVD . 
 = = After The Beatles = = 
 In 1968 , Evans had seen the group Badfinger ( then known as The Iveys ) play live , and suggested that they be signed to Apple . Evans then produced several of their songs in 1969 and 1970 , the most notable of which was " No Matter What " , which charted on Billboard 's Top 10 in December 1970 . Evans also discovered the group Splinter and brought them to the Apple label , although they would subsequently move to George Harrison 's Dark Horse Records . Evans ' other production credits include Jackie Lomax ' 1969 single " New Day " ( on Apple ) and some of the tracks on Keith Moon 's only solo album Two Sides of the Moon ( 1975 ) . 
 Evans separated from his wife in 1973 and moved to Los Angeles where Lennon had moved to live with May Pang after his own separation from Yoko Ono . Evans is credited on Harrison 's All Things Must Pass and the John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band album as providing " tea and sympathy " . Evans cowrote " You and Me ( Babe ) " with Harrison . The track appeared on Starr 's 1973 solo album Ringo . He also cowrote the Splinter song " Lonely Man " , the musical centrepiece of Little Malcolm , an Apple feature film produced by Harrison . 
 Evans was asked to produce the group Natural Gas , and was working on a book of memoirs called Living The Beatles ' Legend which he was due to deliver to his publishers , Grosset & Dunlap , on 12 January 1976 . Evans was depressed about the separation from his wife ( who had asked for a divorce before Christmas ) even though he was then living with his new girlfriend , Fran Hughes , in a rented motel apartment at 8122 West 4th Street in Los Angeles . 
 = = Death = = 
 On 5 January 1976 , Evans was so despondent that Hughes phoned Evans ' cowriter for his biography , John Hoernie , and asked him to visit them . Hoernie saw Evans " really doped @-@ up and groggy " but Evans told Hoernie to make sure he finished Living The Beatles ' Legend . Hoernie helped Evans up to an upstairs bedroom , but during an incoherent conversation , Evans picked up an air rifle . Hoernie struggled with Evans , but Evans , being much stronger , held onto the weapon . 
 Hughes then phoned the police and told them that Evans was confused , had a rifle , and was on <unk> . Four policemen arrived and three of them , David D. <unk> , Robert E. Brannon and Lieutenant Higbie , went up to the bedroom . They later reported that as soon as Evans saw the three policemen he pointed a rifle at them . The officers repeatedly told Evans to put down the rifle ( which they did not know at the time was an air rifle ) but Evans constantly refused . The police fired six shots , four hitting Evans , killing him instantly . Evans had previously been awarded the badge of " Honorary Sheriff of Los Angeles County " , but in the Los Angeles Times , he was referred to as a “ jobless former road manager for the Beatles ” . 
 Evans was cremated on 7 January 1976 , in Los Angeles . None of the former Beatles attended his funeral , but Harry Nilsson and other friends did . Harrison arranged for Evans ' family to receive £ 5 @,@ 000 , as Evans had not maintained his life insurance premiums , and was not entitled to a pension . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In 1986 , a trunk containing Evans ' diaries and other effects was found in the basement of a New York publisher , and then sent to his family in London . In 1992 , Lennon 's original pages of lyrics to " A Day in the Life " were sold by the Evans estate for £ 56 @,@ 600 at Sotheby 's in London . In 2010 , a double @-@ sided sheet of paper containing the hand @-@ written lyrics and notes to " A Day in the Life " were sold at auction at Sotheby 's in New York to an anonymous American buyer for $ 1.2m ( £ 810 @,@ 000 ) . Other lyrics collected by Evans have been subject to legal action over the years : In 1996 , McCartney went to the High Court in England and prevented the sale of the original lyrics to " With a Little Help from My Friends " that Evans ' ex @-@ wife had tried to sell , by claiming that the lyrics were collected by Evans as a part of his duties , and therefore belonged to The Beatles , collectively . A 2004 report of the discovery of a further collection of Evans 's Beatles ' memorabilia proved to be false . 
 A notebook in which McCartney wrote the lyrics for " Hey Jude " was sold in 1998 , for £ 111 @,@ 500 . The notebook also contains lyrics for " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " and " All You Need Is Love " . It also contained lyrics , notes , drawings and poems by Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Starr , as well as by Evans . 
 A new one @-@ man play about Mal Evans called Beatle Mal 's Legendary Band was presented at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe between 5 and 27 August 2012 . It had previously previewed at the Cavern Club in Liverpool on Wednesday 25 July , with members of Mal 's family in the audience . Featuring actor Nik Wood @-@ Jones in the role of Mal , the play took the form of Mal looking back at his time with the Beatles and was presented as an entertainment with original music . 
 = Turahan Bey = 
 Turahan Bey or <unk> Beg ( Turkish : Turahan Bey / <unk> ; Albanian : <unk> Bej ; Greek : <unk> , <unk> <unk> or <unk> ; died in 1456 ) was a prominent Ottoman military commander and governor of Thessaly from 1423 until his death in 1456 . He participated in many Ottoman campaigns of the second quarter of the 15th century , fighting against the Byzantines as well as against the Crusade of Varna . His repeated raids into the Morea transformed the local Byzantine despotate into an Ottoman dependency and opened the way for its conquest . At the same time , his administration of Thessaly , where he settled new peoples , founded the town of Tyrnavos and revitalized the economy , set the groundwork for Ottoman rule in the area for centuries to come . 
 = = Life = = 
 Nothing is known of his birth date or early life , except that he was the son of Pasha <unk> Bey , who conquered Skopje in 1392 and was the first Ottoman governor of Bosansko <unk> . 
 He is first mentioned in 1413 as governor of Vidin , and then again in 1422 , when he fought against the Byzantine governor of Lamia , Kantakouzenos <unk> . He was one of the supporters of Mustafa Çelebi during the latter 's struggle against Mehmed I and Murad II . He became governor of Thessaly in early 1423 , and led his first major expedition in May – June of the same year , against the Peloponnese peninsula in southern Greece . His cavalry breached the recently rebuilt Hexamilion wall on 21 / 22 May and ravaged the interior of the peninsula unopposed . He attacked some Byzantine towns and settlements like Mystras , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Aside from the plunder , the expedition was also probably a reconnaissance mission ultimately aimed against Venetian possessions in the area , as Venice was the main driving force behind attempts to unite the various Christian rulers of Greece against the Ottoman advance . Soon after , the Byzantine historian Doukas reports Turahan 's presence on the shores of the Black Sea . At about the same time , he also campaigned in Epirus , defeated local Albanian tribes and made them tributary to the Ottoman state . In the 1430s along with Ali Bey and Ishak Bey he participated in the campaigns that suppressed an Albanian revolt , led by Gjergj Arianiti and Andrew Thopia . 
 Despite the devastation visited upon the Peloponnese , Turahan 's 1423 expedition was only a raid , and the Byzantine <unk> of the Morea were able to restore their position and gradually over the next few years bring the entire peninsula under their control . In 1431 however Turahan again breached and destroyed the Hexamilion and took Thebes in 1435 , to prevent it from falling into the hands of the <unk> Byzantines . The Despotate of the Morea , under the constant threat of renewed Turkish invasion clung on to a precarious independence only through continuous gifts and tribute to Turahan . 
 In November 1443 Turahan participated in the Battle of Niš against John Hunyadi , which ended in an Ottoman defeat . During their retreat from Niš , Turahan Bey and Kasim Pasha burned all villages between Niš and Sofia . Turahan persuaded Sultan Murad II to abandon Sofia as well , and follow a consequent scorched earth strategy against the Hungarian advance . Although the Hungarians were badly mauled in the Battle of <unk> , in a subsequent action at <unk> they were able to capture Mahmud Bey , the Sultan 's son @-@ in @-@ law , creating the impression of an overall victorious campaign . Contemporary Ottoman sources blame rivalry between Kasim and Turahan for the defeat at <unk> , while some claim that the Serbian Despot Đurađ Branković bribed Turahan not to participate in the battle . Turahan fell from favour as a result and was banished by the Sultan to a prison in Tokat . 
 Nevertheless , he was soon restored to his position , as he was present in Murad 's 1446 campaign against the Morea . Murad was reportedly disheartened by the strength of the Hexamilion , but Turahan insisted on an assault . Aided by an artillery bombardment , the Ottomans again breached the Byzantine defences and ravaged the Peloponnese at will . As a result , the Morea was now officially reduced to an Ottoman vassal state . In early October 1452 , Turahan and his sons Ahmed and Ömer led a large force into the Peloponnese . Sultan Mehmed II ordered them to remain there during the winter in order to prevent despots Thomas and Demetrios from assisting their brother , Emperor Constantine XI , during the Siege of Constantinople in 1453 . Turahan again stormed the Hexamilion and penetrated into the Morea , raiding from Corinth through the Argolid and Arcadia to Messenia . The Byzantines put up little resistance after Hexamilion , although Turahan 's son Ahmed was captured in an ambush at <unk> and imprisoned in Mystras . 
 The fall of Constantinople on 29 May 1453 had great repercussions in the Morea . The two despots , the brothers Demetrios and Thomas , heartily detested each other and were unpopular among their own subjects . A rebellion broke out against them in autumn , supported both by the local Albanian immigrants and the native Greeks , and spread quickly . As the Sultan 's vassals , the despots called upon Turkish aid , and Turahan 's son Ömer arrived in December . After a few successes , he departed after securing the release of his brother from captivity . The revolt did not subside , and in October 1454 Turahan himself was forced to intervene . After sacking a few fortresses , the rebellious populace capitulated . Turahan advised the two Palaiologoi to compose their differences and rule well , and then departed the peninsula . The two brothers were however unable to reconcile themselves , and soon reverted to quarrelling and conspiring with Western powers against the Sultan . In retaliation , Mehmed II campaigned in the Morea in 1458 and seized the northwestern half of the country , which became an Ottoman province under Ömer . The rest of the despotate followed in 1460 . 
 Turahan himself was recalled to Adrianople in October 1455 and died ca . August 1456 . He was buried at Kirk <unk> near Uzun <unk> in Thrace , but his memorial tomb ( türbe ) survives to this day in the city . His descendants , the <unk> , were wealthy landowners in Thessaly until the end of the Ottoman rule there in the late 19th century ; with the exception of his sons however , they did not rise to any wider prominence . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Turahan Bey ranked among the great , practically semi @-@ autonomous Ottoman " marcher @-@ lords " ( <unk> <unk> ) of the 15th @-@ century Balkans , along the likes of Gazi Evrenos . He was instrumental in the establishment of Ottoman rule in Thessaly and central Greece in general . Aside from his campaigns of conquest , he brought in 5 @,@ 000 Turkish settlers ( <unk> and <unk> ) whom he settled in a string of twelve villages across the province to strengthen Ottoman military control . In addition , according to Turahan 's Arab @-@ language biography , which the Scottish traveller David Urquhart reported to be still extant in the 1830s in Tyrnavos , he was also the first to institute a Greek militia for the lawless mountainous regions of central Greece , the forerunners of the later <unk> . 
 Turahan also took several measures to restore order and prosperity in his province , most notably the foundation ( or re @-@ foundation ) of the town of Tyrnavos , which before was a small pastoral settlement . To attract and protect the local Greek Orthodox population , he granted it special privileges , such as special administrative status as a waqf ( a religious endowment ) of the Sharif of Mecca , tax exemptions and the prohibition of Ottoman troops from passing through the town . He also endowed it with both a mosque ( destroyed after the Greek annexation of Thessaly in 1881 ) and a church , St Nicholas Turahan , which survives to this day . Turahan also endowed many other public buildings such as mosques , monasteries , madrasas , schools , caravanserais , bridges and baths across the province . He also took care to maintain and foster the Thessalian cotton , silk and wool textile industry , to the extent that later generations attributed to him the introduction of new dye techniques based on yellow berries , madder and the kali plant , used in the manufacture of potash . From there these materials spread to the rest of Rumelia and thence to Western Europe . 
 = = Family tree = = 
 After Franz <unk> in the Encyclopedia of Islam : 
 = Miami Valley Hospital South = 
 Miami Valley Hospital South ( <unk> ) is a hospital in Centerville , Ohio . It is a branch of Miami Valley Hospital in Dayton , Ohio and is managed by Premier Health . Designed and constructed in 2007 as an outpatient facility with an emergency room , the facility grew faster than expected and became a full service hospital with as office building for physicians and a five @-@ story patient wing added between 2009 and 2013 . As of 2013 , the hospital is a 579 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 53 @,@ 800 m2 ) complex on a 115 @-@ acre ( 47 ha ) campus adjacent to Interstate 675 . It has 60 beds and features a number of specialty care options including oncology , cardiology , sports medicine , and maternity care to cater to the suburban community surrounding the hospital . 
 = = History = = 
 Miami Valley Hospital South sits on a 115 @-@ acre ( 47 ha ) campus along Interstate 675 south of Dayton , Ohio . The land had been owned by Premier Health for 20 years before the hospital was built in 2007 , after several decades of planning for an outpatient hospital facility to serve southwestern Greene County , specifically Centerville and <unk> where significant suburban housing development was taking place . It was also constructed with partnerships with local high schools in mind to expand athletic training services for student athletes . The project was overseen by Premier Health employee Joann Ringer , who later became chief operating officer of the facility . 
 The original 268 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 24 @,@ 900 m2 ) outpatient facility was opened in October 2007 at a construction cost of $ 79 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 , and featured a general surgery emergency room with 10 operating rooms . It had a total of 200 employees , many of whom were trained at Miami Valley Hospital . The facility also featured a helipad for <unk> service , as emergencies were transferred to the Level I Trauma Center at Miami Valley Hospital . Originally called Miami Valley South Health Center , traffic to the hospital quickly escalated beyond what was projected , in part because of consumer demand for care in a single facility and without the need to transfer to other hospitals . 
 In November 2008 , the first inpatient beds were added following demand for recovery services from the emergency room , including several observation beds and 10 short @-@ stay beds , at which point the facility was renamed Miami Valley Hospital South . These expansions were completed in June 2009 . In late 2010 , the hospital added a 215 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 20 @,@ 000 m2 ) , five story patient wing to the facility , initially planned to cost $ 64 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 . A $ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 comprehensive cancer care center was also added along with an office building for physicians . Ultimately this expansion was completed at a cost of $ 51 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , which brought the hospital size to 579 @,@ 000 square feet ( 53 @,@ 800 m2 ) . The new patient wing opened in March 2012 . This new wing included a 24 @-@ bed general surgery floor , a 24 @-@ bed orthopedic surgery floor , and a 12 @-@ bed maternity ward completed in August 2012 , for a total of 60 beds . At the end of this expansion , the number of staff grew to 478 full- and part @-@ time employees . The hospital saw admittance to its emergency room grow from 19 @,@ 500 in 2007 to 2008 to 32 @,@ 000 in 2012 . From August 2012 to February 2013 the number of babies born in the maternity ward was 550 . 
 The facility features architecture intended to evoke a sense of calm . It was constructed with a central courtyard and a number of windows overlooking it , as well as nature @-@ related artwork and architecture . There are also separate hallways for staff and visitors in order to make the interior appear less crowded . The hospital also features a substantial amount of parking and a shuttle service to the entrance . Miami Valley Hospital South was constructed with future expansion in mind . Two of the five floors in the patient wing are empty and can be filled adding 24 beds each . A third hallway can be added to the wing which will add 60 beds , and the maternity ward can also be expanded with a second floor to add 12 beds , which means the facility could be expanded to 180 beds . 
 = = Services = = 
 The hospital features a number of inpatient support services including a cafeteria food facility which also delivers food to patient rooms , housekeeping and environmental services . Among the hospital 's medical specialties are general surgery , obstetrics and orthopedics . The hospital also features a high @-@ risk breast cancer center aimed at preventative care for patients at risk of developing cancer , staffed by surgical oncologists and staff nurses . Among other specialty services are cardiology , sports medicine , and a hyperbaric oxygen therapy chamber . The hospital has equipment for cardiac monitoring , magnetic resonance imaging , and computed tomography 
 The facility also features a physician office building which houses staff practitioners as well as offices for physicians with independent practices within the community . The 78 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 7 @,@ 200 m2 ) building , opened in January 2013 , also features a comprehensive cancer care center focused on outpatient cancer care treatment , as well as space for patient education and support groups . In addition to physician labs , the facility also houses a concrete enclosed vault which houses a linear accelerator , which is used for precision cancer treatments . When Miami Valley Hospital South opened , the specialists for ovarian cancer and uterine cancer were moved there from Miami Valley Hospital . 
 = Bart King = 
 John Barton " Bart " King ( October 19 , 1873 – October 17 , 1965 ) was an American cricketer , active in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . King was part of the Philadelphia team that played from the end of the 19th century until the outbreak of World War I. This period of cricket in the United States was dominated by " gentlemen cricketers " — men of independent wealth who did not need to work . King , an amateur from a middle @-@ class family , was able to devote time to cricket thanks to a job set up by his teammates . 
 A skilled batsman who proved his worth as a bowler , King set numerous records in the continent of North America during his career and led the first @-@ class bowling averages in England in 1908 . He successfully competed against the best cricketers from England and Australia . King was the dominant bowler on his team when it toured England in 1897 , 1903 , and 1908 . He dismissed batsmen with his unique delivery , which he called the " angler " , and helped develop the art of swing bowling in the sport . Sir Pelham Warner described Bart King as " one of the finest bowlers of all time " , and Donald Bradman called him " America 's greatest cricketing son . " 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 King was born in Philadelphia in 1873 . Early in his life , he worked in a linen trade . Although this was the family business , his father later allowed him to leave to enter the insurance industry . King was not a member of the aristocratic and wealthy families of Philadelphia that produced many of the era 's top cricketers . King 's obituary in Cricket Quarterly suggests that his career in insurance was set up for him by those families to allow him to continue playing the game . In 1913 ( or 1911 ) , King married Fannie Lockhart ; the marriage lasted for fifty years . King 's wife died in 1963 , and he died in 1965 in his native Philadelphia two days before his 92nd birthday . 
 Bart King was regarded by many of his contemporaries as an affable person . Ralph Barker called him the Bob Hope of cricket thanks to his quips and stories . King was also noted for making jabs at opponents , but leaving them laughing at themselves . The same held true when he would question umpires that turned down his appeals . He is said to have spoken for ninety minutes at a dinner during his last tour to England , punctuated every few seconds with laughs . The dinner guests were kept laughing even while King spoke with a dead @-@ pan expression . One man who attended the dinner noted that King " told his impossible tales with such an air of conviction ... that his audiences were always in doubt when to take him seriously . He made their task doubly difficult by sprinkling in a fair mixture of truth with his fiction . " 
 = = Cricketing career = = 
 Like most young American men of this era , Bart King came to cricket only after first playing baseball . He began to play club cricket at Tioga Cricket Club in 1888 , aged 15 , starting out as a batsman . Tioga was one of the lesser Philadelphian cricket clubs . King played his first recorded match for the club in 1889 , when he was tried as a bowler due to his physique . He took 37 wickets for 99 runs for the club in the 1889 cricket season . 
 King played for Tioga until 1896 , when he joined Belmont Cricket Club . King joined the Philadelphian cricket team for three tours of England while playing at Belmont . King 's most dominating matches came during these tours , playing with the premier American team of the era . 
 = = = Australia in Philadelphia = = = 
 In 1893 , the Australian team stopped by Philadelphia on its way home from a tour of England . Australia fielded a strong side , but the team was tired after a long tour and trip . In spite of this fatigue , the Australians chose to face the full strength of the Gentlemen of Philadelphia in a three @-@ day match starting September 29 . 
 On a small ground at Belmont , the September grass was coarse . It had been rolled so that the ball moved very quickly across the ground . The Australian side , fielding first , dropped many catches and could not cope with the short boundary , allowing the Philadelphians to reach a huge total of 525 runs . King came in to bat last , at number 11 , making 36 runs . The leading Australian bowlers , Hugh Trumble and George Giffen , took 2 for 104 and 0 for 114 respectively . When the Australians came to bat , they hoped that they would , by now , have recovered from their tiring journey , but ran into problems when dealing with Bart King 's developing swing bowling . The side was all out for 199 , with King taking 5 wickets for 78 runs . The Australians followed on and were all out again for 268 , allowing the Gentlemen of Philadelphia to win by an innings and 68 runs . 
 The cricket world was stunned that a single American city could turn out a side capable of beating the full strength of Australia . The Australians won the return match on October 6 by six wickets , but the Australian captain , Jack Blackham , said to the Americans , " You have better players here than we have been led to believe . They class with England 's best . " 
 = = = Tour of England in 1897 = = = 
 King won the Child 's Bowling Cup , the premier award for bowling in American cricket , for the first time in 1896 , and joined the Philadelphian cricket team 's tour of England in 1897 . The tour was very ambitious , and was arranged mainly for educational purposes : few of those on the American side expected to win many matches . Previous tours had tended to involve amateur English sides with a low level of competition . In 1897 , the tour started on June 7 at Oxford , ending in late July at The Oval almost 2 months later . The schedule included fifteen matches against all of the top county cricket teams , the Oxford and Cambridge University teams , the Marylebone Cricket Club , and two other sides , though only a few of the counties thought it worthwhile to put their best elevens onto the field . 
 While the tour initially aroused some curiosity , many English fans lost interest until Bart King and the Philadelphians met the full Sussex team at Brighton on June 17 . King demonstrated his batting ability in the first innings with a fourth @-@ wicket stand of 107 with John Lester . He then took 7 wickets for 13 runs , and Philadelphia dismissed Sussex for 46 in less than an hour . King took 6 for 102 in Sussex 's second innings , helping the Philadelphians to victory by 8 wickets . 
 Despite the excitement surrounding King 's performance , the Americans did not fare well overall , and the results may have been worse than hoped for by the tour 's promoters . Philadelphia won only two of their fifteen matches , losing nine and earning a draw in the remaining four . After their win against Sussex , the only other win of the tour came against Warwickshire . During this match , King took 5 for 95 and 7 for 72 and scored 46 runs . According to Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , King proved himself to be the best bowler on the American side and had to do much of the work . He bowled three hundred overs , more than anyone else in the team , taking 72 wickets with a bowling average of a little over 24 runs . In addition to his bowling , King scored 441 runs as a batsman at a batting average of just over 20 . 
 Following the 1897 tour , many English counties were interested in securing King 's services . It was thought that he would not play as a professional , so alternative means of remuneration had to be found : one county reportedly offered to arrange a marriage with a widow who had an income of £ 7000 per year . In the end , King returned to the United States , where he continued to perform very well in club cricket . 
 = = = Tour of England in 1903 = = = 
 The Philadelphian team returned to England in 1903 . This proved to be King 's most successful tour , particularly his performances in the matches against Lancashire and Surrey . King played in 13 of the 15 matches on the tour , missing two with a strained side . In his first match , against Cambridge University , he took 5 for 136 and 4 for 28 . He followed that with 8 for 39 in the first innings against Oxford University , though the match was eventually abandoned as a draw due to rain . In his next match , against Gloucestershire , he took 2 for 26 in the first innings but did not bowl in the second . He also took 7 for 51 and 2 for 28 against a strong MCC side at Lord 's . Then came the Lancashire match at Old Trafford Cricket Ground . 
 In Lancashire 's first innings , King bowled 27 overs and took 5 wickets for 46 runs . The Philadelphians passed Lancashire 's first innings score , but their lead was quickly overtaken in Lancashire 's second innings . With the wind strong over King 's left shoulder , the scene was set for him to dominate the opposition . In his first over after the lunch break on day two of the match , he yorked one of Lancashire 's opening batsmen and his replacement with successive balls . He clean bowled two more batsmen in his second over , and bowled a stump out of the ground in the third . In 3 overs , he had taken 5 wickets for 7 runs . After this performance , King had to be rested in the field . One batsman was run out before King returned to take 4 more wickets , ending the innings with 9 for 62 . The Philadelphians won next morning by nine wickets . 
 Against Surrey on August 6 , King was overpowering again . It was in this match that King gave what Barker called his finest first @-@ class performance ever . Batting first , he scored 98 runs in the Philadelphian 's first innings before being run out , and he then took 3 for 89 in Surrey 's reply . In the second innings , he made 113 not out and then took 3 for 98 . Surrey lost the match by 110 runs . Apparently , King was so exhausted after his performance that he fell asleep during a speech by the Lord Chief Justice Lord Alverstone at a banquet after the match . 
 = = = Tour of England in 1908 = = = 
 King toured England with the Philadelphians a third time in 1908 . This tour included both first @-@ class matches and more minor ones . The first match that was played was against South Wales in Cardiff . The Philadelphians won by 36 behind the bowling of King and Ranji Hordern . The pair took all 20 wickets of the Welsh side . After this , the first @-@ class matches began with Worcestershire on July 9 . Again the Philadelphians won and again Hordern and King took most of the wickets . This trend continued throughout the tour . In the first @-@ class matches that King played , the Philadelphians recorded four wins and six losses . Although he was already 35 years old , King had posted extraordinary numbers in his bowling . He topped the bowling averages for the entire 1908 English cricket season at 11 @.@ 01 . This mark was not bettered until 1958 , when Les Jackson of Derbyshire posted an average of 10 @.@ 99 . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 King 's cricketing career did not end with his last first @-@ class match . He continued to play club matches in Philadelphia and participated in non @-@ first @-@ class fixtures around the continent . King is noted for holding the bowling record against Canada . On a rainy afternoon at Philadelphia in 1906 , King bowled into a slight breeze to capture 8 wickets for 17 runs . This record came in a four @-@ year period during which King focused on club cricket in Philadelphia , when he won the city 's batting award three times and the bowling award four times . 
 King played in his last two international matches in 1912 , against Australia . His performances were of the highest quality , given that he was nearing his fortieth year . In the first match , he took 9 wickets for 78 runs to help Philadelphia win by 2 runs ; in the second , Australia won by 45 runs despite him taking 8 for 74 . 
 King joined the Philadelphia Cricket Club after the 1912 season . Despite being well past his 40th year , he continued to play competitive cricket for another 4 years . His 27 @-@ year career ended with his last game for the Philadelphia Cricket Club against Frankford , on July 20 , 1916 . On this occasion , his bowling and batting skills had declined , but he maintained a batting average of 43 @.@ 33 for that final season . 
 = = Death = = 
 King died at a nursing home in his native Philadelphia in 1965 , two days short of his 92nd birthday . The Times newspaper in the UK ran an obituary for him , which quoted Plum Warner as saying that : " Had he been an Englishman or an Australian , he would have been even more famous than he was . " 
 = = Achievements and legacy = = 
 Though King focused on bowling throughout his career , he was also a very fine batsman . In 1905 , he established a North American record batting record by scoring 315 at the Germantown Cricket Club . The following year , he scored 344 not out for Belmont against the Merion Cricket Club , setting a North American batting record which still stands . He scored 39 centuries in his North American career , and he topped 1 @,@ 000 runs in six seasons . He took over 100 wickets in eight seasons , including a double of 1 @,@ 000 runs and 100 wickets in four seasons . In his whole career , he scored 19 @,@ 808 runs at an average of 36 @.@ 47 , and took 2 @,@ 088 wickets at an average of 10 @.@ 47 . He took all 10 wickets in an innings on three occasions , and took 9 wickets in an innings five times . One of these occasions , in the Gentlemen of Ireland 's first innings in 1909 , was followed by a hat @-@ trick in the second innings . 
 There is an apocryphal story of King emulating a famous baseball pitcher of the day , Rube Waddell , by sending all his fielders back into the pavilion and finishing off the opponent 's innings on his own . King and Belmont were playing Trenton in the Halifax Cup at Elmwood Cricket Ground . Some versions of the story have him banishing the fielders and then calling one of them to a position 22 yards ( 20 m ) back and 4 yards ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) to the leg side . This fielder was stationed there to pick up the bails which landed at his feet after King bowled his trademark " angler " . This story was disputed some years later by the captain of Trenton , who claimed that when he " went in to bat that afternoon , King had four balls left in his over . " He claimed to have " hit the first delivery to cover point but of course there was no one there . The ball stopped within three feet of the boundary , and King had to chase it . By the time he got back we had run six . " The captain claimed to be the only batsmen to have hit four consecutive sixes off King , but commended the bowler on his ability to spin a tale . 
 Thanks to his dominant performance over his career and his renown in the world of cricket , King was elected an honorary member of the Incogniti Cricket Club in 1908 and an honorary life member of the Marylebone Cricket Club in 1962 . When Plum Warner was asked to name the greatest bowler who ever lived , he said that John Barton King , " at the top of his power and speed , was at least the equal of the greatest of them all . " 
 King is credited as one of the first bowlers to utilise swing bowling deliberately . Other bowlers in his time could sometimes get the ball to swing , but King was one of the first to do so at will with an old or new ball . He made use of a lethal delivery which he called the " angler " , a product of his experience as a baseball pitcher , to confuse the English batsmen . He would come in with the ball clasped above his head in both hands as would a baseball pitcher . He was famous for his late swing — in and out — and would produce the in @-@ swinger with his right hand coming down from a point over his left shoulder . He described it as an in @-@ swinger which , if properly bowled , would change direction sharply in the last 10 or 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) of flight . King used this ball only sparingly and only against good batsmen . After a tour to Philadelphia by an Australian side in 1896 , George Giffen said " the Philadelphians really have some high @-@ class players , but it was the fact of their bowlers playing us with baseball curves that upset our batsmen . " 
 = Siren ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Siren " is the seventeenth episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on March 20 , 1998 . Millennium concerns offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) as he investigates crimes for the Millennium Group . The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed Allen Coulter . " Siren " featured guest appearances by Vivian Wu , Tzi Ma and Kristen Cloke . 
 When offender profiler Black investigates several deaths on a cargo ship , he encounters a mysterious woman who shows him visions of a life in which he had never joined the Millennium Group . Upon recovering , his experience leads him to doubt his role in the organisation . " Siren " was viewed by approximately 5 @.@ 68 million households during its original broadcast . The episode received positive critical reviews , with one reviewer drawing comparisons with the film It 's a Wonderful Life . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) is an offender profiler working for a private investigative firm called the Millennium Group , who consult with local or federal law enforcement on criminal cases . The Millennium Group , and Black , specialise in examining violent crimes or those of a millenarian nature . 
 As a cargo ship pulls into harbour , it is surrounded by Immigration and Naturalization Service agents . On board , the captain , Law ( Tzi Ma ) , sends two of his crew to kill a " monster " in the cargo hold . Before they can do so , the ship is boarded and the men arrested . Inside the hold , INS agents find a glamorous woman ( Vivian Wu ) bound in chains . 
 Black 's wife Catherine ( Megan Gallagher ) has brought their daughter Jordan to the hospital where she works ; there , Jordan sees the captive woman and is convinced she will be significant to her father . Black works for Catherine brings the woman 's file to Black , who becomes interested in the case . However , attempts to communicate with her fail , as a translator insists the woman is speaking a wholly unknown language . 
 <unk> , Black and fellow Group member Lara Means ( Kristen Cloke ) investigate the ship , finding several bodies hidden in a crate , all having died of exposure . Black then interviews Law and his crew individually , each time being given a contradicting story of how the woman came to be on board the ship . However , they all agree that after she boarded , crew were discovered daily , dead of exposure on the ship 's bow ; Law had the woman chained up in the belief she was responsible . 
 Black traces the woman 's fingerprints through a Millennium Group database , finding they belong to a Tamara Shui Fa Lee , who disappeared at sea near Hong Kong ten years prior — and who Black believes is now dead . Black visits " Lee " at the hospital , where she speaks to him in perfect English , discussing personal events from his life of which she would have no knowledge . As he drives home , he sees her on the side of the highway and stops to investigate ; however , he finds no sign of her and returns home , where he shares an intimate dinner with Catherine and Jordan , later retiring to bed with Catherine — despite their estrangement . Black gradually notices more differences from how his life had been , realizing he has never been a member of the Millennium Group and founded a private investigation firm after leaving the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Returning home again one day , he sees a demon holding Jordan 's lifeless body . 
 Back on the highway , an ambulance crew try to resuscitate Black , who has been outside his car through the night after his vision of Lee . After he comes to , he realizes this alternate reality was Lee showing him a life without the Millennium Group . However , he is left unsure whether his role within the Group is protecting his family from evil , or exposing them to it . Black seeks out Lee in a refugee camp ; meanwhile , Law and his crewmen are also tracking her , conspiring to kill her to avenge their fellow crew . Lee turns the men against each other with her visions , before Black arrives to rescue her . As Black questions her as to the Group 's influence , she resumes speaking in her unknown tongue , leaving Black without the answer he seeks . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Siren " was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong . It was the fourteenth episode to have been written by the pair , who had penned several across the first and second seasons of the series . The pair had also taken the roles of co @-@ executive producers during the second season . The episode was directed by Allen Coulter , in his third and final contribution to the series ; Coulter had previously helmed the earlier second season episodes " Beware of the Dog " and " The Pest House " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Siren " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on March 20 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 8 during its original broadcast , meaning that 5 @.@ 8 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 5 @.@ 68 million households , and left the episode the eighty @-@ second most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received mildly positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a " B " . He compared its central premise to the film It 's A Wonderful Life , and considered this a common trope in television ; VanDerWerff also felt that the plot structure , with a supernatural event being encountered during a criminal investigation , was overly reminiscent of Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files . However , he considered that the episode worked well overall , highlighting its alternate @-@ reality section and its decision not to answer every question raised . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 3 out of 5 , finding that its motif of temptation was an intriguing one , but that overall the episode 's spiritual themes were muddied by its reliance on a " routine cops and robbers " framework . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Siren " three stars out of five . Shearman found the episode 's alternate reality section to be " touching " but " not especially revelatory " , considering it and the episode as a whole to have been more interesting in premise than in execution . Shearman compared the episode to " The Curse of Frank Black " and " Midnight of the Century " , though finding that the immigration plot left it less focused and interesting than those installments . 
 = The Boat Race 1936 = 
 The 88th Boat Race took place on 4 April 1936 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Umpired by the former Boat Race coach Francis Escombe , Cambridge won by five lengths in a time of 21 minutes 6 seconds . The record thirteenth consecutive victory took the overall record in the event to 47 – 40 in Cambridge 's favour . The heaviest crew up to that year in Boat Race history , Cambridge were the first to weigh more than an average of 13 st ( 82 @.@ 4 kg ) per individual . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1935 race by four and a half lengths , and led overall with 46 victories to Oxford 's 40 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford were coached by William Rathbone ( who rowed for Oxford in the 1926 and 1927 races ) , and former Cambridge rowers John Houghton Gibbon ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1899 and 1900 races ) and Kenneth Payne ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races ) . Cambridge 's coaches were F. E. Hellyer ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1910 and 1911 races ) , B. C. Johnstone , D. H. E. McCowen ( who had rowed in the 1932 race ) and C. H. Rew ( who had coached the Light Blues the previous year ) . The race was umpired by Francis Jerram Escombe who had coached Cambridge fifteen times between 1904 and 1934 , and Oxford the previous year . Both boats were made by Sims and both crews used Ayling 's oars . 
 The rowing correspondent for The Times suggested that on arrival at Putney , " Cambridge were almost certainly the fastest crew ever to come to the tideway . Oxford were equally certain one of the worst " . He went on to report that while Cambridge still looked " remarkably neat " , they " have actually got slower " ; at the same time Oxford " improved their pace , if not their appearance , in a measure that most critics would have thought quite impossible " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 0 @.@ 5 lb ( 82 @.@ 6 kg ) , 3 @.@ 75 pounds ( 1 @.@ 7 kg ) per rower more than their opponents , the heaviest crew ever at the time . It was the first time in the race history that a crew weighed more than an average of 13 st ( 82 @.@ 4 kg ) . Oxford saw two participants with Boat Race experience return to the crew in number five B. J. <unk> and stroke D. M. de R. Winser . Cambridge 's crew contained five former Blues , four of whom were making their third appearance including cox Noel Duckworth , and Jack Wilson and Ran Laurie , who would win the <unk> pairs Gold medal at the 1948 Olympics . Three of the race participants were registered as non @-@ British : Oxford 's J. S. Lewes and S. R. C. Wood , along with Cambridge 's Thomas Cree were all Australian . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . Umpire Escombe started the race at 11 : 40 a.m in relatively calm water . Cambridge made the quicker start , out @-@ rating the Dark Blues , but struggled in patches of rougher water such that Oxford held a slight lead by the end of the Fulham Wall . With the bend in the river against them , the Dark Blues held a half @-@ length lead as the crews passed the Mile Post and , according to former Oxford rower E. P. Evans , writing in The Manchester Guardian , " were going well ... and seemed to be forging ahead at every stroke " . At Harrods Furniture Depository , Cambridge stroke Ran Laurie pushed on to reduce Oxford 's advantage as the long bend in the river favoured them : the crews passed under Hammersmith Bridge with Cambridge trailing by half a length . 
 A series of spurts from Cambridge combined with intelligent steering from their cox , pushing the Dark Blue boat out of the tide , resulted in a reversal of fortune with Cambridge leading , and by the end of Chiswick Eyot , they were nearly clear of Oxford . Passing Chiswick Steps four seconds ahead , the Light Blues continued to increase their advantage , passing below Barnes Bridge four lengths ahead . They passed the finishing post five lengths ahead in a time of 21 minutes 6 seconds . It was the largest winning margin since the 1929 race and the slowest winning time since the 1925 race when Oxford sank in adverse conditions . It was Cambridge 's thirteenth consecutive victory , a record streak in the history of the Boat Race , and took the overall record in the event to 47 – 40 in their favour . E. P. Evans wrote that " no praise is too much for the gallant Oxford crew " while of Cambridge he noted " though they may not have produced their best form in the early part of the race they made up for it later " . The rowing correspondent for The Times stated that " it was an exciting race over the first half of the course " and praised the Light Blues saying " all credit is due to the Cambridge crew for the manner in which they recovered themselves after being led through such bad water " . William Beach Thomas , writing in The Observer , claimed " Cambridge were described as the best crew in the chronicles of rowing kings , and Oxford the very worst " . 
 = History of Brasenose College , Oxford = 
 The history of Brasenose College , Oxford stretches back to 1509 , when the college was founded on the site of Brasenose Hall . Its name is believed to derive from the name of a bronze knocker that adorned the hall 's door . The college was associated with Lancashire and Cheshire , the county origins of its two founders – Sir Richard Sutton and the Bishop of Lincoln , William Smyth – a link that was maintained strongly until the latter half of the nineteenth century . The first principals navigated Brasenose , with its Catholic sympathisers , through the reformation and continuing religious reforms . Most of Brasenose favoured the Royalist side during the English Civil War , although it produced notable generals and clergy on both sides . The library and chapel were completed in the mid @-@ seventeenth century , despite Brasenose suffering continuing financial problems . 
 The post @-@ 1785 period would see an era of prosperity of the college under Principal William Cleaver . The college began to be populated by gentlemen , its income doubling between 1790 and 1810 , and academic success considerable . Efforts to reconstruct Brasenose were not completed , however , until the second half of the century with the addition of New Quad between 1886 and 1911 . Brasenose 's financial position remained secure , although under the tenure of Principal Edward <unk> Cradock Brasenose 's academic record waned greatly , with much of its success focussed on sports – where it excelled most notably in cricket and rowing . The mid @-@ Century Royal Commissions were navigated – although they were opposed in form , their recommendations welcomed including the submission of accounts . The election of Charles Buller Heberden as Principal in 1889 led to a reversal in Brasenose 's academic failures , although its sporting performance suffered . Heberden was the first lay Principal , presiding over an increasingly secular college , opening up the library to undergraduates , instituting an entrance exam for the first time and accepting Rhodes scholarships . 
 Brasenose lost 115 men in the First World War ( including a quarter of the 1913 year ) , with its undergraduate numbers greatly reduced . Lord Curzon 's post @-@ War reforms were successfully instituted . The inter @-@ war period was defined by William Stallybrass , who as fellow and eventual Principal ( until 1948 ) dominated college life . Brasenose once again produced top sportsmen – cricketers , rowers , and others . This came at the cost of falling academic standards and poorly performing finances , which would see Stallybrass ' authority challenged . He died in a railway accident before he could be forced out , however . After the war , sporting achievements waned ( although there were notable exceptions ) but academic success did not improve significantly , in what was now one of Oxford 's largest colleges . 
 The 1970s saw considerable social change in Brasenose : the admission of women beginning in 1974 , more post @-@ graduate attendees and fewer domestic staff . There was also considerable construction work to ensure that undergraduates could be housed for the entirety of their degree on the main site and on the Frewin site ; this task was only completed in 1997 with the opening of the St Cross Building and Frewin extension . Law continued to be a strong subject for Brasenose ( following on from Stallybrass , through Principals Barry Nicholas and Herbert Hart ) as was the emerging subject of Philosophy , Politics and Economics ( PPE ) , starting with the fellowship of Vernon Bogdanor . Brasenose 's finances were secured , and it thus entered the twenty @-@ first century in a good position with regards financial , extracurricular and academic success – the last having significantly recovered from its lows , helped by PPE . 
 = = Foundation and early history = = 
 The first reference to a " Brasenose Hall " is found in the forged charter of 1219 , occupying at that time only one small part of the current site . It was recorded in 1278 as having four scholars , although over the next fifty years it was to acquire some corporate strength . The name " Brasenose " is thought to originate from a brass – lead door knocker in the shape of leopard ( or lion ) head ; the nose @-@ shaped door knocker of which one version now hangs above the high table of the main hall of Brasenose College . An alternative theory is that the name is a corruption of <unk> ( brewhouse ) , but this is not widely accepted , although the college did have its own brewhouse up until 1889 . This theory is believed to date back only to 1837 . 
 During the 1333 disturbances in Oxford , a group of clerks from Brasenose Hall left the ongoing violence and made their way to Stamford , Lincolnshire . The Brasenose knocker was taken with them as a symbol of continuity , and only believed returned in 1890 . Although Edward III intervened , ordering the students to return , some persisted in Stamford and acquired a second " Brasenose Hall " there . In 1381 , Brasenose Hall , Oxford , acquired a lease from University College for parts of the current site . The Stamford establishment was considered a rival , and candidates for degrees at Brasenose , Oxford , were required to swear that they would not give or attend lectures in Stamford as late as 1827 . Between 1480 and 1509 the Hall was responsible for supplying a vice @-@ chancellor of the University and two of its proctors . Throughout this period , Brasenose appears to have aligned itself with Oxford 's " Northerners " during periods of Northerner – Southerner violence in Oxford . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 The College is traditionally considered to have been founded in 1509 by a lawyer , Sir Richard Sutton , of Prestbury , Cheshire , and the Bishop of Lincoln , William Smyth . It was on 1 June 1509 that the foundation stone for Staircase I was laid . It was not until 15 January 1512 that a royal charter was obtained from Henry VIII . It was on 20 October 1508 that Smyth and eight other members of the college leased the site for the college – Brasenose Hall and neighbouring Little University Hall – from University College for ninety @-@ two years at the cost of £ 3 a year , provided that they spend £ 40 improving the site within a year . William Smyth has risen quickly through the ranks of the Church – albeit as a more able administrator than prelate – to become Bishop of Lincoln in 1496 , Chancellor of the university between 1500 and 1503 and Lord President of the Marches in 1501 , assisted by the influence of Lady Margaret Beaufort . The transition between hall and college was not clear @-@ cut ; rather , the hall was left standing whilst the new buildings for the college were completed . Matthew Smyth , last principal of the hall , became first principal of the College , although he was referred to as " Principal of the College and Hall of <unk> Nose " as late as September 1514 . It was in 1523 that Sutton transferred the lease formally over to the Principal and Fellows of the new college . 
 The Abbey of <unk> leased several halls to the new college , including <unk> , Glass , Black and Little St. Edmund , in 1530 , and in 1556 Lincoln College let Staple Hall to Brasenose on a nominal rent of twenty shillings a year . These complemented other halls which had been taken on as Brasenose Hall had grown , including St Thomas 's Hall , Shield Hall , Ivy Hall , St Mary 's Entry , <unk> Hall and <unk> Hall . The early college was governed by the statutes laid down by the formal charter of foundation in 1511 – 12 ( altered by a revised code of Sutton after Smyth 's death ) which was prefaced with the words : 
 In the name of the Holy and undivided Trinity , Father , Son and Holy Spirit , and of the most blessed Mother of God , Mary the glorious Virgin , and of Saints Hugh and Chad confessors , and also of St. Michael the archangel : We , William Smyth , Bishop of Lincoln , and Richard Sutton , Esquire , confiding in the aid of the Supreme Creator , who knows , directs , and disposes the wills of all that trust in him , do out of goods which in this life , not by our merits , but of the grace of His fulness , we have received abundantly , by royal authority and charter found , institute and establish in the University of Oxford , a perpetual College of <unk> and indignant scholars , who shall study and make progress in philosophy and sacred theology ; commonly called The King 's <unk> and College of <unk> in Oxford ; to the praise , glory , and honour of Almighty God , of the glorious Virgin Mary , Saints Hugh and Chad confessors , St. Michael the archangel and All Saints ; for the support and exaltation of the Christian Faith , for the advancement of holy church , and for the furtherance of divine worship . 
 Smyth had planned for a college of a Principal and sixty bachelor fellows ; however , Sutton lowered this to only twelve . The Principal was required to be over thirty , a graduate and priest , and have the support of the Visitor , the Bishop of Lincoln . He was entitled to take up ecclesiastic office or duties that did not interfere overly with his job as principal ; the fellows were required to be resident for ten months of each year . Entrants to the college would have been only 11 or 12 years old , with an intake both from those whose income was very low , alongside those from gentlemanly backgrounds . Fellows had a high degree of autonomy , but received only board and lodging as reward . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The college remained associated with Lancashire and Cheshire , with a particular preference for those from Prestbury and Prescot , the founders ' birthplaces . This was also reflected in early benefactors . These included the donation of John Port , serjeant @-@ at @-@ law , for two fellowships for natives of Chester in 1522 ; that of William <unk> , the sub @-@ dean of York , for residents of York , Lincoln and Nottingham in 1538 ; and for the Brian <unk> , Dean of York , who sponsored a fellowship for those in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire in 1549 . Another notable benefactor during this period was John <unk> , the first President of Corpus Christi College , Oxford , who in 1538 gave funds to maintain six scholars at Brasenose , provided that their lectures on humanity and Greek take place at his own college . Only in 1572 was a Lectureship in Greek established at Brasenose , symptomatic of a conservatism that attached Brasenose to a monastic teaching style that was increasingly problematic during the reformation . By the end of the sixteenth century , however , the college did boast lectureships ( " public readerships " ) in the new disciplines of logic and natural philosophy . By 1547 , the income of the college had increased to almost £ 200 yearly , with an endowment that placed it squarely in the midst of other colleges in size ; it did , however , make a yearly loss . 
 The original buildings took some time to finish ; only the original gateway was lavished upon from the beginning . The buildings were only of a modest splendour : the hall was not completed until the end of the seventeenth century ; the rooms economically decorated without wood panelling ; the main quadrangle only of one story and <unk> . Although an earlier chapel is suspected , the area above Staircase I – now the Senior Common Room – was in use by 1521 . It appears that the ecclesiastical furnishings promised by Smyth never arrived , and have been presumed taken by the College 's first Visitor , Cardinal Wolsey . Although the chapel ( or perhaps oratory ) was plain , two chalices and two patens survived from the original three of each and have been identified as older than those of Corpus or Trinity , dating to the late fifteenth century . Similarly the Old Library , now staircase IV , room 4 , was completed in 1520 – 1 , was not intended to be permanent but kept a considerable collection of books , most attained from benefactors , of which the most valuable were those donated by Henry Mason during the reign of James I. The library remained in that location until 1663 . 
 The first two principals of the college , Matthew Smyth and John Hawarden , successfully navigated the college through the reformation period . The college retained strong Catholic tendencies , and support for the reforms of Henry VIII and Edward VIII was minimal . The Chapel 's Dean , Thomas Hawarden , was opposed to the reforms , and was once called to the King 's Privy Council to answer for his actions . Eventually , though , the continuing reforms were carried through ; in particular , despite an exception for the University from the Act of Uniformity in 1549 for services other than mass , the enforcement of the Book of Common Prayer severely limited the ability of the college to maintain the old Catholic services whilst outwardly adopting the new reforms . The careful , and generally slow , path trod was exposed under Queen Mary , when five Fellows the left the college over its failings to reinstate the full Catholic mass quickly enough . Under Thomas Blanchard and Richard Harris the college finally accepted the <unk> reforms , and , moving into the later sixteenth century the college was responsible for housing several important figures of Protestantism : John Foxe , publicist , Christopher Goodman , protégé of Peter Martyr , Nicholas <unk> and Alexander Nowell . Despite producing several Anglican and evangelical sympathisers , the college retained many Catholic sympathisers . Six Brasenose fellows were executed for their loyalty to the pope : John Shert , Thomas Cottam and Laurence Johnson at Tyburn in 1582 , and Robert Anderson , Francis Ingleby and George Nichols thereafter , only smaller in number than St. John 's . 
 = = Seventeenth century = = 
 = = = Civil War period = = = 
 The chancellorship of Archbishop William Laud , beginning in 1630 , was a calm and profitable time for the University as a whole , dominating as it did the city of Oxford . The Parliamentarian occupation during the Civil War in 1642 , and the subsequent Royalist siege ended this , however . Although the Parliamentarian army was careful to protect the University 's buildings and freedoms upon regaining the city following its surrender in 1646 . These events , and the plague that came to Oxford in 1643 , did not escape Brasenose . Brasenose produced members of both sides of the war , although in generally leant in favour of the Royalists : the Protestation of 1641 was met with reservation and ingenious mechanisms to avoid reply on the part of many members of the college . Members of Parliament William Brereton , Humphrey <unk> , Henry Brooke and John Cartwright , James Chaloner , Colonel Thomas <unk> , Major General and MP William Jephson and commandant John Bingham all fought for parliament ; James <unk> and Peter Ince , among Brasenose 's many clergy , also supported the Roundheads . On the Royalist side stood Sir Alexander Radcliffe , Major Peter Leicester , MP Sir Edward Littleton , Edward Fischer ( author of Appeal to the Conscience ) , Francis Newman ( brother of Cardinal John Henry Newman ) and the majority of Brasenose 's clergy . Some Royalists stayed in the college during the civil war , including Sir William Le Neve ( Clarenceux King of Arms ) , Dr Edward Lake , and the Duchess of Buckingham ; two , Sir John Spelman and Sir Henry St George ( Garter King of Arms ) died during their stay . 
 Following the war , three visitations reformed the University of Oxford in the Parliamentarians ' preferred style , including purging Brasenose of its remaining loyalists . Sir William Petty , a former student , was among those promoted to fellow of the college . Samuel Radcliffe , Principal , was to be replaced with Dr Daniel Greenwood , a long @-@ term fellow of the college of Puritan sympathies by order of the visitors . However , the college held out repeatedly against efforts to expel or remove its fellows and principal , most through deliberate inactivity . Radcliffe was ill and continued to personally oppose handing over control of the college to Greenwood , particularly the college archives and treasury . The fellows , also opposing Greenwood , instead elected Thomas Yate to replace Radcliffe upon his death , although owing to the visitors ' choice of Greenwood he would not take up his post fully for twelve years . Over this period , thirteen of Brasenose 's sixteen remaining fellows were expelled , but the college survived . 
 Radcliffe was also responsible for the institution of four lectureships , philosophy , humanity , Greek , and Hebrew , although not all were new to Brasenose . However , Radcliffe 's Principalship continued the mismanagement of Brasenose 's finances , which had sunk into debt by the start of the seventeenth century : <unk> had gone unpaid , debts to tradesmen run up . Radcliffe 's sale of two college leases landed the College in unsuccessful litigation with Radcliffe 's family . A " draconian " visitation took place in 1643 , when the college owed £ 1 @,@ 750 . By 1646 , after the civil war , Brasenose still owed £ 1 @,@ 214 8s 0d . During the war , the college had loaned the King £ 600 , which it would not get back . However , the post @-@ civil war period saw Brasenose receive support from both current members and those expelled ; Greenwood and the bursar , John Houghton , continued the building work started by Radcliffe . Finances were gradually improved , with assistance from the government , up to the Restoration . 
 The seventeenth century saw a second wave of building at Brasenose , started under the Principalship of Samuel Radcliffe . Under his leadership an attic story was added to Old Quad in the 1630s , and the current chapel and library both constructed between 1656 and 1666 . The chapel , in particular , was a mix of architectural styles – Gothic revival and baroque – and thus not without criticism . The work totalled some £ 4 @,@ 000 , achieved eventually despite Brasenose 's previous money problems ; by 1680 , college income was a sustainable £ 600 a year . A Senior Common Room , believed to be Staircase 2 , Room 3 , had been added by 1682 . 
 = = = Restoration period = = = 
 Throughout the second half of the century , Brasenose remained around the fourth largest college of the University behind Christ Church and Exeter ; the proportion of students and Fellows from lower income groups was much higher than most other colleges , having improved during the second half of the century . Entrants were also heavily biased towards those from Cheshire and Lancashire : two @-@ thirds of Oxford entrants from those counties went to Brasenose in the first half of the century ; three @-@ quarters by its end . Indeed , by that time , the majority of Brasenose student hailed from one of those two north @-@ western counties , assisted by the localised scholarships . In 1679 , the college received an endowment from Sarah Seymour , Duchess of Somerset to fund four " Somerset " scholars , to be drawn from a free school of Manchester . She also donated further money for additional scholarships ( drawn alternately from Manchester , Marlborough , and Hereford ) upon her death in 1686 . 
 The Restoration , along with a return to the pre @-@ war <unk> church and the passing of the Act of Uniformity in 1662 , posed few problems for the sympathetic and quickly reformed Brasenose ; only one fellow left without agreeing . For some , nominal allegiance to the new regime was the order of the day , supported by a weary college . The Restoration period was one of disciplinary laxity across the university ; Brasenose was no different , with some of its students taking part in riots . Yate was instituted as successor – and somewhat retrospectively as predecessor – to Greenwood ; six of the thirteen fellows that had been expelled returned ; other personnel in the college were replaced . The period saw a rejuvenation of teaching in the University as a whole and a new cache of new thinkers , including Brasenose 's Petty . 
 During this time , French physician Samuel de <unk> and English contemporary Samuel Pepys were among visitors . Alumni of the period included James Alban Gibbes , George Clarke and Elias Ashmole , although only Petty formed part of the emerging mathematics and sciences . 
 = = = Glorious revolution period = = = 
 Upon William and Mary 's rise to the throne in 1688 , Oxford became an established centre of the new regime . The revolution itself was smoothly accepted by Brasenose , with the exception of only a handful . Brasenose , however , remained fairly small , with only six senior fellows , although among colleges it retained some power . The College itself remained loyal to the church above the king and allegiance to oaths and ceremony was enforced , even if college members themselves were not always devout Anglicans . William Hulme gave lands in the then county of Lancaster for the maintenance of " four <unk> of the poorest sort " in 1691 , drawn from the selections of the Warden of Manchester , the Rector of Prestwich and the Rector of Bury . 
 = = Eighteenth century = = 
 Throughout the Georgian period , Brasenose remained " tactically Hanoverian but Jacobite by instinct " , and a strong bias towards Lancashire and Cheshire , and <unk> towards the north of England as a whole , from where over half of members of the college would come in the 1690 – 1799 period . Admissions were predominantly from the lower orders – either in terms of class or wealth . John Meare , Principal since 1681 , was himself a commoner and a supporter of the Glorious revolution ; his election to the Vice @-@ Chancellorship of the University in 1697 was greeted angrily by Tories . 
 At Brasenose , in 1710 , Meare was replaced by Robert Shippen , a prominent crypto @-@ Jacobite in Oxford . Shippen , a Tory , was personally despised . He mounted several campaigns for further power , acquiring several advowsons in East London , including the rectory of Whitechapel . Shippen wanted it for himself and ejected the incumbent at the cost of much personal animosity from parishioners . He then went on to become Vice @-@ Chancellor of the University , and to continually interfere in the institutions of Oxford – the Ashmolean , the Bodleian and other colleges . He was responsible for the much @-@ need purchase of seven sites on the High Street , the completion of a new common room for fellows . However , he had much grander plans for both Brasenose and Oxford – ostensibly to put Brasenose at the centre of a new " forum " for the University – that were not completed , despite some considerably time and money spent on them . In this regard he worked alongside Dr George Clarke , sometime Brasenose student and more recently designer of several colleges and library buildings , and Nicholas Hawksmoor . Brasenose , and Shippen and his allies , did , however , play a crucial role in formulating and completing the plans for the Radcliffe Camera . Shippen 's own Jacobitism appeared to subside – perhaps adjudicating on the mood of the time – but Brasenose 's did not ; ale verses were sung to " our true English king " ( rather than the Hanoverian George I ) . A panegyric for James II was even said yearly for at least ten years from 1701 , at the bequest of Sir Francis Bridgeman ( married 1673 ) . The First Jacobite Rising of 1715 caused a riot in Oxford , and not without Brasenose involvement . 
 Little changed in the century up to 1785 ; the average age of fellows , mostly " youthful clerics " , remained a little under thirty , having been elected to the fellowship at 23 , on average , to serve for around fifteen years . Helped by the Duchess of Somerset 's bequest , Manchester Grammar School supplied up to a sixth of Brasenose 's intake , and proportionately far more of its fellows . Despite this , the college resisted the growing cause of Methodism . 
 Towards the second half of the century , Brasenose began to lose its reputation for ignorance ; it also became wealthier . Its social ranking improved , and it attracted more members . The accounts were much improved : from a deficit of £ 444 in 1761 to a surplus of £ 476 in 1781 . This must have been helped by the introduction of Arabic numerals ( rather than Roman numerals ) as late as 1773 . The Radcliffe Camera was opened in 1749 , assisting the college 's attempts at self @-@ improvement . Social barriers were broken down – both by the reduction in the duties of the lowest groups and the privileges of the richest , and the increasing wealth of entrants to the college generally . The college remained far from the most elite or exclusive of colleges ; nor , by the standards of wealthier colleges , did its members misbehave . Among the 1774 intake , 20 were gentlemen , but it was one of the remaining seven – Henry Addington – who would achieve most fame as Brasenose 's first prime minister . It was into this setting that William Cleaver was made Principal in 1785 , the principals of the previous eighty years – Francis Yarborough , William Gwyn , Ralph Cawley , and Thomas Barker – being without real note . Yarborough oversaw improvements to library and hall , the former guided by the addition of his own considerable collection of books . It was also set upon that improvements to accommodation were needed ; two properties on the High Street were bought , to be turned into the Principal 's residence , the lodgings above the Lodge becoming accommodation for bursar and fellows . This was overseen by Gwyn , but he too did not live to see its completion . It would continue to be the Principal 's residence until 1886 . Barker was a man of modest means ; thus , it was Cleaver who would take Brasenose into a new age of prosperity . 
 Wholesale reform of Oxford examinations began in the late eighteenth century , proposed by , among others , Brasenose 's John <unk> in his pamphlet Considerations on the Public Exercises for the First and Second Degrees in the University of Oxford . It was Cleaver and his successor Frodsham Hodson that would continue the reforms and apply them to Brasenose itself . Cleaver was from the minor gentry and set out from the start to make Brasenose the place of rich men . Unable to secure the librarianship of the Bodleian whilst fellow , he had instead become tutor to his patron George Nugent @-@ Temple @-@ Grenville , 1st Marquess of Buckingham – a position which he used to lead two of the Duke 's sons and other members of the family to Brasenose ; the sons ' uncle , Baron Grenville , became the University 's Chancellor . Under his leadership into the early nineteenth century , numbers improved dramatically and so did the class of people coming : Brasenose began to be dominated by gentlemen like the Egertons , the Grenvilles , and of Richard <unk> Rothwell I. Its income over doubled between 1790 and 1810 to £ 9 @,@ 200 per annum , with the college maintaining its links to the north @-@ west . Among the other acquisitions of Cleaver was the services of Hodson , a Liverpudlian . 
 The Phoenix Common Room ( the oldest dining club in Oxford ) was founded at Brasenose in 1782 , and certainly in place by 1786 . It came to have a uniform , code of practice , and extensive wine cellar . It also took part of the role of the modern Junior Common Room in respect of social activities – although membership was limited to 12 , it was elected on rotation . 
 = = Nineteenth century = = 
 = = = Regency period = = = 
 Cleaver and Hodson made another attempt to redesign the High Street frontage of Brasenose , securing first the services of James Wyatt and later approaching John Nash when Wyatt failed to deliver . No plans were ever laid down , however . Three sets of designs were produced eventually by John Soane , but rather too expensive for the college . The next years would see only temporary buildings on the High Street site . Hodson was made principal in 1809 following Cleaver 's resignation . A year before , and under Hodson 's guidance , the exiled Louis XVIII had visited Brasenose ; in 1814 , the royal families of the United Kingdom , Russia , and Prussia dined in the Radcliffe Camera – food and pre @-@ dinner arrangements organised by Brasenose . In 1815 , in the first inter @-@ collegiate boat race , Brasenose went to the head of the river . Brasenose 's academic record was good , with seven of thirty @-@ seven first class degrees awarded across Oxford between 1808 and 1810 . Among these was that of William Gregson ( later draughtsman of the Great Reform Bill ) – deemed the best the examiners had ever seen . The 1810 – 20 period contained several academic reforms , particularly to the nature of examinations – the institution of terminally collections , including in mathematics and natural philosophy , something of a break from the focus of the past . Brasenose went into the regency one of only three colleges – the others being Christ Church and Oriel – to be both fashionable and academically successful ; it ran a waiting list whilst other colleges had spare places . 
 Alongside the Phoenix Common Room ran the Alfred Lodge ( founded in 1769 ) , The Club ( 1790 ) and the Apollo ; together they made Brasenose central to Oxford socialization in this period . Between 1818 and 1837 , however , life at Oxford was changing : it became far more " diligent and orderly " , less boisterous . Brasenose maintained its reputation for some time longer ( there were still stories of excess , particularly drink ) . In 1840 , several members of the Phoenix resigned , and Sunday meetings and Satanic toasts abolished , after John Woodhouse 's death in a meeting – according to tradition , dragged through the bars of a window <unk> Brasenose Lane immediately upon toasting the devil . It ushered in a period of Victorian morality for Brasenose . 
 Ashurst Turner Gilbert was elected Principal in 1822 , aged only 35 ; he had secured the fellowship in 1809 on the strength of a first . He disliked teaching – although he admitted it paid the bills – and much preferred being Principal . There , he would be eventually made Vice @-@ Chancellor of the University and later Bishop of Chichester . Gilbert committed Brasenose to a cause of neutral politics and mainstream Anglicanism , strongly rejecting Tractarian and Evangelical ideas including supporting the censure of Dr. Renn D. Hampden . His time was spent pre @-@ occupied with the religious tensions of the University , having spent time opposing changes to religious services in Oxford on behalf of Oxford Tories . 
 Despite an intake dominated by commoners at Brasenose , Oxford had become a university dominated by the independently wealthy ; the Edinburgh Review decried it as " simply a great public school " . 
 = = = Victorian period = = = 
 Gilbert 's successor in 1842 was Richard Harrington , who inherited a college in good shape : income was around £ 15 @,@ 000 ; only Christ Church was significantly bigger in size . Academic reforms , particularly with regard to examinations – which were to be administered by the university , rather than the college – were instituted across Oxford in the first half of the century . Brasenose 's proportion of first @-@ class degrees fell sharply from its previous peak . By 1850 , no matriculation exam was instituted at Brasenose , as at other colleges , although the other examinations were altered : <unk> moved forward and <unk> instituted . Brasenose , like the University , was yet to truly reform the range of subjects studied , however . It was only in 1849 that modern sciences were only given a separate School ( and thus examination ) in 1849 ; law and modern history a year later . 
 Edward <unk> Cradock ( known as " Chief " ) became Principal in 1853 , and would lead the college until 1886 ; most notable in his tenure was the introduction of organised sports and the resulting public image of Brasenose as a sporting college . This included the membership of oarsman Walter Bradford Woodgate , founder of Vincent 's Club , and sometime president of the club Tom Cottingham Edwards @-@ Moss . It produced many blues rowers , seven in 1860 – 1867 alone . Between 1870 and 1872 , the Oxford varsity cricket team was similarly dominated by Brasenose men , including Conrad Wallroth . One , Arthur Heath , went on to become a Conservative Party politician , although legal and careers in the church still dominated . Brasenose was also very well turned out in rugby and football – including Cuthbert Ottaway and Heath – but cricket and rowing defined its success . 
 Among other pursuits , amateur dramatics flourish ( even though Brasenose was an all @-@ male college ) . Overall , the intake and careers of undergraduates remained dominated by the Church ( up to half ) , drawn from a range of backgrounds . The college remained largely independent of the large public schools . Brasenose 's academic record remained solid , if unremarkable ; its strengths lay in classics , although one of its most prominent academics – Arthur Evans – studied modern history . 
 Brasenose was staunchly opposed to the establishment of the first Royal Commission of 1850 – 51 into standards at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge , claiming that it lacked authority and served an " ignorant " purpose . The college believed that if it were to support the commission , it might " at all future times be exposed to <unk> of political parties , attacks and influences very injurious to the peace and to the steady performance of its duties " . It instead petitioned the crown to abandon the commission , citing certain freedoms under the Bill of Rights 1689 . However , the commissioners were granted the authority to force cooperation and the petition rejected . 
 As it turned out , the college was happy to pursue many of the commission 's aims : the restriction of the preference for candidates from the north @-@ west ( although the Somerset scholars remained ) , and the reduction of living expenses – something for which new buildings offering cheaper living and even union with Lincoln College were considered but ultimately rejected . More problematic were reforms to the distribution of power and funding between senior and junior fellows – although in 1855 – 7 ordinances were put in place giving junior fellows the same role in governance as their seniors . Thus the situation began to improve for junior fellows as the older fellows were gradually replaced . The changes made by the second Royal Commission ( brought to " inquire into the property and income " of Oxford and Cambridge colleges ) to the running of the accounts and the system of university @-@ wide finances were unopposed by Brasenose . The accounts which the college submitted reveal an income of £ 16 @,@ 000 , of which nearly £ 10 @,@ 000 came from land , other property , stocks and shares . Expenditure was around £ 13 @,@ 600 , which left Brasenose in a secure financial position . Although the university as a whole was hit hard by the agricultural crisis of the latter quarter of the century , Brasenose 's income from agrarian sources was already low , and increasing yields from urban holdings made up most of the fall . Brasenose 's response to the weakening economy was to increase its student intake by 1875 to three times what it had been in 1860 , almost levelling that of the mid @-@ regency period . This did , however , increase considerably the proportion of applicants from public schools . 
 Between 1859 and 1860 , Frewin Hall housed the future Edward VII whilst he attended Christ Church . The chapel and old kitchen were planned to form part of a new , third , quadrangle for Brasenose . The valuable rents that the shops on the south side of Brasenose earned the college provided the most significant reason for the delay in further expansion , which only began in 1886 when work on the west side was started . It was finally completed in 1911 , the last work having been done to the High Street frontage . Frewin Hall was reconstructed between 1887 and 1896 , as were the chapel and <unk> . It had been in 1886 that Cradock had died and was replaced by Albert Watson . 
 Walter Pater , a writer , was sometime fellow of Brasenose ; his writing would later be accused of being " immoral " and inappropriate letters to a student at Balliol , Walter Hardinge , got Pater into trouble . He survived , however , and continued to form part of the literary scene in Oxford and London , tutoring poet C. L. Shadwell and writer Humphrey Ward , lecturing Oscar Wilde and dining with Simeon Solomon and Oscar Browning . Another alumnus of this period was Frederic Weatherly , sometime lyricist and lawyer . It was <unk> , Brasenose 's coxswain , who threw himself out the boat in 1868 and thus invented the coxless four – although Brasenose won the race , they were disqualified . In 1880 , the future Earl Haig entered Brasenose , although he was among very few statesmen to come through its ranks during the century . 
 Charles Buller Heberden became principal in 1889 . He saw sporting as a means to the institution of civility than an end in itself ; together with Richard Lodge , it was this spirit that dominated his tenure as principal . Academic rigour was reintroduced to the college , and the staff of Brasenose were increasingly successful in maintaining discipline . Until the end of the century , however , the number of students achieving blues outnumbered those attaining firsts . Author John Buchan joined in 1895 , a man of this new era – although his work continued to portray Brasenose as its previous muscular stereotype . Heberden was also the first lay principal , although he was personally committed to the church – purchasing an organ for the chapel out of his own personal funds . Brasenose was frequently represented as boasting no academic prowess at all . Three of the ten fellows were set aside for non @-@ classicists ; a Junior Common Room ( JCR ) was created in 1887 ; in 1897 the library was opened up to undergraduates ; in 1899 , Fellows were granted a right to sabbatical leave . The fellows themselves were increasingly secular ; only four of fourteen fellows were clergy . 
 = = First half of the twentieth century = = 
 In the pre @-@ War period , the shift in focus to academia continued . Brasenose 's rowing sides sunk down the tables . In 1901 , the college introduced an entrance exam , and new Rhodes Scholarships were created in 1904 . The Pater Society was founded in 1907 , in memory of the fellow . 
 Like much of the UK , Brasenose suffered a considerable number of casualties in the First World War : 661 members served , with 114 killed , for the Allies ; four members served in the German military , of whom two were killed . Canadian Talbot Mercer Papineau , who had attended Brasenose on a Rhodes Scholarship , was among those to support the war . Over a quarter of the 1913 year were killed , in a college that was considerably smaller than it had been . Some members were decorated : Arnold Jackson became the British Army 's youngest Brigadier , and received the Distinguished Service Order with three bars . By 1918 , Brasenose had just eight undergraduates . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period = = = 
 The inter @-@ war period saw Brasenose adapt to changing conditions within the university : the abolition of Greek as a compulsory language ; the admission of women to degrees ; and the acceptance of the first government funding . Across the university , these were spearheaded by Chancellor Lord Curzon ( appointed in 1907 ) , who wished to avoid another Royal Commission . There were also attempts to broaden the University 's intake of students from poorer backgrounds , but living costs of £ 400 across a three @-@ year degree made this difficult . Curzon was supported by his Vice @-@ Chancellor , now Brasenose 's Heberden . Within Brasenose , however , he was opposed by Brasenose 's youngest fellow , William Teulon Swan Sonnenschein ( who in 1917 took the surname " Stallybrass " ) . 
 Charles Henry Sampson , Principal between 1920 and 1936 , did little more than " keep the ship on an even keel " : it was Stallybrass as Vice @-@ Principal ( 1914 – 36 ) that defined Brasenose between the wars . Stallybrass was a keen sportsman , although like Heberden he saw it only as a means to an end – albeit a plethora of laudable ends . Brasenose had a middling income of £ 24 @,@ 000 a year , with a similarly average 180 undergraduates . Religious attendance was relaxed , and fees for returning to college between 9 and <unk> abolished . Brasenose 's collegiate link with Gonville and Caius College , Cambridge was established . Staircases XIV and XV were created , the only significant changes to the college buildings ; the twenty fellows gradually replaced in Stallybrass ' own image . Brasenose went back to the head of the river in 1928 , rising from 22nd in 1922 . Although Oxford 's performance in rowing was poor , Brasenose was central to its few successes against Cambridge . It would sink to sixth in 1934 – although notable among its members was John Gorton , future Prime Minister of Australia . Success in rowing was matched in rugby and cricket – with Brasenose producing players such as Alexander Obolensky and Ian Smith . Brasenose rugby only reached its peak after the Second World War , with players such as Brian <unk> and Philip Moore , Baron Moore of Wolvercote . In cricket , Geoffrey Legge and Greville Stevens were early players ; Ian Peebles Gerry Chalk and Roger Kimpton followed them : between 1934 and 1938 at least five members of the University team came from <unk> it may have been Brasenose 's attachment to sport that meant it was slow to phase out Pass men . The effect on academic success was considerable ; Brasenose slumped in performance except in law , where it excelled . In the 1930s Brasenose recorded no more than six firsts in a year ; a total assisted by seven firsts in 1937 – 9 in law , out a total of 13 across the University . The future Lord Scarman ( Lord of Appeal in Ordinary ) was among undergraduates ; two contemporaries and aspiring students , Richard Holdsworth and Michael Peacock were killed in the Second World War . 
 In terms of intake , by 1937 there were 201 undergraduates ; it was a uniform selection that was almost completely middle class , like the rest of the University . Over 60 % of entrants came from independent schools , perhaps because of the £ 250 a year cost of reading towards a degree . It had , unlike some other college , students from several other nations : Muhammad Aslam Khan Khattak and Abbas <unk> from British India among them . Students were varied : Baptist Thomas George Cowling became an astronomer and member of the Royal Society , in contrast , Jew Paul Dehn went on to become a film critic and screenwriter . Other alumni of this period include Charles <unk> Morgan , Edward Atiyah and William Golding . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 Brasenose was a smaller community during the war , but it kept going . Once again , union with Lincoln College was discussed : but in other areas , temporary merger was more appropriate ; thus , Brasenose and Christ Church fielded single sports teams . The College hosted military personnel as it had in the First World War ; a Nissen hut was even set up in Deer Park . Brasenose sent a flood of undergraduates into the forces ; in particular , the college 's sporting , masculine ethos meant many joined the Royal Air Force . This would contribute significantly to a high death total – 123 for the Allies and 1 for the Germans – more than in the First World War , although proportionately less . Many of Brasenose 's sporting heroes died ; among survivors were future Archbishop of Canterbury Robert Runcie and cricketer Pieter van der <unk> . 
 The immediate post @-@ War period once again reform on the agenda with , in particular , the passing of the Education Act 1944 . The effect was dramatic : state support , through bursaries and central grants , was hugely increased ; the proportion of state school entrants increased considerably ; for the first time in over a hundred years , there was considerable competition over places . Stallybrass , made Vice @-@ Chancellor of the University in 1947 , was sceptical about state education . It was not the quality of the students , but rather the means of state control that worried him . Annual grants from government were made to the University , not colleges , and might yet replace endowments as Brasenose 's primary source of income , making it dependent on University support and increasing " federation " of colleges in a University superstructure . Stallybrass worried over this loss of college autonomy , although it was matched with a doubled grant from the government and huge sums set aside for capital spending . The right of Brasenose to choose its own students might be under threat , he thought ; as it happened , the Labour government decided against corporate admission and threats to Stallybrass ' power mostly resided within Brasenose . 
 Some members of the governing body , returning in some cases from the war , wished to realign the College with the new national spirit . The Principal 's considerable role in admissions – which Stallybrass had used to elevate sportsmen – was the subject of criticism and accusations of financial under @-@ performance and over @-@ spending were made . A challenge was made directly in the bringing of a motion calling for a review of Brasenose 's financial performance since 1922 . However , before it could be debated , Stallybrass was killed , having apparently fallen from a train whilst returning to Oxford from a University meeting in London . Although the possibility of suicide was considered , the coroner ruled the case one of " death by misadventure " . Hugh Last was elected in his place , although reluctantly : he had been told by his doctor that he was terminally ill , but the fellows were insistent . 
 = = Second half of the twentieth century = = 
 Brasenose 's finances entered the second half of the century in poor shape , and considerably worse than the period between 1930 and 1931 , slipping relative to other colleges from 3rd to 8th . But they were improved during Last 's tenure , along with undergraduate admissions ; the college showed a surplus in 1952 – 53 , and income in 1957 ( £ 104 @,@ 000 ) was double what it had been in 1938 . Pay for fellows was still poor , and they were small in number compared to other colleges . There was a sizeable entertainment budget , however , something which , combined with the long hours , have contributed to short lifespans . Only in 1987 did a sitting fellow reach retirement age . Last resigned as Principal in 1956 , dying shortly after . Turnover was considerable , although some fellows stayed on : Maurice <unk> became Principal in 1956 , and retired in 1960 ; he was replaced by Sir Noel Hall . Hall 's tenure was troubled , not externally , but rather from Hall 's patchy knowledge of the college and staff ; his selection , <unk> de mieux , was sometimes questioned , although he remained well @-@ liked . However , the college , which had thus far stayed assured , found itself in a changing environment . Herbert Hart , however , Principal between 1973 and 1978 , was the first to be elected from outside Brasenose . Lord Windlesham , made principal in 1989 , was the first to hold Cabinet Office . 
 Brasenose 's reputation for law remained , under firstly Ron Maudsley – a Tutorial Fellow in the Stallybrass mould – and Roman and Civil law lecturer and tutor Barry Nicholas , then Peter Birks , another Roman lawyer and sometime Regius Professor of Civil Law at All Souls , Harry Lawson , the first Professor of Comparative Law , and Sir Otto Kahn @-@ Freund , an employment law specialist . There was also a growing reputation for English literature – staff Ian Jack and Alastair Fowler among them . Other notable staff included Robert Shackleton , tutor in French , sometime librarian and Senior Dean ; Sir Ronald Syme , Camden Professorship of Ancient History ( previously held by Last , with whom we would continue a personal dispute ) . It would all mean the Brasenose 's fellows in 1970 were dominated by Britain 's top academic minds , however disjunct from academic success that would become . One subject to develop after 1970 , however , was Politics , Philosophy and Economics ( PPE ) . Bogdanor continued to lead a formidable group of fellows and undergraduates : Peter <unk> Sinclair , Michael Woods , John Foster , and Tony <unk> ; Lord Robin <unk> , Kate Allen , Catharine Hill , and British Prime Minister David Cameron . 
 In the history department , Syme was succeeded by Peter Brunt . In the sciences , Dr John <unk> was sometime Bursar ; Bryan Birch , Professor of Arithmetic and co @-@ author of the Birch and Swinnerton @-@ Dyer conjecture ; and Nicholas Kurti , Vice @-@ President of the Royal Society . Overall , although the immediate post @-@ War staff remained traditional – if not overly conservative in nature – with a third drawn from Brasenose itself , the late sixties signalled a change on this front . Then , a wave of new face emerged : among them , Laszlo <unk> ( later Professor of Applied Electromagnetism ) , Vernon Bogdanor ( Professor of Government ) , Robert Evans ( Regius Professor of Modern History ) and Graham Richards , Oxford 's Chairman of Chemistry . 
 During Last 's tenure , Brasenose had a very high number of undergraduates : a peak of 104 in 1949 , second in the University . Results , however , were poor : two firsts in 1950 , placing the college 18th . It was only near the end that things picked up , perhaps a result of Last 's stern manner ; there were 13 firsts in 1955 . However , until 1970 , they remained poor , with only a small increase on the pre @-@ War years . Brasenose sat twenty @-@ first in the Norrington Table in 1968 , twenty @-@ sixth in 1975 , and twenty @-@ seventh in 1980 . It was into this that Hart made his reforms , to bring students closer to the governing body and make them responsible for more of their own care – cleaning and washing , for example . By 2001 , Brasenose had climbed the tables once again , coming in third place in the Norrington Table with 30 firsts . 
 There were still sportsmen , though : A. W. Ramsay ( future RFU President ) , Kenneth Spence and Pete Dawkins among a dwindling set of rugby players ; Colin Cowdrey among the college 's cricketers . There were no Brasenose men in the Varsity cricket team between 1972 and 1989 , certainly a slide on previous times . In rowing , the decline was even more significant : sixteenth among colleges in 1964 ; twentieth in 1976 . It was only in the 1990s that rowing would return to success , firstly with the women and then with the men . Outside sport , a young Jeffrey Archer successfully invited The Beatles to Brasenose , the peak of a fundraising campaign for Oxfam . 
 In the 1960s onwards , there was a certain progressiveness in the air , and the first women guests were admitted in 1964 . Women members were first admitted to the 1974 – 5 year . The college 's first comprehensive @-@ schooled student ( Paul Barker ) had arrived in 1955 . It was also almost completely secular – with the exception of the chaplain and his deputies ; the chaplain 's role itself dominated by pastoral work . The students themselves concentrated more and more on the exams – marks improved across the university – but this left a class gulf between some staff and undergraduates , most visible in " gentlemanly " sports . Michael Palin and Robert <unk> were among new creative talent . Since the 1950s , over 70 % of students were state @-@ assisted , half of undergraduates drawn from state or direct grant schools , a figure very close to the University average . Brasenose merged entrance and scholarship exams in 1961 , abolished closed scholarships in the decade after , and open entrance awards in 1984 . Brasenose 's traditional link with the north @-@ west also floundered , although it is perhaps surprising that it lasted until the 1970s . In its place , there were more entrants , paying higher fees , from elsewhere in the world . 
 The expectation had been since the 1920s that undergraduates would spend at least one of their years living in College ; however , post @-@ war expectations grew and Brasenose began another construction programme to ensure it could house students for longer . Designs were drawn up by Philip Powell and Hidalgo Moya , in a then @-@ modern style . The new buildings cost £ 76 @,@ 000 to design , housing 32 rooms , and forming staircases XVI , XVII and XVIII . The architecture , which has since come to be thoroughly disliked , was praised . The rather more popular rooms on the Frewin site were also constructed , at a total cost of £ 3 million , including commercial units . In 1996 , the St Cross Building was finished ; in 1997 the final extensions to Frewin were completed , allowing the college to house all undergraduates for the duration of their course . Finances had been secured with a late revival , and accounts early in the twenty @-@ first century showed a 6 % surplus and a ranking of 13th out of 36th in endowment income . 
 = = Twenty @-@ first century = = 
 Professor Roger Cashmore , a particle physicist , became Brasenose 's first scientist Principal in 2003 . He was replaced in 2011 by Alan Bowman , former Camden Professor of Ancient History . Kitchen and servery areas were rebuilt in 2010 – 12 , along with other changes to dining and some living rooms , in a series of building work known as " Project Q " . 
 = Alfie ( Lily Allen song ) = 
 " Alfie " is a song by British recording artist Lily Allen from her debut studio album , Alright , Still ( 2006 ) . Written by Allen and Greg Kurstin , the song was released as the fourth and final single from the album , on 5 March 2007 , by Regal Recordings . In the United Kingdom , it was marketed as a double A @-@ side single , along with " Shame for You " . While the melody incorporates a sample of Sandie Shaw 's " Puppet on a String " , the lyrics directly describe Allen 's real life younger brother , actor Alfie Allen , criticising him for his lazy behaviour . 
 Contemporary critics gave the song mixed reviews , some complimenting the production , while others considered it fell flat as the album 's last song . The single peaked inside the top 20 of the charts in New Zealand and on the UK Singles Chart , where it became her third single to do so . The accompanying music video portrayed Allen 's brother as a puppet while the storyline follows the lyrical meaning of the song . The song was performed live by Allen during her 2007 concert tour , as part of the encore . 
 = = Background = = 
 Musically , the song is set in common time and has a tempo of 120 beats per minute . While it is played in the key of C major and has backing piano and guitar sounds , " Alfie " also uses a sample from Sandie Shaw 's 1967 Eurovision Song Contest winning song " Puppet on a String " . In an interview with Pitchfork Media , Allen stated that the song 's lyrics describe her younger brother , Alfie Allen . She further explained : 
 When I wrote " Alfie " , nobody really knew who I was . At first he was really upset about it , because he thought that I was just pointing out all of his bad points and attacking him . I thought it was really flattering [ Laughs ] . I thought he 'd be really , really happy because it proved to him how much I loved him , that I care about him , and I want him to do something with his life . I suppose his paranoia — induced by smoking so much weed — made him think , " Why are you trying to be mean ? " 
 In the song , she tries to persuade him to emerge from his room and stop wasting his life away , while complaining that he is spending too much time stuck in his room smoking weed , watching television and playing computer games . Alfie Allen treated the song with good humour , but declared that his sister was also lazy when she was pregnant : " She 's at home in bed and everyone is running around after her . Mind you , you have to look after Lily even if she isn 't pregnant . " 
 The cover of the single released in the United Kingdom is different from the EP one used in Japan , as it also shows " Shame for You " written on it . " Alfie " was performed live , as part of the setlist of Allen 's 2007 concert tour . 
 = = Critical and commercial reception = = 
 Rosie Swash from The Guardian described the song 's sound as " fairground pomp " . She then suggested that Allen has fused together a " uniquely acidic brand of pop " , with the icing on the cake being " that brutally barbed tongue " . Rob Webb from Drowned in Sound considered that " Alfie " rescued the lack of wit and imagination of some previous tracks on the album , while Blender reporter Jon Dolan thought that the " silly waltz @-@ rap " of the song is an example at how Allen " casually and wittily blurs the line between fan and friend " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine praised the production of " Alfie " , as well as " Shame for You " , with " plenty of catchy melodies and clever samples " , but claimed that Allen lacks charisma . Heather Phares of Allmusic gave a negative review for the song , claiming it " falls especially flat as the album 's final song " , with the album losing stream at the end , and NME 's Priya Elan considered that if " the pop dreams get slightly tarnished by the graffiti put @-@ downs of ' Not Big ' and ' Alfie ' , then that 's not too worrying , as with a personality this size , this isn ’ t the last time you ’ ll be hearing from [ Allen ] " . It was considered by reviewer Ronan Hunt @-@ Murphy from Two Way Monologues that the song could be used for a children 's TV show , if the swearing and drug references were cut . 
 The single failed to achieve commercial success . It debuted at 44 and peaked inside the top 20 of the UK Singles Chart , at number 15 for only one week , where it charted as the double A @-@ sided single , " Alfie " / " Shame for You " . Other moderate chart peaks include Ireland , at 31 , and New Zealand at 15 . In Japan , " Alfie " was only released as an extended play , made exclusively for that country , which was ineligible to chart on the Singles Chart , so it peaked on the Albums Chart at 226 . In Europe , it reached position 55 on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles compiled by Billboard . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Sarah Chatfield , who wanted to do a Tom and Jerry @-@ like video , where the human character is cut off at the waist . Hence Allen was not going to be part of it originally . However , she did appear on the video . The singer declared on her official blog that , 
 I did a video shoot for the next single , which is Alfie , and that was quite a lot of fun , Alfie was played by a puppet and the whole thing looks like an episode of a mixture Tom and Jerry and Roger Rabbit , you 'll understand when you see it . The whole day was a pleasurable experience [ ... ] 
 The video starts off with an opening title parodying Looney Tunes and shows Allen in the kitchen preparing a cup of tea , while Alfie , impersonated by a puppet , smokes in his miniature bedroom , watching television . The singer enters the room and takes away his bong , as he unsuccessfully tries to get it back . Next , Allen irons his tuxedo and marks a job announcement called " The Puppet Show " in the newspaper , as the lyric " You need to get a job because the bills need to get paid " is sung . Meanwhile , Alfie is in his bed , staring at a magazine in which there are undressed dolls , titled " Roxy & Babs get it on ! " and proceeds to masturbate . Allen walks in on him with the newspaper and suit as he does so , but immediately exits out of embarrassment . With the start of the bridge , puppet birds sing outside the home , while Alfie sneaks out of his room and tries to get beer out of the refrigerator , but is ultimately caught by Allen . She then takes off his " stupid fitted cap " , as he scrawls a picture of her , which is also the cover of " Littlest Things " . The final scene happens at night , in the kitchen , where Allen is lying on the floor , watching her brother dance . After the last lyrics , " Please don 't despair , my dear , mon <unk> " is sung , he punches her and the video ends . 
 There is also an alternate version , where the words " weed " , " THC " and " <unk> " are blanked , the bong is replaced by a joystick , Alfie does not smoke , and , when Allen walks in on him masturbating , there is a big " censored " sign . The video won " Best Pop Video " and " Best New Director " at the <unk> Music Vision Awards in June 2007 , and nominated at the 2007 Q Awards for " Best Video " , but lost to " Ruby " by Kaiser Chiefs . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lead vocals — Lily Allen 
 Written by — Lily Allen and Greg Kurstin 
 Produced by — Greg Kurstin 
 Mastered by — Tim Burrell , Tim Debney 
 Audio mixing — Greg Kurstin 
 = = Charts = = 
 Notes : 
 = U.S. Route 40 Alternate ( Hagerstown – Frederick , Maryland ) = 
 U.S. Route 40 Alternate ( US 40 Alternate ) is an alternate route of US 40 in the U.S. state of Maryland . The highway runs 22 @.@ 97 miles ( 36 @.@ 97 km ) from Potomac Street in Hagerstown east to US 40 in Frederick . US 40 Alternate parallels US 40 and much of Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) to the south through eastern Washington County and western Frederick County . The alternate route connects Hagerstown and Frederick with Funkstown , Boonsboro , Middletown , and Braddock Heights . US 40 Alternate crosses two major north – south components of the Blue Ridge Mountains that separate the Great Appalachian Valley and the Piedmont : South Mountain between Boonsboro and Middletown and Catoctin Mountain , which is locally known as Braddock Mountain , at Braddock Heights . 
 US 40 Alternate is the old alignment of US 40 . The highway 's path was blazed in the mid @-@ 18th century to connect the Hagerstown Valley and Shenandoah Valley with eastern Pennsylvania and central Maryland . In the early 19th century , US 40 Alternate 's path was improved as part of a series of turnpikes to connect Baltimore with the eastern terminus of the National Road in Cumberland . The highway was improved as one of the original state roads in the early 1910s and designated US 40 in the late 1920s . Construction on a relocated US 40 between Hagerstown and Frederick with improved crossings of South Mountain and Braddock Mountain began in the mid @-@ 1930s ; the new highway was completed in the late 1940s . US 40 Alternate was assigned to the old route of US 40 in the early 1950s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 40 Alternate is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial from Edgewood Drive in Funkstown to its underpass of I @-@ 70 south of Funkstown and from Old Hagerstown Road near Middletown to US 40 in Frederick . 
 = = = Hagerstown to South Mountain = = = 
 US 40 Alternate begins as Baltimore Street at its intersection with one @-@ way southbound Potomac Street within the Hagerstown Historic District on the southern edge of downtown Hagerstown . Baltimore Street , which continues west as a city street toward the Hagerstown City Park , runs east – west two blocks south of US 40 , which comprises a one @-@ way pair of Washington Street eastbound and Franklin Street westbound . After heading east for two blocks , during which US 40 Alternate intersects one @-@ way northbound Locust Street , the municipally @-@ maintained alternate route turns southeast onto Frederick Street at a five @-@ way junction that also includes north – south Mulberry Street . US 40 Alternate intersects Memorial Boulevard , which heads east past Municipal Stadium , home of the minor league baseball Hagerstown Suns . The highway meets a CSX rail spur at grade while passing through an industrial area that extends to the southern city limits of Hagerstown at Kenly Avenue . 
 US 40 Alternate continues southeast as a state @-@ maintained highway that passes the historic home Garden Hill and crosses Antietam Creek into Funkstown , where the highway 's name changes to Westside Avenue . Within the Funkstown Historic District , the alternate route turns east onto Baltimore Street , then southeast onto Frederick Street . At the southern town limits of Funkstown , US 40 Alternate becomes Boonsboro Pike , which passes through farmland as it parallels Antietam Creek . The highway passes under I @-@ 70 ( Eisenhower Memorial Highway ) with no access and intersects <unk> Road , which leads west to the historic home Valentia . The highway veers away from Antietam Creek , passes through the hamlet of <unk> , and traverses Landis Spring Branch and Beaver Creek on its way to Boonsboro . 
 US 40 Alternate enters the town of Boonsboro and its name changes to Main Street at its intersection with Maryland Route 68 ( MD 68 ) ( Lappans Road ) . The highway meets the south end of MD 66 ( Maple Avenue ) next to the Bowman House and the east end of MD 34 ( Potomac Street ) in the center of town . US 40 Alternate leaves the town of Boonsboro after its intersection with MD 67 ( <unk> Road ) . The alternate route continues southeast as Boonsboro Pike and starts to ascend South Mountain . At the summit , known as Turner 's Gap , US 40 Alternate intersects Washington Monument Road , which leads north to Washington Monument State Park , and passes the Dahlgren Chapel and the Old South Mountain Inn . 
 = = = South Mountain to Frederick = = = 
 US 40 Alternate 's name changes to Old National Pike as it intersects the Appalachian Trail at the Washington – Frederick county line and begins its curvaceous descent of South Mountain into the Middletown Valley . In the western part of the valley , the highway passes the Henry Shoemaker Farmhouse and intersects Mount Tabor Road , which parallels South Mountain north past the historic Daniel Sheffer Farm and <unk> @-@ Miller <unk> . In <unk> , US 40 Alternate crosses Catoctin Creek and meets Old Hagerstown Road , which passes the Bowlus Mill House . The alternate route 's name becomes Main Street as it heads east through Middletown . US 40 Alternate passes the <unk> and Harbaugh @-@ Shafer Building and intersects MD 17 ( Church Street ) within the Middletown Historic District . The highway passes through the <unk> Historic District before leaving the town limits . 
 East of Middletown , US 40 Alternate passes through a suburban area then begins to ascend Braddock Mountain . The highway gains a climbing lane eastbound to the top of the mountain , which contains the community of Braddock Heights . On the descent of Braddock Mountain , US 40 Alternate expands to a four @-@ lane road , with one lane eastbound , two lanes westbound , and a center turn lane . At the base of the mountain , the alternate route temporarily expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway through its half @-@ diamond interchange with I @-@ 70 , which has ramps to and from the direction of Frederick . East of I @-@ 70 , US 40 Alternate reduces to two lanes and passes the Highland Lodge . The alternate route reaches its eastern terminus at a partial intersection with US 40 ( Patrick Street ) at the western edge of Frederick and the Frederick Golden Mile , a heavily commercialized area east to US 15 ( Frederick Freeway ) . There is no direct access from eastbound US 40 Alternate to westbound US 40 or from eastbound US 40 to the westbound alternate route ; those movements are made by using Old Camp Road . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early paths and turnpikes = = = 
 The portion of US 40 Alternate between Frederick and Boonsboro roughly follows the Monocacy Road , a pack @-@ horse trail blazed by settlers from Pennsylvania around 1730 . The trail connected Philadelphia , Lancaster , and Hanover with Winchester , Virginia by way of what is now Taneytown , Frederick , Boonsboro , and Williamsport . The portion of the Monocacy Road from Frederick to Williamsport was used by the Braddock Expedition on its way from Alexandria to Cumberland to commence its ill @-@ fated assault on Fort Duquesne . Following the founding of Hagerstown in 1762 , a road was laid out north from Boonsboro to connect the new town with the eastern part of the colony . While the Monocacy Road as a whole was disused by 1794 , the portion followed by US 40 Alternate remained an important connection between Baltimore and Western Maryland . 
 The Baltimore and Fredericktown Turnpike Company was chartered in 1805 to build a road along the 62 @-@ mile ( 100 km ) path from Baltimore to Boonsboro . This turnpike was the first step in connecting Baltimore with Cumberland , the eastern terminus of the just @-@ commenced National Road . By 1808 , the turnpike had been completed west 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Baltimore and another 17 miles ( 27 km ) was under construction . The Baltimore and Fredericktown Turnpike was completed in 1812 . That same year , keen for an improved road to fully extend between Baltimore and Cumberland , the Maryland General Assembly conscripted the state 's banks to fund turnpike companies to complete the gap between Boonsboro and Cumberland with the benefit of having their charters extended from 1816 to 1835 . The banks opposed this measure but reluctantly bankrolled the construction of a road from <unk> Creek to Cumberland between 1816 and 1818 and from Hagerstown to Conococheague Creek in 1818 and 1819 . The Maryland General Assembly used their powers again in 1821 , agreeing to extend the banks ' charters to 1845 if they would fund a turnpike in the gap between Boonsboro and Hagerstown . When the National Turnpike was completed in 1823 , it became the first macadam road constructed in the United States . The Baltimore and Fredericktown and National turnpikes remained in operation through 1909 . 
 = = = State road construction and bypass = = = 
 In 1909 , the nascent Maryland State Highway Administration ( MDSRC ) designated the road between Frederick and Hagerstown for improvement as one of the original state roads . The commission 's first task was to acquire the necessary right @-@ of @-@ way by purchasing the two turnpikes in 1911 . MDSRC reconstructed the road between Frederick and Hagerstown with a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) wide macadam surface from Frederick to Middletown and from South Mountain to Boonsboro in 1913 . The state road was built from Middletown to South Mountain and from Boonsboro to Hagerstown in 1914 . The portion of the highway within Boonsboro was paved in 1915 . The last portion of the Frederick – Hagerstown state road to be constructed was within Funkstown , where the highway was surfaced with concrete by 1919 . The highway was designated part of US 40 in 1927 . 
 Around 1926 , US 40 received its first improvement when concrete shoulders were added to expand the roadway from 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in width . By 1934 , MDSRC recommended widening the highway to 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) from 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of Frederick to 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) east of Hagerstown . Ultimately , the commission decided to construct a new highway between the two cities that would shorten the distance by 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) and bypass the sharp curves and limited sight distances of the old road . Grading and drainage work on the new highway began in 1936 and was completed in 1938 for the first roadway of what would ultimately become a divided highway . The first 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) wide concrete roadway was constructed from downtown Hagerstown southeast to near Beaver Creek Road in 1938 . Surfacing of the remainder of the relocated National Pike was delayed by World War II ; construction resumed in 1946 and the new highway opened in 1948 . 
 The relocated National Pike was originally designated US 40 Alternate ; the old and new roads switched to their present designations in 1952 . Despite the construction of a new highway , improvements continued on the original road . Trolley tracks of the Hagerstown and Frederick Railway were removed from the highway in Funkstown and the street was resurfaced in 1940 . Hill climbing lanes were added for a length of 800 to 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 240 to 300 m ) on both sides of Braddock Mountain and South Mountain around 1942 . The highway between Funkstown and Boonsboro had curves modified and was widened and resurfaced in 1949 . US 40 Alternate from US 40 in Frederick west to Braddock Mountain underwent the same type of work in 1951 and 1952 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Work cited = = 
 = This Time Around ( Michael Jackson song ) = 
 " This Time Around " is a song by American recording artist and songwriter Michael Jackson that features the vocals from rapper The Notorious B.I.G. The song appears on Jackson 's ninth studio album , entitled HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I , which was released in 1995 as a two @-@ disc set . The song and lyrics were written by Michael Jackson , while the music was composed by Dallas Austin , Bruce Swedien and Rene Moore . Dallas Austin and Michael Jackson produced the song , while Bruce Swedien and René Moore served as co @-@ producers . The song 's lyrics details a musician 's problems with being famous and dealing with stardom . In December 1995 , the track was released as a promotional single in the United States only , containing a radio edit and remixes . " This Time Around " had a good chart performance , having charted solely due to radio airplay throughout the country . The song received positive reviews from contemporary music critics . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 The song and lyrics were written by Michael Jackson , while the music was composed by Dallas Austin , Bruce Swedien and Rene Moore . " This Time Around " is a song by Jackson that features vocals by rapper The Notorious B.I.G. Austin and Jackson produced the song , while Swedien and Moore co @-@ produced the song . It was recorded by both American musicians in 1994 and 1995 for Jackson 's ninth studio album , entitled HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I , which was released in 1995 as a two @-@ disc set . 
 " This Time Around " was written in common time , and was played in the key of D minor . The track 's tempo is a moderate 108 beats per minute . The track has a basic sequence of Dm11 – Dm9 as its chord progression . The song 's lyrics are about Michael and Biggie 's problems with being famous and dealing with stardom , and throughout the song Jackson asserts that he 's been " falsely accused " . On December 26 , 1995 , the track was released by Epic Records as a promotional single in the United States only . The promo was formatted in three different versions , which were as a standalone CD single with just the song , as a 12 " single with remixes and as a maxi @-@ single . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " This Time Around " received positive reviews from contemporary music critics in their review for the album . James Hunter of Rolling Stone described the song as being a " dynamite jam ... done with Atlanta R & B hotshot Dallas Austin that 's ripe for remixes " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times believed that Jackson " muttered " lyrics such as " They thought they really had control of me " . Although " This Time Around " did not chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , the track had a good chart performance on music component charts in the United States . The song charted on music charts based solely on radio airplay throughout the country . It charted within the top 40 of the Billboard Rhythmic Top 40 chart in 1995 , peaking at number 36 . The song peaked at number 18 on the Billboard Dance Music / Club Play Singles music charts 1996 . In 1996 , the track also peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Sermons of Jonathan Swift = 
 Jonathan Swift , as Dean of St. Patrick 's Cathedral in Dublin , produced many sermons during his tenure from 1713 to 1745 . Although Swift is better known today for his secular writings such as Gulliver 's Travels , A Tale of a Tub , or the Drapier 's Letters , Swift was known in Dublin for his sermons that were delivered every fifth Sunday . Of these sermons , Swift wrote down 35 , of which 12 have been preserved . In his sermons Swift attempted to impart traditional Church of Ireland values to his listeners in a plain manner . 
 Of the surviving twelve sermons , four have received serious consideration : " Doing Good " , " False Witness " , " Mutual Subjection " and " Testimony of Conscience " . These sermons deal with political matters and are used to give insight to Swift 's political writing ; the sermon " Doing Good " and its relationship with the Drapier 's Letters is one such example . However , the audience at St. Patrick 's Cathedral did not come to hear connections to political works , but to enjoy the well @-@ known preacher and be " moved by his [ Swift 's ] manners " . 
 Each sermon begins with a scriptural passage that reinforces the ideas that will be discussed in the sermon and each was preceded with the same opening prayer ( which Swift also delivered ) . The sermons are plainly written and apply a common @-@ sense approach to contemporary moral issues in Dublin . Swift patterned his sermons on the plain style of the Book of Common Prayer and the Church of Ireland Authorized Version of the Bible . 
 = = Background = = 
 As Dean of Saint Patrick 's Cathedral , Jonathan Swift spent every fifth Sunday preaching from the pulpit . Although many of his friends suggested that he should publish these sermons , Swift felt that he lacked the talent as a preacher to make his sermons worthy of publication . Instead , Swift spent his time working more on political works , such as Drapier 's Letters , and justified this by his lacking in religions areas . 
 Members of St. Patrick 's community would ask , " Pray , does the Doctor preach today ? " Swift 's sermons had the reputation of being spoken " with an emphasis and fervor which everyone around him saw , and felt . " In response to such encouragement to preach , Swift was reported to say that he " could never rise higher than preaching pamphlets . " Swift 's friend , Dr. John Arbuthnot , claimed , " I can never imagine any man can be uneasy , that has the opportunity of venting himself to a whole congregation once a week . " Regardless of what Swift thought of himself , the Cathedral was always crowded during his sermons . 
 Swift wrote out his sermons before preaching and marked his words to provide the correct pronunciation or to emphasise the word ironically . He always practised reading his sermons , and , as Davis claims , " he would ( in his own expression ) pick up the lines , and cheat his people , by making them believe he had it all by heart . " However , he wanted to express the truth of his words and impart this truth in a down @-@ to @-@ earth manner that could be understood by his listeners . 
 Swift believed that a preacher had to be understood , and states , " For a divine hath nothing to say to the wisest congregation of any parish in this kingdom , which he may not express in a manner to be understood by the meanest among them . " He elaborates further when he says , " The two principal branches of preaching , are first to tell the people what is their duty ; and then to convince them that it is so . " 
 Shortly before his death , Swift gave the collection of 35 sermons to Dr. Thomas Sheridan , saying , " You may have them if you please ; they maybe of use to you , they never were of any to me . " In 1744 , George Faulkner , the Dublin publisher of Swift 's 1735 Works , printed the sermons entitled " On Mutual Subjection , " " On Conscience , " and " On the Trinity . " 
 = = Surviving sermons = = 
 There are twelve surviving sermons that have been collected , and each sermon was introduced with a corresponding scriptural passage and the following prayer given by Swift : 
 Almighty and most merciful God ! forgive us all our sins . Give us grace heartily to repent them , and to lead new lives . Graft in our hearts a true love and veneration for thy holy name and word . Make thy pastors burning and shining lights , able to convince <unk> , and to save others and themselves . Bless this congregation here met together in thy name ; grant them to hear and receive thy holy word , to the salvation of their own souls . Lastly , we desire to return thee praise and thanksgiving for all thy mercies bestowed upon us ; but chiefly for the Fountain of them all , Jesus Christ our Lord , in whose name and words we further call upon thee , saying , ' Our Father , ' & c . " 
 The order of the sermons is presented according to the 1763 Sermons of the Reverend Dr. Jonathan Swift " carefully corrected " edition , which published the first nine of the twelve known sermons . 
 = = = On the Trinity = = = 
 Its introductory passage from scripture comes from First Epistle of John 5 : 7 – " For there are three that bear record in Heaven , the Father , the Word , and the Holy Ghost ; and these Three are One . " 
 Swift relies on 1 Corinthians in this sermon , but unlike other uses by Swift of 1 Corinthians , his use of the epistle in " On the Trinity " describe man 's inability to understand the complex workings of God . Swift states " Behold I show you a mystery ; we shall not all sleep , but we shall all be changed . " The primarily use of this sermon is to describe the divine mysteries in a simple manner ; Swift is not giving answers to the mysteries , but only explaining how Christians are to understand them . Swift attempts to describe the ambiguous nature of the Trinity and how many should understand it when he says : 
 Therefore I shall again repeat the doctrine of the Trinity , as it is positively affirmed in Scripture : that God is there expressed in three different names , as Father , as Son , and as Holy Ghost : that each of these is God , and that there is but one God . But this union and distinction are a mystery utterly unknown to mankind . 
 Although Swift constantly answers moral problems with common sense and reason , Swift believed that reason cannot be used when it comes to the divine mysteries . Instead , faith is all that man needs and , as Swift claims : 
 This is enough for any good Christian to believe on this great article , without ever inquiring any farther : And , this can be contrary to no man 's reason , although the knowledge of it is hid from him . 
 = = = On Mutual Subjection = = = 
 " On Mutual Subjection " was first given on 28 February 1718 , and it was first printed in 1744 . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from First Epistle of Peter 5 : 5 – " <unk> , all of you be subject one to another . " 
 The sermon relies on scripture to emphasise the divine will in calling people to serve their fellow men , which is a common theme in Swift 's sermons . This calling , as Swift claims , is based on historical events that reinforce scripture and allow mankind to know of the divine will . In particular , the development of the state and of the human body are parallel to each other , and England may soon be entering into a decline . However , Swift emphasises that man is imperfect , and that sin is a symbol of this <unk> . 
 Swift summarises this message with the Parable of the Talents as he says : 
 God sent us into the world to obey His commands , by doing as much good as our abilities will reach , and as little evil as our many infirmities will permit . Some He hath only trusted with one talent , some with five , and some with ten . No man is without his talent ; and he that is faithful or negligent in a little shall be rewarded or punished , as well as he that hath been so in a great deal . " To this John Boyle , Lord Orrery states , " A clearer style , or a discourse more properly adapted to a public audience , can scarce be framed . Every paragraph is simple , nervous , and intelligible . The threads of each argument are closely connected and logically pursued . 
 Although the sermon deals primarily with subjection to higher powers , some of Swift 's contemporaries viewed the sermon as political propaganda . John Evans , Bishop of Meath , told the Archbishop of Canterbury that he heard " a strange sermon ... It was somewhat like one of Montaigne 's essays , making very free with all orders and degrees of men among us – lords , bishops , & c. men in power . The pretended subjects were pride and humiliation . " He later continued to claim that " in short , [ Swift ] is thought to be Tory ... all over , which ( here ) is reckon 'd by every honest man Jacobite . " 
 However , Evans may have overly emphasised a political interpretation of the sermon for his own political gain ; the see of Derry had just opened and Evans wished to have his friend William Nicolson take the position . Evans ' political intrigue provoked Swift during an inspection of the clergy of Meath at Trim . Swift , as vicar of <unk> spoke during a synod to defend himself , his sermons , and his politics , and instead of resolving the issue , only caused more dispute between the two . 
 The emphasis on religious unity , also found in " On the Wisdom of this World " , comes from Swift 's understanding of St. Paul 's treatment of religious dissension among the early Christians . Paul 's words , " that there should be no schism in the body " , were important in the formation of this sermon , and served as part of Swift 's encouragement to the people of Ireland to follow the same religion . 
 = = = On the Testimony of Conscience = = = 
 " On the Testimony of Conscience " was first printed in 1744 . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from 2 Corinthians 1 : 12 – " For our rejoicing is this , the testimony of our conscience . " Part of the sermon relied on discussing the nature of rewards and punishments to come in the afterlife . 
 Religious dissension is the topic of this sermon and argues that dissenters do not want to embrace freedom , but instead exist only to destroy established Churches , especially the Church of Ireland . In the sermon , Swift conflates all dissenters with the Whig political party , and they are " those very persons , who under a pretence of a public spirit and tenderness towards their Christian <unk> , are so jealous for such a liberty of conscience as this , are of all others the least tender to those who differ from them in the smallest point relating to government . " To Swift , tolerating dissent is the same as tolerating blasphemy . 
 The work is filled with innuendo towards the rule of King George and his toleration of Whigs and dissenters as tyrannical ; Swift claims that a leader who tolerates religious dissenters was like a " heathen Emperor , who said , if the gods were offended , it was their own concern , and they were able to vindicate themselves . " To Swift , such leaders would eventually lose power , because God 's divine will manifests itself in historic outcomes . 
 In particular , Swift relies on a quote from Tiberius , as reported by Tacitus , to describe the " heathen " thoughts . Swift relied on Tiberius ' quote when mocking leaders who would undermine religious unity or those who were completely opposed to Christianity , such as in An Argument against Abolishing Christianity . Swift believed in the need for citizens to be required to follow Anglican religious practices and to honor the king as head of the Church , and a king who would who did not believe in the same could be nothing less than pagan . 
 Part of the sermon is dedicated to comparing the actions of the Irish church , in its struggle against religious dissenters and political uncertainty , with that of the primitive church . In particular , Swift claims , " For a man 's Conscience can go no higher than his Knowledge ; and therefore until he has thoroughly examined by Scripture , and the practice of the ancient Church , whether those points are <unk> or no , his Conscience cannot possibly direct him to condemn them . " However , Swift does not believe that experience alone could make one capable of understanding virtue or being capable of teaching virtue . 
 Regardless of the innuendo about Roman religious tyranny or comparisons to early Christian history , the sermon is given , as Ehrenpreis claims , with an " air of simplicity , frankness , common sense , and spontaneity " that " disarms the listener . " This sermon , in its plain language , is able to convey Swift 's message in a manner that could be seen as contradictory if it was embellished by history , allusions , or complex reasoning . 
 = = = On Brotherly Love = = = 
 " On Brotherly Love " was given on 29 November 1717 . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from Hebrews 8 : 1 – " Let brotherly love continue . " 
 Although Swift is preaching on " brotherly love " , he dwells on the topic of true religion and political dissent , and he uses his sermon to preach against those who are politically and religiously different from himself and the members of St. Patrick 's community . He introduces this claim when he says : 
 This nation of ours hath , for an hundred years past , been infested by two enemies , the Papists and fanatics , who , each in their turns , filled it with blood and slaughter , and , for a time , destroyed both the Church and government . The memory of these events hath put all true Protestants equally upon their guard against both these adversaries , who , by consequence , do equally hate us . The fanatics revile us , as too nearly approaching to Popery ; and the Papists condemn us , as bordering too much on fanaticism . The Papists , God be praised , are , by the wisdom of our laws , put out of all visible possibility of hurting us ; besides , their religion is so generally abhorred , that they have no advocates or abettors among Protestants to assist them . But the fanatics are to be considered in another light ; they have had of late years the power , the luck , or the cunning , to divide us among ourselves ; 
 Throughout this sermon , Swift emphasises that history is connected to the divine will throughout this sermon to criticise those who dissent . For example : 
 And others again , whom God had formed with mild and gentle dispositions , think it necessary to put a force upon their own tempers , by acting a noisy , violent , malicious part , as a means to be distinguished . Thus hath party got the better of the very genius and constitution of our people ; so that whoever reads the character of the English in former ages , will hardly believe their present posterity to be of the same nation or climate . 
 This work was printed and distributed as a solo tract in 1754 . 
 = = = On the Difficulty of Knowing One 's Self = = = 
 Although " On the Difficulty of Knowing One 's Self " was printed in 1745 along with some of Swift 's other sermons , its authorship is not completely established , since the original printing of the work came with the following disclaimer : 
 The manuscript title page of the following sermon being lost , and no memorandum writ upon it , as there were upon the others , when and where it was preached , made the editor doubtful whether he should print it as the Dean 's , or not . But its being found amongst the same papers ; and the hand , though writ somewhat better , bearing a great similitude to the Dean 's , made him willing to lay it before the public , that they might judge whether the style and manner also does not render it still more probable to be his . " 
 The sermon deals with the issues of understanding one 's self and how to act towards others in a Christian manner . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from 2 Kings 8 : 13 - " And Hazael said , But what , is thy servant a dog , that he should do this great thing ? " and the sermon concludes with the golden rule : 
 let him keep an eye upon that one great comprehensive rule of Christian duty , on which hangs , not only the law and the prophets , but the very life and spirit of the Gospel too : " Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you , do ye even so unto them . " Which rule , that we may all duly observe , by throwing aside all scandal and detraction , all spite and rancour , all rudeness and contempt , all rage and violence , and whatever tends to make conversation and commerce either uneasy , or troublesome , may the God of peace grant for Jesus Christ his sake , & c . 
 Swift relies on Gospel of Matthew in this sermon ( Swift quotes from the Sermon on the Mount , Matthew 7 : 12 ) instead of the other Gospels ; this is standard practice for Swift , because the Gospel features a simple , non @-@ controversial history that complements Swift 's religious views . 
 = = = On False Witness = = = 
 " On False Witness " was given in 1715 . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from Exodus 20 : 16 – " Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour . " 
 This sermon deals primarily with the topic of informers ; an informer had produced evidence that Swift was breaching King George 's order against preachers involving themselves in political matters . Swift , as a Tory propagandist , had been sent a package from another Tory ; the package was intercepted by a customs officer and it put Swift into hot water from the Whig politicians in power at the time . The sermon was used to attack those who " catch up an accidental word " and <unk> situations to hurt others . Swift alludes to such people when he says : 
 Such witnesses are those who cannot hear an idle intemperate expression , but they must immediately run to the magistrate to inform ; or perhaps wrangling in their cups over night , when they were not able to speak or apprehend three words of common sense , will pretend to remember everything the next morning , and think themselves very properly qualified to be accusers of their brethren . God be thanked , the throne of our King is too firmly settled to be shaken by the folly and rashness of every <unk> companion . 
 Half of the sermon is used to criticise the Whigs and their political activities . The other half is devoted to condemning Tories who betray other Tories as criminals , to gain favour with the Whigs . The Whigs are characterised as the persecutors of the early Christians , and betraying Tories are characterised as apostates . 
 Although King George I had issued a royal edict against speaking about political informers in regards to potential Jacobite rebellion , Swift felt that the issue was necessary to not only defend himself , but to defend all politically @-@ oppressed people . Immediately after the sermon , Prime Minister Robert Walpole used his power to form " The Committee of Secrecy " and deemed that Swift 's allies , Lord Bolingbroke , Lord Oxford , Lord Strafford , and Duke Ormonde would be sent to the Tower of London . However , Lord Bolingbroke and Duke Ormonde fled to France , and Oxford was taken to the Tower . This placed Swift at a political disadvantage , but he was mostly ignored . 
 = = = On the Poor Man 's <unk> = = = 
 Its introductory passage from scripture comes from Epistle to the Philippians 4 : 11 – " I have learned , in whatsoever state I am , therewith to be content " . 
 In this sermon , Swift was worried about how guilt affects mankind or how the lack of guilt is a sign of mankind 's problems : " the Shortness of his Life ; his Dread of a future State , with his <unk> to prepare for it . " He explains this : 
 And , it is a mistake to think , that the most hardened sinner , who <unk> his possessions or titles to any such wicked arts of thieving , can have true peace of mind , under the reproaches of a guilty conscience , and amid the cries of ruined widows and orphans . 
 Swift is trying to convince his listeners that they needed to contemplate their life and their death , and that they need to understand the rewards and punishments that await them in the afterlife . He emphasises this point when he explains the importance of meekness and modesty : 
 Since our blessed Lord , instead of a rich and honourable station in this world , was pleased to choose his lot among men of the lower condition ; let not those , on whom the bounty of Providence hath bestowed wealth and honours , despise the men who are placed in a humble and inferior station ; but rather , with their utmost power , by their countenance , by their protection , by just payment of their honest labour , encourage their daily endeavours for the support of themselves and their families . On the other hand , let the poor labour to provide things honest in the sight of all men ; and so , with diligence in their several employments , live soberly , righteously , and <unk> in this present world , that they may obtain that glorious reward promised in the Gospel to the poor , I mean the kingdom of Heaven . 
 But it is not just knowing your own fate in the afterlife , but also recognising the good in others and respecting that good . 
 = = = On the Wretched Condition of Ireland = = = 
 The sermon is properly titled " A Sermon on the Wretched Conditions of Ireland " . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from Psalms 144 : 14 – 15 – " That there be no complaining in our streets . Happy is the people that is in such a case . " 
 This sermon has been characterised as being particularly grounded in politics , and Swift sums up many of the political issues that he had previously addressed in pamphlets and essays . The solution to fixing the misery of the Irish people is : 
 to found a school in every parish of the kingdom , for teaching the meaner and poorer sort of children to speak and read the English tongue , and to provide a reasonable maintenance for the teachers . This would , in time , abolish that part of barbarity and ignorance , for which our natives are so despised by all foreigners : this would bring them to think and act according to the rules of reason , by which a spirit of industry , and thrift , and honesty would be introduced among them . And , indeed , considering how small a tax would suffice for such a work , it is a public scandal that such a thing should never have been endeavoured , or , perhaps , so much as thought on . 
 However , lack of education is not the only problem for Ireland ; many problems come from the vices of the Irish citizenry . These vices span the way of dress to the inactivity of the common person . To correct the problems of Ireland , Swift emphasises the need for his people to contribute to various charities , and concludes : 
 I might here , if the time would permit , offer many arguments to persuade to works of charity ; but you hear them so often from the pulpit , that I am willing to hope you may not now want them . Besides , my present design was only to shew where your alms would be best bestowed , to the honour of God , your own ease and advantage , the service of your country , and the benefit of the poor . I desire you will all weigh and consider what I have spoken , and , according to your several stations and abilities , endeavour to put it in practice ; 
 Some critics have seen Swift as hopeless in regards to actual change for Ireland . The rich could never change from their absentee landlord mentality that has stripped Ireland of its economic independence , and that is why Swift spends the majority of his sermon discussing the poor . Swift proposes a remedy of sorts that would help the poor ; they should be educated and the free travel of beggars should be restricted . These ideas were intended to limit the amount that the poor consumed in society , which , combined with a proposal for the poor to act more virtuously , should correct many of the problems that plague Ireland , but these ideas were never put into effect . 
 = = = On Sleeping in Church = = = 
 Its introductory passage from scripture comes from Acts of the Apostles 20 : 9 – " And there sat in a window a certain young man , named <unk> , being fallen into a deep sleep ; and as Paul was long preaching , he sunk down with sleep , and fell down from the third loft , and was taken up dead . " 
 In this sermon , Swift criticises a " decay " in preaching that has led to people falling asleep in church . Throughout the Sermon , Swift constantly relies on the Parable of the Sower . Swift emphasises the wording of St. Matthew when he says , " whose Hearts are waxed gross , whose Ears are dulled of hearing , and whose eyes are closed , " and he uses " eyes are closed " to connect back to those sleeping in Church . 
 People not attending Church is another problem addressed in the sermon . Swift states : 
 Many men come to church to save or gain a reputation ; or because they will not be singular , but comply with an established custom ; yet , all the while , they are loaded with the guilt of old rooted sins . These men can expect to hear of nothing but terrors and <unk> , their sins laid open in true colours , and eternal misery the reward of them ; therefore , no wonder they stop their ears , and divert their thoughts , and seek any amusement rather than stir the hell within them . " 
 He describes these people as : 
 Men whose minds are much enslaved to earthly affairs all the week , cannot disengage or break the chain of their thoughts so suddenly , as to apply to a discourse that is wholly foreign to what they have most at heart . " 
 The people are unwilling to be confronted by the results of their actions in the afterlife , and it is this problem that Swift wants to prevent . 
 = = = On the Wisdom of this World = = = 
 " On the Wisdom of this World " was originally titled " A Sermon upon the Excellence of Christianity in Opposition to Heathen Philosophy " in the 1765 edition of Swift 's Works . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from I Corinthians 3 : 19 – " The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God . " This sermon emphasises the nature of rewards and punishments , and how such aspects of Christianity had been lacking in the classical philosophies . 
 Except for The Gospel of St. Matthew , Swift relied on I Corinthians more than any other Biblical book . I Corinthians was a favourite work for Swift to rely on , because the epistle emphasises how to act as a proper Christian and how to conform to united principles . Although the Anglican mass emphasises the Epistle to the Romans , Swift relied on Corinthians in order to combat religious schismatic tendencies in a similar manner to his criticism of dissenters in " On Mutual Subjection " . 
 However , a second aspect of I Corinthians also enters into the sermon ; Swift relies on it to promote the idea that reason can be used to comprehend the world , but " excellency of speech " is false when it comes to knowledge about the divine . To this , Swift said , " we must either believe what God directly <unk> us in Holy Scripture , or we must wholly reject the Scripture , and the Christian Religion which we pretend to confess " . 
 = = = On Doing Good = = = 
 " On Doing Good : A Sermon on the Occasion of Wood 's Project " was given in 1724 . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from Galatians 6 : 10 - " As we have therefore opportunity , let us do good unto all men . " 
 It is unsure when the sermon was actually given , but some critics suggest it was read immediately following the publication of Swift 's Letter to the Whole People of Ireland while others place it in October 1724 . 
 According to Sophie Smith , Swift 's " On Doing Good " sermon is about a patriotic ideal that is " higher than most ideals published in text @-@ books on that subject . " " On Doing Good " calls the people to act on a higher level of ethics , which Smith describes as " Baconian " . 
 Smith claims that Swift discusses this ideal when he says : 
 Under the title of our neighbour , there is yet a duty of a more large , extensive nature incumbent on us – our love to our neighbour is his public capacity , as he is a member of that greatly body , the Commonwealth , under the same government with ourselves , and this is usually called love of the public , and is a duty to which we are more strictly obliged than even that of loving ourselves , because wherein ourselves are also contained – as well as all our neighbours – is one great body . 
 And : 
 But here I would not be misunderstood . By the love of our country , I do not mean loyalty to our King , for that is a duty of another nature , and a man may be very loyal , in the common sense of the word , without one grain of public good in his heart . Witness this very kingdom we live in . I verily believe , that since the beginning of the world , no nation upon earth ever shewed ( all circumstances considered ) , such high constant marks of loyalty in all their action and behaviour as we have done ; and at the same time , no people ever appeared more utterly void of what is called public spirit ... therefore , I shall think my time not ill @-@ spent if I can persuade most and all of you who hear me , to shew the love you have for your country by endeavouring in your several situations to do all the public good you can . For I am certain persuaded that all our misfortunes arise from no other original cause than that general disregard among us to the public welfare . 
 Swift felt that it was his duty as Dean to raise the " Irish self @-@ esteem " to liberate the Irish from English economic oppression . 
 Beyond basic " self @-@ esteem " issues , Swift used the sermon to reinforce the moral arguments incorporated into the Drapier 's Letters with religious doctrine and biblical authority . One image , that of Nineveh and Nimrod , appears in both the sermon and the letters . Nimrod represents Ireland 's desire to coin its own currency and he is a warning to the English that Ireland will not tolerate England 's despotic control . Furthermore , the use of " Nineveh " reinforces Swift 's claim that Ireland is under " God 's special providence " . 
 Because of the correlation between this sermon and the Drapier 's Letters , Swift remarked , " I never preached but twice in my life ; and then they were not sermons , but pamphlets .... They were against Wood 's halfpence . " Even if this sermon was more of a pamphlet , Swift emphasises the divine will and how it guides history . Like the Drapier 's Letters , " On Doing Good " caused the Irish people to respect Swift as a hero and a patriot . 
 = = = On the Martyrdom of King Charles I = = = 
 " On the Martyrdom of King Charles I " was given on 30 January 1725 . Its introductory passage from scripture comes from Genesis 49 : 5 – 7 – 
 Simeon and Levi are brethren ; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations . / O my soul , come not thou into their secret ; unto their assembly , mine honour , be not thou united : for in their anger they slew a man , and in their self @-@ will they <unk> down a wall . / Cursed be their anger , for it was fierce ; and their wrath , for it was cruel . I will divide them in Jacob , and scatter them in Israel . 
 The letter served two purposes : the first was to honour the martyrdom of King Charles I and the second was to criticise dissenters against the Church of Ireland . Swift emphasises both when he says : 
 I know very well , that the Church hath been often censured for keeping holy this day of humiliation , in memory of that excellent king and blessed martyr , Charles I , who rather chose to die on a scaffold , than betray the religion and liberties of his people , wherewith God and the laws had entrusted him . " 
 To Swift , the dissent that led to King Charles I 's martyrdom defied God 's divine will . 
 Swift concludes his sermon with : 
 On the other side , some look upon kings as answerable for every mistake or omission in government , and bound to comply with the most unreasonable demands of an <unk> faction ; which was the case of those who persecuted the blessed Martyr of this day from his throne to the scaffold . Between these two extremes , it is easy , from what hath been said , to choose a middle ; to be good and loyal subjects , yet , according to your power , faithful <unk> of your religion and liberties ; to avoid all <unk> and preachers of newfangled doctrines in the Church ; to be strict observers of the laws , which cannot be justly taken from you without your own consent : In short , ' to obey God and the King , and meddle not with those who are given to <unk> 
 = = Reception = = 
 Lord Orrery favourably described that some of Swift 's sermons were more properly moral or political essays . Lord Orrery prefaced the 1763 edition of The Sermons with : 
 These Sermons are curious ; and curious for such reason as would make other works despicable . They were written in a careless hurrying manner ; and were the offspring of necessity , not of choice : so that one will see the original force of the Dean 's genius more in these compositions , that were the legitimate sons of duty , than in other pieces that were natural sons of love . 
 The Bishop of Meath , John Evans , agreed with Lord Orrery 's critique of the sermons as political works , and he compared a sermon to the writing of Montaigne . 
 Sir Walter Scott wrote : 
 The Sermons of Swift have none of that thunder which appals , or that <unk> and winning softness which melts , the hearts of an audience . He can never have enjoyed the triumph of uniting hundreds in one ardent sentiment of love , of terror , or of devotion . His reasoning , however powerful , and indeed unanswerable , convinces the understanding , but is never addressed to the heart ; and , indeed , from his instructions to a young clergyman , he seems hardly to have considered pathos as a legitimate ingredient in an English sermon . Occasionally , too , Swift 's misanthropic habits break out even from the pulpit ; nor is he altogether able to suppress his disdain of those fellow mortals , on whose behalf was accomplished the great work of redemption . With such unamiable feelings towards his hearers , the preacher might indeed command their respect , but could never excite their sympathy . It may be feared that his Sermons were less popular from another cause , <unk> more to the congregation than to the pastor . Swift spared not the vice of rich or poor ; and , disdaining to amuse the imaginations of his audience with discussion of dark points of divinity , or warm them by a flow of sentimental devotion , he rushes at once to the point of moral depravity , and <unk> them with their favourite and predominant vices in a tone of stern reproof , bordering upon reproach . In short , he tears the bandages from their wounds , like the hasty surgeon of a crowded hospital , and applies the incision knife and caustic with salutary , but rough and untamed severity . But , alas ! the mind must be already victorious over the worst of its evil propensities , that can profit by this harsh medicine . There is a principle of opposition in our nature , which mans itself with obstinacy even against avowed truth , when it approaches our feelings in a harsh and insulting manner . And Swift was probably sensible , that his discourses , owing to these various causes , did not produce the powerful effects most grateful to the feelings of the preacher , because they reflect back to him those of the audience . 
 But although the Sermons of Swift are deficient in eloquence , and were lightly esteemed by their author , they must not be undervalued by the modern reader . They exhibit , in an eminent degree , that powerful grasp of intellect which distinguished the author above all his contemporaries . In no religious discourses can be found more sound good sense , more happy and forcible views of the immediate subject . The reasoning is not only irresistible , but managed in a mode so simple and clear , that its force is obvious to the most ordinary capacity . Upon all subjects of morality , the preacher maintains the character of a rigid and inflexible monitor ; neither admitting apology for that which is wrong , nor softening the difficulty of adhering to that which is right ; a stern stoicism of doctrine , that may fail in finding many converts , but leads to excellence in the few manly minds who dare to embrace it . In treating the doctrinal points of belief , ( as in his Sermon upon the Trinity , ) Swift systematically refuses to quit the high and pre @-@ eminent ground which the defender of Christianity is entitled to occupy , or to submit to the test of human reason , mysteries which are placed , by their very nature , far beyond our finite capacities . Swift considered , that , in religion , as in profane science , there must be certain ultimate laws which are to be received as fundamental truths , although we are incapable of defining or analysing their nature ; and he censures those divines , who , in presumptuous confidence of their own logical powers , enter into controversy upon such mysteries of faith , without considering that they give thereby the most undue advantage to the infidel . Our author wisely and consistently declared reason an incompetent judge of doctrines , of which God had declared the fact , concealing from man the manner . He contended , that he who , upon the whole , receives the Christian religion as of divine inspiration , must be contented to depend upon God 's truth , and his holy word , and receive with humble faith the mysteries which are too high for comprehension . Above all , Swift points out , with his usual forcible precision , the mischievous tendency of those investigations which , while they assail one fundamental doctrine of the Christian religion , shake and endanger the whole fabric , destroy the settled faith of thousands , pervert and mislead the genius of the learned and acute , destroy and confound the religious principles of the simple and ignorant . 
 Scott 's contemporary Edmund Burke said concerning Swift 's sermon on " Doing Good , " : 
 The pieces relating to Ireland are those of a public nature ; in which the Dean appears , as usual , in the best light , because they do honour to his heart as well as to his head ; furnishing some additional proofs , that , though he was very free in his abuse of the inhabitants of that country , as well natives as foreigners , he had their interest sincerely at heart , and perfectly understood it . His sermon upon Doing Good , though peculiarly adapted to Ireland and Wood 's designs upon it , contains perhaps the best motives to patriotism that were ever delivered within so small a compass . 
 = = In Swift 's later works = = 
 Aspects of " On False Witness " are used by Gulliver in his attack against informers . 
 " On Doing Good " is alluded to in the Drapier 's fifth letter . 
 " On Doing Good " is mentioned in the Drapier 's sixth letter when he states , " I did very lately , as I thought it my duty , preach to the people under my inspection , upon the subject of Mr. Wood 's coin ; and although I never heard that my sermon gave the least offence , as I am sure none was intended ; yet , if it were now printed and published , I cannot say , I would insure it from the hands of the common hangman ; or my own person from those of a messenger . " 
