 = Electricity = 
 Electricity is the set of physical phenomena associated with the presence and flow of electric charge . Electricity gives a wide variety of well @-@ known effects , such as lightning , static electricity , electromagnetic induction and electric current . In addition , electricity permits the creation and reception of electromagnetic radiation such as radio waves . 
 In electricity , charges produce electromagnetic fields which act on other charges . Electricity occurs due to several types of physics : 
 electric charge : a property of some subatomic particles , which determines their electromagnetic interactions . Electrically charged matter is influenced by , and produces , electromagnetic fields , electric charges can be positive or negative . 
 electric field ( see electrostatics ) : charges are surrounded by an electric field . The electric field produces a force on other charges . Changes in the electric field travel at the speed of light . 
 electric potential : the capacity of an electric field to do work on an electric charge , typically measured in volts . 
 electric current : a movement or flow of electrically charged particles , typically measured in amperes . 
 electromagnets : Moving charges produce a magnetic field . Electric currents generate magnetic fields , and changing magnetic fields generate electric currents . 
 In electrical engineering , electricity is used for : 
 electric power where electric current is used to energise equipment ; 
 electronics which deals with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes , transistors , diodes and integrated circuits , and associated passive interconnection technologies . 
 Electrical phenomena have been studied since antiquity , though progress in theoretical understanding remained slow until the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries . Even then , practical applications for electricity were few , and it would not be until the late nineteenth century that engineers were able to put it to industrial and residential use . The rapid expansion in electrical technology at this time transformed industry and society . Electricity 's extraordinary versatility means it can be put to an almost limitless set of applications which include transport , heating , lighting , communications , and computation . Electrical power is now the backbone of modern industrial society . 
 = = History = = 
 Long before any knowledge of electricity existed , people were aware of shocks from electric fish . Ancient Egyptian texts dating from 2750 BCE referred to these fish as the " Thunderer of the Nile " , and described them as the " protectors " of all other fish . Electric fish were again reported millennia later by ancient Greek , Roman and Arabic naturalists and physicians . Several ancient writers , such as Pliny the Elder and Scribonius Largus , attested to the numbing effect of electric shocks delivered by catfish and electric rays , and knew that such shocks could travel along conducting objects . Patients suffering from ailments such as gout or headache were directed to touch electric fish in the hope that the powerful jolt might cure them . Possibly the earliest and nearest approach to the discovery of the identity of lightning , and electricity from any other source , is to be attributed to the Arabs , who before the 15th century had the Arabic word for lightning ( <unk> ) applied to the electric ray . 
 Ancient cultures around the Mediterranean knew that certain objects , such as rods of amber , could be rubbed with cat 's fur to attract light objects like feathers . Thales of Miletus made a series of observations on static electricity around 600 BCE , from which he believed that friction rendered amber magnetic , in contrast to minerals such as magnetite , which needed no rubbing . Thales was incorrect in believing the attraction was due to a magnetic effect , but later science would prove a link between magnetism and electricity . According to a controversial theory , the Parthians may have had knowledge of electroplating , based on the 1936 discovery of the Baghdad Battery , which resembles a galvanic cell , though it is uncertain whether the artifact was electrical in nature . 
 Electricity would remain little more than an intellectual curiosity for millennia until 1600 , when the English scientist William Gilbert made a careful study of electricity and magnetism , distinguishing the lodestone effect from static electricity produced by rubbing amber . He coined the New Latin word electricus ( " of amber " or " like amber " , from <unk> , <unk> , the Greek word for " amber " ) to refer to the property of attracting small objects after being rubbed . This association gave rise to the English words " electric " and " electricity " , which made their first appearance in print in Thomas Browne 's Pseudodoxia Epidemica of 1646 . 
 Further work was conducted by Otto von Guericke , Robert Boyle , Stephen Gray and C. F. du Fay . In the 18th century , Benjamin Franklin conducted extensive research in electricity , selling his possessions to fund his work . In June 1752 he is reputed to have attached a metal key to the bottom of a dampened kite string and flown the kite in a storm @-@ threatened sky . A succession of sparks jumping from the key to the back of his hand showed that lightning was indeed electrical in nature . He also explained the apparently paradoxical behavior of the Leyden jar as a device for storing large amounts of electrical charge in terms of electricity consisting of both positive and negative charges . 
 In 1791 , Luigi Galvani published his discovery of <unk> , demonstrating that electricity was the medium by which neurons passed signals to the muscles . Alessandro Volta 's battery , or voltaic pile , of 1800 , made from alternating layers of zinc and copper , provided scientists with a more reliable source of electrical energy than the electrostatic machines previously used . The recognition of electromagnetism , the unity of electric and magnetic phenomena , is due to Hans Christian Ørsted and André @-@ Marie Ampère in 1819 @-@ 1820 ; Michael Faraday invented the electric motor in 1821 , and Georg Ohm mathematically analysed the electrical circuit in 1827 . Electricity and magnetism ( and light ) were definitively linked by James Clerk Maxwell , in particular in his " On Physical Lines of Force " in 1861 and 1862 . 
 While the early 19th century had seen rapid progress in electrical science , the late 19th century would see the greatest progress in electrical engineering . Through such people as Alexander Graham Bell , Ottó Bláthy , Thomas Edison , Galileo Ferraris , Oliver Heaviside , <unk> <unk> , William Thomson , 1st Baron Kelvin , Charles Algernon Parsons , Werner von Siemens , Joseph Swan , Nikola Tesla and George Westinghouse , electricity turned from a scientific curiosity into an essential tool for modern life , becoming a driving force of the Second Industrial Revolution . 
 In 1887 , Heinrich Hertz discovered that electrodes illuminated with ultraviolet light create electric sparks more easily . In 1905 Albert Einstein published a paper that explained experimental data from the photoelectric effect as being the result of light energy being carried in discrete quantized packets , energising electrons . This discovery led to the quantum revolution . Einstein was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for " his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect " . The photoelectric effect is also employed in photocells such as can be found in solar panels and this is frequently used to make electricity commercially . 
 The first solid @-@ state device was the " cat 's @-@ whisker detector " first used in the 1900s in radio receivers . A whisker @-@ like wire is placed lightly in contact with a solid crystal ( such as a germanium crystal ) in order to detect a radio signal by the contact junction effect . In a solid @-@ state component , the current is confined to solid elements and compounds engineered specifically to switch and amplify it . Current flow can be understood in two forms : as negatively charged electrons , and as positively charged electron deficiencies called holes . These charges and holes are understood in terms of quantum physics . The building material is most often a crystalline semiconductor . 
 The solid @-@ state device came into its own with the invention of the transistor in 1947 . Common solid @-@ state devices include transistors , microprocessor chips , and RAM . A specialized type of RAM called flash RAM is used in USB flash drives and more recently , solid @-@ state drives to replace mechanically rotating magnetic disc hard disk drives . Solid state devices became prevalent in the 1950s and the 1960s , during the transition from vacuum tubes to semiconductor diodes , transistors , integrated circuit ( IC ) and the light @-@ emitting diode ( LED ) . 
 = = Concepts = = 
 = = = Electric charge = = = 
 The presence of charge gives rise to an electrostatic force : charges exert a force on each other , an effect that was known , though not understood , in antiquity . A lightweight ball suspended from a string can be charged by touching it with a glass rod that has itself been charged by rubbing with a cloth . If a similar ball is charged by the same glass rod , it is found to repel the first : the charge acts to force the two balls apart . Two balls that are charged with a rubbed amber rod also repel each other . However , if one ball is charged by the glass rod , and the other by an amber rod , the two balls are found to attract each other . These phenomena were investigated in the late eighteenth century by Charles @-@ Augustin de Coulomb , who deduced that charge manifests itself in two opposing forms . This discovery led to the well @-@ known axiom : like @-@ charged objects repel and opposite @-@ charged objects attract . 
 The force acts on the charged particles themselves , hence charge has a tendency to spread itself as evenly as possible over a conducting surface . The magnitude of the electromagnetic force , whether attractive or repulsive , is given by Coulomb 's law , which relates the force to the product of the charges and has an inverse @-@ square relation to the distance between them . The electromagnetic force is very strong , second only in strength to the strong interaction , but unlike that force it operates over all distances . In comparison with the much weaker gravitational force , the electromagnetic force pushing two electrons apart is 1042 times that of the gravitational attraction pulling them together . 
 Study has shown that the origin of charge is from certain types of subatomic particles which have the property of electric charge . Electric charge gives rise to and interacts with the electromagnetic force , one of the four fundamental forces of nature . The most familiar carriers of electrical charge are the electron and proton . Experiment has shown charge to be a conserved quantity , that is , the net charge within an isolated system will always remain constant regardless of any changes taking place within that system . Within the system , charge may be transferred between bodies , either by direct contact , or by passing along a conducting material , such as a wire . The informal term static electricity refers to the net presence ( or ' imbalance ' ) of charge on a body , usually caused when dissimilar materials are rubbed together , transferring charge from one to the other . 
 The charge on electrons and protons is opposite in sign , hence an amount of charge may be expressed as being either negative or positive . By convention , the charge carried by electrons is deemed negative , and that by protons positive , a custom that originated with the work of Benjamin Franklin . The amount of charge is usually given the symbol Q and expressed in coulombs ; each electron carries the same charge of approximately − 1 @.@ <unk> × 10 − 19 coulomb . The proton has a charge that is equal and opposite , and thus + 1 @.@ <unk> × 10 − 19 coulomb . Charge is possessed not just by matter , but also by antimatter , each antiparticle bearing an equal and opposite charge to its corresponding particle . 
 Charge can be measured by a number of means , an early instrument being the gold @-@ leaf <unk> , which although still in use for classroom demonstrations , has been superseded by the electronic electrometer . 
 = = = Electric current = = = 
 The movement of electric charge is known as an electric current , the intensity of which is usually measured in amperes . Current can consist of any moving charged particles ; most commonly these are electrons , but any charge in motion constitutes a current . 
 By historical convention , a positive current is defined as having the same direction of flow as any positive charge it contains , or to flow from the most positive part of a circuit to the most negative part . Current defined in this manner is called conventional current . The motion of negatively charged electrons around an electric circuit , one of the most familiar forms of current , is thus deemed positive in the opposite direction to that of the electrons . However , depending on the conditions , an electric current can consist of a flow of charged particles in either direction , or even in both directions at once . The positive @-@ to @-@ negative convention is widely used to simplify this situation . 
 The process by which electric current passes through a material is termed electrical conduction , and its nature varies with that of the charged particles and the material through which they are travelling . Examples of electric currents include metallic conduction , where electrons flow through a conductor such as metal , and electrolysis , where ions ( charged atoms ) flow through liquids , or through plasmas such as electrical sparks . While the particles themselves can move quite slowly , sometimes with an average drift velocity only fractions of a millimetre per second , the electric field that drives them itself propagates at close to the speed of light , enabling electrical signals to pass rapidly along wires . 
 Current causes several observable effects , which historically were the means of recognising its presence . That water could be decomposed by the current from a voltaic pile was discovered by Nicholson and Carlisle in 1800 , a process now known as electrolysis . Their work was greatly expanded upon by Michael Faraday in 1833 . Current through a resistance causes localised heating , an effect James Prescott Joule studied mathematically in 1840 . One of the most important discoveries relating to current was made accidentally by Hans Christian Ørsted in 1820 , when , while preparing a lecture , he witnessed the current in a wire disturbing the needle of a magnetic compass . He had discovered electromagnetism , a fundamental interaction between electricity and <unk> . The level of electromagnetic emissions generated by electric arcing is high enough to produce electromagnetic interference , which can be detrimental to the workings of adjacent equipment . 
 In engineering or household applications , current is often described as being either direct current ( DC ) or alternating current ( AC ) . These terms refer to how the current varies in time . Direct current , as produced by example from a battery and required by most electronic devices , is a unidirectional flow from the positive part of a circuit to the negative . If , as is most common , this flow is carried by electrons , they will be travelling in the opposite direction . Alternating current is any current that reverses direction repeatedly ; almost always this takes the form of a sine wave . Alternating current thus pulses back and forth within a conductor without the charge moving any net distance over time . The time @-@ averaged value of an alternating current is zero , but it delivers energy in first one direction , and then the reverse . Alternating current is affected by electrical properties that are not observed under steady state direct current , such as inductance and capacitance . These properties however can become important when circuitry is subjected to transients , such as when first energised . 
 = = = Electric field = = = 
 The concept of the electric field was introduced by Michael Faraday . An electric field is created by a charged body in the space that surrounds it , and results in a force exerted on any other charges placed within the field . The electric field acts between two charges in a similar manner to the way that the gravitational field acts between two masses , and like it , extends towards infinity and shows an inverse square relationship with distance . However , there is an important difference . Gravity always acts in attraction , drawing two masses together , while the electric field can result in either attraction or repulsion . Since large bodies such as planets generally carry no net charge , the electric field at a distance is usually zero . Thus gravity is the dominant force at distance in the universe , despite being much weaker . 
 An electric field generally varies in space , and its strength at any one point is defined as the force ( per unit charge ) that would be felt by a stationary , negligible charge if placed at that point . The conceptual charge , termed a ' test charge ' , must be <unk> small to prevent its own electric field disturbing the main field and must also be stationary to prevent the effect of magnetic fields . As the electric field is defined in terms of force , and force is a vector , so it follows that an electric field is also a vector , having both magnitude and direction . Specifically , it is a vector field . 
 The study of electric fields created by stationary charges is called electrostatics . The field may be visualised by a set of imaginary lines whose direction at any point is the same as that of the field . This concept was introduced by Faraday , whose term ' lines of force ' still sometimes sees use . The field lines are the paths that a point positive charge would seek to make as it was forced to move within the field ; they are however an imaginary concept with no physical existence , and the field permeates all the intervening space between the lines . Field lines emanating from stationary charges have several key properties : first , that they originate at positive charges and terminate at negative charges ; second , that they must enter any good conductor at right angles , and third , that they may never cross nor close in on themselves . 
 A hollow conducting body carries all its charge on its outer surface . The field is therefore zero at all places inside the body . This is the operating principal of the Faraday cage , a conducting metal shell which isolates its interior from outside electrical effects . 
 The principles of electrostatics are important when designing items of high @-@ voltage equipment . There is a finite limit to the electric field strength that may be withstood by any medium . Beyond this point , electrical breakdown occurs and an electric arc causes flashover between the charged parts . Air , for example , tends to arc across small gaps at electric field strengths which exceed 30 kV per centimetre . Over larger gaps , its breakdown strength is weaker , perhaps 1 kV per centimetre . The most visible natural occurrence of this is lightning , caused when charge becomes separated in the clouds by rising columns of air , and raises the electric field in the air to greater than it can withstand . The voltage of a large lightning cloud may be as high as 100 MV and have discharge energies as great as 250 kWh . 
 The field strength is greatly affected by nearby conducting objects , and it is particularly intense when it is forced to curve around sharply pointed objects . This principle is exploited in the lightning conductor , the sharp spike of which acts to encourage the lightning stroke to develop there , rather than to the building it serves to protect 
 = = = Electric potential = = = 
 The concept of electric potential is closely linked to that of the electric field . A small charge placed within an electric field experiences a force , and to have brought that charge to that point against the force requires work . The electric potential at any point is defined as the energy required to bring a unit test charge from an infinite distance slowly to that point . It is usually measured in volts , and one volt is the potential for which one joule of work must be expended to bring a charge of one coulomb from infinity . This definition of potential , while formal , has little practical application , and a more useful concept is that of electric potential difference , and is the energy required to move a unit charge between two specified points . An electric field has the special property that it is conservative , which means that the path taken by the test charge is irrelevant : all paths between two specified points expend the same energy , and thus a unique value for potential difference may be stated . The volt is so strongly identified as the unit of choice for measurement and description of electric potential difference that the term voltage sees greater everyday usage . 
 For practical purposes , it is useful to define a common reference point to which potentials may be expressed and compared . While this could be at infinity , a much more useful reference is the Earth itself , which is assumed to be at the same potential everywhere . This reference point naturally takes the name earth or ground . Earth is assumed to be an infinite source of equal amounts of positive and negative charge , and is therefore electrically uncharged — and <unk> . 
 Electric potential is a scalar quantity , that is , it has only magnitude and not direction . It may be viewed as analogous to height : just as a released object will fall through a difference in heights caused by a gravitational field , so a charge will ' fall ' across the voltage caused by an electric field . As relief maps show contour lines marking points of equal height , a set of lines marking points of equal potential ( known as equipotentials ) may be drawn around an <unk> charged object . The equipotentials cross all lines of force at right angles . They must also lie parallel to a conductor 's surface , otherwise this would produce a force that will move the charge carriers to even the potential of the surface . 
 The electric field was formally defined as the force exerted per unit charge , but the concept of potential allows for a more useful and equivalent definition : the electric field is the local gradient of the electric potential . Usually expressed in volts per metre , the vector direction of the field is the line of greatest slope of potential , and where the equipotentials lie closest together . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Ørsted 's discovery in 1821 that a magnetic field existed around all sides of a wire carrying an electric current indicated that there was a direct relationship between electricity and magnetism . Moreover , the interaction seemed different from gravitational and electrostatic forces , the two forces of nature then known . The force on the compass needle did not direct it to or away from the current @-@ carrying wire , but acted at right angles to it . Ørsted 's slightly obscure words were that " the electric conflict acts in a revolving manner . " The force also depended on the direction of the current , for if the flow was reversed , then the force did too . 
 Ørsted did not fully understand his discovery , but he observed the effect was reciprocal : a current exerts a force on a magnet , and a magnetic field exerts a force on a current . The phenomenon was further investigated by Ampère , who discovered that two parallel current @-@ carrying wires exerted a force upon each other : two wires conducting currents in the same direction are attracted to each other , while wires containing currents in opposite directions are forced apart . The interaction is mediated by the magnetic field each current produces and forms the basis for the international definition of the ampere . 
 This relationship between magnetic fields and currents is extremely important , for it led to Michael Faraday 's invention of the electric motor in 1821 . Faraday 's homopolar motor consisted of a permanent magnet sitting in a pool of mercury . A current was allowed through a wire suspended from a pivot above the magnet and dipped into the mercury . The magnet exerted a tangential force on the wire , making it circle around the magnet for as long as the current was maintained . 
 Experimentation by Faraday in 1831 revealed that a wire moving perpendicular to a magnetic field developed a potential difference between its ends . Further analysis of this process , known as electromagnetic induction , enabled him to state the principle , now known as Faraday 's law of induction , that the potential difference induced in a closed circuit is proportional to the rate of change of magnetic flux through the loop . Exploitation of this discovery enabled him to invent the first electrical generator in 1831 , in which he converted the mechanical energy of a rotating copper disc to electrical energy . Faraday 's disc was inefficient and of no use as a practical generator , but it showed the possibility of generating electric power using magnetism , a possibility that would be taken up by those that followed on from his work . 
 = = = Electrochemistry = = = 
 The ability of chemical reactions to produce electricity , and conversely the ability of electricity to drive chemical reactions has a wide array of uses . 
 Electrochemistry has always been an important part of electricity . From the initial invention of the Voltaic pile , electrochemical cells have evolved into the many different types of batteries , electroplating and electrolysis cells . Aluminium is produced in vast quantities this way , and many portable devices are electrically powered using rechargeable cells . 
 = = = Electric circuits = = = 
 An electric circuit is an interconnection of electric components such that electric charge is made to flow along a closed path ( a circuit ) , usually to perform some useful task . 
 The components in an electric circuit can take many forms , which can include elements such as resistors , capacitors , switches , transformers and electronics . Electronic circuits contain active components , usually semiconductors , and typically exhibit non @-@ linear behaviour , requiring complex analysis . The simplest electric components are those that are termed passive and linear : while they may temporarily store energy , they contain no sources of it , and exhibit linear responses to stimuli . 
 The resistor is perhaps the simplest of passive circuit elements : as its name suggests , it resists the current through it , dissipating its energy as heat . The resistance is a consequence of the motion of charge through a conductor : in metals , for example , resistance is primarily due to collisions between electrons and ions . Ohm 's law is a basic law of circuit theory , stating that the current passing through a resistance is directly proportional to the potential difference across it . The resistance of most materials is relatively constant over a range of temperatures and currents ; materials under these conditions are known as ' ohmic ' . The ohm , the unit of resistance , was named in honour of Georg Ohm , and is symbolised by the Greek letter Ω . 1 Ω is the resistance that will produce a potential difference of one volt in response to a current of one amp . 
 The capacitor is a development of the Leyden jar and is a device that can store charge , and thereby storing electrical energy in the resulting field . It consists of two conducting plates separated by a thin insulating dielectric layer ; in practice , thin metal foils are coiled together , increasing the surface area per unit volume and therefore the capacitance . The unit of capacitance is the farad , named after Michael Faraday , and given the symbol F : one farad is the capacitance that develops a potential difference of one volt when it stores a charge of one coulomb . A capacitor connected to a voltage supply initially causes a current as it accumulates charge ; this current will however decay in time as the capacitor fills , eventually falling to zero . A capacitor will therefore not permit a steady state current , but instead blocks it . 
 The inductor is a conductor , usually a coil of wire , that stores energy in a magnetic field in response to the current through it . When the current changes , the magnetic field does too , inducing a voltage between the ends of the conductor . The induced voltage is proportional to the time rate of change of the current . The constant of proportionality is termed the inductance . The unit of inductance is the henry , named after Joseph Henry , a contemporary of Faraday . One henry is the inductance that will induce a potential difference of one volt if the current through it changes at a rate of one ampere per second . The inductor 's behaviour is in some regards converse to that of the capacitor : it will freely allow an unchanging current , but opposes a rapidly changing one . 
 = = = Electric power = = = 
 Electric power is the rate at which electric energy is transferred by an electric circuit . The SI unit of power is the watt , one joule per second . 
 Electric power , like mechanical power , is the rate of doing work , measured in watts , and represented by the letter P. The term wattage is used colloquially to mean " electric power in watts . " The electric power in watts produced by an electric current I consisting of a charge of Q coulombs every t seconds passing through an electric potential ( voltage ) difference of V is 
 <formula> 
 where 
 Q is electric charge in coulombs 
 t is time in seconds 
 I is electric current in amperes 
 V is electric potential or voltage in volts 
 Electricity generation is often done with electric generators , but can also be supplied by chemical sources such as electric batteries or by other means from a wide variety of sources of energy . Electric power is generally supplied to businesses and homes by the electric power industry . Electricity is usually sold by the kilowatt hour ( 3 @.@ 6 MJ ) which is the product of power in kilowatts multiplied by running time in hours . Electric utilities measure power using electricity meters , which keep a running total of the electric energy delivered to a customer . Unlike fossil fuels , electricity is a low entropy form of energy and can be converted into motion or many other forms of energy with high efficiency . 
 = = = Electronics = = = 
 Electronics deals with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes , transistors , diodes and integrated circuits , and associated passive interconnection technologies . The nonlinear behaviour of active components and their ability to control electron flows makes amplification of weak signals possible and electronics is widely used in information processing , telecommunications , and signal processing . The ability of electronic devices to act as switches makes digital information processing possible . Interconnection technologies such as circuit boards , electronics packaging technology , and other varied forms of communication infrastructure complete circuit functionality and transform the mixed components into a regular working system . 
 Today , most electronic devices use semiconductor components to perform electron control . The study of semiconductor devices and related technology is considered a branch of solid state physics , whereas the design and construction of electronic circuits to solve practical problems come under electronics engineering . 
 = = = Electromagnetic wave = = = 
 Faraday 's and Ampère 's work showed that a time @-@ varying magnetic field acted as a source of an electric field , and a time @-@ varying electric field was a source of a magnetic field . Thus , when either field is changing in time , then a field of the other is necessarily induced . Such a phenomenon has the properties of a wave , and is naturally referred to as an electromagnetic wave . Electromagnetic waves were analysed theoretically by James Clerk Maxwell in 1864 . Maxwell developed a set of equations that could unambiguously describe the interrelationship between electric field , magnetic field , electric charge , and electric current . He could moreover prove that such a wave would necessarily travel at the speed of light , and thus light itself was a form of electromagnetic radiation . Maxwell 's Laws , which unify light , fields , and charge are one of the great milestones of theoretical physics . 
 Thus , the work of many researchers enabled the use of electronics to convert signals into high frequency oscillating currents , and via suitably shaped conductors , electricity permits the transmission and reception of these signals via radio waves over very long distances . 
 = = Production and uses = = 
 = = = Generation and transmission = = = 
 In the 6th century BC , the Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus experimented with amber rods and these experiments were the first studies into the production of electrical energy . While this method , now known as the triboelectric effect , can lift light objects and generate sparks , it is extremely inefficient . It was not until the invention of the voltaic pile in the eighteenth century that a viable source of electricity became available . The voltaic pile , and its modern descendant , the electrical battery , store energy chemically and make it available on demand in the form of electrical energy . The battery is a versatile and very common power source which is ideally suited to many applications , but its energy storage is finite , and once discharged it must be disposed of or recharged . For large electrical demands electrical energy must be generated and transmitted continuously over conductive transmission lines . 
 Electrical power is usually generated by electro @-@ mechanical generators driven by steam produced from fossil fuel combustion , or the heat released from nuclear reactions ; or from other sources such as kinetic energy extracted from wind or flowing water . The modern steam turbine invented by Sir Charles Parsons in 1884 today generates about 80 percent of the electric power in the world using a variety of heat sources . Such generators bear no resemblance to Faraday 's homopolar disc generator of 1831 , but they still rely on his electromagnetic principle that a conductor linking a changing magnetic field induces a potential difference across its ends . The invention in the late nineteenth century of the transformer meant that electrical power could be transmitted more efficiently at a higher voltage but lower current . Efficient electrical transmission meant in turn that electricity could be generated at centralised power stations , where it benefited from economies of scale , and then be despatched relatively long distances to where it was needed . 
 Since electrical energy cannot easily be stored in quantities large enough to meet demands on a national scale , at all times exactly as much must be produced as is required . This requires electricity utilities to make careful predictions of their electrical loads , and maintain constant co @-@ ordination with their power stations . A certain amount of generation must always be held in reserve to cushion an electrical grid against inevitable disturbances and losses . 
 Demand for electricity grows with great rapidity as a nation <unk> and its economy develops . The United States showed a 12 % increase in demand during each year of the first three decades of the twentieth century , a rate of growth that is now being experienced by emerging economies such as those of India or China . Historically , the growth rate for electricity demand has outstripped that for other forms of energy . 
 Environmental concerns with electricity generation have led to an increased focus on generation from renewable sources , in particular from wind and hydropower . While debate can be expected to continue over the environmental impact of different means of electricity production , its final form is relatively clean 
 = = = Applications = = = 
 Electricity is a very convenient way to transfer energy , and it has been adapted to a huge , and growing , number of uses . The invention of a practical incandescent light bulb in the 1870s led to lighting becoming one of the first publicly available applications of electrical power . Although electrification brought with it its own dangers , replacing the naked flames of gas lighting greatly reduced fire hazards within homes and factories . Public utilities were set up in many cities targeting the burgeoning market for electrical lighting . 
 The resistive Joule heating effect employed in filament light bulbs also sees more direct use in electric heating . While this is versatile and controllable , it can be seen as wasteful , since most electrical generation has already required the production of heat at a power station . A number of countries , such as Denmark , have issued legislation restricting or banning the use of resistive electric heating in new buildings . Electricity is however still a highly practical energy source for heating and refrigeration , with air conditioning / heat pumps representing a growing sector for electricity demand for heating and cooling , the effects of which electricity utilities are increasingly obliged to accommodate . 
 Electricity is used within telecommunications , and indeed the electrical telegraph , demonstrated commercially in 1837 by Cooke and Wheatstone , was one of its earliest applications . With the construction of first intercontinental , and then transatlantic , telegraph systems in the 1860s , electricity had enabled communications in minutes across the globe . Optical fibre and satellite communication have taken a share of the market for communications systems , but electricity can be expected to remain an essential part of the process . 
 The effects of electromagnetism are most visibly employed in the electric motor , which provides a clean and efficient means of motive power . A stationary motor such as a winch is easily provided with a supply of power , but a motor that moves with its application , such as an electric vehicle , is obliged to either carry along a power source such as a battery , or to collect current from a sliding contact such as a pantograph . 
 Electronic devices make use of the transistor , perhaps one of the most important inventions of the twentieth century , and a fundamental building block of all modern circuitry . A modern integrated circuit may contain several billion miniaturised transistors in a region only a few centimetres square . 
 Electricity is also used to fuel public transportation , including electric buses and trains . 
 = = Electricity and the natural world = = 
 = = = Physiological effects = = = 
 A voltage applied to a human body causes an electric current through the tissues , and although the relationship is non @-@ linear , the greater the voltage , the greater the current . The threshold for perception varies with the supply frequency and with the path of the current , but is about 0 @.@ 1 mA to 1 mA for mains @-@ frequency electricity , though a current as low as a <unk> can be detected as an <unk> effect under certain conditions . If the current is sufficiently high , it will cause muscle contraction , fibrillation of the heart , and tissue burns . The lack of any visible sign that a conductor is electrified makes electricity a particular hazard . The pain caused by an electric shock can be intense , leading electricity at times to be employed as a method of torture . Death caused by an electric shock is referred to as electrocution . Electrocution is still the means of judicial execution in some jurisdictions , though its use has become rarer in recent times . 
 = = = Electrical phenomena in nature = = = 
 Electricity is not a human invention , and may be observed in several forms in nature , a prominent manifestation of which is lightning . Many interactions familiar at the macroscopic level , such as touch , friction or chemical bonding , are due to interactions between electric fields on the atomic scale . The Earth 's magnetic field is thought to arise from a natural dynamo of circulating currents in the planet 's core . Certain crystals , such as quartz , or even sugar , generate a potential difference across their faces when subjected to external pressure . This phenomenon is known as piezoelectricity , from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning to press , and was discovered in 1880 by Pierre and Jacques Curie . The effect is reciprocal , and when a piezoelectric material is subjected to an electric field , a small change in physical dimensions takes place . 
 Some organisms , such as sharks , are able to detect and respond to changes in electric fields , an ability known as electroreception , while others , termed electrogenic , are able to generate voltages themselves to serve as a predatory or defensive weapon . The order <unk> , of which the best known example is the electric eel , detect or stun their prey via high voltages generated from modified muscle cells called <unk> . All animals transmit information along their cell membranes with voltage pulses called action potentials , whose functions include communication by the nervous system between neurons and muscles . An electric shock stimulates this system , and causes muscles to contract . Action potentials are also responsible for coordinating activities in certain plants . 
 = = Cultural perception = = 
 In 1850 , William Gladstone asked the scientist Michael Faraday why electricity was valuable . Faraday answered , “ One day sir , you may tax it . ” 
 In the 19th and early 20th century , electricity was not part of the everyday life of many people , even in the industrialised Western world . The popular culture of the time accordingly often depicts it as a mysterious , quasi @-@ magical force that can slay the living , revive the dead or otherwise bend the laws of nature . This attitude began with the 1771 experiments of Luigi Galvani in which the legs of dead frogs were shown to twitch on application of animal electricity . " Revitalization " or resuscitation of apparently dead or drowned persons was reported in the medical literature shortly after Galvani 's work . These results were known to Mary Shelley when she authored Frankenstein ( 1819 ) , although she does not name the method of revitalization of the monster . The revitalization of monsters with electricity later became a stock theme in horror films . 
 As the public familiarity with electricity as the lifeblood of the Second Industrial Revolution grew , its wielders were more often cast in a positive light , such as the workers who " finger death at their gloves ' end as they piece and <unk> the living wires " in Rudyard Kipling 's 1907 poem Sons of Martha . Electrically powered vehicles of every sort featured large in adventure stories such as those of Jules Verne and the Tom Swift books . The masters of electricity , whether fictional or real — including scientists such as Thomas Edison , Charles Steinmetz or Nikola Tesla — were popularly conceived of as having wizard @-@ like powers . 
 With electricity ceasing to be a novelty and becoming a necessity of everyday life in the later half of the 20th century , it required particular attention by popular culture only when it stops flowing , an event that usually signals disaster . The people who keep it flowing , such as the nameless hero of Jimmy Webb ’ s song " Wichita Lineman " ( 1968 ) , are still often cast as heroic , wizard @-@ like figures . 
 = BOAC Flight 712 = 
 BOAC Flight 712 ( callsign Speedbird 712 ) was a British Overseas Airways Corporation service operated by a Boeing 707 @-@ 465 from London Heathrow Airport bound for Sydney via Zurich and Singapore . On Monday 8 April 1968 , it suffered an engine failure on takeoff that quickly led to a major fire . The engine fell off the aircraft in flight . After the aircraft had made a successful emergency landing , confusion over checklists and distractions from the presence of a check captain contributed to the deaths of five of the 127 on board . 
 The actions taken by those involved in the accident resulted in the award of the George Cross posthumously to stewardess Barbara Jane Harrison . Two other crew members received awards ; a BEM and an MBE . As a direct result of the accident , BOAC changed the checklists for engine severe failures and engine fires , combining them both into one checklist , the " engine fire or severe failure " checklist . 
 = = Flight = = 
 Flight 712 took off from Heathrow at 15 : 27 GMT ( 16 : 27 BST ) , 12 minutes later than scheduled . Flight 712 had 127 people aboard , including a crew augmented by the addition of an acting flight officer , John Hutchinson , and a check captain for routine performance review of the pilot in command , Captain Cliff Taylor . As well as the passengers , the aircraft was carrying baggage , mail and a radioactive isotope from the Isotope Production Unit at Harwell destined for the University Hospital in Jerusalem . 
 Seconds after take off from Heathrow 's then 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) long runway 28L ( now 12 @,@ 008 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 660 m ) long and designated 27L ) , there was an unexpected bang and the aircraft started vibrating . The throttle controlling number two engine was shutting down . While Captain Taylor ordered an engine failure drill , Flight Engineer Thomas Hicks carried out the engine failure drill , but both he and Check Captain Geoffrey Moss reached for the switch to cancel the undercarriage warning horn . At the same time , First Officer Francis Kirkland inadvertently cancelled the fire bell . Hicks reached for , but didn 't pull , the engine fire shut @-@ off handle . Moss , observing the fire , exclaimed " Bloody Hell ! The wing 's on Fire ! " A Mayday was broadcast at 15 : 29 . 
 In the control tower , the takeoff had been observed by John Davis , who saw what he initially thought was the sun reflecting off the aircraft 's wing during its initial climb . Davis quickly realised that the aircraft was on fire . Davis instructed Flight 712 to make a left turn , with the intention that the aircraft would land on runway 28L . He hit the " crash button " which alerted the emergency services and declared an aircraft accident . The emergency services were informed of the type of aircraft involved and given a rendezvous point at which they were to assemble . 
 By this time , the windows on the port side at the rear of the fuselage were beginning to melt . As the aircraft flew over Thorpe the burning engine broke away from its mounting and fell into a gravel pit where some children were playing , without causing any injury . At this time , the undercarriage was lowered and full flap selected . The flaps stopped some three degrees short of their full travel . The aircraft was at a height of 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) and flying at 225 knots ( 417 km / h ) . Cabin crew member Jennifer <unk> repeated the emergency landing drill for the benefit of the passengers despite not being sure herself that they would actually manage to land before the aircraft exploded . 
 The crew realised that the aircraft would not last long enough to enable a landing back on 28L , and declared a Mayday . Davis cleared the aircraft to land on runway 05R , which was 7 @,@ 733 feet ( 2 @,@ 357 m ) long . He also instructed two other aircraft to perform a go @-@ around , as runway 05R crossed runway <unk> , which they were due to land on and Davis did not know whether Flight 712 would be able to stop before reaching that runway . The crew accepted Davis 's offer of runway 05R , even though it was much shorter and not equipped with ILS . Taylor was able to safely land the aircraft on 05R , using wheel brakes and reversing the outboard engines ' thrust to halt the aircraft . The aircraft touched down about 400 yards ( 370 m ) beyond the threshold and stopped in 1 @,@ 400 yards ( 1 @,@ 300 m ) . The aircraft had made a perfect emergency landing after just 3m : 32s of flight . Taylor asked Davis for permission to evacuate , but the cabin crew were already opening the emergency doors . The flight crew started the fire drill , but the port wing exploded before this could be completed . As a result , the fire shut off handles were not pulled , and the booster pumps and electrical supply were left switched on . Due to the short period of time between the Mayday being declared at 15 : 29 and the aircraft landing at 15 : 31 , there was no time for the emergency services to lay a carpet of foam , which was standard practice at the time . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 The cabin crew started the evacuation , even before the plane had come to a halt , via both forward galley doors , both rear doors and the starboard overwing exits . 18 passengers escaped via the overwing exits before the fire grew too intense to use that route . The forward port galley door escape slide caught fire before it could be used , but one person jumped from there . 84 people escaped via the starboard galley door . Three of the crew escaped by the emergency cockpit rope . The rear starboard door escape slide had twisted on deployment , so Steward Taylor climbed down to straighten it , leaving stewardess Barbara Jane Harrison , known as Jane Harrison , at the door assisting the passengers . Six passengers escaped via this route before the slide was punctured and deflated . Harrison encouraged the passengers to jump , and pushed out those too frightened to do so . 11 people escaped via this route , and five more escaped via the rear port door before the slide was destroyed . Harrison was last seen alive preparing to jump herself , but then she turned back and disappeared into the burning fuselage in a valiant attempt to save the remaining four female passengers , including a disabled woman and eight @-@ year @-@ old girl . It was these actions which led to the award of the George Cross posthumously to Harrison in recognition of her selfless gallantry . 35 people were injured , and five killed . 
 = = = Fire @-@ fighting = = = 
 The first two fire engines to arrive were unable to do much to stop the fire , as the drivers misjudged their distance , and also they were unable to make foam whilst on the move . To make foam , the main transfer gearboxes of the fire engines had to be operated , which meant that the vehicles were unable to move . Problems with couplings on the fire hoses exacerbated the situation – the fire hydrants had been regularly painted , and a build up of paint on the coupling threads prevented the hoses from being attached to the hydrants . The driver of a back @-@ up foam tender drove in closer to the burning aircraft and discharged his foam effectively , but the fire had already gained hold by the time this happened . 
 = = Passengers = = 
 The aircraft was carrying 116 passengers and 11 crew . Five people were killed in the accident : stewardess Barbara Jane Harrison and four passengers , Esther Cohen , who was severely disabled , Catherine Shearer , a young Australian teacher who was seated with her mother ( who survived ) next to Mrs Cohen in the back row of seats , Mary Smith , a widow , and Jacqueline Cooper , an eight @-@ year @-@ old girl whose parents and two brothers escaped , helped by Miss Harrison . All five victims were found at the Inquest of 17 September 1968 to have died of " <unk> due to Inhalation of Fire Fumes " , and a verdict was returned in all five cases of Accidental Death . 
 One of the survivors was the pop singer Mark Wynter , who was travelling to Australia for his wedding to <unk> <unk> . 
 Another notable survivor was <unk> Katz , Israeli Ambassador to the Soviet Union . Katz had been expelled from the Soviet Union by Andrei Gromyko on 10 June 1967 , the last day of the Six @-@ Day War . Gromyko is said to have told Katz not to let his emotions get the better of him , advice he was to ignore in the emergency that was to befall him . During the evacuation from the aircraft , Katz was the only passenger to escape through the forward port door , despite the efforts of Hutchinson and Unwin to stop him using that door . The two flight crew were almost carried out through the door by Katz , who was a large man . Katz was seriously injured jumping from the doorway . He was taken to Hillingdon Hospital , where it was initially feared that he would become the sixth victim of Flight 712 . Katz recovered after a few days . He died in 1988 aged 80 . 
 = = Aircraft involved = = 
 The aircraft involved in the accident was a Boeing 707 – 465 registered G @-@ ARWE ( manufacturer 's serial number <unk> , Boeing line number 302 ) . First flown on 27 June 1962 , the aircraft was originally to have been operated by Cunard Eagle Airways , but before it entered service it was sold to BOAC @-@ Cunard and was delivered on 7 July 1962 . On 21 November 1967 the aircraft suffered an engine failure on take off from Honolulu International Airport . The take off was aborted , and there were no injuries to any of the passengers or crew . At the time of the Heathrow accident , the aircraft had flown for a total of 20 @,@ 870 hours . The aircraft was insured for £ 2 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 with Lloyd 's of London . 
 = = = Salvage = = = 
 The nose section of the 707 was salvaged for use on a Convair CV @-@ 580 ( <unk> ) for test purposes as part of the Total In Flight Simulator program ( <unk> ) . On 12 April 1969 the nose was airlifted by an Aero <unk> Guppy from Heathrow to Santa Barbara to support the modification . 
 References that the nose from G @-@ ARWE was used to repair a damaged TWA 707 are incorrect . G @-@ ARWE 's nose was too fire damaged for use as a repair donor for an airliner . TWA 's Boeing 707 @-@ <unk> , <unk> , ( Originally <unk> , c / n <unk> ) had been hijacked on a flight from Rome to Athens . Its cockpit had been destroyed by a bomb at Damascus , Syria , on 29 August 1968 . The rest of the airframe was found to be undamaged . <unk> received a new nose section from Boeing 's Renton production line . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 In the subsequent investigation , metal fatigue was ultimately blamed for the failure of the number five compressor wheel in the number two Rolls @-@ Royce 508 Conway turbofan engine , starting the rapid chain of failures . The crew 's omitting to shut off the fuel to the engine was blamed for the rapid growth of the fire and the loss of the aircraft . Check Captain Moss had accidentally cancelled the fire warning bell instead of the undercarriage warning bell . Moss had also issued orders to Captain Taylor , in breach of the normal protocol for his duties . However , the report on the accident also stated that Captain Taylor had briefed Moss to act as an extra set of eyes and ears inside and outside the cockpit . Moss 's actions therefore could be seen as acting within that remit . Although Moss had alerted the crew to the fire , none of them were aware that the number 2 engine had fallen off until after the evacuation on the ground . 
 As a result of the investigation , and lessons learned from the chain of events , BOAC combined the " Engine Fire Drill " and " Engine Severe Failure Drill " checklists into one list , called the " Engine Fire or Severe Failure Drill " . Modifications were also made to the checklist , including adding to the checklist confirmation that the fire handles had been pulled . 
 Whiskey Echo 's number 2 port engine <unk> , constructed in 1961 , had run for 14 @,@ 917 hours from new , and had been overhauled in spring 1965 because of vibration caused by metal fatigue that had led to the failure of a stage 8 high pressure compressor blade . In 1967 the engine had been removed from service because of flame tube deterioration , and as part of the repairs , the low pressure compressor , of which the number 5 wheel was an original component , was overhauled , but the wheel itself was not tested for fatigue . On 22 November 1967 the engine was bench tested and rejected because of excessive vibration of the high pressure compressor , but was later released as serviceable following further analysis . After 1 @,@ 415 hours service on another 707 and modification to the turbine seals , on 5 April 1968 <unk> became number 2 engine of the port wing of Whiskey Echo , scheduled to fly long @-@ haul to Sydney , Australia , three days later . 
 Shortly after takeoff at 16 @.@ 27 BST ( 15 @.@ 27 GMT ) on 8 April 1968 , according to the investigations of Rolls @-@ Royce , the 5th stage low pressure compressor wheel failed in fatigue at the run out radius of the wheel web with the rim , causing secondary failures to other wheels and other parts of the engine . The wheel then burst through its casing and disconnected the main fuel pipe , igniting the fuel which was being pumped at 50 gallons ( approx . 150 kg ) per minute . The fire could not be put out because the engine 's two extinguishers had become ineffectual following the destruction caused to the engine cowling by the broken compressor casing . The ferocity of the blaze soon after caused the engine pylon to fatally weaken , which when it gave way , led to the engine falling off of the wing . However , the fuel booster pump continued to function , intensifying the fire until it spread to the wing itself , sweeping back from forward of the leading edge towards the tail . Upon landing , the application of reverse thrust and the westerly crosswind on runway 05R blew the flames underneath the wing and set light to the fuselage . The rapidly intensifying fire then spread under the plane and ignited the fuel lines and oxygen tanks , which , within seconds of Whiskey Echo coming to a stop , caused a series of explosions that broke through the fuselage and set fire to the cabin , ultimately resulting in the deaths of five people . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Queen Elizabeth II awarded Barbara Jane Harrison a posthumous George Cross ( GC ) , the only GC ever presented to a woman in peacetime . Her medal was accepted on her behalf by her father , Alan . Harrison is the youngest ever female recipient of the George Cross . Neville Davis @-@ Gordon was awarded the British Empire Medal for Gallantry ( BEM ) . John Davis was appointed a Member of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) . 
 The citation for Barbara Jane Harrison 's GC reads : - 
 The citation for Neville Davis @-@ Gordon 's BEM reads : - 
 In addition , Air Traffic Control Officer John Davis , who was responsible for Flight 712 and had first spotted the port engine fire from the ground , was appointed MBE . 
 While mistakes had been made in the cockpit that fateful day , Captain Cliff Taylor and Acting First Officer John Hutchinson had managed to safely land their aircraft which , having lost an engine , was on fire carrying about 22 @,@ 000 gallons of fuel , in the most testing of circumstances and almost certainly saved 121 lives . Taylor was recommended for an award by BOAC , but following the publication of the official inquiry report in August 1969 , the decision was taken at ministerial level not to recognise any member of the flight crew . Both Taylor and Hutchinson received , along with First Officer Francis <unk> and Check Captain Geoffrey Moss , but not Flight Engineer Thomas Hicks , commendations from BOAC , and Captain Taylor was awarded the British Airline Pilots Association Gold Medal . 
 = G and H @-@ class destroyer = 
 The G- and H @-@ class destroyers were a group of 18 destroyers built for the Royal Navy during the 1930s . Six additional ships being built for the Brazilian Navy when World War II began in 1939 were purchased by the British and named the Havant class . The design was a major export success with other ships built for the Argentine and Royal Hellenic Navies . They were assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet upon completion and enforced the Non @-@ Intervention Agreement during the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 39 . 
 Most ships were recalled home or were sent to the North Atlantic from October – November 1939 , after it became clear that Fascist Italy was not going to intervene in World War II . Then they began to escort convoys and patrol for German submarines and commerce raiders . Two ships were lost to German mines in the first six months of the war . Three more were lost during the Norwegian Campaign , one in combat with a German cruiser and two during the First Battle of Narvik in April 1940 . The Battle of France was the next test for the destroyers from May – June , with many of the Gs and Havants participating in the evacuation of Dunkirk and the subsequent evacuations of Allied troops from western France . Three ships were sunk , two by bombs and the other to torpedoes . Most of the H @-@ class ships were sent to the Mediterranean in May in case Mussolini decided to attack France and the majority of the surviving Gs were sent to Force H at Gibraltar in July . Several of them participated in the Battle of Dakar , before being assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet with their sister ships . By the end of the year , the ships participated in several battles with the Royal Italian Navy , losing two to Italian mines and torpedoes , while sinking two Italian submarines . The Havants spent most of the war in the North Atlantic on convoy escort duties , losing half their number to German submarines , while helping to sink six in exchange by the end of the war . 
 The G- and H @-@ class ships of the Mediterranean Fleet escorted numerous Malta convoys , participated in the Battle of Cape Matapan in March 1941 and covered the evacuation of troops from Greece and Crete from May – June , losing two to German bombers and another so badly damaged that she was later written off . By the end of the year , they had sunk three submarines , two Italian and one German . Three Hs participated in the Second Battle of Sirte in March 1942 , during which one was damaged . Further damaged by aerial attacks , she was ordered to Gibraltar and ran aground in transit and had to be destroyed . Another was torpedoed and lost during Operation Vigorous in June . The ships sank two more submarines during 1942 and three destroyers began conversion to escort destroyers late that year and early in 1943 . Two of the four surviving Gs and Hs were transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy while under conversion . All of the surviving ships joined their Havant half @-@ sisters on escort duty in the North Atlantic in 1943 . 
 One ship was sent to the Mediterranean in 1944 while three others were transferred to the UK in preparation for Operation Overlord . Between them they sank five German submarines in 1944 with another in 1945 . Worn @-@ out and obsolete , the survivors were either broken up for scrap or sold off after the war . 
 = = Design and description ( G and H classes ) = = 
 The G class were ordered as part of the 1933 Naval Construction Programme , the H class following in 1934 . These ships were based on the preceding F class , but the elimination of cruising turbines and the development of more compact machinery allowed their dimensions and displacement to be slightly reduced . The H class were repeats of the G 's with some minor differences . All of the destroyers were fitted with ASDIC ( sonar ) and the ability to use the Two @-@ Speed Destroyer Sweep ( TSDS ) minesweeping gear . 
 The G- and H @-@ class destroyers displaced 1 @,@ 340 – 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 360 – 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 854 – 1 @,@ 860 long tons ( 1 @,@ 884 – 1 @,@ 890 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . Their peacetime complement was 137 officers and ratings , which was intended to increase to 146 in wartime . The ships were at their stability limit as built and the Director of Naval Construction believed that no additions in top weight should be made without an equal amount of weight being removed . 
 They were powered by two Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers that operated at a pressure of 300 psi ( 2 @,@ 068 kPa ; 21 kgf / cm2 ) and a temperature of 620 ° F ( 327 ° C ) . Hyperion was fitted with one Johnson boiler in her aft boiler room . The turbines developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . The destroyers carried a maximum of 450 – 475 long tons ( 457 – 483 t ) of fuel oil that gave them a range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . 
 All of the ships had the same main armament , four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . The guns had a maximum elevation of 40 ° ; the G class achieved this with a lowered section of the deck around the mount , the " well " , that allowed the breech of the gun to be lowered below deck height , but the new gun mount used in the H class was designed to reach that elevation without the necessity for the clumsy " wells " . They fired a 50 @-@ pound ( 23 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 650 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) to a range of 16 @,@ 970 yards ( 15 @,@ 520 m ) . Hereward served as the testbed for the twin 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch gun mount used for the Tribal and the J , K and N classes that temporarily replaced ' B ' gun . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , they had two quadruple mounts for the QF 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Vickers Mk III machine gun on platforms between the funnels . The G- and H @-@ class ships were fitted with two quadruple mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes , although Glowworm trialled the new quintuple mount . The ships were also equipped with two throwers and one rack for 20 depth charges . 
 The main guns were controlled by an Admiralty Fire Control Clock Mk I that used data derived from the manually @-@ operated director @-@ control tower and the separate rangefinder situated above the bridge . They had no capability for anti @-@ aircraft fire and the anti @-@ aircraft guns were aimed solely by eye . Hero and Hereward saw the introduction of a new style of bridge that would become standard on all Royal Navy fleet destroyers from the I class through to the Battle class of 1944 . This was necessary as Hereward was fitted with a prototype twin @-@ gun mounting that had a trunnion height 13 inches ( 33 @.@ 0 cm ) higher than the previous weapons , therefore it was necessary to raise the wheelhouse to allow the helmsman to see over the top . Raising the wheelhouse meant it had to be placed in front of , rather than underneath , the bridge , and it was given angled sides , resulting in a characteristic wedge shape with a sloping roof . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Beginning in May 1940 , the after bank of torpedo tubes was removed and replaced with a QF 12 @-@ pounder Mk V anti @-@ aircraft gun , the after mast and funnel being cut down to improve the gun 's field of fire . Four to eight QF 20 mm Oerlikon cannons were added to the surviving ships , usually replacing the .50 @-@ calibre machine gun mounts between the funnels . One pair of these was added to the bridge wings and the other pair was mounted abreast the searchlight platform . Early in the war , depth charge stowage increased to 44 . By 1943 , only four ships were still afloat and all had the ' Y ' gun on the quarterdeck removed to allow for additional depth charge stowage and two additional depth charge throwers . The 12 @-@ pounder was removed to allow for the installation of a Huff @-@ Duff radio direction finder on a short mainmast and for more depth charges . All of the survivors , except Garland , had ' A ' or ' B ' gun replaced by a Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine spigot mortar , and their director @-@ control tower and rangefinder above the bridge removed in exchange for a Type 271 target @-@ indication radar . ' A ' gun was later replaced in Hotspur while Hero had exchanged ' B ' gun for a Hedgehog and a twin @-@ gun mount for QF six @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns for use against U @-@ boats at very close range . A Type 286 short @-@ range , surface @-@ search radar , adapted from the Royal Air Force 's ASV radar , was also added . The early models , however , could only scan directly forward and had to be aimed by turning the entire ship . 
 = = = Flotilla leaders = = = 
 As per the E and F class , the flotilla leaders were built to an enlarged design , incorporating a fifth 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch gun in ' Q ' position , between the funnels and were based on the F @-@ class leader , Faulknor . Grenville was shorter and heavier than Hardy as she used compact Yarrow @-@ type side fired boilers while Hardy was slightly <unk> . They displaced 1 @,@ 445 – 1 @,@ 465 long tons ( 1 @,@ 468 – 1 @,@ 489 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 953 – 2 @,@ 033 long tons ( 1 @,@ 984 – 2 @,@ 066 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 330 – 337 feet ( 100 @.@ 6 – 102 @.@ 7 m ) , a beam of 33 @.@ 75 – 34 feet ( 10 @.@ 3 – 10 @.@ 4 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . The ships carried a total of 175 personnel which included the staff of the Captain ( D ) , commanding officer of the flotilla . Their turbines were 2 @,@ 000 shp ( 1 @,@ 500 kW ) more powerful than the private ships , which made them 0 @.@ 5 knots ( 0 @.@ 93 km / h ; 0 @.@ 58 mph ) faster ; their propulsion machinery was otherwise identical . Both ships were early wartime losses and consequently received no modifications . 
 = = Havant class = = 
 The Havants were laid down in 1938 for Brazil and requisitioned on 5 September 1939 . They were optimized for anti @-@ submarine work and were completed without ' Y ' gun and were equipped with eight throwers and three racks for a total of 110 depth charges . Unlike their half @-@ sisters , they were fitted with a combined rangefinder @-@ director above the bridge . Wartime modifications were similar to the other G- and H @-@ class ships as a 12 @-@ pounder AA gun replaced the aft torpedo tubes , 20 mm Oerlikons were added on the bridge wings and a Type 286 radar was installed . Later modifications replaced the .50 @-@ calibre machine guns with a pair of Oerlikons , a Type 271 radar was added that replaced the rangefinder @-@ director , a Hedgehog was substituted for ' A ' gun , the 12 @-@ pounder removed for more depth charge stowage , and a HF / DF mast was installed aft . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = = Royal Navy = = = 
 = = = = G class = = = = 
 = = = = H class = = = = 
 = = = = Havant class = = = = 
 These six ships were ordered by the Brazilian Navy , but on the outbreak of World War II , they were requisitioned by the Royal Navy . They are usually included with the H class . 
 = = = Argentine Navy = = = 
 Seven ships were built for the Argentine Navy as the Buenos Aires class , they were delivered in 1938 . They were built by Vickers Armstrongs ( Barrow ) , Cammell Laird and John Brown & Company ( Clydebank ) . One ship was lost after a collision in 1941 , but the remaining ships were in service until broken up in the early 1970s . 
 = = = Brazilian Navy = = = 
 Brazil ordered six Jurua @-@ class ships from Britain in 1938 . These ships were purchased by Britain on the outbreak of war in 1939 and are described above . The Brazilians decided to produce indigenous destroyers , the Acre class , at the Ilha das Cobras shipyard , Rio de Janeiro . The design was based on the H @-@ class plans supplied by Britain , but with guns and machinery supplied by the United States . Although laid down in 1940 , the ships were not completed until 1949 – 51 . 
 = = = Royal Hellenic Navy = = = 
 Two ships , modified versions of the G class , were built for the Greek Royal Hellenic Navy ( RHN ) by Yarrow in the late 1930s . The ships were fitted with German @-@ made 127 @-@ millimetre ( 5 in ) guns and 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) AA guns . The number of torpedo tubes was reduced by two on these ships to compensate for the additional topweight . The installation of the armament was carried out in Greece as the Germans refused to ship the weapons to Britain . Vasilefs Georgios , named after King George I , she served with the RHN during the Greco @-@ Italian War . Damaged by German aircraft , the ship managed to reach the Salamis Navy Yard and was put in dry dock for repairs , where after further damage during German air attacks , she was finally scuttled to prevent capture . The Germans raised and repaired her and she was commissioned into the Kriegsmarine as Hermes ( <unk> ) on 21 March 1942 . Hermes was heavily damaged off Cape Bon , Tunisia , on 30 April 1943 and scuttled on 7 May 1943 . <unk> Olga , named after Queen Olga , served with the RHN during the Greco @-@ Italian War . Along with other ships , she escaped to Alexandria in May 1941 and joined the Allied forces . She was lost to German aircraft while anchored in <unk> Bay , Leros on 26 September 1943 . 
 = = Service = = 
 Grenville and the G class spent the bulk of their time before the start of World War II assigned to the 1st Destroyer Flotilla ( DF ) in the Mediterranean Fleet , where they made a number of neutrality patrols during the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 39 . With the exception of Garland which was under repair at Malta after a premature explosion of her depth charges , they returned home in October – November after it became clear that the Italians would not enter the war . Hardy and the H @-@ class ships were assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla and joined the Gs in the Mediterranean after commissioning for similar duties . 
 After a few weeks assigned to Western Approaches Command , the 1st DF was assigned to the Nore Command at Harwich , although some of the ships were transferred to the 22nd Destroyer Flotilla , where they were tasked for escort and patrol duty . Gipsy was sunk on 21 November after she struck a mine , as did Grenville on 19 January 1940 . Unlike the 1st DF , the Second was transferred to Force K in Freetown in West Africa , to help search for German commerce raiders . Some ships were later transferred to Bermuda and the West Indies for escort work and patrolling . They returned to the UK in January and spent several months refitting . 
 After commissioning , Handy and Hearty were renamed Harvester and Hesperus , respectively , to avoid confusion with Hardy . The Havant @-@ class destroyers initially formed the 9th Destroyer Flotilla assigned to Western Approaches Command for anti @-@ submarine patrols and escort duty . The German invasion of Norway caused Havant , Hesperus , and Havelock to be detached to reinforce the Home Fleet during the Norwegian Campaign . 
 Garland , Grafton , Gallant , Hasty and Hereward were either under repair or refitting during the early stages of the Norwegian Campaign and did not participate in the Battles of Narvik in April . The remaining ships were assigned to the Home Fleet by this time . Glowworm was separated from the battlecruiser Renown in a heavy storm on 8 April and encountered the German heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper and several destroyers . The British destroyer could not disengage and was sunk after ramming Admiral Hipper . Hardy , Havock , Hostile , Hotspur and Hunter participated in the First Battle of Narvik on 10 April . They sank two German destroyers in exchange for the loss of Hardy and Hunter , while Hotspur was badly damaged . That same day , Hero sank the German submarine U @-@ 50 off the Norwegian coast and was the only G- or H @-@ class destroyer to participate in the Second Battle of Narvik three days later . Griffin and Hasty helped to cover the evacuation of Allied troops from Namsos and Åndalsnes at the end of the month . Havelock escorted the transports conducting the evacuation of Narvik in June . Garland was loaned to the Polish Navy in May after her repairs were finished and she remained in the Mediterranean , escorting convoys between Malta and Alexandria , Egypt , until she was transferred to the Western Approaches Command in September . 
 In mid @-@ May , the 2nd DF was transferred to the Mediterranean with Hostile , Hyperion , Hero , Hereward , Havock , and Hasty assigned . Later that month , many of the remaining G and Havant @-@ class ships participated in Operation Dynamo . Grafton was torpedoed by U @-@ 62 on 29 May whilst rescuing survivors from the torpedoed destroyer Wakeful and had to be scuttled by the destroyer Ivanhoe . Later that day , Grenade blew up after being set on fire by German bombs ; three days later , on 1 June , Havant was sunk by German bombers . Gallant and Greyhound were damaged while evacuating troops from Dunkirk . Harvester helped to evacuate more troops from Saint @-@ Valery @-@ en @-@ Caux in Operation Cycle and , together with Griffin , Highlander , and Havelock , she participated in Operation Aerial , the evacuation of Allied troops from Saint @-@ Nazaire and St. Jean de Luz . 
 Most of the ships of the 2nd DF participated in the inconclusive Battle of Calabria on 7 – 8 July . Almost two weeks later , Hasty , Hero , Hyperion and Havock were escorting the Australian light cruiser Sydney when they encountered two Italian light cruisers , sinking one of them in the Battle of Cape Spada . The ships escorted convoys and the ships of the Mediterranean Fleet for the rest of the year , although Hostile was sunk when she struck an Italian mine on 23 August and Hyperion was sunk by the Italian submarine Serpente on 22 December . Hotspur was assigned to the 13th Destroyer Flotilla , supporting Force H at Gibraltar in July ; she was joined by Gallant , Greyhound , and Griffin shortly afterwards . The latter two ships escorted Force H during the Battle of Dakar in September against the Vichy French forces there . Havock and Hasty sank the Italian submarine Berillo on 2 October off the coast of Cyrenica while Gallant , Griffin and Hotspur sank the Italian submarine Lafolè on 18 October . Gallant , Greyhound , Griffin , now assigned to the 14th Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet , together with Hero and Hereward , participated in the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento on 27 November . 
 The 9th DF returned to the Western Approaches Command ( WAC ) from July to September , before they were briefly transferred to Portsmouth Command for several weeks , in response to the possible invasion ( Operation Sea Lion ) . They returned to the WAC before the end of the month and Harvester and Highlander sank U @-@ 32 on 30 October . In November 1940 , the 9th DF was re @-@ designated as the 9th Escort Group . The Havants remained on escort duty until they began lengthy refits during 1941 . 
 Gallant , Greyhound and Griffin were covering a convoy to Malta on 10 January when the former struck a mine that blew off her bow . Griffin rescued her crew and the ship was towed to Malta . Repairs were estimated to take until June 1942 , but she was declared a constructive total loss and stripped of equipment after she had to be beached during an aerial attack on 5 April 1942 . On 19 January , Greyhound sank the Italian submarine <unk> after the latter torpedoed one of the ships in the convoy that Greyhound was escorting . Two months later , she sank the Italian submarine <unk> on 6 March . Greyhound , Griffin , Hotspur , Hasty , Havock and Hereward participated in the Battle of Cape Matapan on 27 – 28 March . Greyhound was sunk by German dive bombers two months later , on 22 May , off Crete ; Hereward suffered a similar fate a week later . Hotspur , Havock , Hero , and Hasty also participated in the evacuations of Greece and Crete in May . The latter three ships then supported Allied forces during the Syria – Lebanon Campaign in June . All four of the H @-@ class ships , joined by Griffin , began escorting convoys from Alexandria to Tobruk in July , as well as occasional convoys to Malta , and continued to do so for most of the rest of the year . Hasty and Hotspur sank U @-@ 79 on 23 December while returning from Tobruk . 
 Garland and the five surviving Havants spent most of the year on convoy escort duties in the Atlantic aside from brief diversions such as Operation Tiger , a Mediterranean convoy in May that Harvester , Havelock , and Hesperus escorted , and Garland 's participation in the Spitzbergen Raid in July . Hurricane was badly damaged by a German bomb in May that took the rest of the year to repair . 
 Hesperus was transferred to Force H in December 1941 for anti @-@ submarine defence of the Strait of Gibraltar and sank U @-@ 93 by ramming on 15 January 1942 . In March 1942 , the Havant @-@ class destroyers were designated group leaders of the Mid @-@ Ocean Escort Force through the winter of 1942 – 43 . Garland was assigned to the escort force for Convoy PQ 16 to Murmansk in May , during which she was damaged by a German bomber . After repairs , she rejoined her half @-@ sisters in the North Atlantic . On 26 December , Hesperus sank U @-@ 357 by ramming . 
 Griffin and Hotspur were transferred to the Eastern Fleet in February 1942 . Havock , Hasty , and Hero participated in the Second Battle of Sirte on 22 March during which the former was damaged . While under repair at Malta , she was further damaged and was then ordered to Gibraltar for repairs in a safer environment . Whilst in transit , she ran aground off the Tunisian coast during the night of 5 / 6 April due to a navigational error and had to be destroyed to prevent her capture . Together with the destroyers Eridge and Hurworth , Hero sank U @-@ 568 on 28 May . To reinforce the escorts for Operation Vigorous , a convoy from Alexandria to Malta in June , Griffin and Hotspur were temporarily recalled to join their sisters . During the mission , Hasty was torpedoed by a German E @-@ boat and had to be scuttled by Hotspur on 15 June . On 30 October , Hero shared the credit for sinking U @-@ 559 with five other destroyers and a Vickers Wellesley bomber of No. 42 Squadron RAF . Griffin arrived home that same month to begin her conversion into an escort destroyer . Garland remained in the North Atlantic until December 1943 when she began escorting convoys between Freetown and Gibraltar . 
 Hotspur and Hero were sent home and converted into escort destroyers in early 1943 . Griffin and Hero were transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy in March and November 1943 and renamed Ottawa and Chaudière , respectively . Hotspur began escort duties in the WAC after her conversion was completed that lasted until October 1944 . While escorting Convoy HX 228 , Harvester rammed U @-@ 444 on 10 March , but was disabled in the process , so the French corvette Aconit finished off the submarine . The following day , Harvester was sunk by U @-@ 432 which was in turn sunk by Aconit . Hesperus sank U @-@ 191 on 23 April and U @-@ 186 on 12 May . Hesperus continued to escort convoys in the North Atlantic until January 1945 when she was transferred to the UK . Highlander and Hurricane also remained on convoy duties , although the latter ship was torpedoed by U @-@ 415 on 24 December and had to be scuttled by Watchman the next day . 
 Garland was transferred to the Mediterranean in April 1944 and sank U @-@ 407 on 19 September . She began a lengthy refit in November and had barely finished working up when the war ended . Havelock , Ottawa and Chaudière were escorting convoys in the North Atlantic until they were transferred to the UK in preparation for Operation Overlord in May 1944 . Chaudière and the escorts of Convoy HX 280 sank U @-@ 744 on 6 March . Ottawa sank three German submarines in 1944 , U @-@ 678 with the corvette Statice on 6 July , U @-@ 621 with Chaudière on 16 August and U @-@ 984 , also with Chaudière , two days later . 
 Ottawa , Chaudière and Hotspur also had lengthy overhauls that began in late 1944 ; the latter 's was completed in March 1945 and she then patrolled the Irish Sea until the end of the war while Ottawa returned to the North Atlantic when her refit was finished in February . Chaudière 's , however , was still not completed by the end of the war . Highlander struck a small iceberg on 15 April that crushed the underwater portion of her bow and was under repair for the next three months . Havelock and Hesperus , assisted by aircraft from No. 201 Squadron RAF , sank U @-@ 242 in the Irish Channel on 30 April . 
 = = = Postwar = = = 
 The surviving ships were essentially obsolete and worn @-@ out when the war ended in May . Ottawa made several voyages ferrying Canadian troops back home before she was paid off in October . The ship was sold for scrap in 1946 , but was not actually broken up until 1950 . Chaudière was in the worst shape of any of the Canadian destroyers and was paid off in August , although she was not scrapped until 1950 like her sister . Garland transported food and other supplies to Dutch and Belgian towns immediately after the end of the war and was part of the Home Fleet until she was reduced to reserve in August 1946 . She was purchased by the Royal Netherlands Navy in November 1947 , renamed Marnix , and became a training ship until 1964 . Hotspur remained in service until 1948 when she was sold to the Dominican Republic and renamed Trujillo . Renamed Duarte in 1962 , the ship was sold for scrap in 1972 . Havelock and Hesperus escorted the Norwegian government @-@ in @-@ exile back to Norway in May and then served as a target ship before being broken up in late 1946 and 1947 , respectively . Like her sisters , Highlander served as a target ship after her repairs were completed and was scrapped beginning in May 1947 . 
 = Hawkhurst Branch Line = 
 The Hawkhurst Branch Line was a short railway line in Kent that connected Hawkhurst , Cranbrook , Goudhurst and Horsmonden with the town of Paddock Wood and the South Eastern and Medway Valley lines , a distance of 11 miles 24 chains ( 18 @.@ 19 km ) . 
 The line was promoted by the Cranbrook and Paddock Wood Railway ( C & PWR ) , which was incorporated in 1877 , but took until 1892 to open the first section of the line to Hope Mill . Services were worked by the South Eastern and Chatham Railway ( SECR ) . The line was extended to Hawkhurst in 1893 . In 1900 , the SECR absorbed the C & PWR . Sunday services ceased in 1917 . In 1923 , the SECR was absorbed into the Southern Railway at the Grouping . The line became part of British Railways at Nationalisation on 1 January 1948 . The line was closed in June 1961 , before the Beeching Report was published . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The construction between 1842 and 1853 of the Ashford to Hastings Line , the Tonbridge to Hastings line and South Eastern Main Line between Redhill and Folkestone left a triangle of land within the Kentish High Weald devoid of rail communication . It was a heavily wooded and agricultural area which comprised many small villages and hamlets . The three largest settlements in this area were Cranbrook ; the former heart of the defunct Wealden cloth industry , Hawkhurst and Tenterden . There were no large landowners or wealthy industrialists to promote a branch line , while the local railway company - the South Eastern Railway ( SER ) - preferred to wait until local enterprise had funded the route 's construction . 
 A variety of abortive schemes were proposed , including an 1864 proposal by the nominally independent Weald of Kent Railway to run a route from Paddock Wood to Hythe via Cranbrook for which the SER obtained parliamentary authorisation as a defensive measure against a similar scheme proposed by the rival London , Chatham and Dover Railway . The SER 's enthusiasm for the scheme waned after the financial collapse of its rival in the wake of the 1866 Overend Gurney crisis . It was left to another independent company , the locally promoted Cranbrook and Paddock Wood Railway , to revive the scheme in 1877 and pursue it for a further 15 years before its opening in October 1892 . The company was incorporated on 2 August 1877 . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The Cranbrook and Paddock Wood Railway obtained authorisation for a single track line to link the two towns from which the company took its name . Agreement had been reached with the SER that it would provide £ 50 @,@ 000 towards construction costs once the local company had raised £ 25 @,@ 000 in the district . The necessary funds could not be raised and by April 1878 only £ 11 @,@ 000 had been found and , on the suggestion of the SER , it was decided to save costs by locating Cranbrook station in Hartley , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Cranbrook 's centre , where land prices were higher . Preliminary construction works were commenced in 1879 but soon ground to a halt due to a lack of funds . <unk> , the railway company obtained two further Acts of Parliament in 1882 and 1892 which authorised a " cut @-@ price " route between Goudhurst and Hawkhurst . 
 Financial problems meant that construction was further delayed between 1884 and 1890 , by which time the SER had taken over the board of the Cranbrook Railway on which now sat Alfred Gathorne @-@ Hardy , Lord Brabourne and Alfred Watkin , son of SER Chairman Edward Watkin . Edward Seaton , an engineer and independent consultant to the Metropolitan Railway , was appointed to oversee the works and he recommended the 22 @-@ year @-@ old Holman Fred Stephens as resident engineer . The contract for the construction was awarded to J.T. Firbank who had overseen the building of the Metropolitan 's line between Aylesbury and Quainton Road . Work began in the spring of 1890 , and the first section between Paddock Wood and Hope Mill was opened on 1 October 1892 . The remainder of the line to Hawkhurst followed a year later . The four stations were built by <unk> Bros , Horsmonden . 
 = = = Route of the line = = = 
 At Paddock Wood , the line 's northern terminus , the rear of the Up platform was adapted to accommodate Hawkhurst services and 3 ⁄ 4 mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) of single track was laid parallel to the main line up to the point where the routes diverged . This arrangement kept branch services off the main line and avoided the cost of installing a signal box to control the junction . The branch gradually turned to the south and ran on the level , passing under a road bridge and over two level crossings , while climbing gradients of 1 in 78 and 1 in 66 through orchards and hop gardens , before reaching Churn Lane siding . The line then passed an accommodation crossing and under a road bridge carrying Yew Tree Green Road , climbing to 1 in 66 before running on a level for half a mile through <unk> Hole valley on a 42 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 13 m ) embankment . After crossing a deeply wooded cutting , the line reached the 86 @-@ yard ( 79 m ) Horsmonden Tunnel which was situated on the summit level at the end of a 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) climb at 1 in 66 and carried the <unk> road over the line . 
 Horsmonden was the first station to be reached . It was ( 4 miles 20 chains ( 6 @.@ 84 km ) from Paddock Wood ) . The station had a single platform on the up side . Goods facilities consisted a loop on the down side , and two sidings on the up side . The signal on the approach from Goudhurst had arms for traffic from both directions . Leaving Horsmonden , the branch crossed Goudhurst Road by a plate girder bridge , running along the valley of the River Teise towards the Wealden hills . After climbing much of the way through gradients of 1 in 85 and 1 in 60 , Goudhurst was reached ( 6 miles 25 chains ( 10 @.@ 16 km ) ) , although it was a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) away and some 250 feet ( 76 m ) lower than Goudhurst village . It was initially more correctly named " Hope Mill , for Goudhurst and <unk> " . Goudhurst station had a passing loop and two platforms , and was signalled so that either platform could be used by down passenger trains . There were three sidings on the up side . The route then continued along the valley of a tributary of the Teise in a south @-@ easterly direction . An intermediate siding at Pattenden served the local farming community and timber industry . Cranbrook ( 9 miles 70 chains ( 15 @.@ 89 km ) ) was the line 's third station and reached following a climb up the valley through woodland . There was a single platform on the down side , with a passing loop opposite it . Four sidings were on the down side of the line , but on the Goudhurst side of the station . Heading towards its southern terminus at Hawkhurst ( 11 miles 24 chains ( 18 @.@ 19 km ) ) , the branch climbed again at 1 in 85 up to the 178 @-@ yard ( 163 m ) Badger 's Oak Tunnel , the line 's summit , before dropping at 1 in 80 . To save costs , the station was situated at Gills Green , around 1 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 2 @.@ 0 km ) from Hawkhurst village . Hawkhurst station was 46 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 74 @.@ 4 km ) from Charing Cross . The single platform was on the down side of the line , with a passing loop opposite , which also gave access to the two road engine shed . The five sidings were located on the down side of the station . 
 = = = Proposed extensions = = = 
 Various abortive proposals were made to extend the line , whose dead @-@ end nature deprived it of much of its usefulness . Even before construction had been completed , businesses in Tenterden were pressing the SER to link with their town . In response , the SER asked Edward Seaton to come forward with proposals for an affordable extension . Three schemes were put forward in October 1893 which would see the line extended from either Cranbrook or Hawkhurst . The first was essentially a continuation to Appledore , passing near the villages of Benenden , Newenden , Sandhurst and Rolvenden , but only passing within 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) of Tenterden . The second would see the Hawkhurst branch becoming part of the proposed Loose Valley Railway linking Maidstone with Dungeness via Headcorn , Tenterden and Appledore . The final proposal began with a junction at Cranbrook station , before running to Appledore via <unk> , Biddenden , Tenterden and Reading Street . None of these schemes came to fruition due to a lack of impetus on the part of the SER and the merger of operations of the SER with the rival London , Chatham and Dover Railway . The buffer stops at Hawkhurst were nevertheless positioned so as to allow the extension of the line without the need for alterations to the existing layout . 
 Holman Fred Stephens , the Hawkhurst line 's resident engineer , later became the chief engineer in the construction of the Rother Valley Railway ( RVR ) , later known as the Kent and East Sussex Railway ) which opened in 1900 from Robertsbridge as far as Rolvenden ( then known as " Tenterden " ) . In 1899 , Stephens obtained a light railway order authorising the Cranbrook and Tenterden Light Railway , which would run from Cranbrook station through a 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) tunnel under Hartley Road for a distance of 9 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 15 @.@ 3 km ) to join the RVR at a triangular junction just beyond Rolvenden where it would join the proposed extension of the RVR to Headcorn . Due to the increase in the use of motor transport , apart from the section between Rolvenden and Tenterden Town , the line was never built although it continued to appear in Kent and East Sussex Railway reports until 1937 . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Official opening = = = 
 Following a satisfactory inspection carried out by Major <unk> of the Board of Trade on 3 September 1892 , the line between Paddock Wood and Hope Mill , for Goudhurst and <unk> was opened to passenger and goods traffic nine days later . The first service drawn by Cudworth E1 class 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 No. 112 left Hope Mill at 08 : 25 and free travel was offered throughout the day . The official opening took place on 1 October 1892 , and services were extended to Hawkhurst on 4 September 1893 . The line was worked by the SER ( soon to become the SECR ) which formally absorbed the Cranbrook and Paddock Wood Railway on 29 January 1900 . 
 Shortly before the entire line was opened the residents of Cranbrook , regretful that the village was not directly served , approached the SER with a proposal to construct a 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) " light line " between Hartley and Cranbrook at an estimated cost of £ 10 @,@ 000 , which they offered to guarantee themselves . The scheme never came to fruition . 
 = = = Traffic = = = 
 = = = = Passengers = = = = 
 Passenger traffic was always light on the branch , and the addition of through coaches to London in the 1890s failed to encourage patronage . The inaugural passenger service of ten trains daily each way ( two on Sundays ) remained unchanged until 1917 when , as a result of economies imposed by the First World War , the frequency was reduced to four weekday services with no service on Sundays . Initially , passenger trains were worked by Cudworth 118 class 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 locomotives . Later , Cudworth E class 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0s were used , with the occasional use of Stirling B Class and F class 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0s . Since at least 1912 , services had been drawn by an ageing Stirling Q class 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4T locomotive . After the First World War , Kirtley R and R1 class 0 @-@ 4 @-@ <unk> were introduced . These provided the mainstay of services until they were withdrawn in the 1950s and replaced by Wainwright H class 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4s . In 1922 , the timetable showed six down trains and seven up trains daily except Sundays . The maximum speed allowed on the line was 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) , with a restriction of 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) at <unk> Farm occupation crossing , which was between Pattenden Siding and Cranbrook station . 
 By 1925 , the frequency had increased to eight with the introduction of push @-@ pull working by former LCDR R1 class 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4T locomotives . In 1926 , a Sentinel @-@ Cammell steam <unk> was trialled on the line for a month . Two extra services had been added by 1928 and an extra Saturday afternoon Paddock Wood working was added in 1930 . By 1938 the timetable had taken on its final form of seven up and six down services plus the Saturday afternoon working ; by special regulation , the push @-@ pull services were <unk> except for the first train of the day . 
 On 6 July 1950 , the Queen Mother travelled the line as far as Cranbrook when she visited the National Sanatorium at Benenden . The five @-@ coach Royal Train was pulled by a Maunsell E1 class 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 No. <unk> , Her Majesty using a Pullman car named Malaga , which was flanked by two corridor composites ; there was a corridor third brake at each end of the train . Malaga was one of six twelve @-@ wheel first @-@ class kitchen cars which had been built in 1920 – 1 ; and following an extensive refit in late 1949 , was occasionally used in the Royal Train . It was withdrawn in 1961 , and is preserved close to Shepperton railway station . 
 = = = = Goods = = = = 
 Goods traffic was more substantial , with fruit , hops and timber being sent out and coal being received . The 1937 timetable showed two down freight workings from Paddock Wood and one conditional working for Goudhurst , while in the other direction two conditional workings ran from Hawkhurst and one from Goudhurst . These were market trains and carried wagons for Blackfriars Goods attached to freight services at Paddock Wood . The volume of goods carried fell into steep decline after the Second World War as more and more freight was taken to market by road . Coal traffic remained constant as did the transport of pot plants from local nurseries at <unk> and Wadhurst for F W Woolworth . This was an important source of revenue for the line with one million pot plants a year being transported from Hawkhurst , bringing in around £ 1 @,@ 000 per week . Up to four parcels and miscellaneous vans were loaded daily at Hawkhurst and attached to the last train to Tonbridge , with further collections possibly being made at Horsmonden ; special services were laid on in the busy period before Mothering Sunday . 
 There were two sidings on the line which were available for public use . Churn Siding was located between Paddock Wood and Horsmonden stations . The siding was on the up side of the line . It was accessed by a facing connection in each direction . A siding at the Horsmonden end served a brickworks . Although some sources state that Churn Siding was out of use by 1940 , photographs show that it was still in use in 1951 and it was named in the closure notice . Towards the end of the line 's existence , Churn Siding was used for storage of wagons . The siding was located at the start of the 1 in 78 climb to Horsmonden . If wagons had to be left on the running line while shunting took place , they had to be left on the Paddock Wood side of the level crossing , where there was level track . Pattenden Siding was located between Goudhurst and Cranbrook stations , just after milepost 42 and thus 7 miles 20 chains ( 11 @.@ 67 km ) from Paddock Wood . The siding was located on the down side of the <unk> was accessed by a trailing connection in the down direction ( towards Hawkhurst ) . Its main use was to import shoddy which was used as fertiliser for hop gardens . 
 = = = = Specials = = = = 
 During the early 1950s , well over 4 @,@ 000 hop @-@ pickers and some 23 @,@ 000 visitors travelled in 56 " Hopper specials " – extra services laid on during the late August – early October hop season ; at the busiest period , up to six trains per day ran through to the branch from London . In 1912 there had been 26 specials each carrying as many as 350 people ; they generally started at London Bridge and called at New Cross or New Cross Gate . The farmers agreed between themselves when the picking would begin , and informed the railway who then set about the planning of the special trains . A " Hop Control Centre " was set up at Paddock Wood to organise these services , ensuring that hoppers could alight at London Bridge and be taken directly to the nearest hop farm . Since the hopping season generally coincided with the end of the holiday season , most serviceable trains were already in use elsewhere , so spare rolling stock would be brought out of storage and pressed into service for just three weeks ; sometimes carriages had to be borrowed from other parts of the country . The carriages tended to be old or in poor condition , since the hoppers had a reputation for drunkenness and violence . This traffic was however already in decline as rising living standards and paid holidays led to a decline in the hop @-@ picker workforce , and many of those who remained chose to travel by car or van . By 1959 the Sunday service consisted of a single two @-@ coach unit , with an evening working to London Bridge . As mechanical pickers gradually replaced the human workforce , hop @-@ picking had become a memory by the time the branch closed in 1961 . 
 Special services were also laid on for the Benenden and Cranbrook boarding schools . Special trains to Benenden were laid on from Charing Cross , quite often with six corridor coaches hauled by E1 or D1 class 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 locomotives . The last special train ran on 2 May 1961 from Charing Cross at 2 : <unk> , hauled by D1 class <unk> . Boarders ' trunks and other belongings occupied so much space that utility vans were required at the end of each term . These were loaded at Hawkhurst and Cranbrook , attached to the daily up goods working and forwarded to Paddock Wood by parcels train . The behaviour of pupils from both schools was described by one regular passenger as " hysterical " , with the girls from Benenden being compared to those of the fictional St Trinian 's . 
 = = = = Accidents = = = = 
 On 18 February 1948 C Class locomotive 1225 was wrongly despatched into the north sidings at Goudhurst and derailed . 
 = = = Decline and closure = = = 
 The inconvenient siting of stations and the decline in hop @-@ picking in the area all contributed to diminishing returns on the line by the late 1950s . Apart from the 16 : 25 daily working from Paddock Wood which was well patronised by children , few trains carried more than a dozen passengers . Passenger journeys were estimated in 1958 at around 170 per day , to which was added around 100 schoolchildren . Even the school traffic was lost once the local authority hired the services of Maidstone & District Motor Company . The line was unpopular with commuters due to the poor connections to and from London . Only the 07 : 34 service would ensure arrival at Charing Cross before 10 : 00 with one change at Paddock Wood , the following train at 08 @.@ 20 would only get the passenger to Cannon Street at 10 @.@ 15 after two changes . In the evening , the 16 : 32 departed too early for many commuters while the eleven @-@ coach 18 : 18 Ramsgate service was overcrowded and divided at Tonbridge where three coaches were detached for Ashford . Hawkhurst @-@ bound passengers had to change at Paddock Wood and cross over to the bay platform for the branch service which arrived in Hawkhurst at 19 : 58 . Locals preferred the direct bus services to Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells over the indirect railway journey , as shown by the fact that no more than 250 return tickets were sold from Hawkhurst in the final years of the line . Only the line 's expanding pot plant traffic justified its continuing existence . 
 It was therefore no surprise when closure notices were posted in March 1961 . The last day of regular services was Saturday 10 June 1961 when a pair of C class 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 's replaced the usual H class tanks . The event was recorded by a BBC cameraman who filmed the 09 : 07 departure from Paddock Wood . The Tonbridge crew had chalked on the cabside of the engine " Shed no tears for the single track , for perhaps we may come back . And if we do , you can be sure , we 'll see you all again once more . " Later in the day the trains were lengthened with the addition of former LSWR push @-@ pull set No. 656 and a Maunsell corridor coach . The same locomotive worked the last 17 : 00 train from Hawkhurst , while every seat was taken by locals and railway enthusiasts . The daughter of bandleader Jack Payne was on @-@ hand to toast the final departure . 
 The line 's last public train ran the next day , hauled by Class O1 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 No. <unk> piloting C class no . <unk> . This was part of a railtour organised by the Locomotive Club of Great Britain . Bearing the nameplate " The South Eastern Limited " , the train travelled the line as part of its " Farewell to Steam " tour . Later that day it also navigated the remaining section of the K & ESR from Robertsbridge to Tenterden - the northern section to Headcorn having closed in 1954 . Amongst the carriages that formed the train was <unk> , a Pullman carriage built in 1926 . Both locomotives are preserved on the Bluebell Railway . Theodora is preserved on the Kent and East Sussex Railway . 
 The track was lifted in 1964 , the contract for the work was awarded to The Demolition and Construction Co Ltd , of Croydon , Surrey . By March 1964 , Goudhurst station yard was in use for the dismantling of track panels into their component parts . Sleepers with chairs attached and rails being loaded separately into goods wagons for removal . The track lifting had been completed by October of that year . The station sites were offered for sale in 1967 . Electric services on the South Eastern Main Line through Paddock Wood commenced on 12 June 1961 , the first day on which there was no service on the Hawkhurst Branch . 
 = = = The Old Pull N ' Push TV series = = = 
 Elisabeth Beresford , who was subsequently well known as the creator of The Wombles , wrote a children 's book Danger on the " Old Pull ' n Push " based on the Hawkhurst Branch . Subsequently this was televised by Rediffusion for ITV in two six @-@ part series The Old Pull ' n Push and Return of the old Pull ' n Push , shown in 1960 @-@ 61 . These were filmed on the Hawkhurst Line shortly before it closed . 
 = = Present @-@ day scene = = 
 = = = Remains = = = 
 The platform bay at Paddock Wood from which most of the line 's trains departed is now part of a car park , with the edge of the platform fenced off . Parts of the line are still visible , such as the embankment through <unk> 's Hole valley and the approach to Horsmonden tunnel . Some bridges still remain , although the plate girder bridge over Goudhurst Road , Horsmonden has been removed . 
 Horsmonden station has been converted to a private garage trading as the " Old Station Garage " , with the old stationmaster 's house in use as a private dwelling . A station sign is preserved on the garage wall and part of the platform survives in the workshop . Goudhurst station , yard and level crossing have disappeared as a result of road @-@ widening and residential development ; a private house called " <unk> " stands on part of the old goods yard . The old station lights have been re @-@ used along the drive of the house . Cranbrook station was used for many years as a pottery , and its stationmaster 's house is now a private dwelling , with part of the goods yard also having survived . The signal box has survived and the station building has been extended to meet with it ; the trackbed is now part of the lawn . The site of Hawkhurst station is now occupied by Kent <unk> Co , a wood turnery business . The main station building was demolished in the 1960s but the engine and goods sheds , stationmaster 's house and signal box are still extant . The owner , a railway enthusiast , ensures that the signal box receives " a good coat of paint every other year " . 
 = = = Proposed cycleway = = = 
 In September 2008 representatives from Hawkhurst , Goudhurst , Horsmonden and Paddock Wood Parish Councils met to discuss the possibility of converting all or part of the former line into a trail which could be used by cyclists and walkers . The proposal was supported by Kent County Council and a 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) section between Hawkhurst and Goudhurst has been identified as being easily convertible into a trail . The remainder to Paddock Wood is said to be " more difficult but not impossible " . Horsmonden Parish Council has declined to participate in the scheme on the basis that any trail would not be able to follow the former railway alignment in its area due to private ownerships and in @-@ filled sections . On 10 June 2011 , Kent County Council organised a walk of the trackbed from Gills Green to demonstrate the work that would be needed to convert the trackbed for use by walkers and cyclists . The Kent and Sussex Courier reported that the project was keenly supported by all parish councils involved except for Horsmonden . The scheme was initially suggested by Hawkhurst Community Partnership . The proposed cycleway will be known as The Hop Pickers ' Line should it be constructed . On 15 July 2011 , it was reported that an application for a £ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund was to be made in the coming week , with the result of the application being known in September 2011 . In March 2013 , it was reported that a decision from the Heritage Lottery Fund was still awaited . 
 = The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution = 
 " The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution " is the eighth episode of the twenty @-@ third season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 4 , 2011 . In the episode , Krusty the Clown becomes depressed after getting fired from his television show for being unpopular with children . The Simpson family encourages him to make a comeback , suggesting that he seek help from an agent they met earlier at a television museum . This agent turns out to be Annie Dubinsky , who was Krusty 's first agent and former girlfriend . Krusty left her when he became successful but now he begs her to take him as a client again . She accepts and together they are able to get him back on television , hosting a show for adults that features his clown tricks . However , Annie soon begins to interfere too much , which frustrates the network executives . 
 The episode , which contains parodies of films such as The King 's Speech , The Social Network , and Black Swan , was written by cast member Dan Castellaneta and his wife Deb Lacusta . Comedian and actress Joan Rivers , who was a big fan of The Simpsons , guest starred as the character Annie . Other guest performances in the episode came from Kevin Dillon and Janeane Garofalo as themselves and Jackie Mason as Krusty 's father . Reception of " The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution " from television critics has been mixed , with praise directed at Rivers ' appearance and the development of Krusty 's character . During its original American broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately nine million people . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During an episode of The Krusty the Clown Show , three Itchy & Scratchy cartoons are shown . This angers Krusty , the host of the show , since he thinks he should be the star of the show and not the Itchy and Scratchy characters . Meanwhile , the Simpsons visit a television museum that is soon to be closed . After a while , they come to an exhibit displaying The Adventures of Fatso Flanagan , which is one of Homer 's favorite television shows . There , the family is approached by Annie Dubinsky , the agent of the actor who played Fatso Flanagan . They start chatting and become acquainted . At the Channel 6 studios , during a board meeting , Krusty is fired because " Today 's children are uncomfortable with a clown whose every reference they have to look up on Wikipedia " , and because Itchy and Scratchy are shown to be more popular with the children . Krusty goes to his current agent , hoping to get a new job , but the agent drops him since he got fired . 
 After the Simpsons have left the museum , they head for Krusty Burger where they discover Krusty crying in a ball pit . Krusty is encouraged by them into making a comeback , and they inform him that they met an agent that can help him out . However , when they all go to Annie 's office , Annie instantly recognizes Krusty and angrily slams the door before he gets a chance to enter . It is revealed that Annie was the one who discovered Krusty , became his first agent , and was responsible for his rise to success . They also had a romantic relationship together . Once he achieved fame , Krusty fired Annie and replaced her with a more acclaimed agent , and as a result their relationship ended . Back in the present , he begs her to take him back as a client , and she eventually accepts . 
 Krusty starts performing his clown tricks at a theater in front of adults , and not children like before . This is because Annie knows that there is nothing adults enjoy more than the things they liked as children . The performances are praised by both the audience and the critics , and Krusty and Annie initiate a relationship again . Soon , a premium cable television network called HBOWTIME ( an obvious portmanteau of HBO and Showtime , straight down to their parody of HBO 's longtime slogan , " It 's not just TV , it 's more expensive . " ) gives Krusty his own show and Annie is hired as the producer on his demand . The stars of the series Entourage , such as Kevin Dillon , become Krusty 's assistants . The network executives soon become frustrated with Annie for meddling too much in the show . For example , she refuses to let Janeane Garofalo appear only because Garofalo is funnier than Krusty . She also runs over an intern with a stage car for sharpening her pencil too much . The executives decide to fire Annie , but Krusty refuses to continue without her . The couple therefore turns to another network where they start a show called Sex Over Sixty , with them as the stars . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution " was written by Dan Castellaneta , who voices characters such as Homer and Krusty on The Simpsons , and his wife Deb Lacusta . American comedian and actress Joan Rivers guest starred in the episode as Annie . She recorded her lines in March 2011 . In an interview with E ! News at that time , Rivers noted that this was not her first animated voice @-@ over role , though it was her biggest one yet . She further added that she is a fan of the show because it is " so clever and so funny on so many levels . So when they called and said , ' Do you want to do it ? ' without even reading a script I said , ' Absolutely . ' " Adam Buckman , a former television columnist at the New York Post , noted on his blog that the story of the episode is similar to a period in Rivers ' life at the end of the 1980s . At that time , she was hosting The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers on the Fox network . When Rivers challenged Fox executives who wanted to fire her husband Edgar Rosenberg as the show 's executive producer , the network fired them both . Rosenberg committed suicide just three months later . Buckman wrote that the story of " The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution " was " no doubt devised with Rivers ’ approval and possibly with her input " , and that " only a comedian of her stature and experience " would attempt to spoof a personal tragedy such as this one . Other guest stars in the episode include actor Kevin Dillon and stand @-@ up comedian Janeane Garofalo as themselves , and stand @-@ up comedian Jackie Mason in a minor reprisal of his role as Krusty 's father , speaking only one line . 
 Several references to popular culture , including a meta @-@ reference to The Simpsons , are included in " The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution " . The three The Itchy & Scratchy cartoons that are shown at the beginning of the episode as Krusty is hosting his show are all parodies of films released in 2010 : the first one , titled The Cat 's Speech , is a parody of The King 's Speech ; the second one , titled The Social <unk> , parodies The Social Network in that the storyline is partially explained through the use of screens containing nothing but text ; and the final one , titled Black and Blue Swan , references Black Swan . After the three cartoons are shown , Krusty points out that " It ’ s like those parodies were written when the movies came out , but it took so long to animate them that we look dated and hacky ! " This is a reference to the long time it takes to produce an episode of The Simpsons — hence why cultural references on the show can often be seen as dated . Pop culture allusions at the television museum include a brief appearance by the main characters of the animated series King of the Hill as cardboard cutouts being taken down in a process similar to the opening of the show , an exhibit devoted to the sitcom The Beverly Hillbillies , and the showing of one of Homer 's favorite television shows , Fatso Flanagan , which is a knockoff of the sitcom The Honeymooners . The TV network Krusty 's new show is on , HBOWTIME , is an obvious merging of the names of pay @-@ tv channels HBO and Showtime ; their slogan , " It 's not just TV , it 's more expensive . " , is a parody of HBO 's longtime slogan , " It 's not just TV , it 's HBO . " The scenes seen during a bumper for HBOWTIME reference the current / former HBO shows Game of Thrones , John Adams , The Sopranos , and The Ricky Gervais Show . 
 The music that is played during the parody of The King 's Speech is " Symphony No. 7 " by Ludwig van Beethoven , and a musical piece from the Swan Lake ballet is played during the Black Swan parody . For the King of the Hill visual gag , the Simpsons staff acquired the rights to use the actual theme song from that show . The music that is played as Krusty performs his new show in front of adults at the theater is a mixture of the old Krusty theme and the theme from Playboy After Dark , a television show hosted by Hugh Hefner that started airing in the 1960s and featured parties from a Playboy club . This musical combination was composed by Alf Clausen after The Simpsons music editor Chris Ledesma came with the suggestion . On his blog , Ledesma wrote that theme for Playboy After Dark " was cool and jazzy and just right for its time . Alf ’ s homage to that theme , wrapped around Krusty ’ s theme was very clever indeed . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 4 , 2011 . It was watched by approximately nine million people during this broadcast . In the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , the episode received a 4 @.@ 0 Nielsen rating ( a fifty @-@ four percent increase over the previous episode ) and a ten percent share . The high rating was the result of the episode being preceded by a popular National Football League game . The Simpsons became the highest @-@ rated program in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup that night in terms of both total viewers and in the 18 – 49 demographic , finishing ahead of new episodes of Family Guy , The Cleveland Show , and Allen Gregory . For the week of November 28 – December 4 , 2011 , " The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution " placed seventh in the ratings among all prime @-@ time broadcasts in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Hayden Childs of The A.V. Club praised the choice of having Rivers guest star since she was able to " employ her trademark humor within the world of The Simpsons without hijacking the plot or satire . " He also noted that while the Simpson family does not appear heavily , " Krusty is such a large part of the supporting cast that he carries this episode well . While it may seem a little funny that Castellaneta , who voices Krusty , wrote such a large part for himself , it is also a testament to his empathy for Krusty that this episode both deepens our understanding of Krusty and actually allows him growth as a character in an organic fashion . " Ology 's Josh Harrison similarly praised " The Ten @-@ Per @-@ Cent Solution " for having " some wonderful Krusty the Klown moments and some clutch guest star appearances " . He also cited the visual gags in the episode as " clever " . Harrison concluded his review by writing that though the episode " wasn 't Simpsons gold , it was a great chance to focus on a secondary character and an opportunity for Joan Rivers to , um , be Joan Rivers . I imagine your assessment of the episode may be based largely on your opinion of the guest star . That said ? I dug it . " 
 AOL TV 's Jason Hughes was more negative , criticizing the episode for taking a " soft approach " to the television industry when it " had a chance for some sharp satire " . He elaborated that the writers " had a little bit of fun talking about networks meddling in shows – as well as agents trying to control content as when Joan Rivers booted Janeane Garofalo for being funnier than Krusty – and the differences between cable original programming and broadcast programming . But they had the potential they had to make some bold statements about television and how the industry works throughout , and simply didn 't . " Hughes did , however , like the King of the Hill appearance , which he described as a " fun nod " . 
 = Metacomet Ridge = 
 The Metacomet Ridge , Metacomet Ridge Mountains , or Metacomet Range of southern New England , United States , is a narrow and steep fault @-@ block mountain ridge known for its extensive cliff faces , scenic vistas , microclimate ecosystems , and communities of plants considered rare or endangered . An important recreation resource located within 10 miles ( 16 km ) of a population corridor of over 1 @.@ 5 million people , the ridge is home to four long @-@ distance hiking trails and over a dozen parks and recreation areas including several state and nationally recognized historic sites . Because of its natural , historic , and recreational value , the ridge has been the focus of ongoing conservation efforts involving municipal , state , and national agencies and nearly two dozen non @-@ profit organizations . 
 The Metacomet Ridge extends from New Haven and Branford , Connecticut , on Long Island Sound , through the Connecticut River Valley region of Massachusetts , to northern Franklin County , 2 miles ( 3 km ) short of the Vermont and New Hampshire borders , a distance of 100 miles ( 160 km ) . Younger and geologically distinct from the nearby Appalachian Mountains and surrounding uplands , the Metacomet Ridge is composed of volcanic basalt , also known as trap rock , and sedimentary rock in faulted and tilted layers many hundreds of feet thick . In most but not all cases , the basalt layers are dominant , prevalent , and exposed . Although only 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) above sea level at its highest , with an average summit elevation of 725 feet ( 221 m ) , the Metacomet Ridge rises dramatically from much lower valley elevations , making it a prominent landscape feature . 
 = = Geographic definitions = = 
 There is no universal consensus on the name for this topographic feature . The Metacomet Ridge is described by some sources as a traprock ridge beginning on the Holyoke Range in Belchertown , Massachusetts , and ending at the Hanging Hills in Meriden , Connecticut . A 2004 report conducted for the National Park Service extends that definition to include the entire traprock ridgeline from Greenfield , Massachusetts , to Long Island Sound . The Sierra Club has referred to the entire range in Connecticut as " The Traprock Ridge " . Geologically and visually , the traprock ridgeline exists as one continuous landscape feature from Belchertown , Massachusetts , to Branford , Connecticut at Long Island Sound , a distance of 71 miles ( 114 km ) , broken only by the river gorges of the Farmington River in northern Connecticut and the Westfield and Connecticut Rivers in Massachusetts . Until January 2008 , the United States Board on Geographic Names ( <unk> ) did not recognize Metacomet Ridge , Traprock Ridge or any other name , although several sub @-@ ranges were identified . Geologists usually refer to the overall range generically as " the traprock ridge " or " the traprock mountains " or refer to it with regard to its prehistoric geologic significance in technical terms . Further complicating the matter is the fact that traprock only accounts for the highest surface layers of rock strata on the southern three – fourths of the range ; an underlying geology of related sedimentary rock is also a part of the structure of the ridge ; in north central Massachusetts it becomes the dominant strata and extends the range geologically from the Holyoke Range another 35 miles ( 56 km ) through Greenfield to nearly the Vermont border . This article describes the entire Metacomet Ridge and all geologic extensions of it . 
 Easier to explain is the name " Metacomet " or " <unk> , " borrowed from the 17th century sachem of the Wampanoag Tribe of southern New England who led his people during King Philip 's War in the mid – 17th century . Metacomet was also known as King Philip by early New England colonists . A number of features associated with the Metacomet Ridge are named after the sachem , including the Metacomet Trail , the Metacomet @-@ Monadnock Trail , King Philip 's Cave , King Philip Mountain , and Sachem Head . According to legend , Metacomet orchestrated the burning of Simsbury , Connecticut , and watched the conflagration from Talcott Mountain near the cave now named after him . The names Metacomet and King Philip have been applied to at least sixteen landscape features and over seventy @-@ five businesses , schools , and civic organizations throughout southern New England . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Beginning at Long Island Sound , the Metacomet Ridge commences as two parallel ridges with related sub @-@ ridges and outcrops in between ; the latter include the high butte – like cliffs of East Rock and the isolated peak of Peter 's Rock . The western ridgeline of the Metacomet Ridge begins in New Haven , Connecticut , as West Rock Ridge and continues as Sleeping Giant , Mount Sanford , Peck Mountain , and Prospect Ridge , for a distance of 16 miles ( 26 km ) before diminishing into a series of low profile outcrops just short of Southington , Connecticut , 2 @.@ 75 miles ( 4 @.@ 4 km ) west of the Hanging Hills in Meriden . 
 To the east , beginning on the rocky prominence of Beacon Hill , 130 feet ( 40 m ) , in Branford , Connecticut , overlooking the East Haven River estuary , the Metacomet Ridge continues as a traprock ridge 60 miles ( 97 km ) north to Mount Tom in Holyoke , Massachusetts ; it then breaks east across the Connecticut River to form the Holyoke Range , which continues for 10 miles ( 16 km ) before terminating in Belchertown , Massachusetts . Several scattered parallel ridges flank it ; the most prominent of these are the hills of Rocky Hill , Connecticut , and the Barn Door Hills of Granby , Connecticut . 
 North of Mount Tom and the Holyoke Range , the apparent crest of the Metacomet Ridge is broken by a discontinuity in the once dominant traprock strata . Underlying sedimentary layers remain but lack the same profile . Between the Holyoke Range and the Pocumtuck Ridge , a stretch of 9 miles ( 14 km ) , the Metacomet Ridge exists only as a series of mostly nondescript rises set among flat plains of sedimentary bedrock . Mount Warner , 512 feet ( 156 m ) , in Hadley , Massachusetts , the only significant peak in the area , is a geologically unrelated metamorphic rock landform that extends west into the sedimentary strata . 
 The Metacomet Ridge picks up elevation again with the Pocumtuck Ridge , beginning on Sugarloaf Mountain and the parallel massif of Mount Toby , 1 @,@ 269 feet ( 387 m ) , the high point of the Metacomet Ridge geography . Both Sugarloaf Mountain and Mount Toby are composed of erosion @-@ resistant sedimentary rock . North of Mount Sugarloaf , the Pocumtuck Ridge continues as alternating sedimentary and traprock dominated strata to Greenfield , Massachusetts . From Greenfield north to 2 miles ( 3 km ) short of the Vermont – New Hampshire – Massachusetts tri – border , the profile of the Metacomet Ridge diminishes into a series of nondescript hills and low , wooded mountain peaks composed of sedimentary rock with dwindling traprock outcrops . 
 In Connecticut , the high point of the Metacomet Ridge is West Peak of the Hanging Hills at 1 @,@ 024 feet ( 312 m ) ; in Massachusetts , the highest traprock peak is Mount Tom , 1 @,@ 202 feet ( 366 m ) , although Mount Toby , made of sedimentary rock , is higher . Visually , the Metacomet Ridge is narrowest at <unk> Mountain and East Mountain in Massachusetts where it is less than 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 1 km ) wide ; it is widest at Totoket Mountain , over 4 miles ( 6 km ) . However , low parallel hills and related strata along much of the range often make the actual geologic breadth of the Metacomet Ridge wider than the more noticeable ridgeline crests , up to 10 miles ( 16 km ) across in some areas . Significant river drainages of the Metacomet Ridge include the Connecticut River and tributaries ( Falls River , Deerfield River , Westfield River , Farmington River , <unk> River ) ; and , in southern Connecticut , the Quinnipiac River . 
 The Metacomet Ridge is surrounded by rural wooded , agricultural , and suburban landscapes , and is no more than 6 miles ( 10 km ) from a number of urban hubs such as New Haven , Meriden , New Britain , Hartford , and Springfield . Small city centers abutting the ridge include Greenfield , Northampton , Amherst , Holyoke , West Hartford , Farmington , Wallingford , and Hamden . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Metacomet Ridge is the result of continental rifting processes that took place 200 million years ago during the Triassic and Jurassic periods . The basalt ( also called traprock ) crest of the Metacomet Ridge is the product of a series of massive lava flows hundreds of feet thick that welled up in faults created by the rifting apart of the North American continent from Eurasia and Africa . Essentially , the area now occupied by the Metacomet Ridge is a prehistoric rift valley which was once a branch of ( or a parallel of ) the major rift to the east that became the Atlantic Ocean . 
 Basalt is a dark colored extrusive volcanic rock . The weathering of iron @-@ bearing minerals within it results in a rusty brown color when exposed to air and water , lending it a distinct reddish or purple – red hue . Basalt frequently breaks into octagonal and pentagonal columns , creating a unique " <unk> " appearance . Extensive slopes made of fractured basalt talus are visible at the base of many of the cliffs along the Metacomet Ridge . 
 The basalt floods of lava that now form much of the Metacomet Ridge took place over a span of 20 million years . Erosion and deposition occurring between the eruptions deposited layers of sediment between the lava flows which eventually lithified into sedimentary rock layers within the basalt . The resulting " layer cake " of basalt and sedimentary rock eventually faulted and tilted upward ( see fault @-@ block ) . Subsequent erosion wore away many of the weaker sedimentary layers at a faster rate than the basalt layers , leaving the abruptly tilted edges of the basalt sheets exposed , creating the distinct linear ridge and dramatic cliff faces visible today on the western and northern sides of the ridge . Evidence of this layer @-@ cake structure is visible on Mount Norwottuck of the Holyoke Range in Massachusetts . The summit of Norwottuck is made of basalt ; directly beneath the summit are the Horse Caves , a deep overhang where the weaker sedimentary layer has worn away at a more rapid rate than the basalt layer above it . Mount Sugarloaf , Pocumtuck Ridge , and Mount Toby , also in Massachusetts , together present a larger " layer cake " example . The bottom layer is composed of arkose sandstone , visible on Mount Sugarloaf . The middle layer is composed of volcanic traprock , most visible on the Pocumtuck Ridge . The top layer is composed of a sedimentary conglomerate known as Mount Toby Conglomerate . Faulting and earthquakes during the period of continental rifting tilted the layers diagonally ; subsequent erosion and glacial activity exposed the tilted layers of sandstone , basalt , and conglomerate visible today as three distinct mountain masses . Although Mount Toby and Mount Sugarloaf are not composed of traprock , they are part of the Metacomet Ridge by virtue of their origin via the same rifting and uplift processes . 
 Of all the summits that make up the Metacomet Ridge , West Rock , in New Haven , Connecticut , bears special mention because it was not formed by the volcanic flooding that created most of the traprock ridges . Rather , it is the remains of an enormous volcanic dike through which the basalt lava floods found access to the surface . 
 While the traprock cliffs remain the most obvious evidence of the prehistoric geologic processes of the Metacomet Ridge , the sedimentary rock of the ridge and surrounding terrain has produced equally significant evidence of prehistoric life in the form of Triassic and Jurassic fossils ; in particular , dinosaur tracks . At a state park in Rocky Hill , Connecticut , more than 2 @,@ 000 well preserved early Jurassic prints have been excavated . Other sites in Holyoke and Greenfield have likewise produced significant finds . 
 = = Ecosystem = = 
 The Metacomet Ridge hosts a combination of microclimates unusual to the region . Dry , hot upper ridges support oak savannas , often dominated by chestnut oak and a variety of understory grasses and ferns . Eastern red @-@ cedar , a dry @-@ loving species , clings to the barren edges of cliffs . <unk> plant communities tend to be similar to the adjacent upland plateaus and nearby Appalachians , containing species common to the northern hardwood and oak @-@ hickory forest ecosystem types . Eastern hemlock crowds narrow ravines , blocking sunlight and creating damp , cooler growing conditions with associated cooler climate plant species . <unk> slopes are especially rich in nutrients and support a number of calcium @-@ loving plants uncommon in the region . Miles of high cliffs make ideal raptor habitat , and the Metacomet Ridge is a seasonal raptor migration corridor . 
 Because the topography of the ridge offers such varied terrain , many species reach the northern or southern limit of their range on the Metacomet Ridge ; others are considered rare nationally or globally . Examples of rare species that live on the ridge include the prickly pear cactus , peregrine falcon , northern copperhead , showy lady 's slipper , yellow <unk> , ram 's – head lady 's slipper , basil mountain mint , and devil 's bit lily . 
 The Metacomet Ridge is also an important aquifer . It provides municipalities and towns with public drinking water ; reservoirs are located on Talcott Mountain , Totoket Mountain , Saltonstall Mountain , Bradley Mountain , Ragged Mountain , and the Hanging Hills in Connecticut . Reservoirs that supply metropolitan Springfield , Massachusetts , are located on <unk> Mountain and East Mountain . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ colonial era = = = 
 Native Americans occupied the river valleys surrounding the Metacomet Ridge for at least 10 @,@ 000 years . Major tribal groups active in the area included the Quinnipiac , Niantic , Pequot , <unk> , and Mohegan . Traprock was used to make tools and arrowheads . Natives hunted game , gathered plants and fruits , and fished in local bodies of water around the Metacomet Ridge . Tracts of woodland in the river bottoms surrounding the ridges were sometimes burned to facilitate the cultivation of crops such as corn , squash , tobacco , and beans . 
 Natives incorporated the natural features of the ridgeline and surrounding geography into their spiritual belief systems . Many Native American stories were in turn incorporated into regional colonial folklore . The giant stone spirit <unk> ( or <unk> ) , a prominent figure in many stories , was credited with diverting the course of the Connecticut River where it suddenly swings east in Middletown , Connecticut , after several hundred miles of running due south . <unk> is also credited with slaying a giant human @-@ eating beaver who lived in a great lake that existed in the Connecticut River Valley of Massachusetts . According to native beliefs as retold by European settlers , the corpse of the beaver remains visible as the Pocumtuck Ridge portion of the Metacomet Ridge . Later , after <unk> diverted the course of the Connecticut River , he was punished to sleep forever as the prominent man @-@ like form of the Sleeping Giant , part of the Metacomet Ridge in southern Connecticut . There seems to be an element of scientific truth in some of these tales . For instance , the great lake that the giant beaver was said to have inhabited may very well have been the post @-@ glacial Lake Hitchcock , extant 10 @,@ 000 years ago ; the giant beaver may have been an actual prehistoric species of bear – sized beaver , <unk> <unk> , that lived at that time . Many features of the Metacomet Ridge region still bear names with Native American origins : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Metacomet , Totoket , Norwottuck , <unk> , <unk> , Pocumtuck , and others . 
 = = = Colonization , agricultural transformation , and industrialization = = = 
 Europeans began settling the river valleys around the Metacomet Ridge in the mid – 17th century . Forests were cut down or burned to make room for agriculture , resulting in the near complete denuding of the once contiguous forests of southern New England by the 19th century . Steep terrain like the Metacomet Ridge , while not suitable for planting crops , was widely harvested of timber as a result of the expanding charcoal industry that boomed before the mining of coal from the mid – Appalachian regions replaced it as a source of fuel . In other cases , ridgetop forests burned when lower elevation land was set afire , and some uplands were used for pasturing . Traprock was harvested from talus slopes of the Metacomet Ridge to build house foundations ; copper ore was discovered at the base of Peak Mountain in northern Connecticut and was mined by prisoners incarcerated at Old Newgate Prison located there . 
 With the advent of industrialization in the 19th century , riverways beneath the Metacomet Ridge were dammed to provide power as the labor force expanded in nearby cities and towns . Logging to provide additional fuel for mills further denuded the ridges . Traprock and sandstone were quarried from the ridge for paving stones and architectural brownstone , either used locally or shipped via rail , barge , and boat . 
 = = = Transcendentalism = = = 
 Increased urbanization and industrialization in Europe and North America resulted in an opposing aesthetic transcendentalist movement characterized in New England by the art of Thomas Cole , Frederic Edwin Church , and other Hudson River School painters , the work of landscape architects such as Frederick Law Olmsted , and the writings of philosophers such as Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson . As was true of other scenic areas of New England , the philosophical , artistic , and environmental movement of transcendentalism transformed the Metacomet Ridge from a commercial resource to a recreational resource . Hotels , parks , and summer estates were built on the mountains from the mid @-@ 1880s to the early 20th century . Notable structures included summit hotels and inns on Mount Holyoke , Mount Tom , Sugarloaf Mountain , and Mount <unk> . Parks and park structures such as Poet 's Seat in Greenfield , Massachusetts , and Hubbard Park ( designed with the help of Frederick Law Olmsted ) of the Hanging Hills of Meriden , Connecticut , were intended as respites from the urban areas they closely abutted . Estates such as Hill @-@ Stead and Heublein Tower were built as mountain home retreats by local industrialists and commercial investors . Although public attention gradually shifted to more remote and less developed destinations with the advent of modern transportation and the westward expansion of the United States , the physical , cultural , and historic legacy of that early recreational interest in the Metacomet Ridge still supports modern conservation efforts . Estates became museums ; old hotels and the lands they occupied , frequently subject to damaging fires , became state and municipal parkland through philanthropic donation , purchase , or confiscation for unpaid taxes . Nostalgia among former guests of hotels and estates contributed to the aesthetic of conservation . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Interest in mountains as places to build recreational footpaths took root in New England with organizations such as the Appalachian Mountain Club , the Green Mountain Club , the Appalachian Trail Conference , and the Connecticut Forest and Park Association . Following the pioneering effort of the Green Mountain Club in the inauguration of Vermont 's Long Trail in 1918 , the Connecticut Forest and Park Association , spearheaded by Edgar Laing <unk> , created the 23 miles ( 37 km ) Quinnipiac Trail on the Metacomet Ridge in southern Connecticut in 1928 and soon followed it up with the 51 miles ( 82 km ) Metacomet Trail along the Metacomet Ridge in central and northern Connecticut . More than 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) of " blue blaze trails " in Connecticut were completed by the association by the end of the 20th century . While the focus of the Appalachian Mountain Club was geared primarily toward the White Mountains of New Hampshire in its early years , as club membership broadened , so did interest in the areas closer to club members ' homes . In the late 1950s , the 110 miles ( 180 km ) Metacomet @-@ Monadnock Trail was laid out by the Berkshire Chapter of the Appalachian Mountain Club under leadership of Professor Walter M. Banfield of the University of Massachusetts Amherst . The trail follows the Metacomet Ridge for the first one – third of its length . Overall , <unk> had a pro @-@ active effect on conservation awareness by thrusting portions of the Metacomet Ridge into the public consciousness . 
 = = = Suburbanization and land conservation = = = 
 Although the Metacomet Ridge has abutted significant urban areas for nearly two hundred years , because of its rugged , steep , and rocky terrain , the ridge was long considered an undesirable place to build a home except for those wealthy enough to afford such a luxury . However , suburbanization through urban exodus and automobile culture , and modern construction techniques and equipment have created a demand for homes on and around the once undeveloped Metacomet Ridge and its surrounding exurban communities . As of 2007 , the metropolitan areas bordering the range — New Haven , Meriden , New Britain , Hartford , Springfield and Greenfield — had a combined population of more than 2 @.@ 5 million people . Populations in exurban towns around the range in Connecticut have increased 7 @.@ 6 percent between the mid @-@ 1990s to 2000 , and building permits increased 26 percent in the same period . Considered an attractive place to build homes because of its views and proximity to urban centers and highways , the Metacomet Ridge has become a target for both developers and advocates of land conservation . Quarrying , supported by the increased need for stone in local and regional construction projects , has been especially damaging to the ecosystem , public access , and visual landscape of the ridge . At the same time , the boom in interest in outdoor recreation in the latter 20th century has made the Metacomet Ridge an attractive " active leisure " resource . In response to public interest in the ridge and its surrounding landscapes , more than twenty local non @-@ profit organizations have become involved in conservation efforts on and around the ridge and surrounding region . Most of these organizations came into being between 1970 and 2000 , and nearly all of them have evidenced a marked increase in conservation activity since 1990 . Several international and national organizations have also become interested in the Metacomet Ridge , including The Nature Conservancy , the Sierra Club , and the Trust for Public Land . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 <unk> , long cliff – top views , and proximity to urban areas make the Metacomet Ridge a significant regional outdoor recreation resource . The ridge is traversed by more than 200 miles ( 320 km ) of long @-@ distance and shorter hiking trails . Noteworthy trails in Connecticut include the 51 @-@ mile ( 82 km ) Metacomet Trail , the 50 @-@ mile ( 80 km ) <unk> Trail , the 23 @-@ mile ( 37 km ) Quinnipiac Trail , and the 6 @-@ mile ( 10 km ) <unk> Trail . Massachusetts trails include the 110 @-@ mile ( 177 km ) Metacomet @-@ Monadnock Trail , the 47 @-@ mile ( 76 km ) Robert Frost Trail , and the 15 @-@ mile ( 24 km ) Pocumtuck Ridge Trail . Site – specific activities enjoyed on the ridge include rock climbing , bouldering , fishing , boating , hunting , swimming , backcountry skiing , cross @-@ country skiing , trail running , bicycling , and mountain biking . Trails on the ridge are open to snowshoeing , birdwatching and picnicking as well . The Metacomet Ridge hosts more than a dozen state parks , reservations , and municipal parks , and more than three dozen nature preserves and conservation properties . Seasonal automobile roads with scenic vistas are located at Poet 's Seat Park , Mount Sugarloaf State Reservation , J.A. Skinner State Park , the Mount Tom State Reservation , Hubbard Park , and West Rock Ridge State Park ; these roads are also used for bicycling and cross – country skiing . Camping and campfires are discouraged on most of the Metacomet Ridge , especially in Connecticut . Museums , historic sites , interpretive centers , and other attractions can be found on or near the Metacomet Ridge ; some offer outdoor concerts , celebrations , and festivals . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Because of its narrowness , proximity to urban areas , and fragile ecosystems , the Metacomet Ridge is most endangered by encroaching suburban sprawl . Quarry operations , also a threat , have obliterated several square miles of traprock ridgeline in both Massachusetts and Connecticut . Ridges and mountains affected include <unk> , Bradley Mountain , Totoket Mountain , Chauncey Peak , Rattlesnake Mountain , East Mountain , Pocumtuck Ridge , and the former Round Mountain of the Holyoke Range . The gigantic man @-@ like profile of the Sleeping Giant , a traprock massif visible for more than 30 miles ( 50 km ) in south central Connecticut , bears quarrying scars on its " head " . Mining there was halted by the efforts of local citizens and the Sleeping Giant Park Association . 
 Development and quarrying threats to the Metacomet Ridge have resulted in public open space acquisition efforts through collective purchasing and fundraising , active solicitation of land donations , securing of conservation easements , protective and restrictive legislation agreements limiting development , and , in a few cases , land taking by eminent domain . Recent conservation milestones include the acquisition of a defunct ski area on Mount Tom , the purchase of the ledges and summits of Ragged Mountain through the efforts of a local rock climbing club and the Nature Conservancy , and the inclusion of the ridgeline from North Branford , Connecticut , to Belchertown , Massachusetts , in a study by the National Park Service for a new National Scenic Trail now tentatively called the New England National Scenic Trail . 
 = Senghenydd colliery disaster = 
 The Senghenydd colliery disaster , also known as the Senghenydd explosion ( Welsh : <unk> Senghennydd ) , occurred at the Universal Colliery in Senghenydd , near Caerphilly , Glamorgan , Wales , on 14 October 1913 . The explosion , which killed 439 miners and a rescuer , is still the worst mining accident in the United Kingdom . Universal Colliery , located on the South Wales Coalfield , produced steam coal which was much in demand . Some of the region 's coal seams contained high quantities of firedamp , a highly explosive gas consisting of methane and hydrogen , and were prone to explosions . 
 In an earlier disaster in May 1901 , three underground explosions at the colliery killed 81 miners . The inquest established that the colliery had high levels of airborne coal dust , which would have exacerbated the explosion and carried it further into the mine workings . The cause of the 1913 explosion is unknown , but the subsequent inquiry thought the most likely cause was a spark from underground signalling equipment that could have ignited any firedamp present . The miners in the east side of the workings were evacuated , but the men in the western section bore the brunt of the explosion , fire and afterdamp — a poisonous mixture of carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide and nitrogen left after an explosion . 
 Fires in the workings hampered rescue efforts , and it took several days before they were under control . It took six weeks for most of the bodies to be recovered and the fire to be extinguished . The subsequent enquiry pointed to errors made by the company and its management leading to charges of negligence against Edward Shaw , the colliery manager , and the owners . Shaw was fined £ 24 while the company was fined £ 10 ; newspapers calculated the cost of each miner lost was just 51 ⁄ 2 pence . 
 In 1981 a memorial to the men who died in the disaster was unveiled by the National Coal Board , followed by a second in 2006 , to honour the dead of both the 1901 and 1913 explosions . In October 2013 , on the centenary of the tragedy , a Welsh national memorial to those killed in all Wales 's mining disasters was unveiled at the former pithead , depicting a rescue worker coming to the aid of one of the survivors of the explosion . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Welsh coal industry = = = 
 The Welsh coal industry employed 1 @,@ 500 workers in 1800 ; and as the industry expanded , the workforce rose to 30 @,@ 000 by 1864 , and to 250 @,@ 000 by 1913 . As employment became available , many people moved to the area of the South Wales Coalfield ; between 1851 and 1911 the population increased by 320 @,@ 000 . By 1913 the Welsh collieries were extracting 56 @.@ 8 million long tons of coal ( 63 @.@ 6 million short tons ) a year , up from 8 @.@ 5 million long tons ( 9 @.@ 5 million short tons ) in 1854 ; collieries in the region mined a fifth of all coal produced in the UK , and employed a fifth of its miners in the mid @-@ nineteenth century . In 1913 Britain was responsible for 25 per cent of world coal production and 55 percent of all world coal exports . 
 The South Wales Coalfield produced the sought @-@ after anthracite , bituminous and steam coals — the latter a grade between the two comprising a hard coal without the coking elements . Some of the region 's coal seams contained high quantities of firedamp , a highly explosive gas consisting of methane and hydrogen , and were therefore prone to explosions ; firedamp rises into the higher points of workings , including cavities or , as at Senghenydd , when the seams were being mined in an upward gradient . An additional danger of firedamp is afterdamp , a poisonous mixture of gases left after an explosion , primarily constituted of carbon dioxide , carbon monoxide and nitrogen . They combine with haemoglobin in the bloodstream to stop cells carrying oxygen , which can result in suffocation by lack of oxygen or anoxia . If survivors from an explosion are not rescued quickly , they face the possibility of being killed by the gas . The presence of firedamp contributed to a higher @-@ than @-@ average proportion of accidents : between 1880 and 1900 South Wales accounted for 18 % of Britain 's miners , but 48 per cent of all UK mining deaths occurred in the region . As coal output from British collieries reached its peak in 1913 there was a correspondingly large number of accidents around this time . 
 = = = Senghenydd and the Universal Colliery = = = 
 Senghenydd — Senghennydd in Welsh — is situated at the northern end of the Aber Valley , approximately four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north @-@ west of Caerphilly and eleven miles ( 18 km ) north @-@ west of Cardiff . When geological surveys for coal began in 1890 it was a farming hamlet of around 100 people . Coal was found , and sinking of the first mineshaft for Universal Colliery — which was owned and developed by William Lewis — began in 1891 ; the first coal was extracted in 1896 . The colliery 's two shafts were both 1 @,@ 950 feet ( 590 m ) deep , the downcast Lancaster and the upcast York . Development of the pit coincided with the Boer War , and sectors of the underground workings were named after key places in the war , such as Pretoria , or the lifting of the sieges at Ladysmith , Mafeking and Kimberley . 
 South Wales miners , including those at Universal , were paid on a rate determined by the Sliding Scale Committee , which fixed wages on the price coal fetched at market . When the price of coal slumped in the late 1890s , low wages led to industrial unrest and , in 1898 , a strike that the men at Universal joined at the end of April . The Monmouthshire and South Wales Coal Owners ' Association refused to replace the scale , and the strike ended on 1 September with some small concessions granted by the owners . The colliery resumed production and in 1899 was producing 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 400 short tons ) of coal a week . 
 The industrial historians Helen and Baron <unk> consider Universal Colliery to have been " an unlucky mine " . At approximately 5 : 00 am on 24 May 1901 three underground explosions occurred as the night shift was exiting the pit . Because the explosion damaged the pit winding gear , it took time to clear the debris from the pithead to allow rescuers to begin work . They descended at 11 : 00 am and rescued one man , an ostler , found alongside the corpse of the horse he was tending . There were no other survivors and 81 men died . Although the funerals for the victims started four days later , the rescue and recovery operations lasted for six weeks . 
 The Mines Inspectorate began an enquiry , chaired by the mining engineer Professor William Galloway . The report was published on 15 July . It stated that the mine was hot with high levels of coal dust present . The method used to load coal onto underground trucks created quantities of dust , which had aggravated a small explosion and created a chain reaction of related explosions throughout the workings . An inquest held in the October concluded that various safety precautions had not been followed , and that the mine had been insufficiently watered — which would have reduced the coal dust held in the air . The colliery had further problems in October 1910 when a heavy roof fall in the Mafeking return released trapped firedamp , which caused the mine to be temporarily evacuated . 
 In 1906 a major explosion at a colliery in <unk> , northern France , caused the deaths of more than 1 @,@ 000 miners . The subsequent report blamed the accidental ignition of firedamp , exacerbated by coal dust in the air . Concerned that a similar disaster might happen in British collieries , the Royal Commission was formed , reporting back in 1907 , 1909 and 1911 . The reports led to the Coal Mines Act 1911 , which came force into December that year . Among other changes to the health and safety culture , the Act required that ventilation fans in all collieries be capable of reversing the air current underground ; this measure was to be implemented by 1 January 1913 . 
 In 1913 the colliery was producing 1 @,@ 800 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 short tons ) of coal a day , and Senghenydd 's population had grown to just under 6 @,@ 000 . No work was undertaken at Senghenydd to implement the requirement , and the Mines Inspectorate gave the management an extended deadline of September 1913 to complete the work , but this was missed . 
 = = 14 October 1913 = = 
 At 3 : 00 am on 14 October 1913 , the day firemen descended the pit to conduct the daily checks for gas ; they had three hours to complete their investigations . The firemen for the Mafeking return had to travel more than two miles from the shaft bottom to the <unk> . It left insufficient time in which to make a thorough check of the workings — which involved placing a naked flame into cavities to see if the flame lengthened — although the historian Michael Lieven states that " the company considered any other form of inspection to be too time @-@ consuming " . Between 5 : 10 and 6 : 00 am 950 men descended the shaft for a shift that was due to last until 2 : 00 pm . 
 Just after 8 : 00 am an explosion occurred in the west side of the underground workings . It is possible there were two explosions as survivors stated a smaller explosion preceded the main one , although the official report referred only to one . The cause was probably a build @-@ up of firedamp that was ignited by an electric spark from equipment such as electric bell signalling gear . The initial explosion ignited airborne coal dust , and a shock wave ahead of the explosion raised yet more coal dust , which also combusted . Many victims who were not killed immediately by the explosion and fire died from the effects of afterdamp . The explosive wave travelled up the Lancaster shaft to the surface , destroying the headframe ; it killed the winder — the man in charge — and badly wounded his deputy . 
 Edward Shaw , the colliery manager , was on the surface and the remaining shift foremen were still underground and unable to give assistance . He took charge and descended the York shaft , accompanied by overman D R Thomas . The descent was slow , and they had to clear several girders and obstructions before they reached the bottom . They found that the men from the east side of the workings ( approximately 450 workers ) were unharmed , and their evacuation was ordered . Shaw and Thomas moved to the western side , where they found other men , alive but injured , and arranged for them to travel to the surface . Thomas later reported that the view into the western workings " was exactly like looking into a furnace " . 
 Shaw explored what he could of the western workings , before he and some of the survivors began tackling the fire . The water pipes from the surface in the Lancaster shaft were all fractured , and hand @-@ extinguishers were used . Shaw returned to the surface at 9 : 30 am to arrange for rescue and fire @-@ fighting teams from neighbouring collieries . From 11 : 00 am the specialist mines rescue teams began arriving at the colliery from the Rhymney and Rhondda Valleys , as did Red Cross workers and local ambulance services ; a police detachment was sent from Cardiff in a special train . Members of the Inspectorate of Mines were quickly on the scene , and an inspector descended to view the mine the same morning . 
 Lieven recounts how the rescue parties " in their desperation , ... were reckless with their lives " in their attempts to find survivors ; many were injured in small roof collapses , or suffered the effects of carbon monoxide poisoning . Their endeavours saved lives throughout the remainder of the day and into the night , including a group of 18 men found at around 1 : 00 am . They were the last survivors found . A total of 432 miners had died that day — although some bodies were not found until later — and 7 others died later in hospital or at home . A journalist from The Times wrote : " The numbers are truly awful . We talk in awed terms of the decimation of a regiment in a bloody battle , but here a great community engaged in the pursuit of a peaceful vocation is threatened with the loss of at least a quarter of its able bodied manhood " . On the surface the townsfolk waited for news ; a reporter for The Dundee Courier thought : " the scene at Senghenydd last night was depressing in the extreme . The streets were full of silent throngs of people who moved aimlessly about or stood stolidly at the street corners . " 
 = = Rescue , fire @-@ fighting and recovery : 15 October to 30 November = = 
 Work continued throughout the night of 15 October and into the following day . It focused on finding survivors and fighting the fire that blocked the entry into some workings of the western returns . The fire caused the roof supports to become unstable , and falls triggered outbursts of methane . Several rescuers were injured by the falls , one fatally . Before descending the mine many of the firefighters wrote what they thought might be their last letters home , and some made their wills . As the water pipe in the shaft was out of operation , fire @-@ fighting continued with hand extinguishers and work was only possible in 20 @-@ minute shifts . Despite wearing respirators , several rescuers were overcome by the effects of firedamp . During the course of the day , 56 bodies were raised to the surface and , that evening , a new water supply , connected by three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) of pipes to a nearby reservoir , was installed in the Lancaster shaft . 
 Reginald McKenna , the Home Secretary , visited the colliery on 15 October representing King George V , who was attending the marriage of Prince Arthur of Connaught and Princess Alexandra , 2nd Duchess of Fife . The king sent a £ 500 donation to a disaster relief fund , while the royal couple displayed their wedding presents at St James 's Palace and charged a shilling for entrance , raising £ 1 @,@ 200 for the fund . The fund was started by the Lord Mayor of Cardiff , while another collection , the Mansion House Fund set up by the Lord Mayor of London , raised more than £ 3 @,@ 000 on its first day . 
 William Brace , the local MP speaking on behalf of the South Wales Miners ' Federation , announced on 16 October that the priority would be given to putting out the fire and that no more search parties would be looking for survivors . Brace observed that the fire was blocking the western workings and consuming the oxygen in the air , making it unlikely that anyone was left alive . Progress in tackling the fire over the previous days had been slow , and it had only been extinguished in the first 30 yards of the roadway — still two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the coal face . Two coroner 's inquests were opened : one in Senghenydd for the men who died in the colliery , and one in Cardiff for those who had died in hospital ; both were adjourned the same day . The first funerals took place the following day , Friday 17 October . An estimated 150 @,@ 000 mourners gathered for the 11 men buried on the Saturday and 8 on the Sunday . 
 The firefighters built <unk> , walls of sandbags , turf and sand , approximately 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 metres ) deep and 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 metres ) up to the tunnel 's roof to prevent smoke filling the rest of the workings and allow men to explore areas previously cut off . Within two days the temperatures dropped and the volume of smoke was reduced . Although the fire was contained , miners still faced several obstacles , including roof collapses and large pockets of trapped firedamp . The first collapse consisted of more than 100 tons of debris , while another fall was more than 300 feet ( 91 @.@ 5 metres ) long and 30 to 40 feet ( 10 – 12 metres ) high . Clearing the falls and finding bodies was slow , and it took until 8 November for the first of the 4 working districts to be explored and cleared of bodies . Many victims were unidentifiable — either the explosion , fire or subsequent decomposition had taken its toll — and many had to be identified by their personal effects , although some bodies remained unidentified . 
 By 17 November the Mafeking and Pretoria districts had been fully explored , with more than 200 bodies raised to the surface in the preceding two days . On 20 November an official announcement reported that 439 miners had died , of whom 33 were still unaccounted for . Toward the end of the month , the men voted to return to work , even though the western workings were still out of action and 11 bodies were still missing . 
 A photographer , W Benton , took a series of photographs as the disaster unfolded , and later published them as a set of postcards . Their publication is described by the National Library of Wales as " an excellent example of early photo @-@ journalism " . The photographs came with a caption , shown below : 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Senghenydd explosion remains the worst mining disaster in Britain . The deaths of 440 men on a small community had a devastating effect ; 60 victims were younger than 20 , of whom 8 were 14 years old ; 542 children had lost their fathers and 205 women were widowed . The impact on individual households was great : 12 homes lost both a father and son , 10 homes lost two sons each , while the death of one father and son left an 18 @-@ year @-@ old daughter to raise her 6 siblings alone ; another woman lost her husband , 2 sons , a brother and her lodger . 
 The inquiry into the disaster opened on 2 January 1914 with R A S Redmayne , the Chief Inspector of Mines , as the commissioner ; he was assisted by two assessors , Evan Williams , the chairman of the South Wales and Monmouthshire Coal Owners Association , and Robert Smillie , the president of the Miners ' Federation of Great Britain . The inquiry ran for three days before being adjourned to allow for the coroner 's inquest to run at Senghenydd . It reopened on 27 January and ran until 21 February . Over the 13 days it heard evidence , 21 @,@ 837 questions were put to 50 witnesses . The coroner 's inquest chaired by David Rees lasted for 5 days from 5 January 1914 . A total of 9 @,@ 000 questions were put to 50 witnesses , and the jury returned verdicts of accidental death . 
 The inquiry report failed to identify a definite cause , although it was considered that the most likely cause was a spark from the signalling gear . It would have ignited the firedamp , exacerbated and fuelled by coal dust in the air . The report was critical of many aspects of the management 's practices , and considered it had breached the mining regulations in respect of measuring and maintaining the air quality in the workings , and in the removal of coal dust from the tracks and walkways . The report pointed out that because the management had not implemented the changes needed to the ventilation fans as demanded by the Coal Mines Act 1911 , the fans were unable to reverse the direction of the airflow , which would have blown the smoke out through the Lancaster shaft , although Redmayne and his colleagues held differing opinions on the advisability of reversing or stopping the airflow . The historian John H Brown , in his examination of the disaster , states that had the airflow been reversed , firedamp or afterdamp could have been extracted from some sectors into the blaze , causing another explosion . 
 Further criticism was directed toward the emergency procedures . The lack of respirators at the mine was deemed to have cost lives . The lack of an adequate water supply for fire fighting was criticised , and Redmayne wrote : " I should have thought , in view of the fact that the colliery was such a gassy one , and it had already been devastated by an explosion , that the management would have made arrangements for a supply of water adequate to meet an emergency of the kind that actually occurred . " 
 Shaw 's actions were described by Lieven as those that " gained him a degree of respect from the local mining community which remained over the years ; they probably also cost the lives of scores of miners . " The Duckhams describe Shaw 's inaction in fixing the ventilation fan before the explosion , as well as his delay in sending for assistance from rescue teams until he exited the mine an hour and a half after the explosion . The official report considered there had been a " disquieting laxity in the management of the mine " , although Shaw was described by the Duckhams as " undoubtedly a highly capable manager " . The report led to Shaw being charged with 17 breaches of the Mines Act 1911 , and four charges were made against the company . Shaw was found guilty of failing to keep adequate environmental records and failing to replace a broken lamp locker ; he was fined £ 24 . The company was convicted of failing to provide a ventilation system that could reverse the airflow and was fined £ 10 with £ 5 5 shillings costs . One newspaper , Pioneer , calculated " Miners ' Lives at 1 / 11 ⁄ 4 each " ( 1 shilling 11 ⁄ 4d or 51 ⁄ 2p each ) . 
 After it reopened the colliery never reached the same levels of employment as before the explosion . William Lewis died in August 1914 ; Shaw continued as manager of the mine until November 1928 , when it closed . 
 A stage play based on the disaster , by the journalist and broadcaster Margaret Coles , was first performed at the Sherman Cymru , Cardiff in 1991 . The disaster at Senghenydd has provided the backdrop to two printed works of historical fiction : Alexander Cordell 's This Sweet and Bitter Earth ( 1977 ) and <unk> <unk> y Cwm ( 2013 ) by Gareth F Williams . 
 In 1981 a memorial to those lost in the disaster was unveiled by the National Coal Board . Based outside Nant @-@ y @-@ parc Primary School , which is built on the site of the former colliery , the monument is a 20 feet ( 6 m ) high replica of the colliery 's winding gear . A second monument was unveiled in 2006 to the dead from both the 1901 and 1913 explosions . 
 On 14 October 2013 , the centenary of the disaster , a Welsh national memorial to all mining disasters was unveiled at the former pithead . Funded by the Aber Valley Heritage Group and their patron Roy Noble , with matched funding from the Welsh Government , a bronze statue by Les Johnson depicting a rescue worker coming to the aid of one of the survivors of the explosion , was unveiled by Carwyn Jones , the First Minister of Wales . Jones said : " Mining is central to the story of Wales . It has shaped our history and communities and its social and physical legacy is still with us to this day . ... It is only right that we have a permanent memorial . " 
 = Zhu De = 
 Zhu De ( Chu Teh ; Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Zhū Dé ; pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ̌ ] ; 1 December 1886 – 6 July 1976 ) was a Chinese general , warlord , politician , revolutionary , and one of the pioneers of the Communist Party of China . Born poor in 1886 in Sichuan , Zhu was adopted by a wealthy uncle at age nine ; this prosperity provided him a superior early education that led to his admission into a military academy . After his time at the academy , he joined a rebel army , and soon became a warlord . It was after this period that he adopted communism . He ascended through the ranks of the Red Army as it closed in on securing the nation . By the time China was under Mao 's control , Zhu was a high @-@ ranking official within the Communist Party of China . He served as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . In 1955 , Zhu became one of the Ten Marshals of the People 's Liberation Army , of which he is regarded as the principal founder . Zhu remained a prominent political figure until his death in 1976 . As the chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People 's Congress from 1975 to 1976 , Zhu was the head of state of the People 's Republic of China . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Zhu was born on December 18 , 1886 to a poor tenant farmer 's family in Hung , a town in <unk> County , a hilly and isolated part of northern Sichuan province . Of the fifteen children born to the family only eight survived . His family relocated to Sichuan during the migration from Hunan province and Guangdong province . His origins are often given as Hakka , but Agnes Smedley 's biography of him says his people came from <unk> and speaks of Hakka as merely associates of his . She also says that older generations of his family had spoken the ' Kwangtung dialect ' ( which would be close to but probably different from modern Cantonese . And that his generation also spoke the ' <unk> dialect ' , <unk> Standard Chinese , a distinct regional variant that is however <unk> to other speakers of Standard Chinese ( Mandarin ) . 
 In spite of the family 's poverty , by pooling resources , Zhu was chosen to be sent to a regional private school in 1892 . At age nine , Zhu was adopted by his prosperous uncle , whose political influence allowed him to gain access to Yunnan Military Academy . Before the suspension of imperial examinations in 1906 , he attained the rank of <unk> , which allowed him to qualify as a civil servant . He enrolled in a Sichuan high school around 1907 , and graduated in 1908 . Subsequently , he returned to <unk> 's primary school as a gym instructor . An advocate of modern science and political teaching , rather than the strict classical education afforded by schools , he was dismissed from his post and entered the Yunnan Military Academy in Kunming . There , he joined the Beiyang Army and the Tongmenghui secret political society ( the forerunner of the Kuomintang ) . 
 = = = Nationalism and <unk> = = = 
 It was at the Yunnan Military Academy in Kunming , that Zhu first met Cai E ( Tsai Ao ) . He taught at the Academy after his graduation in July 1911 . Siding with the revolutionary forces after the Chinese Revolution , he joined Brigadier Cai E in the October 1911 expeditionary force that marched on Qing forces in Sichuan . He served as a regimental commander in the campaign to unseat Yuan Shikai in 1915 @-@ 16 . When Cai became governor of Sichuan after Yuan 's death in June 1916 , Zhu was made a brigade commander . 
 Following the death of his mentor Cai E ( November 1916 ) and of his first wife , Zhu developed a severe opium habit that afflicted him until 1922 , when he underwent treatment in Shanghai . His troops continued to support him , and so he consolidated his forces to become a warlord . In 1920 , after his troops were driven from Sichuan toward the Tibetan border , he returned to Yunnan as a public security commissioner of the provincial government . Around this time , his second wife and child were murdered by rival warlords , which is believed to have contributed to his decision to leave China for study in Europe . He first traveled to Shanghai where he broke his opium habit and , according to historians of the Kuomintang , met Dr Sun Yat @-@ sen . He attempted to join the Chinese Communist Party in early 1922 , but was rejected due to his being a warlord . 
 = = = Converting to Communism = = = 
 In late 1922 , Zhu went to Berlin . He resided in Germany until 1925 , studying at one point at Göttingen University . Here he met Zhou Enlai and was expelled from Germany for his role in a number of student protests . Around this time he joined the Communist Party of China ; Zhou Enlai was one of his sponsors ( having sponsors being a condition of probationary membership , the stage before actual membership ) . In July 1925 , after being expelled from Germany , he traveled to the Soviet Union to study military affairs and Marxism at the Communist University of the <unk> of the East , returning to China in July 1926 to unsuccessfully persuade Sichuan warlord Yang Sen to support the Northern Expedition . 
 In 1927 , following the collapse of the First United Front , Kuomintang authorities ordered Zhu to lead a force against Zhou Enlai and Liu Bocheng 's Nanchang Uprising . Having helped orchestrate the uprising , Zhu and his army defected from the Kuomintang . The uprising failed to gather support , however , and Zhu was forced to flee Nanchang with his army . Under the false name of Wang Kai , Zhu managed to find shelter for his remaining forces by joining the warlord Fan <unk> . He was soon named head of a new First United Front military institute in Nanchang . 
 = = = ' Zhu @-@ Mao ' = = = 
 Zhu 's close affiliation with Mao Zedong began in 1928 when under the assistance of Chen Yi and Lin Biao , Zhu defected from Fan <unk> 's protection and marched his army of 10 @,@ 000 men to Jiangxi and the <unk> Mountains . Here Mao had formed a soviet in 1927 , and Zhu began building up his army into the Red Army , consolidating and expanding the Soviet areas of control . 
 Zhu 's leadership made him a figure of immense prestige ; locals even credited him with supernatural abilities . During this time Mao and Zhu became so closely connected that to the local peasant farmers they were known collectively as " Zhu @-@ Mao " ( homophonic to <unk> , or pig 's pelage ) . 
 In 1929 , Zhu and Mao were forced to flee Jinggangshan to Ruijin following Kuomintang military pressure . Here they formed the Jiangxi Soviet , which would eventually grow to cover some 30 @,@ 000 square kilometers ( 11 @,@ 584 square miles ) and include some three million people . In 1931 , Zhu was appointed leader of the Red Army in Ruijin by the CPC leadership . Zhu successfully led a conventional military force against the Kuomintang in the lead up to the Fourth Counter Encirclement Campaign ; However , he was not able to do the same during the Fifth Counter Encirclement Campaign and the CPC fled . Zhu helped form the 1934 break @-@ out that began the Long March . 
 = = = Red Army leader = = = 
 During the Long March , Zhu and Zhou Enlai organized certain battles in tandem . There were few positive effects since the real power was in the hands of Bo Gu and Otto Braun . In the Zunyi Conference , Zhu supported Mao Zedong ’ s criticisms of Bo and Braun . After the conference , Zhu cooperated with Mao and Zhou on military affairs . In July 1935 , Zhu and Liu Bocheng were with the Fourth Red Army while Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai with the First Red Army . When separation between the two divisions occurred , Zhu was forced by Zhang Guotao , the leader of Fourth Red Army , to go south . The Fourth Red Army barely survived the retreat through Sichuan Province . Arriving in Yan 'an , Zhu directed the reconstruction of the Red Army under the political guidance of Mao . 
 During the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War and the Chinese Civil War , he held the position of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Red Army and , in 1940 , Zhu , alongside Peng Dehuai , devised and organized the Hundred Regiments Offensive . Initially , Mao supported this offensive . While a successful campaign , Mao later attributed it as the main provocation for the devastating Japanese Three <unk> Policy later and used it to criticize Peng at the Lushan Conference . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 In 1949 Zhu was named Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the People 's Liberation Army ( PLA ) ; it is in this way posterity regards him as a principal founder of the PLA . He also served as the Vice @-@ Chairman of the Communist Party ( 1956 – 1966 ) and Vice @-@ Chairman of the People 's Republic of China ( 1954 – 1959 ) . Zhu oversaw the PLA during the Korean War within his authority as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . In 1955 , he was conferred to the rank of marshal . At the Lushan Conference , he tried to protect Peng Dehuai , by giving some mild criticisms of Peng ; rather than denouncing him , he merely gently <unk> his targeted comrade , who was a target of Mao Zedong . Mao wasn 't satisfied with Zhu De 's behavior . After the conference , Zhu was dismissed from vice chairmen of Central Military Commission , not in least part due to his loyalty for the fallen Peng . 
 In April 1969 , during the summit of the Cultural Revolution , Zhu was dismissed from his position on the Politburo Standing Committee of the Communist Party of China , and the activity of the National People 's Congress was halted . However , due to the support of Zhou Enlai , he was not harmed or imprisoned . In August 1969 , Lin Biao issued a command that dispatched important martial figures to distant areas due to the tension between China and Soviet Union , and Zhu De was driven to Guangzhou . In 1973 Zhu was reinstated in the Standing Committee . 
 He continued to be a prominent elder statesman until his death on 6 July 1976 . His passing came six months after the death of Zhou Enlai , and just two months before the death of Mao Zedong . Zhu was cremated three days later , and received a funeral days afterwards . During a " Strike Hard " anti @-@ crime campaign in 1983 , one of Zhu 's grandsons , <unk> , was sentenced to death due to a rape conviction in Tianjin . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Zhu De was married four times , according to the unfinished biography written by Agnes Smedley . His first two wives were educated women to whom he was introduced by brothers who were fellow officers in the <unk> Army . They were : 
 <unk> Chu @-@ fen , married in 1912 . She died of a fever in 1916 after bearing him a son . 
 Chen Yu @-@ chen , married in 1916 . Killed by the Kuomintang in 1935 . Zhu 's only child , son of the first wife , vanished and is presumed also to have been killed . 
 Zhu viewed himself as separated from Chen Yu @-@ chen after leaving her 1922 . He felt free to marry again , though there had been no formal divorce . 
 Wu Yu @-@ lan , married in 1928 . A peasant leader from an educated family . Captured and killed by the Kuomintang in 1929 . 
 Kang <unk> , also <unk> as K 'ang K 'e @-@ ching or Kang Keh @-@ chin . Also a peasant leader , but not educated before she joined the Red Army . <unk> him and was famous in her own right . 
 = Weldon Humble = 
 Weldon Gaston " Hum " Humble ( April 24 , 1921 – April 14 , 1998 ) was an American football guard who played five seasons in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and National Football League ( NFL ) for the Cleveland Browns and Dallas Texans in the late 1940s and early 1950s . 
 Humble grew up in Texas and was a <unk> @-@ sport athlete at his San Antonio high school . He enrolled at Rice University in Houston , Texas in 1940 and played three seasons on the school 's football team . Humble then spent three years in the U.S. Marines during World War II , serving in the Pacific War and earning a Bronze Star Medal before returning to complete his college studies in 1946 . Sportswriters named him a first @-@ team All @-@ American after the Rice Owls finished with an 8 – 2 win – loss record and beat Tennessee in the Orange Bowl . 
 The AAFC 's Baltimore Colts signed Humble in 1947 , but the Browns acquired him in a trade before the season . Humble became an anchor on Cleveland 's offensive line , helping the team win three straight AAFC titles in the late 1940s . When the AAFC dissolved in 1949 , Cleveland moved to the NFL and won another championship in 1950 . Humble , who remained in the Marine Reserves , was called into service in the Korean War after the season . He was expected to return to Cleveland the following year , but head coach Paul Brown traded him to the Texans before the 1952 season began . He retired after one year in Dallas . 
 After his playing career , Humble worked as a bank executive and at an office supply company . He was also the chairman of the selection committee for the Bluebonnet Bowl . Humble was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1961 , and was named to the Texas Sports Hall of Fame and the South Texas Football Hall of Fame in 1969 . He is also a member of the Rice University Athletics Hall of Fame . He died in 1998 in Houston following a long illness . 
 = = Early life and college career = = 
 Humble was born in Nixon , Texas , a suburb of San Antonio , in 1921 . His athletic career began at San Antonio 's G.W. Brackenridge High School . Humble played as an end for two seasons and a fullback for a third season on the football team . He also played on the basketball , track and swimming teams before graduating and enrolling at Rice University in Houston , Texas in 1940 . 
 Humble began play on Rice 's freshman team as an end in 1940 . He advanced to the varsity team the next year . While he started as an end , coach Jess Neely switched him to guard before the first game of the season . He thrived in the new position , and was named a sophomore all @-@ star by the Associated Press after the Rice Owls finished 1941 with a 6 – 3 – 1 win – loss – tie record . The following year , Humble earned All @-@ Southwestern Conference honors and won the George Martin Award , given to Rice 's most valuable player , as Rice put up a 7 – 2 – 1 record . 
 Humble left Rice in 1943 for the University of Louisiana at Lafayette , then called Southwestern Institute , to prepare for service in World War II in a V @-@ 12 U.S. Navy training program . As he trained , he played alongside enlistees from Tulane University , the University of Tulsa and Louisiana State University on a military team that won six straight games and was selected to play in the first Oil Bowl in Houston . Captained by Humble , Southwestern beat a service team from Randolph Air Force Base in San Antonio . 
 After the season , Humble enlisted in the United States Marine Corps and was sent to fight in the Pacific War . He rose to the rank of first lieutenant and won a Bronze Star Medal . Upon his discharge in 1946 , Humble returned to Rice . He lettered in football and track and field and was voted a consensus first @-@ team All @-@ American guard while captain of Rice 's Southwestern Conference co @-@ champion team . He was also named lineman of the week by the Associated Press in November for his strong tackling in a game against the Texas A & M Aggies . After finishing with an 8 – 2 record , Rice beat Tennessee in the Orange Bowl game in early 1947 . Rice was ranked the 10th @-@ best college team in the nation in the AP Poll . 
 = = Professional football career = = 
 Paul Brown , the coach of the Cleveland Browns in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) , met Humble while vacationing in Florida in 1946 . Brown came to watch the Orange Bowl on New Year 's Day , and was staying in the same hotel as the Rice team . He saw Humble and his wife Lorraine , whom Humble had met while in training at Southwestern , on a dance floor at the hotel . " He appeared to be the sort of fellow we like to have on our team , " Brown said later in 1947 . " Then I watched him in that Tennessee game and after that made up my mind he 'd be with my club if I ever had the chance to make a deal for him . " The AAFC 's Baltimore Colts selected Humble in the league 's draft , but Brown got his chance in August . He engineered a trade that sent four players including quarterback Steve Nemeth and guard George <unk> to the Colts , plus two players to be named later . 
 Before joining the Browns , Humble played in the College All @-@ Star Game , a now @-@ defunct annual matchup between the National Football League ( NFL ) champion and a selection of the best college players from around the country . The college all @-@ stars won the game , defeating the Chicago Bears 16 – 0 . In Cleveland , Humble was part of an offensive line that included Lin Houston , Ed <unk> and Bob Gaudio . Their job was to protect quarterback Otto Graham from opposing defenders and open up running room for fullback Marion Motley . They chanted " nobody touches Graham " when they broke the huddle . 
 Helped by strong line play , Graham , Motley and Cleveland ends Dante Lavelli and Mac Speedie led a potent offense that dominated the AAFC for three years . The Browns won the AAFC championship in 1947 , 1948 and 1949 before the league disbanded and Cleveland was absorbed by the more established NFL . Humble was a consensus second @-@ team All @-@ Pro selection in 1948 , when Cleveland won all of its games . Cleveland 's success continued in the NFL in 1950 , when Humble was used on occasion as a linebacker on defense . The Browns finished the season with a 10 – 2 record and beat the Los Angeles Rams in the NFL championship game . Humble was selected to play in the first @-@ ever Pro Bowl , the NFL 's all @-@ star game . 
 Humble continued as a member of the Marine Reserves as his professional career continued , and in 1951 he was in danger of being called up for service in the Korean War . He re @-@ enlisted in the summer and played for a military team at Marine Corps Base Quantico later in the year . After the season , he was named the best service player in the country by the Washington Touchdown Club . 
 Humble was expected to return to the Browns after his discharge from the military in 1952 . In a surprise move , however , Brown traded him before the season to the Dallas Texans for fullback Sherman Howard . The trade was unexpected because Cleveland 's other guards , including Gaudio and Alex Agase , were getting older and nearing retirement . " I 'm sure we 'll be all right at the guard position , " Brown said at the time . " But we do have a definite fullback problem . " Humble played one season for the Texans before retiring . Dallas had a 1 – 11 record in 1952 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After his football career , Humble worked for 20 years at First City National Bank in Houston . He later became vice @-@ president of an office supply firm called Stationers , Inc . He maintained an affiliation with his Texas alma mater , serving as president and later director of the R Association , an alumni group for former Rice student @-@ athletes . In the late 1960s , he became the president of the Greater Houston Bowl Association , which organized the Bluebonnet Bowl . By the mid @-@ 1970s , he was chairman of the Bowl 's selection committee . 
 Humble won numerous honors after his career . He became the first Rice player inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1961 . He was included on a 50th anniversary All @-@ Southwest Conference team in 1968 , and in 1970 was one of the first people inducted into the Rice University Athletics Hall of Fame . Humble was inducted into the Texas Sports Hall of Fame and the South Texas Football Hall of Fame in 1969 . 
 Later in life , Humble worked for the Harris County Appraisal Review Board and was a salesman for an office furniture supply company . He died in 1998 in Houston after a long illness . Humble and his wife Lorraine had three children . 
 = Barbara Hershey = 
 Barbara Hershey ( born Barbara Lynn Herzstein ; February 5 , 1948 ) , once known as Barbara Seagull , is an American actress . In a career spanning nearly 50 years , she has played a variety of roles on television and in cinema in several genres , including westerns and comedies . She began acting at age 17 in 1965 but did not achieve much critical acclaim until the latter half of the 1980s . By that time , the Chicago Tribune referred to her as " one of America 's finest actresses . " 
 Hershey won an Emmy and a Golden Globe for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries / TV Film for her role in A Killing in a Small Town ( 1990 ) . She has also received Golden Globe nominations for Best Supporting Actress for her role as Mary Magdalene in Martin Scorsese 's The Last Temptation of Christ ( 1988 ) and for her role in Jane Campion 's Portrait of a Lady ( 1996 ) . For the latter film , she was also nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress and won the Los Angeles Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actress . In addition , she has won two Best Actress awards at the Cannes Film Festival for her roles in Shy People ( 1987 ) and A World Apart ( 1988 ) . She was also featured in Woody Allen 's critically acclaimed Hannah and Her Sisters ( 1986 ) , for which she was nominated for the British Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress and Garry Marshall 's melodrama Beaches ( 1988 ) , and she earned a second British Academy Award nomination for Darren Aronofsky 's Black Swan ( 2010 ) . 
 Establishing a reputation early in her career as a " hippie , " Hershey experienced conflict between her personal life and her acting goals . Her career suffered a decline during a six @-@ year relationship with actor David Carradine , with whom she had a child . She experimented with a change in stage name that she later regretted . During this time her personal life was highly publicized and ridiculed . It was not until she separated from Carradine and changed her stage name back to Hershey that her acting career became well established . Later in her career , she began to keep her personal life private . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Barbara Herzstein was born in Hollywood , California . She is the daughter of Melrose ( née Moore ) and Arnold Nathan Herzstein . Her father , a horse racing columnist , was Jewish ( his parents had emigrated from Hungary and Russia ) and her mother , a native of Arkansas , was a Presbyterian of Irish descent . 
 The youngest of three children , Barbara always wanted to be an actress , and her family nicknamed her " Sarah Bernhardt . " She was shy in school and so quiet that people thought she was deaf . By the age of 10 she proved herself to be an " A " student . Her high school drama coach helped her find an agent , and in 1965 , at age 17 , she landed a role on Sally Field 's television series <unk> . Barbara said that she found Field to be very supportive of her in her first acting role . According to The New York Times All Movie Guide , Barbara graduated from Hollywood High School in 1966 , but David Carradine , in his autobiography , said she dropped out of high school after she began acting . 
 = = Career = = 
 Barbara 's acting debut , three episodes of <unk> , was followed by the short @-@ lived television series The Monroes ( 1966 ) , which also featured Michael Anderson , Jr . By this point , she had adopted the stage name " Barbara Hershey . " Although Hershey said the series helped her career , she expressed some frustration with her role , saying : " One week I was strong , the next , weak " . While on the series , Hershey garnered several other roles , including one in Doris Day 's final feature film , With Six You Get <unk> . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In 1969 , Hershey co @-@ starred in the Glenn Ford western Heaven with a Gun . On the set , she met and began a romantic relationship with actor David Carradine , who later starred in the television series Kung Fu ( see Personal life ) . In the same year , she acted in the controversial drama Last Summer , which was based on Evan Hunter 's eponymous novel . In this film , Hershey played Sandy , the " heavy " who influences two young men ( played by Bruce Davison and Richard Thomas ) to rape another girl , Rhoda ( played by Catherine Burns ) . Even though the film , directed by Frank Perry , received an X rating for the graphic rape scene , Burns earned a Best Supporting Actress Oscar nomination for her performance . 
 During the filming of Last Summer , a seagull was killed . " In one scene , " Hershey explained , " I had to throw the bird in the air to make her fly . We had to reshoot the scene over and over again . I could tell the bird was tired . Finally when the scene was finished the director , Frank Perry , told me the bird had broken her neck on the last throw . " Hershey felt responsible for the bird 's death and changed her stage name to " Seagull " as a tribute to the creature . " I felt her spirit enter me , " she later explained . " It was the only moral thing to do . " The name change was not positively received . When she was offered a part opposite Timothy Bottoms in The Crazy World of Julius <unk> ( 1974 ) ( AKA <unk> 's Hooch ) , Hershey had to forfeit half her salary , $ 25 @,@ 000 , to be billed under the name " Seagull " because the producers were not in favor of the billing . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 In 1970 , Hershey played Tish Grey in The Baby Maker , a film that explored surrogate motherhood . Criticizing the directing and writing of James Bridges , critic Shirley Rigby said of the " bizarre " film , " Only the performances in the film save it from being a total travesty . " Rigby went on to say , " Barbara Hershey is a great little actress , much , much more than just another pretty face . " 
 Hershey once said that starring in Boxcar Bertha ( 1972 ) " was the most fun I ever had on a movie . " The film , co @-@ starring Hershey 's domestic partner , David Carradine , and produced by Roger Corman , was Martin Scorsese 's first Hollywood picture . Shot in six weeks on a budget of $ 600 @,@ 000 , Boxcar Bertha was intended to be a period crime drama similar to Corman 's Bloody Mama ( 1970 ) or Bonnie and Clyde ( 1967 ) . Although Corman publicized it as an exploitation piece with plenty of sex and violence , Scorsese 's influence made it " something much more . " Roger Ebert , of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , wrote of the film 's direction , " Martin Scorsese has gone for mood and atmosphere more than for action , and his violence is always blunt and unpleasant — never liberating and exhilarating , as the New Violence is supposed to be . " A spread recreating sexually explicit scenes from the movie appeared in Playboy magazine in 1972 . 
 Hershey 's experience with Scorsese would extend to another major role for her 16 years later in The Last Temptation of Christ ( 1988 ) as Mary Magdalene . During the filming of Boxcar Bertha , Hershey had introduced Scorsese to the Nikos Kazantzakis novel on which the latter film was based . That collaboration resulted in an Academy Award nomination for the director and a Golden Globe nod for Hershey . 
 By the mid 1970s , Hershey concluded , " I 've been so tied up with David [ Carradine ] that people have forgotten that I am me . I spend 50 percent of my time working with David . " She had , in 1974 , guest @-@ starred in a two @-@ part episode of Carradine 's television series Kung Fu . She played , under the direction of Carradine , a love interest to his character , Kwai Chang Caine , during his time at the Shaolin temple . She also appeared in two of Carradine 's independent directorial projects , You and Me ( 1975 ) and Americana ( 1983 ) , both of which had been filmed in 1973 . Her father , Arnold Herzstein , also appeared in Americana . 
 She publicly acknowledged the desire to be recognized in her own right . Later , in 1974 , she did just that , winning a Gold Medal at the Atlanta Film Festival for her role in the Dutch @-@ produced film Love Comes Quietly . 
 Later in the decade , Hershey starred with Charlton Heston in The Last Hard Men ( 1976 ) . She hoped the film would revive her career after the damage she felt it had suffered while she was with Carradine , believing that the hippie label she had been given was a career impediment . By this time she had shed Carradine and her " Seagull " pseudonym . Throughout the rest of the 1970s , however , she was appearing in made @-@ for @-@ TV movies that were described as " forgettable , " like Flood ! ( 1976 ) , Sunshine Christmas ( 1977 ) , and The Glitter Palace ( 1977 ) , in which she played a lesbian . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 When Hershey landed a role in Richard Rush 's The Stunt Man ( 1980 ) , it marked a return to the big screen after four years and earned her critical praise . Hershey felt that she would be forever in debt to Rush for fighting with financiers to allow her a part in that film . She also felt The Stunt Man was an important transition for her , from playing girls to playing women . 
 Some of the " women roles " that followed The Stunt Man included the horror movie The Entity ( 1982 ) ; Philip Kaufman 's The Right Stuff ( 1983 ) , in which she played Glennis Yeager , wife of test pilot Chuck Yeager ; and The Natural ( 1984 ) , in which she shot Robert Redford 's character . For the role of Harriet Bird , Hershey had chosen a particular hat as her " anchor . " Director Barry Levinson disagreed with her choice , but she insisted on wearing it . Levinson later cast Hershey as the wife of Danny DeVito 's character in the comedy Tin Men ( 1987 ) . 
 In 1986 , Hershey left her native California and moved with her son to Manhattan . Three days later , she met briefly with Woody Allen , who offered her the role of Lee in Hannah and Her Sisters ( 1986 ) . In addition to a Manhattan apartment , Hershey bought an antique home in rural Connecticut . The Allen picture won three Academy Awards and a Golden Globe . The film also earned Hershey a BAFTA nomination for Best Actress in a Supporting Role . She described her part as " a wonderful gift . " 
 Hershey followed Hannah and Her Sisters with back @-@ to @-@ back wins for Best Actress at the Cannes Film Festival for Shy People and for her appearance as anti @-@ apartheid activist Diana Roth in A World Apart ( 1988 ) . Her character in the latter film was based on Ruth First . Also in the 1980s , she portrayed Errol Flynn 's first wife , actress Lili Damita , in the TV movie My Wicked , Wicked Ways ( 1985 ) , which was based on Flynn 's autobiography . She also played the love interest to Gene Hackman 's character in the basketball film Hoosiers ( 1986 ) . 
 Barbara Cloud of the Pittsburgh Press gave attribution to Barbara Hershey for starting a trend when she had collagen injected into her lips for her role in Beaches ( 1988 ) . Humorist Erma Bombeck said of the movie , which also starred Bette Midler , " I have no idea what Beaches was all about . All I could focus on was Barbara Hershey 's lips . She looked like she stopped off at a gas station and someone said , ' Your lips are down 30 pounds . Better let me hit ' em with some air . ' " 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 In 1990 , Hershey won an Emmy and a Golden Globe for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Special for her role as Candy Morrison in A Killing in a Small Town , which was based on Candy Montgomery 's acquittal for the death of Betty Gore . Montgomery had killed Gore on Friday , June 13 , 1980 , in Gore 's Wylie , Texas , home , by hitting her 41 times with an ax . The jury determined that she did so in self @-@ defense . In preparation for the part , Hershey had a phone conversation with Montgomery . Many of the names of the real @-@ life principals in the case were changed for the movie . The film 's alternative title was Evidence of Love , the name of a 1984 book about the case . 
 Also in 1990 , Hershey drew upon what Woody Allen once described as her " erotic overtones , " portraying a woman who falls in love with her much younger nephew , by marriage , played by Keanu Reeves , in the comedic Tune in Tomorrow . 
 In 1991 , Hershey played Hanna Trout , the wife of the title character in Paris Trout ( 1991 ) , a made @-@ for @-@ cable television movie . In this Showtime production , Hershey collaborated again with A Killing in a Small Town director Stephen Gyllenhaal to play a woman who has an affair with her husband 's lawyer . Her husband , an abusive bigot ( played by Dennis Hopper ) , is on trial for murdering a young African American girl . The film , which was based on Pete Dexter 's 1988 National Book Award @-@ winning novel , featured Hopper and Hershey enacting a graphic rape scene that the actress found difficult to view . The picture was described as a " dramatic reach deep into the dark hollows of racism , abuse and murder . " Paris Trout was nominated for five Prime Time Emmy Awards , including nods for both Hershey and Hopper . 
 Later in the year , Hershey played an attorney defending her college roommate for the murder of her husband in the suspenseful whodunit Defenseless ( 1991 ) . 
 Because of her frequent television appearances , by the end of 1991 Hershey was accused of " selling out to the small screen . " In 1992 , Hershey appeared with Jane Alexander in the ABC miniseries Stay the Night ( 1992 ) , prompting Associated Press writer Jerry Buck to write , " Barbara Hershey is a person who jumps back and forth between features and television very easily . " She starred in another TV miniseries in 1993 , succeeding Anjelica Huston as Clara Allen in the sequel series Return to Lonesome Dove . She was nominated for a Golden Satellite Award for another TV appearance , The Staircase ( 1998 ) . Between 1999 and 2000 , she played Dr. Francesca <unk> in 22 season 6 episodes of the medical TV drama Chicago Hope . 
 Hershey co @-@ starred with Joe Pesci as a nightclub owner in the film drama The Public Eye ( 1992 ) and as the estranged wife of homicidal Michael Douglas in the thriller Falling Down ( 1993 ) . Among the other feature films in which she appeared during the 1990s was Jane Campion 's adaptation of the Henry James novel The Portrait of a Lady ( 1996 ) . Hershey earned an Oscar nomination and won the Best Supporting Actress award from the National Society of Film Critics for her role as Madame Serena Merle in that picture . In 1995 , Last of the <unk> , co @-@ starring Tom Berenger , was released through Savoy Pictures . In 1999 , Hershey starred in an independent film called Drowning on Dry Land ; during production she met co @-@ star Naveen Andrews , with whom she began a romantic relationship that lasted until 2010 ( see Personal life ) . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 In 2001 , Hershey appeared in the psychological thriller Lantana ( 2001 ) . She was the only American in a mostly Australian cast , which included Kerry Armstrong , Anthony LaPaglia , and Geoffrey Rush . Film writer Sheila Johnson said the film was " one of the best to emerge from Australia in years . " Another thriller followed : 11 : 14 ( 2003 ) also featured Rachael Leigh Cook , Patrick Swayze , Hilary Swank , and Colin Hanks . 
 Hershey continued to appear on television during the 2000s , including a season on the series The Mountain . She also starred as Anne Shirley as an adult in Anne of Green Gables : A New Beginning ( 2008 ) , the fourth in a series of made @-@ for @-@ TV films based on the character , taking over the role from Megan Follows . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Hershey appeared as an American actress , Mrs. Hubbard , in an adaptation of Agatha Christie 's Murder on the Orient Express for the British television series Poirot ( starring David Suchet ) , which aired in the United States on Public Broadcast Service ( PBS ) in July 2010 . Also in 2010 , Hershey co @-@ starred in Darren Aronofsky 's acclaimed psychological thriller Black Swan ( 2010 ) opposite Natalie Portman and Mila Kunis . The following year , she co @-@ starred in the James Wan horror film Insidious ( 2011 ) . From 2012 to 2013 , she had a recurring role in the first two seasons of ABC 's hit drama Once Upon a Time as Cora , the Queen of Hearts and mother of the Evil Queen . In 2014 , she reprised the role in one episode of the show 's spin @-@ off Once Upon a Time in Wonderland . In 2015 , she once more reprised the role when she returned to the show for an episode of its fourth season , and in 2016 she appeared again for two episodes of the show 's fifth season , most notably its landmark 100th episode . In A & E 's new series Damien , Hershey portrayed series regular Ann Rutledge , the world 's most powerful woman , who has been tasked with making sure Damien fulfills his destiny as the Antichrist . The role marks Hershey 's latest TV gig following Once Upon a Time , The Mountain , Chicago Hope , and Lifetime 's Left to Die TV movie . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1969 , Hershey met David Carradine while they were working on Heaven With a Gun . The pair began a domestic relationship that would last until 1975 . Carradine said that during the rape scene in that movie , he cracked one of Barbara 's ribs . They appeared in other films together including Martin Scorsese 's Boxcar Bertha . In 1972 , the couple posed together in a nude Playboy spread , recreating some sex scenes from Boxcar Bertha . Later in 1972 , Hershey gave birth to their son , Free , who changed his name to Tom when he was nine years old . The relationship fell apart around the time of Carradine 's 1974 burglary arrest , after he had begun an affair with Season Hubley , who had guest starred in Kung Fu . 
 During this period , Hershey changed her stage name to " Seagull . " In 1979 , a blunt newspaper article from the Knight News Service referenced this period of her life , saying of her acting career that " it looked as if she blew it . " The article referred to Hershey as a " <unk> " and stated that she was frequently " high on something . " In addition to that criticism , she had been ostracized for breast @-@ feeding her son during an appearance on The Dick Cavett Show , and for breast @-@ feeding him beyond the age of two years . She said that this period of her life hurt her career ; " Producers wouldn 't see me because I had a reputation for using drugs and being <unk> . I never used drugs at all and I have always been serious about my acting career . " After splitting up with Carradine , she changed her stage name back to " Hershey , " explaining that she had told the story of why she adopted the name " Seagull " so many times that it had lost its meaning . 
 By the time Hershey was 42 , she was described by columnist <unk> Lee as a " private person who was mired in some heavy publicity when she first became a professional actress . " <unk> Arar , writing for the Los Angeles Daily News , confirmed that Hershey had become a private person by 1990 . 
 On August 8 , 1992 , Hershey married artist Stephen Douglas . The ceremony took place at her home in Oxford , Connecticut , where the only guests were their two mothers and Hershey 's then 19 @-@ year @-@ old son , Tom ( né Free ) Carradine . The couple separated and divorced one year after the wedding . 
 Hershey began dating actor Naveen Andrews in 1999 . During a brief separation in 2005 , Andrews fathered a child with another woman . In May 2010 , after Andrews won sole custody of his son , the couple announced that they had ended their 10 @-@ year relationship six months earlier . 
 Hershey has residences in Los Angeles , Hawaii , New York , and Connecticut . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = 2015 Mexican Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Mexican Grand Prix ( formally known as the Formula 1 Gran Premio de México 2015 ) was a Formula One motor race held at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez in Mexico City on 1 November 2015 . The race , which was contested over seventy @-@ one laps , was the seventeenth race of the 2015 Formula One season . It marked the seventeenth time that the Mexican Grand Prix has been run as a round of the Formula One World Championship since its inception in 1950 , and the first time that the race has been run since 1992 . 
 Nico Rosberg qualified in pole position , having already been fastest in two of the three free practice sessions . He won the race for Mercedes , followed by his teammate Lewis Hamilton , who had secured the Drivers ' Championship at the previous event in the United States . Valtteri Bottas completed the podium in third , driving for Williams . Both Ferrari drivers — Sebastian Vettel and Kimi Räikkönen — retired after crashes , with both losing one position in the Championship to Rosberg and Bottas respectively . It was the first time since the 2006 Australian Grand Prix that neither Ferrari was classified . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez circuit underwent substantial reconfiguration in the build @-@ up to the event . The first corner complex was tightened on entry , while the middle part of the track was completely re @-@ profiled , retaining much of the original design whilst reducing the reliance on aerodynamic grip . The most significant changes were made in the final part , with the <unk> corner cut in half and the circuit redirected through the Foro Sol stadium complex in the circuit infield beginning with turn 12 , following a similar layout to the one used by <unk> between 2002 and 2007 . The track layout featured two drag reduction system ( DRS ) zones , one on the main straight and another between turns three and four . 
 One week prior to the race , Hurricane Patricia — the largest tropical storm cell in the Northern Hemisphere on record — crossed the Mexican coastline near Cuixmala in Jalisco state . Patricia had previously disrupted the United States Grand Prix . 
 Tyre supplier Pirelli brought four compounds to the race . As for all races , the blue @-@ banded wet and green @-@ banded intermediate tyres were provided for possible rain . As for dry @-@ weather ( or " slick " ) tyres , Pirelli supplied the teams with the soft and medium compounds , the two middle options of their four tyres for the 2015 season . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were scheduled , two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . The first session on Friday started on a damp track , described by Sebastian Vettel as " ridiculously slippery " , with the first half @-@ hour of running done on intermediate tyres . Valtteri Bottas set the fastest time on those tyres , before all teams switched on the medium compound . Even on the dry tyres , still many drivers were fooled by the conditions , going off at turns 8 and 10 in particular . Nico Rosberg 's Mercedes suffered from overheating rear brakes , forcing him back to the pits while he held the fastest time . Carlos Sainz , Jr. recorded the most timed laps with 37 , and finished eighth fastest , ahead of local favourite Sergio Pérez and Felipe Massa . Jolyon Palmer again replaced Romain Grosjean at the wheel of the Lotus , as he would do for the rest of the season , and finished fifteenth fastest , two @-@ tenths of a second slower than teammate Pastor Maldonado . The fastest time of the session was set by Max Verstappen in the Toro Rosso , at <unk> , even though the young Dutchman went off in the second sector of the track . He was followed by Daniil Kvyat and the two Ferraris of Kimi Räikkönen and Sebastian Vettel . While Rosberg was demoted to sixth , newly crowned World Champion Lewis Hamilton was only eleventh fastest . 
 In the second session on Friday afternoon , Nico Rosberg was fastest , setting a time of <unk> With the track tarmac still being very new , the surface was slippery and it was another session that saw a lot of drivers get caught out . The biggest accident of the practice came after just five minutes , when Max Verstappen crashed at the exit of the stadium , bringing out red flags . After the running resumed , Valtteri Bottas lost the rear of his Williams FW37 , caused by a fault in his DRS flap , and crashed at turn one . He was not the only one having problems in the first corner , as Sergio Pérez , Carlos Sainz , Jr. and Pastor Maldonado also went off there . Lewis Hamilton meanwhile had an off @-@ track moment at turn four . Romain Grosjean had to end his first practice of the weekend early , when a clutch failure saw him park his car 28 minutes into the session . Jenson Button ran 25 laps and finished ninth fastest albeit spending half of the session in the pits , while the team equipped his car with a new power unit . Behind Rosberg , the two Red Bulls were second and third , ahead of Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel . 
 Nico Rosberg was again fastest at the last practice session on Saturday morning with a time of <unk> , edging out teammate Hamilton by just <unk> After rainfall during the night , the track was slippery at the beginning of practice . It was not until thirty minutes into the session that the grip improved and many teams then opted to run the faster soft compound tyres . Rosberg set the fastest times early on and while Hamilton was able to close the gap gradually , he ended the session slightly slower than the German . Behind the two Mercedes , Daniel Ricciardo was close , just <unk> behind , followed by Vettel , another tenth of a second adrift . Reporting vibrations from his engine , Jenson Button again spent much time in the garage , ending the practice with the slowest time , more than eight seconds behind Rosberg . The long main straight of the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez delivered the fastest speeds seen during the 2015 season . Due to their lack of pure power , McLaren expected to struggle during the remainder of the weekend . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . During the first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) , Kimi Räikkönen was able to compete , after the Ferrari crew was able to change his gearbox in time for the session . Not running was Jenson Button , after his team decided not to go out , since a 55 @-@ place grid penalty would have placed him at the back of the grid at any case . Marcus Ericsson was more than half a second quicker than teammate Felipe Nasr , who failed to proceed into Q2 , as did both Manor Marussia drivers . With Button out of the running , just one more driver was eliminated , and that proved to be his McLaren teammate Alonso , who barely missed out on making the cut . At the front , Rosberg set the fastest time ahead of Vettel , while Hamilton was the only driver not to use the soft compound tyre . 
 Lewis Hamilton did go out on the softer tyres in Q2 , setting the fastest time of the session , the first to lap in under 1 : 20 minutes . Behind him Vettel was second ahead of Rosberg . Räikkönen went out on the harder compound tyre , but aborted his running after spinning in turn one , leaving him fifteenth fastest with a grid penalty for his gearbox change yet to come . Max Verstappen put in a fast lap towards the end of the session , demoting his teammate Sainz , Jr. out of the top ten . Also eliminated were both Lotus and the second Sauber of Ericsson . 
 In Q3 , both Mercedes drivers set two consecutive fast laps at the beginning of the session , with Rosberg coming out on top , <unk> ahead of his teammate . All drivers had problems in improving on their times during the second run of timed laps on fresher tyres . While Hamilton did improve early in the lap , his effort was stopped when he made a mistake at turn twelve . This meant that he was unable to challenge Rosberg for pole position , who qualified first for the fourth race in a row . The two Mercedes drivers were closely followed by Vettel , ahead of the two Red Bulls of Kvyat and Ricciardo , both Williams cars and Verstappen in eighth . In the fifth row of the grid , local favourite Sergio Pérez edged out teammate Nico Hülkenberg for ninth . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the start , Nico Rosberg got away well , fending off an attack by teammate Hamilton into the first corner . Behind them , Vettel had a bad getaway that saw him get in the midst of the Red Bulls . In turn 5 , he touched Daniel Ricciardo 's car , suffering a puncture that forced him into the pits at the end of the first lap . While he was able to get back out , Fernando Alonso ended his race after just one lap due to a loss of power . Therefore , the order after the first lap stood as : Rosberg , Hamilton , Kvyat and Ricciardo . The two Mercedes ( Rosberg and Hamilton ) soon opened a gap on the Red Bulls ( Kvyat and Ricciardo ) , exchanging fastest laps in the process , while Felipe Massa and Max Verstappen got entangled in a fight for sixth place . Kimi Räikkönen , who was told early on to cool his brakes , made good progress up the field and was in 13th position by lap 8 . One lap later , Valtteri Bottas became the first of the front runners to pit , putting on the medium compound , followed just a lap later by teammate Massa . While Räikkönen had moved up to eighth place by lap 12 , Sergio Pérez and Carlos Sainz , Jr. got into a fight for sixth place , with the former being asked by his team to stay out as long as possible . 
 Sebastian Vettel slowly moved up the field , running eleventh on lap 18 , only to spin a lap later at turn seven , falling back to 16th . He subsequently complained about a flat spot on his tyre , but continued without pitting . On lap 20 , Sergio Pérez pitted for new tyres and a front wing adjustment . Since the stop took longer than expected , he rejoined just before Sainz , Jr . , who used the momentum to pass Pérez into turn one . Meanwhile , Räikkönen and Bottas were racing for sixth place . On lap 24 , Bottas attacked around the outside into turn two , sticking to the inside line at the following corner , where Räikkönen did not back away and ran into the front @-@ left of the Williams , breaking his own rear @-@ right suspension and forcing him to retire on the spot , while Bottas was able to carry on . Rosberg came in for his scheduled pit stop on lap 27 , while Hamilton waited two laps to follow suit , trying to get ahead . This proved unsuccessful , as he rejoined behind Rosberg after his stop on lap 29 . On lap 35 , Sergio Pérez attempted to overtake Carlos Sainz , Jr. for ninth , who ran wide and kept his position . After his team radio informed him that he had done so by going off track , he handed the position to Pérez . Sebastian Vettel pitted for a second time on lap 37 and rejoined in between the two Mercedes of Rosberg and Hamilton , albeit a lap down . He was told to let Hamilton go by as well some laps later . 
 On lap 48 , Mercedes changed strategies , bringing in both drivers for another tyre stop , much to the dismay of Lewis Hamilton , who complained to his team over the radio . Meanwhile , a fight developed between Massa and Ricciardo for fifth place , with the latter making the pass at the beginning of lap 53 . On the same lap , Sebastian Vettel spun once more at turn seven , this time hitting the barriers , ending his race and bringing out the safety car . The double retirement marked the first time since the 2006 Australian Grand Prix that none of their cars were classified . During the caution period , the order stood as : Rosberg , Hamilton , Kvyat , Bottas , Ricciardo , Massa , Hülkenberg , Pérez , Verstappen and Grosjean . At the restart at the beginning of lap 58 , Bottas made a move on Kvyat into turn one , taking third place . Over the last laps of the race , Hamilton was able to close on Rosberg , as was Massa on the two Red Bulls ahead of him . However , neither were able to overtake , and Rosberg crossed the finish line to take victory , followed by Hamilton and Bottas . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 At the podium ceremony , the interviews were conducted by Nigel Mansell , who had won the last race at the venue in 1992 . Both Mercedes drivers complimented each other 's driving , highlighting the atmosphere and the enthusiasm of the fans in Mexico . Valtteri Bottas thanked his team , saying that they were " racing like a race @-@ winning team " . During the post @-@ race press conference , Lewis Hamilton described it as " one of the fun races for me " , since he did not have to worry about points at that point . However , new frictions emerged at Mercedes as Hamilton later asserted that the team had favoured Rosberg over the weekend in order to " keep him happy " . 
 Local favourite Sergio Pérez , who had been on a one @-@ stop strategy , said after the race that it had been the safety car period that " destroyed " his chances at a better result , but added : " What I could do , I did perfectly , so I 'm happy with that . " His teammate Nico Hülkenberg had finished the race in front of him , and said after the race : " The Safety Car ended up playing into my hands , which is the little bit of luck you always need to get a good result " . Speaking about the race , 14th @-@ placed Jenson Button said : " Painful , I think , is the word . I was on the harder tyre at the start but still it was just waving goodbye to everyone in front really . " He also stated that he believed that McLaren were more affected by the high altitude than the other teams . On his one @-@ lap outing , Fernando Alonso explained that the problem that caused his retirement had been discovered the night before . He added : " We had two possibilities , retire the car without even starting the race or try our maximum , knowing that maybe one or two laps was the maximum we could achieve [ ... ] . We did one lap , for respect of the fans because they were amazing all weekend . " 
 Following their worst weekend in almost ten years , Ferrari were self @-@ critical . Sebastian Vettel was quoted as describing his race as " a shit job " , and later took full responsibility for his race ending crash , saying that he " probably just ask [ ed ] or want [ ed ] a little bit too much " . Speaking about the collision between Kimi Räikkönen and Valtteri Bottas , Ferrari team principal Maurizio Arrivabene said : " It 's an accident , it 's part of the show . I don 't want to blame anybody . " He went on to describe the weekend as " a good lesson " for the team , taking positive things from the race , such as the good race pace shown by both cars . As a result of their double retirement , both Ferrari drivers lost their respective positions in the Drivers ' Championship . While Vettel was overtaken by Rosberg into second place , Räikkönen lost fourth position to Valtteri Bottas . In the Constructors ' Standings , Williams moved closer to Ferrari in second place , now trailing them by 131 points . At the FIA Prize Giving Ceremony on 3 December 2015 , the organizers were awarded the prize as Best Promoter . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes : 
 ^ 1 — Kimi Räikkönen received a ten- and four five @-@ place grid penalties for exceeding the allowed allocation of four of his power unit components , as well as a five @-@ place grid penalty for an unauthorized gearbox change . 
 ^ 2 — Fernando Alonso received a ten @-@ place grid penalty for an engine change and a five @-@ place grid penalty for an unauthorized gearbox change . 
 ^ 3 — Jenson Button did not set a lap time during Q1 . He received permission from the stewards to start the race . Additionally , he received 70 @-@ place ( three ten- and eight five @-@ place ) grid penalties for exceeding the allowed allocation of five of his power unit components , unscheduled engine and gearbox changes . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 Bold text indicates 2015 World Champions . 
 = Columbian mammoth = 
 The Columbian mammoth ( Mammuthus columbi ) is an extinct species of mammoth that inhabited North America as far north as the northern United States and as far south as Costa Rica during the Pleistocene epoch . It was one of the last in a line of mammoth species , beginning with M. subplanifrons in the early Pliocene . The Columbian mammoth evolved from the steppe mammoth , which entered North America from Asia about 1 @.@ 5 million years ago . The pygmy mammoths of the Channel Islands of California evolved from Columbian mammoths . The closest extant relative of the Columbian and other mammoths is the Asian elephant . 
 Reaching 4 m ( 13 ft ) at the shoulders and 8 – 10 tonnes ( 18 @,@ 000 – 22 @,@ 000 lb ) in weight , the Columbian mammoth was one of the largest species of mammoth . It had long , curved tusks and four molars , which were replaced six times during the lifetime of an individual . It most likely used its tusks and trunk like modern elephants — for manipulating objects , fighting , and foraging . Bones , hair , dung and stomach contents have been discovered , but no preserved carcasses are known . The Columbian mammoth preferred open areas , such as parkland landscapes , and fed on sedge , grass , and other plants . It did not live in the Arctic regions of Canada , which were instead inhabited by woolly mammoths . The ranges of the two species may have overlapped , and genetic evidence suggests that they interbred . Several sites contain the skeletons of multiple Columbian mammoths , either because they died in a single incident such as a flash flood , or because these locations were natural traps in which individuals accumulated over time . 
 For a few thousand years prior to their extinction , Columbian mammoths coexisted in North America with <unk> – the first humans to inhabit the Americas – who hunted them for food , used their bones for making tools , and depicted them in ancient art . Columbian mammoth remains have been found in association with Clovis culture artifacts ; these remains may have stemmed either from hunting or from scavenging . The Columbian mammoth disappeared at the end of the Pleistocene around 11 @,@ 000 years ago , most likely as a result of habitat loss caused by climate change , hunting by humans , or a combination of both . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Columbian mammoth was first scientifically described in 1857 by Scottish naturalist Hugh Falconer , who named the species Elephas columbi after Christopher Columbus . The animal was brought to Falconer 's attention in 1846 by Charles Lyell , who sent him molar fragments found during the 1838 excavation of the Brunswick – Altamaha Canal in Georgia , in the southeastern United States . At the time , similar fossils from across North America were attributed to woolly mammoths ( then Elephas primigenius ) . Falconer found that his specimens were distinct , confirming his conclusion by examining their internal structure and studying additional molars from Mexico . Although William Phipps Blake and Richard Owen believed that E. texianus was more appropriate for the species , Falconer rejected the name ; he also suggested that E. imperator and E. <unk> , two other American elephants described from molars , were based on remains too fragmentary to classify properly . More complete material that may be from the same quarry as Falconer 's fragmentary holotype molar was reported in 2012 , and could help shed more light on that specimen , since doubts about its adequacy as a holotype have been raised . 
 In the early 20th century , the taxonomy of extinct elephants became increasingly complicated . In 1942 , Henry Fairfield Osborn 's posthumous monograph on the Proboscidea was published , wherein he used various genus and subgenus names that had previously been proposed for extinct elephant species , such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Osborn also retained names for many regional and intermediate subspecies or " varieties " , and created <unk> such as <unk> columbi <unk> and <unk> imperator <unk> . The taxonomic situation was simplified by various researchers from the 1970s onwards : all species of mammoth were retained in the genus Mammuthus , and many proposed differences between species were instead interpreted as intraspecific variation . In 2003 , palaeontologist Larry <unk> summarised current views about North American mammoth taxonomy , and concluded that several species had been declared junior synonyms , and that M. columbi ( the Columbian mammoth ) and M. exilis ( the pygmy mammoth ) were the only species of mammoth endemic to the Americas ( as other species lived both there and in Eurasia ) . The idea that species such as M. imperator ( the imperial mammoth ) and M. <unk> ( Jefferson 's mammoth ) were either more primitive or advanced stages in Columbian mammoth evolution was largely dismissed , and they were regarded as synonyms . In spite of these conclusions , <unk> cautioned that American mammoth taxonomy is not yet fully resolved . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The earliest known members of Proboscidea , the clade that contains the elephants , existed about 55 million years ago around the Tethys Sea area . The closest living relatives of the Proboscidea are the sirenians ( dugongs and manatees ) and the hyraxes ( an order of small , herbivorous mammals ) . The family Elephantidae existed six million years ago in Africa , and includes the living elephants and the mammoths . Among many now extinct clades , the mastodon ( Mammut ) is only a distant relative , and part of the distinct family <unk> , which diverged 25 million years before the mammoths evolved . The Asian elephant ( Elephas maximus ) is the closest extant relative of the mammoths . The following cladogram shows the placement of the Columbian mammoth among other proboscideans , based on characteristics of the hyoid bone in the neck : 
 Since many remains of each species of mammoth are known from several localities , it is possible to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the genus through morphological studies . Mammoth species can be identified from the number of enamel ridges ( or lamellar plates ) on their molars : primitive species had few ridges , and the number increased gradually as new species evolved to feed on more abrasive food items . The crowns of the teeth became deeper in height and the skulls became taller to accommodate this . At the same time , the skulls became shorter from front to back to minimise the weight of the head . The short , tall skulls of woolly and Columbian mammoths are the culmination of this process . 
 The first known members of the genus Mammuthus are the African species M. subplanifrons from the Pliocene , and M. <unk> from the Pleistocene . The former is thought to be the ancestor of later forms . Mammoths entered Europe around 3 million years ago . The earliest European mammoth has been named M. <unk> ; it spread across Europe and China . Only its molars are known , which show that it had 8 – 10 enamel ridges . A population evolved 12 – 14 ridges , splitting off from and replacing the earlier type , becoming M. meridionalis about 2 – 1 @.@ 7 million years ago . In turn , this species was replaced by the steppe mammoth ( M. trogontherii ) with 18 – 20 ridges , which evolved in eastern Asia around 2 – 1 @.@ 5 million years ago . The Columbian mammoth evolved from a population of M. trogontherii that had crossed the Bering Strait and entered North America about 1 @.@ 5 million years ago ; it retained a similar number of molar ridges . Mammoths derived from M. trogontherii evolved molars with 26 ridges 400 @,@ 000 years ago in Siberia and became the woolly mammoth ( M. primigenius ) . Woolly mammoths entered North America about 100 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 A population of Columbian mammoths that lived between 80 @,@ 000 and 13 @,@ 000 years ago on the Channel Islands of California , 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) away from the mainland , evolved to be less than half the size of the mainland Columbian mammoths . They are therefore considered to be the distinct species M. exilis , the pygmy mammoth ( or a subspecies , M. c. exilis ) . These mammoths presumably reached the islands by swimming there when sea levels were lower , and decreased in size due to the limited food provided by the islands ' small areas . Bones of larger specimens have also been found on the islands , but it is unknown whether these were stages in the dwarfing process , or later arrivals of Columbian mammoths . 
 A 2011 study of the complete mitochondrial genome ( inherited through the female line ) showed that two examined Columbian mammoths , including the morphologically typical " Huntington mammoth " , were grouped within a subclade of woolly mammoths . This suggests that the two populations interbred and produced fertile offspring . One possible explanation is introgression of a haplogroup from woolly to Columbian mammoths , or vice versa . A similar situation has been documented in modern species of African elephant ( Loxodonta ) , the African bush elephant ( L. africana ) and the African forest elephant ( L. cyclotis ) . The authors of the study also suggest that the North American type formerly referred to as M. jeffersonii may have been a hybrid between the two species , as it is apparently morphologically intermediate . These findings were not expected by scientists ; nuclear DNA and more specimens will have to be analysed to clarify the situation . 
 A 2015 study of mammoth molars confirmed that M. columbi evolved from Eurasian M. trogontherii , not M. meridionalis as had been suggested earlier , and noted that M. columbi and M. trogontherii were so similar in morphology that their classification as separate species may be questionable . The study also suggested that the animals in the range where M. columbi and M. primigenius overlapped formed a metapopulation of hybrids with varying morphology . In 2016 , a genetic study of North American mammoth specimens confirmed that M. columbi and M. primigenius interbred extensively , were both descended from M. trogontherii , and concluded that morphological differences between fossils may therefore not be reliable for determining taxonomy . The authors also questioned whether M. columbi and M. primigenius should be considered " good species " , considering that they were able to interbreed after supposedly being separated for a million years , but cautioned that more specimens need to be sampled . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Columbian mammoth reached 4 m ( 13 ft ) tall at the shoulder , and weighed up to 8 – 10 tonnes ( 18 @,@ 000 – 22 @,@ 000 lb ) . It was about the same size as the earlier mammoth species M. meridionalis and M. trogontherii , and was larger than the modern African elephant and the woolly mammoth , both of which reached about 2 @.@ 7 to 3 @.@ 4 m ( 8 @.@ 9 to 11 @.@ 2 ft ) . Males were generally larger and more robust . The best indication of sex is the size of the pelvic girdle , since the opening that functions as the birth canal is always wider in females than in males . Like other mammoths , the Columbian mammoth had a high , single @-@ domed head and a sloping back with a high shoulder hump ; this shape resulted from the spinous processes ( protrusions ) of the back vertebrae decreasing in length from front to rear . Juveniles , on the other hand , had convex backs like Asian elephants . Other skeletal features include a short , deep rostrum ( front part of the jaws ) , a rounded mandibular symphysis ( central jaw ridge ) and the coronoid process of the mandible ( upper protrusion of the jaw bone ) extending above the molar surfaces . 
 Apart from its larger size and more primitive molars , the Columbian mammoth also differed from the woolly mammoth by its more downturned mandibular symphysis ; the dental alveoli ( tooth sockets ) of the tusks were directed more laterally away from the midline . Its tail was intermediate in length between that of modern elephants and the woolly mammoth . Since no Columbian mammoth soft tissue has been found , much less is known about its appearance than that of the woolly mammoth . It lived in warmer habitats than the woolly mammoth , and probably lacked many of the adaptations seen in that species . Hair thought to be that of the Columbian mammoth has been discovered in Bechan Cave in Utah , where mammoth dung has also been found . Some of this hair is coarse , and identical to that known to belong to woolly mammoths ; however , since this location is so far south it is unlikely to be woolly mammoth hair . The distribution and density of fur on the living animal is unknown , but it was probably less dense than that of the woolly mammoth due to the warmer habitat . 
 = = = Dentition = = = 
 Columbian mammoths had very long tusks ( modified incisor teeth ) , which were more curved than those of modern elephants . The largest known mammoth tusk , 4 @.@ 9 m ( 16 ft ) long , belonged to a Columbian mammoth , and others range from 3 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 121 m ( 11 @.@ 48 to 13 @.@ 52 ft ) long . Columbian mammoth tusks were usually not much larger than those of woolly mammoths , which reached 4 @.@ 2 m ( 14 ft ) . The tusks of females were much smaller and thinner . About a quarter of the tusks ' length was inside the sockets ; they grew spirally in opposite directions from the base , curving until the tips pointed towards each other , and sometimes crossed . Most of their weight would have been close to the skull , with less torque than straight tusks would have provided . The tusks were usually asymmetrical , with considerable variation ; some tusks curved down , instead of outwards , or were shorter due to breakage . Columbian mammoth tusks were generally less twisted than those of woolly mammoths . At six months of age calves developed milk tusks a few centimeters long , which were replaced by permanent tusks a year later . Annual tusk growth of 2 @.@ 5 – 15 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 – 5 @.@ 91 in ) continued throughout life , slowing as the animal reached adulthood . 
 Columbian mammoths had four functional molar teeth at a time , two in the upper jaw and two in the lower . About 23 cm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) of the crown was within the jaw , and 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) was above . The crown was pushed forward and up as it wore down , comparable to a conveyor belt . The teeth had separated ridges of enamel , which were covered in " prisms " directed towards the chewing surface . Wear @-@ resistant , they were held together with cementum and dentin . A mammoth 's molars were replaced five times over the animal 's lifetime . The first molars were about the size of those of a human , 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 51 in ) ; the third were 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long , and the sixth were about 30 cm ( 1 ft ) long and weighed 1 @.@ 8 kg ( 4 lb ) . With each replacement , the molars grew larger and gained more ridges ; the number of plates varied between individuals . Growing 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) of ridge took about 10 @.@ 6 years . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 Like that of modern elephants , the mammoth 's sensitive , muscular trunk was a limb @-@ like organ with many functions . It was used for manipulating objects and social interaction . Although healthy adult mammoths could defend themselves from predators with their tusks , trunks and size , juveniles and weakened adults were vulnerable to pack hunters such as wolves and big cats . Bones of juvenile Columbian mammoths , accumulated by Homotherium ( the scimitar @-@ toothed cat ) , have been found in <unk> Cave in Texas . Tusks may have been used in intra @-@ species fighting for territory or mates and for display , to attract females and intimidate rivals . Two Columbian mammoths that died in Nebraska with tusks interlocked provide evidence of fighting behavior . The mammoths could use their tusks as weapons by thrusting , swiping or crashing them down , and used them in pushing contests by interlocking them , which sometimes resulted in breakage . The tusks ' curvature made them unsuitable for stabbing . On Goat Rock Beach in Sonoma Coast State Park , <unk> and chert outcrops ( nicknamed " Mammoth Rocks " ) show evidence of having been rubbed by Columbian mammoths or mastodons . The rocks have polished areas 3 – 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) above the ground , primarily near their edges , and are similar to African rubbing rocks used by elephants and other herbivores to rid themselves of mud and parasites . Similar rocks exist in Hueco Tanks , Texas , and on <unk> Mountain in New Mexico . 
 Accumulations of modern elephant remains have been called " elephants ' graveyards " , because these sites were erroneously thought to be where old elephants went to die . Similar accumulations of mammoth bones have been found ; it is thought these are the result of individuals dying near or in rivers over thousands of years and their bones being accumulated by the water ( such as in the Aucilla River in Florida ) , or animals dying after becoming mired in mud . Some accumulations are thought to be the remains of herds which died at the same time , perhaps due to flooding . Columbian mammoths are occasionally preserved in volcanic deposits such as those in <unk> , Texcoco , Mexico , where a volcanic lahar mudflow covered at least seven individuals 12 @,@ 500 years ago . It is unknown how many mammoths lived at one location at a time , but it is likely that the number varied by season and life cycle . Modern elephants can form large herds , sometimes consisting of multiple family groups , and these herds can include thousands of animals migrating together . Mammoths may have formed large herds more often than modern elephants , since animals living in open areas are more likely to do this than those in forested areas . Although it is unclear to what extent Columbian mammoths migrated , an isotope analysis of Blackwater Draw in New Mexico indicated that they spent part of the year in the Rocky Mountains , 200 km ( 120 mi ) away . The study of tusk rings may aid further study of mammoth migration . 
 Like modern elephants , Columbian mammoths were probably social and lived in matriarchal ( female @-@ led ) family groups ; most of their other social behavior was also similar to that of modern elephants . This is supported by fossil assemblages such as the Dent Site in Colorado and the Waco Mammoth National Monument in Waco , Texas , where groups consisting entirely of female and juvenile Columbian mammoths have been found ( implying female @-@ led family groups ) . The latter assemblage includes 22 skeletons , with 15 individuals representing a herd of females and juveniles that died in a single event , probably a flash flood ; the arrangement of some of the skeletons suggests that the females may have formed a defensive ring around the juveniles . At the same site another group , consisting of a bull and six females , also appears to have been killed by a flash flood ; although both groups died between 64 @,@ 000 and 73 @,@ 000 years ago , whether they died in the same event is unknown . At the Murray Springs Clovis Site in Arizona , where several Columbian mammoth skeletons have been excavated , a trackway similar to that left by modern elephants leads to one of the skeletons . The mammoth may have made the trackway before it died , or another individual may have approached the dead or dying animal — similar to the way modern elephants guard dead relatives for several days . 
 = = = Natural traps = = = 
 Many specimens also accumulated in natural traps , such as sinkholes and tar pits . The Hot Springs Mammoth Site in South Dakota is a 26 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old , approximately 40 m ( 130 ft ) -long sinkhole that functioned for 300 to 700 years before filling with sediment . The site is the opposite scenario of that in Waco ; all but one of the at least 55 skeletons — additional skeletons are excavated each year — are male , and accumulated over time rather than in a single event . It is assumed that like modern male elephants , male mammoths primarily lived alone , were more adventurous ( especially young males ) and more likely to encounter dangerous situations than the females . The mammoths may have been lured to the hole by warm water or vegetation near the edges , slipping in and drowning or starving . Isotope studies of growth rings have shown that most of the mammoths died during spring and summer , which may have correlated with vegetation near the sinkhole . One individual , nicknamed " Murray " , lies on its side , and probably died in this pose while struggling to get free . Deep footprints of mammoths attempting to free themselves from the sinkhole 's mud can be seen in vertically @-@ excavated sections of the site . 
 Since the early 20th century , excavations at the La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles have yielded 100 tonnes of fossils from 600 species of flora and fauna , including several Columbian mammoths . Many of the fossils are the remains of animals that became stuck in asphalt puddles which seeped to the surface of the pits , 40 @,@ 000 to 11 @,@ 500 years ago . Dust and leaves likely concealed the liquid asphalt , which then trapped unwary animals . Mired animals died from hunger or exhaustion ; their corpses attracted predators , which sometimes became stuck themselves . The tar pits ' fossil record is dominated by the remains of predators , such as large canids and felids . Fossils of different animals are found stuck together when they are excavated from the pits . The tar pits do not preserve soft tissue , and a 2014 study concluded that asphalt may degrade the DNA of animals mired in it after an attempt was made to extract DNA from a Columbian mammoth . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 An adult Columbian mammoth would have needed more than 180 kg ( 400 lb ) of food per day , and may have foraged for twenty hours a day . Mammoths chewed their food by using their powerful jaw muscles to move the mandible forward and close the mouth , then backward while opening ; the sharp enamel ridges thereby cut across each other , grinding the food . The ridges were wear @-@ resistant , enabling the animal to chew large quantities of food which contained grit . The trunk could be used for pulling up large tufts of grass , picking buds and flowers or tearing leaves and branches from trees and shrubs , and the tusks were used to dig up plants and strip bark from trees . Digging is indicated on preserved tusks by flat , polished sections of the surface that would have reached the ground . Isotope studies of Columbian mammoths from Mexico and the United States have shown that their diet varied by location , consisting of a mix of C3 ( most plants ) and C4 plants ( such as grasses ) , and they were not restricted to grazing or browsing . 
 Stomach contents from Columbian mammoths are rare , since no carcasses have been found , but plant remains were discovered between the pelvis and ribs of the " Huntington mammoth " when it was excavated in Utah . Microscopy showed that these chewed remains consisted of sedge , grass , fir twigs and needles , oak and maple . A large amount of mammoth dung has been found in two caves in Utah . The dry conditions and stable temperature of Bechan Cave ( <unk> is Navajo for " large faeces " ) has preserved <unk> to 13 @,@ 500 @-@ year @-@ old elephant dung , most likely from Columbian mammoths . The dung consists of 95 percent grass and sedge , and varies from 0 to 25 percent of woody plants between dung boluses , including saltbush , sagebrush , water birch and blue spruce . This is similar to the diet documented for the woolly mammoth , although browsing seems to have been more important for the Columbian mammoth . The cover of dung is 41 cm ( 16 in ) thick , and has a volume of 227 m ³ ( 8 @,@ 000 cubic ft ) , with the largest boluses 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter . The Bechan dung could have been produced by a small group of mammoths over a relatively short time , since adult African elephants drop an average of 11 kg ( 24 lb ) of dung every two hours and 90 – 135 kg ( 198 – 298 lb ) each day . 
 It has been proposed that giant North American fruits of plants such as the Osage @-@ orange , Kentucky <unk> and honey locust evolved in tandem with now @-@ extinct American megafauna such as mammoths and other proboscideans , since there are no extant endemic herbivores able to ingest these fruits and disperse their seeds . Introduced cattle and horses have since taken over this ecological role . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The lifespan of the Columbian mammoth is thought to have been about 80 years . The lifespan of a mammal is related to its size ; Columbian mammoths are larger than modern elephants , which have a lifespan of about 60 years . The age of a mammoth can be roughly determined by counting the growth rings of its tusks when viewed in cross section . However , ring @-@ counting does not account for a mammoth 's early years ; early growth is represented in tusk tips , which are usually worn away . In the remainder of the tusk each major line represents a year , with weekly and daily lines found in between . Dark bands correspond to summer , making it possible to determine the season in which a mammoth died . Tusk growth slowed when foraging became more difficult , such as during illness or when a male mammoth was banished from the herd ( male elephants live with their herds until about the age of ten ) . 
 Mammoths continued growing during adulthood , as do other elephants . Males grew until age 40 , and females until age 25 . Mammoths may have had gestation periods of 21 – 22 months , like those of modern elephants . Columbian mammoths had six sets of molars in the course of a lifetime . At 6 – 12 months the second set of molars would erupt , with the first set worn out at 18 months of age . The third set of molars lasted for ten years , and this process was repeated until the sixth set emerged at 30 years of age . When the last set of molars wore out the animal would be unable to chew , and would die of starvation . 
 Almost all vertebrae of the " Huntington mammoth " , a very aged specimen , were deformed by arthritic disease , and four of its lumbar vertebrae were fused ; some bones also indicate bacterial infection , such as osteomyelitis . The condition of the bones suggests the specimen died of old age and malnutrition . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Columbian mammoths inhabited the southern half of North America , ranging from the northern United States across Mexico as far south as Costa Rica . One Costa Rican specimen , a molar , was reported in 1963 but has since been lost . The environment in these areas may have had more varied habitats than those inhabited by woolly mammoths in the north ( the mammoth steppe ) . Some areas were covered by grass , herbaceous plants , trees and shrubs ; their composition varied from region to region , and included grassland , savanna and aspen parkland habitats . There were also wooded areas ; although mammoths would not have preferred forests , clearings could provide them with grass and herbs . 
 The Columbian mammoth shared its habitat with other now @-@ extinct Pleistocene mammals ( such as Glyptodon , Smilodon , ground sloths , Camelops and the American mastodon ) , horses and buffalos . It did not live in Arctic Canada , which was inhabited by woolly mammoths . Fossils of woolly and Columbian mammoths have been found in the same place in a few areas of North America where their ranges overlapped , including the Hot Springs Site . It is unknown whether the two species were sympatric and lived there simultaneously , or if the woolly mammoths entered southern areas when Columbian mammoth populations were absent . The Columbian mammoth coexisted with the other extinct proboscideans <unk> mirificus and <unk> <unk> at sites in Texas and New Mexico during the early Irvingtonian . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Humans entered the Americas through Beringia , and evidence documents their interactions with Columbian mammoths . Tools made from Columbian mammoth remains have been discovered in several North American sites . At <unk> , Mexico , mammoth bones were quarried 13 @,@ 000 years ago to produce lithic flakes and cores . At the Lange @-@ Ferguson Site in South Dakota , the remains of two mammoths were found with two 12 @,@ 800 @-@ year @-@ old cleaver choppers made from a mammoth shoulder blade ; the choppers had been used to butcher the mammoths . At the same site , a flake knife made from a long mammoth bone was also found wedged against mammoth vertebrae . At Murray Springs , archaeologists discovered a 13 @,@ 100 @-@ year @-@ old object made from a mammoth femur ; the object is thought to be a shaft wrench , a tool for straightening wood and bone to make spear @-@ shafts ( the Inuit use similar tools ) . 
 The earliest suggested evidence of Columbian mammoth @-@ butchering in America ( from Lovewell , Kansas ) dates from 18 @,@ 000 to 21 @,@ 000 years ago . Paleo @-@ Indians of the Clovis culture , which arose 7 @,@ 000 years later , may have been the first humans to hunt mammoths extensively . These people are thought to have hunted Columbian mammoths with Clovis pointed spears which were thrown or thrust . Although Clovis points have been found with Columbian mammoth remains at several sites , archaeologists disagree about whether the finds represent hunting , scavenging dead mammoths , or are coincidental . A female mammoth at the <unk> @-@ Mammoth Kill Site in Arizona , found with eight Clovis points near its skull , shoulder blade , ribs and other bones , is considered the most convincing evidence for hunting . In modern experiments , replica spears have been able to penetrate the rib cages of African elephants with re @-@ use causing little damage to the points . 
 Other sites show more circumstantial evidence of mammoth hunting , such as piled bones bearing butcher marks . Some of these sites are not closely associated with Clovis points . The Lehner Mammoth @-@ Kill Site and the Dent Site , where multiple juvenile and adult mammoths have been found with butcher marks and in association with Clovis points , were once interpreted as the killing of entire herds by Clovis hunters . However , isotope studies have shown that the accumulations represent individual deaths at different seasons of the year , and therefore not herds killed in single incidents . Many other such assemblages of bones with butcher marks may also represent accumulations over time , and are therefore ambiguous as evidence for large scale hunting . 
 Petroglyphs in the Colorado Plateau depict either Columbian mammoths or mastodons . A 13 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old bone fragment from Vero Beach , Florida , the earliest example of art in the Americas , is engraved with either a mammoth or a mastodon . 11 @,@ 000 – 13 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old petroglyphs from the San Juan River in Utah are thought to include depictions of two Columbian mammoths ; the mammoths ' domed heads distinguish them from mastodons . They are also shown with two " fingers " on their trunks , a feature known from European depictions of mammoths . The tusks are short , which may indicate they are meant to be females . A carving of a bison ( possibly the extinct Bison antiquus ) is superimposed on one of the mammoth carvings and may be a later addition . Other possible depictions of Columbian mammoths have been shown to be either misinterpretations or fraudulent . 
 The Columbian mammoth is the state fossil of Washington and South Carolina . Nebraska 's state fossil is " Archie " , a Columbian mammoth specimen found in the state in 1922 . " Archie " is currently on display at Elephant Hall in Lincoln , Nebraska , and is the largest mounted mammoth specimen in the United States . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Columbian and woolly mammoths both disappeared during the late Pleistocene and early Holocene , alongside most of the Pleistocene megafauna . The most recent Columbian mammoth remains have been dated to around 11 @,@ 500 years ago . This extinction formed part of the Quaternary extinction event , which began 40 @,@ 000 years ago and peaked between 14 @,@ 000 and 11 @,@ 500 years ago . Scientists do not know whether these extinctions happened abruptly or were drawn out . During this period , 40 mammal species disappeared from North America , almost all of which weighed over 40 kg ( 88 lb ) ; the extinction of the mammoths cannot be explained in isolation . 
 Scientists are divided over whether climate change , hunting , or a combination of the two , drove the extinction of the Columbian mammoths . According to the climate change hypothesis , warmer weather led to the shrinking of suitable habitat for Columbian mammoths , which turned from parkland to forest , grassland and semi @-@ desert , with less diverse vegetation . The overkill hypothesis , on the other hand , attributes the extinction to hunting by humans . This idea was first proposed by Paul S. Martin in 1967 ; more recent research on this subject have varied in their conclusions . A 2002 study concluded that the archaeological record did not support the overkill hypothesis , given that only 14 Clovis sites ( 12 with mammoth remains and two with mastodon remains ) out of 76 examined provided strong evidence of hunting . In contrast , a 2007 study found that the Clovis record indicated the highest frequency of prehistoric exploitation of proboscideans for subsistence in the world , and supported the overkill hypothesis . Whatever the actual cause of extinction , large mammals are generally more vulnerable than smaller ones due to their smaller population size and low reproduction rates . 
 = Tejano Music Award for Female Vocalist of the Year = 
 The Tejano Music Award for Female Vocalist of the Year is an honor presented to female Tejano music recording artists . The Tejano Music Awards , first bestowed in 1981 , was established to recognize the most talented performers of the genre — a subcategory of regional Mexican music , with roots in the music of early European settlers in Texas . The awards are presented by the Texas Talent Musicians Association ( <unk> ) , to " promote excellence in the Tejano music industry " using the popular vote method to select the winner of the female vocalist of the year . Historically , female musicians fared less favorably in the male @-@ dominated genre and were seen as inferior to their male counterparts . The award was established by Rick Trevino , a male Tejano performer , who founded the Awards in 1981 . 
 The award was first presented to American singer Lisa Lopez . Laura Canales won the award five nonconsecutive times , and is considered Tejano music 's first leading lady before the genre 's golden age in the 1990s . Selena holds the record for most wins , winning 11 of her 12 nominations . The singer has been called the Queen of Tejano music , and is credited with catapulting the genre into the mainstream market . Following her death in March 1995 , the genre suffered and its popularity waned . In 1998 Shelly Lares won for the first time since she was initially nominated in 1986 . She holds the record for most nominations at 28 . The following year Jennifer Peña won the award ; the first time the award was won by two different participants since 1982 . The current award holder is Elida Reyna who shares the record with Selena for most consecutive wins - nine . 
 = = Background and nomination process = = 
 Tejano music is a blend of polka , jazz , rhythm and blues , and country music , with influences of American pop music . Early European settlers introduced the accordion and bajo <unk> , one of the major musical components used in the genre , to the state of Texas . Tejano music has since been urbanized with the introduction of keyboards and synthesizers . Historically , female musicians were seen as inferior and less successful commercially than their male counterparts , and were often turned down by music concert organizers who wanted sellouts . The female vocalist category was introduced at the first awards ceremony which was pioneered by Rick Trevino , a male Tejano musician , in 1981 . 
 Nominees were originally selected by a voting poll conducted by program directors and disc jockeys at Spanish @-@ language radio stations in Texas . Winners were previously chosen by Tejano radio station <unk> listeners in the 1980s , and later by fans of Tejano musicians in the Southwest of the United States . Currently , winners are selected through a survey of 50 @,@ 000 Texas households with Hispanic surnames , though anyone with Internet access is eligible to vote on the official website page . 
 By 1987 , the awards ceremony was broadcast by 32 radio stations and 25 local television channels in Texas , New Mexico , Arkansas , Oklahoma , and Louisiana . The awards ceremony was originally held at the Henry B. Gonzalez Convention Center , then at the San Antonio Convention Center until 1994 , and the Alamodome until 1999 . As of 2015 , the ceremony is held annually at the Tobin Center for the Performing Arts in San Antonio , Texas . 
 = = Recipients = = 
 The award was first presented to American singer Lisa Lopez , who had a US Billboard Regional Mexican Airplay number one single with " Si Quieres <unk> Llorar " ( 1982 ) . Lopez ' core audience was Mexicans , and she became the first female Tejano singer to appear on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart in October 1986 . Laura Canales , who popularized <unk> in the 1970s , won the award five nonconsecutive times . She was considered Tejano music 's first leading lady before the genre 's golden age in the 1990s . At the sixth Tejano Music Awards ( 1986 ) , Female Vocalist of the Year nominees included newcomers Shelly Lares and Selena who were up against veteran winner Canales . Selena won the award and won again at the seventh Tejano Music Awards in 1987 ; Canales won the honor in 1988 . Beginning in 1989 , Selena won the award for seven consecutive years . 
 At the 10th Tejano Music Awards ( 1990 ) , the nomination pool increased to include newcomers Cathy Chavez , Jean Le Grand , Agnes Torres , and veteran performers Selena , Lares , Elsa Garcia , and Canales . From the 11th ( 1991 ) and 12th Tejano Music Awards ( 1992 ) , the nominees remained the same with Selena , Lares , and Canales . The 13th Tejano Music Awards nominees included newcomer Esmeralda along with Selena and Lares . At the 14th Tejano Music Awards , Elsa Garcia was nominated for the first time in four years . Selena twice won the award posthumously after her shooting death in March 1995 . She was called the Queen of Tejano music and was credited with catapulting the genre into the mainstream U.S. market . Following the singer 's death , Tejano music 's popularity faded and has never recovered . At the 16th Tejano Music Awards ( 1998 ) , Shelly Lares won the honor for the first time since she was nominated in 1986 . Among the nominees for the 16th annual ceremony was newcomer Jennifer Peña , who was pegged as " the next Selena " , and Elida Reyna who was first nominated in 1996 . Peña was awarded the honor in 1999 , 2001 , and 2003 before retiring from the music industry . 
 In 2000 , Elida Reyna took home the award . At the 22nd Tejano Music Awards , Lares won out over Reyna and Peña . For the 24th Tejano Music Awards nominees <unk> Zavala and Megan Leyva were up against veterans Reyna and Lares , with the former winning the title . The nomination pool increased for the 25th Tejano Music Awards with nominees including newcomers Delia <unk> , Julia <unk> , Linna Martínez , <unk> De La Garza , Michelle , Stefani Montiel , and Yvette , while <unk> Zavala and Megan Leyva were up against veterans Reyna and Lares who won the award . Lares continued to win the award with her last win at the 26th Tejano Music Awards , when she was up against Montiel , Reyna , and newcomers Tracy Perez and Rebecca Valadez . Beginning in 2007 , Reyna dominated the award and remains the title holder as of 2015 . 
 = = = General = = = 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = The Girl of the Northern Woods = 
 The Girl of the Northern Woods is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film is a drama that follows Lucy Dane and Will Harding and a jealous halfbreed trapper named José . Considering Will his rival , José attempts to ambush Will , but instead shoots Will 's assistant . José then blames Will for the deed and Will is bound by a lynch mob and set to be executed . Lucy frees Will and sends the lynch mob away , but José encounters Will and the two fight . José is wounded and falls over a cliff , but Will is recaptured by the mob . From the bottom of the cliff , José calls out for help and Lucy responds to him . José confesses his crime to Lucy and she rushes to Will and prevents his execution . The film was directed by Barry O 'Neil and was released on June 3 , 1910 . An incomplete print of the film survives in the Library of Congress after its rediscovery in 1978 as part of the Dawson City Collection . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The original synopsis of the film was published in the The Moving Picture World , it states : " This picture tells the story of Lucy Dane , a Canadian lumberman 's daughter , and of Will Harding 's love for her . Will is a worthy young surveyor and Lucy feels honored to have his love , and returns it . José , halfbreed trapper , adores Lucy and necessarily dislikes Will , whom he correctly counts his successful rival . More , he bears Will a grudge for responding to Lucy 's cries for help when he forced his attentions on her in the lonely neck of the woods . His chance to even matters with Will come shortly when he fastens on the surveyor 's responsibility for the shooting of the latter 's assistant , of which the halfbreed is himself guilty , having shot the assistant from ambush in mistake for Will . José claims he witnessed Will 's alleged deed and his falsehoods are believed by the lumbermen . Rarely are the courts resorted to in that portion of the North where these events transpired and the rough lumbermen quickly decide to lynch Will . Lucy hears of the fate intended for her sweetheart and cuts his bonds . Further , she sends the lumbermen off in the wrong direction when they set out to recapture Will . The fugitive is spied by the halfbreed , who steals up from behind and attempts to knife him . The surveyor turns just in time , and in the ensuing struggle the halfbreed is wounded and falls over a precipice . At this juncture Will is retaken by the lumbermen . " 
 " They are leading him to his execution , when the faithful Lucy encounters her sweetheart and whispers : ' Ask for a drink at the brook ! ' Will follows her suggestion , and on stooping to drink finds a revolver which Lucy has placed there for his use . But he is overpowered when he attempts to use the gun and despite Lucy 's effort seems doomed to die . José , the guilty halfbreed , dying at the bottom of the precipice , calls for help . His cries are heard by Lucy , who responds and finds José expiring and repentant . He wishes to clear his conscious before facing his Maker and tells Lucy that he shot Will 's assistant . He puts his confession in writing and , relieved , passes peacefully away . In the meantime the lumbermen have completed the preparations that will make an innocent man pay the penalty of another man 's crime . Already the noose is about Will 's neck and a death prayer on his lips and then , in the nick of time , Lucy arrives with the precious confession , and Will gathers his faithful sweetheart to him in the tenderest scene that has ever closed a thrilling picture . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anna Rosemond as Lucy Dane 
 Frank H. Crane as Will Harding 
 = = Production = = 
 The film was directed by Barry O 'Neil , the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it is presumably Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman still employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . Edwin Thanhouser would later recall that this production featured a minor part of a woodsman who ended up ruining the scene through excessive smoking . He described the young actor trying to focus attention on himself by smoking " like the consolidation of seven chimneys " , but ended up obscuring the action of the scene . The two known credits in the film are for the leading players , Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane . Rosemond was one of two leading ladies for the first year of the company . Crane was also involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . 
 According to an article in the New Rochelle Pioneer the film was produced in New Rochelle and according to a news release the film was shot in the mountains during real blizzard weather . Bowers believes this film was shot during the winter and kept for its later June release . The winter of 1909 through 1910 contained two notable snow events that might have possibly been used in the production . A major snow storm from December 25 to December 26 , 1909 , would make its way through New York City with snow total of about 10 inches and wind gusts up to 58 mph . A second major snow event occurred three weeks later , on January 14 through 15 , 1910 , with New York City getting 15 inches of snow . Another lesser snow event , deemed a blizzard in the press , was recorded in early February . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel drama , approximately 935 feet , was released on June 3 , 1910 . The film was originally set to be the first release distributed through the Motion Picture Distribution and Sales Company , but a dispute with Carl Laemmle pushed the date back more than a month . The film was reviewed positively in the The Moving Picture World for the real snow and weather and for being a high @-@ class drama . A shorter modern synopsis from the incomplete surviving print from the Library of Congress indicates that the film is lost after the halfbreed falls from the precipice . The film was released nationwide and theater advertisements for the film are known in Kansas , Indiana , Oklahoma , Pennsylvania , and Arizona . 
 The survival and rediscovery of this film was by happenstance in the Canadian gold rush town of Dawson City , in Yukon , Canada . Beginning in 1903 , the Dawson Amateur Athletic Association began showing films and the unreturned films were deposited in the Canadian Bank of Commerce and stored in the Carnegie library 's basement . The Dawson Amateur Athletic Association later converted a pool to an ice rink , but because of improper conversion the ice rink suffered from uneven temperatures in the middle of the rink . In 1929 , Clifford Thomson , then @-@ employed by the Canadian Bank of Commerce and also treasurer of the hockey association , solved the problem of the library 's stock of film and the inadequate ice rink . Thomson took 500 @,@ 000 feet of film and stacked the reels in the pool , covered the reels with boards and leveled the rink with a layer of earth . Dawson Amateur Athletic Association continued to receive new nitrate films which would later fuel the destruction of the entire complex in a fire in 1951 . The films stored under the ice rink were preserved and uncovered in 1978 when a new recreation center was being built . The Dawson City Collection films were collected and preserved , with these prints becoming the last surviving records of these studios . The surviving and incomplete print of The Girl of the Northern Woods was one of the films recovered at Dawson City . 
 = Elizabeth David bibliography = 
 Elizabeth David , the British cookery writer , published eight books in the 34 years between 1950 and 1984 ; the last was issued eight years before her death . After David 's death , her literary executor , Jill Norman , supervised the publication of five more books , drawing on David 's unpublished manuscripts and research and on her published writings for books and magazines . 
 David 's first five books , particularly the earlier works , contained recipes interspersed with literary quotation and descriptions of people and places that inspired her . By the time of her third book , Italian Food , David had begun to add sections about the history of the cuisine and the particular dishes that she wrote about . Her interest in the history of cooking led her in her later years to research the history of spices , baking , and ice . 
 Many of the recipes in David 's early books were revised versions of her articles previously published in magazines and newspapers , and in An Omelette and a Glass of Wine ( 1984 ) she collected her favourites among her articles and presented them unedited with her <unk> appended . A second volume of reprinted articles was published after her death . David 's biographer , Artemis Cooper , wrote , " She was hailed not only as Britain 's foremost writer on food and cookery , but as the woman who had transformed the eating habits of middle @-@ class England . " 
 = = Background = = 
 David 's interest in cooking was sparked by a 21st birthday gift from her mother of The Gentle Art of Cookery by Hilda Leyel , her first cookery book . She later wrote , " I wonder if I would have ever learned to cook at all if I had been given a routine Mrs Beeton to learn from , instead of the romantic Mrs Leyel with her rather wild , imagination @-@ catching recipes . " 
 In 1938 , David and a boyfriend travelled through France to Antibes , where she met and became greatly influenced by the ageing writer Norman Douglas , about whom she later wrote extensively . He inspired her love of the Mediterranean , encouraged her interest in good food , and taught her to " search out the best , insist on it , and reject all that was bogus and second @-@ rate . " She continued her exploration of Mediterranean food and the use of fresh , local ingredients in Greece in 1940 . When the Germans invaded Greece in April 1941 , she fled to Egypt . There , she and her employer engaged a Greek cook who , she wrote , produced magnificent food : " The flavour of that octopus stew , the rich wine dark sauce and the aroma of mountain herbs was something not easily forgotten . " In 1942 , she moved to Cairo , where she was asked to set up and run the Ministry of Information 's reference library . The library was open to everyone and was much in demand by journalists and other writers . She employed a Sudanese <unk> ( a cook @-@ housekeeper ) of whom she recalled : 
 Suleiman performed minor miracles with two Primus stoves and an oven which was little more than a tin box perched on top of them . His soufflés were never less than successful . … For three or four years I lived mainly on rather rough but highly flavoured colourful shining vegetable dishes , lentil or fresh tomato soups , delicious spiced <unk> , lamb kebabs grilled over charcoal , salads with cool mint @-@ flavoured yoghurt dressings , the Egyptian fellahin dish of black beans with olive oil and lemon and hard @-@ boiled eggs – these things were not only attractive but also cheap . " 
 Returning to England after the Second World War and her years of access to superior cooking and a profusion of fresh ingredients , David encountered terrible food : " There was flour and water soup seasoned solely with pepper ; bread and gristle rissoles ; dehydrated onions and carrots ; corned beef toad in the hole . I need not go on . " Partly to earn some money , and partly from an " agonized craving for the sun " , David began writing articles on Mediterranean cookery . Her first efforts were published in 1949 in the British magazine Harper 's Bazaar . From the outset , David refused to sell the copyright of her articles , and so she was able to collect and edit them for publication in book form . Even before all the articles had been published , she had assembled them into a typescript volume called A Book of Mediterranean Food . 
 The success of David 's books put her in great demand by magazine editors . Among the publications for whom she regularly wrote for some period were Vogue magazine , The Sunday Times and The Spectator . 
 = = Mediterranean Food ( 1950 ) = = 
 David 's first book , A Book of Mediterranean Food , frequently referred to by the abbreviated title of Mediterranean Food , was published by John Lehmann in 1950 , only a year after David 's first articles had started appearing in British periodicals . The original typescript of the book consisted almost entirely of reused versions of her recent articles . It was submitted to and turned down by a series of publishers , one of whom told her that it needed something more than just the bare recipes . David took note , and wrote some linking text , interspersing her own brief prose with relevant excerpts from a wide range of authors known for their writings about the Mediterranean . They included Norman Douglas , Lawrence Durrell , Gertrude Stein , D. H. Lawrence , Osbert Sitwell , Compton Mackenzie , Arnold Bennett , Henry James and Théophile Gautier . 
 Lehmann accepted the work for publication , and gave David an advance of £ 100 . He commissioned a dust @-@ jacket painting and black and white illustrations from the artist John Minton . Writers including Cyril Ray and John Arlott commented that Minton 's drawings added to the attractions of the book . David thought good illustration important . Although she did not like Minton 's black and white drawings , she described his jacket design ( right ) as " stunning " . She was especially taken with " his beautiful Mediterranean bay , his tables spread with white cloths and bright fruit " and the way that " pitchers and jugs and bottles of wine could be seen far down the street . " 
 The book appeared when food rationing imposed during the Second World War remained fully in force in Britain . As David later put it , " almost every essential ingredient of good cooking was either rationed or unobtainable . " She therefore adapted some of the recipes she had learned during in the years when she lived in Mediterranean countries , " to make up for lack of flavour which should have been supplied by meat or stock or butter . " The Times Literary Supplement observed , " while one might hesitate to attempt ' Lobster à la Enfant Prodigue ' ( with champagne , garlic , basil , lemon , chervil , mushrooms and truffles ) , the resourceful cook with time to explore London 's more individual shops , and money , should not often be nonplussed . " The Observer commented that the book deserved " to become the familiar companion of all who seek uninhibited excitement in the kitchen . " 
 The chapters of Mediterranean Food dealt with : soups ; eggs and luncheon dishes ; fish ; meat ; substantial dishes ; poultry and game ; vegetables ; cold food and salads ; sweets ; jams , chutneys and preserves ; and sauces . The book was reprinted in 1951 ; an American edition was published by Horizon Press in 1952 ; and a paperback edition was published by Penguin Books in 1955 . In 1956 , David revised the work , which was published by Penguin . Translations have been published in Danish and Chinese . In 2009 , the Folio Society published an edition with an introduction by Julian Barnes and colour illustrations by Sophie MacCarthy together with Minton 's original black and white illustrations . 
 = = French Country Cooking ( 1951 ) = = 
 In this book , David acknowledged her debt to books published in French , by Edmond <unk> , Austin De Croze , Marthe Daudet ( 1878 @-@ 1960 ) known as <unk> , and J. B. <unk> . French Country Cooking drew less on David 's magazine articles than its predecessor , although one of her best known and most influential chapters , " Wine in the kitchen " , was reprinted from an article written for a wine merchant . 
 The main text of the book begins with " Batterie de cuisine " , a serious and thorough examination of the equipment that David thought necessary in a good kitchen . Many of the items she mentioned were not widely available in England in the 1950s , such as <unk> for <unk> , <unk> for slicing vegetables , <unk> ( or <unk> ) for chopping . The second section of the book is " Wine in the kitchen " , which opens : 
 Nobody has ever been able to find out why the English regard a glass of wine added to a soup or stew as a reckless and foreign extravagance and at the same time spend pounds on bottled sauces , gravy powders , soup cubes , <unk> and artificial flavourings . If every kitchen contained a bottle each of red wine , white wine and inexpensive port for cooking , hundreds of store cupboards could be swept clean for ever of the cluttering debris of commercial sauce bottles and all synthetic aids to flavouring . 
 The remaining chapters of the book follow the pattern of Mediterranean Food : soups ; fish ; eggs ; luncheon , supper and family dishes ; meat ; poultry ; game ; vegetables ; salads ; sweets ; sauces ; and preserves . 
 The Manchester Guardian classified the book as more ornamental than useful , a book to make " good reading " rather than " good cooks " . Its reviewer , Lucie Marion , took issue with many of David 's recipes : " I cannot think that Mrs. David has actually tried to make many of the dishes for which she gives recipes . " The Observer , by contrast , considered French Country Cooking " of outstanding merit . The book is eminently practical … its directions are so lucid that the reader might be receiving a concrete demonstration . " 
 As with Mediterranean Food , a second edition was soon called for . By 1956 , the book had been reprinted six times in the UK and published in the US . In 1958 , David responded to the improved availability in Britain of good ingredients by revising the work , eliminating sections on specialist suppliers , to whom by 1958 it was no longer necessary to resort . In the second edition David also applied second thoughts , eliminating " a few of the longer and more elaborate recipes " . 
 = = Italian Food ( 1954 ) = = 
 David 's third book differed from its predecessors in that it drew little from anything she had already written . She spent many months in Italy researching it before starting work on the typescript . While she was away , the firm of her publisher , John Lehman , was closed down by its principal shareholder , and she found herself under contract to the far less congenial company , Macdonald . 
 While in Venice during her culinary tour of Italy , David met the artist Renato Guttuso . They struck up a friendship , and he agreed to illustrate her book , which he did , despite the very small fee offered by David 's publisher . With two successful books already published , David felt less in need of extracts from earlier writers to bolster her own prose . The Times Literary Supplement said , " More than a collection of recipes , this is book is in effect a readable and discerning dissertation on Italian food and regional dishes , and their preparation in the English kitchen . The text is divided into kinds of food , with chapters on rice , pasta and Italian wines . " In The Observer , Freya Stark wrote , " Mrs. David … may be counted among the benefactors of humanity . " In The Sunday Times , Evelyn Waugh named Italian Food as one of the two books that had given him the most pleasure in that year . In 2009 , Sir Terence Conran called it " the very best book about Italian food that has ever been published here " . 
 Italian Food begins with a chapter on " The Italian store cupboard " , giving British cooks , who at that time were generally unacquainted with most of Italy 's cuisine and methods , an insight into Italian herbs , spices , tinned , bottled or dried staples including anchovies , tuna , funghi , <unk> , and chickpeas , and Italian essentials such as garlic and olive oil , both seldom seen in Britain in the early 1950s . The rest of the book follows the basic pattern of the earlier works , with chapters on soups , fish , meat , vegetables and sweets , with the addition of extra subjects relevant to Italian food , pasta <unk> , ravioli and <unk> , rice , and Italian wine . In a description of the 2009 edition , the publisher wrote : 
 Even in the 1963 edition Elizabeth David felt the need to explain that a courgette was " a tiny marrow " and lamented the difficulty of finding basil and pine nuts . Yet she refused to participate in what she called the " censorship " of assuming English cooks were too timid or stupid to try anything different ; she included recipes for wood pigeon and squid @-@ ink pasta alongside aromatic marinades , wholesome soups and delicious breads . … [ British ] supermarket aisles were not always filled with packets of fresh herbs , dried porcini and regional olive oils . Elizabeth David was among those responsible for the change , because she inspired a generation with her own curiosity and appreciation for the mouth @-@ watering variety of authentic Italian food . 
 The first American edition was published by Alfred A. Knopf in 1958 , after much argument between the head of the company , Alfred Knopf , and the author . Knopf wanted to drop the Guttuso illustrations and rewrite the text for an American audience ; David refused , and Knopf eventually gave way . David revised the book for its first Penguin edition in 1963 , made further minor revisions for reprints in 1969 and 1977 and revised it again , more extensively , for the 1987 edition , published in hardback by Barrie and Jenkins and , in 1989 , by Penguin in paperback . In 2009 , the Folio Society published an edition with new illustrations by Sophie MacCarthy and an introduction by Sir Terence Conran . 
 = = Summer Cooking ( 1955 ) = = 
 This , David 's fourth book , reverted to some extent to the pattern of the first two , drawing extensively on her articles previously published in magazines . She had severed her ties with the publishers Macdonalds , who had acquired the publishing rights to her first three books when her original publisher was forced out of business . Her new publisher was the Museum Press of London . The illustrations were by Adrian <unk> . 
 In her introduction , David wrote : 
 By summer cookery I do not necessarily mean cold food ; although cold dishes are always agreeable in summer at most meals , however hot the weather , one hot dish is welcome , but it should be a light one , such as a very simply cooked sole , an omelette , a soup of the young vegetables which are in season – something fresh which provides at the same time a change , a new outlook . 
 Summer Cooking reflected David 's strong belief in eating food in season ; she loved " the pleasure of rediscovering each season 's vegetables " and thought it " rather dull to eat the same food all year round . " Unconstrained by the geographical agendas of her first three books , David wrote about dishes from Britain , India , Mauritius , Russia , Spain and Turkey , as well as France , Italy and Greece . Reviewing the first edition , The Observer said : 
 Men who pretend to know about it can be more pretentiously precious over cooking than almost anything else . Thank heavens that the women are at last beginning to put them right . The latest blow at food in fancy dress and out of season ( a male weakness from Apicius to Escoffier ) is Elizabeth David 's forthright Summer Cooking . … For her food has more to do with the seasons , the sea and the countryside than with tin and deep freeze , and cooking concerns saucepan , fire and flavour rather than pretty picture colour patterns . The book is a tonic whether you dabble nervously in the kitchen or have " views " on cooking . 
 In addition to those subjects like soups , fish and meat common to all her books to date , David included chapters about hors d 'oeuvre and salads , preserves , buffet food , and " Improvised cooking for holidays " . Among her recipes are asparagus with Parmesan cheese , cold roast duck on a bed of fresh mint , <unk> of sole in lettuce leaves , broad beans with bacon , and aubergines à la Provençale . 
 David revised the book for a second edition , published in the UK and the U.S. by Penguin Books . Translations were published in Italian in 1975 and Danish in 1980 . David further revised and enlarged the book for a third edition , published by Penguin in 1987 . In 2009 the Folio Society published an edition with new illustrations by Sophie MacCarthy and an introduction by Rose Prince . 
 = = French Provincial Cooking ( 1960 ) = = 
 The fifth , and last , of David 's volumes consisting primarily of recipes is by far the longest of all her books . The 1970 paperback edition published by Penguin Books runs to 584 pages . David 's biographer Artemis Cooper describes it as " a book that only needed assembling " , because it was based on previously published articles and her own collection of notes and recipes from the previous two decades . David researched her recipes thoroughly , and whenever several supposedly classic and mutually contradictory recipes existed she " knew how to reduce a recipe to its bare essentials , and then reconstruct it " . By the 1960s , she was described in the British press as " the most revered goddess of cooking " , and The Observer said , " It is difficult to think of any home that can do without Elizabeth David 's French Provincial Cooking . 
 The layout of the book follows that of the earlier volumes , with the recipes grouped by subject . Each chapter has its own introductory essay , up to four pages in length , and within each chapter sub @-@ sections also have their own preliminary essays ; for instance , the chapter on meat has a two @-@ page opening essay , with individual essays on beef , lamb , pork and veal before the recipes for each . 
 The Folio Society , which published a new edition of the book in 2008 , wrote , " French Provincial Cooking is considered to be the crowning achievement of Elizabeth David 's career , incorporating exquisite recipes from great chefs alongside those gathered from local cooks and one of the finest bibliographies of good cookery books ever compiled . " The bibliography runs to 16 pages , and ranges from 18th @-@ century French cookery books beginning with Le Ménage des champs et le <unk> français ( 1711 ) and ending with modern works by Simone Beck , <unk> <unk> and Julia Child , and Jane Grigson . 
 A typical example of David 's approach in this book is her section on pot au feu , which covers six pages , with sub @-@ sections on the choice of meat , the vegetables , the saucepan , quantities , preparation , cooking , serving , using leftovers , and regional variations of the dish . 
 The Times Literary Supplement commented , " French Provincial Cooking needs to be read rather than referred to quickly . It discourses at some length the type and origin of the dishes popular in various French regions , as well as the culinary terms , herbs and kitchen equipment used in France . But those who can give the extra time to this book will be well repaid by dishes such as La Bourride de Charles <unk> and <unk> <unk> , " ( respectively , a Provençal dish of fillets of white fish in an <unk> and cream sauce , and a Languedoc casserole of beans with pork , mutton , sausage and goose . ) Reviewing the 1977 edition , The Times called it " arguably the most influential cookery book of our age , one which brought food writing into the realms of literature . " 
 The first edition , illustrated by Juliet Renny , was published by Michael Joseph , with a simultaneous paperback issue by Penguin Books . The first American edition was published by Harper and Row in 1962 . A revised edition was published by Michael Joseph in 1965 and by Penguin in 1967 . Further reprints with minor revisions followed in 1969 , 1970 , 1977 , 1981 , 1984 , 1986 and 1997 . A new edition was published by Penguin in 1998 ( London ) and 1999 ( New York ) . A Portuguese translation <unk> <unk> regional was published in 2000 . The Folio Society issued a new edition in 2008 , with illustrations by Sophie MacCarthy in addition to the originals by Renny . 
 = = Spices , Salt and Aromatics in the English Kitchen ( 1970 ) = = 
 The book is in two parts . David wrote the first four chapters , " Spices and Condiments , " " <unk> Herbs , Dried or Fresh , " " More <unk> " and " Measurements and Temperatures " specifically for the book , drawing on an earlier pamphlet , Dried Herbs , Aromatics and Condiments , written in 1967 for sale in her kitchen shop . In these chapters , David writes about the background of the herbs and spices and condiments that came into use in British kitchens over the previous centuries , and sketches the history of their adoption from Asia and continental Europe . The Times Literary Supplement called this part of the book " as difficult to put down as a good thriller . " 
 In the longer second part of the book , David gives recipes for such dishes as spiced beef , smoked fish , cured pork and sweet fruit pickles . Not all use unfamiliar spices : her " Sussex stewed steak " , adds to the beef only port , stout , vinegar or ketchup , and black pepper . The book contains " practical notes on how to make an authentic paella , cook vegetables crisp like the Chinese , and , with assistance from notes by long @-@ dead Indian colonels , how to prepare a genuinely Indian curry . " 
 As David remarked in this section , her approach to measuring out ingredients had changed since her early days : " By temperament a non @-@ <unk> , I have myself , first through the wish to communicate recipes and now by force of habit , become the reverse . I find that the discipline of weighing and measuring does one 's cooking nothing but good , provided that one does not waste time messing about with quarter @-@ <unk> and five @-@ eighths of pints , nor , above all , expect that precision will eliminate the necessity to keep one 's head or train one 's eye and palate . " The author does not conceal her dislike for some much @-@ used herbs : sage " <unk> the food with its musty dried blood scent " and rosemary " acrid taste … the spiky little leaves get stuck between your teeth . " 
 The book was published as the first of a planned series for Penguin Books , " English Cooking , Ancient and Modern . " Penguin reprinted the book with revisions in 1973 , 1981 and 1987 . In 2000 Grub Street publishers issued a new edition . 
 = = English Bread and Yeast Cookery ( 1977 ) = = 
 David follows the pattern of Spices , Salt and Aromatics in the English Kitchen , devoting the first part of the book to history and the second to recipes . Reviewing the new book , Jane Grigson wrote : " Mrs. David gives the history of wheat and milling … She goes into weights and cost from the establishment in 1266 of the Assize of Bread up to present @-@ day regulations , with a separate chapter on costing your own bread vis @-@ à @-@ vis bought loaves . " 
 In the second part , David devotes chapters to recipes for various forms of baking . Bread comes first , followed by recipes for , among many other things , buns , yeast cakes , soda @-@ bread , <unk> , croissants , pain au chocolat , and pizza . As in her earlier books , the recipes are interspersed with excerpts from earlier authors , including Fernand <unk> , Auguste Escoffier , and the painter John Constable . 
 In The Observer , Hilary Spurling called the book " a scathing indictment of the British bread industry " and also " a history of virtually every development since Stone Age crops and querns " . Spurling rejoiced in the range of David 's recipes : " It contains directions for baking anything from the common cob and Coburg to Peggy @-@ tub or <unk> bread , Sussex Plum Heavies , Scotch bun and Selkirk <unk> , not forgetting splits , <unk> , muffins , crumpets , <unk> and <unk> . " The Times said , " This is probably Mrs. David 's most academic work yet . However , not one ounce of the familiar charm , good sense , asperity ( reserved for modern commercial white bread ) , clarity or warmth is missing . " 
 The book was published by Alan Lane in hardback and Penguin Books in paperback , with reprints in 1978 and 1979 . The first American edition was published by Viking Press in 1980 , and a rewritten American edition was published by Penguin in 1982 . In 1995 , Biscuit Books of Newton , <unk> published a new American edition . A new edition was published in London by Grub Street books in 2010 . 
 = = An Omelette and a Glass of Wine ( 1984 ) = = 
 Although David had drawn on her many magazine articles for material in her earlier books , An Omelette and Glass of Wine was the first straightforward anthology of her work . Compiled with the assistance of Jill Norman , it consists of David 's selections from her essays and articles published since 1949 in publications " from the Sunday Times to Nova , from Vogue to the Spectator , from the long defunct travel magazine Go to Cyril Ray 's Compleat <unk> , Peter Dominic 's Wine Mine and a quite a few others . " Jane Grigson wrote of it , " An Omelette and a Glass of Wine is different from any other book by Elizabeth David . Yet in a sense it includes them , holds them together . We feel closer to Mrs David herself in this book , and I suppose it is the closest we are likely to get to an autobiography " 
 The article from which the volume takes its title is an essay on " the almost primitive and elemental meal evoked by the words : ' Let 's just have an omelette and a glass of wine . ' " Among the other subjects are profiles of people including Norman Douglas , Marcel <unk> , Mrs Beeton , and " A gourmet in Edwardian London " , Colonel Nathaniel Newnham @-@ Davis . Several sections are devoted to descriptions of the markets at <unk> , <unk> , Montpellier , <unk> and Valence , and unpretentious restaurants and hotels in France . There are articles on lemons , potted meat , mayonnaise , pizza , <unk> , truffles , and on the cuisines of Spain and Morocco . For most of the articles David provided either an introduction or an <unk> , or both . 
 The Times described the book as " this serenely unhurried gathering of essays , book reviews , pamphlets , travellers ' tales and cookery articles . The food writer Alan Davidson spoke of David 's " intellectual vitality , her amazing memory for detail , her passionate interest in getting everything right , her feeling for style in the larger sense , " qualities that the chef Rowley Leigh found demonstrated in An Omelette and a Glass of Wine . 
 The book was published by Robert Hale . In 1985 Dorling Kindersley published an edition , and the first US edition was published by Viking , New York , in the same year . The first paperback edition was published by Penguin Books in 1986 . Translations have been published in Danish , Swedish and Dutch . The book was reprinted in 1986 , 1996 , and 1997 . In 2009 a new edition was published by Grub Street , London ; in 2010 a new US edition was issued by Lyons Press , Guilford , Conn . 
 = = Posthumous publications = = 
 David had worked with the editor Jill Norman since the 1960s , and Norman became intimately familiar with David 's writings . The success of David 's last book , in collaboration with Norman , and David 's express wishes that Norman complete some of her work in progress , led Norman to edit and publish five books of David 's work after David 's death in 1992 . 
 = = = Harvest of the Cold Months ( 1994 ) = = = 
 David had been working on this book intermittently for several years before her last illnesses . When she realised that she would not live to complete it , she asked Jill Norman to do so . It was a demanding task ; Norman found that " the book had grown without a structure … it was a collection of essays , really . " It was noticeably more academic in tone than any of its predecessors , a book for the scholar rather than the cook . Reviewing the work , Candice Rodd wrote : 
 Harvest of the Cold Months is not a cookery book but an awe @-@ inspiring feat of detective scholarship , the literally marvellous story of how human beings came to ingest lumps of flavoured frozen matter for pleasure . It bulges with recipes variously crude , exquisite and fantastical , but most are for wonderment rather than use . You sense the writer 's quiet triumph as she turns the musty , fragile pages of yet another ancient memoir or book of receipts and sees one more piece of the fascinating global jigsaw slip satisfyingly into place . You remember that before she was a cook she was a history student . 
 The book traces the history of ice in the cuisines of Europe from mediaeval times , when it had to be brought from the mountains and kept in ice houses ( " anything from a hole in the ground lined with straw to elaborate domes " ) . It was published in London by Michael Joseph and in New York by Viking . It was reprinted in 1995 and 1996 . 
 = = = South Wind Through the Kitchen ( 1997 ) = = = 
 Among the projects of David 's later years with which she worked with her editor , Jill Norman , was a single @-@ volume collection of the best of her extensive writings . When David 's health deteriorated , the project was shelved . In 1996 , Norman revived it , and invited chefs , writers and David 's friends to choose their favourite articles and recipes . Many of the contributors , such as the chef Simon Hopkinson , contributed an introduction or afterword to the pieces they chose . The extracts and recipes are taken from all David 's books published by 1996 . There are more than 200 recipes , organised in the customary way with sections on courses and ingredients – eggs and cheese , fish and shellfish , meat , poultry and game , vegetables , pasta , pulses and grains , sauces , sweet dishes and cakes , preserves , and bread – interspersed , as in David 's earlier works , with articles and essays . 
 The title of the book comes from an essay published in 1964 and reprinted in An Omelette and a Glass of Wine , and is a reference to South Wind , a novel by David 's greatly loved friend Norman Douglas . 
 The book was published by Michael Joseph . An American edition was published by North Point Press , New York , in 1998 . A Chinese translation was published in 2000 . 
 = = = Is There a Nutmeg in the House ? ( 2000 ) = = = 
 This book is a successor to An Omelette and a Glass of Wine , consisting , like its predecessor , of magazine articles , essays and other earlier writings . When selecting the material for the earlier book , David and Jill Norman , who assisted her , found too many articles to fit into a single volume , and many were filed away for a sequel . After David 's death , Norman supplemented them with articles written by David in the 1980s . The first section of the book is a short autobiographical piece , a rarity from David , who guarded her privacy carefully . David 's interest in the historical aspects of cuisine is given scope in essays on the history of Oxo and Bovril , Alexis Soyer and the potato . Articles aimed at the domestic cook include " Do not Despair over Rice " , " Making Ice Cream " , and one propounding a view for which she was famous : " Garlic Presses are Utterly Useless " . 
 The book was published in hardback by Michael Joseph , and in paperback by Penguin , in 2001 . An American edition was published by Viking in 2001 . 
 = = = Elizabeth David 's Christmas ( 2003 ) = = = 
 David and her editor Jill Norman had discussed such a book as early as the 1970s , but work on other projects precluded it . After David 's death , Norman found when sorting out her papers that David had written and compiled far more material on a Christmas theme than anyone else had realised . Among the papers was an introduction that David had written for the projected volume , in which she said that one of her motives for writing a book about Christmas cooking was to head off the annual last @-@ minute requests for recipes from her friends and relations . Those she had found most frequently asked for formed the core of the book . Together with some Christmas recipes from Mediterranean Food , French Provincial Cooking , and Spices , Salt and Aromatics in the English Kitchen , and revised articles published in previous years in magazines , they were turned into a 214 @-@ page book . The chapters dealt with the social and historical side of Christmas , first courses and cold meats , soups , poultry and game , meat , vegetables and salads , sauces , pickles and chutneys , and desserts , cakes and drinks . 
 The book reprints one of David 's most quoted sentences , first printed in Vogue in 1959 , and included in Is there a Nutmeg in the House in 2000 : " If I had my way – and I shan 't – my Christmas Day eating and drinking would consist of an omelette and cold ham and a nice bottle of wine at lunchtime , and a smoked salmon sandwich with a glass of champagne on a tray in bed in the evening . " The pattern of the book follows that of earlier ones , with recipes interspersed with more discursive essays on subjects such as avocado pears , persimmons , historical menus , and Christmas hampers , and extracts from prose by writers whom David admired , including Sybille Bedford and George Eliot . 
 The book was published by Michael Joseph . An American edition was published by David R. <unk> , Boston , in 2008 . 
 = = = At Elizabeth David 's Table ( 2010 ) = = = 
 The book was published to mark the 60th anniversary of David 's first book . With prefatory contributions from several prominent British chefs ( Jamie Oliver , Johnny Grey , Rose Gray , Sally Clarke , Simon Hopkinson , and Hugh Fearnley @-@ <unk> ) it assembles recipes and essays from David 's previously published works . There are twelve chapters , including ones on soups , starters , meat , fish , desserts and baking . It was published in London by Michael Joseph and in New York by Ecco in 2010 . 
 = Real and True = 
 " Real and True " is a song written and performed by American rapper Future , American singer Miley Cyrus , and English singer Mr Hudson . It was released as a single on November 5 , 2013 , by A1 Records , <unk> , and Epic Records . Produced by the artists ' frequent collaborator Mike Will Made It , the song is a pop and R & B track , the lyrics of which describe an everlasting love . 
 " Real and True " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who complimented its overall production and lyrical content , but felt that the vocals were over @-@ processed . Its accompanying music video premiered on November 10 , 2013 , preceding the rebroadcast of the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in the United States . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Future and Cyrus had first collaborated on the track " My Darlin ' " for Cyrus ' fourth studio album Bangerz ( 2013 ) . The lyrics of " My Darlin ' " concern the angst following a failed relationship and the simultaneous desire to reconcile . Later , Cyrus expressed interest in " Real and True " , recording her vocals for the chorus . Mr Hudson also recorded vocals for the chorus , which were incorporated with Cyrus ' singing . Future wrote the remaining verses to complement the contributions of Cyrus and Mr Hudson , though the two received credits for being co @-@ writers . The track was released on November 5 , 2013 . Future raps the first verse , which is in third @-@ person perspective , Cyrus raps the second verse and Future raps the third verse . Mr Hudson sings the chorus ( except the second time , where it is sung by Cyrus ) and Cyrus and Future join Mr Hudson on the chorus the fourth and fifth time . The song had originally leaked with an extra verse from Future , but it was cut from the final version . 
 " Real and True " is pop and R & B song , the lyrics of which describe an everlasting love . During the chorus , Cyrus and Mr. Hudson sing the lyrics " When the sun dies and the stars fade from view / Our love will remain real and true / Through the distance and cold depths of space / The radio sings our song / It 's a love real and true " . Carolyn Menyes from <unk> noted that the artists ' vocals heavily relied on Auto @-@ Tune technology , which she credited with providing a " cohesive sound throughout the track " . Future suggested that " Real and True " was lyrically inspired by his fiancée , American recording artist Ciara , commenting " it might surprise people what I 'm saying ' cause I 'm speaking on my relationship and everything I 'm going through right now and trying to capture that moment . " " Real and True " was produced by Mike Will Made It , who frequently collaborates with Cyrus and Future . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Real and True " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who complimented its overall production and lyrical content , but felt that the vocals were over @-@ processed . Erika Ramirez from Billboard felt that " Cyrus steals the spotlight with her vocal prowess " during her verse of the track , while Alex Young of Consequence of Sound commended the recording as a " feel good love song highlighted by an impressive hook " , adding that Future delivered a " delicate mix of rap and sensual croons " . Writing for Exclaim ! , Josiah Hughes enjoyed the " general feeling of love and goodness " present throughout the song . Carl Williott from Idolator complimented Mike Will Made It 's production contributions , and called the track " pretty " . Carolyn Menyes of <unk> commented that the track " gets its point across and is tender " despite " under @-@ utilizing " Cyrus ' vocals . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Real and True " premiered on November 10 , 2013 , preceding the rebroadcast of the 2013 MTV Europe Music Awards in the United States . The clip begins as astronauts Future and Mr Hudson discover the corpse of another astronaut , portrayed by Cyrus . After being revived on an operating table , Cyrus ( covered in silver glitter ) and Future are shown intimately singing their respective verses to one another . Interspersed throughout the video are scenes of Mr Hudson singing the chorus . As the clip finishes , Future and Mr Hudson are shown leaving the planet where they found Cyrus on their damaged rocket . 
 Referencing earlier pictures from the music video prior to its official release , Edwin Ortiz stated that its theme was a " space age love story " , further opining that it shared a space @-@ themed concept with Future 's debut studio album Pluto ( 2012 ) . Zoe Shenton from the Daily Mirror provided a favorable review for the music video , commenting " clothes or no clothes , [ Cyrus ] looks and sounds incredible " . A writer for The Huffington Post thought that the " appropriately futuristic visuals " complemented the space @-@ themed lyrics in the song . 
 = = Charts = = 
 " Real and True " debuted on the South Korea Gaon Single Chart at number 189 during the week of November 3 to 9 , 2013 . In the United States , the song peaked at number 3 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 singles chart . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Santa María de la Cabeza castle = 
 Santa María de la Cabeza castle is a colonial castle built in the seventeenth century by the Spanish monarchy in the center of the city of Cumaná , Venezuela . It was built as a replacement for the San Antonio de la Eminencia castle . Its construction was ordered by Sancho Fernando de Angulo y Sandoval , governor of the Province of Cumaná . The building was designed using the trace italienne style popular during the seventeenth century , with a proportional geometric floor design . Bastions were used as the main defensive elements . The castle housed a garrison of 250 soldiers , and was the seat of government for the Province of Cumaná . 
 Construction began in 1668 when Angulo y Sandoval 's predecessor , Juan de Urtarte , wrote a memorandum to the King of Spain stating that the San Antonio de la Eminencia castle was unfit for defense . Several years later ( and without proper authorization ) , Angulo y Sandoval began construction of a fortress that would be more useful for the defense of the city than the two existing fortifications . The castle underwent several renovations to repair damage caused by severe earthquakes . A 1684 quake severely damaged the castle and another in 1929 left the structure in ruins . The castle was declared a cultural and municipal asset in May 2005 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Santa María de la Cabeza castle is a fortress built c . 1669 – 73 in the city of Cumaná on the orders of Sancho Fernando de Angulo y Sandoval , governor of the Province of Cumaná , as a replacement for the San Antonio de la Eminencia castle . It is located in the center of the city next to St. Agnes Church , about 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) from the San Antonio castle , on a small hill . The castle is square with bastions ( designed by Angulo y Sandoval ) at its corners . It has been described as having minor defensive capability . 
 The castle was built using the trace italienne style popular during the seventeenth century ; its floor has a geometric design , and bastions are the main defensive elements . However , unlike other permanent bastioned fortifications , its defensive walls were designed as two sections : the lower part of the wall is vertical ( perpendicular to the base ) and the upper part , above the string course , is inclined inwards . This design makes the fort unique in Venezuela ; in most castles , the lower portion of the walls inclines outwards at the base and the upper parts are vertical ( perpendicular to the base ) . 
 The primary material used to create the bricks for the castle was <unk> limestone ( a type of sedimentary rock composed of limestone and clay ) . The front of the castle is oriented to the east , and there was a ditch around the entire perimeter , including between the castle and the Plaza de Armas ( Weapons Square ) . As of 2008 the building had lost its parapets and shelters , but the main defensive structures and walls have been preserved . The fort housed a garrison of 250 soldiers , and was the residence of the governor of the Province of Cumaná . 
 = = Origins = = 
 On 22 November 1668 , Don Juan de Urtarte ( governor of the province from 9 June 1668 to 26 July 1669 ) wrote a memorandum to the King of Spain stating that Fort Santiago was unfit for defense because of its round shape and its mud and stone construction . Several years later , Governor Don Sancho Fernando de Angulo y Sandoval began — without authorization from the war council — construction of a new fortress with the rationale that the San Antonio de la Eminencia castle did not meet the city 's defensive requirements , as it is located on a hilltop far from the city and the coast . The governor claimed that the castle also lacked a suitable water supply and accommodation for soldiers , and thus was unable to resist prolonged sieges . 
 Unlike his predecessor Urtarte , who requested financing to supply and improve San Antonio , Angulo y Sandoval decided to build a new castle , one better able to defend the city than the two existing fortifications . The resulting fortress was called Santa María de la Cabeza ; the governor then requested that the two older structures be demolished . 
 = = History = = 
 On 4 May 1684 an earthquake devastated the city , severely damaging the Santa María castle . A road linking the Santa María de la Cabeza and San Antonio de la Eminencia castles was mentioned by Agustín <unk> in a 1777 proposal for the defense of the city . <unk> opposed the idea , but stated that if a road were built it should be a gravel one . The Santa María de la Cabeza castle was partially destroyed in a powerful earthquake felt throughout the state in 1797 . 
 After an earthquake in 1853 , the reliquary enclosing an image of Nuestra Señora del Carmen ( Our Lady of Mount Carmel ) , originally situated at the Mount Carmel chapel , was moved to the Santa María de la Cabeza castle , where Santos <unk> built a new chapel in 1912 to protect the image ; it was later moved to St. Agnes Church . The ditch was filled in for construction of the Mount Carmel chapel and the deteriorated parapets were demolished . The original slopes and terraces present on Diaz Fajardo 's 1737 map were probably also buried in the process . The chapel in the castle was the final resting place for <unk> ; his remains , originally interred at Holy Trinity Cemetery ( which he had built ) , were exhumed and moved five years after his death . 
 Between the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries , Cumaná experienced an increase in population . The areas around the castles and the Manzanares River became densely populated . New buildings were constructed that were attached to the castle walls , completely closing off the perimeter and making direct access impossible . Another earthquake in 1929 left the structure in ruins and rendered it unusable . The offices of the seat of government for the Province of Cumaná were moved elsewhere and the building was abandoned . The castle was declared a Cultural and Municipal Asset in May 2005 by the state Cultural Assets Institute . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park = 
 Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park is a United States National Park located in western Colorado and managed by the National Park Service . There are three entrances to the park . The south rim entrance is located 15 miles ( 24 km ) east of Montrose , while the north rim entrance is 11 miles ( 18 km ) south of Crawford and is closed in the winter . The park contains 12 miles ( 19 km ) of the 48 @-@ mile ( 77 km ) long canyon of the Gunnison River . The national park itself contains the deepest and most dramatic section of the canyon , but the canyon continues upstream into <unk> National Recreation Area and downstream into Gunnison Gorge National Conservation Area . The canyon 's name owes itself to the fact that parts of the gorge only receive 33 minutes of sunlight a day , according to Images of America : The Black Canyon of the Gunnison . In the book , author Duane <unk> states , " Several canyons of the American West are longer and some are deeper , but none combines the depth , <unk> , narrowness , darkness , and dread of the Black Canyon . " 
