 = = Geology = = 
 The Gunnison River drops an average of 34 feet per mile ( 6 @.@ 4 m / km ) through the entire canyon , making it the 5th steepest mountain descent in North America . By comparison , the Colorado River drops an average of 7 @.@ 5 feet per mile ( 1 @.@ 42 m / km ) through the Grand Canyon . The greatest descent of the Gunnison River occurs within the park at Chasm View dropping 240 feet per mile ( 45 m / km ) . The Black Canyon is so named due its steepness which makes it difficult for sunlight to penetrate into its depths . As a result , the canyon is often shrouded in shadow , causing the rocky walls to appear black . At its narrowest point the canyon is only 40 ft ( 12 m ) wide at the river . 
 The extreme steepness and depth of the Black Canyon formed as the result of several geologic processes acting together . The Gunnison River is primarily responsible for carving the canyon , though several other geologic events had to occur in order to form the canyon as it is seen today . 
 = = = Precambrian = = = 
 The Precambrian gneiss and schist that make up the majority of the steep walls of the Black Canyon formed 1 @.@ 7 billion years ago during a metamorphic period brought on by the collision of ancient volcanic island arcs with the southern end of what is present @-@ day Wyoming . The lighter @-@ colored pegmatite dikes that can be seen crosscutting the basement rocks formed later during this same period . 
 = = = Cretaceous - Tertiary = = = 
 The entire area underwent uplift during the Laramide orogeny between 70 and 40 million years ago which was also part of the Gunnison Uplift . This raised the Precambrian gneiss and schist that makes up the canyon walls . During the Tertiary from 26 to 35 million years ago large episodes of volcanism occurred in the area immediately surrounding the present day Black Canyon . The West Elk Mountains , La Sal Mountains , Henry Mountains , and Abajo Mountains all contributed to burying the area in several thousand feet of volcanic ash and debris . 
 The modern Gunnison River set its course 15 million years ago as the run @-@ off from the nearby La Sal and West Elk Mountains and the Sawatch Range began carving through the relatively soft volcanic deposits . 
 = = = Quaternary = = = 
 With the Gunnison River ’ s course set , a broad uplift in the area 2 to 3 million years ago caused the river to cut through the softer volcanic deposits . Eventually the river reached the Precambrian rocks of the Gunnison Uplift . Since the river was unable to change its course , it began scouring through the extremely hard metamorphic rocks of the Gunnison Uplift . The river ’ s flow was much larger than currently , with much higher levels of turbidity . As a result , the river dug down through the Precambrian gneiss and schist at the rate of 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) every 100 years . The extreme hardness of the metamorphic rock along with the relative quickness with which the river carved through them created the steep walls that can be seen today . 
 A number of feeder canyons running into the Black Canyon slope in the wrong direction for water to flow into the canyon . It is believed that less @-@ entrenched streams in the region shifted to a more north @-@ flowing drainage pattern in response to a change in the tilt of the surrounding terrain . The west @-@ flowing Gunnison , however , was essentially trapped in the hard Precambrian rock of the Black Canyon and could not change its course . 
 = = History = = 
 The Ute Indians had known the canyon to exist for a long time before the first Europeans saw it . They referred to the river as " much rocks , big water , " and are known to have avoided the canyon out of superstition . By the time the United States declared independence in 1776 , two Spanish expeditions had passed by the canyons . In the 1800s , the numerous fur trappers searching for beaver pelts would have known of the canyon 's existence but they left no written record . The first official account of the Black Canyon was provided by Captain John Williams Gunnison in 1853 , who was leading an expedition to survey a route from Saint Louis and San Francisco . He described the country to be " the roughest , most hilly and most cut up , " he had ever seen , and skirted the canyon south towards present @-@ day Montrose . Following his death at the hands of Ute Indians later that year , the river that Captain Gunnison had called the Grand was renamed in his honor . 
 In 1881 , William Jackson Palmer 's Denver and Rio Grande Railroad had reached Gunnison from Denver . The line was built to provide a link to the burgeoning gold and silver mines of the San Juan mountains . The rugged terrain precluded using 4 ' 8 1 / 2 " standard rail ; Palmer decided to go with the narrower 3 ' gauge . It took over a year for Irish and Italian laborers to carve out a 15 @-@ mile roadbed from <unk> to Cimarron , costing a staggering $ 165 @,@ 000 a mile . The last mile is said to have cost more than the entire Royal Gorge project . 
 On August 13 , 1882 , the first passenger train passed through the Black Canyon . The editor of the Gunnison Review @-@ Press rode in one of the observation cars ; he remarked that the canyon was " undoubtedly the largest and most rugged canon in the world traversed by the iron horse . We had often heard of the scenery of this canyon , but no one can have the faintest conception of its grandeur and magnificence until they have made a trip through it . It is a narrow gorge with walls of granite rising in some places to a height of thousands of feet … Throughout its entire length there is probably not a quarter of a mile of straight track on it . It is a serpentine road in every respect and the curves are frequent and sharp . In hundreds of places the walls of granite are perpendicular and in many places the road bed is blasted out in the side of the walls of rock which overhang the track . " He went on to proclaim , " Another such a feat of railroad engineering probably can not be found in the world , and there is probably no section of Colorado or of the whole country where such a varied and interesting lot of scenery can be found . " 
 In the hopes of running the railroad through the rest of the Black Canyon , Palmer sent his top engineer Bryan Bryant on an inner canyon exploration . Bryant set off with a 12 @-@ man crew in December 1882 expecting to complete the survey in 20 days ; he returned in 68 . " Eight of the twelve @-@ man crew left after a few days , terrified of the task in front of them . What the rest of the men saw was spectacular and had never been seen by another human . " Bryant reported that the Black Canyon was impenetrable , and that it was impossible to build anything in its depths . 
 Heeding Bryant 's advice , Palmer decided to route the railroad south of the canyon and in March 1883 , it completed its connection to Salt Lake City and for a brief period the canyon was on the main line of a transcontinental railroad system . While the railroad and early visitors used the canyon as a path to Utah and mines to the southwest , later visitors came to see the canyon as an opportunity for recreation and personal enjoyment . Rudyard Kipling described his 1889 ride through the canyon in the following words : " We entered a gorge , remote from the sun , where the rocks were two thousand feet sheer , and where a rock splintered river roared and howled ten feet below a track which seemed to have been built on the simple principle of dropping miscellaneous dirt into the river and pinning a few rails a @-@ top . There was a glory and a wonder and a mystery about the mad ride , which I felt keenly ... " 
 By 1890 , an alternate route through Glenwood Springs had been completed and the route through the Black Canyon , being more difficult to operate , lost importance for through trains . The route was finally abandoned in 1955 . 
 In 1901 , the U.S. Geological Survey sent Abraham Lincoln Fellows and William Torrence into the canyon to look for a site to build a diversion tunnel bringing water to the Uncompahgre Valley , which was suffering from water shortages due to an influx of settlers into the area . Torrence , a Montrose native and an expert mountaineer , had taken part in a failed expedition the previous year , and his experience proved valuable on his second excursion . He opted to bring a single rubber air mattress instead of the heavy wooden boats that had doomed his previous journey into the canyon . They entered the canyon on August 12 equipped with " only hunting knives , two silk lifeline ropes , and rubber bags to encase their instruments . " After a harrowing 10 days braving rock falls , waterfalls , and 76 river crossings , they emerged from the canyon with a suitable tunnel site . 
 Construction on the tunnel began 4 years later , and was fraught with difficulties right from the onset . " Working conditions at the tunnel were difficult due to the high levels of carbon dioxide , excessive temperatures , humidity , water , mud , shale , sand , and a fractured fault zone ... It took the tunneling crew almost one year to bore through 2000 feet of water @-@ filled rock . The tunnel was driven through granite , quartzite , gneiss , and shale as well as layers of sandstone , coal , and limestone . Work on the Gunnison Tunnel was first done manually and by candlelight . One miner would hold the drill and rotate it while the second miner would use a sledgehammer to drive the drill into the rock . This work required strong , hard @-@ working men . In spite of good pay and fringe benefits , most disliked the dangerous underground conditions and stayed an average of only 2 weeks . " 26 men were killed during the 4 year undertaking . The tunnel was finally completed in 1909 , stretching a distance of 5 @.@ 8 miles and costing nearly 3 million dollars . At the time , the Gunnison Tunnel held the honor of being the world 's longest irrigation tunnel . On September 23 , President William Howard Taft dedicated the tunnel in Montrose . The East Portal of the Gunnison Tunnel is accessible via East Portal Road which is on the South Rim of the canyon . Although the tunnel itself is not visible , the diversion dam can be seen from the campground . 
 The Black Canyon of the Gunnison was established as a U.S. National Monument on March 2 , 1933 . It became a National Park on October 21 , 1999 . During 1933 @-@ 35 , the Civilian Conservation Corps built the North Rim Road to design by the National Park Service . This includes fives miles of roadway and five overlooks ; it is listed on the <unk> Register of Historic Places as a historic district . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park contains a wide variety of flora and fauna . Some common plants native to the park include aspen , Ponderosa pine , sagebrush , desert mahogany ( <unk> <unk> ) , Utah juniper , <unk> oak ( scrub oak ) and single @-@ leaf ash . The Black Canyon <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) is a species of wildflower native to the park . Wildlife in the park include the coyote , elk , magpie , eagle , and mule deer . In addition , the canyon is the home of a number of resident birds including the great horned owl , American dipper and Steller 's jay as well as migratory birds such as the mountain bluebird , peregrine falcon , white @-@ throated swift and canyon wren . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 An estimated 250 @,@ 000 tourists visit the park annually . The main attraction of the park is the scenic drive along US Highway 50 and Colorado Highway 92 , as well as the south rim . The east end of the park , where it meets Blue Mesa Reservoir at Blue Mesa Point , is the area most developed for camping . It includes tent camping and RV parking with full hookups as well as canyon tours , hiking , fishing and boat tours . The west end of the park has river access by automobile , as well as guided tours of the canyon . A short hike at Blue Mesa Point Information Center heads down to Pine Creek and the Morrow Point boat tours , boating , fishing and hiking . At the south rim there are two campgrounds and several hiking and nature trails . The north rim is also accessible by automobile and has a small , primitive campground . Automobiles can access the river via the East Portal Road at the south rim ; this road has a 16 % grade and is prohibited to vehicles over 22 feet ( 7 m ) in length . 
 The river can also be accessed by steep , unmaintained trails called routes or draws on the north and south rim . These routes require about two hours to hike down and two to four hours to hike back up , depending on which route is taken . All inner canyon descents are strenuous and require Class 3 climbing and basic route finding skills . Steep talus , impassable ledges , and lack of cover are some of the challenges hikers are faced with . Poison ivy also grows abundantly in the draws and on the canyon floor . Long sleeves and hiking boots are strongly recommended . The flow rate of the Gunnison River should also be considered for those planning on camping in the canyon , as high river levels can wash out the camp sites . The National Park Service warns the following : " Routes are difficult to follow , and only individuals in excellent physical condition should attempt these hikes ... Hikers are expected to find their own way and to be prepared for self @-@ rescue . " A free back country permit is required for all inner canyon use except at the west end . 
 The Gunnison River is designated as a Gold Medal Water from 200 yards downstream of Crystal Reservoir Dam to the North Fork . This includes the 12 miles within the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park . Only artificial flies and lures are permitted , and all rainbow trout are catch and release . Additionally , fishing is prohibited within 200 yards downstream of Crystal Dam . 
 The Black Canyon is a center for rock climbing in a style known as traditional climbing . Most of the climbs are difficult and attempted only by advanced climbers . 
 Rafting opportunities exist in the region , but the run through the park itself is a difficult technical run for only the best kayakers . There are several impassable stretches of water requiring long , sometimes dangerous portages . The remaining rapids are class III - V , and are only for expert river runners . Downstream , in the Gunnison Gorge National Conservation Area , the river is somewhat easier to navigate , though still very remote and only for experienced runners , with rapids that are Class III - IV . 
 = New York State Route 426 = 
 New York State Route 426 ( NY 426 ) is a state highway located entirely within Chautauqua County , New York , in the United States . It runs just over 13 miles ( 21 km ) from one section of the Pennsylvania state line to another , passing through two small hamlets and providing the Southern Tier Expressway ( Interstate 86 or I @-@ 86 and NY 17 ) with its westernmost exit in New York . NY 426 is the westernmost north – south state highway in New York . 
 At both crossings of the state line it continues as Pennsylvania Route 426 ( PA 426 ) . It is the only other state highway besides NY 440 that can claim the distinction of being a middle segment of another state 's similarly @-@ numbered highway . The New York alignment has remained virtually unchanged since it was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , while the designations of the roads it connects to in Pennsylvania have varied over the years . The two segments of PA 426 were established at different times in the 1940s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 426 begins where the southern segment of PA 426 leaves off at the Pennsylvania state line in French Creek 6 miles ( 10 km ) north of Corry , Pennsylvania . The route heads north through rural southwestern Chautauqua County to the small community known as Cutting , where it overlaps NY 474 for a tenth of a mile ( 0 @.@ 16 km ) westward before resuming its trek northward . Roughly 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of Cutting , NY 426 veers to the west to avoid a large ridge situated near Beaver Meadow Brook , a small stream leading to French Creek . The route follows the brook to where it converges with the creek , then parallels French Creek northward toward the waterside hamlet of French Creek . The creek and NY 426 split south of the community , with the creek continuing along French Creek – Mina Road to the hamlet while NY 426 bypasses French Creek to the west . The route enters the town of Mina upon intersecting Harrington Hill Road a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the north . 
 A half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) into Mina , NY 426 comes within view of Findley Lake , a body of water 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long from south to north and as wide as one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) at points . The route follows the eastern edge of the lake north to the hamlet of Findley Lake , situated at the northern tip of the lake . Here , NY 426 overlaps NY 430 westward for three blocks through the community prior to connecting to the Southern Tier Expressway ( I @-@ 86 and NY 17 ) by way of an interchange 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of Findley Lake . The exit is the westernmost exit on NY 17 ; however , the expressway itself continues west to I @-@ 90 near Erie , Pennsylvania , as I @-@ 86 . Past the expressway , NY 426 continues northwest for another 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) through nondescript terrain to the Pennsylvania state line , where it becomes the northern segment of PA 426 . 
 = = History = = 
 The entirety of NY 426 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York as a northward extension of PA 189 , a short route leading south to Corry , Pennsylvania . Originally , NY 426 broke from its modern alignment at French Creek – Mina Road to serve the hamlet of French Creek via French Creek – Mina and King roads before rejoining its current route west of the hamlet . The route was realigned onto its present alignment west of French Creek c . 1936 . In the early 1940s , the 426 designation was extended southward into Pennsylvania as PA 426 . It was also extended northwestward into Pennsylvania in the mid @-@ 1940s , effectively making NY 426 the missing segment of an otherwise discontinuous PA 426 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Chautauqua County . 
 = Iowa Highway 1 = 
 Iowa Highway 1 ( Iowa 1 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Iowa that extends from Keosauqua to Anamosa . It travels nearly 120 miles ( 190 km ) , mainly through rich farmland and small communities . Iowa 1 provides an important link to Iowa City and the University of Iowa as it passes through campus . Portions of the route today date back to the late 1830s , when Martin Van Buren was president , making Iowa 1 one of the oldest routes in the state , pre @-@ dating the current primary highway system by nearly eighty years . The highway was seriously damaged by the Cedar River in the Iowa flood of 2008 , which closed the highway for seven weeks . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Iowa 1 begins at a T @-@ intersection with Iowa 2 in rural Van Buren County , south of Keosauqua . It passes through gently rolling farmland for ten miles ( 16 km ) before entering the Des Moines River valley adjacent to Lacey @-@ Keosauqua State Park . The highway crosses the Des Moines River and enters Keosauqua along Main Street . At Broad Street , Iowa 1 turned north and headed out of town . Between Keosauqua and the southern junction with Iowa 16 , the highway runs parallel to the Des Moines River , the river 's course bending sharply around Keosauqua . South of Birmingham , Iowa 1 briefly overlaps Iowa 16 for two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . The next seven miles ( 11 km ) run due north passing through Birmingham , before the highway crosses Cedar Creek south of Fairfield . 
 On the south side of Fairfield , the highway meets the new U.S. Highway 34 ( US 34 ) / Iowa 163 bypass at a partial cloverleaf interchange . Iowa 1 enters Fairfield along Main Street . For one block , Iowa 1 overlaps US 34 Business on Burlington Street before turning onto Second Street . Along Second Street , the highway passes under a BNSF Railway / Amtrak viaduct . North of the viaduct , Iowa 1 turns west for two blocks along Merrill Avenue and turns north again onto Fourth Street . On the northern edge of Fairfield , the highway passes next to Maharishi International University . 
 North of Fairfield , Iowa 1 passes the Fairfield Municipal Airport and Maharishi Vedic City . For the next nine miles ( 14 km ) , the highway continues due north through Jefferson and Keokuk County . Southeast of Richland , Iowa 1 meets Iowa 78 at a T @-@ intersection . Heading east from this intersection , Iowa 1 and Iowa 78 overlap for seven and a half miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) until entering Brighton on Fountain Street . Iowa 1 splits off to the north onto Benton Street while Iowa 78 turns to the south and east . North of Brighton , it crosses the Skunk River and passes through the river 's one @-@ mile @-@ wide ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) valley . For nine miles ( 14 km ) , Iowa 1 passes through southern Washington County heading northeast towards Washington . 
 At Washington , Iowa 1 intersects Iowa 92 on the southwestern edge of town . The two highways curve around to the north and split three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) later . Iowa 1 passes through flat farmland before crossing the English River south of <unk> . Iowa 1 skirts the western edge of <unk> and intersects Iowa Highway 22 . It continues north for seven miles ( 11 km ) before turning northeast for eight miles ( 13 km ) more towards Iowa City . 
 Iowa 1 intersects US 218 and Iowa 27 , the Avenue of the Saints , at a diamond interchange on the southwestern edge of Iowa City . It curves to the north of Iowa City Municipal Airport , intersecting US 6 at Riverside Drive . For three @-@ quarters mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) , Iowa 1 overlaps US 6 on Riverside Drive before crossing the Iowa River in downtown Iowa City . On Burlington Street , Iowa 1 passes the University of Iowa library , the old state capitol , and the <unk> Mall . Iowa 1 turns north onto the one @-@ way Governor Street ; Dodge Street handles the accompanying southbound lanes of traffic . The one @-@ way streets rejoin as Dodge Street before intersecting Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) at another diamond interchange . 
 Iowa 1 continues north through Johnson County for twelve miles ( 19 km ) , passing through Solon . At Solon , it intersects County Road F16 , which provides access to Lake MacBride State Park . Six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) southwest of Mount Vernon , Iowa 1 turns to the northeast , entering Linn County and crossing the Cedar River before entering Mount Vernon , where it intersects US 30 . At First Street , Iowa 1 crosses the Lincoln Highway . On the northern edge of Mount Vernon , Iowa 1 crosses a major Union Pacific Railroad line . Iowa 1 continues north towards <unk> , where it enters Jones <unk> three and a half miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) northeast of <unk> , Iowa 1 ends at a partial cloverleaf interchange with US 151 . 
 = = History = = 
 The current Iowa 1 was designated in the 1920s , extending from Iowa 2 near Keosauqua to Iowa 38 near Rochester . Between Keosauqua and Iowa City , Iowa 1 replaced Primary Road No. 11 ; and between Iowa City and Rochester , it replaced Primary Road No. 74 . In 1962 , Iowa 1 was realigned north of Iowa City replacing Iowa 261 from Anamosa to Iowa City . This section approximately follows part of the route of the territorial and military road from Dubuque to Iowa City . This road , authorized by President Martin Van Buren in 1839 , was known as Dillon 's Furrow , named after Dubuque merchant Lyman Dillon who surveyed the route and marked it with a furrow . Most of the deviations of the route of Iowa 1 from Dillon 's original route are the result of road straightening or bypasses around town centers . The leftover section of Iowa 1 from Iowa City to Iowa 38 , part of the Herbert Hoover Highway , became the unsigned Iowa 979 . 
 In 1997 , it was announced that parts of US 151 and Iowa 1 would become the first Super two highways in Iowa . A 42 @-@ mile ( 68 km ) section between Washington and US 30 was to be improved in 2002 , but because of funding shortages , the project was scratched . 
 In the Iowa flood of 2008 , flood waters of the Cedar River caused the closure of Iowa 1 between Solon and Mount Vernon on June 12 , 2008 . Once the floods receded , major damage was left behind . Repair work began on July 11 and was completed by July 30 , 2008 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Lessons ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Lessons " is the 19th episode of the sixth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation and was originally aired in the United States on April 5 , 1993 , in broadcast syndication . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship USS Enterprise @-@ D. In " Lessons " , Captain Picard 's ( Patrick Stewart ) shared love of music with Lt. Commander Nella Daren ( Wendy Hughes ) leads to romance , resulting in conflicting emotions on his behalf . After incorrectly believing her to have died , he realises that he is incapable of carrying out a relationship with someone under his command . 
 The episode was directed by Robert Wiemer , the episode was written by Ron Wilkerson and Jean Louise Matthias , with some uncredited revisions by René Echevarria . Stand @-@ ins were used to perform the pieces by Picard and Daren , which required the use of close @-@ up camera angles by the director . The episode was received warmly by critics reviewing it after the end of the series , who praised the performances of Hughes and Stewart . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Picard is irritated that the stellar cartography department has shut down several systems on the Enterprise , and heads down there to find out what is going on . He meets the head of the department , Lt. Commander Nella Daren , who makes an impression on Picard . It is a meeting memorable enough to later discuss with Dr. Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) . At a musical recital by Lt. Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) , Picard is surprised to see Daren , once again , playing the piano . The two discuss music , and later meet in Picard 's quarters and participate in a duet . Daren plays a portable piano and Picard performs on his <unk> flute . 
 The two meet more often ; even in a Jefferies tube , which Daren claims has the best acoustics on the ship . In this private setting , their attraction for one another is expressed in a kiss . The moment of intimacy is fleeting , however . When they enter a turbolift , and are joined by another crewmember , Picard resumes the professional demeanour of Captain . The Enterprise is diverted from its mission , when it is directed to investigate a report of firestorms at a Federation outpost . While in transit , Picard consults Counsellor Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) regarding his actions with Daren . Picard then goes to Daren to apologize and to explain . He recounts an earlier experience in which he was scanned by an alien probe ( previously shown in the episode " The Inner Light " ) . The probe imparted to Picard the life experience of a man named Kamin , on the planet <unk> . As Kamin , Picard had a wife and family , became a grandfather , and grew old . And he learned to play the flute . The probe imparted to Picard a deep appreciation of intimacy and family life , as well as knowledge of the probe 's doomed creators . When the probe shut down , and Picard re @-@ awoke on the bridge of the Enterprise , only a few moments had elapsed . When the probe was dismantled , it contained Kamin 's flute , an object of great significance to Picard . 
 Daren speaks to Commander Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) requesting a transfer for another crew member to stellar cartography . Riker turns down the request . Afterwards , Riker speaks with Picard , explaining that Picard and Daren 's relationship made the decision complicated . The Enterprise arrives at the Federation outpost to find that firestorms are heading toward the facility . Daren suggests a means of deflecting the storms , but the equipment requires trained personnel on the ground to operate it . Daren is assigned to the surface team , along with a number of other crew . 
 The outpost is evacuated during the dangerous mission , leaving only the Enterprise away team on surface . The firestorms overwhelm the position that Daren 's team occupies before they can be retrieved . Believing Daren to be dead , Picard sits contemplating his decision in his quarters . He then hears that survivors are being transported aboard , and heads to the transporter room . Daren is not among the initial group of survivors , but is later transported to the ship . Eight members of the team have died . Afterwards , Picard and Daren discuss their relationship . They realize that it cannot continue , as Picard could not bear to put her in danger once more . They discuss giving up their Starfleet careers to be together . Daren realizes that Picard , still cherishing the family life he experienced as Kamin , has nonetheless chosen duty , career , and loneliness . They both know that Daren must transfer off the Enterprise . They kiss once more , and Daren makes Picard promise not to give up music . 
 = = Production = = 
 Ron Wilkerson and Jean Louise Matthias had previously written the episodes " Imaginary Friend " and " <unk> " , but in both instances the writing of the teleplay for the initial story idea had been given to a staff writer due to time constraints . Co @-@ executive producer Jeri Taylor instead allowed the pair to write the teleplay for " Lessons " , their first for Star Trek . René Echevarria did some minor uncredited re @-@ writes to the final version of the script as staff @-@ writer Brannon Braga wished to avoid working on " Lessons " after recently working on another love story related script for the episode " Aquiel " . Writer and producer Michael Piller likened " Lessons " to the 1945 Noël Coward film Brief Encounter . 
 The production crew sought to give Picard a romantic peer and equal in Daren , and were pleased with the actors ' performances . Director Robert Wiemer said that " we had really turned @-@ on performances ... if we 'd had only moderate performances it would have fallen flat " . However , as neither Stewart nor Hughes could play their instruments , it required a number of camera techniques to be used in order to disguise the musicians playing just off screen . Husband and wife duo Natalie and Bryce Martin played the piano and tin whistle respectively to portray Daren and Picard 's abilities . Bryce had played his instrument to represent Picard 's <unk> flute since it first appeared in " The Inner Light " . However , while Stewart did the majority of his flute fingering , he was doubled in several scenes by Noel Webb and John <unk> . Webb also doubled for Brent Spiner early in the episode when Data was playing Frédéric Chopin 's trio in G minor . A variety of pieces are played throughout the episode , including Frère Jacques , Ludwig van Beethoven 's Piano Sonata No. 14 and Johann Sebastian Bach 's Third Brandenburg Concerto . The " Flute song " by Jay Chattaway , which originally appeared in " The Inner Light " , reappears in this episode . 
 The firestorm itself was created by Dan Curry and Ronald B. Moore by pouring liquid nitrogen onto black velvet and then blowing it with an air hose . The effect was then enhanced by digital effects and was digitally inserted into the background of the exterior standing set ( usually referred to by cast and crew as " planet hell " ) . " Lessons " was the first appearance of the stellar cartography on board the Enterprise , but the set would be completely replaced for its reappearance in the movie Star Trek Generations . 
 = = Reception and home media = = 
 James Van Hise and Hal Schuster wrote in their 1995 book , The Complete Next Generation , that they thought the relationship between Picard and Daren was believable , and that the story itself was very effective . They thought that the loneliness Picard feels at the end of the episode was part of an ongoing story which would culminate in the subplot about Picard 's loneliness in Star Trek Generations . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched Star Trek : The Next Generation after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido watched the episode for Tor.com , and described the performance of Wendy Hughes as " magnificent " and " never not wonderful " . However , he commented that whenever a double was not used to play the piano , it was obvious that Hughes wasn 't playing . Overall , he appreciated the script and thought that the ending was not contrived ; however , he would have preferred for the episodic structure of The Next Generation to have been changed a little to allow for the romance to be portrayed as a subplot over several episodes . He gave the episode a score of 9 / 10 , saying " this is one of TNG 's best romances and an absolute joy . " DeCandido subsequently named " Lessons " as one of the best episodes of season six , which he said was the best season of the series . 
 Zack Handlen , who reviewed " Lessons " for The A.V. Club , thought that the episode works because of Patrick Stewart and that the episode was well @-@ handled . He gave " Lessons " a score of B + , saying that he " wasn 't hugely sold on Daren , but when Picard makes a special point of explaining the flute 's significance to her , it helps solidify the connection between them . " 
 The episode was first released on VHS cassette on August 4 , 1998 . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season six DVD box set , released in the United States on December 3 , 2002 , and on Blu @-@ ray on June 24 , 2014 . 
 = Battle of Hama = 
 The Battle of Hama was fought some 24 km from the city of Hama in Syria on 29 – 30 November 903 between the forces of the Abbasid Caliphate and the Qarmatians . The Abbasids were victorious , resulting in the capture and execution of the Qarmatian leadership . This weakened the Qarmatian presence in northern Syria , which was finally eradicated after the suppression of another revolt in 906 . More importantly , it paved the way for the Abbasid attack on the autonomous Tulunid dynasty and the reincorporation of the Tulunid domains in southern Syria and Egypt into the Abbasid Caliphate . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Qarmatians were a radical Isma 'ili Shi 'ite sect founded in Kufa around 874 by a certain Hamdan <unk> . They denounced mainstream Sunni Islam for practices they viewed as deviations from the true teachings of the religion , such as the hajj and the worship of the Kaaba , as well as the dwelling in cities and the marginalization of the Bedouin . Consequently , as they gained adherents , the Qarmatians began assaulting the neighbouring Muslim communities . Originally a sporadic and minor nuisance in the Sawad , their power grew swiftly to alarming proportions after 897 , when they launched a series of uprisings against the Abbasid Caliphate . In this period , the movement was based at Salamiyya on the western edge of the Syrian Desert , and its leadership was assumed by Abu Muhammad Abdallah , the future founder of the Fatimid Caliphate . Abdallah 's claims to be the awaited Mahdi caused a split in the movement in 899 . The majority , including Hamdan <unk> , rejected the Fatimid claims and leaving to continue their proselytization elsewhere . 
 The missionary efforts of the remaining Qarmatian movement were redirected beyond the Sawad and quickly bore fruit . Under the leadership of Abu Sa 'id al @-@ Jannabi , they seized Bahrayn in 899 and in the next year defeated a caliphal army under al @-@ Abbas ibn Amr al @-@ <unk> . Another base was established in the area around Palmyra by the missionaries Yahya ibn Zikrawayh , known by the name Sahib al @-@ <unk> ( " Master of the She @-@ camel " ) and al @-@ Husayn , probably Yahya 's brother , who took the name Sahib al @-@ Shama ( " Man with the Mole " ) . Both in Bahrayn and in Syria , the Qarmatians were able to convert many local Bedouin — the Banu Kalb in Syria and the Banu Kilab and Banu Uqayl in Bahrayn — to their cause , thus acquiring a potent military force . Threatened by the rise of Qarmatian centres around Salamiyya , Abdallah and his followers soon left and travelled secretly to Ifriqiya , where in 909 they would overthrow the ruling Aghlabids and establish the Fatimid state . 
 From their base in the region around Palmyra , the Qarmatians began launching raids against the Abbasid and Tulunid provinces of Syria , with devastating effect . In 902 , the Qarmatians defeated the Tulunids under Tughj ibn Juff near al @-@ Raqqah , and laid siege to Damascus . The city was successfully held by Tughj and the Sahib al @-@ <unk> was killed . Leadership passed to the Sahib al @-@ Shama , who led the Qarmatians to ravage Homs , Hama , Ba <unk> , Ma 'arrat al @-@ Numan and even Salamiyya , where they massacred the members of Abdallah 's family that had remained there . 
 = = Battle = = 
 In view of the apparent impotence of the Tulunid regime to stop the Qarmatian raids , the Syrians called upon the Abbasid government to intervene directly , and on 30 July 903 , Caliph al @-@ Muktafi commanded that a campaign be undertaken . The campaign was nominally headed by Caliph al @-@ Muktafi in person , who left Baghdad on 9 August and went to al @-@ Raqqah . In mid @-@ August , the Qarmatians under a certain al @-@ <unk> surprised an Abbasid army some 10 @,@ 000 strong near Aleppo , while it was resting and dispersed , with many troops seeking to escape the intense heat in a local river ; the Abbasid troops were routed , and only about a thousand managed to reach the city , where , under the command of Abu al @-@ <unk> , they repulsed the Qarmatian attacks . At about the same time , however , the general Badr al @-@ <unk> inflicted a heavy defeat on the Sahib al @-@ Shama and his men near Damascus . The Qarmatians fled to the desert , and Caliph al @-@ Muktafi sent men under al @-@ Husayn ibn Hamdan to pursue them . While al @-@ Muktafi remained at al @-@ Raqqah , command of the army in the field was given to the head of the department of the army ( dīwān al @-@ jund ) , Muhammad ibn Sulayman al @-@ Katib . On Tuesday , 29 November 903 , the Abbasid army under Muhammad met the Qarmatians at a location some 24 km from Hama . The course of the battle is described in a victory dispatch sent by Muhammad to the caliph afterwards and included in the history of al @-@ Tabari . 
 According to the latter , on the morning of 29 November , the Abbasid army set out from al @-@ <unk> towards al @-@ <unk> — both unidentified locations — deployed in full battle order . During the march , Muhammad ibn Sulayman received a report that a part of the Qarmatian army , comprising 3 @,@ 000 horse and many foot under one of the chief missionaries ( <unk> 'ī ) , al @-@ Nu 'man , had encamped at a locality some 12 Arabic miles ( ca . 24 km ) from Hama , and that the other detachments of the Qarmatian army had joined him there . Muhammad led his army towards the Qarmatian encampment , and found them deployed in battle array . According to the report of Muhammad , the Qarmatian left wing was led by Masrur al @-@ <unk> and others , in charge of 1 @,@ 500 horsemen . Behind the left wing was placed a reserve force of 400 cavalry . The Qarmatian centre was commanded by al @-@ Nu 'man al @-@ <unk> and other officers , and comprised 1 @,@ 400 cavalry and 3 @,@ 000 infantry , while the right wing was commanded by <unk> al @-@ <unk> and others and numbered 1 @,@ 400 horsemen , with a reserve force of 200 horsemen more . 
 As the two armies advanced on each other , the Qarmatian left thrust forward against the Abbasid right , which was commanded by al @-@ Husayn ibn Hamdan . The troops of Ibn Hamdan repulsed the first Qarmatian attack , and then the second , killing 600 horsemen . The Qarmatians on the left broke and fled ; Ibn Hamdan and his men pursued them and in a series of engagements killed all but 200 of them . Ibn Hamdan 's troops reportedly captured 500 horses and 400 silver necklaces as well . The Qarmatian right wing likewise attacked the Abbasid left , held by al @-@ Qasim ibn Sima , <unk> al @-@ Khadim , and the tribal allies of Banu Shayban and Banu Tamim . While the two wings were grappling with each other , an Abbasid detachment under Khalifah ibn al @-@ Mubarak and Lu 'lu ' attacked the Qarmatians on their flank and broke their lines . Here too the Qarmatians fled pursued by the government forces , who took some 600 horses and 200 necklaces as booty . 
 Muhammad himself confronted the Qarmatian centre along with several other officers : Khaqan , Nasr al @-@ <unk> , and Muhammad ibn <unk> led forces from the right flank , <unk> <unk> , Muhammad ibn Ishaq ibn <unk> , Ahmad ibn Kayghalagh and his brother Ibrahim , al @-@ Mubarak al @-@ <unk> , Rabi 'a ibn Muhammad , Muhajir ibn <unk> , al @-@ Muzaffar ibn Hajj , Abdallah ibn Hamdan ( al @-@ Husayn 's brother ) , <unk> the Elder , Wasif al @-@ <unk> , Bishr al @-@ <unk> , and Muhammad ibn <unk> . With the support of troops from the right wing , who after repelling the Qarmatian left flanked the Qarmatian centre , the Abbasids were victorious here as well . The Qarmatians broke and were pursued over several miles . Muhammad ibn Sulayman , fearful lest his army disperse itself during the pursuit , or leave the infantry and the baggage train — guarded by Isa ibn Muhammad al @-@ <unk> — exposed to a Qarmatian attack , halted the pursuit of his own detachment after half a mile . He set up camp there for the night , and with the caliphal spear as a rallying point , began regrouping the various squadrons . Despite the overwhelming victory , Muhammad and his officers remained on guard during the night , concerned of a possible Qarmatian attack . 
 Several Qarmatian commanders , including the da 'i al @-@ Nu 'man , were killed , while the Sahib al @-@ Shama along with his cousin al @-@ <unk> , his associate al @-@ <unk> and a Greek page fled through the desert , trying to reach Kufa . By the time they reached the locality of al @-@ <unk> on the Euphrates Road near al @-@ Rahba , they had run out of supplies . When a servant was sent to buy provisions in the settlement , he aroused the suspicions of the villagers with his strange dress and manner , so that they notified a local official , Abu <unk> . The latter rode out with an escort , and after interrogating the servant went to the Qarmatians ' camp and took them prisoner . The captured the Sahib al @-@ Shama and his companions were then escorted by Abu <unk> and the local governor , Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn <unk> , to Caliph al @-@ Muktafi in al @-@ Raqqah , which they entered on 19 December . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Al @-@ Muktafi returned to Baghdad with the senior captives , who were thrown into prison . Muhammad ibn Sulayman remained at al @-@ Raqqah to scour the countryside and round up the remaining rebels . He too then returned to Baghdad , which he entered in triumph on 2 February 904 . Eleven days later , on 13 February , Muhammad and the sahib al @-@ shurta of the capital , Ahmad ibn Muhammad al @-@ <unk> , presided over the public execution of the Qarmatian leaders and Qarmatian sympathizers rounded up from Kufa and Baghdad . 
 The Abbasid victory near Hama did not yet fully eradicate the Qarmatians from the area ; in 906 , the Banu Kalb , under the Qarmatian Abu Ghanim Nasr , rose up in rebellion , raided the <unk> and Tiberias , and launched a failed attack on Damascus . Nasr was soon defeated and killed , however , and the Qarmatian activities shifted east to the Euphrates , where Zikrawayh ibn <unk> ( the father of al @-@ Husayn and Yahya ) had also rebelled in 906 near Kufa . He too was killed in the next year during an attack on the hajj caravan . With these defeats , the Qarmatian movement virtually ceased to exist in the Syrian Desert , although their counterparts in Bahrayn remained an active threat for several decades to come . 
 More importantly , the defeat of the Qarmatians at Hama opened the way for the Abbasids to recover the provinces of southern Syria and Egypt , held by the Tulunids . The Tulunid regime had become enfeebled due to internal strife , rivalries and the defection of senior officers , and the recent failures against the Qarmatians . In 904 , Muhammad ibn Sulayman led an army into Syria . The campaign met with little opposition ; the Tulunid emir Harun ibn Khumarawayh was even assassinated by his uncles , whereupon several senior commanders switched sides . The Abbasids entered the Egyptian capital Fustat in January 905 without a fight , completing the reconquest of the province . 
 = No. 5 Service Flying Training School RAAF = 
 No. 5 Service Flying Training School ( No. 5 SFTS ) was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) flight training unit that operated during World War II . It was one of eight Service Flying Training Schools established by the RAAF to provide intermediate and advanced flying instruction to new pilots as part of Australia 's contribution to the Empire Air Training Scheme . No. 5 SFTS was formed at RAAF Station Uranquinty , New South Wales , in October 1941 , and disbanded in February 1946 . Its staff and equipment were employed to re @-@ establish No. 1 Flying Training School , which transferred to RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria , the following year . Care and Maintenance Unit Uranquinty was also formed from No. 5 SFTS 's facilities , to look after surplus aircraft at the base prior to their disposal , and disbanded in December 1948 . 
 = = History = = 
 RAAF aircrew training expanded dramatically following the outbreak of World War II , in response to Australia 's participation in the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . The Air Force 's pre @-@ war flight training facility , No. 1 Flying Training School at RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria , was supplanted in 1940 – 41 by twelve Elementary Flying Training Schools ( EFTS ) , eight Service Flying Training Schools ( SFTS ) , and the Central Flying School ( CFS ) . While CFS turned out new flight instructors , the EFTS provided basic training to prospective pilots who , if successful , would go on to an SFTS for further instruction that focussed on operational ( or " service " ) flying techniques . 
 The course at SFTS typically consisted of two streams , intermediate and advanced , and included such techniques as instrument flying , night flying , advanced aerobatics , formation flying , dive bombing , and aerial gunnery . The total duration of training varied during the war as demand for aircrew fluctuated . Initially running for 16 weeks , the course was cut to 10 weeks ( which included 75 hours flying time ) in October 1940 . A year later it was raised to 12 weeks ( including 100 hours flying time ) , and again to 16 weeks two months later . It continued to increase after this , peaking at 28 weeks in June 1944 . 
 No. 5 Service Flying Training School ( No. 5 SFTS ) was formed at RAAF Station Uranquinty , New South Wales , in October 1941 , and came under the control of No. 2 Training Group . Along with No. 2 Service Flying Training School at nearby RAAF Station Forest Hill , and the later No. 1 Basic Flying Training School at Uranquinty , No. 5 SFTS was one of the so @-@ called " Wagga Flying Training Schools " , which together graduated over 3 @,@ 000 pilots in the 1940s and ' 50s . The unit 's inaugural commanding officer was Group Captain Ulex Ewart , a graduate of the Royal Military College , Duntroon , who had been seconded to the Air Force and learnt to fly on the first cadet course at No. 1 Flying Training School in 1923 . At the time of its formation , No. 5 SFTS had a strength of 792 personnel , responsible for training about 200 pilots . One of its original instructors was Flying Officer Bill Newton , who was later awarded the Victoria Cross for bombing raids in New Guinea . Following the outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941 , the school 's CAC Wirraway single @-@ engined trainers were classified as Second Line ( Reserve ) aircraft in the defence of Australia . 
 No. 5 SFTS began flight training in February 1942 using 28 Wirraways . The unit grew over the next two years , and by early 1944 was operating 128 Wirraways , two de Havilland DH.84 Dragons , two de Havilland Moth Minors and a CAC Wackett . It typically graduated one course of pilots each month , although the wastage rate sometimes exceeded 40 per cent . Among its graduates was Len Waters , the first Aboriginal Australian military aviator , and the only one to serve as a fighter pilot in the RAAF during World War II . As a training facility , No. 5 SFTS regularly suffered flying accidents . Forty @-@ two of its students died during the war , an average of around one per month . A near miss involving more experienced pilots occurred at the school in December 1943 , when aces Clive Caldwell and John Waddy , then instructors at No. 2 Operational Training Unit in Mildura , almost collided when they crossed paths during an aerobatics display over the base . 
 No. 5 SFTS reached a strength of some 2 @,@ 000 personnel during the war , and graduated 1 @,@ 515 pilots . The rate of flying conducted at the school declined during 1945 and , by November , its aircraft were being readied for storage . In February 1946 , No. 5 SFTS was disbanded and its staff and equipment used to re @-@ establish No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) , which had operated during the war as No. 1 Service Flying Training School prior to disbanding in 1944 . No. 1 FTS was allocated 55 Wirraways , two de Havilland Tiger Moths , and one Avro Anson , though in the event it undertook little flying before relocating to Point Cook in August 1947 . Post @-@ war demobilisation saw the establishment of several RAAF Care and Maintenance Units ( CMU ) , which were responsible for the upkeep of surplus equipment prior to disposal . No. 5 SFTS spawned Care and Maintenance Unit Uranquinty to look after aircraft stored at the base . These were auctioned off in November 1948 , and CMU Uranquinty was dissolved the next month . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following the departure of No. 1 FTS in 1947 , no flying was conducted at Uranquinty until 1951 , when the newly formed No. 1 Basic Flying Training School ( No. 1 BFTS ) inherited the base facilities . No. 1 BFTS transferred to Point Cook in 1958 , at which point Uranquinty was closed . The RAAF units that operated at the base formed a close connection with the local community . In 1999 , a memorial to No. 5 SFTS was erected at Wirraway Park , Uranquinty . An additional panel to the memorial was unveiled in September 2002 by the Governor @-@ General of Australia , Peter Hollingworth ; the proceedings included an aerial display by a Pilatus PC @-@ 9 of the Roulettes aerobatic team , and the arrival of a Wirraway from Temora Aviation Museum , the first time in 45 years that one of these trainers had landed at Uranquinty . 
 = Mary of Hungary ( governor of the Netherlands ) = 
 Mary of Austria ( 15 September 1505 – 18 October 1558 ) , also known as Mary of Hungary , was queen consort of Hungary and Bohemia as the wife of King Louis II , and was later Governor of the Habsburg Netherlands . 
 The daughter of Queen Joanna and King Philip I of Castile , Mary married King Louis II of Hungary and Bohemia in 1515 . Their marriage was happy but short and childless . Upon her husband 's death following the Battle of Mohács in 1526 , Queen Mary governed Hungary as regent in the name of the new king , her brother , Ferdinand I. 
 Following the death of their aunt Margaret in 1530 , Mary was asked by her eldest brother , Emperor Charles V , to assume the governance of the Netherlands and guardianship over their nieces , Dorothea and Christina of Denmark . As governor of the Netherlands , Mary faced riots and a difficult relationship with the Emperor . Throughout her tenure she continuously attempted to ensure peace between the Emperor and the King of France . Although she never enjoyed governing and asked for permission to resign several times , the Queen succeeded in creating a unity between the provinces , as well as in securing for them a measure of independence from both France and the Holy Roman Empire . After her final resignation , the frail Queen moved to Castile , where she died . 
 Having inherited the Habsburg lip and not very feminine looks , Mary was not considered physically attractive . Her portraits , letters , and comments by her contemporaries do not assign her the easy Burgundian charm possessed by her grandmother , Duchess Mary of Burgundy , and her aunt Margaret . Nevertheless , she proved to be a determined and skillful politician , as well as an enthusiastic patron of literature , music , and hunting . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Brussels on 15 September 1505 , between ten and eleven in the morning , Archduchess Mary of Austria was the fifth child of King Philip I and Queen Joanna of Castile . Her birth was very difficult ; the Queen 's life was in danger and it took her a month to recover . On 20 September , she was baptized by Nicolas Le <unk> , Bishop of Arras , and named after her paternal grandmother , Mary of Burgundy , who had died in 1482 . Her godfather was her paternal grandfather , Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I. 
 On 17 March 1506 , Emperor Maximilian promised to marry her to the first son born to King Vladislaus II of Hungary . At the same time , the two monarchs decided that a brother of Mary would marry Vladislaus ' daughter Anne . Three months later , Vladislaus ' wife , Anne of Foix @-@ <unk> , gave birth to a son , Louis Jagiellon . Queen Anne died in childbirth and the royal physicians made great efforts to keep the sickly Louis alive . 
 After the death of Mary 's father in September 1506 , her mother 's mental health began to deteriorate . Mary , along with her brother , Archduke Charles , and her sisters , <unk> Eleanor and Isabella , was put into the care of her paternal aunt , Archduchess Margaret , while two other siblings , Archduke Ferdinand and posthumously @-@ born Archduchess Catherine , remained in Castile . Mary , Isabella , and Eleanor were educated together at their aunt 's court in Mechelen . Their music teacher was Henry <unk> . 
 = = Queen of Hungary and Bohemia = = 
 Mary was summoned to the court of her grandfather Maximilian in 1514 . On 22 July 1515 , Mary and Louis were married in St. Stephen 's Cathedral , Vienna . At the same time , Louis ' sister Anne was betrothed to an as yet unspecified brother of Mary , with Emperor Maximilian acting as proxy . Due to their age , it was decided that the newly married couple would not live together for a few more years . Anne eventually married Mary 's brother Ferdinand and came to Vienna , where the double sisters @-@ in @-@ law were educated together until 1516 . That year , Mary 's father @-@ in @-@ law died , making Louis and Mary king and queen of Hungary and Bohemia . Mary moved to Innsbruck , where she was educated until 1521 . Maximilian encouraged her interest in hunting , while childhood lessons prompted an interest in music . This passion would later be demonstrated during her tenure as governor of the Netherlands . 
 = = = Life with Louis = = = 
 Mary travelled to Hungary in June 1521 , two and a half years after Emperor Maximilian 's death . She was anointed and crowned queen of Hungary by Simon <unk> , Bishop of Zagreb , in Székesfehérvár on 11 December 1521 . The queen 's coronation was followed by brilliant festivities . The royal marriage was blessed on 13 January 1522 in Buda . Mary 's anointment and coronation as queen of Bohemia took place on 1 June 1522 . 
 Mary and Louis fell in love when they were reunited in Buda . At first , Queen Mary had no influence over politics of Hungary and Bohemia because of her youth . Her court was replete with Germans and Dutch , who formed a base for the interests of the House of Habsburg . By 1524 Mary negotiated significant authority and influence for herself . In 1525 , she took control over one powerful political faction and neutralised another . Austria 's ambassador , Andrea de Borgo , was appointed by the Queen herself . 
 During her tenure as queen of Hungary , Mary attracted the interest of Martin Luther , who dedicated four psalms to her in 1526 . Despite her brother Ferdinand 's strong disapproval , Luther 's teachings held great appeal for Mary during her marriage and even more for her sister Isabella and her brother @-@ in @-@ law King Christian II of Denmark . Mary turned away from his teachings mostly because of pressure from Ferdinand . Her trusted court preacher , Johann Henckel , is also considered responsible for Mary 's return to orthodox Roman Catholicism . The return was lukewarm , but historian Helmut Georg Koenigsberger considers Mary 's reputation for sympathy with Lutheranism " much @-@ exaggerated " . 
 Louis and Mary spent their free time riding and hunting in the open country near the palace . They tried unsuccessfully to mobilize the Hungarian nobility against an imminent Ottoman invasion . Louis had inherited the crown of a country whose noblemen were fighting among themselves and against the peasantry . Hungary was deeply divided when , by the end of 1525 , it became clear that the Ottoman Sultan Suleiman I was planning to invade . 
 = = = Ottoman invasion = = = 
 On 29 August 1526 , Suleiman and his army broke through Hungary 's southern defences . Louis and his entire government marched out with a small army of 20 @,@ 000 men . The Battle of Mohács was over in less than two hours , with the entire Hungarian army virtually annihilated . Louis tried to flee the site of the battle but slipped from his frightened horse and drowned . Mary would mourn him for the rest of her life . 
 Hungary was divided into three parts : Ottoman Hungary - a part of the Ottoman Empire , Royal Hungary - ruled by Mary 's brother Ferdinand , and Eastern Hungarian Kingdom - ruled by John Zápolya . Ferdinand was elected King of Bohemia . Mary took a vow to never remarry and always wore the heart @-@ shaped medallion worn by her husband in the fatal Battle of Mohács . 
 = = Regency in Hungary = = 
 The day after her husband 's death , Mary notified Ferdinand of the defeat and asked him to come to Hungary . She requested troops to support her until his arrival . Ferdinand , busy in Bohemia where he had already been elected king , instead named Mary his regent in Hungary . 
 Mary spent the following year working to secure the election of Ferdinand as King of Hungary . On 14 February 1527 , she asked for his permission to resign as regent . Permission was denied , and Mary had to remain in the post until the summer of 1527 , when he finally came to Hungary and assumed the crown , to Mary 's relief . 
 Mary soon experienced financial troubles , illnesses , and loneliness . In 1528 , her aunt Margaret suggested that she should marry King James V of Scotland . Mary rejected the idea because she had loved her husband and did not wish another marriage . In 1530 Charles again suggested that she should remarry ; he proposed to arrange a marriage to Frederick of Bavaria , who had unsuccessfully courted Mary 's sister Eleanor sixteen years before . Mary rejected him as well . 
 Ferdinand offered Mary the post of regent again in 1528 , but she declined , saying that " such affairs need a person wiser and older " . Ferdinand persisted in drawing Mary into his affairs throughout 1529 . Archduchess Margaret died on 1 December the next year , leaving the position of Governor of the Seventeen Provinces in the Netherlands vacant . Ferdinand informed her about their aunt 's death , saying that her affairs might now " take a different course " . 
 = = Governor of the Netherlands = = 
 On 3 January 1531 , Mary 's older brother , Holy Roman Emperor Charles V , requested that she assume the regency of the Netherlands . Charles was ruling a vast empire and was constantly in need of reliable family members who could govern his remote territories in his name . Mary reluctantly accepted on Charles ' insistence . On 6 October 1537 , in Monzón , the Emperor wrote to her : 
 I am only one and I can 't be everywhere ; and I must be where I ought to be and where I can , and often enough only where I can be and not where I would like to be ; for one can 't do more than one can do . 
 Mary served as regent of the Netherlands so well that Charles forced her to retain the post and granted her more powers than their aunt had enjoyed . Unlike her aunt , Mary was deeply unhappy during her tenure as governor and never enjoyed her role . In May 1531 , having governed for only four months , Mary told her brother Ferdinand the experience was like having a rope around her neck . While Margaret had been considered truly feminine , flexible , adaptable , humorous and charming , Mary was unyielding and authoritarian . Margaret accomplished her goals using a smile , a joke , or a word of praise , but Mary used cynical and biting comments . Unlike her aunt , Mary was unable to forgive or forget . She recognized this lack of " power as a woman " as her main problem . 
 = = = Guardianship over nieces = = = 
 Assuming the regency in the Netherlands meant assuming the guardianship of her nieces , Dorothea and Christina of Denmark , the daughters of her older sister , Queen Isabella of Denmark , who had died in 1526 . Upon Isabella 's death , the princesses had been cared for by Archduchess Margaret . Charles now relied upon Mary to arrange marriages for them , especially for Dorothea , whom he wanted to place on the Danish throne . 
 In 1532 , Francesco II Sforza , Duke of Milan , proposed a marriage with Christina , who was then 11 years old . Charles agreed to the marriage and allowed its immediate consummation . Mary determinedly opposed this decision , explaining to Charles that Christina was too young for consummation of the marriage . Charles ignored her , but she nevertheless managed to delay the marriage . She first told the Milanese envoy that her niece was ill and then took her to another part of the Netherlands for " serious affairs " . Christina was finally married on 28 September 1532 , but Mary managed to postpone her departure until 11 March 1533 . 
 Immediately after Christina 's departure , Mary fell ill and requested that she be allowed to resign as governor , but Charles did not allow it . A year later , Dorothea too was married . A few months after Dorothea 's departure , the now widowed Christina returned to her aunt 's court . King Henry VIII of England immediately proposed marriage to Christina , and Charles urged Mary to negotiate the marriage . She was not in favour of the union , and delayed . Henry was excommunicated in 1539 , at which point Charles had to end the negotiations . 
 = = = Relationship with Charles = = = 
 The Emperor assured Mary that he had no doubts about her loyalty to the Roman Catholic Church . He had learned that the Queen could not easily be bullied , especially not in matters which affected her personally . Yet , upon leaving the States General in October 1531 , Charles gave her a warning , saying that if his parent , wife , child or sibling became a follower of Luther , he would consider them his greatest enemy . Mary was thus forced to suppress Protestantism in the Netherlands , regardless of her own religious tolerance . However , she always strived to enforce her brother 's laws on religion as little as possible . She was accused of protecting Protestants on several occasions . 
 Her determination sometimes caused clashes of wills with Charles . In most matters of patronage , Mary had to defer to Charles , which is why his relations in this area were not much better with Mary than with their aunt Margaret . He often criticized her decisions , which negatively affected their otherwise affectionate relationship . 
 = = = Riots = = = 
 Mary became worried about losing authority and was having trouble with the finances in February 1534 . She complained that the budget could not be balanced even during the times of peace . Charles assured her that she was doing her best . 
 The Queen complained to Charles in August 1537 that the Low Countries were no longer governable and said he should come himself . In fact , Mary handled the crisis quite well and kept a cool head in public . In October , she travelled to the north of France to meet her brother @-@ in @-@ law , King Francis I of France , the second husband of her sister Eleanor . On October 23 , they signed a treaty . Francis thereby promised Mary that he would not help those who rebelled against her , while the Queen promised to compensate certain French noblemen who lost their land in the Low Countries during the Italian Wars . 
 = = = Seeking peace = = = 
 In 1534 , Mary prepared a proposal for a defensive union of all the provinces in her councils . She made the proposal at the States General in Mechelen in July , citing her brother , who had requested the provinces assist each other . The plan had to be given up and , after Mary and Eleanor 's failure to negotiate peace between the Empire and France , Mary 's letters to Charles began to resemble the theatrical outbursts of their aunt Margaret . 
 Mary strived for peace in the Netherlands . Charles paid no attention to the problems she was facing as governor and often ignored her warnings . One such incident led to Charles 's loss of the city of Metz to France . Mary was forced to wage war against France in 1537 and to deal with the Revolt of Ghent between 1538 and 1540 . Mary 's appointment as Governor of the Netherlands was renewed on 14 October 1540 , after the revolt in Ghent had been subdued . 
 = = = Resignation = = = 
 The Queen had to mediate between her brothers in 1555 , when Charles decided to abdicate as emperor and leave the government of the Netherlands to his son Philip , despite Ferdinand 's objections . When Mary learned of Charles 's decision , she informed him that she too would resign . Both Charles and Philip urged her to remain in the post , but she refused . She chronicled the difficulties she had faced due to her gender , the fact that she could not act as she thought she should have because of disagreements with Charles , and her age . Furthermore , she did not wish to accommodate to the ways of her nephew after years of getting used to Charles 's demands . The actual reason for Mary 's resignation was her numerous disagreements with her nephew . She asked for Charles 's permission to leave the Netherlands upon her resignation , fearing that she would be drawn into politics again if she remained . 
 Charles finally allowed his sister to resign . She formally announced her decision on 24 September 1555 and dismissed her household on 1 October . On 25 October , her authority was transferred to Philip , who , despite his personal dislike of his aunt , tried to convince her to resume the post . After another quarrel with Philip , Mary retired to Turnhout . She remained in the Netherlands one more year . 
 = = Life in Castile = = 
 Mary wished to retire to Castile and live with her recently widowed sister Eleanor , near Charles , who had retired . She was afraid of moving to Castile because , although her mentally unstable mother Joanna ( who died aged 77 in April 1555 ) had been sovereign there , Mary had never lived in Castile . She was afraid that Eleanor 's death would leave her alone in a country whose customs she did not know . In the end , she decided to move to Castile , while retaining the possibility of moving back to the Netherlands in case she could not adjust to the Castilian customs . Charles , Eleanor , and Mary sailed from Ghent on 15 September 1556 . 
 Although she repeatedly assured her brother that she had no intention of occupying herself with the affairs of state , Mary offered to become adviser to her niece Joan , who was serving as regent for Philip . Joan did not wish to share power and declined her aunt 's offer . 
 Mary did not enjoy her retirement for long ; Eleanor died in her arms in February 1558 . The grief @-@ stricken queen travelled to Charles to ask him for advice about her future . Charles told her that he wanted her to resume regency in the Netherlands , and promised a home and a large income , but Mary declined the offer . Her nephew Philip then urged her advisor to convince her to return . When Charles became ill in August , Mary accepted the offer and decided that she would become governor once again . 
 In September , Mary was fully prepared to depart for the Netherlands and resume her post when she was informed of Charles 's death . Distressed by the death of another sibling , the Queen , who had suffered from a heart disease most of her life , had two heart attacks in October . Both were so severe that her doctors thought that she had died . When Joan visited her , Mary was still determined to fulfill the promise she had given to Charles and assume the regency in the Netherlands , but she was weak and feverish . She died only few weeks later , in <unk> on 18 October 1558 . 
 In her last will , Mary left all her possessions to Charles . Since Charles had died , Philip inherited his aunt 's property . Shortly before her death , she decided that Philip and Joan should execute her will . She requested that her heart @-@ shaped gold medallion , once worn by her husband , be melted down and the gold distributed to the poor . 
 Queen Mary was first buried in the Monastery of Saint Benedict in Valladolid . Fifteen years after her death , Philip ordered that the remains be transferred to El Escorial . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mary was a keen art collector , and owned several important masterpieces of Early Netherlandish painting as well as more contemporary works . These included the Deposition of Christ by Rogier van der Weyden , now in the Museo de Prado , and the Arnolfini Portrait by Jan van Eyck , now in the National Gallery , London . Most of the collection passed to the Spanish Royal Collection after her death . 
 Queen Mary of Hungary was a great patron of music . She supported both sacred and secular music at her court in the Netherlands , where her maître de <unk> was Benedictus <unk> . Several elaborate music manuscripts that she commissioned during her governance are preserved in Spain in the monastery of Montserrat . 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = New Jersey Route 208 = 
 Route 208 is a state highway in the northern part of New Jersey in the United States . It runs 10 @.@ 07 miles ( 16 @.@ 21 km ) from an interchange with Route 4 and County Route 79 ( Saddle River Road ) in Fair Lawn northwest to an interchange with Interstate 287 in Oakland . The route runs through suburban areas of Bergen and Passaic counties as four- to six @-@ lane divided highway . It is constructed like a freeway , as intersections with cross roads are controlled by interchanges , but is not a controlled access road as several driveways exist . The route runs through the communities of Fair Lawn , Glen Rock , Hawthorne , Wyckoff , and Franklin Lakes along the way , interchanging with County Route 507 in Fair Lawn and County Route 502 in Franklin Lakes . 
 What is now Route 208 was initially planned as Route S4B in 1929 , a spur of Route 4 that was to run from Fair Lawn northwest to the New York border in Greenwood Lake , where it would eventually connect to New York State Route 208 . This route replaced what was planned as a part of Route 3 in 1927 between Paterson and Greenwood Lake . By the time the route was renumbered to Route 208 in 1953 to match NY 208 , only a portion of the route in Fair Lawn from Route 4 to Maple Avenue had been built . Route 208 was completed west to U.S. Route 202 in Oakland by 1960 as a two @-@ lane undivided road ; it would be built into its present configuration in later years . A Route 208 freeway was planned across the Ramapo Mountains from Oakland to connect to a proposed NY 208 freeway at Greenwood Lake ; however , it was never built . After Interstate 287 was extended from Montville to the New York border in 1993 , it took over the alignment of Route 208 between U.S. Route 202 and the route ’ s current northern terminus . The last traffic signal along Route 208 at McBride Avenue was removed in 1997 and the interchange with Route 4 and Saddle River Road was reconstructed in 2002 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 208 ( dedicated as the World War II Veterans Memorial Highway ) is constructed like a freeway , however , at no point does it meet the standard of controlled access . Several streets and private driveways abut the road throughout its length , with right @-@ in / right @-@ out access ; however , no traffic may cross the highway at grade . Traffic moves in at least two lanes in each direction for the road 's entire length of 10 @.@ 07 miles ( 16 @.@ 21 km ) , widening briefly to three lanes next to a commercial area in Fair Lawn and near its northern terminus . 
 The road originates at an interchange with Route 4 in Fair Lawn , Bergen County that also includes ramps for County Route 79 ( Saddle River Road ) , heading to the west near residential areas . Shortly after beginning , a ramp from southbound Route 208 provides access via Virginia Drive to westbound Route 4 . The next exit is a partial interchange with County Route 78 ( Morlot Avenue ) , followed by a full interchange with Plaza Road . Past the latter , the route passes over New Jersey Transit ’ s Bergen County Line and comes to a southbound exit and entrance with Berdan Avenue . From here , the road turns to the northwest , passing near more neighborhoods before coming to an interchange with County Route 76 ( Fair Lawn Avenue ) . Past this interchange , the northbound direction of Route 208 widens to three lanes and it continues into commercial areas , with some driveways along the road and an intersection with McBride Avenue . At this point , the highway passes an industrial park , including a Nabisco plant on the right side . A short distance later , the road reaches the interchange with County Route 507 ( Maple Avenue ) and County Route 127 ( <unk> Road ) . Past this interchange , the road enters Glen Rock and has a northbound exit and entrance with De Boer Drive before crossing over the New Jersey Transit Main Line . Past the railroad crossing , Route 208 heads through wooded residential areas prior to a northbound interchange with County Route 653 ( Lincoln Avenue ) , where it enters Hawthorne , Passaic County . County Route 653 and Route 208 are connected by a short segment of County Route 664 ( Rea Avenue ) . 
 The highway has turnoffs in each direction for Utter Avenue before passing beneath the New York , Susquehanna and Western Railway track prior the interchange with County Route 659 ( <unk> Road ) . Past here , the highway turns north and climbs a hill , passing the Hawthorne Gospel Church on the right . It re @-@ enters Bergen County in Wyckoff , just before the Grandview Avenue interchange . From here , Route 208 largely resembles a wooded parkway , although there are a few driveways off the road . The road turns northwest and interchanges with County Route 93 ( Cedar Hill Avenue ) before passing near more homes and coming to an interchange with County Route <unk> ( Russell Avenue ) . The road continues into Franklin Lakes and interchanges with County Route 502 ( Ewing Avenue ) before turning west @-@ northwest and coming to an exit for County Route <unk> ( Summit Avenue ) . Past Summit Avenue , the road has two interchanges providing access to the Becton Dickinson headquarters campus , where the road carries three lanes in each direction . It narrows back to two lanes in each direction before coming to the interchange with County Route 117 ( Colonial Road ) and County Route 89 ( High Mountain Road ) . The final exit heading northbound is for Interstate 287 north , an interchange that includes another crossing of the New York , Susquehanna and Western Railway . After passing the exit , Route 208 northbound merges into Interstate 287 southbound at the Franklin Lakes and Oakland border . 
 = = History = = 
 NJ 208 was first plotted in 1929 as Route S4B , a spur off Route 4 that was to run from Fair Lawn northwest through Ringwood , and West Milford to the New York border near Greenwood Lake . This route was to replace what was to be a portion of Route 3 between Paterson and the New York border that was designated in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering . The road was projected to continue into New York and continue through Sterling Forest and Monroe , New York , where it would join New York 's Route 208 at its intersection with New York State Route 17 . By 1953 , the portion of Route S4B between Route 4 and Maple Avenue in Fair Lawn was completed ; that same year , it was renumbered to Route 208 in order to match NY 208 . By 1960 , the road was extended to a northern terminus at U.S. Route 202 and West Oakland Avenue in Oakland , where traffic could exit and continue over Skyline Drive to Ringwood . When first constructed , this portion of Route 208 was a two @-@ lane undivided road . By 1969 , the portion between Maple Avenue and <unk> Road was widened to a divided highway with the entire route built into a multi @-@ lane divided highway by the 1980s . 
 Meanwhile , plans still existed to build Route 208 past Oakland to the New York border . Passaic County called for a divided highway to bypass Skyline Drive , and in 1967 the New Jersey Department of Transportation proposed a Route 208 freeway through the Ramapo Mountains that would run from Oakland to the New York border in Greenwood Lake , where it would connect to a proposed NY 208 freeway ( called the Orange Expressway ) that would continue north to Interstate 84 in <unk> , New York . This freeway , which was to cost $ 66 @.@ 3 million , was to improve traffic in the resort areas of the Ramapo Mountains and also connect to the proposed Route 94 freeway leading to Warren County and the proposed Route 178 freeway leading to Morris County . In 1975 , this proposed freeway was recommended by the Tri @-@ State Regional Planning Commission to be completed by 2000 . However , it was never built . 
 When Interstate 287 was extended from Montville to the New York border in 1993 , it took over the alignment of Route 208 between U.S. Route 202 and the current northern terminus of Route 208 . In 1995 , the last traffic signal along Route 208 at McBride Avenue was turned off . In 2002 , construction was completed on a $ 32 million project that improved the interchange with Route 4 in Fair Lawn . This interchange saw improvements of the ramps and bridges , including the Route 208 bridge over Saddle River Road . The Route 208 freeway , like many others in New Jersey , once had solar powered emergency call boxes every 1 @.@ 0 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) ; however with the advent of cell phones the usage of these call boxes became extremely limited . To save on maintenance costs , the NJDOT removed these call boxes in 2005 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Len Hutton = 
 Sir Leonard " Len " Hutton ( 23 June 1916 – 6 September 1990 ) was an English cricketer who played as an opening batsman for Yorkshire from 1934 to 1955 and for England in 79 Test matches between 1937 and 1955 . Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack described him as one of the greatest batsmen in the history of cricket . He set a record in 1938 for the highest individual innings in a Test match in only his sixth Test appearance , scoring 364 runs against Australia , a milestone that stood for nearly 20 years ( and remains an England Test record ) . In 1952 , he became the first professional cricketer of the 20th Century to captain England in Tests ; under his captaincy England won the Ashes the following year for the first time in 19 years . Following the Second World War , he was the mainstay of England 's batting , and the team depended greatly on his success . 
 Marked out as a potential star from his teenage years , Hutton made his debut for Yorkshire in 1934 and quickly established himself at county level . By 1937 , he was playing for England and when the war interrupted his career in 1939 , critics regarded him as one of the leading batsmen in the country , and even the world . During the war , he received a serious injury to his arm while taking part in a commando training course . His arm never fully recovered , forcing him to alter his batting style . When cricket restarted , Hutton resumed his role as one of England 's leading batsmen ; by the time of England 's tour to Australia in 1950 – 51 , the team relied heavily on his batting and did so for the remainder of his career . As a batsman , Hutton was cautious and built his style on a sound defence . Although capable of attacking strokeplay , both Yorkshire and England depended on him , and awareness of this affected his style . Hutton remains statistically among the best batsmen to have played Test cricket . 
 Hutton captained the England Test team between 1952 and 1955 , although his leadership was at times controversial . He pursued a cautious approach and faced criticism for negativity . Never comfortable in the role , Hutton felt that the former amateur players who administered and governed English cricket did not trust him . In 23 Tests as captain , he won eight Tests and lost four with the others drawn . Worn out by the mental and physical demands of his role , Hutton retired from regular first @-@ class cricket during the 1955 season . Knighted for his contributions to cricket in 1956 , he went on to be a Test selector , a journalist and broadcaster . He also worked as a representative for an engineering firm until retiring from the job in 1984 . Hutton remained involved in cricket , and became president of Yorkshire County Cricket Club in 1990 . He died a few months afterwards in September 1990 , aged 74 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hutton was born on 23 June 1916 in the Moravian community of <unk> , Pudsey , the youngest of five children to Henry Hutton and his wife Lily ( née <unk> ) . Many of his family were local cricketers and Hutton soon became immersed in the sport , which he both played and read about with enthusiasm . He practised in the playground of Littlemoor Council School , which he attended from 1921 until 1930 , and at Pudsey St Lawrence Cricket Club , which he joined as a junior . At the age of 12 , he made his first appearance for Pudsey St Lawrence 's second eleven and by 1929 had reached the first team . Locals encouraged him to meet the Yorkshire and England cricketer Herbert Sutcliffe , a neighbour , from whom Hutton received coaching in Sutcliffe 's garden . Sutcliffe was impressed by the young batsman , and commended him to Yorkshire as a good prospect . 
 Following this endorsement , Hutton went to the county 's indoor practice shed at Headingley in February 1930 . George Hirst , a former Yorkshire cricketer responsible for assessing and coaching young players , believed that Hutton 's batting technique was essentially already complete . Bill Bowes , the Yorkshire pace bowler , was equally impressed , and helped Hutton to correct a minor flaw in his technique . Hutton was sufficiently encouraged to decide to attempt a career in professional cricket , but at the prompting of his parents decided to learn a trade as well . During 1930 , he watched the Australian Don Bradman hit 334 not out at Headingley in a Test match , then a record individual score in Tests — which he himself would surpass eight years later . Later that year , Hutton enrolled at Pudsey Grammar School where he spent a year studying technical drawing and quantitative work before joining his father at a local building firm , Joseph Verity . After becoming a professional cricketer , Hutton continued to work for the company during winter months until 1939 . 
 = = Career before the Second World War = = 
 = = = First years with Yorkshire = = = 
 By 1933 , Hutton was regularly opening the batting for the Pudsey St Lawrence first team in the Bradford Cricket League . By close observation of his opening partner , the former Yorkshire county batsman Edgar <unk> , Hutton further developed his batting technique , especially in defence . The local press soon identified Hutton as a player of promise , particularly after he scored a match @-@ winning 108 not out in the Priestley Cup . Senior figures within Yorkshire cricket identified him as a potential successor to Percy Holmes as an opening partner to Sutcliffe ; at this stage in his career , Hutton was also considered a promising leg spin bowler . In the 1933 season Hutton was selected for the Yorkshire Second Eleven . Although he failed to score a run in either of his first two innings , over the season he scored 699 runs at an average of 69 @.@ 90 . Yorkshire appointed Cyril Turner as Hutton 's mentor ; Hedley Verity and Bowes also offered Hutton guidance in his early career . 
 Hutton made his first @-@ class debut for Yorkshire in 1934 , at the age of 17 the youngest Yorkshire player since Hirst , 45 years earlier . In his first match , against Cambridge University , he was run out for a duck but scored an unbeaten 50 runs in his second match ; he followed this with another half @-@ century against Warwickshire on his County Championship debut . He played regularly for the rest of the season but to prevent his overexposure to Championship cricket , Yorkshire limited his appearances and returned him periodically to the second eleven . In matches for the first team , Hutton shared large first @-@ wicket partnerships with Wilf Barber and with Arthur Mitchell , before scoring his maiden first @-@ class century in an innings of 196 against Worcestershire . At the time , he was the youngest Yorkshire batsman to score a first @-@ class century . He finished the season with a total of 863 runs at an average of 33 @.@ 19 ; 
 An operation on his nose before the 1935 season delayed Hutton 's appearance on the cricket field that year . Attempting to return too quickly , he endured poor health which limited his subsequent appearances and effectiveness ; by the middle of August he had scored a total of just 73 runs . A century against Middlesex led to run of bigger scores , and his contribution to Yorkshire 's County Championship victory that season was 577 runs at an average in first @-@ class matches of 28 @.@ 85 . In the winter of 1935 – 36 Hutton went on his first overseas tour , as Yorkshire visited Jamaica . In the 1936 season he reached 1 @,@ 000 runs in a season for the first time — 1 @,@ 282 runs at an average of 29 @.@ 81 — and was awarded his county cap in July . He took part in several large partnerships through the season , including one of 230 with Sutcliffe , although he experienced a sequence of low scores in May and June . 
 Throughout his first seasons , Hutton faced press criticism for his caution and reluctance to play attacking shots . Although regarding him a certain England selection in the future , critics thought Hutton slightly dull and pedestrian . Yorkshire remained unconcerned ; cricket writer Alan Hill believes Hutton 's subsequent success was built on this initial establishment of a defensive technique . His achievements brought limited recognition , owing to the high level of expectation surrounding him . This sense of frustration was heightened by comments from Sutcliffe in 1935 , when he wrote that Hutton was " a certainty for a place as England 's opening batsman . He is a marvel – the discovery of a generation ... His technique is that of a maestro . " Such praise was rare from Sutcliffe , but Hutton found the comments a burden , while others found them embarrassing . 
 = = = Test match debut = = = 
 After Hutton began 1937 with a series of high scores — including an innings of 271 against Derbyshire , the reigning County Champions , and 153 against Leicestershire two days later when he and Sutcliffe shared a 315 @-@ run opening partnership — he was chosen to play for England against New Zealand in the first Test match of the season . On 26 June , he made his Test debut at Lord 's Cricket Ground , scoring 0 and 1 . Retaining his place in the England team after scoring centuries for Yorkshire in the following games , he scored his maiden Test hundred on 24 July in the second Test at Old Trafford , Manchester . He batted for three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours to score exactly 100 runs and shared a century opening partnership with Charlie Barnett . Hutton 's remaining two innings in the Test series yielded 14 and 12 , giving him 127 runs at an average of 25 @.@ 40 . Also in 1937 , Hutton made his first appearance for the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord 's . In total that year he scored 2 @,@ 888 runs , more than double his previous seasonal best , at an average of 56 @.@ 62 and including ten centuries . He also recorded the best bowling performance of his career , six wickets for 76 against Leicestershire , altogether taking ten wickets in the match — the only time he achieved this . His performances that year earned him selection as one of Wisden 's Cricketers of the Year . The citation praised his attitude , technique , fielding and bowling , noting however that some commentators continued to criticise his <unk> . 
 In early matches of the 1938 season , with an Ashes series against Australia pending , Hutton made three centuries and scored 93 not out . Selected for a Test trial , he shared a century opening partnership with Bill Edrich , and was selected for the first Test at Trent Bridge in Nottingham beginning on 28 June . In just over three hours , Hutton scored 100 from 221 deliveries on his Ashes debut , adding 219 with Charlie Barnett for the first wicket . England , in Wally Hammond 's first match as Test captain , posted a total of 658 for eight wickets , but the match was drawn . Hutton failed in the second Test , with two single figure scores in another drawn game . He was generally unsuccessful with the bat in the following weeks , during which the third Test was entirely rained off . Following a sequence of low scores for Yorkshire , Hutton 's finger was broken in a match against Middlesex played on a dangerous pitch at Lord 's . Consequently , he could not play in the fourth Test , played at his home ground , Headingley , in which England were soundly beaten . After missing a month of cricket , Hutton played just two games before his selection for the final Test of the series . 
 = = = Test record score = = = 
 The last Test was played at The Oval and began on 20 August 1938 . Hammond won the toss on a very good pitch for batting , and after an early wicket fell , Hutton and Maurice Leyland , his Yorkshire teammate , took the score to 347 for one wicket after the first day . Hutton was unbeaten on 160 although Australia missed a chance to dismiss him , stumped , when he had scored 40 . After a rest day , the Yorkshire batsmen took their partnership to 382 before Leyland was out . Hutton then shared substantial partnerships with Hammond and Joe Hardstaff junior , taking his personal score to 300 at the end of the second day , out of a total of 634 for five . In the process he surpassed the previous highest Test score by an England batsman in a home match . Hutton maintained caution throughout ; Wisden commented that his dominance of the bowling had become slightly monotonous after two days , although it recognised his skill . On the third day ( 23 August ) , the Australians made a concerted effort to dismiss Hutton before he broke Bradman 's 1930 record Ashes score of 334 — the record score in a Test match was Hammond 's 336 not out against New Zealand , but it was compiled against what was perceived as inferior bowling , and Bradman 's total was more prestigious . Although showing nerves as he approached the record , Hutton passed Bradman 's score with a cut off Chuck Fleetwood @-@ Smith , and extended his score to 364 before he was out , caught . Lasting for more than 13 hours , with 847 balls faced , Hutton 's innings was the longest in first @-@ class cricket at the time . It was only the sixth Test of his career . The innings was the highest individual score in a Test until Garfield Sobers scored 365 in 1958 ; in 2016 it remains the 6th highest in Tests and is the most runs scored in an innings by an English player . England eventually scored 903 , the highest team total in a Test at that time , before Hammond declared the innings closed . Australia were bowled out twice and England won by an innings and 579 runs to draw the series with one victory apiece . 
 Commentators mainly praised Hutton 's concentration and stamina ; his slow scoring , particularly when compared to Bradman 's innings of 334 , was excused on the grounds that the Oval match was played without a time limit , and run accumulation was more important than fast scoring . Furthermore , Hammond had instructed Hutton to bat as long as possible . Among views expressed by Test cricketers , Les Ames believed that while Hutton had shown great skill , a combination of a very easy wicket for batting and an unusually weak bowling attack presented an ideal opportunity . Former England captain Bob Wyatt described the innings as one of the greatest feats of concentration and endurance in the history of the game . Some critics expressed distaste at England 's approach , but this opinion was not widely shared . In the aftermath of the innings , Hutton became famous , in constant demand from the public and press who compared him to Bradman . Hutton later described the acclamation he received as one of the worst things that happened to him , not least because expectations were unreasonably high every time he subsequently batted . When the season ended , Hutton had scored 1 @,@ 874 runs in all matches at an average of 60 @.@ 45 . 
 = = = Leading batsman = = = 
 From October 1938 , Hutton toured South Africa with the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) — the name by which England teams toured at the time — under the captaincy of Hammond ; England won the series 1 – 0 , with the other four games drawn . He scored centuries in two early matches but in a match against Transvaal , a delivery from Eric Davies knocked him unconscious and forced him to miss the first Test . Unsuccessful on his return in the second Test , Hutton scored a double century in the following tour match , but had another low score in the third Test , which England won . He was more successful in the final Tests . In the fourth , on a difficult pitch for batting , he scored 92 . The final Test was drawn after ten days of play in a supposedly " timeless " Test . In a match which set a record aggregate of runs , Hutton scored 38 and 55 but his contributions were overshadowed by the heavy scoring of others . Although Hutton scored 265 runs in the Test series , at an average of 44 @.@ 16 , critics were disappointed , expecting more after his record innings of 1938 . In all first @-@ class matches , he scored 1 @,@ 168 runs at an average of 64 @.@ 88 , the highest aggregate among the tourists , and accumulated five centuries . Spectators found his batting attractive and the Wisden correspondent regarded him the most accomplished batsman on the tour . 
 In its summary of the 1939 season , Wisden noted the development of Hutton into a more exciting batsman to watch , observing that he " gave further evidence of being one of the world 's greatest batsmen " . He began to dominate opening partnerships with Sutcliffe , in contrast to prior seasons when he was the junior partner . In total , he scored 2 @,@ 883 runs , over 400 more than any other batsman and his average of 62 @.@ 27 placed him second in the national averages behind Hammond . Among his twelve centuries , Hutton scored his highest total for Yorkshire , 280 not out in six hours against Hampshire , sharing an opening partnership of 315 with Sutcliffe . His contributions helped Yorkshire to their third successive Championship . He was also successful in representative matches , scoring 86 for the Players against the Gentlemen , and compiling 480 runs ( averaging 96 @.@ 00 ) in the Test matches against West Indies . England won the series , after recording victory in the first match and drawing the others . Hutton scored 196 in the first Test , hitting his last 96 runs in 95 minutes ; he and Denis Compton scored 248 runs together in 133 minutes . After low scores in the second Test , Hutton scored 73 and 165 not out in the final game at the Oval . Facing a West Indian lead of 146 , he batted five hours in the second innings , sharing a partnership of 264 with Hammond . He ended his season with a century against Sussex in Yorkshire 's final match before the war ; two days after its conclusion , the Second World War began . 
 = = Wartime injury and recovery = = 
 At the beginning of the war , Hutton volunteered for the army and was recruited to the Army Physical Training Corps as a sergeant @-@ instructor . Although no first @-@ class cricket was played during the war , league and charity cricket matches continued and Hutton played several high @-@ profile matches in 1940 . But in March 1941 , his future in cricket was threatened by a serious injury . On the last day of a commando training course in York , Hutton fell in the gymnasium when a mat slipped from under him . He suffered a fractured left forearm and dislocated his ulna at the wrist . By the summer , surgery and rest initially looked to have repaired the injury ; Hutton returned to his unit and resumed cricket , scoring a century in one game . However , he began to suffer increasing pain and underwent more surgery to graft bone from his legs onto the injured arm . A first operation failed , but the second attempt at the end of 1941 eventually proved successful . The surgery left him with a left arm almost two inches shorter than the right . He was discharged from the army in the summer of 1942 and , after a period of recovery , began work as a civilian for the Royal Engineers , inspecting the condition of government @-@ owned properties . Hutton 's recovery and return to cricket was closely followed by the wartime press , which kept track of many pre @-@ war cricketers . 
 Hutton resumed professional cricket with Pudsey St Lawrence in 1943 , briefly captaining the team before poor results and a disagreement with the committee led him to resign the captaincy . He played for Pudsey until 1945 , batting successfully and helping the team to the Priestley Cup , but his relationship with the club remained strained and he did not play for them again after 1945 . When the war ended in 1945 , a programme of first @-@ class matches was organised , involving counties and other teams . A series of matches was played between England and an Australian Services cricket team , called Victory Tests although they were not official Test matches . Hutton played in all three games with mixed success . He scored 46 in the second match , but was struck painfully on his weak arm by a short ball from Keith Miller , whom he encountered for the first time . After scoring 81 for Yorkshire against the Australian team , Hutton scored 104 and 69 in the final " Test " . Another century followed for Yorkshire against the Australians , taking his first @-@ class run aggregate to 782 runs at an average of 48 @.@ 87 in nine games . Commentators were satisfied that his batting technique remained effective and that he could still succeed at the highest level . The showpiece match of the season was England against the Dominions at Lord 's , but Hutton was prevented from appearing by his commitments to Pudsey . 
 = = Career after the war = = 
 = = = First tour to Australia = = = 
 County cricket fully resumed in 1946 . Hutton was troubled by his injury ; his wrists no longer rotated fully and he abandoned the hook shot . Nevertheless , he scored 1 @,@ 552 runs at an average of 48 @.@ 50 , and was recognised by Wisden as Yorkshire 's most effective batsman as the county won their fourth consecutive championship title . His four centuries included 183 not out against the touring Indian team , but he was less successful in the three Tests , scoring 123 runs at an average of 30 @.@ 75 . England won the series 1 – 0 but Hutton 's only fifty was a defensive innings in the second Test , when he was troubled by a bad back . He was omitted from the Gentlemen and Players match , but was part of the MCC team touring party for the 1946 – 47 tour of Australia . 
 The MCC were reluctant to tour so soon after the war , but the Australian authorities were insistent . The tourists , led once more by Wally Hammond , were beaten 3 – 0 in the Test series , finding their opponents much stronger than expected . Hutton began the tour well , scoring two early centuries , the latter of which was described by Wisden as the best English innings of the tour . A string of other good performances drew praise from press and former players ; one such report named him the best batsman in the world . However , Hutton failed to reach a score of 50 runs in the first three Tests ; in the first , he was out for a first ball duck , and in the second , a short ball from Keith Miller struck him on his injured arm . In the second innings of the latter game , he quickly scored 37 , frequently driving the bowling of Miller and Fred Freer before the bat slipped from his hand and hit the wicket , ending the innings . Even so , the display was praised by critics . 
 In the final two Tests , Hutton shared three consecutive century opening partnerships with Cyril Washbrook . A four @-@ hour 94 in the first innings was followed by 76 in the second . Press opinion was divided over Hutton 's performance ; some critics , including the Australian bowlers , detected insecurity against fast bowling , particularly the bouncers with which Ray Lindwall and Miller targeted him . Hutton 's preferred tactic of ducking under the ball reinforced the impression that he was afraid . In the final Test , Hutton scored a century , batting through the first day to score 122 not out , his first Test century in Australia , despite another barrage from Lindwall and Miller . The Sydney Morning Herald criticised the high number of short balls bowled by the Australian pacemen , bowled at Hutton as often as three times per over . After the second day was rained off , Hutton was taken ill overnight with tonsillitis , missed the remainder of the match and flew home soon after . In all first @-@ class matches on tour , Hutton scored 1 @,@ 267 runs at an average of 70 @.@ 38 , while in the Tests , he managed 417 runs at an average of 52 @.@ 12 ; he topped both sets of averages . Wisden noted that it took him time to find form in the Tests , but that he often batted well despite ill health . Bill Bowes , covering the tour as a journalist , believed that Hutton was unable to master bowling faster than he had encountered for eight years , but acquitted himself reasonably well . 
 = = = Series against South Africa and West Indies = = = 
 Hutton 's tonsils were removed before the start of the 1947 season but his poor health continued , forcing him to miss some games at the start of the season . Nevertheless , his form remained good and he scored four centuries in early matches . Yorkshire dropped to equal seventh in the County Championship , affected by the retirement of key players and the frequent loss of Hutton to representative cricket . In the Test matches Hutton did not initially score heavily . His highest innings after three Tests was only 24 runs , and critics called his place into question . He returned to form during the fourth Test , his first at Headingley , with a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour century on a difficult pitch for batting . Hutton scored 83 and 36 in the drawn final Test , and England won the series 3 – 0 with the other two games drawn . Hutton hit 344 runs in the Test series at an average of 44 @.@ 00 ; in all first @-@ class matches , he scored eleven centuries and totalled 2 @,@ 585 runs at an average 64 @.@ 62 , although his achievements that season were overshadowed by those of Denis Compton and Bill Edrich , who both broke the previous record for most runs scored in a season . 
 After 16 months of continuous cricket , Hutton chose to miss the 1947 – 48 winter MCC tour of the West Indies . However , injuries severely affected that team , and its captain Gubby Allen requested reinforcements . Subsequently , Hutton flew out to join the tour ; Immediately after he arrived , having travelled for four days , Hutton played against British Guiana , scoring 138 and 62 not out , before appearing in the third Test . After a century against Jamaica , Hutton played innings of 56 and 60 in the fourth and final Test , giving him 171 runs at an average of 42 @.@ 75 in the series . He came top of the first @-@ class averages for the tourists , with 578 runs at an average of 64 @.@ 22 , and was judged by Wisden as one of the few batting successes in a team which lost the four @-@ Test series 2 – 0 and failed to win a single match on tour . 
 = = = Struggles against pace = = = 
 During 1948 , Hutton scored heavily for Yorkshire . Despite missing more than half the County Championship matches , he scored more runs at a better average than anyone else in the side . In county matches , Hutton averaged 92 @.@ 05 and scored eight centuries . Some Yorkshire critics expressed concern at the team 's dependence on Hutton and the poor performance of other batsmen . Hutton 's main challenge that season came from the Australian side which toured England undefeated and won the Test series 4 – 0 . In the early part of the tour , the Australians , and particularly the pace bowlers Lindwall and Miller , tried to shake Hutton 's confidence by targeting him . Although Hutton failed on a difficult pitch in Yorkshire 's match against the tourists , he was the only successful batsman against them when he appeared for MCC shortly after . 
 Hutton was selected for the first Test , but England were overwhelmed by the Australian fast bowlers and lost the match . After a failure in the first innings , Hutton scored 74 in the second , and briefly established dominance over Miller , who responded with a series of bouncers , one of which struck Hutton on the shoulder and provoked an angry reaction from the crowd . Miller bowled him in very poor light at the start of the fourth day 's play . At Lord 's in the second Test , also lost by England , Hutton scored 20 and 13 , but of more concern to critics was the manner in which he batted . In the second innings , England had to bat for a long time to save the game , Wisden noted that Hutton , in contrast to his opening partner Washbrook , looked " plainly uncomfortable " . He was nearly dismissed several times before he was out for 13 , and returned to the pavilion to an uncomfortable silence from the crowd . The former Australian batsman Jack Fingleton , covering the tour as a journalist , described it as Hutton 's worst effort in a Test . Bill O 'Reilly , another former Australian player working as a journalist , said Hutton seemed to be struggling with concentration and was a shadow of his former self . 
 Following his struggles at Lord 's , Hutton was omitted from the team for the third Test . Observers had noticed Hutton backing away from the fast bowlers , which the English selectors saw as a poor example from a leading batsman . The decision generated considerable acrimony , but surprised and pleased the Australians , who felt Hutton was their most formidable opponent with the bat . Press and critics generally judged the omission a mistake , although the Wisden correspondent believed the decision to be correct as Hutton benefited from a break . In later years , Norman Yardley , the England captain , agreed that the choice was a poor one . Hutton , who escaped most of the debate by playing in Scotland for Yorkshire , found the situation unsettling and Patrick Murphy , a sports journalist , writes that it " served to drive a reserved man further in on himself . " Meanwhile , Hutton was chosen to captain the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord 's ; he scored 59 and 132 not out . 
 Recalled to the England team for the fourth Test at Headingley , Hutton scored 81 and 57 . Given an excellent reception by his home crowd , he shared a century opening partnership with Washbrook in both innings , the second time they had accomplished this feat . Critics considered Hutton to be a better batsmen when he returned and that these innings repaired his damaged reputation . Australia needed 404 to win on a pitch favouring spin , but the poor performances of the main bowlers allowed Australia to record a seven wicket win described by Wisden as " astonishing " . Hutton 's contribution to the second Australian innings was to bowl four overs and concede 30 runs . Australia 's dominance in the series was sealed by a crushing win in the fifth Test . England were bowled out for 52 runs in the first innings , of which Hutton scored 30 before being last out to an exceptional catch down the leg side from wicketkeeper Don Tallon . Wisden described Hutton as " the one exception to complete failure " , while other critics noted he always looked comfortable . Facing a huge deficit in their second innings , England were bowled out for 188 . Hutton scored 64 , playing a similar defensive role to his first innings . In the Test series , Hutton scored 342 runs at an average of 42 @.@ 75 . In all first @-@ class matches , he reached 2 @,@ 654 runs at an average of 64 @.@ 73 . 
 = = = Leading batsman again = = = 
 Hutton toured South Africa in the winter of 1948 – 49 with the MCC under the captaincy of George Mann . Wisden described Hutton 's tour as a succession of triumphs until he tired at the end : " Hutton 's driving aroused the greatest admiration , but all his strokes were stamped with the hallmark of class . " Before the Test matches began , Hutton scored three centuries and then contributed 83 as England won the first Test . The next three Tests were drawn . In the second match , Hutton and Washbrook set a new Test match record opening partnership . In easy batting conditions , they shared 359 runs on the first day before Hutton was out for 158 after almost five hours batting . In more favourable bowling conditions in the third Test , Hutton scored 41 and 87 , followed by 123 in the fourth game which settled England 's second innings at a dangerous time . England won the final game to take the series 2 – 0 , and Hutton finished the Test series with 577 runs at an average of 64 @.@ 11 , while in all first @-@ class matches he recorded 1 @,@ 477 runs at an average of 73 @.@ 85 . 
 The most successful season of Hutton 's career in terms of runs scored was 1949 ; he scored 3 @,@ 429 runs at an average of 68 @.@ 58 , the fourth highest aggregate of runs in an English season . In both June and August he scored over 1 @,@ 000 runs ; his 1 @,@ 294 runs in June was a record for a single month and only Herbert Sutcliffe had previously passed 1 @,@ 000 runs for a calendar month twice in a season . He scored a double century against Lancashire , only the second for a Yorkshire batsman in the fixture . With Hutton available for more matches than in the previous few seasons , Yorkshire shared the County Championship with Middlesex , their last success until 1959 . In the four Test matches against the touring New Zealanders , all of which were drawn , Hutton scored 469 runs at an average of 78 @.@ 16 . He scored 101 in the first Test , and fifties in the second and third matches , before ending the series with an innings of 206 in the fourth Test , in which the second hundred runs took only 85 minutes . 
 Hutton scored 2 @,@ 049 runs at an average of 56 @.@ 91 in the 1950 season . Batting effectively on a succession of early season rain @-@ affected wickets , Hutton frequently top @-@ scored for Yorkshire . Hutton 's benefit match against Middlesex was affected by rain , but other events , collections and insurance for loss of play gave Hutton £ 9 @,@ 713 , a record at that point for a Yorkshire cricketer . Two @-@ thirds of the amount was invested on Hutton 's behalf by the Yorkshire committee , following their usual practice ; Hutton resented this paternalism from the committee , particularly as he did not receive the full amount until 1972 . Hutton played in three of the four Tests against West Indies . In the first Test , hampered by a finger injury , he scored 39 and 45 as England recorded their only victory of the series . The West Indies won the second Test , their first Test victory in England , and won the final two Tests to take the series 3 – 1 ; Hutton missed the third Test with lumbago but in the fourth Test scored 202 not out , carrying his bat through England 's first innings . The West Indian spinners Sonny Ramadhin and Alf Valentine caused difficulties for all the batsmen except Hutton , who always appeared comfortable . Wisden praised his effort as unforgettable . 
 = = = Australia 1950 – 51 = = = 
 Hutton was chosen to go on the MCC tour of Australia in 1950 – 51 , under the captaincy of the amateur Freddie Brown . The latter was an unexpected choice as captain , after a struggle to find a suitable amateur for the role . As a compromise aimed at critics who favoured the appointment of a professional captain , the professional Denis Compton was made vice @-@ captain , but Brown came to rely more on Hutton than on Compton for advice . The tour selectors , in an attempt to strengthen the batting line @-@ up , asked Hutton to bat in the middle order rather than his usual position as opener . He batted well in the early games but the team struggled . In the first Test , England dismissed Australia for 228 before rain made the pitch difficult for batting . In reply , England collapsed to 68 for seven before Brown declared to make Australia bat again while the pitch was still treacherous . Australia in turn struggled to 32 for seven , before declaring to leave England needing 193 to win . By the end of the third day 's play , victory seemed unlikely as England were 30 for six . Next morning on a slightly easier pitch , Hutton scored 62 not out , an innings which was widely acclaimed in the press . Wisden observed that he had " given yet another exhibition of his wonderful batsmanship on tricky turf ... Hutton thrashed the fast bowlers majestically and played the turning or lifting ball with the ease of a master craftsman . " However , the team were bowled out for 122 and Australia won by 70 runs . 
 Hutton remained in the middle order for the second Test , which England lost by 28 runs , but resumed his role as opener for the rest of the tour and scored a century in the following state game . Hutton scored 62 in the third Test , but the Australian spinner Jack Iverson , who caused the touring batsmen huge problems all series , bowled Australia to victory . Hutton 's form continued in the fourth Test as he carried his bat for the second time in six months . Wisden observed : " Against Hutton the bowling looked almost mediocre , but most of the other batsmen made it appear lethal . " He scored 156 not out and added 45 more runs in the second innings , but Australian won by 274 runs . With the series lost , England won the final game , their first victory over Australia since the war and Australia 's first defeat in 26 matches ; Hutton contributed scores of 79 and 60 not out and struck the winning run . Hutton scored 553 Test runs at an average of 88 @.@ 83 , and in all first @-@ class matches accumulated 1 @,@ 199 runs with five centuries and an average of 70 @.@ 52 . In contrast to his previous Australian tour , Hutton played the short ball comfortably . Reviewing the tour , Wisden stated , " With Hutton , figures did not lie . He stood head and shoulders above every other batsman and , taking all factors into consideration , worthily earned the description of the finest present @-@ day batsman in the world . " 
 = = = 100th century = = = 
 Hutton scored 2 @,@ 145 runs in 1951 with nine centuries , including his 100th in first @-@ class cricket . The South Africans toured England , losing the Test series 3 – 1 . After Hutton scored fifty in the first Test , which was won by South Africa , his 100th century almost came during the third Test , when he scored an unbeaten 98 in the second innings to take England to victory . But the innings provoked controversy when Hutton 's team @-@ mates seemed to decline easy runs to allow Hutton the opportunity to reach his hundred before the end of the match , thereby jeopardising England 's chances of victory in unsettled weather . The 100th century came a week later , against Surrey , when Hutton became the thirteenth player to achieve the landmark . He followed this immediately with 194 not out against Nottinghamshire and 100 , in the drawn fourth Test at <unk> . In the final Test , which England won to take the series , Hutton became the first man in Tests , and only the fourth in all first @-@ class cricket , to be given out obstructing the field : he edged a ball in the air and legitimately knocked it away from his wickets with his bat ; in doing so , he prevented a catch being taken and was given out . This remains the only such instance in Tests . Hutton ended the Test series with 378 runs at an average of 54 @.@ 00 . Late in the season , he scored a century against Gloucestershire to become the second Yorkshire player after Sutcliffe to complete centuries against the other 16 first @-@ class counties . 
 = = Captain of England = = 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 Brown 's resignation from the captaincy of England at the end of 1951 left no obvious replacement candidate . Traditionally , captains in county or Test cricket were amateurs , who usually came from privileged backgrounds , in contrast to professionals , who often came from the working classes . Consequently , class distinction pervaded cricket which was organised and administered by former and current amateurs , many of whom reasoned that professionals would not make good captains owing to their worries over safeguarding their contracts or concerns about affecting the livelihoods of other professionals . In 1952 , the selectors judged that none of the serving amateur county captains possessed the required ability or experience to fill the role of England captain . Consequently , the selectors decided to radically depart from tradition and appoint a professional captain . All previous England captains in home Test matches had been amateurs , and no professional had captained England in any match in the 20th century . But , as widely anticipated by the press , Hutton was appointed to captain England in the first Test of a four @-@ match series against the 1952 Indian tourists . He harboured private doubts whether the cricket establishment would accept a professional captain , but declined to turn amateur , as Wally Hammond had done in 1938 . The decision met with broad approval from the press , and the editor of Wisden wrote : " In breaking with tradition and choosing a professional as captain the Selection Committee made a vital decision in the interests of England , because it should mean that in future no man will be picked as leader unless he is worth a place in the side . " Hutton had not expected to be asked and had thought an amateur would have been appointed as usual . He presumed his appointment was an interim measure until a more suitable candidate could be found . 
 Before his home crowd at Headingley , Hutton 's first match as captain was a success , although his tactics were cautious . The Wisden correspondent wrote : " For Hutton the match was a personal triumph . Tradition had been broken ... and he must have known that the eyes of the world were upon him . He did not falter and his astute leadership earned him many admirers " . England won comfortably , although Hutton failed with the bat . In the second Test , Hutton scored 150 out of a total of 537 , and although cautious once more , the Wisden editor believed his captaincy helped to secure a win . Following this match , the selectors appointed Hutton captain for the rest of the series . In the final two Tests , Hutton scored 104 and 86 and his bowlers dominated the Indian batsmen . The drawn final Test was ruined by weather , but England won the four match series 3 – 0 , and Hutton scored 399 runs at an average of 79 @.@ 80 ; in the whole summer he scored 2 @,@ 567 first @-@ class runs at an average of 61 @.@ 11 with eleven centuries . 
 = = = Ashes victory = = = 
 During the 1953 season , Australia toured England having held the Ashes since 1934 but critics considered England to have a good chance of winning the series . Hutton was retained as England captain initially on a match @-@ by @-@ match basis . His health was uncertain and he was troubled by fibrositis which restricted his movement and adversely affected his fielding . He top @-@ scored in both England innings with 43 and 60 not out in the drawn first Test , and batted effectively for Yorkshire against the Australians . After dropping three catches in Australia 's first innings in the second Test , Hutton scored 145 runs in his first innings . However , he was dismissed early in the second innings ; England managed to draw the match , but Hutton faced press criticism for his cautious tactics . Rain prevented a result in the third Test , but Hutton scored 66 and his tactics were praised . After the match , he was confirmed as captain for the remainder of the series , and the forthcoming MCC winter tour of West Indies . 
 The fourth Test , in front of Hutton 's home crowd , was his least successful of the series . He was bowled second ball by a yorker from Lindwall and England struggled to remain competitive throughout the match . In the fourth innings of the game , Australia needed 177 runs to win , with 115 minutes of play remaining . Hutton used Trevor Bailey to bowl negatively and slow Australia down ; his tactics , including time @-@ wasting and the use of leg theory , meant Australia could not score the runs in the available time and the match was drawn . It is possible that the idea came from Bailey himself , but the Australian press criticised Hutton for his negativity . In contrast , English critics believed the tactics were justified . Amid great public interest for the deciding fifth Test , Hutton lost his fifth successive toss but replying to Australia 's first innings of 275 , England established a narrow first @-@ innings lead . Surviving an early scare when a bouncer from Lindwall nearly knocked his cap onto his wickets , Hutton scored 82 . In reply , Australia collapsed before the England spinners and England scored the necessary 132 runs to win their first series against Australia since 1932 – 33 and their first such home series win since 1926 . Wisden praised Hutton 's strategy and tactical sense , and he was widely acclaimed in the press , particularly for the good spirit which he and Hassett , the Australian captain , maintained . Hutton scored 443 runs at an average of 55 @.@ 37 in the Tests , but found it mentally tiring to lead England . Meanwhile , some Yorkshire observers felt he should do more to improve discipline at the county . In the whole summer , he scored 2 @,@ 458 runs at an average of 63 @.@ 02 . 
 = = = Captain in the West Indies = = = 
 In the winter of 1953 – 54 , Hutton led the MCC on a tour of West Indies . Before the team left England , critics queried his appointment , arguing that a professional captain was unsuitable to lead a tour . Hutton 's authority was also compromised by the MCC , who did not give him the tour manager he requested ; instead , they appointed the inexperienced Charles Palmer , the Leicestershire captain , who had already been selected as a player on the tour . Palmer 's dual role as player and manager blurred the lines of command . Hutton also found some of the professionals in the team to be difficult to lead , particularly Godfrey Evans , and Fred Trueman . Off @-@ field events often overshadowed the cricket . Amid growing independence movements in the region , Hutton believed his team was used as a political instrument to support colonial rule . The situation was further inflamed as journalists and English residents in the Caribbean placed great emphasis on an English victory , and the perception was that the series would establish the unofficial world champions . The standards of local umpiring were a further source of controversy . The crowds often made noisy protests about on @-@ field events , often related to umpiring . The climax came in the third Test when missiles were thrown onto the outfield when the umpire judged Cliff <unk> was out ; Hutton kept his team and the umpires on the field , possibly defusing a dangerous situation . The attitude of some English players inflamed feelings , either through a perceived lack of courtesy , or their negative reactions to events on the field . Some critics held Hutton responsible for this , but the editor of Wisden later wrote : " [ Hutton ] was involved in the most thankless task any cricket captain has undertaken when he went to West Indies . Instead of finding a friendly cricket atmosphere he and his players were subjected to the impact of deep political and racial feeling — an experience all of them wish to forget . A few members of the team did not hide their innermost feelings , with the result that Hutton came under severe criticism , although his behaviour was blameless . " 
 Hutton wanted to exploit what he saw as a West Indian weakness against pace , picking four fast bowlers for the first Test . In doing so , he misjudged the pitch ; West Indies made a large score and won by 140 runs . Both captains employed time @-@ wasting tactics in the match , and used negative leg theory bowling , outside leg stump . In the second Test , Hutton scored 72 and 77 but could not prevent another defeat after losing his seventh consecutive toss in Tests . England batted slowly throughout ; Hutton was himself barracked for his slow , defensive batting during the match . England won the third Test by nine wickets , their first victory in the Caribbean since 1935 . Hutton , who finally won the toss , scored 169 in seven hours and West Indies were bowled out twice . After a drawn fourth Test , England had to win the final Test to draw the series . Hutton lost the toss but his bowlers dismissed West Indies cheaply in good batting conditions . Hutton then batted for almost nine hours to score 205 , his nineteenth and final Test century . Wisden observed that " For concentration and control , Hutton 's innings ... scarcely could have been excelled . " The innings ended amid another controversy when local officials and journalists accused Hutton of snubbing the congratulations of the Chief Minister Alexander Bustamante during a tea interval . Hutton apologised , not having noticed Bustamante speaking to him , but was dismissed immediately when play resumed ; the incident was prominently reported the following day . England 's bowlers bowled out West Indies a second time and England scored the required runs to record a series @-@ levelling victory , West Indies ' first defeat in Jamaica in a Test . In its summary of the tour , Wisden said that Hutton showed mastery over every bowler . The correspondent wrote , " From first to last no batsman compared with Hutton ... Considering the weight of his many responsibilities and worries , Hutton played magnificent cricket " . The press were generally supportive despite reservations over his caution . Swanton and Alan Gibson later credited England 's recovery in the series to Hutton 's batting and leadership . In five Tests , he scored 677 runs — his largest aggregate in a series — at an average of 96 @.@ 71 , the highest on either side . In all first @-@ class matches , he made 780 runs at an average of 78 @.@ 00 . 
 = = = Appointment of Sheppard = = = 
 Hutton missed large parts of the 1954 season on medical advice , suffering from mental and physical exhaustion brought about by the West Indian tour . He played in the first Test against Pakistan , on their first tour of England , scored a duck and missed the next two matches . In Hutton 's absence , the selectors appointed the amateur David Sheppard , a theology student at the time ; Sheppard achieved little batting success , but England won the two Tests in which he was captain . According to Wisden editor Norman Preston , influential figures within the cricket hierarchy blamed Hutton for the previous winter 's events and attempted to replace him as captain . Two former England cricketers , Errol Holmes and Walter Robins , the latter also a selector that year , favoured Sheppard over Hutton and persuaded him to offer his candidacy to captain the MCC in Australia that winter . Sheppard indicated he would accept the post and take a leave of absence from his studies if required . The press speculated that Hutton would step aside , but most newspapers favoured his continued leadership and ran stories alleging MCC prejudice against professional cricketers . Neither Hutton nor Sheppard publicly expressed an opinion , although Hutton informed the MCC he would tour Australia as captain or player as required , and both men remained on good personal terms throughout . Robins , seeing the strength of opinion , backed down . When Hutton returned to cricket in July , scoring two centuries , he was appointed captain of the MCC for the winter tour . Returning to captain a slightly weakened team for the fourth and final Test , Hutton failed with the bat , and Pakistan recorded their first Test victory . In his three Test innings of the season , Hutton scored just 19 runs . Owing to his reduced appearances , Hutton failed to reach 1 @,@ 000 first @-@ class runs for the first time since 1936 , reaching 912 runs at an average of 35 @.@ 07 . 
 = = = Captain in Australia = = = 
 Expectations before the Australian tour were low after the confusion of the 1954 summer and some controversial selections . Trueman , Jim Laker and Tony Lock , part of the winning 1953 team , were omitted ; Colin Cowdrey and Vic Wilson were included . Hutton further downplayed his team 's chances through exaggerating its inexperience to the Australian press ; newspapers were already sympathetic to Hutton as a professional captain of a class @-@ driven country . The team began the tour well . Hutton made a series of good scores in the opening games . But for the first Test , Hutton did not include a spinner in the team and chose to bowl on winning the toss , an unusual strategy in Australia . The home side scored 601 , England dropped 12 catches and , with the key players Evans and Compton injured , lost by an innings ; the press blamed Hutton for choosing to bowl . Despite the result , Hutton saw potential in Frank Tyson 's bowling and arranged for Alf Gover , a respected coach who was in Australia as a journalist , to improve and shorten Tyson 's run to the wicket . For the second Test , Hutton left out the unfit Alec Bedser , England 's most reliable bowler since the war , to include two spinners , but in a low @-@ scoring game , Tyson made the difference and England won by 38 runs . Hutton was unwell before the third Test , suffering from fibrositis and a heavy cold , and had to be persuaded out of bed by members of his team . He decided to play at the last minute and unexpectedly left out Bedser again , although he was fit to play . Hutton neglected to inform Bedser , who only learned of his omission when he saw the team list displayed in the dressing room before the match . Hutton contributed few runs , but Cowdrey and Peter May made large scores and Tyson took seven wickets as Australia were bowled out for 111 in their second innings , giving England a 128 @-@ run victory . The fourth Test was crucial , and Hutton 's innings of 80 runs in four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours was the highest of the game . Wisden believed Hutton 's tactics were instrumental in giving his team the upper hand , and in the final innings , England needed 94 to win and retain the Ashes . Early wickets , including Hutton 's , fell to Miller , and when the captain returned to the dressing room , he said that Miller had " done us again . " Compton , the next man in , replied " I haven 't been in yet " , and stayed at the wicket until the match was won by five wickets . Many commentators viewed this as a sign that Hutton 's reserve had slipped in the critical situation , but Alan Gibson believes it was a deliberate ploy to inspire Compton . England went on to draw the final Test in a match ruined by rain . Hutton was out to the fourth ball of the match , but Australia were forced to follow on for the first time by England since 1938 , and Hutton took a wicket with the last ball of the match before time ran out . This ended the series , which England won 3 – 1 . 
 Hutton 's tactical approach in the series was praised by Australian and English commentators ; they noted how Hutton observed his opponents carefully to spot weaknesses . His caution was criticised , but the main complaint was that he deliberately slowed the speed of play , reducing the number of overs bowled , allowing the fast bowlers to rest and restricting the rate at which Australia scored . With the bat , Hutton scored 220 runs in Tests at an average of 24 @.@ 44 . In all first @-@ class matches in Australia , he scored 959 runs at 50 @.@ 47 . The tour ended with two Tests in New Zealand ; England won the first by eight wickets , and the second by an innings and 20 runs . New Zealand were bowled out for 26 in their second innings , which , in 2016 , remains the lowest Test score . In the latter match , Hutton scored 53 batting at number five in his final Test innings . He had played in 79 Test matches , scoring 6 @,@ 971 runs at an average of 56 @.@ 67 with 19 hundreds . As England captain in 23 matches , he won eight Tests and lost four , and along with Percy Chapman was the only England captain to win consecutive series against Australia . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On Hutton 's return to England , he was made an honorary member of the MCC , which changed its rules to allow a current professional to join the club . The selectors appointed him England captain for the entire forthcoming series against South Africa , a rare indication of confidence . After a poor start to the season , Hutton captained MCC against the tourists , but withdrew from the final day of the match with lumbago . His uncertain health led him to resign the England captaincy . The selectors made Peter May captain in his place and appointed Hutton as a selector . Hutton played for Yorkshire until the end of June . Against Nottinghamshire , he scored 194 in five hours , his final first @-@ class century . His last 100 runs came in an hour . After the following match , his back was too painful to continue and he did not play again that season . In eleven first @-@ class matches , he scored 537 runs at an average of 29 @.@ 83 . In June , he was knighted for services to cricket . Following the advice of a specialist , Hutton announced his retirement from first @-@ class cricket in January 1956 . He was 39 , an early retirement age for the period . He played one further match in 1957 for MCC against Lancashire , and two matches in 1960 for MCC and L. C. Stevens ' XI . In all first @-@ class cricket , he scored 40 @,@ 140 runs at an average of 55 @.@ 51 with 129 hundreds . 
 = = Style and technique = = 
 = = = Batting = = = 
 Wisden viewed Hutton , with Jack Hobbs , as " one of the two most accomplished professional batsmen to have played for his country " , and following the Second World War , critics regarded him as the best batsman in the world . In October 2010 , he was chosen as part of the ESPNCricinfo All @-@ time World XI , a team selected by a panel of respected commentators and cricket writers to represent the greatest cricketers of all time . As part of the same process , he was also chosen in England 's greatest team . The official Yorkshire history describes him as " technically and aesthetically the best batsman to play for Yorkshire " . E. W. Swanton believed that if Hobbs was the greatest professional batsman , Hutton , along with Hammond and Compton , came next . Hutton was more cautious than these others . Following the lead of Herbert Sutcliffe , he saw the role of an opening batsman as defensive . The basis of his game was a good defensive technique , although he was able to accelerate and play attacking shots when the situation demanded . Cricket historian David Frith believes that " there was an apparent touch of genius about his batsmanship " , and Alan Gibson described Hutton 's off drive as " the glory of the game . " He was particularly effective on difficult batting pitches . Of the next generation of England batsmen , Peter May tried to adopt Hutton 's mental approach to both batting and captaincy , while Colin Cowdrey later said " I had tried to model myself on Len Hutton ever since I started playing serious cricket . " Statistically , Hutton stands near the highest achievers . When he retired , only two men had scored more than his 6 @,@ 971 Test runs ; his average of 56 @.@ 67 is seventh highest of those who played at least fifty Test matches , as of 2016 , while only Sutcliffe has a higher average among openers who scored over 4 @,@ 000 runs . He also displayed consistency ; his annual average only fell below 50 three times , he averaged over 50 each year from 1947 to 1954 and scored 20 or more in 90 of his 138 innings . 
 Hutton 's batting technique was orthodox and conventional . John Woodcock writes that he seemed to possess great intuition , for example playing mystery spinners Ramadhin and Iverson with ease . His batting stance was relaxed and still , his first movement being to slide his right foot back and across towards middle stump . He often played the ball off the back foot , getting right back onto his stumps , but never played as far forward , preferring to let the ball come to him and play it late . Occasionally , he left a slight gap between his bat and pads , meaning he was sometimes bowled through it when out of form . This arose mainly through the wartime injury to his arm and by 1950 he had adjusted his technique to compensate and had fewer problems . Immediately before the war , Hutton batted in a more attacking style and several of his contemporaries remembered his attractive strokeplay . By his own admission , Hutton was not the same player after the war . A combination of the effects of his injury and the responsibility of opening the batting in generally weak Yorkshire and England teams , whose success often depended on Hutton , meant that he batted cautiously . Hutton only played attacking shots when they presented no risk , and he rarely lifted the ball in the air ; he hit just seven sixes in Test matches . However , Patrick Murphy writes : " Just now and again he would play an innings of genius , when bowlers could not contain him . " One such innings was his score of 37 in the second Test of 1946 – 47 in which the attacking shots he played reminded older spectators of Victor Trumper , regarded as the ultimate Australian strokeplayer . In all his innings , he was expert at hitting the ball just out of the reach of fieldsmen to allow runs to be taken . Several of his contemporaries believed he did not get enough credit for surviving the short @-@ pitched attacks of the Australian bowlers following the war . 
 = = = Captaincy = = = 
 As captain , Hutton believed that the key to success was a strong pace attack , stemming from his experiences against Lindwall and Miller , which influenced his selection of several promising fast bowlers . His natural inclination and the background to his appointment made him a cautious captain , for example slowing down the game to allow the fast bowlers to rest , which set a precedent for other captains . Tactically , Norman Yardley found him " sound rather than venturesome " . Run saving was his main priority , but during matches , he quickly adjusted his approach to attack the weakness of particular batsmen . Jim Kilburn believed that Hutton pursued a serious approach to all matches , to the point where he missed some enjoyment of the game . Kilburn wrote that the " outstanding characteristic of his captaincy was shrewdness . He made no romantic gestures ; he lit no fires of inspiration . He invited admiration rather than affection and would have exchanged either or both for effective obedience . " 
 Some of his selections as captain were widely debated . Following incidents in the Caribbean , Trueman did not play for England again under Hutton 's captaincy , although he was still regarded as an England prospect . Jim Laker was also omitted from the team , possibly because Hutton doubted Laker 's commitment . Both Jim <unk> , Laker 's replacement , and Vic Wilson were controversial choices for the 1954 – 55 Australian tour , whose selections Trevor Bailey attributed to Hutton ; neither played a substantial role on the tour . A poor communicator , Hutton distanced himself from his team when a stronger lead was required . Trueman and Bailey thought Hutton found it hard to talk to his players : amateur critics considered this an inevitable consequence of a professional leading other professionals . On the other hand , Hutton played a key role in the development of fast bowlers Trueman , Tyson and Brian Statham . Tyson and Statham later acknowledged his advice and encouragement as factor in their subsequent success . Cowdrey also acknowledged Hutton 's advice and assistance when the former began his career . Furthermore , on the 1954 – 55 tour of Australia , Hutton took a close interest in him and was a particular comfort when Cowdrey 's father died during the tour . 
 Cricket followers from the south of England remained slightly distrustful of Hutton owing to the perception that he occasionally carried professionalism to excess . When he was appointed England captain , many in the cricketing establishment held his professionalism against him with the result that Hutton never felt comfortable dealing with the amateurs who ran English cricket at the time . While captain , he was criticised for caution and negativity but also was expected to lead a successful team at a time when results began to assume a far greater importance than in previous years . Consequently , Hutton never felt secure in the position and was often uncomfortable around the amateur establishment . Like Herbert Sutcliffe , he attempted to alter his accent to match that of leading southern amateurs to help him to fit in . But he did not enjoy the attention that went with the captaincy , and he often worried about the impression he was making . 
 Hutton rarely captained Yorkshire , except in the absence of the official captain , through a combination of poor health , frequent absences with England and the presence of the amateur Norman Yardley in the side . Yardley claimed several times that he would have stood down in Hutton 's favour , but the committee remained distrustful of professional captaincy and thought Hutton a hypochondriac who used his health as an excuse not to play . Hutton was a reserved man for whom the Yorkshire dressing room clashes of the 1950s held little appeal . As the side 's senior professional , he did not always provide the guidance which younger players in the side were seeking . The team was divided and the players frequently clashed with each other ; some critics believe this was a factor in the county 's failure to win the County Championship in the 1950s . Ray Illingworth , a player at the time , believes that Hutton was the only man who could have changed the negative attitude around the team , but " he didn 't do anything about it " . Illingworth recalled that he was a " distant hero " , saying : " He was a funny man was Len — slightly sarcastic all the time . He 'd hear an argument in the dressing room and he 'd throw a bit of wood on the fire to keep it going . He looked after himself , he was very much of a loner . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 Hutton married Dorothy Mary Dennis , the sister of former Yorkshire cricketer Frank Dennis , on 16 September 1939 at Wykeham near Scarborough ; they met at an end @-@ of @-@ season dance which Dorothy had attended with her brother . They had two sons : Richard , who later played cricket for Yorkshire and England , in 1942 , and John in 1947 . 
 During and after the war , Hutton worked for a paper manufacturer , but writing and journalism provided a more permanent career . Hutton worked with Thomas Moult , a journalist and writer , to produce a book of memoirs , Cricket is My Life in 1949 , and he wrote for the News of the World while still playing . Following his cricketing retirement , Hutton worked in broadcasting until 1961 , and after 1955 , he wrote for the London Evening News until 1963 . A second book , Just my story , followed in 1956 in collaboration with journalist , R. J. Hayter . In 1958 – 59 , Hutton travelled to Australia to cover the MCC tour as correspondent for the Evening News , again assisted by a professional journalist , while between 1963 and 1986 , he wrote for The Observer . He wrote a third book , Thirty Years in Cricket , in 1984 . Hutton 's increasing commitments in the south of England meant he moved to North London in 1959 . In 1960 , Hutton was invited to join the engineering firm of J. H. Fenner , mainly working in a public relations capacity . Later , he moved into marketing and overseas promotion of products , became a director of the firm in 1973 , and retired in 1984 . 
 Although he disliked committees , Hutton served as an England Test selector in 1975 and 1976 , but business commitments limited his availability so he resigned in 1977 . Hutton became involved with Surrey cricket in later years but maintained links with Yorkshire , and became president of Yorkshire county cricket in January 1990 . In his final years , Hutton suffered from ill health and became increasingly frail . In September 1990 , he suffered a ruptured aorta shortly after watching a cricket match at the Oval . After an unsuccessful operation , he died on 6 September . 
 = Pachycephalosaurus = 
 Pachycephalosaurus ( / <unk> / ; meaning " thick @-@ headed lizard , " from Greek <unk> / <unk> " thick " , kephale / κεφαλη " head " and sauros / σαυρος " lizard " ) is a genus of pachycephalosaurid dinosaurs . The type species , P. wyomingensis , is the only known species . It lived during the Late Cretaceous Period ( Maastrichtian stage ) of what is now North America . Remains have been excavated in Montana , South Dakota , and Wyoming . It was an herbivorous or omnivorous creature which is primarily known from a single skull and a few extremely thick skull roofs , though more complete fossils have been found in recent years . Pachycephalosaurus was one of the last non @-@ avian dinosaurs before the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . Another dinosaur , Tylosteus of western North America , has been synonymized with Pachycephalosaurus . 
 Like other pachycephalosaurids , Pachycephalosaurus was a bipedal omnivore with an extremely thick skull roof . It possessed long hindlimbs and small forelimbs . Pachycephalosaurus is the largest known pachycephalosaur . 
 The thick skull domes of Pachycephalosaurus and related genera gave rise to the hypothesis that pachycephalosaurs used their skulls in intra @-@ species combat . This hypothesis has been disputed in recent years . 
 = = Description = = 
 The anatomy of Pachycephalosaurus is poorly known , as only skull remains have been described . Pachycephalosaurus is famous for having a large , bony dome atop its skull , up to 25 cm ( 10 in ) thick , which safely cushioned its tiny brain . The dome 's rear aspect was edged with bony knobs and short bony spikes projected upwards from the snout . The spikes were probably blunt , not sharp . 
 The skull was short , and possessed large , rounded eye sockets that faced forward , suggesting that the animal had good vision and was capable of binocular vision . Pachycephalosaurus had a small muzzle which ended in a pointed beak . The teeth were tiny , with leaf @-@ shaped crowns . The head was supported by an " S " - or " U " -shaped neck . 
 Pachycephalosaurus was probably bipedal and was the largest of the pachycephalosaurid ( bone @-@ headed ) dinosaurs . It has been estimated that Pachycephalosaurus was around 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 15 ft ) long and weighed 450 kilograms ( 990 lb ) . Based on other pachycephalosaurids , it probably had a fairly short , thick neck , short fore limbs , a bulky body , long hind legs and a heavy tail , which was likely held rigid by ossified tendons . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 Remains attributable to Pachycephalosaurus may have been found as early as the 1850s . As determined by Donald Baird , in 1859 or 1860 Ferdinand <unk> Hayden , an early fossil collector in the North American West , collected a bone fragment in the vicinity of the head of the Missouri River , from what is now known to be the Lance Formation in southeastern Montana . This specimen , now <unk> <unk> , was described by Joseph Leidy in 1872 as belonging to the dermal armor of a reptile or an armadillo @-@ like animal . It became known as Tylosteus . Its actual nature was not found until Baird restudied it over a century later and identified it as a squamosal ( bone from the back of the skull ) of Pachycephalosaurus , including a set of bony knobs corresponding to those found on other specimens of Pachycephalosaurus . Because the name Tylosteus predates Pachycephalosaurus , according to the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature Tylosteus would normally be preferred . In 1985 , Baird successfully petitioned to have Pachycephalosaurus used instead of Tylosteus because the latter name had not been used for over fifty years , was based on <unk> materials , and had poor geographic and stratigraphic information . This may not be the end of the story ; Robert Sullivan suggested in 2006 that <unk> <unk> is more like the corresponding bone of Dracorex than that of Pachycephalosaurus . The issue is of uncertain importance , though , if Dracorex actually represents a juvenile Pachycephalosaurus , as has been recently proposed . 
 P. wyomingensis , the type and currently only valid species of Pachycephalosaurus , was named by Charles W. Gilmore in 1931 . He coined it for the partial skull USNM <unk> , from the Lance Formation of Niobrara County , Wyoming . Gilmore assigned his new species to Troodon as T. wyomingensis . At the time , paleontologists thought that Troodon , then known only from teeth , was the same as Stegoceras , which had similar teeth . Accordingly , what are now known as pachycephalosaurids were assigned to the family Troodontidae , a misconception not corrected until 1945 , by Charles M. Sternberg . 
 In 1943 , Barnum Brown and Erich Maren Schlaikjer , with newer , more complete material , established the genus Pachycephalosaurus . They named two species : Pachycephalosaurus grangeri , the type species of the genus Pachycephalosaurus , and Pachycephalosaurus <unk> . P. grangeri was based on AMNH 1696 , a nearly complete skull from the Hell Creek Formation of <unk> , Carter County , Montana . P. <unk> was based on what is now DMNH 469 , a dome and a few associated elements from the Lance Formation of Corson County , South Dakota . They also referred the older species " Troodon " wyomingensis to their new genus . Their two newer species have been considered synonymous with P. wyomingensis since 1983 . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Pachycephalosaurus gives its name to the Pachycephalosauria , a clade of herbivorous ornithischian ( " bird hipped " ) dinosaurs which lived during the Late Cretaceous Period in North America and Asia . Despite their bipedal stance , they were likely more closely related to the ceratopsians than the ornithopods . 
 Pachycephalosaurus is the most famous member of the Pachycephalosauria ( though not the best @-@ preserved member ) . The clade also includes <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Stegoceras , Homalocephale , <unk> , Sphaerotholus and Prenocephale . Within the tribe <unk> , Pachycephalosaurus is most closely related to Dracorex and Stygimoloch , although these may be juvenile forms of Pachycephalosaurus . 
 Below is a cladogram modified from Evans et al . , 2013 . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 The pachycephalosaurs Dracorex and Stygimoloch may be specimens of Pachycephalosaurus in which the dome and horns are not well @-@ developed , either because the animal was a juvenile or a female . This consideration was supported at the 2007 annual meeting of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology . Jack Horner of Montana State University presented evidence , from analysis of the skull of the single existing Dracorex specimen , that this dinosaur may well be a juvenile form of Stygimoloch . In addition , he presented data that indicates that both Stygimoloch and Dracorex may be juvenile forms of Pachycephalosaurus . Horner and M.B. Goodwin published their findings in 2009 , showing that the spike / node and skull dome bones of all three ' species ' exhibit extreme plasticity , and that both Dracorex and Stygimoloch are known only from juvenile specimens while Pachycephalosaurus is known only from adult specimens . These observations , in addition to the fact that all three forms lived in the same time and place , lead them to conclude that Dracorex and Stygimoloch were simply juvenile Pachycephalosaurus , which lost spikes and grew domes as they aged . The discovery of baby skulls assigned to Pachycephalosaurus that were described in 2016 from two different bone beds in the Hell Creek Formation have been presented as further evidence for this hypothesis . The fossils , as described by David Evans and Mark Goodwin et al are identical to all three supposed genera in the placement of the rugose knobs on their skulls . This and further studies of the different , more mature skulls , suggested that the knobs present in the skull developed very early in the dinosaur 's life while the iconic , domed head developed later . A 2010 study by Nick Longrich and colleagues also supported the hypothesis that all flat @-@ skulled pachycephalosaurs were juveniles , suggesting that flat @-@ skulled forms like <unk> and Homalocephale represent juveniles of dome @-@ skulled adults . 
 = = = Fighting behavior = = = 
 Scientists once suspected that Pachycephalosaurus and its relatives were the bipedal equivalents of bighorn sheep or musk oxen ; that male individuals would ram each other headlong . It was also believed that they would make their head , neck , and body horizontally straight , in order to transmit stress during ramming . However , it is now believed that the pachycephalosaurs could not have used their domes in this way . 
 Foremost , the skull roof could probably not have adequately sustained impact associated with such ramming . Also , there is no definitive evidence of scars or other damage on fossilized Pachycephalosaurus skulls , although recent findings may contradict this . Furthermore , the cervical and anterior dorsal vertebrae show that the neck was carried in an " S " - or " U " -shaped curve , rather than a straight orientation , and thus unfit for direct head @-@ butting . Lastly , the rounded shape of the skull would lessen the contacted surface area during head @-@ butting , resulting in glancing blows . However , CT scan <unk> of the skulls of Stegoceras <unk> , Prenocephale <unk> and several head @-@ striking artiodactyls supported pachycephalosaurids being well @-@ equipped for head @-@ butting . 
 Alternatively , Pachycephalosaurus and other pachycephalosaurid genera engaged in flank @-@ butting in intraspecific combat . In this scenario , an individual may have stood roughly parallel or faced a rival directly , using intimidation displays to cow its rival . If intimidation failed , the Pachycephalosaurus would bend its head downward and to the side , striking the rival pachycephalosaur on its flank . This hypothesis is supported by the relatively broad width of most pachycephalosaurs , a trait that would have protected vital organs from harm . The flank @-@ butting theory was first proposed by Sues in 1978 , and expanded upon by Ken Carpenter in 1997 . 
 In 2012 , a study showed that cranial pathologies in a P. wyomingensis specimen were likely due to agonistic behavior . It was also proposed that similar damage in other pachycephalosaur specimens previously explained as taphonomic artifacts and bone absorptions may instead have been due to such behavior . Peterson et al . ( 2013 ) studied cranial pathologies among the <unk> and found that 22 % of all domes examined had lesions that are consistent with osteomyelitis , an infection of the bone resulting from penetrating trauma , or trauma to the tissue overlying the skull leading to an infection of the bone tissue . This high rate of pathology lends more support to the hypothesis that pachycephalosaurid domes were employed in intra @-@ specific combat . Pachycephalosaurus wyomingensis specimen <unk> <unk> was observed to have 23 lesions in its frontal bone and P. wyomingensis specimen <unk> 469 was observed to have 5 lesions . The frequency of trauma was comparable across the different genera in the pachycephalosaurid family , despite the fact that these genera vary with respect to the size and architecture of their domes , and fact that they existed during varying geologic periods . These findings were in stark contrast with the results from analysis of the relatively flat @-@ headed pachycephalosaurids , where there was an absence of pathology . This would support the hypothesis that these individuals represent either females or juveniles , where intra @-@ specific combat behavior is not expected . 
 Histological examination reveals that pachycephalosaurid domes are composed of a unique form of fibrolamellar bone which contains fibroblasts that play a critical role in wound healing , and are capable of rapidly depositing bone during remodeling . Peterson et al . ( 2013 ) concluded that taken together , the frequency of lesion distribution and the bone structure of frontoparietal domes , lends strong support to the hypothesis that pachycephalosaurids used their unique cranial structures for agonistic behavior . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Scientists do not yet know what these dinosaurs ate . Having very small , ridged teeth they could not have chewed tough , fibrous plants as effectively as other dinosaurs of the same period . It is assumed that pachycephalosaurs lived on a mixed diet of leaves , seeds , fruit and insects . The sharp , serrated teeth would have been very effective for shredding plants . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Nearly all Pachycephalosaurus fossils have been recovered from the Lance Formation and Hell Creek Formation of the western United States . Pachycephalosaurus possibly co @-@ existed alongside additional pachycephalosaur species of the genera Sphaerotholus , Dracorex and Stygimoloch , though these may represent juveniles of Pachycephalosaurus itself , though Sphaerotholus is regarded as a valid species . Other dinosaurs that shared its time and place include Thescelosaurus , the hadrosaurid Edmontosaurus and a possible species of Parasaurolophus , ceratopsids like Triceratops , Torosaurus , Nedoceratops , Tatankaceratops and Leptoceratops , ankylosaurids Ankylosaurus , nodosaurids Denversaurus and Edmontonia , and the theropods Acheroraptor , Dakotaraptor , Ornithomimus , Struthiomimus , <unk> , <unk> , Troodon , Pectinodon , Paronychodon , Richardoestesia and Tyrannosaurus . 
 = = In Popular Culture = = 
 Pachycephalosaurus has often appeared appeared in books and television media , and has been featured throughout several installments of the Jurassic Park franchise and related media , particularly Michael Crichton 's The Lost World ( Crichton novel ) and its film adaptation , The Lost World : Jurassic Park , in which it was portrayed as being only as large as the much smaller Stegoceras , its close relative . Pachycephalosaurus will also have a starring role as one of the four main playable dinosaurs in the simulation game Saurian ( video game ) . 
 = Battle of Kettle Creek = 
 The Battle of Kettle Creek ( February 14 , 1779 ) was a major encounter in the back country of Georgia during the American Revolutionary War . It was fought in Wilkes County about eight miles ( 13 km ) from present @-@ day Washington , Georgia . A militia force of Patriots decisively defeated and scattered a Loyalist militia force that was on its way to British @-@ controlled Augusta . 
 The victory demonstrated the inability of British forces to hold the interior of the state , or to protect even sizable numbers of Loyalist recruits outside their immediate protection . The British , who had already decided to abandon Augusta , recovered some prestige a few weeks later , surprising a Patriot force in the Battle of Brier Creek . Georgia 's back country would not come fully under British control until after the 1780 Siege of Charleston broke Patriot forces in the South . 
 = = Background = = 
 The British began their " southern strategy " by sending expeditions from New York City and Saint Augustine , East Florida to capture the port of Savannah , Georgia in late 1778 . The New York expedition , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Archibald Campbell , arrived first , landing at Tybee Island on December 3 , 1778 , and successfully captured Savannah on December 29 , 1778 . 
 = = = British occupation of Augusta = = = 
 When British Brigadier General Augustine Prevost arrived from Saint Augustine in mid @-@ January , he assumed command of the garrison there and sent a force under Campbell to take control of Augusta and raise Loyalist forces . 
 Leaving Savannah on January 24 , Campbell and more than 1 @,@ 000 men arrived near Augusta a week later , with only minimal harassment from Georgia Patriot militia on the way . Augusta had been defended by South Carolina General Andrew Williamson leading about 1 @,@ 000 militia from Georgia and South Carolina , but he withdrew most of his men when Campbell approached . His rear guard briefly skirmished with Campbell 's men before withdrawing across the Savannah River into South Carolina . 
 Campbell started recruiting Loyalists . By February 10 , 1779 , about 1 @,@ 100 men signed up , but relatively few actually formed militia companies , forming only 20 companies of the British Army . Campbell then began requiring oaths of loyalty , on pain of forfeiture of property ; many took this oath insincerely , quickly letting Williamson know their true feelings . Early in his march , Campbell dispatched Major John Hamilton to recruit Loyalists in Wilkes County and Lt. Colonel John Boyd on an expedition to raise Loyalists in the backcountry of North and South Carolina . Boyd met with success and recruited several hundred men . As he traveled south back toward Augusta , more Loyalists joined his company until it numbered over 600 men in central South Carolina . As this column moved on , the men plundered and pillaged along the way , predictably drawing angered Patriots to take up arms . 
 = = = American response = = = 
 The Continental Army commander in the South , Major General Benjamin Lincoln , based in Charleston , South Carolina , had been unable to respond adequately to the capture of Savannah . With only limited resources ( he was short of both men and funds ) , he was able to raise about 1 @,@ 400 South Carolina militia , but did not have authorization to order them outside the state . On January 30 , he was further reinforced at Charleston by the arrival of 1 @,@ 100 North Carolina militia under General John Ashe . These he immediately dispatched to join Williamson on the South Carolina side of the Savannah River near Augusta . 
 The Georgia banks of the Savannah in the Augusta area were controlled by a Loyalist force led by Colonel Daniel <unk> , while the South Carolina banks were controlled by a Georgia Patriot militia led by Colonel John Dooly . When about 250 South Carolina militia under Colonel Andrew Pickens arrived , Pickens and Dooly joined forces to conduct offensive operations into Georgia , with Pickens taking overall command . They were at some point joined by a few companies of North Carolina light horse militia . 
 On February 10 , Pickens and Dooly crossed the Savannah River to attack a British Army camp southeast of Augusta . Finding the camp unoccupied , they learned that the company was out on an extended patrol . Suspecting they would head for a stockaded frontier post called Carr 's Fort , Pickens sent men directly there while the main body chased after the British . The British made it into the fort , but were forced to abandon their horses and baggage outside its walls . Pickens then besieged the fort until he learned that Boyd was passing through the Ninety Six district of South Carolina with seven to eight hundred Loyalists , headed for Georgia . He reluctantly raised the siege and moved to intercept Boyd . 
 Pickens established a strong presence near the mouth of the Broad River , where he expected Boyd might try to cross . However , Boyd , his force grown by then to 800 men , chose to go to the north . He first tried Cherokee Ford , the southernmost fording of the Savannah River , where he was met with some resistance known as the Engagement at McGowen 's Blockhouse . The encounter consisted of a detachment of eight Patriots commanded by Capt. Robert Anderson with two small swivel guns in an entrenched position , who thwarted Boyd 's approach to Cherokee Ford . Boyd moved north upstream about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) and crossed the Savannah River there , skirmishing with a small Patriot force that had shadowed his movements on the Georgia side . Boyd reported losing 100 men , killed , wounded , or deserted , in the encounter . 
 By the time Pickens learned that Boyd had crossed the river , he had himself crossed into South Carolina in an attempt to intercept Boyd . He immediately recrossed into Georgia upon learning of Boyd 's whereabouts . On February 14 , Pickens caught up with Boyd when he paused to rest his troops near Kettle Creek , only a few miles from Colonel <unk> 's Loyalist camp . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Boyd was apparently unaware that he was being followed so closely , and his camp , even though guards were posted , was not particularly alert . Pickens advanced , leading the center , with his right flank under Colonel Dooly and his left under Georgia Lieutenant Colonel Elijah Clarke . Gunfire between Patriot scouts and the camp guards alerted Boyd to the situation . Boyd formed a defensive line near the camp 's rear and advanced with a force of 100 men to oppose Pickens at a crude breastwork made of fencing and fallen trees . Pickens , whose advance gave him the advantage of high ground , was able to flank this position , even though his own wings were slowed by the swampy conditions near the creek . In heavy fighting , Boyd went down with a mortal wound , and the small company retreated back to the main Loyalist line . 
 The Patriot flanks then began to emerge from the swamps . The Loyalists , led by Boyd 's second in command , Major William <unk> , engaged the Patriots in battle for 90 minutes . Some of the Loyalists crossed the creek , abandoning horses and equipment . Clarke <unk> noticed some high ground across the creek that they seemed to be heading for and led some of his men there , having his horse shot from under him in the process . The Loyalist line was eventually broken , and its men were killed , captured , or dispersed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Treatment of prisoners = = = 
 Pickens took 75 prisoners , including most of the wounded , and between 40 and 70 Loyalists were killed . He suffered 7 to 9 killed and 14 @-@ 23 wounded or missing in the battle . Many of Boyd 's men ( including some that escaped the battlefield and others that Pickens paroled ) returned home . A significant number were either captured or surrendered themselves to Patriot authorities in the days following the battle , and the fate of some of his men is unknown . Lieutenant Colonel Campbell reported that 270 of Boyd 's recruits eventually joined him . He organized them into the Royal North Carolina Regiment . 
 When Pickens approached the mortally wounded Boyd after the battle , the Loyalist leader , who had lived in South Carolina before the war and was known to Pickens , asked the Patriot leader to deliver a brooch to his wife and inform her of his fate . This , Pickens eventually did . 
 Of the Loyalist prisoners , only about 20 survived their wounds . Pickens first took them to Augusta , and then Ninety Six , where they were held along with a large number of other Loyalists . Seeking to make an example of them , South Carolina authorities put a number of these Loyalists on trial for treason . About 50 of them were convicted , and five men , including some of the men captured at Kettle Creek , were hanged . British military leaders were outraged over this treatment of what they considered prisoners of war , even before the trial was held . General Prevost threatened retaliation against Patriot prisoners he was holding , but did not act out of fear that other American @-@ held British prisoners might be mistreated . His invasion of coastal South Carolina in April 1779 , a counter @-@ thrust against movements by General Lincoln to recover Georgia , prompted South Carolina officials to vacate most of the convictions . 
 = = = British reaction = = = 
 In a council held in Augusta on February 12 , Campbell decided to abandon Augusta and began the withdrawal to Savannah on February 14 at 2AM , the morning of the battle . Contrary to opinions expressed by some historians , Campbell did not leave because of the battle 's outcome . He did not learn of the battle until after he had already left Augusta ; his departure was prompted by the arrival of 1 @,@ 200 of patriot General John Ashe 's forces in General Andrew Williamson 's camp across the Savannah River , a shortage of provisions , and uncertainty over whether Boyd would be successful in his mission . The success of Kettle Creek was undone to some extent by the subsequent British victory at the March 3 Battle of Brier Creek , which took place during Campbell 's retreat in present @-@ day <unk> County . 
 Augusta was latter recaptured by the British in June 1780 after Patriot forces collapsed in the aftermath of the Siege of Charleston . It was retaken by siege by Patriot forces on June 5 , 1781 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Kettle Creek Battlefield has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Most of the battlefield is owned by Wilkes County , although the full extent of locations where the action took place has not been identified . It is located off Tyrone Road in Wilkes County . 
 = Battle of Byczyna = 
 The Battle of Byczyna or Battle of Pitschen ( German : Pitschen ; Polish : Byczyna ) was the deciding battle of the 1587 – 1588 War of the Polish Succession , which erupted after two rival candidates were elected to the Polish throne . Both sides had rough parity in forces , with armies about 6 @,@ 000 strong , divided roughly into half infantry and half cavalry . The battle was an overwhelming victory of the Polish @-@ Swedish faction , led by the Swedish @-@ born king @-@ elect Sigismund III Vasa , over the army of his rival to the throne , Maximilian III , Archduke of Austria . Taking place near the Silesian town of Pitschen ( modern Byczyna ) , then just a few kilometres outside the territory of Poland @-@ Lithuania , on 24 January 1588 , Sigismund 's supporters were commanded by Chancellor and Great Crown Hetman Jan Zamoyski . Besides the commanders , notable participants included Stanisław <unk> on the Maximilian 's side , and Stanisław Żółkiewski on Sigismund 's . The army of the Polish @-@ Austrian ( or Habsburg ) faction was largely annihilated , the Archduke was captured and his cause came to an abrupt end . He subsequently renounced his claim to the Polish throne . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1586 , following the death of previous Polish king , Stefan Batory , the Swedish duke Sigismund III Vasa and Habsburg Maximilian III , Archduke of Austria took part in the election to the joint Polish – Lithuanian throne . Each of the two candidates had supporters in the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth with the two opposing sides gathered around pro @-@ Sigismund Chancellor and Great Crown Hetman Jan Zamoyski and the Primate of Poland , Stanisław Karnkowski on one side and the pro @-@ <unk> Zborowski family on the other . The rivalry between Zamoyski and the Zborowski family dated years past and tensions during the elections ran high . 
 Sigismund , supported by Zamoyski and the former king 's wife , Anna Jagiellon , was elected King of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth on 19 August 1587 and recognized as such by the interrex , the Primate Karnkowski . The election was disputed , however , by Maximilian and opponents of Sigismund chose not to respect the election outcome , decreeing that Maximilian was the rightful monarch three days later on 22 August . The Zborowski family called for the rokosz ( legitimate right to rebel ) and the election ended in chaos , with several killed and many wounded . For both Zamoyski and the Zborowski family , losing was not an option , as they knew the losing side would likely pay a severe price , from confiscations and a loss of prestige to a possible death sentence for treason . 
 Neither Sigismund nor Maximilian were present in the Commonwealth at that time . After receiving news of the election , both Sigismund and Maximilan made haste for Poland . Sigismund arrived at Danzig ( Gdańsk ) on 28 September and , after approximately two weeks , he had departed to Kraków , where he arrived on 9 December and was crowned on 27 December . 
 Maximilian attempted to resolve the dispute by bringing a military force to Poland , thereby starting the War of the Polish Succession . After a failed attempt to take Kraków in late 1587 , successfully defended by Zamoyski , he retreated to gather more reinforcements but was pursued by the forces loyal to Sigismund . Zamoyski at first wanted to avoid a large battle , as he hoped for more reinforcements and supplies , but , when it became apparent that Maximilian would be reinforced first , he decided to press an attack . He also received the king 's and royal permission to cross the borders and attack Maximilian in Silesia . Zamoyski divided his army into several regiments that were able to march quickly , at approximately 24 kilometers a day . He reformed his army after a week near Częstochowa . In the meantime , on 22 January 1588 , Maximilian crossed the border into his own territory , towards Byczyna ( Pitschen ) . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 Each side had comparable forces : Maximilan had about 6 @,@ 500 men , about half of which ( 3 @,@ 290 ) were infantry . His forces consisted primarily of Silesians , Hungarians and Moravians . , with artillery consisting of four heavy and a dozen or so lighter pieces . Zamoyski 's forces numbered about 6 @,@ 000 , including 3 @,@ 700 cavalry , 2 @,@ 300 infantry , and several cannon . Maximilian 's Polish supporters included 600 cavalry under the command of the " devil of <unk> " Stanisław <unk> . Another of Maximilan 's notable Polish supporters at the battle was the poet Adam <unk> . Overall Maximilan 's forces held the advantage in infantry , while Zamoyski 's was in cavalry . The Poles favored the cavalry , which had supreme mobility and used the effective charging tactics , but also meant that their infantry was geared too much towards cavalry support . 
 = = The battle = = 
 On the night of 24 January the Archduke 's army took positions east of the small town of Byczyna on the royal road leading into Poland . They felt secure in their camp , on the Habsburg side of the border , and did not expect the Poles to cross . Zamoyski marshaled his forces into three lines and was able to position them at an angle to the opponent 's line . 
 The exact position of the Polish Army is unknown , but part of the Polish right flank , moving quietly in the dense mist , encircled Maximilian 's left flank . After the mist began to clear the Archduke realized his force was being flanked and his retreat to Byczyna was threatened . He ordered an attack , but a miscommunication of his orders confused part of his army and the Hungarian regiment began to retreat . The Polish left wing , under command of future Hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski , dispersed the opposing units . The battle saw more infantry action than many others of the Commonwealth but , even so , the Polish cavalry ( Polish winged hussars ) played a major part . The battle began with some duels between <unk> ( cavalry champions ) , soon followed by Polish cavalry charges , on the left flank and in the center , which did not result in any significant breakthroughs for either side . Zamoyski is said to have commanded the battle very well , turning it at several points . Eventually a Polish hussar counterattack on the left flank mauled Maximilan 's Hungarian cavalry and forced his army to start giving ground . The bloody retreat quickly turned into a general rout during which the Archduke 's army suffered heavy casualties . 
 The entire battle lasted approximately one to two hours . Maximilian took refuge in Byczyna , but the Poles took control of his artillery and turned the guns on the town . Before the Polish forces began their assault , Maximilian surrendered and was taken prisoner . The battle , therefore , ended up being the decisive victory for the Polish @-@ Swedish faction . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Exact casualties are unknown , but the Archduke 's army suffered heavier losses , estimated at about 2 @,@ 000 , whereas the Poles lost about 1 @,@ 000 men . Żółkiewski captured an enemy standard , but received a knee wound which lamed him for life . After the intervention of a papal envoy Maximilian was released , but only after spending thirteen months as a " guest " of Zamoyski . In the Treaty of Bytom and Będzin ( signed on 9 March 1589 ) Maximilian was to renounce the Polish crown and Rudolf II , Holy Roman Emperor had to pledge not to make any alliances against Poland with the Muscovy or Sweden . The town of Lubowla , taken early in the conflict by Maximilian , was returned to Poland . Upon his return to Vienna he failed to honor his pledge and renounce his claim to the Polish crown and would not do so until 1598 . 
 = Stan Coveleski = 
 Stanley Anthony Coveleski ( born Stanislaus Kowalewski , July 13 , 1889 – March 20 , 1984 ) was an American Major League Baseball pitcher during the 1910s and 1920s who primarily threw the spitball . In 14 seasons in the American League ( AL ) , Coveleski pitched for the Philadelphia Athletics , Cleveland Indians , Washington Senators and New York Yankees . In 450 career games , Coveleski pitched 3 @,@ 082 innings and posted a win – loss record of 215 – 142 , with 224 complete games , 38 shutouts , and a 2 @.@ 89 earned run average ( ERA ) . He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1969 . 
 Born in Shamokin , Pennsylvania , Coveleski began playing professional baseball in 1908 , following in the footsteps of his brother , Harry Coveleski . He played mostly for the Lancaster Red Roses until he made his major league debut with the Athletics in 1912 . Following three more seasons in the minor leagues , he stayed in the major leagues after signing with the Indians in 1916 . During his nine seasons with the Indians , his accomplishments included winning three games during the 1920 World Series . 
 After his time with the Indians ended , Coveleski spent three seasons with the Senators and one with the Yankees before retiring after the 1928 season . He retired to South Bend , Indiana , where he died in 1984 . A starting pitcher , Coveleski specialized in throwing the spitball , a pitch where the ball is altered with a foreign substance such as chewing tobacco . It was legal when his career began and outlawed in 1920 , but he was one of 17 pitchers permitted to continue throwing the pitch . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Stanislaus Anthony Kowalewski was the youngest of five baseball @-@ playing brothers in the coal @-@ mining community of Shamokin , Pennsylvania . His oldest brother Jacob died serving in the Spanish – American War ; his other brothers Frank and John also played baseball , but never reached the major leagues . His older brother , Harry Coveleski , later won 20 games in a season on three occasions during his major league career . 
 Like many his age in the Shamokin area , Coveleski began work as a " breaker boy " at a local colliery at the age of 12 . In return for 72 hours of labor per week , Coveleski received $ 3 @.@ 75 , or about five cents an hour . " There was nothing strange in those days about a twelve @-@ year @-@ old Polish kid working in the mines for 72 hours a week at a nickel an hour " , he later recalled . " What was strange is that I ever got out of there " . Coveleski was rarely able to play baseball as a child due to his work schedule . 
 Nevertheless , he worked on his pitching skills during the evenings , when he threw stones at a tin can placed 50 feet away . When he was 18 years old , Coveleski 's abilities caught the attention of the local semi @-@ professional ball club , which invited him to pitch for them . " When it came to throwing a baseball , why it was easy to pitch " , Coveleski recalled . " After all , the plate 's a lot bigger than a tin can to throw at " . His baseball career in Shamokin was short @-@ lived ; after five games , Coveleski relocated to Lancaster , Pennsylvania . 
 = = Philadelphia Athletics and minor leagues = = 
 Coveleski signed his first professional contract in 1909 with the minor league Lancaster Red Roses , a club affiliated with the Tri @-@ State League . Originally reluctant to sign for the club , he only agreed to do so if his older brother John also joined ; at that time he anglicized his name , changing it to <unk> , which it would remain throughout his professional career . During his first trip to Lancaster , he recalled that it was " the first time I ever rode on a train " , and he added that he " was too shy to eat in the hotel with the rest of the team " . In 272 innings of work his first season , Coveleski had a 23 – 11 win @-@ loss record with an earned run average of 1 @.@ 95 . He pitched two more seasons for Lancaster , earning a record of 53 – 38 in 109 appearances through three seasons . 
 In 1912 , he pitched for the relocated Lancaster team , the Atlantic City <unk> , where he had a 20 – 14 record with a 2 @.@ 53 ERA in 40 appearances , 30 of them starts . In September 1912 , manager Connie Mack signed him to a contract with the Philadelphia Athletics and brought him to the major leagues , where he made his debut for the Athletics on September 10 . Coveleski pitched in five games for the Athletics that season , starting two of them and finishing the season with a 2 – 1 record and a 3 @.@ 43 ERA . After the season ended , Mack felt that Coveleski needed more seasoning , and sent him to the Spokane Indians of the Northwestern League . Coveleski finished the 1913 season with a 17 – 20 record and a 2 @.@ 82 ERA . Around that time , he married Mary Stivetts , and the following season he went 20 – 15 , pitched over 300 innings , and led the league in strikeouts . 
 At the time of his debut , the Philadelphia club retained several talented pitchers , including Eddie Plank , Chief Bender , and Jack Coombs . Coveleski admitted that he " [ didn 't ] know if I could have beat them out for a spot in the rotation . " After the 1914 season , the Portland Beavers of the Pacific Coast League wanted Coveleski , and traded five players to Spokane to acquire him . While Connie Mack had an agreement with Spokane that Coveleski would be promoted after playing there for a time , the Athletics fell under new ownership in 1913 and lost control of him due to the Athletics ' rights expiring . Coveleski spent his time in Portland learning to throw the spitball ; originally using chewing tobacco , he later used alum . In his lone season with Portland , he won and lost 17 games , and had a 2 @.@ 67 ERA . After the season ended , the Cleveland Indians purchased Coveleski from Portland , and he joined the major league squad in 1916 . 
 = = Cleveland Indians = = 
 When Coveleski was brought up to the majors , the original intention was to use him as a relief pitcher . Due to an injury to Ed <unk> , the Indians used him as a starter early on in the season , and kept him in the role when he performed well . He was scheduled to pitch in the first week of the season against his brother Harry , but the matchup never took place at Harry 's behest . Coveleski fought health problems during the season , suffering from tonsillitis in the middle of the year and pitching one game with a fever of 102 ° F ( 39 ° C ) . He finished the season with a 15 – 13 record and a 3 @.@ 41 ERA in 45 games , 27 of them starts . Coveleski had lost 10 pounds due to illness during 1916 , but recovered during the offseason , gained 20 pounds , and appeared healthier by the time the season began . 
 Coveleski 's status as the ace of the staff was demonstrated when he was named the starter for Opening Day of the 1917 season ; he beat the Detroit Tigers 6 – 4 on April 11 . He improved statistically during the 1917 season , winning 19 games and losing 14 with an ERA of 1 @.@ 81 and a career high 133 strikeouts . On September 19 , Coveleski pitched a one @-@ hitter against the New York Yankees ; the only hit came from Fritz Maisel in the seventh inning . Coveleski continued to improve during the war @-@ shortened 1918 season . His outings that year included pitching a complete game against the New York Yankees , where he pitched 19 innings , allowing two runs as the Indians won , 3 – 2 . He finished the season with a 22 – 13 record , a 1 @.@ 82 ERA , and 311 innings pitched in 38 games , 33 of them starts ; his wins and ERA were both second in the American League to Walter Johnson . In 1919 , Coveleski pitched in 43 games , starting 34 , and had a 24 – 12 record and an ERA of 2 @.@ 61 . 
 At the beginning of the 1920 season , the spitball was banned by Major League Baseball . As a current spitball pitcher , Coveleski was grandfathered in , and was allowed to continue using the pitch until his retirement . He won his first seven starting appearances of the season , but on May 28 , his wife died suddenly , and he was given some time off to mourn , returning to pitching two weeks later . Nearly three months later , he was the starting pitcher against the New York Yankees on August 16 . In the game , Coveleski hit a sacrifice fly to help the Indians win , 4 – 3 , but it was best remembered as the game where Yankees pitcher Carl Mays hit Ray Chapman , leading to the only death in MLB history from a pitch . He finished the 1920 regular season with 24 wins , 14 losses , a 2 @.@ 49 ERA , and 133 strikeouts ; he led the AL in strikeouts and finished second in ERA to Bob Shawkey . 
 Coveleski 's helped the Indians to win the AL pennant and play in the 1920 World Series against the Brooklyn Robins . Coveleski was the star of the 1920 World Series , in which he pitched three complete game victories . He pitched the first game against Rube Marquard , and allowed one run and five hits in a 3 – 1 Cleveland victory . Four days later , he pitched game four , again allowing one run and five hits in a 5 – 1 win . In game seven , the final one of the series , Coveleski threw a complete game shutout with five hits against fellow spitballer Burleigh Grimes ; the 3 – 0 victory gave the Indians the first World Series championship in franchise history . Coveleski had an ERA of 0 @.@ 67 , which remains a World Series record . 
 After spending the offseason hunting with Smoky Joe Wood , Coveleski returned to the Indians in 1921 , and throughout the season , the Indians battled the Yankees for first in the American League . On September 26 , the two teams faced off , but Coveleski failed to make it past the third inning ; the Yankees won 8 – 7 to ensure they won the pennant . Coveleski pitched 315 innings in 1921 , matching his career high from the year before , and had a 23 – 13 record and a 3 @.@ 37 ERA . The following season , Coveleski married Frances Stivetts , the sister of his late wife . While he did cause the Yankees to move out of first place after winning an August 23 game against them , 4 – 1 , it was his last game of the season . He finished the year with a 17 – 14 record , the first time since 1917 he did not have 20 wins , and a 3 @.@ 32 ERA . 
 Early on in the 1923 season , Coveleski pitched 27 straight scoreless innings , winning three consecutive games during that time . However , he won less frequently as the season wore on , losing three straight games in mid @-@ August . His last game came on August 15 , with over a month left in the season . Coveleski finished the season with a 13 – 14 record , his first season with a losing record . Despite that , he had an ERA of 2 @.@ 76 and five shutouts , both of which led the AL . In 1924 , Coveleski struggled , and at the end of May , he had four losses and an ERA of 6 @.@ 49 . By the end of the season , he had a 15 – 16 record and a 4 @.@ 04 ERA . In December 1924 , after nine years pitching for Cleveland , Coveleski was traded to the Washington Senators for pitcher By <unk> and outfielder Carr Smith . 
 Despite Coveleski 's success in Cleveland , he was not a fan of playing there ; he stated that he " didn 't like the town . Now the people are all right , but I just didn 't like the town . " He also stated that it began to affect his performance on the mound , and that he began to get " lazy " from being with the club so long . He did , however , have praise for his catcher : " The best thing that happened to me there was pitching to Steve O 'Neill . He caught me for nine years in Cleveland and knew me so well he didn 't even need to give me a sign " . 
 = = Washington Senators and New York Yankees = = 
 Due to the acquisition of Coveleski , combined with winning the 1924 World Series , the Washington Senators were considered favorites to win the AL in 1925 . During his first season in Washington , Coveleski bounced back from his 1924 season , and by mid @-@ July , critics regarded his success as the biggest surprise in baseball ; Cleveland considered him to be past his best . He won 20 games and lost five that year , and his ERA of 2 @.@ 84 led the AL . Coveleski also finished 12th in MVP voting that year . The Senators won the AL and were to face the Pittsburgh Pirates in the 1925 World Series , but Coveleski suffered from sore back muscles late in the season . Coveleski pitched two games in the World Series . In game two , he faced Vic Aldridge in a pitcher 's duel ; the teams were tied at one apiece in the eighth inning , but a Pittsburgh home run led to a 3 – 2 loss . Aldridge and Coveleski faced off again in game five , and Coveleski allowed four runs in under seven innings , leading to a 6 – 3 Pirates win . The Senators lost the series in seven games , and he finished with a 3 @.@ 77 ERA , five walks , three strikeouts , and two of the Senators ' four losses . 
 Coveleski continued to pitch for Washington during the 1926 season . His performances that season included a 2 – 0 victory against the Boston Red Sox on August 31 , in which the game was finished in only 78 minutes . Coveleski finished the season with 14 wins , 11 losses , 3 shutouts , and a 3 @.@ 12 ERA in 36 games . To start the 1927 season , due to an injury to Walter Johnson , Coveleski became the Senators ' Opening Day starter against the Red Sox ; he won the game 6 – 2 . However , his performance declined due to " a chronically sore arm " , which limited his playing time that season . Due to his sore arm , the Senators released him unconditionally on June 17 , 1927 . He finished the season with a 2 – 1 record and a 3 @.@ 14 ERA in five games . 
 On December 21 , 1927 , Coveleski signed with the New York Yankees in an attempt at a comeback . In his final season , he posted a 5 – 1 record with a 5 @.@ 74 ERA in 12 appearances . Coveleski failed to regain his form , however , pitching his last game on August 3 , and after the signing of Tom Zachary , manager Miller Huggins released Coveleski . He retired from the game later that year . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 In 1929 , after leaving major league baseball , Coveleski relocated to South Bend , Indiana . There , he ran Coveleski Service Station for a time , but closed the business during the Great Depression . He became a popular member of the community in South Bend , providing free pitching lessons to local youths in a field behind his garage . After his playing career ended , he dropped the " e " at the end of his name , as he never corrected anyone if his last name was incorrectly spelled . In 1969 , Coveleski was named to the Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans ' Committee alongside 1920s pitcher Waite Hoyt . Of his introduction into the Hall he said , " I figured I 'd make it sooner or later , and I just kept hoping each year would be the one . " His health declined in later years , and he was eventually admitted to a local nursing home , where he died on March 20 , 1984 at the age of 94 . 
 In addition to Coveleski 's induction into the Baseball Hall of Fame , he was inducted into the National Polish @-@ American Sports Hall of Fame in 1976 . In 1984 , the minor league baseball stadium in South Bend , Indiana , was named in his honor . Coveleski was interviewed by Lawrence Ritter for his 1966 book The Glory of Their Times , a series of interviews with players of the early 20th century . To fellow ballplayers , Coveleski was considered " taciturn and ornery " on days when he was scheduled to pitch , but was otherwise friendly with a lively sense of humor . 
 Coveleski had 216 wins and 142 losses with a 2 @.@ 89 ERA in 450 games , 385 of them starts in a 14 @-@ year career . He had 224 complete games , 38 shutouts , 981 strikeouts , and pitched 3 @,@ 082 total innings . His control was highly regarded . He never considered himself a strikeout pitcher , and it was not unusual for him to pitch a complete game having thrown 95 pitches or less . He once pitched seven innings of a game where every pitch was either a hit or a strike . In 2001 , baseball statistician Bill James ranked Coveleski 58th among the all @-@ time greatest major league pitchers . 
 = The Puppy Episode = 
 " The Puppy Episode " is a two @-@ part episode of the situation comedy television series Ellen . The episode details lead character Ellen Morgan 's realization that she is a lesbian and her coming out . It was the 22nd and 23rd episode of the series ' 4th season . The episode was written by series star Ellen DeGeneres with Mark Driscoll , Tracy Newman , Dava <unk> and Jonathan Stark and directed by Gil Junger . It originally aired on ABC on April 30 , 1997 . 
 DeGeneres began negotiating with ABC in 1996 to have Morgan come out . When word of the negotiations got out , DeGeneres found herself at the center of intense speculation about when she or her character , or both , would come out . With DeGeneres hinting at her and her character 's coming out both off @-@ screen and within the show , the rumors were confirmed when the episode went into production in March 1997 . 
 Despite threats from advertisers and religious groups , " The Puppy Episode " was an enormous ratings success , won multiple awards and became a cultural phenomenon . Regardless of the episode 's success , DeGeneres and her show quickly garnered criticism for being " too gay " ; the series was canceled after one more season and DeGeneres and guest star Laura Dern faced career backlash . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ellen goes out to dinner with her old friend Richard , a reporter who is in town to cover a story . His producer , Susan , joins them for dessert and she and Ellen hit it off . Ellen goes back to Richard 's hotel room . He comes on to her and , uncomfortable , Ellen leaves . She runs into Susan in the hall and returns with her to her room . They continue to enjoy each other 's company until Susan tells Ellen that she 's gay and that she thought Ellen might be too . Ellen denies it and suggests that Susan is trying to " recruit " her . Susan sarcastically says that she 'll have to call " national headquarters " and let them know Ellen got away . ( " Damn , just one more and I would have gotten that toaster oven . " ) An agitated Ellen leaves Susan 's room and returns to Richard 's room , determined to have sex with him to prove to herself she is not gay . 
 The next day , Ellen tells her friends at the bookstore that she and Richard had amazing sex . She tells her therapist the truth , that she could not have sex with Richard . Ellen laments that she just wants someone that she clicks with . Her therapist asks if she has ever clicked with anyone and Ellen replies , " Susan . " 
 A message from Richard that he is leaving town ahead of schedule sends Ellen rushing to the airport to see Susan . Ellen tells Susan that she was right and struggles to say the word . Finally , Ellen is able to say , " I 'm gay , " inadvertently broadcasting her announcement over the airport 's public address system . Ellen assumes that Susan will be leaving with Richard but in fact Susan will be staying in town for several more days . 
 Ellen has a dream in which she is grocery shopping . She is offered a special lesbian discount on melons , her sexuality is announced to the other shoppers , she is offered a granola bar , she is beckoned toward a checkout lane with a pink triangular sign reading " 10 lesbians or less " and given her grocery total of " a lesbian twenty @-@ nine " ( $ 11 @.@ 29 ) . She discusses the dream with her therapist and realizes that she 's been suppressing her sexuality for many years . Her therapist encourages her to come out to her friends but Ellen is worried about not being accepted . 
 Ellen has her friends over to come out to them . Before they arrive , she comes out to her gay neighbor Peter . When everyone else arrives , Ellen balks at telling them but Peter outs her . Ellen confirms that it 's true and her friends are all supportive of her , although her friend Paige is hesitant . 
 The next day Ellen and Susan are at the bookstore . Susan tells Ellen that she does have feelings for her but she is in a long @-@ term relationship . Ellen is heartbroken and Susan leaves . To cheer her up , her friends take her to a lesbian coffeehouse . There Ellen mistakenly thinks her waitress is coming on to her and is chagrined when a woman flirts with Paige instead of her . 
 Under the closing credits , Susan leads Ellen over to Melissa Etheridge , who confirms that Ellen is gay and , after completing the necessary paperwork , awards Susan a toaster oven . 
 = = Production = = 
 By the end of the third season of Ellen , producers were becoming frustrated by the series ' lack of focus and the lack of interest that the character Ellen Morgan displayed toward the standard sitcom tropes of dating and relationships . One producer suggested that since the character showed no inclination toward dating , she should get a puppy . " It was an indication of just how lost the show was that network executives would be excited by Ellen buying a puppy " , said executive producer Mark Driscoll . It was this suggestion that served as the source of the coming out episode 's name . In the summer of 1996 DeGeneres and the show 's other writers opened negotiations with ABC and its parent company , Disney , to have Ellen Morgan come out during season four . Word of the secret negotiations leaked in September of that year , sparking a storm of speculation as to whether the character , the actress , or both would come out . The LGBT media watchdog group Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation ( GLAAD ) launched a " Let Ellen Out ! " campaign , including an " Ellen Watch " website . Disney rejected the first draft of the script , with Disney executive Dean Valentine stating that it did not go far enough . Director Junger reported that Valentine said " ' If we 're going to do it , let 's do it . ' Once he said to go as far as we could , it became great fun to write . " Once final approval from Disney was secured , ABC announced on March 3 , 1997 , that Ellen Morgan would be coming out . " The Puppy Episode " went into production on March 7 . Guest stars sought to be a part of the project . According to writer / producer Driscoll , " Suddenly all these talented actors were lining up to be in the episode . It had a buzz around it that it would be an historic episode . When Oprah came on — and she was so wonderful and open and giving — it suddenly had this great weight to it . " 
 With word of the episode out , backlash began . The studio received at least one bomb threat and Driscoll received a telephone call informing him he was going to Hell . DeGeneres was followed by car to the studio on at least one occasion by a " suspicious man " . Some within the entertainment industry assumed that the coming out was simply a ratings stunt , to which DeGeneres responded , " I did it selfishly for myself and because I thought it was a great thing for the show , which desperately needed a point of view . " 
 DeGeneres began dropping hints in the episodes leading up to " The Puppy Episode " that she was planning to come out in real life and have her character come out as well , including such sight gags as Ellen Morgan stumbling into an actual closet so that she could come out of it . She also invited comment with her off @-@ screen actions , as when she kissed k.d. lang while presenting her with an award at a Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center function in early 1997 . DeGeneres finally officially came out in Time magazine , with an April 14 , 1997 cover emblazoned with the words , " Yep , I 'm Gay " . She appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show with then @-@ girlfriend Anne Heche the day " The Puppy Episode " was set to air . 
 DeGeneres commented on her months of hinting at her sexuality and the media frenzy within the episode itself , giving Ellen Morgan 's friends lines like " Ellen , are you coming out or not ? ! " and " Yeah , quit jerking us around and come out already ! " Morgan 's therapist comments that if Morgan does not come out she will " continue to have these dreams and then it 's going to show up in your waking life as these little clues that get more and more obvious . And eventually tiresome . " She also says that Morgan cannot blame her reluctance to come out on the media . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Puppy Episode " and DeGeneres 's attendant coming out generated enormous publicity before the show aired . Right @-@ wing groups like the American Family Association pressured ABC to drop the storyline and Ellen sponsors not to advertise ; two occasional advertisers , J. C. Penney and Chrysler , decided not to buy time during the episode . Another sponsor , Wendy 's , decided not to advertise on Ellen again at all . Despite these losses of potential advertisers , ABC turned away ads from two LGBT @-@ oriented sponsors , the Human Rights Campaign ( HRC ) and lesbian vacation company Olivia Cruises . Jerry Falwell called DeGeneres " Ellen Degenerate " , to which DeGeneres responded , " I 've been getting that since the fourth grade . I guess I 'm happy I could give him work . " GLAAD organized " Come Out With Ellen " house parties across the United States and HRC created " Ellen Coming Out House Party " kits that included invitations , posters and an Ellen trivia game . HRC had initially planned to send out about 300 kits . <unk> with requests , they ended up sending out about 3 @,@ 000 . ABC affiliate WBMA @-@ LP in Birmingham , Alabama , citing " family values " , first sought ABC 's permission to move the episode out of prime @-@ time to a late @-@ night slot . When ABC declined the request , the affiliate refused to air the episode at all . Local LGBT organization Pride Birmingham arranged for a satellite feed of the episode and rented a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ seat theatre for a viewing party , with about 1 @,@ 000 people attending . Local activists circulated a petition requesting that Abilene , Texas @-@ area affiliate <unk> @-@ TV not air the episode but were unsuccessful . 
 " The Puppy Episode " was the highest @-@ rated episode ever of Ellen , drawing some 42 million viewers . " The Puppy Episode " won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series and a second for Outstanding Multi @-@ Camera Picture Editing . The episode won a Peabody Award and DeGeneres won a GLAAD Media Award in 1998 . Ellen Morgan 's coming out has been described as " the most hyped , anticipated , and possibly influential gay moment on television " . GLAAD credits Ellen with paving the way for such LGBT @-@ themed programming as Will and Grace , The L Word , and Ugly Betty and it has been suggested that Ellen and these other series presenting LGBT characters have helped to reduce societal prejudice against LGBT people . The episode was ranked # 46 on TV Guide 's list of " 100 Greatest Episodes of All @-@ Time " . 
 Following " The Puppy Episode " , Ellen was renewed for another season . ABC prefaced each episode of season five with a parental advisory warning . DeGeneres strongly criticized ABC for including the warnings , saying in an interview with Entertainment Weekly , " It was like this voice like you 're entering some kind of radiation center . It was very offensive , and you don 't think that 's going to affect ratings ? " DeGeneres further noted demonstrable hypocrisy on the part of ABC , citing episodes of ABC series The Drew Carey Show and Spin City which included two men kissing ( the Carey episode was even promoted using the kiss ) . " There 's no disclaimer on [ the Carey show ] at all , because it 's two heterosexual men , and they 're making fun of heterosexuality ... [ Spin City aired without a disclaimer ] because neither ( Michael J. Fox nor Michael Boatman ) is really gay in real life . " Episodes after " The Puppy Episode " dealt with Ellen 's coming out to her parents and boss , quitting her job at the bookstore and finding a series of new jobs . Other episodes dealt with her search for a romantic partner and learning more about the LGBT community . Even some gay people began criticizing the amount of gay content in the series , including Chaz Bono , formerly known as Chastity Bono , who was at the time working for GLAAD . Bono was quoted as saying , " [ Ellen ] is so gay it 's excluding a large part of our society . A lot of the stuff on it is somewhat of an inside joke . It 's one thing to have a gay lead character , but it 's another when every episode deals with specific gay issues . " Bono would later say that the comments were taken out of context . Ellen was canceled after its fifth season . 
 With the cancellation of Ellen , DeGeneres focused her energy on stand @-@ up comedy , where she had begun her career . She returned to network television in 2001 with the short @-@ lived The Ellen Show , in which her character Ellen Richmond was openly lesbian from the start , before finding renewed success with her talk show The Ellen DeGeneres Show . 
 Guest star Laura Dern faced backlash over her appearance on the show . In a 2007 interview for <unk> 's talk show commemorating the tenth anniversary of " The Puppy Episode , " Dern stated that she did not work for a year and a half because of playing Susan . Nonetheless , Dern said that she was grateful for the " extraordinary experience and opportunity " of being a part of the episode . Speaking of her experience , DeGeneres said , " It was a huge step in my life . I think people sensed the honesty in it . I think it helped a lot of people , and still to this day I hear about parents and children being able to have an honest conversation through watching that show . That 's ultimately what television can be : It can get conversations started . " 
 = John Endecott = 
 John Endecott ( before 1601 – 15 March 1664 / 65 , also spelled Endicott ) was an English colonial magistrate , soldier and the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony . During all of his years in the colony but one , he held some form of civil , judicial , or military high office . He served a total of 16 years as governor , including most of the last 15 years of his life ; this period of service was the longest of any colonial governor . He also held important posts representing the colony as part of the New England Confederation , and was a leading force in expanding the settlement of Salem , Massachusetts and other parts of Essex County . 
 Endecott was a zealous and somewhat hotheaded Puritan , with Separatist attitudes toward the Anglican Church . This sometimes put him at odds with Nonconformist views that were dominant among the colony 's early leaders , which became apparent when he gave shelter to the vocally Separatist Roger Williams . Endecott also argued that women should dress modestly and that men should keep their hair short , and issued judicial decisions banishing individuals who held religious views that did not accord well with those of the Puritans . He notoriously defaced the English flag because he saw St George 's Cross as a symbol of the papacy , and had four Quakers put to death for returning to the colony after their banishment . An expedition he led in 1636 is considered the opening offensive in the Pequot War , which practically destroyed the Pequot tribe as an entity . 
 Endecott used some of his properties to propagate fruit trees ; a pear tree he planted still lives in Danvers , Massachusetts . He also engaged in one of the earliest attempts to develop a mining industry in the colonies when copper ore was found on his land . His name is found on a rock in Lake Winnipesaukee , carved by surveyors sent to identify the Massachusetts colony 's northern border in 1652 . Places and institutions are named for him , and ( like many early colonists ) he has several notable descendants . 
 = = Life = = 
 Most of what is known about John Endecott 's origins is at best circumstantial . Biographers of the 19th century believed he was from the Dorset town of Dorchester because of his significant later association with people from that place . In the early 20th century , historian Roper Lethbridge proposed that Endecott was born circa 1588 in or near Chagford in Devon . Interestingly , in the 16th century the prominent Endecott family , together with the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , owned most of the mines around the stannary town of Chagford , which might - if he is indeed from this family - explain the Governor 's interest in developing copper mining . ( Based on this evidence , Chagford now has a house from the period named in Endecott 's honour . ) However , more recent research by the New England Historic Genealogical Society has identified problems with Lethbridge 's claims , which they dispute . According to their research , Endecott may have been born in or near Chagford , but there is no firm evidence for this , nor is there evidence that identifies his parents . They conclude , based on available evidence , that he was probably born no later than 1600 . A John Endecott was active in Devon early in the 17th century , but there is no firm evidence connecting him to this Endecott . 
 Very little is known of Endecott 's life before his association with colonisation efforts in the 1620s . He was known to Sir Edward Coke , and may have come to know Roger Williams through this connection . He was highly literate , and spoke French . Some early colonial documents refer to him as " Captain Endecott " , indicating some military experience , and other records suggest he had some medical training . 
 = = = Settlement in the New World = = = 
 In March 1627 / 8 Endecott was one of seven signatories to a land grant given to " The New England Company for a Plantation in Massachusetts " ( or the New England Company ) by the Earl of Warwick on behalf of the Plymouth Council for New England ; the council was at the time the umbrella organisation overseeing English colonisation efforts in North America between 40 and 48 degrees latitude . 
 Endecott was chosen to lead the first expedition , and sailed for the New World aboard the Abigail with fifty or so " planters and servants " on 20 June 1628 . The settlement they organized was first called Naumkeag , after the local Indian tribe , but was eventually renamed Salem in 1629 . The area was already occupied by settlers of the failed Dorchester Company , some of whose backers also participated in the New England Company . This group of earlier settlers , led by Roger Conant , had migrated from a settlement on Cape Ann ( near present @-@ day Gloucester , Massachusetts ) after it was abandoned . Endecott was not formally named governor of the new colony until it was issued a royal charter in 1629 . At that time , he was appointed governor by the company 's council in London , and Matthew Craddock was named the company 's governor in London . 
 Endecott 's responsibility was to establish the colony and to prepare it for the arrival of additional settlers . The winters of 1629 and 1630 were difficult compared to those in England , and he called on the Plymouth Colony for medical assistance . His wife , who had been ill on the voyage over , died that winter . Other difficulties he encountered included early signs of religious friction among the colony 's settlers ( dividing between Nonconformists and Separatists ) , and poor relations with Thomas Morton , whose failed Wessagusset Colony and libertine practices ( which including a May pole and dancing ) were anathema to the conservative Puritanism practiced by most settlers in the Massachusetts Bay and Plymouth colonies . Early in his term as governor he visited the abandoned site of Morton 's colony and had the Maypole taken down . When one group of early settlers wanted to establish a church independent of that established by the colonial leadership , he had their leaders summarily sent back to England . 
 = = = Early 1630s = = = 
 Endecott 's first tenure as governor came to an end in 1630 , with the arrival of John Winthrop and the colonial charter . The company had reorganised itself , relocating its seat to the colony itself , with Winthrop as its sole governor . After seeing the conditions at Salem , Winthrop decided to relocate the colony 's seat at the mouth of the Charles River , where he founded what is now the city of Boston . Endecott , who was chosen as one of the governor 's Assistants ( a precursor to the later notion of a Governor 's Council ) , chose to remain in Salem , where he was one of its leading citizens for the rest of his life , serving in roles as town councilor and militia leader , in addition to statewide roles as militia leader , magistrate , deputy governor , and governor . He established a plantation called " Orchard " in Salem Village ( now known as Danvers ) , where he cultivated seedlings of fruit trees . One particular pear tree , brought over as a sapling on one of the early settlement convoys , still lives and bears fruit ; it is known as the Endicott Pear Tree . 
 In the early 1630s the religious conflict between the Nonconformists and the Separatists was the primary source of political disagreement in the colony , and it was embodied by the churches established in Boston and Salem . The Salem church adhered to Separatist teachings , which sought a complete break with the Church of England , while Nonconformist teachings , which were held by Winthrop and most of the colonial leadership in Boston , sought to reform the Anglican church from within . The arrival in Boston in 1631 of Roger Williams , an avowed Separatist , heightened this conflict . Authorities there banished him , and he first went to Salem , where , due to Endecott 's intervention , he was offered a position as a teacher in the local church . When word of this reached Boston , Endecott was criticised for supporting Williams , who was banished from the colony . Williams went to Plymouth , but returned to Salem a few years later , becoming the church 's unofficial pastor following the death of Samuel Skelton in 1634 . Boston authorities called for his arrest after he made what they viewed as treasonous and heretical statements ; he fled , eventually establishing Providence , Rhode Island . During this time Endecott argued that women should be veiled in church , and controversially defaced the local militia 's flag , because it bore St George 's Cross , which Williams claimed was a symbol of the papacy . This action is celebrated in Nathaniel Hawthorne 's story , " Endicott and the Red Cross " , where the writer presents the " tension between Endecott as a symbol of religious intolerance and as [ an ? ] emblem of heroic resistance to foreign domination of New England . " Endecott did this at a time when the Privy Council of King Charles I was examining affairs in Massachusetts , and the colonial administration was concerned that a strong response was needed to prevent the loss of the colonial charter . Endecott was censured for the rashness of his action ( and not for the act itself ) , and deprived of holding any offices for one year ; 1635 was the only year in which he held no office . The committee managing the colonial militia voted that year to stop using the English flag as its standard . Following the incident , and the refusal of the colonial assembly to grant Salem additional land on the Marblehead Neck because of Williams ' presence in Salem , the Salem church circulated a letter to other churches in the colony , calling the legislative act a heinous sin . Although the authorship of the letter is uncertain , Endecott defended the letter when summoned to Boston , and was consequently jailed for a day ; after " he came and acknowledged his fault , he was discharged . " 
 = = = Pequot War = = = 
 In 1636 the boat of Massachusetts trader John Oldham was seen anchored off Block Island , swarming with Indians . The Indians fled at the approach of the investigating colonists , and Oldham 's body was found below the main deck . The attackers were at the time believed to be from tribes affiliated with the Narragansetts , but Narragansett leaders claimed that those responsible had fled to the protection of the Pequots . At the time the Pequots were aggressively expansionist in their dealings with the surrounding native tribes ( including the Narragansett ) , but had generally kept the peace with the English colonists of present @-@ day southern New England . The accusation of the <unk> angered Massachusetts authorities ( then under governor Henry Vane ) , who were already upset that the Pequots had earlier failed to turn over men implicated in killing another trader on the Connecticut River . This second perceived affront produced calls in Massachusetts for action against the Pequots . In August 1636 Governor Vane placed Endecott at the head of a 90 @-@ man force to extract justice from the Pequots . 
 Endecott 's instructions were to go to Block Island , where he was to kill all of the Indian men and take captive the women and children . He was then to go to the Pequots on the mainland , where he was to make three demands : first , that the killers of Oldham and the other trader be surrendered ; second , that a payment of one thousand fathoms of wampum be made ; and third , that some Pequot children be delivered to serve as hostages . Endecott executed these instructions with zeal . Although most of the Indians on Block Island only briefly opposed the English landing there , he spent two days destroying their villages , crops and canoes ; most of the Indians on the island successfully eluded English searches for them . English reports claimed as many as 14 Indians were killed , but the Narragansetts only reported one dead . Endecott then sailed for Saybrook , an English settlement at the mouth of the Connecticut River . Lion Gardiner , the leader there , angrily informed Endecott when he learned of the mission 's goals , " You come hither to raise these wasps around my ears , and then you will take wing and flee away . " 
 After some discussion and delays due to bad weather , Gardiner and a company of his men agreed to accompany the Massachusetts force to raid the Pequot harvest stores . When they arrived at the Pequot village near the mouth of the Thames River , they returned the friendly greetings of the inhabitants with stony silence . Eventually a Pequot sachem rowed out to meet them ; the English delivered their demands , threatening war if they did not receive satisfaction . When the sachem left to discuss the matter in the village , Endecott gave a promise to await his return ; however , shortly after the sachem left , he began landing his fully armed men on shore . The sachem rushed back , claiming the senior tribal leaders were away on Long Island ; Endecott responded that this was a lie , and ordered an attack on the village . Most of the villagers got away , and once again the expedition 's activity was reduced to destroying the village and seizing its crop stores ; Gardiner reported that " [ t ] he Bay @-@ men killed not a man " . After completing this work , Endecott and the Massachusetts men boarded their boats to return to Boston , leaving Gardiner and his men to finish the removal of the crops . The Pequots regrouped and launched an attack on Gardiner 's party whose armor protected them from the <unk> , but their escape was nevertheless difficult . 
 Historian Alfred Cave describes Endecott 's actions as a " heavy @-@ handed provocation of an Indian war . " All of the surrounding colonies protested the action , complaining that the lives of their citizens were placed in jeopardy by the raid . Since the Pequots had previously been relatively peaceful with the English , Endecott 's raid had the effect Gardiner predicted and feared . Communities on the Connecticut River were attacked in April 1637 , and Gardiner was virtually besieged in Saybrook by Pequot forces . Endecott had no further role in the war , which ended with the destruction of the Pequots as a tribe ; their land was divided up by the colonies and their Indian allies in the 1638 Treaty of Hartford , and the surviving tribespeople were distributed among their neighbors . 
 = = = Later terms as governor = = = 
 Endecott was elected deputy governor in 1641 and in this role was one of the signatories to the Massachusetts Body of Liberties , which enumerated a number of individual rights available to all colonists , and presaged the United States Bill of Rights . The next few years were quiet , although rumors of war with the Indians led to the formation in 1643 of the New England Confederation , designed to facilitate united action by the New England colonies against common external threats as well as internal matters like dealing with escaped slaves and fugitives from justice . 
 In 1643 , Governor Winthrop became embroiled in a controversy over the propriety of taking sides in a power struggle going on in neighbouring French Acadia . Endecott pointed out that he should have let the French fight amongst themselves without English involvement , as this would weaken them both . The 1644 governor 's election became a referendum on Winthrop 's policy ; Endecott was elected governor , with Winthrop as his deputy . During his one @-@ year term he oversaw the division of the colony into four counties : Suffolk , Essex , Middlesex , and Norfolk . The ascent of the Salem @-@ based Endecott also prompted an attempt by other Salem residents to have the colonial capital relocated there ; the attempt was rejected by the governor 's council of assistants . 
 Fallout from the English Civil War ( begun in 1642 ) also permeated Boston during Endecott 's tenure . Two ships , one with a Royalist captain , the other with a Parliamentarian captain , arrived in Boston , and the Parliamentarian sought to seize the Royalist ship . After much deliberation , Endecott 's councils essentially adopted support of the Parliamentarian position , reserving the right to declare independence if the Parliament " should hereafter be a malignant spirit " . The Parliamentarian was permitted to seize the Royalist vessel , and the colony also began seizing Royalist vessels that came into port . 
 Thomas Dudley was elected governor in 1645 , with Winthrop as his deputy . Endecott , as a consolation , was given command of the colonial militia , reporting to the governor . He was also once again made a governor 's assistant , and was chosen to represent the colony to the confederation in 1646 . The threat of Indian conflicts in neighbouring colonies prompted the colony to raise its defensive profile , in which Endecott played a leading role . Winthrop was reelected governor in 1646 ; after his death in 1649 , Endecott succeeded him as governor . By annual re @-@ elections Endecott served nearly continuously until his death in 1665 ; for two periods ( 1650 – 1651 and 1654 – 1655 ) he was deputy governor . 
 In 1639 Endecott had been granted several hundred acres of land north of Salem , in what is now <unk> and <unk> . The tract was not formally laid out until 1659 , but as early as 1651 Endecott was granted an additional " three hundred acres of land to tend the furtherance of a copper works " that was adjacent to his land . Endecott hired Richard Leader , an early settler who had done pioneering work at an iron works in nearby Lynn , but the efforts to develop the site for copper processing failed . 
 A persistent shortage of coinage in all of the colonies prompted Massachusetts to establish a mint in 1652 , and begin production of coins from its silver reserves . This act solved a practical problem , but the colony had no authority to do so from the crown . Although this did not become an issue while Endecott was governor , it eventually became a source of controversy with the crown , and the mint had apparently ceased operations around 1682 . 
 The colony 's boundaries expanded somewhat during Endecott 's tenure , mainly in the 1650s . In addition to formally claiming present @-@ day Stonington , Connecticut as spoils from the Pequot War , Endecott sought to establish the colony 's northern boundary . In 1652 he sent a commission with surveyors to locate the most northerly point on the Merrimack River , since the colonial grant defined its northern border as 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of that river . These surveyors were led by Indian guides to the outlet of Lake Winnipesaukee which was claimed by the guides to be the source of the Merrimack . At that location , the party incised an inscription on a rock that survives , and is now located in a small New Hampshire state park . When this survey line was extended eastward , the boundary was determined to fall on the coast at Casco Bay , and the colony thus claimed most of what is now southern Maine and New Hampshire . 
 = = = Religious intolerance = = = 
 One written statement made early in his tenure in May 1649 showed Endecott 's dislike of a fashionable trend toward long hair : " <unk> as the wearing of long <unk> after the manner of Ruffians and barbarous Indians , hath begun to invade new England contrary to the rule of gods word ... Wee the Magistrates who have subscribed [ signed ] this paper ... doe declare and manifest our dislike and detestation against the wearing of such long <unk> " . In 1651 he presided over a legal case in which three people were accused of being Baptists , a practice that had been banned in the colony in 1644 . In convicting John Clarke and sentencing him to either pay a fine or be whipped , Endecott , according to Clarke 's account of the exchange , told Clarke that he " deserved death , and said he would not have such trash brought into his jurisdiction . " Clarke refused to pay the fine ; it was paid by friends against his wishes , and he returned to Rhode Island . Of the three men convicted , only Obadiah Holmes was whipped ; John Crandall , out on bond , returned to Rhode Island with Clarke . 
 When Oliver Cromwell consolidated his control over England in the early 1650s , he began a crackdown on religious communities that dissented from his religious views . This notably included Baptists and Quakers , and these groups began their own migration to the North American colonies to escape persecution . Those that first arrived in Boston in 1656 were promptly deported by Endecott 's deputy , Richard Bellingham , while Endecott was in Salem . More Quakers arrived while Endecott was resident in Boston , and he had them imprisoned pending trial and deportation . He met several times with the Quaker , Mary Prince , after receiving an " outrageous letter " from her . The meetings were apparently fruitless , and she and the other Quakers were deported . Following these acts , the members of the New England Confederation all adopted measures for the prompt removal of Quakers from their jurisdictions . 
 The measures adopted were insufficient to prevent the influx of these perceived undesirables , so harsher measures were enacted . Repeat offenders were to be punished by having ears cut off , and , on the third offense , to have the tongue " bored through with a hot iron " . By 1658 the punishment for the third offense had been raised to death , " except they do then and there plainly and publicly renounce their said cursed opinions and devilish tenets . " In October 1658 the death penalty was enacted for the second offense in Massachusetts . One year later , three Quakers were arrested and sentenced to death under this law . Two of them , Marmaduke Stephenson and William Robinson , were hanged , while the third , Mary Dyer , received a reprieve at the last minute . Dyer returned to the colony in 1660 , and , under questioning by Endecott and the other magistrates , refused to either recant her beliefs or agree to permanent banishment from the colony . She was hanged on 1 June 1660 ; she , Stephenson , Robinson , and William Leddra ( hanged in 1661 ) are now known as the Boston martyrs . The severity of these acts was recognized by the colonists as problematic , and the laws were changed so that execution was the penalty for the fifth offense . ( The poor treatment of Quakers and other religious dissenters would be cited as one of the reasons for revocation of the colonial charter in 1684 . ) 
 Endecott 's role in the treatment of the Quakers was immortalized by John Greenleaf Whittier in his poem " The Ballad of Cassandra Southwick , " named for another Quaker who suffered persecution along with husband Lawrence and at least three of her six children , daughter Provided and sons Daniel and Josiah , while Endecott was governor . Whittier characterized Endecott as " dark and haughty " , and exhibiting " bitter hate and scorn " for the Quaker . Henry Wadsworth Longfellow recreated the trial of Wenlock Christison in " John Endicott " , one of three dramatic poems in a collection called New England Tragedies . Christison was the last Quaker Endecott sentenced to death for returning to Massachusetts after having been banished . He was not executed , however , because the law was changed shortly after his sentencing . Author Nathaniel Hawthorne described Endecott in " The Gentle Boy " , whose title character is the six @-@ year @-@ old son of William and Mary Dyer , as " a man of narrow mind and imperfect education , and his uncompromising bigotry was made hot and mischievous by violent and hasty passions ; he exerted his influence <unk> and unjustifiably to compass the death of the enthusiasts [ i.e. , the Quakers ] ; and his whole contact , in respect to them , was marked by brutal cruelty . " 
 Even though the Puritan colonists of New England were supportive of Oliver Cromwell 's reign in England , they were not always receptive to Cromwell 's suggestions . In response to a proposal by Cromwell that New Englanders migrate to Ireland to increase its Protestant population , the Massachusetts assembly drafted a polite response , signed by Endecott , indicating that its people were happy where they were . 
 = = = English Restoration = = = 
 In July 1660 word arrived in Boston that Charles II had been restored to the English throne . This was an immediate cause of concern in all of the colonies that had supported Cromwell , since their charters might be revoked . In Boston it created a more difficult problem for Edward Whalley and William Goffe , two of the " regicide " commissioners who had voted to execute Charles I. Although Charles promised in the 1660 Declaration of Breda that all were pardoned except by act of Parliament , the Indemnity and Oblivion Act of 1660 singled out all of the regicides for punishment . Whalley and Goffe moved freely about the Boston area for some time , and Endecott refused to order their arrest until word arrived of the passage of the Indemnity Act . Endecott then issued a warrant for their arrest on 8 March 1661 . It is unknown whether Whalley and Goffe had advance warning of the warrant , but they fled , apparently to the New Haven area . 
 Endecott 's warrant was followed by an order issued by King Charles in March and received by Endecott in May 1661 containing a direct order to apprehend the two fugitives and ship them back to England . Endecott dutifully obeyed , but he appointed two recently arrived Royalists to track them down . Somewhat predictably , their search came up empty , and Whalley and Goffe thus escaped . Biographer Lawrence Mayo suggests Endecott would have appointed different men for the search had he been serious about catching them . 
 Opponents to the rule of the Puritans in Massachusetts were vocal in airing their complaints to the new king . Among their complaints was the fact that Charles ' ascension to power had not been formally announced ; this only took place in 1661 after Endecott received a chastising order from the king . This prompted the assembly to draft another of several laudatory letters it addressed to the king , congratulating him on his rise to power . The mint was claimed to be a bald @-@ faced attempt to devalue good English currency , some colonists complained that the expansion of the colony 's borders in 1652 was little more than a land grab , while others put forward claims of administrative malfeasance with respect to funds provided by the crown for the Christianization of Indians , and the Quakers cataloged a long list of grievances . Believing that it was best to ignore the accusations , Endecott and other members of the old guard opposed sending representatives to London to argue against these charges . Supporters of the idea raised funds in a private subscription , and sent a commission to London . 
 The colonial mission , led by future governor Simon Bradstreet and pastor John Norton , was successful , and King Charles announced that he would renew the colonial charter , provided the colony allowed the Church of England to practice there . The Endecott administration dragged its feet on implementation , and after months of inaction , the king sent a commission headed by Samuel Maverick , one of the colony 's most vocal critics , to investigate . Endecott had advance warning of what the commission was to investigate , and took steps to address in form , if not in substance , some of the expected actions . Charles insisted that all religious dissenters be freed , which Endecott had done long before Maverick 's arrival , but he did so by deporting them . Upon the commissioners ' arrival , the assembly took up the matter of allowing Church of England activity in the colony . They passed a law deliberately using the king 's language , allowing anyone " orthodox in religion " to practice in the colony ; however , they also defined such orthodoxy as consisting of views that were acceptable to local ministers . This effectively negated the law , because there were probably no ministers in the colony who would agree that Anglicans satisfied their idea of orthodoxy . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 In 1655 the Massachusetts assembly passed a law requiring its governor to live closer to Boston ; this was probably done in response to Endecott 's sixth consecutive election as governor . Endecott was consequently obliged to acquire a residence in Boston ; although he returned to Salem frequently , Boston became his home for the rest of his life . Endecott died in Boston on 15 March 1664 / 5 . Although early accounts claim he was buried at Boston 's King 's Chapel , later evidence has identified his burial site as tomb 189 in the Granary Burying Ground . 
 = = Family = = 
 Before he came to the colonies in 1628 , Endecott was married to his first wife , Anne Gower , who was a cousin of Governor Matthew Craddock . After her death in New England , he was married in 1630 to a woman whose last name was Gibson , and by 1640 he was married to Elizabeth , the daughter of <unk> Cogan of Somersetshire . It is uncertain whether these represent two different wives , or a single wife whose name was Elizabeth ( Cogan ) Gibson . Because of the uncertainty concerning his wives , it is not known who the mother of his two sons was . There is only firm evidence that he was already married to Elizabeth in 1640 , and the records that survive for the 1630s , when his sons were born , do not otherwise identify his wife by name . Endecott 's last wife , Elizabeth , was a sister @-@ in @-@ law of the colonial financier and magistrate Roger Ludlow . Endecott 's two known children were John Endecott and Dr. <unk> Endecott , neither of whom , seemingly to his disappointment , followed him into public service . There is also evidence that Endecott fathered another child in his early years in England ; in about 1635 he arranged funds and instructions for the care of a minor also named John Endecott . 
 Despite his high position , Endecott was never particularly affluent . According to his will , several large tracts of land , including the Orchard estate in Salem and one quarter of Block Island , were distributed to his wife and sons ; however , it was also noted that some of his books were sold to pay debts . One unexpected legacy left behind by Endecott was the uncertain boundaries of the " Orchard " estate . Several generations later , his descendants were involved in litigation concerning disputed occupancy of part of the estate . 
 Endecott 's descendants include Massachusetts governor Endicott Peabody and United States Secretary of War William Crowninshield Endicott . His descendants donated family records dating as far back as the colonial era to the Massachusetts Historical Society . In 1930 , the Massachusetts tercentenary was marked by the issuance of a medal bearing Endecott 's likeness ; it was designed by Laura Gardin Fraser . Endicott College in Beverly , Massachusetts ( once a part of Salem ) is named for him . 
 = = Namesakes = = 
 In 1831 , the brig Governor Endicott , of Salem , H. H. Jenks , master , was engaged in the pepper trade on the coast of Sumatra when she had occasion to help free Friendship , also of Salem , Charles Endicott , master , from Malay pirates . He and some of his officers had gone ashore to negotiate for pepper in the town of <unk> <unk> when pirates took over the ship , murdered some of her crew and looted the cargo . Captain Endicott obtained aid from Governor Endicott and the ship James Monroe , of New York , J. Porter , master , to rescue his ship from her captors and return her to Salem , where he arrived 16 July 1831 . 
 = = Descendants = = 
 Endicott Peabody 
 Endicott Peabody ( educator ) 
 Malcolm E. Peabody 
 = Tropical Storm Vamei = 
 Tropical Storm Vamei was a Pacific tropical cyclone that formed closer to the equator than any other tropical cyclone in Pacific Ocean . The last storm of the 2001 Pacific typhoon season , Vamei developed on December 26 at 1 @.@ 4 ° N in the South China Sea . It strengthened quickly and made landfall along extreme southeastern Malaysia . Vamei rapidly dissipated over Sumatra on December 28 , and the remnants eventually re @-@ organized in the North Indian Ocean . 
 Though officially designated as a tropical storm , the intensity of Vamei is disputed ; some agencies classify it as a typhoon , based on sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) and the appearance of an eye . The storm brought flooding and landslides to eastern Malaysia , causing $ 3 @.@ 6 million in damage ( 2001 USD , $ 4 @.@ 81 million 2016 USD ) and five deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On December 19 , a small low @-@ level circulation was located along the northwest coastline of Borneo ; at the same time a plume of cold air progressed southward through the South China Sea on the southeastern periphery of a ridge over the Far East . The vortex drifted southwestward , reaching open water by December 21 . The northerly air surge was deflected after interacting with the circulation , and at the same time a portion of the air surge crossed the equator . The southerly flow turned eastward , then northward , and in combination with the northerly flow it wrapped into the vortex , resulting in rapid development of the low @-@ level circulation , just a short distance north of the equator . By December 25 , an area of scattered convection persisted about 370 km ( 230 mi ) east of Singapore within an area of low wind shear , in association with the low @-@ level circulation . Continuing slowly westward , the convection deepened and organized further , and at 1200 UTC on December 26 the disturbance developed into a tropical depression about 230 km ( 145 mi ) east of Singapore , or 156 km ( 97 mi ) north of the equator . This was the first recorded occurrence of a tropical cyclone near the equator . 
 The depression strengthened further and officially attained tropical storm status at 0000 UTC on December 27 , based on the analysis by the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) , though the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) unofficially classified it as a tropical storm six hours prior . Shortly thereafter , an eye with a 39 km ( 24 mi ) diameter became apparent on satellite imagery , along with rainbands extending southward to the opposite side of the equator . At 0600 UTC , the JMA first classified the system as Tropical Storm Vamei , about 65 km ( 40 mi ) northeast of Singapore , and the agency estimated the storm attained peak winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) at the same time . However , the JTWC upgraded Vamei to typhoon status with peak winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) , based on a United States Navy ship report from within the eye ; a second ship reported wind gusts of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) in the southern portion of the eyewall . The storm was small and compact , with gales extending about 45 km ( 30 mi ) from its center . At about 0830 UTC on December 27 , Vamei made landfall approximately 60 km ( 35 mi ) northeast of Singapore , in the southeastern portion of the Malaysian state of Johor . Initially , the Malaysian Meteorological Department classified the cyclone as a tropical storm , though it was later re @-@ assessed as a typhoon at landfall . 
 Tropical Storm Vamei weakened quickly as it crossed the extreme southern portion of the Malay Peninsula , and late on December 27 the JMA downgraded it to tropical depression status before the cyclone emerged into the Straits of Malacca . The JTWC initially maintained it as a minimal tropical storm , though the agency downgraded the storm to depression status as the center again approached land . Early on December 28 , Vamei moved ashore along northeastern Sumatra , and at 0600 UTC the JMA classified the storm as dissipated . However , convection persisted near the circulation over land , believed to have been caused by the process known as upper @-@ level diffluence . On December 29 , what was originally believed to be a separate system reached the southeastern Bay of Bengal . In a post @-@ season re @-@ evaluation , the JTWC classified the system as a continuation of Vamei , based on analysis of satellite imagery that indicated the circulation of Vamei crossed Sumatra without dissipating . Convection re @-@ developed , and late on December 30 the JTWC classified the cyclone as a tropical storm about 390 km ( 245 mi ) west @-@ southwest of the northwestern tip of Sumatra ; initially , due to being treated as a separate system , it was classified as Tropical Cyclone 05B . Vamei quickly developed good outflow and organization , though increased wind shear on December 31 rapidly weakened the storm ; by late that day , the center was exposed from the deep convection , and Vamei quickly dissipated . 
 = = = Unusual formation = = = 
 Vamei formed and reached tropical storm strength at <unk> N , only 156 km ( 97 mi ) from the equator . This broke the previous record of Typhoon Sarah in the 1956 Pacific typhoon season , which reached tropical storm strength at <unk> N. Due to a lack of Coriolis effect near the equator , the formation of Vamei was previously considered impossible . However , a study by the Naval Postgraduate School indicated that the probability for a similar equatorial development was at least once every four centuries . 
 Vamei developed in a vortex that appears every winter along the northwest coast of Borneo and is maintained by the interaction between monsoonal winds and the local topography . Often , the vortex remains near the coastline , and in an analysis of 51 winters , only six reported the vortex as being over the equatorial waters for four days or more . As the area in the South China Sea between Borneo and Singapore is only 665 km ( 415 mi ) wide , a vortex needs to move slowly to develop . A persistent northerly wind surge for more than five days , which is needed to enhance the vortex , is present , on average , nine days each winter . The probability for a pre @-@ existing tropical disturbance to develop into a tropical cyclone is between 10 – 30 percent . Thus , the conditions which resulted in the formation of Vamei are believed to occur once every 100 – 400 years . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Four days prior to Vamei moving ashore , the Malaysian Meteorological Department ( <unk> ) issued storm advisories for potentially affected areas . Subsequently , the agency issued warnings for heavy rainfall , high winds , and rough seas . However , few citizens knew of the passage of the rare storm . 
 Offshore of Malaysia , two U.S. Navy ships in Vamei 's eyewall were damaged by strong winds . Upon moving ashore , the storm brought storm surge damage to portions of southeastern Malaysia . Vamei brought strong winds and heavy rainfall to portions of Melaka , Negeri Sembilan , and Selangor as well as to Johor , where rainfall reached over 200 mm ( 8 in ) in Senai . Additionally , monsoonal moisture , influenced by the storm , produced moderate to heavy precipitation across various regions of peninsular Malaysia . The passage of the cyclone resulted in flooding and mudslides , which forced the evacuation of more than 13 @,@ 195 people in Johor and Pahang states into 69 shelters . Along Gunung Pulai , the rainfall caused a landslide which destroyed four houses and killed five people . River flooding was also reported , as a result of the precipitation from Vamei as well as previous rainfall . Damage from the flooding was estimated at <unk> million ( 2001 MYR , $ 3 @.@ 6 million 2001 USD ) . About 40 percent of the damage occurred to crops at a farm in Kota Tinggi . Moderate damage to transportation , education , and health @-@ care facilities was also reported . The Malaysian government provided affected families up to <unk> ( 2001 MYR , $ 1 @,@ 300 2001 USD ) in assistance for food , clothing , and repairs . Vamei also brought heavy rainfall to Singapore , which caused air traffic disruptions at the Singapore Changi Airport . The passage of the cyclone resulted in many downed trees . 
 In 2004 , the name " Vamei " was retired and replaced with " <unk> " , becoming the first retired name since the Japan Meteorological Agency began naming Pacific typhoons in 2000 . Vamei was one of three tropical cyclones in the current naming list that was retired without attaining typhoon status ; the others were Tropical Storm Bilis in 2006 and Tropical Storm <unk> in 2011 . 
 = Neverwinter Nights 2 = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Obsidian Entertainment and published by Atari . It is the sequel to BioWare 's Neverwinter Nights , based on the Dungeons & Dragons pencil and paper fantasy role @-@ playing game . Neverwinter Nights 2 utilizes an adaptation of the Dungeons & Dragons 3 @.@ 5 edition rules . Players create player characters to represent themselves in the game , using the same character creation rules as found in the Dungeons & Dragons game . They may gain the assistance of additional party members , and they eventually acquire a keep that can be used as a base of operations . Neverwinter Nights 2 is set in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting — in and around the city of Neverwinter . The story is mostly unrelated to Neverwinter Nights and follows the journey of an orphaned adventurer investigating a group of mysterious artifacts known as " silver shards " and their connection to an ancient , evil spirit known as the King of Shadows . 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 went into development in July 2004 . This sequel was designed with the Aurora Engine , also used by its predecessor , and the game 's toolset was included in the game 's release for players to use in designing their own adventures . The game 's design team drew upon older role @-@ playing video games , and decided that the player character would have to earn the respect of others by the things the character does . The game was also designed to be playable with other players online in a cooperative fashion . The game was released in October and November 2006 . Official multiplayer support for the game was suspended in December 2012 . In response , the Neverwinter Nights 2 community developed several initiatives by which players can continue to play the game online . 
 Reviews of Neverwinter Nights 2 were generally positive . Reviewers were pleased with the changes that had been made from the first game in the series , especially regarding the storyline and party management . The game won GameSpot 's Best Story award for 2006 . One of the most commonly raised complaints about the game was the presence of numerous technical glitches in its initial release . Two official expansions and one official adventure pack have been released for the game : Mask of the Betrayer in 2007 , Storm of Zehir in 2008 , and Mysteries of Westgate in 2009 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 is played in the third @-@ person from a top @-@ down perspective , where the player controls a hero and his or her attendant party . As a role @-@ playing video game based on the Dungeons & Dragons 3 @.@ 5 edition ruleset , players build a player character in accordance with the character creation rules of Dungeons & Dragons , which includes selecting a race and class , then assigning skill points . There are sixteen races and twelve classes available , including the rogue and the wizard , as well as an additional seventeen unlockable classes . Neverwinter Nights 2 makes use of the d20 system introduced in Dungeons & Dragons , where a die roll or random number is used to determine the probability and effectiveness of every action , including attacks and saving throws . The player character can recruit companions during the campaign , and may form a party with up to three of them . Party members can be controlled directly by the player or given orders dictating how to behave in combat . 
 The game is set in the Forgotten Realms campaign setting . The party is able to explore various areas of Faerûn — including its cities , forests , and dungeons — while earning experience points and treasure by defeating monsters and completing quests . The entire party collaborates during combat , with characters ' behavior determined by their class and abilities . Upon gaining specified amounts of experience , characters level up which allows them to earn new abilities such as magic spells and feats . Some races , like the drow , are more powerful than others and require characters to accumulate more experience to earn levels . Characters can access Prestige classes , more specialized versions of base classes , by fulfilling certain requirements . The <unk> , for example , is available to divine spellcasters such as clerics after they have reached a set level of power . Items such as weapons , armor , potions , and scrolls can be used or equipped by characters , and some equipment changes will affect a character 's appearance . As the game progresses , the player character acquires a keep that can be used as a base of operations . Initially , the keep is in a state of disrepair and must be refurbished using party funds . As the keep is improved , it can generate income and gain stronger defenses to repel sieges . Non @-@ player characters such as equipment vendors can be recruited to work at the keep , and the player must manage the training of guards and the allocation of resources . 
 Before the online component was disabled ( see Development below ) , the campaign of Neverwinter Nights 2 could be played with other players , but only from the beginning of the storyline . The rules could be modified for multiplayer games , such as deactivating friendly fire . A BioWare community account was required to play online , and players were able to search for game servers matching their style of play . Players could upload and play modules online created with the Electron toolset , which is included with the Windows version of the game . 
 = = Story = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 takes place in and around the city of Neverwinter , in the Sword Coast region of Faerûn . The first part of the game is set in the small Sword Coast village of West Harbor , which was the site of a battle between an evil host led by an entity known as the " King of Shadows " and the warriors aligned with Neverwinter . The player character 's fate is tied to this battle , during which his or her mother was killed . During the campaign , the player has the opportunity to recruit party members to aid in the cause , including the violent dwarf <unk> and a vocal young tiefling . Antagonists include the King of Shadows , a manipulative <unk> diplomat named <unk> , and the warlock Ammon Jerro . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 is composed of three distinct acts . The game 's first act begins in the village of West Harbor , where the player 's character was raised as an orphan by the elven ranger <unk> . After a festival , the town is attacked by a group of githyanki in search of an unnamed object . Afterward , the character is sent to retrieve a mysterious silver shard from a nearby cave , which was left there years earlier after the defeat of the King of Shadows . The character then sets out for Neverwinter , meeting other adventurers along the way , several of whom are available for recruitment . In Neverwinter , <unk> 's half @-@ brother Duncan offers a more comprehensive explanation of the situation . In Neverwinter , Duncan instructs the party to speak with <unk> , a sage who reveals the shard 's connection with a dead warlock and his descendant , a farmer named Shandra Jerro . However , the githyanki kidnap Shandra and the player character must rescue her . At the end of Act I , the party dispatches the githyanki , rescues Shandra , and learns of the origin of the shards . 
 In act two , the party discovers that an evil wizard , Black Garius , is plotting to subsume the power of a powerful entity known as the King of Shadows . The party interrupts Garius during the scheme and Garius is apparently killed . As a reward , the protagonist earns a title of nobility and is awarded a stronghold , Crossroads Keep , by Neverwinter 's political leader , Lord Nasher . After tracking down Ammon Jerro , the warlock who fought the King of Shadows and the grandfather of Shandra Jerro , the player character learns that the King of Shadows was once known as the Guardian , a powerful creation of the ancient fallen empire of Illefarn . The Guardian was corrupted after tapping into a dark magical energy called the Shadow Weave . Thereafter the Guardian destroyed Illefarn in a misguided attempt to protect it . Ammon is initially unwilling to help the player character , but after inadvertently slaying his descendant Shandra , he repents and joins the party . 
 Act three introduces the Shadow Reavers , a sect of powerful undead mages that include a revived Garius , still intent on resurrecting the King of Shadows . The player must prepare Crossroad Keep for imminent battle by fortifying its troops and lands . After additional shards are retrieved by defeating Shadow Reavers , the shards are reformed into a powerful unique weapon for the player character , the Silver Sword of Gith . The sword , stolen by Ammon Jerro in the first battle against the King of Shadows , is the only weapon that can resist the enemy 's power . The army of the Shadow Reavers lays siege to Crossroads Keep and is repelled by the occupants . After making their way through Garius ' new stronghold , the party engages the mage in a second confrontation . After Garius is defeated , good members of the party begin the final fight against the King of Shadows . Evil and neutral characters ( including the player character , if applicable ) can decide to attack the King or fight alongside him . A cutscene afterwards details the battle 's effect on the world , and ends on a cliffhanger which is continued in the Mask of the Betrayer expansion pack . 
 = = Development = = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 was unofficially announced on April 1 , 2004 , when an Atari employee listed the names of several games in development , including a " NWN2 " in response to an inflammatory comment on Atari 's forums . The company officially announced the game on August 4 , 2004 . Obsidian Entertainment handled development of the game , and BioWare , the company that created the first Neverwinter Nights , offered support and guidance to Obsidian . The two companies collaborated in a similar manner on Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic II , an Obsidian – developed sequel to a BioWare game . BioWare joint CEO Ray Muzyka said " Neverwinter Nights remains one of the most important titles BioWare has ever created . We certainly plan to remain involved in the production and development of Neverwinter Nights 2 " . Obsidian employed several game designers from the defunct Black Isle Studios , which developed other Dungeons & Dragons role @-@ playing video games such as Planescape : Torment , the Icewind Dale series , and the Baldur 's Gate series . Development of Neverwinter Nights 2 began in July 2004 , when Obsidian assigned several staff members to work on the project . Staff included Darren Monahan , the producer of several Icewind Dale and Baldur 's Gate : Dark Alliance games ; Marc Holmes , art director of the first Neverwinter Nights ; and Chris Avellone , lead designer of Planescape : Torment and Knights of the Old Republic II . 
 BioWare provided its Aurora Engine from Neverwinter Nights for the sequel . One of the decisions to use Aurora rather than build a new engine from scratch was the toolset — Obsidian wanted players to continue to be able to make content for the game , which may not have been possible with a new engine . BioWare made itself available to Obsidian with technical support on the engine , but Obsidian planned on completely overhauling Aurora , including its code . The designers wanted to improve the visuals of the first game with additions such as better lighting and textures , which required significant changes to the engine . The upgraded engine was referred to as Electron . Electron was designed to incorporate DirectX to make it compatible for a potential Xbox 360 release , but Obsidian eventually abandoned plans for a port to the system for financial reasons . The toolset that was used to create the game was also revamped , and included several additions like a customizable interface , a new dialogue format , and building assistants — similar to the wizards found in Microsoft Word and Excel . Like Neverwinter Nights , the toolset was included in the game 's release for players to use . 
 Obsidian drew on older computer RPGs for inspiration on the storyline and gameplay , like Fallout and the Ultima series . Obsidian CEO Feargus Urquhart said " We 've been thinking about a lot of older RPGs , and we have this feeling that something has been lost with recent RPGs . " He compared Neverwinter Nights 2 to Baldur 's Gate II , stating that he wanted to expand upon the city of Neverwinter as Baldur 's Gate II had done with its setting , Athkatla . " We 're looking at how to make Neverwinter a really intriguing place to be , and make it a place where you go and come back to and go and come back to and have it really be a center for the game , " Urquhart said . The game 's story , while still revolving around the city of Neverwinter , would be unrelated to Neverwinter Nights . Instead of starting the game as a powerful , important character , players would begin Neverwinter Nights 2 as nobodies . Obsidian wanted realism in the game and concrete consequences for the player 's actions . The story would be centered on the player character , who would have to gradually earn the respect of Lord Nasher and the city of Neverwinter . 
 " At the beginning of the game , the main character will run into a person of importance and be ignored like any other lump of crap with legs . The powerful simply don 't notice those weaker than themselves . It 's this kind of philosophy that promises a more cohesive story . " 
 Instead of the henchmen system used in Neverwinter Nights , Obsidian overhauled the game 's party format to mimic Knights of the Old Republic II . Like the Neverwinter Nights expansion Hordes of the Underdark , the player would be able to recruit more than one party member . Each character could be directly controlled , but party members would also be able to come to a player 's aid even when not controlled , such as summoning a rogue to open a locked chest . Companions would have distinct personalities and their own agendas , but it would be possible for the player character to influence them . Characters can leave the party permanently under certain circumstances . Other changes from the first game include the addition of prestige classes and more exotic races , like <unk> and Elven subraces . 
 In 2012 , GameSpy , the company providing multiplayer support for the game , was purchased by Glu Mobile . After the purchase , Glu Mobile raised the fees being charged to publishers to provide online services for their games . The new owners then shut down a number of the online services for different games , including Neverwinter Nights 2 . GameSpy claimed that the developers had allowed their contracts to lapse , and , after providing free services for a time , were no longer willing to continue . 
 = = Release = = 
 Neverwinter Nights 2 was ready for mass production on October 17 , 2006 and was released on October 31 in the United States , on November 3 in Europe , and on November 16 in Australia . The Electron toolset was available early for consumers who pre @-@ ordered the game through GameStop or Best Buy , as well as exclusive class @-@ specific special items . Alongside the standard version , Atari also published a special edition . The United States and Australia " Limited Edition " contained several physical items like a cloth map depicting the Sword Coast , as well as in @-@ game benefits like the " Blessed of <unk> " feat that grants players a bonus to saving throws . The Europe special edition was split into two separate boxes , dubbed " Lawful Good Limited Edition " and " Chaotic Evil Limited Edition " , a reference to the Dungeons & Dragons concept of moral alignment . Each box contained the collectibles available in the United States and Australia versions , as well as copies of the original Neverwinter Nights and its expansions , and a trial code for Dungeons & Dragons Online : Stormreach . 
 Atari licensed Aspyr Media to develop a port of Neverwinter Nights 2 for the Apple Macintosh ; the game was announced shortly before the Windows release . The initial announcement gave a December 2007 release date , but the port was not shipped to retailers until February 2008 . It included the full version of Neverwinter Nights 2 with the exception of the editor toolkit . Atari announced in March 2008 that many of its PC games , including Neverwinter Nights 2 and its first expansion , Mask of the Betrayer , would be available online via Valve Corporation 's digital distribution service Steam . A " Gold Edition " bundle was also published in May 2008 containing copies of Neverwinter Nights 2 and Mask of the Betrayer . A platinum edition containing the original game and both its expansion packs was released on the Steam platform on December 27 , 2010 . As of May 2013 , Neverwinter Nights 2 is no longer sold through Steam . 
 A complete edition that contains the original game and the three expansion packs ( Mask of the Betrayer , Storm of Zehir , Mysteries of Westgate ) was released on GOG.com on January 24 , 2013 . 
 = = Expansions = = 
 Mask of the Betrayer , the game 's first expansion pack , was announced in April 2007 by Atari and Obsidian Entertainment . It was released on September 28 , 2007 in Europe , on October 9 in the United States , and on November 1 in Australia . Mask of the Betrayer 's story begins shortly after the events of Neverwinter Nights 2 and is set in the country of Rashemen , a matriarchy near Thay . The expansion contains several new options for character development , including additional races and prestige classes . It received favorable reviews from critics . 
 Storm of Zehir was announced in June 2008 . The pack is set on the Sword Coast and Chult areas of the Forgotten Realms and was released on November 18 , 2008 in the United States , on November 21 in Europe , and on December 11 in Australia . Despite being released after the introduction of the D & D 4th edition ruleset , Storm of Zehir made use of the 3 @.@ 5 ruleset like its predecessors . The expansion featured gameplay with similarities to previous D & D video game series Baldur 's Gate and Icewind Dale and received mixed reviews . 
 Mysteries of Westgate was announced in October 2007 . Atari referred to it as an " adventure pack " , comparing it to the premium modules of Neverwinter Nights . The game was developed by Canadian @-@ based Ossian Studios , the designers of the cancelled premium module Darkness over Daggerford . It is set in the Dragon Coast city of Westgate . Atari 's initial press release gave a release date of fall 2007 for Mysteries of Westgate , but it was not released until April 29 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reception of Neverwinter Nights 2 was generally favorable . It placed number 6 on Amazon 's video game pre @-@ order list the week before its release , and was a best @-@ seller for several weeks afterwards . It received GameSpot 's " Best Story " award for 2006 , beating out the reader 's choice , The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion . It was also nominated for a Golden Joystick Award for Best PC Game of 2006 . 
 While some reviewers considered Neverwinter Nights 2 superior to its predecessor , Neverwinter Nights , the sequel received lower overall review ratings . Implementation of the Dungeons & Dragons 3 @.@ 5 ruleset was praised as faithful to the pen @-@ and @-@ paper version , with GameDaily stating " The 3 @.@ 5 edition ruleset is in full swing in Neverwinter Nights 2 , where critical hits can devastate your entire party . " The game 's representation of the Forgotten Realms campaign setting was also well received . The storyline was widely considered one of the game 's strong points and an improvement over Neverwinter Nights . GameSpy stated that the single – player campaign was " worthy of its exhaustive pedigree " , and Game Informer 's reviewer said " This title easily trumps the original <unk> ’ s campaign with a vastly superior story and characters " . Another reviewer declared it " one of the best written games in history " . Aaron R. Conklin of The Wisconsin State Journal said , " It 'd be very easy to be turned off by the first mundane chapters of the game 's sprawling plot .... Stick with it : Once your party hits Neverwinter ( and reaches level seven or so ) , the proceedings become significantly more interesting — especially in terms of character interaction and development .... NWN2 is a masterpiece of storytelling and scope . " Conklin and Matt Slagle of Deseret News were pleased with the ethical choices in the game , with both noting approvingly that diplomacy was a very valid option that could succeed in place of combat . 
 Other reviewers were less convinced , with Australia 's PALGN referring to the story as " rather predictable and clichéd " . Jonathan <unk> of Personal Computer World wrote , " Dialogue is NWN2 's key component .... but those who favour fisticuffs may find it tiresome after playing for several billion hours . " Similarly , reception of Neverwinter Nights 2 's graphics was mixed . Some reviewers referred to the visuals as " new age " and " beautiful " , but others noticed inconsistencies in their rendering and performance , especially on lower @-@ end PCs . The Sydney Morning Herald said " The detailed 3D engine allows for lush scenery , giving you a greater sense of exploration as you poke around the rustic villages and murky swamps " . Several comments on the audio and voice acting were positive , though one reviewer expressed disappointment that some sound effects had apparently been recycled from Neverwinter Nights . Conklin called the in @-@ game camera " abysmal " and said the game had a many graphical glitches . Slagle agreed , writing , " I had a lot of stuttering graphics and voiceovers that were out of synch with the characters ' on @-@ screen animations . " 
 The most common criticism of the game was its numerous technical glitches . Adam Diamond of Isthmus was not happy with the pathfinding , writing , " I often found myself traveling solo through a dungeon , my companions spread out far behind me , leaving me vulnerable to attack . What 's the point of having henchmen if they 're not there to protect you ? " . Some reviews compared Neverwinter Nights 2 to Star Wars : Knights of the Old Republic II , a previous Obsidian game that had received similar complaints . The bugs were described as disruptive to gameplay and " downright infuriating " , and one reviewer encountered a " showstopper bug " in the initial retail version that prevented him from playing the game past a certain point . The bugs were said to negatively affect NPC AI , camera operation , and pathfinding . One review stated " The launch – to – load time is fairly long so be prepared to wonder if the game has crashed or is loading . " Obsidian was quick to release fixes for several bugs , but later reviews still described the glitches as a serious problem . 1UP.com 's review , written two weeks after the game 's release , stated " But the sad truth is that NWN2 shipped in a pretty messy state , and even after a couple patches ( as of this writing ) , the biggest problems remain . " 
 The level editor and design toolset were widely praised , with Deseret referring to them as " insanely powerful and complex " . The Mac version received mixed reception , and reviewers complained about its lack of the editor toolkit and its high system requirements . 
 1UP.com writer Matt Peckham caused controversy with his initial review of Neverwinter Nights 2 . A 1UP editor pulled the review from the site and officially retracted it from the print version of the January 2007 issue of Games for Windows : The Official Magazine , explaining that " we felt that this particular review of Neverwinter Nights 2 did a disservice to fans of the [ role @-@ playing game ] genre . " The subsequent review by Jeff Green gave the game a score of C + and is one of the most negative reviews among major outlets . A modified version of Peckham 's review was later published by the Sci Fi Channel , and another version of the review can be found at Penny @-@ Arcade . 
 = Bajkam = 
 Abū al @-@ Husayn Bajkam al @-@ <unk> ( Arabic : أبو <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , referred to as Bajkam , <unk> or <unk> ( from <unk> , a Persian and Turkish word meaning a horse- or yak @-@ tail ) , was a Turkish military commander and official of the Abbasid Caliphate . A former ghulam of the Ziyarid dynasty , Bajkam entered Abbasid service following the assassination of the Ziyarid ruler Mardavij in 935 . During his five @-@ year tenure at the Caliphate 's court at Baghdad , he was granted the title of amir al @-@ umara , consolidating his dominance over the Caliphs ar @-@ Radi and al @-@ Muttaqi and giving him absolute power over their domains . Bajkam was challenged throughout his rule by various opponents , including his predecessor as amir al @-@ umara , Muhammad ibn Ra 'iq , the Basra @-@ based Baridis , and the Buyid dynasty of Iran , but he succeeded in retaining control until his death . He was murdered by a party of Kurds during a hunting excursion in 941 , shortly after the accession of al @-@ Muttaqi as Caliph . Bajkam was known both for his firm rule and for his patronage of Baghdad intellectuals , who respected and in some cases befriended him . His death led to a void in central power , resulting in a brief period of instability and fighting in Baghdad . 
 = = Early military career and service under Ibn Ra 'iq = = 
 Details of Bajkam 's early life are unknown . He was one of the ghilman ( military slaves , usually of Turkish origin ) of the Daylamite warlord Makan ibn Kaki in northern Iran . Makan took care of the young Bajkam 's training and education , something for which the latter showed his gratitude by adopting his patron 's name as his <unk> ( surname ) . After Makan , Bajkam entered the service of Mardavij , founder of the Ziyarid dynasty , who came to control Daylam , Jibal and Tabaristan . Mardavij mistreated his ghilman , who consequently murdered him at Isfahan in January 935 , an act in which Bajkam may have been complicit . After Mardavij 's death , most of the ghilman in Ziyarid service dispersed . Bajkam and his fellow officer Tuzun assumed the leadership of a large group and , after first offering their services to the new governor of Jibal , Hasan ibn Harun , proceeded to the Abbasid court at Baghdad . At first , their offers were rejected by the court , where the Caliph 's <unk> bodyguards jealously guarded their prerogatives , but the ghilman were eventually taken into the service of Muhammad ibn Ra 'iq , governor of Basra and Wasit in southern Iraq . Now known as Bajkam Ra <unk> , Bajkam created a large military force under his command consisting of his own followers as well as additional Turks and Daylamites summoned from Jibal . 
 In early November 936 , the Caliph al @-@ Radi ( reigned 934 – 940 ) bestowed the newly created title of amir al @-@ umara ( " commander of commanders " ) on Ibn Ra 'iq , who was effectively granted absolute control over the Caliphate . This provoked the reaction of various provincial governors as well as that of powerful interest groups in Baghdad itself , such as the caliphal bodyguards . Against them , Ibn Ra 'iq employed Bajkam and his Turkish supporters . With their aid , he managed to neutralize the <unk> and <unk> guard units , after which , in February 937 , Bajkam was rewarded with the posts of sahib al @-@ shurta ( chief of police ) and governor of the eastern provinces . 
 Far more difficult and protracted was the war against the ambitious governor of Ahwaz , Abu Abdallah al @-@ Baridi , who aimed to supplant Ibn Ra 'iq . Al @-@ Baridi 's family was of Basran origin , and had served the Abbasids in various roles as officials before managing to assert a weak hold over Khuzistan . Ibn Ra 'iq himself was defeated and forced to leave Basra to the Baridis , but Bajkam saved the situation by scoring two major victories , despite being outnumbered , that allowed him to take possession of Khuzistan . The hard @-@ pressed al @-@ Baridi now turned to his powerful neighbour , the Buyid ruler of Fars , Ali ibn <unk> , for help . Ali 's brother Ahmad soon took over Khuzistan , and Ibn Ra 'iq was forced to offer possession of the province as an independent domain if Bajkam would recover it . Bajkam however was repulsed by the Buyid forces , and fell back to Wasit . 
 Ignoring Ibn Ra 'iq 's orders to retake Khuzistan , Bajkam remained at Wasit , and began plotting to depose Ibn Ra 'iq himself . To this end , Bajkam began seeking allies : he offered the governorship of Wasit to the Baridis , and through the former vizier Ibn <unk> , who wished to avenge himself on Ibn Ra 'iq for his own downfall and confiscation of his property , gained the covert support of Caliph al @-@ Radi himself . In September 938 , Bajkam led his troops from Wasit to Baghdad . Ibn Ra 'iq tried without success to impede his advance by destroying the great dams of the Nahrawan Canal and flooding the plain , but Bajkam 's army entered the Abbasid capital without opposition , and al @-@ Radi immediately transferred Ibn Ra 'iq 's title of amir al @-@ umara to Bajkam . 
 = = Amir al @-@ umara = = 
 Despite the continued relegation of al @-@ Radi to a ceremonial role , the relationship between the Caliph and Bajkam was strong , with al @-@ Radi praising Bajkam for his harsh discipline and referring to the latter as his " protégé " . Al @-@ Radi was appreciative of Bajkam 's respect for his position as Caliph , and promised his support for the amir al @-@ umara . 
 In October – November 938 , Bajkam and the Caliph campaigned against the influential Hamdanid emir of Mosul , Hasan ibn Abdallah , who had taken advantage of the turmoil in Iraq to cease forwarding his province 's revenue to Baghdad . Although Bajkam 's army captured Mosul , Hasan fled before him to the remotest corners of his domain , where Bajkam 's forces pursued him in vain . In the meantime , the local population resented the presence of the caliphal troops and launched guerilla warfare against them , while Ibn Ra 'iq used Bajkam 's absence to take control of Baghdad at the head of a <unk> force . These developments forced Bajkam to negotiate with his rivals : the Hamdanids were restored in their province in exchange for the payment of the tax arrears , and Ibn Ra 'iq was bought off with the governorship of the provinces of Tariq al @-@ Furat , Diyar Mudar , Qinnasrin and al- ' <unk> , which were also claimed by the Ikhshidids of Egypt . This arrangement allowed Bajkam and the Caliph to return to Baghdad in February 939 . 
 Bajkam , having consolidated his control over Baghdad , now turned to face the threat posed by the Buyids . To this end , he strengthened his ties with the Baridis of Basra , by handing over Wasit , as previously agreed , appointing Abu Abdallah al @-@ Baridi as vizier of the Abbasid court ( although the latter remained at Wasit and did not visit Baghdad ) , and , finally , by marrying himself to one of al @-@ Baridi 's daughters . Bajkam 's success against the Buyids was mixed : Wasit was saved from Buyid attack , and the Baridis led a successful campaign in <unk> , but an expedition into Jibal was crushed by the third Buyid brother , Hasan . The alliance with the Baridis quickly soured , however , as al @-@ Baridi still maintained his ambition of replacing Bajkam , and <unk> was aware of this . In late August 940 , Bajkam removed al @-@ Baridi from the vizierate and launched an attack on Wasit , which the Baridis abandoned without resistance . In the meantime , the Baghdad was in turmoil as religious violence had become commonplace , with fanatical members of the Hanbali school imposing their tenets on the general populace . 
 In December 940 , al @-@ Radi died . Bajkam remained at Wasit , but sent his secretary to Baghdad to convene a council of Abbasid aristocrats , who selected al @-@ Muttaqi ( r . 940 – 944 ) , al @-@ Radi 's brother , as Caliph . Bajkam also sent a slave named <unk> to the deceased Caliph 's palace , the Dar al @-@ Sultan , to procure various items , including the valuable al @-@ <unk> pearl . He also obtained three female slaves from al @-@ Radi 's palace , whose singing he remembered from his earlier visits to the Caliph . 
 Among al @-@ Muttaqi 's first actions as Caliph was the confirmation of Bajkam as amir al @-@ umara . Despite al @-@ Muttaqi 's gesture of support , Bajkam still faced opposition among the semi @-@ autonomous provincial governors , including al @-@ Baridi . 
 = = Death and ensuing anarchy = = 
 Bajkam opened a campaign against al @-@ Baridi in early spring 941 . His lieutenants were at first defeated by the Baridis , whereupon Bajkam himself left Wasit to take the field . On his way to join his army , however , he was informed that his generals had achieved a major victory over the Baridis , and decided to return to Wasit . On 21 April 941 , while travelling , he took part in a hunting excursion , during which he and his party inadvertently encountered a band of Kurdish brigands . During a brief skirmish , Bajkam was slain when one of the Kurds stabbed him in the back with his lance . 
 Bajkam 's unexpected death created a power vacuum in Baghdad , with disagreements between Daylamite and Turkish forces prompting the former to join the defeated al @-@ Baridi . With their assistance , he marched on Wasit and Baghdad , capturing them , but was soon forced to flee due to the disorder that followed his usurpation of power . A Daylamite chief named <unk> replaced him as de facto ruler of Baghdad , but he imposed tyrannical rule , and al @-@ Muttaqi appealed to the former amir al @-@ umara Ibn Ra 'iq for assistance . 
 Ibn Ra 'iq soon retook control of Baghdad , but political turmoil did not cease with his re @-@ installation as amir al @-@ umara . Once again , al @-@ Baridi captured the city , and Ibn Ra 'iq fled with the Caliph to Mosul , from where the Hamdanid rulers launched a successful attempt to restore them . The Hamdanid emir Hasan , after ordering the assassination of Ibn Ra 'iq , was made amir al @-@ umara and given the laqab of Nasir al @-@ Dawla ( " Defender of the Dynasty " ) . In 943 , the Hamdanids were forced to retreat to Mosul when Tuzun , one of Bajkam 's officers , seized power with military support ; the following year , Tuzun captured , blinded , and deposed al @-@ Muttaqi , assuming the role of amir al @-@ umara . The Caliph 's brother , al @-@ Mustakfi ( r . 944 – 946 ) , was appointed as his successor . The competition for control of the Caliph ended in 945 , when the Buyid Ahmad took over the position of amir al @-@ umara with the title of Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla . This begun the period of undisputed Buyid control over Baghdad and Iraq , which lasted until the Seljuk conquest in the 1050s . 
 = = Character = = 
 Despite his slave origin , Bajkam was educated in Arabic ( although he reportedly did not speak it for fear of making mistakes ) , respected by intellectuals and was known to seek the company of such men as al @-@ <unk> and the physician Sinan ibn <unk> . It is in their writings that glimpses of his character survive . According to the researcher Marius Canard , Bajkam was " covetous of power and money , he did not hesitate to resort to dissimulation and ruse , corruption and torture to attain his ends ; he was at times cruel , though his bravery was legendary , and was more upright in character than Ibn Ra 'iq " . Bajkam was also solicitous for the welfare of his subjects , and especially the inhabitants of Wasit cherished his memory . 
 = Brazilian battleship Minas Geraes = 
 Minas Geraes , spelled Minas Gerais in some sources , was a dreadnought battleship of the Brazilian Navy . Named in honor of the state of Minas Gerais , the ship was laid down in April 1907 as the lead ship of its class , making the country the third to have a dreadnought under construction and igniting a naval arms race between Brazil , Argentina , and Chile . 
 Two months after its completion in January 1910 , Minas Geraes was featured in Scientific American , which described it as " the last word in heavy battleship design and the ... most powerfully armed warship afloat " . In November 1910 , Minas Geraes was the focal point of the Revolt of the Lash . The mutiny spread from Minas Geraes to other ships in the Navy , including its sister São Paulo , the elderly coastal defense ship Deodoro , and the recently commissioned cruiser Bahia . Led by the " Black Admiral " João Cândido Felisberto , the mutineers threatened to bombard the Brazilian capital of Rio de Janeiro if their demands were not met . As it was not possible to end the situation militarily — the only loyal troops nearby being small torpedo boats and army troops confined to land — the National Congress of Brazil gave in and the rebels disbanded . 
 When Brazil entered the First World War in 1917 , Britain 's Royal Navy declined Brazil 's offer of Minas Geraes for duty with the Grand Fleet because the ship was outdated ; it had not been refitted since entering service , so range @-@ finders and a fire @-@ control system had not been added . São Paulo underwent modernization in the United States in 1920 ; in 1921 , Minas Geraes received the same treatment . A year later , Minas Geraes sailed to counter the first of the Tenente revolts . São Paulo shelled the rebels ' fort , and they surrendered shortly thereafter ; Minas Geraes did not fire its guns . In 1924 , mutineers seized São Paulo and attempted to persuade the crews of Minas Geraes and several other ships to join them , but were unsuccessful . 
 Minas Geraes was modernized at the Rio de Janeiro Naval Yard in the 1930s , and underwent further refitting from 1939 to 1943 . During the Second World War , the ship was anchored in Salvador as the main defense of the port , as it was too old to play an active part in the war . For the last nine years of its service life , Minas Geraes remained largely inactive , and was towed to Italy for scrapping in March 1954 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Beginning in the late 1880s , Brazil 's navy fell into obsolescence , helped along by an 1889 revolution , which deposed Emperor Dom Pedro II , and naval revolts in 1891 and 1893 – 94 . By the turn of the 20th century it was lagging behind the Chilean and Argentine navies in quality and total tonnage , despite Brazil having nearly three times the population of Argentina and almost five times the population of Chile . 
 At the turn of the twentieth century , soaring demand for coffee and rubber brought prosperity to the Brazilian economy . The government of Brazil used some of the extra money from this economic growth to finance a large naval building program in 1904 , which authorized the construction of a large number of warships , including three battleships . The Minister of the Navy , Admiral Júlio César de Noronha , signed a contract with Armstrong Whitworth for three battleships on 23 July 1906 . While the first designs for these ships were derived from the Norwegian coastal defense ship Norge and the British ( originally Chilean ) Swiftsure class , the contracted ships were to follow Armstrong Whitworth 's Design 439 ( Design 188 in Vickers ' files ) . They would displace 11 @,@ 800 long tons ( 12 @,@ 000 tonnes ) , have a speed of 19 knots ( 22 mph ; 35 km / h ) , and be protected by belt armor of 9 inches ( 23 cm ) and deck armor of 1 @.@ 5 in ( 3 @.@ 8 cm ) . Each ship would be armed with twelve 10 @-@ inch ( 25 cm ) guns mounted in six twin turrets . These turrets would be mounted in a hexagonal configuration , similar to the later German Nassau @-@ class battleships . 
 Two of these ships were laid down by Armstrong in Elswick ( Minas Geraes and Rio de Janeiro ) , while the other was subcontracted out to Vickers in Barrow ( São Paulo ) . The new dreadnought concept , which premiered in December 1906 upon the completion of the namesake ship in December 1906 , rendered the Brazilian ships obsolete . The money authorized for naval expansion was redirected by new Minister of the Navy , Rear Admiral Alexandrino <unk> de Alencar , to building two dreadnoughts , with plans for a third dreadnought after the first was completed , two scout cruisers ( which became the Bahia class ) , ten destroyers ( the Pará class ) , and three submarines . The three battleships on which construction had just begun were demolished beginning on 7 January 1907 , and the design of the new dreadnoughts was approved by the Brazilians on 20 February 1907 . 
 Even though the greater cost of these ships meant that only two ships could begin immediately , plans went ahead . Minas Geraes , the lead ship , was laid down by Armstrong on 17 April 1907 , while São Paulo followed thirteen days later at Vickers . The news shocked Brazil 's neighbors , especially Argentina , whose Minister of Foreign Affairs remarked that either Minas Geraes or São Paulo could destroy the entire Argentine and Chilean fleets . In addition , Brazil 's order meant that they had laid down a dreadnought before many of the other major maritime powers , such as Germany , France or Russia , and the two ships made Brazil just the third country to have dreadnoughts under construction , behind the United Kingdom and the United States . In particular , the United States now actively attempted to court Brazil as an ally ; caught up in the spirit , U.S. naval journals began using terms like " Pan Americanism " and " Hemispheric Cooperation " . Newspapers and journals around the world , particularly in Britain and Germany , speculated that Brazil was acting as a proxy for a naval power which would take possession of the two dreadnoughts soon after completion , as they did not believe that a previously insignificant geopolitical power would contract for such powerful armament . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Minas Geraes was christened by Senhora Regis de Oliveira , the wife of the Brazilian minister to Great Britain , and launched at Newcastle @-@ on @-@ Tyne on 10 September 1908 . During fitting @-@ out , it was moved to Vickers ' Walker Yard , and thousands turned out to see the incomplete ship squeeze barely underneath and through overhead and swing bridges . After completion , Minas Geraes was handed over by Armstrong on 5 January to the Brazilian Commission on behalf of the Brazilian government , while the ship 's company was mustered on deck . The British Royal Navy carried out its gunnery trials at the request of Armstrong 's and with the agreement of the Brazilian government . Although the idea of having superfiring turrets was not new — the American South Carolina @-@ class battleships were also designed and built in this fashion around the same time — the trials attracted interest from a few nations , who sent representatives to observe . They wanted to resolve two major questions : the effect that firing the upper superfiring turrets would have on the crewmen in the lower guns , and whether smoke from the discharge of the lower guns would hinder the targeting capabilities of the upper turret . The tests resolved both questions satisfactorily . 
 Minas Geraes left the Tyne on 5 February 1910 and traveled to Plymouth before beginning a voyage to the United States on 8 February . When the ship reached Norfolk , Virginia , it escorted the American armored cruiser North Carolina , which was carrying the body of the former Brazilian ambassador to the United States Joaquim Nabuco ( who had died in Washington , D.C. on 17 January ) to Rio de Janeiro . The two ships set sail on 17 March 1910 and reached Rio de Janeiro one month later , where Minas Geraes was commissioned into the Brazilian Navy on 18 April . 
 Soon after Minas Geraes ' arrival in Brazil , the country 's prosperity began to wane , and a severe depression hit the Brazilian economy . The economic hardship , the racism prevalent in all branches of the Brazilian armed forces , and the severe discipline enforced on all navy ships spawned a mutiny known as the Revolt of the Lash , or Revolta da Chibata , among sailors on the most powerful ships . 
 = = = Revolt of the Lash = = = 
 The initial spark was provided on 16 November 1910 when Afro @-@ Brazilian sailor Marcelino Rodrigues Menezes was brutally flogged 250 times for insubordination . The sailor 's back was later described by José Carlos de Carvalho , a retired navy captain assigned to be the Brazilian government 's representative to the mutineers , as " a mullet sliced open for salting . " Many Afro @-@ Brazilian sailors were sons of former slaves , or were former slaves freed under the Lei Áurea ( abolition ) but forced to enter the navy . They had been planning a revolt for some time , and Menezes became the catalyst . The revolt began aboard Minas Geraes at around 10 pm on 22 November ; the ship 's commander and several loyal crewmen were murdered in the process . Soon after , São Paulo , the new cruiser Bahia , the coast @-@ defense ship Deodoro , the minelayer República , the training ship Benjamin Constant , and the torpedo boats <unk> and <unk> all revolted with relatively little violence . The first four ships represented the newest and strongest ships in the navy ; Minas Geraes , São Paulo , and Bahia had been completed and commissioned only months before . Deodoro was twelve years old and had recently undergone a refit . The crews of the smaller warships made up only two percent of the mutineers , and some moved to the largest ships after the revolt began . 
 The ships were well @-@ supplied with foodstuffs , ammunition , and coal , and the only demand of mutineers — led by João Cândido Felisberto — was the abolition of what they called slavery : they objected to low pay , long hours , inadequate training , and punishments including bolo ( being struck on the hand with a ferrule ) and the use of whips or lashes ( chibata ) , which eventually became a symbol of the revolt . By the 23rd , the National Congress had begun discussing the possibility of a general amnesty for the sailors . Senator Ruy Barbosa , long an opponent of slavery , lent a large amount of support , and the measure unanimously passed the Federal Senate on 24 November . The measure was then sent to the Chamber of Deputies . 
 Humiliated by the revolt , naval officers and the president of Brazil were staunchly opposed to amnesty , so they quickly began planning to assault the rebel ships . The officers believed such an action was necessary to restore the service 's honor . The rebels , believing an attack was imminent , sailed their ships out of Guanabara Bay and spent the night of 23 – 24 November at sea , only returning during daylight . Late on the 24th , the President ordered the naval officers to attack the mutineers . Officers crewed some smaller warships and the cruiser Rio Grande do Sul , Bahia 's sister ship with ten 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns . They planned to attack on the morning of the 25th , when the government expected the mutineers would return to Guanabara Bay . When they did not return and the amnesty measure neared passage in the Chamber of Deputies , the order was rescinded . After the bill passed 125 – 23 and the president signed it into law , the mutineers stood down on the 26th . 
 During the revolt , the ships were noted by many observers to be well handled , despite a previous belief that the Brazilian Navy was incapable of effectively operating the ships even before being split by a rebellion . João Cândido Felisberto ordered all liquor thrown overboard , and discipline on the ships was recognized as exemplary . The 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns were often used for shots over the city , but the 12 @-@ inch guns were not , which led to a suspicion among the naval officers that the rebels were incapable of using the weapons . Later research and interviews indicate that Minas Geraes ' guns were fully operational , and while São Paulo 's could not be turned after salt water contaminated the hydraulic system , British engineers still on board the ship after the voyage from the United Kingdom were working on the problem . Still , historians have never ascertained how well the mutineers could handle the ships . 
 The crews of the torpedo boats remained loyal to the government , and army troops moved to the presidential palace and the coastline , but neither group could stop the mutineers ; a major problem for the authorities was that many of the men who manned Rio de Janeiro 's harbor defenses were sympathetic to the mutineers ' cause . The additional possibility of the capital being bombarded forced the National Congress of Brazil to give in to the rebels ' demands . The demands included the abolition of flogging , improved living conditions , and the granting of amnesty to all mutineers . The government also issued official pardons and a statement of regret . Its submission resulted in the rebellion 's end on 26 November , when control of the four ships was handed back to the navy . 
 In 1913 , Minas Geraes took the Brazilian Minister of Foreign Affairs , Lauro Müller , to the United States , reciprocating the visit U.S. Secretary of State Elihu Root had paid to Brazil seven years earlier . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Even though the First World War did not touch Brazilian soil , it had crushing effects on Brazil 's economy . Prices for rubber and coffee plummeted ; the war had only a small need for rubber , and Britain allowed no coffee into Europe as space on merchant ships was reserved for " essential items " . In addition , coffee was declared to be contraband , so every Brazilian shipment to the Central Powers was subject to search and seizure ; even shipments to some neutral countries were barred to ensure that no coffee would get through . Despite these restrictions , neutral Brazil was pro @-@ Allied for the first three years of the war because of its sizable merchant fleet ; as merchantmen from Allied countries were sunk , Brazilian ships were able to take over routes that had been vacated . This policy exposed them to attack by German submarines , and after the German declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare in February 1917 , several Brazilian ships were sunk , driving the country closer to declaring war on the Central Powers . 
 Brazil revoked its neutrality in the war between the United States and Germany on 1 June 1917 , but did not declare war . At the same time , all German merchant ships interned in Brazilian harbors , 45 in all , were boarded and seized ; most were unusable due to neglect or sabotage . On 28 June , Brazil revoked its neutrality between all of the Allied and Central Powers but again stopped short of declaring war ; this move allowed Brazilian merchantmen to travel in Allied convoys . 
 The Brazilian Navy was sent out to patrol the South Atlantic with French , British and American naval units , even though none of its ships had anti @-@ submarine capabilities and , not being at war with the Central Powers , its ships were not supposed to engage any threat outside territorial waters . Another Brazilian merchant ship , Macao , was sunk by German submarine U @-@ 93 off Spain on 18 October , and eight days later Brazil declared war . 
 Brazil offered to send Minas Geraes and São Paulo to serve with the British Grand Fleet , but this offer was declined because both ships were in poor condition and lacked modern fire @-@ control systems . Neither of the two dreadnoughts had undergone any form of refitting since their original construction in Britain . Indicative of their poor condition , fourteen of São Paulo 's eighteen boilers failed when voyaging to New York in June 1918 for a modernization . 
 = = Inter @-@ war period = = 
 São Paulo 's refit was finished on 17 January 1920 and it returned to Brazil ; on 15 July Minas Geraes departed for New York for its own refit . Beginning on 22 August , the day it arrived , and finishing on 4 October 1921 , the battleship was dramatically modernized , with Sperry fire @-@ control equipment and Bausch and Lomb range @-@ finders for the two superfiring turrets fore and aft . A vertical armor bulkhead was fitted inside the main turrets , and the secondary battery of 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns was reduced from 22 to 12 ; five guns in casemates were removed from each side . A few modern AA guns were fitted : two 3 " / 50 caliber guns from Bethlehem Steel were added on the aft superstructure , 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns were added near each turret , and 3 @-@ pounder guns were removed from the tops of turrets . 
 In July 1922 , Minas Geraes joined São Paulo in helping to quash the first of the <unk> <unk> ( English : Tenente revolts ) , in which the garrison of Rio de Janeiro 's Fort Copacabana rebelled and began bombarding the city . São Paulo shelled the fort , and the rebels surrendered shortly thereafter ; Minas Geraes did not fire its guns . 
 In 1924 , Minas Geraes was involved in another mutiny , but remained on the side of the government . First Lieutenant Hercolino Cascardo , seven second lieutenants and others commandeered São Paulo in Rio de Janeiro 's harbor on 4 November 1924 . Their goal was to force the government to release prisoners who had participated in the 1922 Tenente revolts from confinement aboard the prison ship <unk> ; the mutineers ' demands were not met . São Paulo 's boilers were then fired , and the ship " steamed menacingly " around Minas Geraes in an attempt to entice its and other ships to join the rebellion . São Paulo was only able to sway the crew of one old torpedo boat to its <unk> its crew , angry that Minas Geraes would not join them , shot a six @-@ pounder at Minas Geraes , wounding a cook . The mutineers then sailed out of the harbor , exchanging shots with forts at the entrance along the way , and set course for Montevideo , Uruguay . The condensers failed along the way , and they reached Montevideo on 10 November making only 9 knots ( 10 mph ; 17 km / h ) . The rebellious members of the crew disembarked and were granted asylum , while the remainder re @-@ hoisted the colors of Brazil . 
 Between June 1931 and April 1938 , Minas Geraes was totally reconstructed and modernized at the Rio de Janeiro Naval Yard . It was converted from its old coal – oil combination to all @-@ oil firing . All eighteen of the original Babcock & Wilcox boilers were removed in favor of six new John I. Thornycroft & Company boilers . The former No. 1 boiler room and all twelve of the side coal bunkers were converted to fuel oil storage tanks ; the upper coal bunkers were removed . In addition , Minas Geraes ' dynamos were replaced with new turbogenerators . The most striking aesthetic change was the trunking of the boiler uptakes into a single funnel . The fire @-@ control systems that had been fitted after the First World War were also modernized in favor of Zeiss range @-@ finders . The guns were overhauled ; two extra 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns were added ( making 14 total ) , and six 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Madsen guns were installed , including two on the top of ' X ' turret . The maximum elevation of the 12 @-@ inch guns was upped from 13 ° to 18 ° . 
 = = Second World War and later career = = 
 As in the First World War , Brazil was neutral during the early years of the Second World War . German attacks on Brazilian merchant ships pushed the country into war on the Allied side ; Brazil declared war on 21 August 1942 , taking effect on 31 August . 
 Apart from three destroyers launched in 1940 and four submarines from the inter @-@ war years , Brazil 's warships were old and mostly obsolete pre @-@ First World War vessels . The mainstays of the fleet , Minas Geraes , São Paulo , Bahia , and Rio Grande do Sul , were all over thirty years old . Although Minas Geraes had been further refitted from 1939 to 1943 , the ship was still too old and in too poor a condition for any active role in the Second World War ; instead , the dreadnought was anchored as a floating battery in the port of Salvador for the duration of the war . 
 Minas Geraes was inactive for much of the rest of its career . Decommissioned on 16 May 1952 , it was used as a stationary headquarters for the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Brazilian Navy until 17 December of that year . The ship was removed from the naval register on 31 December , and sold to the Italian ship breaking company SA Cantiere Navale de Santa Maria . Minas Geraes was taken under tow on 1 March 1954 and arrived in Genoa on 22 April ; the old dreadnought , which had been in service for more than forty years , was broken up for scrap later that year . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Líf and Lífþrasir = 
 In Norse mythology , Líf ( identical with the Old Norse feminine noun meaning " life , the life of the body " ) and Lífþrasir ( Old Norse masculine name from <unk> and <unk> . Lexicon <unk> defines this name as " <unk> <unk> , vitæ <unk> , vitæ <unk> " , " Líf 's lover , lover of life , zest for life " ) , sometimes anglicized as Lift and <unk> , — female and male respectively — are two humans who are foretold to survive the events of Ragnarök by hiding in a wood called Hoddmímis holt , and after the flames have abated , to repopulate the newly risen and fertile world . Líf and Lífþrasir are mentioned in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the thirteenth century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . Scholarly theories have been proposed about the underlying meaning and origins of the two names . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the poem Vafþrúðnismál , collected in the Poetic Edda , the god Odin poses a question to the jötunn Vafþrúðnir , asking who among mankind will survive when the winter at the end of the world <unk> occurs . Vafþrúðnir responds that they will be Líf and Lífþrasir , that the two will have hidden in the wood of Hoddmímis Holt , they will consume the morning dew as food , and " from them generations will spring " . 
 In chapter 53 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , High tells Gangleri ( king Gylfi in disguise ) that two people , Líf and Lífþrasir , will lie hid in Hoddmímis Holt during " Surt 's fire " , and that " from these people there will be descended such a great progeny that the world will be inhabited . " The above mentioned stanza of Vafþrúðnismál is then quoted . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Carolyne Larrington notes that it is nowhere expressly stated what will happen to the world tree Yggdrasil at Ragnarök , points to a connection between Mímir and Yggdrasil in the poem Völuspá , and theorizes that " it is possible that <unk> is another name for <unk> , and that the two survivors hide in Yggdrasill . " 
 Rudolf Simek theorizes that the survival of Líf and Lífþrasir is " a case of reduplication of the <unk> , understandable from the cyclic nature of the Eddic eschatology . " Simek says that Hoddmímis holt " should not be understood literally as a wood or even a forest in which the two keep themselves hidden , but rather as an alternative name for the world @-@ tree Yggdrasill . Thus , the creation of mankind from tree trunks ( Askr , Embla ) is repeated after the <unk> as well . " Simek says that in Germanic regions , the concept of mankind originating from trees is ancient . Simek additionally points out legendary parallels in a Bavarian legend of a shepherd who lives inside a tree , whose descendants repopulate the land after life there has been wiped out by plague ( citing a retelling by F. R. Schröder ) . In addition , Simek points to an Old Norse parallel in the figure of <unk> @-@ Oddr , " who is rejuvenated after living as a tree @-@ man ( <unk> @-@ Odds saga 24 – 27 ) " . 
 = Ås Station = 
 Ås Station ( Norwegian : Ås stasjon ) is a railway station in Ås , Norway on the Østfold Line . The station was opened on 2 January 1879 and designed by Peter A. Blix in Swiss chalet style . The station was modernized in 1992 , when the section between Ski and Moss was upgraded to double track and speeds up to 160 kilometres per hour ( 99 mph ) . In 2006 , a cultural meeting place comprising a café , concert hall and an art exhibition was established inside the station 's building , initiated by the local organization " Galleri Texas " and to the governmental corporation Follo Futura . Galleri Texas and Follo Futura had been arguing a while over how the operating of the café should be , and in 2010 , all the maintenance and operation of the meeting place were transferred entirely from Galleri Texas to Follo Futura , since Galleri Texas no longer were satisfied with Follo <unk> work . The station is served by commuter trains on the Line L21 of the Oslo Commuter Rail , running from Stabekk over Oslo to Moss . Ski Station and Vestby Station are the preceding and the following stations , respectively . 
 = = History = = 
 The station opened on 2 January 1879 , and was designed by the Norwegian architect Peter Andreas Blix in Swiss chalet style . The Norwegian author Knut Hamsun wrote several letters at the station between 1897 and 1906 . When the section between Ski and Moss Station was upgraded to double tracks in 1992 , Ås Station received a major renovation . In 2000 , a 16 @-@ year @-@ old boy had <unk> lighter gas at the station , and was found dead on the platform the next morning . On 25 October 2006 , a cultural meeting place was established inside the station building , initiated by the association " Galleri Texas " . The building is located in <unk> 4 , and houses a tiny café known as " <unk> <unk> " , an art gallery , and a small gift shop . The café serves local commuters riding to Oslo in the morning , as well as dining and lunch guests residing in the area around the station . In the weekends , there are sometimes arranged concerts with local bands and musicians . 
 In 2008 , controversy between the local organisation Galleri Texas and the state @-@ owned corporation Follo Futura arose , regarding the hiring contract of the station building , and which of them were to operate the cultural meeting place . Follo Futura , which together with the Norwegian National Rail Administration and Rom Eiendom officially owned the station building wanted to take over the café business . They argued that they were better fit to operate it , since Galleri Texas did not have the economical capacity to run the café with the art exhibition and gift shop the whole week . The local community wanted Galleri Texas to operate the café , arguing that replacing a local company for a governmental one would weaken the local and patriotic spirit of the café . On 1 January 2010 , the operation of the café and the cultural meeting place was transferred from Galleri Texas to Follo Futura , since Galleri Texas no longer could pay the rental costs . In 2010 , smoke was tumbling out of the station , but it turned out that it was only a cigarette that had not been quenched , and had been laying overnight in a flower basket . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The station 's facilities are designed similarly to most of the other stations on the Østfold Line , apart from the station building , which dates back to 1877 . There is step @-@ free access to the platforms . There is a <unk> walkway over the rail tracks in the south end of the station , which shapes together with the stairways one minimalistic construction down to the platforms . At the north end of the station , there is a second walkway which runs under the tracks . There are sheds and ticket machines on the platforms . The station 's parking area has room for 200 cars and 8 bicycles . Akershus <unk> operates a bus terminal a few metres away from the station . Ås Station is located north of Vestby Station and south of Ski Station on the Østfold Line , 31 @.@ 15 kilometres ( 19 @.@ 36 mi ) from Oslo Central Station . 
 = = Service = = 
 Ås Station is served by the line L21 of the Oslo Commuter Rail , operated by the Norwegian State Railways . The line runs from Stabekk through Oslo to Moss . The travel time from Ås to Oslo Central Station is 28 minutes and to Moss Station 21 minutes . The public transport authority Ruter operates feeder bus services to the station from Drøbak , Ski , <unk> and other conurbations around Ås . 
 = Pot o ' Gold ( Glee ) = 
 " Pot o ' Gold " is the fourth episode of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the forty @-@ eighth overall . It was written by Ali Adler , directed by Adam Shankman , and was first broadcast on Fox in the United States on November 1 , 2011 . The episode featured the arrival of Irish foreign exchange student Rory Flanagan ( Glee Project prizewinner Damian McGinty ) at McKinley High , a new challenger to Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) in her congressional race , and the ongoing fragmentation of the show 's central glee club , New Directions . 
 The episode as a whole received mixed reviews from reviewers . The storyline involving Quinn , Puck and Shelby was extensively criticized , while the injection of Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) into the congressional race as Sue 's opponent was greeted with enthusiasm . The music was received with somewhat more favor than the episode itself , especially " Candyman " , sung by the newly constituted Troubletones . 
 All five song covers performed in the episode were released as singles , available for download , and one of them , " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " , charted on the Billboard Hot 100 . Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 47 million American viewers and earned a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership numbers and rating / share were down significantly from the previous episode , " Asian F " , which had been broadcast four weeks earlier on October 4 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Rory Flanagan ( Damian McGinty ) , a foreign exchange student from Ireland , has begun attending McKinley High and is regularly being bullied . He is staying at Brittany 's ( Heather Morris ) house ; she believes that he is a leprechaun . Rory , who has a crush on Brittany , does not disabuse her of this belief because she has promised to let him into her " pot o ' gold " if he grants her three wishes . He easily fulfills her first two wishes in mundane ways . 
 Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) is recruiting for the new all @-@ girl show choir directed by Shelby Corcoran ( Idina Menzel ) , and asks Santana ( Naya Rivera ) — a member of the school 's existing glee club , New Directions — to join . Santana balks at leaving Brittany behind , and when she and Brittany go out on a dinner date , Santana tries to recruit her , but Brittany is unwilling to leave her New Directions friends . She tells Santana of Rory 's supposed magical powers , and Santana later coerces Rory into telling Brittany that Santana has wished for her to join Shelby 's glee club . Brittany believes she must obey that wish , but her third wish is that doing so does not hurt anybody 's feelings . New Directions co @-@ captain Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) tries to persuade Brittany not to leave : he tells her that leprechauns are not real and that she is being stupid . Brittany , insulted , quits anyway . 
 Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) and Puck ( Mark Salling ) offer to babysit Beth , their biological daughter who they gave up to Shelby for adoption . While babysitting , Quinn hides hot sauce , sharp knives , books on child cannibalism and other items to make Shelby look like an unfit mother ; she subsequently calls Child Protective Services , under the assumption that they will ultimately restore Beth to her after they investigate and find the evidence . Puck later returns to secretly gather up the items . He also sings " Waiting for a Girl Like You " to calm a crying Beth and to comfort Shelby , who confesses she is extremely lonely . In the episode 's closing moments , Puck and Shelby kiss . 
 Congressional candidate and cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) — whose campaign platform includes the elimination of funding for school arts programs — <unk> on television to rescind the budget of the school 's production of West Side Story . She succeeds after an angry mother throws a brick at Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) . Glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) recruits the members to sell advertising space in the program book to raise money ; when Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) asks his father Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) to purchase an ad , he instead gathers a group of businessmen to fund the musical . He then announces that he is running for congress against Sue . 
 At a meeting of Shelby 's group , which is dubbed the Troubletones , a newly arrived Santana <unk> Sugar Motta ( Vanessa Lengies ) into surrendering her central role . The Troubletones later give a dynamic performance of " Candyman " , which is witnessed by a dismayed Finn and Will . Finn later apologizes to Brittany for his insensitive remarks and wishes her and the Troubletones the best , after which Rory claims that he has fulfilled Brittany 's third wish . However , she chastises him , saying that Finn 's feelings clearly were hurt by the defection and that she now knows leprechauns are not real . Later , when Rory is being harassed by bullies , Finn comes to his rescue and invites him to join New Directions ; he successfully auditions with the song " Take Care of Yourself " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer Ali Adler , making it the first episode not to be written by any of the co @-@ creators of Glee — Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan — and it was the second to be directed by choreographer Adam Shankman , who helmed " The Rocky Horror Glee Show " in the second season . Shankman started working on the episode on September 2 , 2011 , and filming ended on September 22 , 2011 . This episode and the prior one were shot in parallel for several days until " Asian F " finished filming its musical finale on September 16 , 2011 . 
 McGinty , one of the two winners of The Glee Project 's top prize of a seven @-@ episode recurring character role on Glee , makes his first appearance in this episode as Rory Flanagan , an Irish exchange student . Murphy revealed that on McGinty 's first day of filming " he was shoved into a locker 25 times " , and that on " his first take in his first song , the crew gave him a huge ovation . " Rory is living with Brittany 's family , and the idea of McGinty 's character interacting with Brittany was first broached in the penultimate episode of The Glee Project , with the judges speculating that Brittany would not be able to understand a word the character said due to his Irish accent . 
 Additional recurring guest stars appearing in this episode include Menzel as Shelby Corcoran , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , Kurt 's father Burt Hummel , Burt 's wife and Finn 's mother Carole Hudson @-@ Hummel ( Romy Rosemont ) , student Sugar Motta ( Vanessa Lengies ) , and TV news co @-@ anchors Rod Remington ( Bill A. Jones ) and Andrea Carmichael ( Earlene Davis ) . 
 This episode features five covers , all of which were made available for download as digital singles : Christina Aguilera 's " Candyman " performed by Rivera , Morris , and Riley , Katy Perry 's " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " with Criss on lead vocals , Foreigner 's " Waiting for a Girl Like You " performed by Salling , and " Bein ' Green " from Sesame Street and Teddy Thompson 's " Take Care of Yourself " , both performed by McGinty . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Pot o ' Gold " was first broadcast on November 1 , 2011 in the United States on Fox . It garnered a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and received 7 @.@ 47 million American viewers during its initial airing . It continued the streak of coming in second in its timeslot to NCIS on CBS , which earned a 3 @.@ 9 / 11 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . It had been four weeks since the previous Glee episode was broadcast , and the show 's viewership numbers were down over 11 % from the 3 @.@ 6 / 10 rating / share and 8 @.@ 42 million viewers from the " Asian F " broadcast on October 4 , 2011 . " Pot o ' Gold " tied for the second @-@ lowest rating / share Glee had ever received in the 18 – 49 demographic — the fourth episode of the first season , " Preggers " , also earned 3 @.@ 0 / 8 rating / share , though it only had 6 @.@ 62 million viewers . It was still ahead of the eleventh episode of the first season , " Hairography " , which received a 2 @.@ 5 / 7 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic and 6 @.@ 08 million viewers when broadcast on November 25 , 2009 , the night before Thanksgiving . 
 Viewership also decreased in other countries . In the United Kingdom , " Pot o ' Gold " was watched on Sky1 by 1 @.@ 05 million viewers , down nearly 5 % compared to " Asian F " four weeks earlier , when 1 @.@ 10 million viewers were watching . In Australia , " Pot o ' Gold " was watched by 724 @,@ 000 viewers , which made Glee the fourteenth most @-@ watched program of the night . The viewership was down 11 % from " Asian F " , which was watched by 843 @,@ 000 viewers . It was the lowest number of viewers of the third season , just below the second episode , " I Am Unicorn " , which drew 729 @,@ 000 viewers . In Canada , 1 @.@ 62 million viewers watched the episode , and it was the eighteenth most @-@ viewed show of the week , down four slots and 11 % from the 1 @.@ 82 million viewers who watched " Asian F " , though up 8 % from the 1 @.@ 50 million viewers who watched " I Am Unicorn " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Pot o ' Gold " received mixed reviews from critics , which ranged from reasonably positive to very negative . In the latter camp were Bobby Hankinson of The Houston Chronicle , who called it " a disaster " , and Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman , who said it was " stale and unfunny " and " outright failed to keep up the momentum started by the season 's first three episodes " . Robert Canning of IGN took the opposite view from Futterman with regard to the show 's progress : he gave it a " good " rating of 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , and wrote that while it was not a " stunning return after four weeks off " , it " kept the momentum and focus of the first few episodes of this season intact " . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff characterized it as " an episode that tries a lot of things " but " produced too many duds " , while Anthony Benigno of The Faster Times felt that the fact that it was the first episode not written by one of the show 's co @-@ creators meant it was " a lot more subtle " but " seemed a bit lifeless at times " . AOLTV 's Crystal Bell was " pleasantly surprised " and said the episode was " better than a majority " of those from the second season , and Abby West of Entertainment Weekly described it as a " pretty solid return " after the hiatus . 
 The entire storyline that centered around Quinn , Puck and Shelby was roundly criticized by reviewers . West wrote that it made her feel " queasy " , and she called Quinn 's actions " abhorrent " . Bell was one of several who thought it was highly implausible that Child Protective Services would be backed up , much less for two weeks , given the gravity of Quinn 's accusations . Hankinson wondered why they " made Quinn a total sociopath " who went from " dancing on desks " to " framing someone for child endangerment " with great ease ; VanDerWerff was also critical of these actions , and called Quinn 's sabotage of Shelby 's apartment " a move that takes a potentially good character , played by a fine actress , and just guts her " . Kevin P. Sullivan of MTV had a different view , and wrote that the " storyline stuck out throughout the episode as the most interesting " . He also noted that it was " cathartic and definitely nice to see a sweeter Puck balance out the earnest craziness of Quinn " . The final scene of the episode , when Puck kissed Shelby , was characterized as " creepy " and " super awkward " by Bell , as either " super creepy " or " romantic " by BuddyTV 's John Kubicek , as " groan @-@ inducing " in the " You 're actually going to go there ? " vein by Canning and " as realistic as Lord <unk> pooping candy bars " by Michael Slezak of TVLine . 
 Sue 's campaign for congress in the third season has not heretofore found much favor with reviewers , though Futterman felt that the addition of Burt Hummel as a rival candidate " gives us a sliver of hope , mainly because Mike O 'Malley has managed to do no wrong thus far " as Burt , and VanDerWerff , while otherwise unimpressed , said he liked " the idea of the show pitting its most purely heroic figure against its most purely villainous " . Bell was pleased with the new development , and noted that in three seasons , " no character has grown more than Burt " . Canning said he loved having Burt as Sue 's nemesis , and Kubicek wrote that the two are " awesome together " . 
 Several reviewers felt that the introduction of Rory overdid his Irishness . Benigno called it " cheap stereotyping " , and " juvenile " on the part of the writers . West , while she admitted that " it may have been a little heavy @-@ handed " to have Rory in green , felt it " worked " , especially for his opening solo and " his isolation " during it . Jen Chaney of The Washington Post characterized the tweaking of that solo to be about " Irish exchange students being bullied " as " forced " , and VanDerWerff wrote that he was tired of " people just randomly getting shoved around for no real reason " . Benigno noted that Sugar was also being bullied — by Santana — and wrote that he was " not a fan " of this " on a show that supposedly glorifies outcasts and promotes their successes " . Santana came in for praise from Kubicek , along with Brittany , for their " fantastic date " and their relationship which is " the most interesting one on the show " . The new show choir they join , the Troubletones , was acclaimed by Bell : " I 'm really loving Shelby 's diva troupe . " 
 The Hollywood Reporter 's Lesley Goldberg called the use of Katy Perry 's " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " in the episode " completely out of place " , and Sullivan characterized its inclusion as " barely justified " . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal pointed out that both Criss and McHale had major roles in Perry 's video of the song , and the Glee performance " winks at [ that ] fact " . West was annoyed by Finn 's recent tendency to " succumb " to his less nice and less responsible side as exemplified in the episode by his failure to " stand up for Rory " and for blasting " Brittany 's simple , goofy belief system " , even if he does eventually do the right thing . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The musical performances in this episode were received with a bit more enthusiasm than the episode itself . Benigno described them as " decent songs " , but though Canning wrote that " Candyman " was " fun " , he also said that the " rest of the music " prevented the episode " from being much better " . Indeed , " Candyman " was a favorite of many reviewers : The Star @-@ Ledger 's Vicki Hyman called it " bouncy and fun " , Futterman praised the " tight harmonies " and the " diva notes from Mercedes and Santana " , and Slezak gave the number an " A " and said he loved the Troubletones " absolutely soaring " in their performance . Hankinson , Hyman , and Chaney singled out the production values of the number — Hyman to call them " amazing " ; Chaney to note , as she gave the song an " A − " , that the costuming cost for the number would have rivaled the $ 2 @,@ 004 budget of West Side Story that had Sue so upset ; and Hankinson , although he said it would have been his favorite in a " blind test " , to call it " a classic example of the kind of inexplicably elaborate performance I hate the most on this show " . 
 Most of the reviewers had positive things to say about new character Rory Flanagan 's singing voice , including Futterman , who said his was " quite lovely " and had " rich tones " , and Rae Votta of Billboard , who called him a " smooth crooner " . Hankinson , however , said he had never been " floored " by McGinty 's voice , " so both of his numbers fell extremely flat to me " , and Futterman maintained that both songs were a " weird fit " for the episode , while Votta thought having him perform two solos was " overkill on his character introduction " . In general , " Bein ' Green " was considered less impressive than " Take Care of Yourself " , though it had its supporters : Votta and Bell both referred to it as " a nice introduction " , and West declared that his " simple , clear @-@ voiced ode to being an outsider rang true and was hauntingly beautiful " , and gave it an " A − " . Canning was not impressed : " Perhaps if it had been sung with more feeling , it could have worked better . " For " Take Care of Yourself " , both West and Goldberg agreed with Rachel 's assessment that the performance was " magical " , and West graded it with an " A + " . The Los Angeles Times 's Amy Reiter was " blown away " , and Chaney gave it an " A " with the comment that Rory " handled it with adorable aplomb " . Slezak and VanDerWerff , however , thought the number was somewhat sleep @-@ inducing . 
 Puck 's rendition of " Waiting for a Girl Like You " was almost universally described as " sweet " . Flandez went further , and wrote " he oozes sweet and sexy , and you can ’ t help but feel good " , and Goldberg still further when she stated that it " ends up being one of the episode ’ s — and season ’ s — sweetest moments thus far " . West praised the " lovely little guitar solo " and gave the song a " B " ; Chaney bestowed the same grade and called it a " cheesy moment " but a " nice job " by Salling . Futterman commented that Puck got to " showcase his nice falsetto " . 
 " Last Friday Night " evoked a wide range of opinions from reviewers . Chaney wrote that the performance " incorporated several Glee tropes " and was a routine seen before ; she gave it a " B − " . Futterman characterized the choreography as " full of forced sunshine " and said " Blaine 's normally effortless voice sounds breathy " . West noted that the song " wasn 't the best showcase for his voice " but added that " it was exactly the playful little interlude it needed to be " , and gave it a " B + " . Goldberg called it " fantastic " , and Kubicek said " it 's hard not to love his singing " . Slezak stated that " Darren Criss is better than this song " , and gave it a " D " . Votta pointed out that the song was " one of the first truly current pop hits on Glee this season " , described the performance as " pure Glee " and the dancing " disorganized and joyful " , and the whole number as why the show " connects with the youth of America " . 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 One of the five cover versions released as singles debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 : " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " debuted at number seventy @-@ two . " Last Friday Night ( T.G.I.F. ) " also debuted on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 chart , at number eighty @-@ six . In addition , it is the one single from the episode to be included on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , Volume 7 . An additional song from the episode , " Take Care of Yourself " , was included as one of the five bonus tracks available on the Target edition of the album . 
 = Come Dancing ( song ) = 
 " Come Dancing " is a 1982 song written by Ray Davies and performed by British rock group the Kinks on their 1983 album State of Confusion . The song was inspired by Ray 's memories of his older sister , Rene , who died of a heart attack while dancing at a dance hall . The track , sung from the perspective of an " East End barrow boy , " contains lyrics about dates at a local Palais dance hall . 
 When first released as a single in United Kingdom in November 1982 , " Come Dancing " failed to chart . Although Arista Records founder Clive Davis had reservations about releasing the single in the United States due to the English subject matter of dance halls , the track saw an American single release in April 1983 . " Come Dancing " reached number six on the Hot 100 , becoming the band 's highest US charting single in over a decade and tying with " Tired of Waiting for You " as the band 's highest charting single ever . This success was achieved largely with the help of a promotional music video directed by Julien Temple that saw frequent airing on MTV . As a result of its American success , the single was re @-@ released in Britain . Unlike its first release , the single became a top 20 British hit , reaching number 12 . 
 In addition to its presence on State of Confusion , " Come Dancing " has appeared on numerous compilations albums since its release . It spawned a successful follow @-@ up single , " Don 't Forget to Dance , " which became a top 40 hit in the United States . Come Dancing , a musical written by Ray Davies that premiered in 2008 , was named after the song . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Come Dancing " is a tribute to the Davies brothers ' sister Rene . Living in Canada with her reportedly abusive husband , the 31 @-@ year @-@ old Rene was visiting her parental home in Fortis Green at the time of Ray Davies ' thirteenth birthday — 21 June 1957 — on which she surprised him with a gift of the Spanish guitar he had tried to persuade his parents to buy him . That evening , Rene , who had a weak heart as a result of a childhood bout of rheumatic fever , suffered a fatal heart attack while dancing at the Lyceum ballroom . 
 Ray later said that the pop song was an attempt to return to the " warmer " style they had prior to their transformation to an arena rock act , explaining , " I wanted to regain some of the warmth I thought we ’ d lost , doing those stadium tours . ' Come Dancing ' was an attempt to get back to roots , about my sisters ’ memories of dancing in the ’ 50s . " The song is a nostalgic look back at childhood memories of its writer : the Kinks ' frontman Ray Davies , remembering his older sister going on dates to the local Palais dance hall where big bands would play . 
 Davies later claimed that the song was about a spiv , saying , " it was about an East End spiv , sung in a London voice . If anybody had lost any faith in us being real people , that record [ ' Come Dancing ' ] would restore it . " Davies also claimed that the song was sung from a " barrow boy 's " point of view , saying , " [ ' Come Dancing ' ] is sung by an East End barrow boy — I think there ’ s cockney rhyming slang in it ! " 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 In a 1983 interview , Ray Davies claimed that writing the song was an " easy " and quick process , but the idea for the song had been in his head for a long time . He reportedly began writing the song in March 1982 on a flight home from Tokyo using a newly purchased Casio keyboard . The song was completed in London that October . Author Nick Hasted claimed that the song was also written " to reach out to the Kinks ' lost British audience . " 
 A demo for the song was created at Konk Studios , the recording facility in Hornsey that Ray Davies owned , in October 1982 . A master backing track with bass , acoustic guitar , and drums was made during that same month , with overdubs following . Dave Davies later claimed that the recording was completed on the day after an intense argument with brother Ray . Also completed that month was " Don 't Forget to Dance , " which later competed with " Come Dancing " for the A @-@ side of the first single from State of Confusion . 
 In the song , Ray Davies sung in a strong British accent , later claiming that he " tried to retain the Englishness . " While recording " Come Dancing , " Ray was asked to sing in an " American accent , " a request he turned down . He said of this , " Back when the Kinks were recording ' Come Dancing , ' which was a big hit in the States , the record company actually asked me to sing it in more of an American accent . I just refused . " Ray has singled out Mick Avory 's drum performance on the song , saying , " Just keep Mick Avory nervous , and you 'll get great performances from him . He 's responsible for some of the great comedy drum parts . His drum roll into ' Come Dancing , ' ... it 's totally a beat late . It 's totally unplanned , and that 's what was so magical , when we were rolling . " 
 = = Release = = 
 When deciding the band 's next single , Ray Davies pushed for " Come Dancing " to be released rather than " Don 't Forget to Dance , " which had been suggested by the record company as the first single from State of Confusion . The UK branch of Arista Records approved this decision , releasing 7 @-@ inch and 12 @-@ inch versions of the new single on 19 November 1982 with " Noise " as the B @-@ side . However , Clive Davis initially had reservations ; Davies recalls that Davis " didn 't want to put it out because it was too much of an English subject matter " . Davis also thought it was just a " ditty " and did not have enough substance to be a single . 
 The US single of the song was finally released on 21 April 1983 after Davis was convinced by the success of the track 's music video and the impressive US sales of import copies of the single . The track 's promotional video became a staple of the fledgling MTV network , which gave the single sufficient momentum to enter the Billboard Hot 100 that May , ascending to the Top 40 in June 1983 and peaking at number six on 11 July . " Come Dancing " became the highest charting US single of the band 's career , tying " Tired of Waiting for You " from 1965 . 
 " Come Dancing " was re @-@ released during July 1983 in Britain due to its immense popularity in America , thus delaying the UK release of follow @-@ up " Don 't Forget to Dance " in the process . The track peaked at number twelve on the UK singles chart on 27 August 1983 . A Top of the Pops broadcast on 24 September 1983 featured videos of several current US hits including a lip @-@ sync performance of " Come Dancing " by the band and a three @-@ piece horn section , the Kinks ' first appearance on the show since 1972 . On 27 October 1983 , Ray was given the One of the Most Played Songs of 1983 award by ASCAP for the song . " Don 't Forget to Dance " was later released as a follow @-@ up single , charting at number 29 in the United States . 
 Despite the success the single reached , it would be one of the Kinks ' final hits in either Britain or America , ending the comeback the band had during the late 1970s and early 1980s . Ray said in 1996 , " [ I ] wanted to quit in 1984 , after ' Come Dancing . ' I felt that that was the end of an era for the Kinks , and I wanted to stop the treadmill and step back and reappraise the whole thing , but we had another album to deliver . It seemed like we always had another album to deliver . " Mick Avory left the band in 1984 , a year after " Come Dancing " peaked in the USA . He later said , " I think leaving after a world wide hit with ' Come Dancing ' was a good note to leave on . " 
 Following its release , the song became a mainstay in the band 's live set @-@ list until the band 's break @-@ up . Live versions of the song appeared on both 1988 's Live : The Road and the 1996 US double @-@ album version of To the Bone . The studio version of the song has also appeared on multiple compilations , being used as the namesake for the 1986 greatest @-@ hits package Come Dancing With the Kinks : The Best of the Kinks 1977 @-@ 1986 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Come Dancing " has generally received positive reviews from music critics . In his review of State of Confusion , Rolling Stone critic Parke Puterbaugh said that the song " sums up the bittersweet mood that wafts through [ State of Confusion ] in calming counterpoint to its more turbulent moments . " George <unk> , also of Rolling Stone , said in his review of the album Live : The Road that the song was an " undeniable winner , " claiming that " hearing [ the song ] in th [ is ] crackling live version is like running into [ an ] old friend . " AllMusic writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted the song as one of the " quieter moments " on State of Confusion where the album " came to life , " praising its " buoyant nostalgia . " On the band 's Rolling Stone biography , the song was called " delightfully nostalgic . " Author Rob Jovanovic called the song " incredibly catchy " and said that , as the song 's title suggested , it " made [ him ] want to move his feet . " Andrew Hickey said in his book , Preservation : The Kinks ' Music 1964 @-@ 1974 , that the track was a " great pop song . " Thomas M. Kitts praised its " big band sound " in his book , Ray Davies : Not Like Everybody Else . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The promotional music video for " Come Dancing " was shot in November 1982 at Ilford Palais in Essex . The video was produced by Michael Hamlyn and directed by Julien Temple , with choreography done by Jim Cameron . Dave Davies later said of Temple , " Julian was such a <unk> sod , walking around in a fur coat like he was Orson Welles , even though he was only doing a promo video . " Local fans of the band appeared as the audience . The video was first broadcast in Britain in December 1982 on The Tube , a show on Channel 4 , making its American debut on MTV on 25 March 1983 . 
 In the video , the lyrics of " Come Dancing " are used as the storyline . Calling back to his youth , Ray starred as the " spiv " character who took the sister out to dance . Ray 's character , according to author Johnny Rogan , was inspired by the Davies brothers ' uncle , Frank Willmore , who Dave Davies described as " an old school kind of cockney " . The members of the Kinks were featured as the band performing at the palais at the end of the video , with the spiv character solemnly watching the performance . Temple said of this scene , " I was standing behind [ Martin ] <unk> at a bar , and he was going on about that shot , saying it was one of his favorites ever . There 's a [ Luis ] Buñuel film , Simon of the Desert , where this guy who 's been suffering on his pillar in the desert in BC whatever ends up in some weird club in Mexico City in ' 65 . It 's a bit like that . [ Ray ] did it beautifully , the fact he 's so still and they 're all heaving around him . I think Ray could have been more of an actor . He has a great , deep sense of film . " 
 The band would revisit the spiv character Ray played in the video multiple times , such as in the music videos for " Don 't Forget to Dance " and " Do It Again . " According to Ray , the band 's 1986 album Think Visual was originally going to be a concept album centered on taking the character and putting him in the " environment of a video shop . " Ilford Palais was demolished in 2007 to make room for luxury flats , meeting a similar fate to that of the palais described in the lyrics of " Come Dancing . " 
 = = Musical = = 
 " Come Dancing " served as the title number for a stage musical of the same name that Ray Davies had created . Set in a 1950s music hall , Come Dancing premiered at the Theatre Royal Stratford East on 13 September 2008 . Ray Davies had written the original version of the play in 1997 , although he had begun work on it since not long after he had written the original song . The final version of Come Dancing featured a book co @-@ written by Davies and Paul <unk> and a score written by Davies that included three Kinks hits ( including the title song ) and a number of original songs . Davies also appeared as the narrator in the production , which ran until 25 October 2008 . Come Dancing was to be revived by director Bill Kenwright in January 2010 , but this , to Ray Davies 's disappointment , was cancelled . 
 Come Dancing received mixed reviews from critics . The Daily Telegraph spoke positively of the production , calling it " a winning show that deserves a bright future . " The Times , however , criticized it for lacking a story @-@ line , saying it was " a ragged and sentimental montage of scenes sorely in need of narrative . " Davies would later premiere another musical , Sunny Afternoon ( named after the 1966 Kinks song of the same name ) , in 2014 , which he had written in 2005 after finding out that Come Dancing would not be staged . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel per Doug Hinman . 
 The Kinks 
 Ray Davies - lead vocal , acoustic guitar 
 Dave Davies - electric guitar , backing vocal 
 Mick Avory - drums 
 Jim Rodford - bass guitar , backing vocal 
 Ian Gibbons - keyboard 
 Other musicians 
 John Beecham - trombone 
 Noel Morris - trumpet 
 Andy Hamilton - tenor saxophone 
 Alan Holmes - baritone saxophone 
 Kate Williams - spoken voice 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = The Holocaust in Belgium = 
 The Holocaust in German @-@ occupied Belgium refers to the persecution and attempted extermination of Jews and Roma between 1940 and 1944 during World War II . 
 At the start of the war , the population of Belgium was overwhelmingly Catholic . Jews made up the largest non @-@ Christian population in the country , numbering between 70 – 75 @,@ 000 out of a population of 8 million . Most lived in the cities of Antwerp , Brussels , Charleroi and Liège . The vast majority were recent immigrants to Belgium who had fled persecution in Germany and Eastern Europe , and , as a result , only a small minority actually possessed Belgian citizenship . 
 Shortly after the invasion of Belgium , the Military Government passed a series of anti @-@ Jewish laws in October 1940 . The Belgian Committee of Secretary @-@ Generals refused from the start to co @-@ operate on passing any anti @-@ Jewish measures and the Military Government seemed unwilling to pass further legislation . The German government began to seize Jewish @-@ owned businesses and forced Jews out of positions in the civil service . In April 1941 , without orders from the German authorities , Flemish collaborators pillaged two synagogues in Antwerp and burned the house of the chief rabbi of the town in the Antwerp Pogrom . The Germans created a Judenrat in the country , the Association des Juifs en Belgique ( AJB ; " Association of Jews in Belgium " ) , which all Jews were required to join . As part of the Final Solution from 1942 , the persecution of Belgian Jews escalated . From May 1942 , Jews were forced to wear yellow Star of David badges to mark them out in public . Using the registers compiled by the AJB , the Germans began deporting Jews to concentration camps in the General Government ( the occupied portion of Poland ) . Jews chosen from the registration lists were required to turn up at the newly established Mechelen transit camp ; they were then deported by train to concentration camps , mostly to Auschwitz . Between August 1942 and July 1944 , around 25 @,@ 000 Jews and 350 Roma were deported from Belgium ; more than 24 @,@ 000 were killed before the camps were liberated by the Allies . 
 From 1942 , opposition among the general population to the treatment of the Jews in Belgium grew . By the end of the occupation , more than 40 per cent of all Jews in Belgium were in hiding ; many of them were hidden by Gentiles , particularly by Catholic priests and nuns . Some were helped by the organized resistance , such as the Comité de Défense des Juifs ( CDJ ; " Committee of Jewish Defence " ) , which provided food and refuge to hiding Jews . Many of the Jews in hiding joined the armed resistance . In April 1943 , members of the CDJ attacked the twentieth rail convoy to Auschwitz and succeeded in rescuing some of those being deported . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Religion and anti @-@ Semitism = = = 
 Before the war , the population of Belgium was overwhelmingly Catholic . Around 98 per cent of the population was baptized and around 80 per cent of marriage ceremonies were held with traditional Catholic services , while politically the country was dominated by the Catholic Party . 
 The Jewish population of Belgium was comparatively small . Out of a population of around 8 million , there were only 10 @,@ 000 Jews in the country before World War I. The interwar period saw substantial Jewish immigration to Belgium . By 1930 , the population rose to 50 @,@ 000 , and by 1940 it was between 70 @,@ 000 – 75 @,@ 000 . Most of the new Jewish immigrants came from Eastern Europe and Nazi Germany , escaping anti @-@ Semitism and poverty in their native countries . The Roma population of Belgium at the same time was approximately 530 . Few of the Jewish migrants claimed Belgian citizenship , and many did not speak French or Dutch . Jewish communities developed in Charleroi , Liège , Brussels and , above all , Antwerp , where more than half of the Jews in Belgium lived . 
 The Interwar period also saw the rise in popularity of Fascist New Order parties in Belgium . These were chiefly represented by the Vlaams Nationaal Verbond ( VNV ; " Flemish National Union " ) and Verdinaso in Flanders , and Rex in Wallonia . Both Flemish parties supported the creation of an ethnically Germanic " <unk> <unk> " ( " Greater Dutch State " ) from which Jews would be excluded . Rex , whose ideology was based on Christian Fascism , was particularly anti @-@ Semitic , but both VNV and Rex campaigned under anti @-@ Semitic slogans for the 1938 elections . Their stance was officially condemned by the Belgian authorities , but prominent figures , including King Leopold III , were suspected of holding anti @-@ Semitic attitudes . From June 1938 , Jewish illegal immigrants arrested by the Belgian police were deported to Germany , until public condemnation halted the practice after Kristallnacht in November 1938 . Between 1938 and the start of the war , with the influence of Fascist parties declining in Belgium , the country began accepting more Jewish refugees , including 215 from the MS St. Louis who had been refused visas elsewhere . 
 = = = German invasion and occupation = = = 
 In the interwar period , Belgium followed a strict policy of political neutrality . Though the Belgian Land Component was mobilized in 1939 , the country only became involved in the war on 10 May 1940 , when it was invaded by Nazi Germany . After a campaign lasting 18 days , the Belgian military , along with its commander @-@ in @-@ chief Leopold III , surrendered on 28 May . Belgium , together with the French province of Nord @-@ Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais , were grouped together under the German Military Administration in Belgium and Northern France ( Militärverwaltung in Belgien und Nordfrankreich ) . Because the country was under military occupation , it initially fell under the control of the Wehrmacht rather than Nazi Party or Schutzstaffel ( SS ) authorities . In July 1944 , the Militärverwaltung was replaced with a civilian administration ( <unk> ) , greatly increasing the power of the more radical Nazi Party and SS organisations until the Allied liberation in September 1944 . 
 = = The Holocaust = = 
 = = = Early discrimination and persecution , 1940 @-@ 41 = = = 
 On 23 October 1940 , the German Military Administration adopted anti @-@ Jewish legislation for the first time . The new laws , similar to the Nuremberg Laws adopted in Germany in 1935 , coincided with the adoption of similar legislation in the Netherlands and in France . The laws of 28 October forbade Jews to practice certain professions ( including the civil service ) and forced Jews to register with their local municipality . On the same date , the German administration announced a definition of who was regarded as Jewish . Jewish @-@ owned shops or businesses had to be marked by a sign in the window , and Jewish @-@ owned economic assets had to be registered . From June 1940 , a list of Jewish businesses had already been drawn up in Liège . 
 In 1940 , the German government began to liquidate Jewish businesses . Some were transferred to German ownership in a process termed Aryanization . Some 6 @,@ 300 Jewish @-@ owned businesses were liquidated before 1942 , and 600 were <unk> . Around 600 million Belgian francs was raised from the seizures , much less than anticipated . 
