 The game received mostly positive reviews from critics upon release , particularly for its gameplay , graphical design , and sound . Criticism was also directed at the game 's ports , and the limitations met with the inferior hardware . Jason Holborn of ST / Amiga Format wrote that the game " provides some of the best arcade action " in an Amiga game . 
 Holborn of ST / Amiga Format called the gameplay " exceptional " and " addictive " , stating that players will be " hooked for hours on end " . Ciaran Brennan of Computer and Video Games praised its replayability , writing that it has " enough depth built in to make it last " . Conversely , Zzap ! 64 's Kati Hamza wrote that the gameplay is " rather poor " , disliking the pace and level design , and Maff Evans in the same review called it " dull and unrewarding " , pointing out the lack of excitement and reward . The Games Machine condemned the " jerky scrolling " of the PC version , while Rod Lawton of ACE called the gameplay of the Amiga version " stubbornly 8 @-@ bit " . 
 The game 's graphics received positive reactions . Lawton of ACE called them " attractive " , and Holborn of ST / Amiga Format named them " beautifully stomach churning " , calling Menace " one of the best presented games available " . While Zzap ! 64 's Hamza felt that the Amiga version was " blessed with nice graphics " , she wrote that the Commodore 64 version has " surprisingly weak presentation " ; Evans similarly called the graphics " half @-@ baked " . The Games Machine was disappointed by the graphics , particularly identifying the limited colour capabilities of the Atari ST version . 
 Reviewers praised the game 's use of sound . ST / Amiga Format 's Holborn lauded the soundtrack 's appropriation to gameplay , calling it " brilliant " , and writing that the game 's speech and sound effects enhance the feel of the game . The Games Machine favourably compared the soundtrack to Xenon ( 1988 ) , however noted that the sounds in the Atari ST version are " less clear " , and the PC sound effects are " pathetic " . Zzap ! 64 called the soundtrack " average " , and wrote that the " pathetic [ sound ] effects add little atmosphere " . 
 = Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? = 
 Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? is the second studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth , released on September 19 , 1986 . The project was originally handled by Combat Records , resulting in the first mix of the album being co @-@ produced by Randy Burns . Capitol Records then bought the rights to the album and hired another producer , Paul Lani , to mix it himself . The album 's front cover , featuring the band 's mascot Vic Rattlehead , was created by Ed Repka . The recording of the album was difficult for the band because of the ongoing drug issues the members had at the time . This was the last Megadeth album to feature drummer Gar Samuelson and guitarist Chris Poland , who were fired shortly after the album 's promotional tour for drug abuse . The title track , noted for its politically conscious lyrics , was released as the album 's lead single . 
 Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? is regarded as a thrash metal classic and as an album that gave prominence to extreme metal . It has been featured in several publications ' best album lists , including Robert Dimery 's 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die and Martin Popoff 's Top 500 Heavy Metal Albums of All Time . The album has been reissued several times over the years . In 2004 , the album was remixed and remastered by Megadeth frontman Dave Mustaine , with extensive liner notes detailing the album 's background . In 2011 , the three different versions were reissued as part of the album 's 25th anniversary celebration . All of them , with the exception of the 2004 mixes , feature new remastering . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In an interview for Metal Forces in December 1985 , frontman Dave Mustaine revealed that the band had already started writing new material for the second album . He said that two songs ( " Black Friday " and " Bad Omen " ) were finished and described them as a " total blur " , being much faster than " Rattlehead " . Speaking about the lyrical content of the album , Mustaine and bassist David Ellefson stated that they wanted to change the public perception of heavy metal by writing songs that contained socially aware lyrics . Mustaine further noted that the band was not unaware of the political situation at the time and that some of his political beliefs were reflected in the songs . Professional rock critic Steve Huey noted the album 's combination of " punkish political awareness with a dark , threatening , typically heavy metal worldview " . 
 During the first two months of 1986 , Megadeth commenced a brief tour at the East Coast of the United States . At the shows , which were practically a continuation of the Killing for a Living tour , the band performed a number of songs from its upcoming album . Following the conclusion of the tour , the band intended to start making the record at the Music Grinder studio on Melrose Avenue in Hollywood . Mustaine lifted the title from an article in Reader 's Digest , which was titled " Peace Would Sell But No One Would Buy It " . Their current label , Combat Records , provided a recording budget of $ 25 @,@ 000 , which allowed the band to hire a freelance producer , Randy Burns . The recording of the album was very difficult for the band , because Mustaine and Ellefson were homeless at the time . Furthermore , guitarist Chris Poland and drummer Gar Samuelson would not show up for hours because of their heroin addiction . Shortly after the band finished the final recordings of the album for Combat , they were approached by Tim Carr , an A & R representative of Capitol Records . After securing a contract with the group , Capitol hired producer Paul Lani to remix the original mixes done by Randy Burns , the previous producer . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? was released on September 19 , 1986 . The album 's artwork was designed by Ed Repka , who would go on to do several other pieces of artwork for the band over the years . The cover art depicts the band 's mascot , Vic Rattlehead , in front of the United Nations building . He is portrayed as a real estate agent , who is selling the devastated remains of the organization 's headquarters . The title track was released as a single , for which the band filmed its first video . In 1987 , a video was made for the second single , " Wake Up Dead " , which exposed the band performing in a steel cage . Soon after the album 's release , Megadeth began a tour as a supporting band for Motörhead . The tour took place in California and the southwestern parts of the United States . However , due to disagreements between the managements of the two bands , Megadeth were pulled from the last three shows . Following the short stint with Motörhead , Megadeth were added as the opening act on Alice Cooper 's Constrictor tour , which took place at the beginning of 1987 . Later in 1987 , after the conclusion of the album 's promotional tour , Mustaine fired Poland and Samuelson due to their substance abuse issues . 
 = = Songs = = 
 = = = Tracks 1 – 4 = = = 
 " Wake Up Dead " features lyrics which describe a man who has been cheating on his wife or girlfriend and is sneaking into his house , knowing that if his wife finds out about his other lover , she will kill him . Mustaine said that " Wake up Dead " was written about him cheating on a girl he was living with . He stayed with her because he was homeless at the time and needed a place to stay . Unfortunately , he was in love with another girl and thought the one he lived with would be mad because he was cheating her . He had to leave her because he thought she had intentions to kill him . " The Conjuring " , according to author Bob Larson , simulates a Satanic ceremony , and makes references about being the devil 's advocate and his salesman . Mustaine explained the song is about black magic and contains instructions for hexes . However , because the subject matter appears incompatible to his conversion to Christianity , the song has not been played live since 2001 . 
 " Peace Sells " reflects Mustaine 's political and social beliefs . The lyrics are disapproval of the American way and convey Mustaine 's wish for a new social structure . Ellefson has stated that during the tour prior to recording the album , the band could tell then that the song was going to be a hit . The video for the title track became an MTV mainstay and the opening bass line was used as introduction to MTV News . However , Mustaine proclaimed that they received no royalties because the song was excluded shortly before MTV would have to pay them for its use . " Devils Island " is a reference to a former French penal colony off the coast of French Guiana . The lyrics detail the thoughts of a condemned prisoner awaiting execution . He is spared by God , but must spend the rest of his life on the island . 
 = = = Tracks 5 – 8 = = = 
 " Good Mourning / Black Friday " is a two @-@ piece song , which begins with an instrumental part called " Good Mourning " . Lyrically , Mustaine has described " Black Friday " as being about " a homicidal madman who goes on a killing spree " . With an excessive use of gory language and violent imagery , the song chronicles the acts of a serial killer . It was inspired by Dijon Carruthers , who was briefly the band 's drummer prior to the hiring of Gar Samuelson . According to Mustaine , Carruthers was hanging out with people who were practicing occultism , and they inspired him to write songs based on spiritual themes . 
 " Bad Omen " explores the theme of occultism . Mustaine described " Bad Omen " like " two happy campers who have stumbled onto a Satanic orgy in the middle of the woods " and then " they see these fools waiting around for Satan 's blessing " . Asked whether the band members really believe in the subject matters they write , Mustaine responded : " We 're aware of the subjects we write about — witchcraft , Satanic sacrifices and the like — but we 're not condoning them . " " I Ain 't <unk> " was written by Willie Dixon and originally recorded by Howlin ' Wolf in 1961 . However , Megadeth 's version is vastly different from the original . " My Last Words " is about a game of Russian roulette and the fear one goes through when playing the game . Despite being one of the lesser known tracks on the record , music journalist Martin Popoff said that the song was an example of the band 's " fast thrashers " and an evidence why Megadeth were dubbed as the " fearless speed progenitors " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? was well received by contemporary music critics . Billboard 's critic Fred Goodman facetiously remarked that the album is an " array of impressive tracks " that he does not recommend for " the weak @-@ hearted " . Colin Larkin , writing in the Encyclopedia of Popular Music , viewed the album as a vast improvement over their previous record , from both technical and musical aspect . Kerrang ! deemed Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? as the album that saw the inception of Megadeth 's always @-@ distinctive sound . Writing in The Rolling Stone Album Guide , author Nathan Brackett said that Megadeth were representing " the dark and nasty side " of American thrash throughout the 1980s . However , he considered the album to be almost identical to the rest of their discography from this period . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In retrospect , Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? has been regarded as a milestone of the American thrash metal movement . Along with Metallica 's Master of Puppets and Slayer 's Reign in Blood , which were also released in 1986 , Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? is considered pivotal in giving prominence to extreme metal . AllMusic 's Steve Huey recognized the record as a notable achievement in the band 's history , and called it a " classic of early thrash " . Similarly , Chad Bowar of About.com said that the album captured Megadeth in their prime , and recommended it as a " mandatory " recording for the fans of this genre . Sputnikmusic 's Mike Stagno named the album a " bona @-@ fide masterpiece " and said it was the main reason why Megadeth became one of the leading acts of the underground scene . Joel McIver , writing in Record Collector , said that the album 's main strength was its fluidity , with all songs moving in a continuous , steady stream . According to him , the album was " flip the bird " to the critics who were hostile to this type of music at the time . 
 Pitchfork Media 's Jess Harvell said that thanks to this album , Megadeth developed a strong cult following . He viewed the record as a resistance against the glam metal acts from the day , because bands like Megadeth were more appealing to the " dead @-@ end kids " . Adrien Begrand of PopMatters praised the album for making strong impression both musically and visually . Although Begrand acknowledged that this was not Megadeth 's most technically proficient album , he explained that the unique combination of " the extreme and the accessible " is why this album remained a fan @-@ favorite . Spin magazine 's Mike Powell cited the record as an example of " glossy hardcore " with Satanic lyricism . Jeff Treppel from Decibel noted that the album exhibits a distinctive sound , which set Megadeth apart from their contemporaries : " Peace Sells was a leaner , nastier predator . Megadeth preferred to kill with speed and precision instead of size and power . " According to him , the album influenced countless heavy metal bands that followed , from Arch Enemy to DragonForce . 
 In addition to being critically acclaimed , the album received numerous accolades since its release . It has been featured in Robert Dimery 's book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , as well as in Martin Popoff 's edition of the Top 500 Heavy Metal Albums of All Time . About.com ranked it third on their list of " Essential Thrash Metal Albums " , commenting that more than two decades after its release , the record holds a status as an undisputed classic . 
 = = Reissues = = 
 In 2003 , Capitol Records re @-@ released the album on DVD @-@ Audio , with the original tracklist , in 96k / 24 @-@ bit resolution for both surround and stereo mixes , and music videos for " Wake Up Dead " and " Peace Sells " . The album was remixed and remastered in 2004 along with the rest of the band 's Capitol Records albums . This reissue featured four alternate mixes of the album 's songs as bonus tracks . 
 On July 12 , 2011 , the band re @-@ released the album in both a 2 @-@ Disc reissue and a special 5 @-@ Disc + 3 @-@ LP box set , to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the album . The reissue features liner notes written by Mustaine and Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich . The 25th anniversary re @-@ release sold approximately 2 @,@ 000 units in its first week of release . 
 The 25th Anniversary edition box set features five discs . Discs 1 – 3 all feature the original album , with disc 1 having the original mix ( remastered version from 2011 ) , disc 2 featuring the 2004 remix , and disc 3 featuring the Randy Burns mixes ( several examples of which appear as bonus tracks on the album 's 2004 release ) . Disc 4 features the same 1987 show available on the 2 @-@ disc set . Disc five contains both the original album ( again , remastered version from 2011 ) , and the above listed 1987 show in hi @-@ resolution audio . The 25th anniversary 2 CD edition features the original album on disc one and a previously unreleased 1987 concert on disc two . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Mustaine , except " I Ain 't <unk> " by Willie Dixon . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Except where otherwise cited , all listed accolades attributed to Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? are adapted from Acclaimed Music . 
 = The Dark Side of the Moon = 
 The Dark Side of the Moon is the eighth studio album by the English rock band Pink Floyd . Originally released on 1 March 1973 , on the label Harvest . It built on ideas explored in the band 's earlier recordings and live shows , but lacks the extended instrumental excursions that characterised their previous work following the departure in 1968 of founder member , principal composer , and lyricist , Syd Barrett . The Dark Side of the Moon explores themes including conflict , greed , the passage of time , and mental illness , the latter partly inspired by Barrett 's deteriorating mental state . 
 Developed during live performances , an early version of the suite was premiered several months before studio recording began ; new material was recorded in two sessions in 1972 and 1973 at Abbey Road Studios in London . The group used some of the most advanced recording techniques of the time , including multitrack recording and tape loops . Analogue synthesizers were given prominence in several tracks , and a series of recorded interviews with the band 's road crew and others provided the philosophical quotations used throughout . Engineer Alan Parsons was responsible for many of the album 's most notable sonic aspects and the recruitment of non @-@ lexical singer Clare Torry . The album 's iconic sleeve , designed by Storm Thorgerson , depicts a prism dispersing light into color and represents the band 's stage lighting , the record 's lyrical themes , and keyboardist Richard Wright 's request for a " simple and bold " design . 
 The Dark Side of the Moon was an immediate success ; it topped the Billboard Top LPs & Tapes chart for one week and remained in the charts for 741 weeks from 1973 to 1988 . With an estimated 45 million copies sold , it is Pink Floyd 's most commercially successful album and one of the best @-@ selling albums worldwide . It has twice been remastered and re @-@ released , and has been covered in its entirety by several other acts . It produced two singles , " Money " and " Us and Them " . The Dark Side of the Moon is Pink Floyd 's most popular album among fans and critics , and has been ranked as one of the greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of Meddle in 1971 , Pink Floyd assembled for an upcoming tour of Britain , Japan and the United States in December of that year . <unk> in Broadhurst Gardens in London , there was the looming prospect of a new album , although their priority at that time was the creation of new material . In a band meeting at drummer Nick Mason 's home in Camden , bassist Roger Waters proposed that a new album could form part of the tour . Waters ' idea was for an album that dealt with things that " make people mad " , focusing on the pressures faced by the band during their arduous lifestyle , and dealing with the apparent mental problems suffered by former band member Syd Barrett . The band had explored a similar idea with 1969 's The Man and The Journey . In an interview for Rolling Stone , guitarist David Gilmour said : " I think we all thought – and Roger definitely thought – that a lot of the lyrics that we had been using were a little too indirect . There was definitely a feeling that the words were going to be very clear and specific . " 
 Generally , all four members agreed that Waters ' concept of an album unified by a single theme was a good idea . Waters , Gilmour , Mason and keyboardist Richard Wright participated in the writing and production of the new material , and Waters created the early demo tracks at his Islington home in a small recording studio he had built in his garden shed . Parts of the new album were taken from previously unused material ; the opening line of " Breathe " came from an earlier work by Waters and Ron Geesin , written for the soundtrack of The Body , and the basic structure of " Us and Them " was taken from a piece originally composed by Wright for the film Zabriskie Point . The band rehearsed at a warehouse in London owned by the Rolling Stones , and then at the Rainbow Theatre . They also purchased extra equipment , which included new speakers , a PA system , a 28 @-@ track mixing desk with four quadraphonic outputs , and a custom @-@ built lighting rig . Nine tonnes of kit was transported in three lorries ; this would be the first time the band had taken an entire album on tour , but it would allow them to refine and improve the new material , which by then had been given the provisional title of Dark Side of the Moon ( an allusion to lunacy , rather than astronomy ) . However , after discovering that that title had already been used by another band , Medicine Head , it was temporarily changed to Eclipse . The new material premièred at The Dome in Brighton , on 20 January 1972 , and after the commercial failure of Medicine Head 's album the title was changed back to the band 's original preference . 
 Dark Side of the Moon : A Piece for Assorted Lunatics , as it was then known , was performed in the presence of an assembled press on 17 February 1972 – more than a year before its release – at the Rainbow Theatre , and was critically acclaimed . Michael Wale of The Times described the piece as " ... bringing tears to the eyes . It was so completely understanding and musically questioning . " Derek Jewell of The Sunday Times wrote " The ambition of the Floyd 's artistic intention is now vast . " Melody Maker was , however , less enthusiastic : " Musically , there were some great ideas , but the sound effects often left me wondering if I was in a bird @-@ cage at London zoo . " However , the following tour was praised by the public . The new material was performed live , in the same order in which it would eventually be recorded , but obvious differences between the live version , and the recorded version released a year later , included the lack of synthesizers in tracks such as " On the Run " , and Bible readings that were later replaced by Clare Torry 's non @-@ lexical vocables on " The Great Gig in the Sky " . 
 The band 's lengthy tour through Europe and North America gave them the opportunity to make continual improvements to the scale and quality of their performances . Work on the album was interrupted in late February when the band travelled to France and recorded music for French director Barbet Schroeder 's film , La Vallée . They then performed in Japan and returned to France in March to complete work on the film . After a series of dates in North America , the band flew to London to begin recording the album , from 24 May to 25 June . More concerts in Europe and North America followed before the band returned on 9 January 1973 to complete work on the album . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The Dark Side of the Moon built upon experiments Pink Floyd had attempted in their previous live shows and recordings , but lacks the extended instrumental excursions which , according to critic David Fricke , had become characteristic of the band after founder member Syd Barrett left in 1968 . Gilmour , Barrett 's replacement , later referred to those instrumentals as " that psychedelic noodling stuff " , and with Waters cited 1971 's Meddle as a turning @-@ point towards what would be realised on the album . The Dark Side of the Moon 's lyrical themes include conflict , greed , the passage of time , death , and insanity , the latter inspired in part by Barrett 's deteriorating mental state ; he had been the band 's principal composer and lyricist . The album is notable for its use of musique concrète and conceptual , philosophical lyrics , as found in much of the band 's other work . 
 Each side of the album is a continuous piece of music . The five tracks on each side reflect various stages of human life , beginning and ending with a heartbeat , exploring the nature of the human experience , and ( according to Waters ) " empathy " . " Speak to Me " and " Breathe " together stress the mundane and futile elements of life that accompany the ever @-@ present threat of madness , and the importance of living one 's own life – " Don 't be afraid to care " . By shifting the scene to an airport , the synthesizer @-@ driven instrumental " On the Run " evokes the stress and anxiety of modern travel , in particular Wright 's fear of flying . " Time " examines the manner in which its passage can control one 's life and offers a stark warning to those who remain focused on mundane aspects ; it is followed by a retreat into solitude and withdrawal in " Breathe ( Reprise ) " . The first side of the album ends with Wright and vocalist Clare Torry 's soulful metaphor for death , " The Great Gig in the Sky " . Opening with the sound of cash registers and loose change , the first track on side two , " Money " , mocks greed and consumerism using tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek lyrics and cash @-@ related sound effects ( ironically , " Money " has been the most commercially successful track from the album , with several cover versions produced by other bands ) . " Us and Them " addresses the isolation of the depressed with the symbolism of conflict and the use of simple dichotomies to describe personal relationships . " Any Colour You Like " concerns the lack of choice one has in a human society . " Brain Damage " looks at a mental illness resulting from the elevation of fame and success above the needs of the self ; in particular , the line " and if the band you 're in starts playing different tunes " reflects the mental breakdown of former bandmate Syd Barrett . The album ends with " Eclipse " , which espouses the concepts of alterity and unity , while forcing the listener to recognise the common traits shared by humanity . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The album was recorded at Abbey Road Studios , in two sessions , between May 1972 and January 1973 . The band were assigned staff engineer Alan Parsons , who had worked as assistant tape operator on Atom Heart Mother , and who had also gained experience as a recording engineer on the Beatles ' Abbey Road and Let It Be . The recording sessions made use of some of the most advanced studio techniques of the time ; the studio was capable of 16 @-@ track mixes , which offered a greater degree of flexibility than the eight- or four @-@ track mixes they had previously used , although the band often used so many tracks that to make more space available second @-@ generation copies were made . 
 Beginning on 1 June , the first track to be recorded was " Us and Them " , followed six days later by " Money " . Waters had created effects loops from recordings of various money @-@ related objects , including coins thrown into a food @-@ mixing bowl taken from his wife 's pottery studio , and these were later re @-@ recorded to take advantage of the band 's decision to record a quadraphonic mix of the album ( Parsons has since expressed dissatisfaction with the result of this mix , attributed to a lack of time and the paucity of available multi @-@ track tape recorders ) . " Time " and " The Great Gig in the Sky " were the next pieces to be recorded , followed by a two @-@ month break , during which the band spent time with their families and prepared for an upcoming tour of the US . The recording sessions suffered regular interruptions ; Waters , a supporter of Arsenal F.C. , would often break to see his team compete , and the band would occasionally stop work to watch Monty Python 's Flying Circus on the television , leaving Parsons to work on material recorded up to that point . Gilmour has , however , disputed this claim ; in an interview in 2003 he said : " We would sometimes watch them but when we were on a roll , we would get on . " 
 Returning from the US in January 1973 , they recorded " Brain Damage " , " Eclipse " , " Any Colour You Like " and " On the Run " , while fine @-@ tuning the work they had already laid down in the previous sessions . A foursome of female vocalists was assembled to sing on " Brain Damage " , " Eclipse " and " Time " , and saxophonist Dick Parry was booked to play on " Us and Them " and " Money " . With director Adrian Maben , the band also filmed studio footage for Pink Floyd : Live at Pompeii . Once the recording sessions were complete , the band began a tour of Europe . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 The album is particularly notable for the metronomic sound effects during " Speak to Me " , and the tape loops that open " Money " . Mason created a rough version of " Speak to Me " at his home , before completing it in the studio . The track serves as an overture and contains cross @-@ fades of elements from other pieces on the album . A piano chord , replayed backwards , serves to augment the build @-@ up of effects , which are immediately followed by the opening of " Breathe " . Mason received a rare solo composing credit for " Speak to Me " . 
 The sound effects on " Money " were created by splicing together Waters ' recordings of clinking coins , tearing paper , a ringing cash register , and a clicking adding machine , which were used to create a 7 @-@ beat effects loop ( later adapted to four tracks in order to create a " walk around the room " effect in quadraphonic presentations of the album ) . At times the degree of sonic experimentation on the album required the engineers and band to operate the mixing console 's faders simultaneously , in order to mix down the intricately assembled multitrack recordings of several of the songs ( particularly " On the Run " ) . 
 Along with the conventional rock band instrumentation , Pink Floyd added prominent synthesizers to their sound . For example , the band experimented with an EMS VCS 3 on " Brain Damage " and " Any Colour You Like " , and a Synthi A on " Time " and " On the Run " . They also devised and recorded unconventional sounds , such as an assistant engineer running around the studio 's echo chamber ( during " On the Run " ) , and a specially treated bass drum made to simulate a human heartbeat ( during " Speak to Me " , " On the Run " , " Time " and " Eclipse " ) . This heartbeat is most prominent as the intro and the outro to the album , but it can also be heard sporadically on " Time " and " On the Run " . The assorted clocks ticking then chiming simultaneously at the start of " Time " , accompanied by a series of <unk> , were initially created as a quadraphonic test by Parsons . The engineer recorded each timepiece at an antique clock shop , and although his recordings had not been created specifically for the album , elements of the material were eventually used in the track . 
 = = = Voices = = = 
 Several tracks , including " Us and Them " and " Time " , demonstrate Richard Wright 's and David Gilmour 's ability to harmonise their voices . In the 2003 documentary The Making of The Dark Side of the Moon , Waters attributed this to the fact that their voices sound extremely similar . To take advantage of this , Parsons utilised studio techniques such as the double tracking of vocals and guitars , which allowed Gilmour to harmonise with himself . The engineer also made prominent use of flanging and phase shifting effects on vocals and instruments , odd trickery with reverb , and the panning of sounds between channels ( most notable in the quadraphonic mix of " On the Run " , when the sound of the Hammond B3 organ played through a Leslie speaker rapidly swirls around the listener ) . 
 The album 's credits include Clare Torry , a session singer and songwriter , and a regular at Abbey Road . She had worked on pop material and numerous cover albums , and after hearing one of those albums Parsons invited her to the studio to sing on Wright 's composition The Great Gig in the Sky . She declined this invitation as she wanted to watch Chuck Berry perform at the Hammersmith Odeon , but arranged to come in on the following Sunday . The band explained the concept behind the album , but were unable to tell her exactly what she should do . Gilmour was in charge of the session , and in a few short takes on a Sunday night Torry improvised a wordless melody to accompany Wright 's emotive piano solo . She was initially embarrassed by her exuberance in the recording booth , and wanted to apologise to the band – only to find them delighted with her performance . Her takes were then selectively edited to produce the version used on the track . For her contribution she was paid £ 30 , equivalent to about £ 360 in 2016 , but in 2004 she sued EMI and Pink Floyd for songwriting royalties , arguing that her contribution to " The Great Gig in the Sky " was substantial enough to be considered co @-@ authorship . The High Court agreed with her , but the terms of the settlement were not disclosed . All post @-@ 2005 pressings therefore credit Wright and Torry jointly for the song . 
 Snippets of voices between and over the music are another notable feature of the album . During recording sessions , Waters recruited both the staff and the temporary occupants of the studio to answer a series of questions printed on flashcards . The interviewees were placed in front of a microphone in a darkened studio three , and shown such questions as " What 's your favourite colour ? " and " What 's your favourite food ? " , before moving on to themes more central to the album ( such as madness , violence , and death ) . Questions such as " When was the last time you were violent ? " , followed immediately by " Were you in the right ? " , were answered in the order they were presented . Roger " The Hat " Manifold proved difficult to find , and was the only contributor recorded in a conventional sit @-@ down interview , as by then the flashcards had been mislaid . Waters asked him about a violent encounter he had had with another motorist , and Manifold replied " ... give ' em a quick , short , sharp shock ... " When asked about death he responded " live for today , gone tomorrow , that 's me ... " Another roadie , Chris Adamson , who was on tour with Pink Floyd , recorded the snippet which opens the album : " I 've been mad for fucking years – absolutely years " . The band 's road manager Peter Watts ( father of actress Naomi Watts ) contributed the repeated laughter during " Brain Damage " and " Speak to Me " . His second wife , Patricia " <unk> " Watts ( now Patricia Gleason ) , was responsible for the line about the " geezer " who was " cruisin ' for a <unk> ' " used in the segue between " Money " and " Us and Them " , and the words " I never said I was frightened of dying " heard near the beginning of " The Great Gig in the Sky " . 
 Perhaps the most notable responses " I am not frightened of dying . Any time will do : I don 't mind . Why should I be frightened of dying ? There 's no reason for it – you 've got to go sometime " and closing words " there is no dark side in the moon , really . As a matter of fact it 's all dark " came from the studios ' Irish doorman , Gerry O 'Driscoll . Paul and Linda McCartney were also interviewed , but their answers were judged to be " trying too hard to be funny " , and were not included on the album . McCartney 's Wings bandmate Henry McCullough contributed the line " I don 't know , I was really drunk at the time " . 
 = = = Completion = = = 
 Following the completion of the dialogue sessions , producer Chris Thomas was hired to provide " a fresh pair of ears " . Thomas 's background was in music , rather than engineering . He had worked with Beatles producer George Martin , and was acquainted with Pink Floyd 's manager Steve O 'Rourke . All four members of the band were engaged in a disagreement over the style of the mix , with Waters and Mason preferring a " dry " and " clean " mix which made more use of the non @-@ musical elements , and Gilmour and Wright preferring a subtler and more " echoey " mix . Thomas later claimed there were no such disagreements , stating " There was no difference in opinion between them , I don 't remember Roger once saying that he wanted less echo . In fact , there were never any hints that they were later going to fall out . It was a very creative atmosphere . A lot of fun . " Although the truth remains unclear , Thomas 's intervention resulted in a welcome compromise between Waters and Gilmour , leaving both entirely satisfied with the end product . Thomas was responsible for significant changes to the album , including the perfect timing of the echo used on " Us and Them " . He was also present for the recording of " The Great Gig in the Sky " ( although Parsons was responsible for hiring Torry ) . Interviewed in 2006 , when asked if he felt his goals had been accomplished in the studio , Waters said : 
 When the record was finished I took a reel @-@ to @-@ reel copy home with me and I remember playing it for my wife then , and I remember her bursting into tears when it was finished . And I thought , " This has obviously struck a chord somewhere " , and I was kinda pleased by that . You know when you 've done something , certainly if you create a piece of music , you then hear it with fresh ears when you play it for somebody else . And at that point I thought to myself , " Wow , this is a pretty complete piece of work " , and I had every confidence that people would respond to it . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The album was originally released in a gatefold LP sleeve designed by Hipgnosis and George Hardie . Hipgnosis had designed several of the band 's previous albums , with controversial results ; EMI had reacted with confusion when faced with the cover designs for Atom Heart Mother and Obscured by Clouds , as they had expected to see traditional designs which included lettering and words . Designers Storm Thorgerson and Aubrey Powell were able to ignore such criticism as they were employed by the band . For The Dark Side of the Moon , Richard Wright instructed them to come up with something " smarter , neater – more classy " . The prism design was inspired by a photograph that Thorgerson had seen during a brainstorming session with Powell . 
 The artwork was created by their associate , George Hardie . Hipgnosis offered the band a choice of seven designs , but all four members agreed that the prism was by far the best . The final design depicts a glass prism dispersing light into color . The design represents three elements ; the band 's stage lighting , the album lyrics , and Wright 's request for a " simple and bold " design . The spectrum of light continues through to the gatefold – an idea that Waters came up with . Added shortly afterwards , the gatefold design also includes a visual representation of the heartbeat sound used throughout the album , and the back of the album cover contains Thorgerson 's suggestion of another prism recombining the spectrum of light , facilitating interesting layouts of the sleeve in record shops . The light band emanating from the prism on the album cover has six colours , missing indigo compared to the traditional division of the spectrum into red , orange , yellow , green , blue , indigo and violet . Inside the sleeve were two posters and two pyramid @-@ themed stickers . One poster bore pictures of the band in concert , overlaid with scattered letters to form PINK <unk> , and the other an infrared photograph of the Great Pyramids of Giza , created by Powell and Thorgerson . 
 Since the departure of founder member Barrett in 1968 , the burden of lyrical composition had fallen mostly on Waters ' shoulders . He is therefore credited as the author of the album 's lyrics , making The Dark Side of the Moon the first of five consecutive Pink Floyd albums with lyrics credited only to him . The band were so confident of the quality of the writing that , for the first time , they felt able to print them on the album 's sleeve . When in 2003 he was asked if his input on the album was " organising [ the ] ideas and frameworks " and David Gilmour 's was " the music " , Waters replied : 
 That 's crap . There 's no question that Dave needs a vehicle to bring out the best of his guitar playing . And he is a great guitar player . But the idea which he 's tried to propagate over the years that he 's somehow more musical than I am is absolute fucking nonsense . It 's an absurd notion but people seem quite happy to believe it . 
 = = Release = = 
 As the quadraphonic mix of the album was not then complete , the band ( with the exception of Wright ) boycotted the press reception held at the London Planetarium on 27 February . The guests were , instead , presented with a quartet of life @-@ sized cardboard cut @-@ outs of the band , and the stereo mix of the album was presented through a poor @-@ quality public address system . Generally , however , the press were enthusiastic ; Melody Maker 's Roy Hollingworth described side one as " so utterly confused with itself it was difficult to follow " , but praised side two , writing : " The songs , the sounds , the rhythms were solid and sound , Saxophone hit the air , the band rocked and rolled , and then gushed and tripped away into the night . " Steve Peacock of Sounds wrote : " I don 't care if you 've never heard a note of the Pink Floyd 's music in your life , I 'd unreservedly recommend everyone to The Dark Side of the Moon " . In his 1973 review for Rolling Stone magazine , Loyd Grossman declared Dark Side " a fine album with a textural and conceptual richness that not only invites , but demands involvement " . In his 1981 review of the album , Robert Christgau found its lyrical ideas clichéd and its music pretentious , but called it a " kitsch masterpiece " that can be charming with highlights such as taped speech fragments , Parry 's saxophone , and studio effects which enhance Gilmour 's guitar solos . 
 The Dark Side of the Moon was released first in the US on 1 March 1973 , and then in the UK on 16 March . It became an instant chart success in Britain and throughout Western Europe ; by the following month , it had gained a gold certification in the US . Throughout March 1973 the band played the album as part of their US tour , including a midnight performance at Radio City Music Hall in New York City on 17 March before an audience of 6 @,@ 000 . The album reached the Billboard Top LP 's & Tape chart 's number one spot on 28 April 1973 , and was so successful that the band returned two months later for another tour . 
 = = = Label = = = 
 Much of the album 's early American success is attributed to the efforts of Pink Floyd 's US record company , Capitol Records . Newly appointed chairman Bhaskar Menon set about trying to reverse the relatively poor sales of the band 's 1971 studio album Meddle . Meanwhile , disenchanted with Capitol , the band and manager O 'Rourke had been quietly negotiating a new contract with CBS president Clive Davis , on Columbia Records . The Dark Side of the Moon was the last album that Pink Floyd were obliged to release before formally signing a new contract . Menon 's enthusiasm for the new album was such that he began a huge promotional advertising campaign , which included radio @-@ friendly truncated versions of " Us and Them " and " Time " . In some countries – notably the UK – Pink Floyd had not released a single since 1968 's " Point Me at the Sky " , and unusually " Money " was released as a single on 7 May , with " Any Colour You Like " on the B @-@ side . It reached number 13 on the Billboard Hot 100 in July 1973 . A two @-@ sided white label promotional version of the single , with mono and stereo mixes , was sent to radio stations . The mono side had the word " bullshit " removed from the song – leaving " bull " in its place – however , the stereo side retained the uncensored version . This was subsequently withdrawn ; the replacement was sent to radio stations with a note advising disc jockeys to dispose of the first uncensored copy . On 4 February 1974 , a double A @-@ side single was released with " Time " on one side , and " Us and Them " on the opposite side . Menon 's efforts to secure a contract renewal with Pink Floyd were in vain however ; at the beginning of 1974 , the band signed for Columbia with a reported advance fee of $ 1M ( in Britain and Europe they continued to be represented by Harvest Records ) . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The Dark Side of the Moon became one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time and is in the top 25 of a list of best @-@ selling albums in the United States . Although it held the number one spot in the US for only a week , it remained in the Billboard album chart for 741 weeks . The album re @-@ appeared on the Billboard charts with the introduction of the Top Pop Catalog Albums chart in May 1991 , and has been a perennial feature since then . In the UK it is the eighth @-@ best @-@ selling album of all time . 
 In the US the LP was released before the introduction of platinum awards on 1 January 1976 . It therefore held only a gold disc until 16 February 1990 , when it was certified 11 × platinum . On 4 June 1998 the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the album 15 × platinum , denoting sales of fifteen million in the United States – making it their biggest @-@ selling work there ( The Wall is 23 × platinum , but as a double album this signifies sales of 11 @.@ 5 million ) . " Money " has sold well as a single , and as with " Time " , remains a radio favourite ; in the US , for the year ending 20 April 2005 , " Time " was played on 13 @,@ 723 occasions , and " Money " on 13 @,@ 731 occasions . Industry sources suggest that worldwide sales of the album total about 45 million . " On a slow week " between 8 @,@ 000 and 9 @,@ 000 copies are sold , and a total of 400 @,@ 000 were sold in 2002 , making it the 200th @-@ best @-@ selling album of that year – nearly three decades after its initial release . The album has sold 9 @,@ 502 @,@ 000 copies in the US since 1991 when Nielsen SoundScan began tracking sales for Billboard . To this day , it occupies a prominent spot on Billboard 's Pop Catalog Chart . It reached number one when the 2003 hybrid CD / SACD edition was released and sold 800 @,@ 000 copies in the US . On the week of 5 May 2006 The Dark Side of the Moon achieved a combined total of 1 @,@ 500 weeks on the Billboard 200 and Pop Catalog charts . One in every fourteen people in the US under the age of 50 is estimated to own , or to have owned , a copy . Upon a chart rule change in 2009 allowing catalog titles to re @-@ enter the Billboard 200 , The Dark Side of the Moon returned to the chart at number 189 on 12 December of that year for its <unk> charting week . It has continued to sporadically appear on the Billboard 200 since then , reaching 900 weeks on the chart in April 2015 . 
 = = = Re @-@ issues and remastering = = = 
 In 1979 , The Dark Side of the Moon was released as a remastered LP by Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab , and in April 1988 on their " Ultradisc " gold CD format . The album was released by EMI on the then @-@ new compact disc format in 1984 , and in 1992 it was re @-@ released as a remastered CD in the box set Shine On . This version was re @-@ released as a 20th anniversary box set edition with postcards the following year . The cover design was again by Storm Thorgerson , the designer of the original 1973 cover . A suggestion that on CD pressings a faintly audible orchestral version of the Beatles ' " Ticket to Ride " can be heard after " Eclipse " over the album 's closing heartbeats may be due to a remastering error . 
 The original quadraphonic mix , created by Parsons , was commissioned by EMI but never endorsed by Pink Floyd , as Parsons was disappointed with his mix . To celebrate the album 's 30th anniversary , an updated surround version was released in 2003 . The band elected not to use Parsons ' quadraphonic mix ( done shortly after the original release ) , and instead had engineer James Guthrie create a new 5 @.@ 1 channel surround sound mix on the SACD format . Guthrie had worked with Pink Floyd since co @-@ producing and engineering their eleventh album , The Wall , and had previously worked on surround versions of The Wall for DVD @-@ Video and Waters ' In the Flesh for SACD . Speaking in 2003 , Alan Parsons expressed some disappointment with Guthrie 's SACD mix , suggesting that Guthrie was " possibly a little too true to the original mix " , but was generally complimentary . The 30th @-@ anniversary edition won four Surround Music Awards in 2003 , and has since sold more than 800 @,@ 000 copies . The cover image was created by a team of designers including Storm Thorgerson . The image is a photograph of a custom @-@ made stained glass window , built to match the exact dimensions and proportions of the original prism design . Transparent glass , held in place by strips of lead , was used in place of the opaque colours of the original . The idea is derived from the " sense of purity in the sound quality , being 5 @.@ 1 surround sound ... " The image was created out of a desire to be " the same but different , such that the design was clearly <unk> , still the recognisable prism design , but was different and hence new " . 
 The Dark Side of the Moon was also re @-@ released in 2003 on 180 @-@ gram virgin vinyl ( mastered by Kevin Gray at <unk> Mastering ) and included slightly different versions of the original posters and stickers that came with the original vinyl release , along with a new 30th anniversary poster . In 2007 the album was included in Oh , by the Way , a box set celebrating the 40th anniversary of Pink Floyd , and a DRM @-@ free version was released on the iTunes Store . In 2011 the album was re @-@ released as part of the Why Pink Floyd ... ? campaign , featuring a remastered version of the album along with various other material . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of the album brought wealth to all four members of the band ; Richard Wright and Roger Waters bought large country houses , and Nick Mason became a collector of upmarket cars . Some of the profits were invested in the production of Monty Python and the Holy Grail . Engineer Alan Parsons received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Engineered Recording , Non @-@ Classical for The Dark Side of the Moon , and he went on to have a successful career as a recording artist with the Alan Parsons Project . Although Waters and Gilmour have on occasion downplayed his contribution to the success of the album , Mason has praised his role . In 2003 , Parsons reflected : " I think they all felt that I managed to hang the rest of my career on Dark Side of the Moon , which has an element of truth to it . But I still wake up occasionally , frustrated about the fact that they made untold millions and a lot of the people involved in the record didn 't . " 
 Part of the legacy of The Dark Side of the Moon is in its influence on modern music , the musicians who have performed cover versions of its songs , and even in modern urban myths . Its release is often seen as a pivotal point in the history of rock music , and comparisons are sometimes drawn between Pink Floyd and Radiohead – specifically their 1997 album OK Computer – which has been called The Dark Side of the Moon of the 1990s , owing to the fact that both albums share themes relating to the loss of a creative individual 's ability to function in the modern world . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 The Dark Side of the Moon has appeared on rankings of the greatest albums of all @-@ time . In 1987 , Rolling Stone listed the record 35th on its " Top 100 Albums of the Last 20 Years " , and sixteen years later , in 2003 the album polled in 43rd position on the magazine 's list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . In 2012 , The Dark Side of the Moon was voted 43rd on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . In 2006 , it was voted " My Favourite Album " by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation 's audience . NME readers voted the album eighth in their 2006 " Best Album of All Time " online poll , and in 2009 , Planet Rock listeners voted the album the " greatest of all time " . The album is also number two on the " Definitive 200 " list of albums , made by the National Association of Recording Merchandisers " in celebration of the art form of the record album " . It came 29th in The Observer 's 2006 list of " The 50 Albums That Changed Music " , and 37th in The Guardian 's 1997 list of the " 100 Best Albums Ever " , as voted for by a panel of artists and music critics . The album 's cover has been lauded by critics and listeners alike , VH1 proclaiming it the fourth greatest in history , and Planet Rock listeners the greatest of all time . In 2013 , The Dark Side of the Moon was selected for preservation in the United States National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress for being deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . In 2014 , readers of Rhythm voted it the seventh most influential progressive drumming album . 
 = = = Covers , tributes and samples = = = 
 One of the more notable covers of The Dark Side of the Moon is Return to the Dark Side of the Moon : A Tribute to Pink Floyd . Released in 2006 , the album is a progressive rock tribute featuring artists such as Adrian Belew , Tommy Shaw , Dweezil Zappa , and Rick Wakeman . In 2000 , The Squirrels released The Not So Bright Side of the Moon , which features a cover of the entire album . The New York dub collective Easy Star All @-@ Stars released Dub Side of the Moon in 2003 and Dubber Side of the Moon in 2010 . The group Voices on the Dark Side released the album Dark Side of the Moon a Cappella , a complete a cappella version of the album . The bluegrass band Poor Man 's Whiskey frequently play the album in bluegrass style , calling the suite Dark Side of the Moonshine . A string quartet version of the album was released in 2004 . In 2009 , The Flaming Lips released a track @-@ by @-@ track remake of the album in collaboration with <unk> and White Dwarfs , and featuring Henry Rollins and Peaches as guest musicians . 
 Several notable acts have covered the album live in its entirety , and a range of performers have used samples from The Dark Side of the Moon in their own material . Jam @-@ rock band Phish performed a semi @-@ improvised version of the entire album as part their show on 2 November 1998 in West Valley City , Utah . Progressive metal band Dream Theater have twice covered the album in their live shows , and in May 2011 Mary Fahl released From the Dark Side of the Moon , a song @-@ by @-@ song " re @-@ imagining " of the album . Milli Vanilli used the tape loops from Pink Floyd 's " Money " to open their track " Money " , followed by Marky Mark and the Funky Bunch on Music for the People . 
 = = = Dark Side of the Rainbow = = = 
 Dark Side of the Rainbow and Dark Side of Oz are two names commonly used in reference to rumours ( circulated on the Internet since at least 1994 ) that The Dark Side of the Moon was written as a soundtrack for the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz . Observers playing the film and the album simultaneously have reported apparent <unk> , such as Dorothy beginning to jog at the lyric " no one told you when to run " during " Time " , and Dorothy balancing on a tightrope fence during the line " balanced on the biggest wave " in " Breathe " . David Gilmour and Nick Mason have both denied a connection between the two works , and Roger Waters has described the rumours as " amusing " . Alan Parsons has stated that the film was not mentioned during production of the album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Roger Waters . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cyclone Onil = 
 Severe Cyclonic Storm Onil ( India Meteorological Department designation : ARB 03 ; Joint Typhoon Warning Center designation : 03A ) was the first tropical cyclone to be named in the northern Indian Ocean . Forming out of an area of convection several hundred kilometres southwest of India on October 1 , 2004 , Cyclone Onil quickly attained its peak intensity on October 2 with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 990 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 23 inHg ) . However , dry air quickly entered the system , causing it to rapidly weaken to a depression just off the coast of Gujarat , India . Over the following several days , the system took a slow , erratic track towards the south @-@ southeast . After turning northeastward , the system made landfall near Porbandar on October 10 and dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 Throughout southeastern Pakistan and northwestern India , thousands of residents were evacuated prior to the cyclone 's arrival . In these areas , the storm produced moderate to heavy rainfall , peaking at 145 mm ( 5 @.@ 7 in ) in Thatta , Sindh , Pakistan . These rains led to flash flooding in several areas . Nine people died in several incidents related to the storm in Karachi . The drainage system of Hyderabad sustained significant damage , leading to several protests and demonstrations by city residents . Offshore , 300 fishermen are believed to have gone missing during the storm ; no reports have confirmed their whereabouts since they disappeared . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Severe Cyclonic Storm Onil was first identified as an area of convection early on September 30 , 2004 situated roughly 465 km ( 290 mi ) southwest of Mumbai , India . Satellite imagery depicted a poorly organized system with deep convection partially surrounding a low @-@ level circulation . Situated over warm water and within an area of moderate wind shear , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) assessed the system 's chances of developing into a tropical cyclone as " fair " . Within several hours of being identified , the Indian Meteorological Department ( IMD ) began monitoring the system as Depression ARB 03 . Despite a decrease in convection later on September 30 , the IMD upgraded the cyclone to a deep depression , stating that three @-@ minute sustained winds had reached 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . Early the next day , organization substantially improved , prompting the JTWC to issue a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . Around 0900 UTC on October 1 , the IMD upgraded the deep depression to Cyclonic Storm Onil . Upon being named , the storm became the first tropical cyclone on record to be named in the northern Indian Ocean . The WMO / ESCAP Panel agreed in May 2004 that in September , tropical cyclones in the Northern Indian Ocean attaining gale @-@ force winds would be given names . 
 Later on October 1 , the JTWC issued their first advisory on the storm , classifying it as Tropical Cyclone 03A . Tracking towards the northeast , Onil intensified as convection consolidated around the center of circulation . Roughly 24 hours after being named , the system attained its peak intensity as a severe cyclonic storm with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 990 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 23 inHg ) according to the IMD with . Upon reaching this strength , the system featured a pinhole eye surrounded by deep convection . Additionally , Dvorak technique intensity estimates reached 3 @.@ 5 , indicating a high @-@ end tropical storm . However , the JTWC stated maximum winds to be 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , a low @-@ end tropical storm . As the storm neared the Indian coastline , dry air quickly entered the circulation , causing most of the convection associated with Onil to dissipate . Located within 100 km ( 65 mi ) of land , the JTWC downgraded the system to a tropical depression and the IMD downgraded Onil to a deep depression . 
 On October 3 , the center of Onil skimmed the coastline of northwestern India ; however , the center did not cross land . Around this time , the upper @-@ level circulation detached from the low @-@ level circulation , further weakening the storm . Early on October 4 , the JTWC stated that the system had degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant low pressure system . After executing a counter @-@ clockwise loop , the depression slowly tracked south @-@ southeastward , away from land . By October 7 , the system was reclassified as a tropical depression by the JTWC as it stalled several hundred kilometres southwest of Gujarat , India . The system maintained a relatively low intensity for the following several days before making landfall near Porbandar with winds of 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) . Within hours of moving inland , Onil dissipated early on October 10 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 In northwestern India , thousands of residents were evacuated in fears of Onil striking the region . According to one of the evacuated residents , this was the seventh evacuation due to a cyclone in the area since 1999 . On October 10 , the storm 's remnants brought light to moderate rainfall in India ; there was no known rainfall amount exceeding 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) throughout the region . 
 In southeastern Pakistan , an estimated 6 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from coastal regions prior to Cyclone Onil 's arrival . Port officials warned fishermen not to venture out during the storm due to rough seas . Cyclone Onil brought moderate to heavy rainfall and gusty winds . A maximum of 145 mm ( 5 @.@ 7 in ) of rain fell in Thatta , Sindh between October 2 and 3 . In Hyderabad , heavy rains amounting to 98 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) caused a 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) section of a drainage system to collapse , prompting the evacuation of several hundred residents . Throughout Sindh , an estimated 607 square kilometres ( 234 sq mi ) of land was inundated by flood waters , destroying roughly 70 % of the cotton crop . In the city of Karachi , nine people were killed in various incidents related to the storm at least 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) winds were reported . Two people were killed after being electrocuted by a downed power line outside their home . Many streets in the city were flooded and power lines were downed . Another one of these people died while trying to clear a drain near her house when a wall collapsed on her . Offshore , 163 fishermen were reported to be missing after being caught in the storm . However , reports from Pakistani officials stated that at least 300 fishermen were missing . In other areas , power was lost for more than 48 hours after Onil moved through the region . Around Karo <unk> , 100 people were stranded along a major roadway after flash flooding struck the area . 
 In the wake of the storm , Pakistani officials set up 26 relief camps where residents were offered food and shelter . Roughly 3 @,@ 000 people sought refuge in these shelters . Mobile units were also set up by the District Health Department to minimize the impacts of any post @-@ storm diseases . On October 3 , Imtiaz Ahmed Shaikh expressed his grief over the damage caused by Cyclonic Storm Onil and stated that he would be touring the affected region within the following days . At least 40 million Pakistani rupee ( $ 469 @,@ 000 USD ) was allocated in relief funds by Sindh Minister Syed <unk> Shah . On October 4 , port officials stated that it was safe for fishermen to resume their activities in the Arabian Sea . Later that day , a rain emergency was declared for Hyderabad and emergency shelters were set up in the city . All officers in the Hyderabad Development Authority who were initially put on leave ahead of the cyclone were told to resume work to assist in clearing drainage systems . Several days after the storm , reports indicated that there were more than 300 instances where the city 's drainage system collapsed across the area , resulting in standing water in many structures . Residents in these areas , frustrated by the lack of quick action by the government , began holding protests about the flooding . In response to these protests , Shaukat Hayat Bhutto suspended Assistant Engineer Sewage manager , Qamar <unk> , for his negligence on draining flood waters . 
 = Jauchzet Gott in allen Landen , BWV 51 = 
 Jauchzet Gott in allen Landen ( " Exult in God in every land " or " Shout for joy to God in all lands " ) BWV 51 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . The work is Bach 's only church cantata scored for a solo soprano and trumpet . He composed it for general use ( ogni tempo ) , in other words not for a particular date in the church calendar , although he used it for the 15th Sunday after Trinity : the first known performance was on 17 September 1730 in Leipzig . The work may have been composed earlier , possibly for an occasion at the court of Christian , Duke of Saxe @-@ Weissenfels , for whom Bach had composed the Hunting Cantata and the Shepherd Cantata . 
 The text was written by an unknown poet who took inspiration from various biblical books , especially from psalms , and included as a closing chorale a stanza from the hymn " Nun lob , mein Seel , den Herren " . Bach structured the work in five movements , with the solo voice accompanied by a Baroque orchestra of a virtuoso trumpet , strings and continuo . While the outer movements with the trumpet express extrovert jubilation of God 's goodness and his wonders , the central introspective aria , accompanied only by the continuo , conveys a " profound expression of commitment to God " . He set the closing chorale as a chorale fantasia , the soprano sings the unadorned melody to a trio of two violins and continuo , leading to an unusual festive fugal Alleluja , in which the trumpet joins . 
 The Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann notes that the work , unusually popular among Bach 's church cantatas , is unique in the demanded virtuosity of the soprano and trumpet soloist , and evidences " overflowing jubilation and radiant beauty " . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach used the cantata in Leipzig for the 15th Sunday after Trinity on 17 September 1730 . The prescribed readings for the Sunday came from the Epistle to the Galatians , Paul 's admonition to " walk in the Spirit " ( Galatians 5 : 25 – 6 : 10 ) , and from the Sermon on the Mount in the Gospel of Matthew , which exhorts the faithful not to worry about material needs , but to seek God 's kingdom first ( Matthew 6 : 23 – 34 ) . The author is unknown . Without any reference to the prescribed readings , he incorporates in the first movement ideas from Matthew 6 : 30 , Psalms 138 : 2 and Psalms 26 : 8 , and in the central aria thoughts from Matthew 6 : 34 and Lamentations 3 : 22 – 23 . The closing chorale is the fifth stanza of " Nun lob , mein Seel , den Herren " , added to Johann Gramann 's hymn in Königsberg in 1549 . Bach used the same stanza in a different setting to close his cantata Wir danken dir , Gott , wir danken dir , BWV 29 . Bach led the performance on 17 September 1730 . 
 Bach 's manuscript indicates the 15th Sunday after Trinity " et in ogni tempo " ( " and at any time " ) . The latter phrase indicates the possible general use of the work , with a cantata text that has no direct relevance to the scriptural readings . The dedication for the 15th Sunday was added later , indicating that the cantata was not intended for the specific occasion . 
 Bach composed BWV 51 during a period when he composed church cantatas only irregularly , some of them to complete his earlier cycles . According to the Bach scholar Christoph Wolff , Bach may have written the cantata shortly before 1730 for an unknown occasion . The performance material survived but does not reveal further detail , other than indicating one later performance . Hofmann sees a connection to the court of <unk> where a scoring of solo soprano and trumpet was popular , and assumes that the work may have been originally intended for a performance at court by a professional female singer . Bach had written two birthday cantatas for Christian , Duke of Saxe @-@ Weissenfels . He was invited to the birthday celebration of 1729 and returned with the title of <unk> of Sachsen @-@ <unk> ( " court director of music of Saxe @-@ Weissenfels " ) , and Hofmann thinks a connection between the title and cantata " highly probable " . 
 Both the soprano part , which covers two octaves and requires a high C , and the solo trumpet part , which at times trades melodic lines with the soprano on an equal basis , are extremely virtuosic . The Bach scholar Alfred Dürr assumes that Bach had an unusually gifted singer , adding that a female voice was unlikely in conservative Leipzig . According to Joshua Rifkin Christoph Nichelmann is a possible candidate because Bach being aware of his capabilities accepted him willingly to the Thomasschule and Nichelmann matriculated into the school three weeks before the first performance . The trumpet part was probably written for Gottfried Reiche , Bach 's principal trumpeter at the time . The scoring is unique in Bach 's cantatas , but was frequently used by Italian composers such as Alessandro Scarlatti . Bach 's son <unk> Bach arranged the work by adding a second trumpet and timpani . 
 The cantata is one of only four sacred cantatas that Bach wrote for a solo soprano ( if one excludes his arrangement of the cantata for solo bass and oboe Ich habe <unk> , BWV 82 , for flute and soprano BWV <unk> ) and no other vocal soloists ( the others being <unk> Welt , dir trau ich nicht , BWV 52 , Ich bin vergnügt mit meinem Glücke , BWV 84 , and Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut , BWV 199 ) , while he wrote several secular cantatas for solo soprano : <unk> nur , betrübte Schatten , BWV 202 , Ich bin in mir vergnügt , BWV 204 , Non sa che <unk> <unk> , BWV 209 , and O holder Tag , <unk> Zeit , BWV 210 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in five movements and scored it for a soprano soloist and a Baroque orchestra of trumpets ( Tr ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) , and basso continuo ( Bc ) . The title of the autograph score reads : " Dominica 15 post Trinitatis / et / In ogni Tempo . / Jauchzet Gott in allen Landen . / à / Soprano solo / 1 Tromba * / 2 <unk> / Viola / e / Continuo / di / Joh : Seb : Bach " . It is the only church cantata by Bach scored for solo soprano and trumpet . The duration is given as 20 minutes . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The instruments are shown separately for wind instrument and strings . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music is concertante and virtuoso for both the trumpet and the soloist . The first aria and the concluding Alleluja are in the style of an Italian concerto . Dürr observes that the five movements are in five different musical forms : concerto , monody , variation , chorale fantasia and fugue . The scoring is richest in the outer movements ( with the trumpet ) , and reduced to just continuo in the central aria . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The first aria , " Jauchzet Gott in allen Landen " ( Exult in God in every land ) , is in da capo form , with extended coloraturas . The theme , with a beginning in a triad fanfare , is well suited to the trumpet . It is first developed in a ritornello of the orchestra and then " constantly worked " in the soprano part . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The only recitative , " Wir <unk> zu dem Tempel an " ( We pray at your temple ) , is first accompanied by the strings , a second part is secco but arioso . The second part develops the idea of " von seinen <unk> <unk> " ( chatter about His wonders ) in coloraturas of rhythmical complexity . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The second aria , " <unk> , mache deine Güte " ( Highest , renew Your goodness ) , is accompanied only by the continuo " quasi ostinato " which supports expressive coloraturas of the voice . The lines in the continuo , in constant movement in 12 / 8 time seem to constantly rise , towards the addressed " <unk> " ( Highest ) which appears as an octave jump down . Two extended melismas express gratefulness for being a child of God . The musicologist Julian <unk> notes that Bach is able to convey with modest means a " profound expression of commitment to God " . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The chorale , " Sei Lob und Preis mit Ehren " ( Glory , and praise with honor ) , is a chorale fantasia , with the soprano singing the unadorned melody to a three @-@ part accompaniment of two violins and continuo . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The chorale leads without a break to a concluding fugal " Alleluja " with the trumpet , bringing the cantata to a particularly festive close . The movement begins with the soprano and the responding trumpet , before the other instruments come in to build a " fine display piece " . Mincham summarizes : " The long flowing melismas leave one literally breathless with the sheer pleasure in , and energy generated through , the relationship with God . " 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The listing is taken from the selection provided by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . 
 The piece was recorded by sopranos such as Elisabeth Schwarzkopf ( from 1948 ) , Maria <unk> ( 1959 ) , Elly <unk> ( 1970 ) , Edith Mathis ( 1972 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1979 ) , Lucia Popp ( 1980 ) , Helen Donath ( 1983 ) , Elizabeth Parcells ( 1983 ) , Monika <unk> ( 1984 ) , Barbara Hendricks ( 1989 ) , Christine Schäfer ( 1999 ) , Siri Thornhill ( 2007 ) . 
 In the following table , the second soloist is the trumpeter . Ensembles playing on period instruments in historically informed performance are marked by a green background under the header Instr .. 
 = Hospice care in the United States = 
 Hospice care in the United States is a type and philosophy of end @-@ of @-@ life care which focuses on the palliation of a terminally ill patient 's symptoms . These symptoms can be physical , emotional , spiritual or social in nature . The concept of hospice as a place to treat the incurably ill has been evolving since the 11th century and came into the United States in the 1970s in response to the work of Cicely Saunders in the United Kingdom . Since its first establishment , the industry has rapidly expanded . In the United States , it is distinguished by more extensive volunteerism and a greater emphasis on the patient 's psychological needs in coming to terms with dying . 
 With practices largely defined by the Medicare system , a social insurance program in the United States , and other health insurance providers , hospice care is made available in the United States to patients of any age with any terminal prognosis who are medically certified to have less than six months to live . In 2007 , hospice treatment was utilized by 1 @.@ 4 million people in the United States . More than one @-@ third of dying Americans utilize the service . However , common misperceptions regarding the length of time a patient may receive hospice care and the kinds of illnesses covered may result in hospice being underutilized . Although most hospice patients are in treatment for less than thirty days , care may extend beyond six months so long as a patient 's condition continues to merit such medical outlook . Medical and social services are supplied to patients and their families by an interdisciplinary team of professional providers and volunteers who take a patient @-@ directed approach to managing illness . Generally , treatment is not diagnostic or curative , although the patient may choose some treatment options intended to prolong life , such as CPR . Most hospice services are covered by Medicare or other providers , and many hospices can provide access to charitable resources for patients lacking such coverage . 
 Care may be provided in a patient 's home or in a designated facility , such as a nursing home , hospital unit or freestanding hospice , with level of care and sometimes location based upon frequent evaluation of the patient 's needs . The four primary levels of care provided by hospice are routine home care , continuous care , general inpatient and respite care . Patients undergoing hospice treatment may be discharged for a number of reasons , including improvement of their condition and refusal to cooperate with providers , but may return to hospice care as their circumstances change . Providers are required by Medicare to provide to patients notice of pending discharge , which they may appeal . 
 Outside the United States there may not be the same distinctions made between care of those with terminal illnesses as against palliative care in a more general setting . In such countries , the term hospice is more likely to refer to a particular type of institution , rather than specifically to care in the final months or weeks of life ; and specific end @-@ of @-@ life care is more likely to be included in the general term " palliative care " . 
 = = History and statistics = = 
 The first hospices are believed to have originated in the 11th century when for the first time the incurably ill were permitted into places dedicated to treatment by Crusaders . In the early 14th century , the order of the Knights Hospitaller of St. John of Jerusalem opened the first hospice in Rhodes , meant to provide refuge for travelers and care for the ill and dying . But the hospice practice languished until revived in the 17th century in France by the Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul and , later , by the Irish Sisters of Charity , who opened St Joseph 's Hospice in London , England in 1902 . It was there in the 1950s that Cicely Saunders , who later founded St Christopher 's Hospice in London , developed many of the foundational principles of modern hospice care . 
 In 1971 , Hospice , Inc. was founded in the United States , first bringing the principles of modern hospice care to that country . Throughout the 1970s , the philosophies of hospice were being implemented throughout the United States . The hospice movement in the United States soon distinguished itself from that in Britain , according to Stephen Connor 's Hospice : Practice , <unk> and Promise , by " a greater emphasis on use of volunteers and more focus on psychological preparation for death " . Medicare , a social insurance program in the United States , added hospice services to its coverage in 1982 . On September 13 , 1982 , by request of the senate , US President Ronald Reagan proclaimed the week of November 7 through November 14 , 1982 , as National Hospice Week . 
 Since then , the hospice industry has rapidly expanded . By 1995 , hospices were a $ 2 @.@ 8 billion industry , with $ 1 @.@ 9 billion from Medicare alone funding patients in 1 @,@ 857 hospice programs with Medicare certification . In that year , 72 % of hospice providers were non @-@ profit . By 1998 , there were 3 @,@ 200 hospices either in operation or under development throughout the United States and Puerto Rico , according to the National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization ( <unk> ) . According to 2007 's Last Rights : Rescuing the End of Life from the Medical System , hospice sites are expanding at a national rate of about 3 @.@ 5 % per year . In 2007 , 1 @.@ 4 million people in the United States utilized hospice , with more than one @-@ third of dying Americans utilizing the service , approximately 39 % . In 2008 , Medicare alone , which pays for 80 % of hospice treatment , paid $ 10 billion to the 4 @,@ 000 Medicare @-@ certified providers in the United States . 
 As the hospice industry has expanded , so , too , has the concept of hospice care . 2003 saw the opening of the first US children 's hospice facility , the George Mark Children 's House Hospice in San Francisco . In February , 2009 , Buffalo News reported that the balance of non @-@ profit and for @-@ profit hospices was shifting , with the latter as " the fastest @-@ growing slice of the industry . " 
 = = Philosophy and practices = = 
 The goal of all hospice agencies in the United States is to provide comfort to the patient . How comfort is defined is up to the patient or , if the patient is incapacitated , the patient 's family . This can mean freedom from physical , emotional , spiritual and / or social pain . Hospices typically do not perform treatments that are meant to diagnose or cure an illness , and they do not seek to hasten death or , primarily or unduly , to extend life . While it is not required that patients sign " Do not resuscitate " orders to be on hospice , some hospices do require them as a condition of acceptance . Many hospice patients , though not all , have made decisions not to receive CPR should their heart or breathing stop . If a patient does decide to request CPR , that service may not be provided by the hospice ; the family may need to contact Emergency Medical Services to provide CPR . The decision not to extend life as well as the pulling back of diagnostic or curative treatments is often the greatest barrier for patients in accepting hospice care ; it can also create conflicts in medical professionals attempting to provide it . 
 Some confusion exists as to what treatments a patient may receive and still qualify for hospice care . Hospices may provide treatments that have been traditionally regarded as curative , including radiation therapy or antibiotics , if these are administered to improve quality of life . Determination of appropriate treatment is made on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis . 
 Another aspect of the hospice philosophy is the patient @-@ centered care they provide . As the focus throughout the United States has shifted from provider @-@ centered care , many healthcare agencies market themselves as patient @-@ centered ; for hospice , this patient @-@ directed care is integral and interwoven throughout the care which is provided , and Medicare regulations reflect this philosophy . 
 = = Hospice demographic = = 
 In order to qualify for hospice care , a patient must have certification from two physicians that he or she has less than six months to live if his or her disease runs its natural course ; usually the patient 's primary physician and the Hospice Medical Director will provide this certification . Patients can and do stay on hospice longer than six months , and as long as the hospice team continues to certify with supporting evidence that the patient is terminal , insurance companies will usually continue to pay for hospice care . 
 Many physicians are slow to refer to hospice care , waiting until they are absolutely certain of a terminal prognosis . Some physicians believe that the patient must have a six @-@ month prognosis or less to receive hospice care , while others are overly optimistic in their assessment of prognosis , presuming treatment will be more effective than it is . As a result , the majority of patients are referred to hospice in the very end @-@ stages of their diseases . The average length of stay in hospice before a patient dies was 26 days in 1994 , but only 19 days in 1998 . Although these numbers have since increased , the term of care continues to be underutilized , with an average length of stay in 2004 of 57 days and a median length of 22 days . 33 % of hospice patients admitted in 2004 died within seven days of admission . Such late admission is inconsistent with the process of hospice , which requires time for patients and family members to develop relationships with the hospice team . 
 A misperception regarding hospice is that only individuals suffering from cancer or AIDS can receive hospice care . Hospice in the United States did evolve around the model of cancer care , with its predictable pattern of deterioration , and according to 2002 's The Case Against Assisted Suicide : For the Right to End @-@ of @-@ life Care , " 60 % of hospice patients have cancer and many of the rest have AIDS " . However , patients can be on hospice for cancer , end @-@ stage heart and lung diseases , stroke , renal failure , Alzheimers or many other conditions . Any diagnosis that would be an acceptable cause of death on a death certificate is , if expected to be terminal , an acceptable diagnosis for hospice care . 
 = = = Re @-@ certification = = = 
 In order to qualify for hospice , a patient has to be certified as having a prognosis of less than six months to live , but sometimes patients live longer . Medicare patients who receive the hospice benefit must waive other Medicare benefits that could prolong life . Under the Medicare provisions , the hospice benefit through the first six months is broken up into two 90 day benefit periods . At the end of these two benefit periods , the hospice team will evaluate whether or not the patient continues to have a prognosis of less than six months to live . Following these two 90 day benefit periods , the hospice is then required to evaluate more closely and will review every 60 days . Commercial insurers , managed care program providers and Medicaid often have their own individual regulations regarding re @-@ certification . When the hospice re @-@ certifies a six @-@ month or less prognosis , it does not judge based upon the start of hospice , but rather the patient 's current condition . 
 = = = Pediatric hospice care = = = 
 Patients in hospice are primarily elderly ; according to the 2006 Handbook of Social Work in Health and Aging , over 80 % of hospice patients in the United States are over 65 . However , while the elderly are the primary hospice population , hospice care is available to all age groups , including those under 21 . Not all hospices are able to serve every population . In 1983 , less than 1 % of hospice providers offered pediatric care ; by 2001 , that number had grown to 15 % . The first pediatric hospice facility in the United States , the George Mark Children 's House Hospice of San Francisco , opened in 2003 . While pediatric hospice options are expanding , as of 2006 many adult @-@ oriented hospice programs remained ill @-@ prepared to handle younger populations . 
 The primary diagnosis for children in hospice treatment is cancer , but , like the adult population , children may enter hospice for a variety of conditions , including AIDS , prematurity , congenital disorder , cerebral palsy , cystic fibrosis or " death @-@ inducing trauma " , such as automobile accidents . Hospice care , which is intended to treat the whole family , may also be made available to families expecting a child who is not anticipated to survive long after delivery . 
 The recommended model of hospice for children differs from that of adults . In 2000 , the committees on Bioethics and Hospital Care for the American Academy of Pediatrics jointly released a recommendation that palliative care for children should be provided for any life @-@ threatening condition from the point of diagnosis , whether death is the prognosis or not , as the benefits of palliative care can be offered concurrently with curative treatment . The Virginia @-@ based Children 's Hospice International also recommends hospice services for all children with life @-@ threatening conditions , even if seeking " hopeful " treatment , " to enhance the quality of life for the child and family " . However , the federal standards set by Medicaid require the six @-@ months terminal prognosis , and insurance providers may restrict access to hospice care to pediatric patients undergoing life @-@ extending treatment . 
 = = Expense = = 
 The cost of hospice care may be met by health insurance providers , including Medicare or Medicaid for eligible Americans . Hospice is covered 100 % with no co @-@ pay or deductible by Medicare Part A except that patients are responsible for a <unk> for outpatient drugs and respite care , if needed . ( Respite care may be necessary , for instance , if a family member who is providing home hospice care is briefly unable to perform his or her duties and an alternative care provider becomes necessary . ) As of 2008 , Medicare was responsible for around 80 % of hospice payments , reimbursing providers differently from county to county with a higher rate for inpatient hospice care . A lower rate is paid for home care with a higher rate paid for round the clock nursing care in order to get a patient 's symptoms under control . 
 Most commercial health insurances and Medicaid have a hospice benefit as well , and these typically mirror the Medicare benefit . There may be a co @-@ pay required by commercial health insurance providers depending on individual plans . According to a 2008 article by Lauren Tara LaCapra on <unk> , Medicare and Medicaid paid 78 % of home @-@ based hospice charges in 2008 , with 12 % being supplied by private insurance providers and 10 % " out of pocket " , paid by the patient . Most non @-@ profit hospice agencies have contingencies for patients who lack insurance coverage and will provide care to the patient free of charge or at reduced rates . LaCapra said that out @-@ of @-@ pocket expenses for home @-@ based hospice services were $ 758 a year in 2008 for the average hospice patient . 
 Once a patient is enrolled in hospice , the hospice becomes the insurance payor for that patient for any hospice @-@ related illnesses . In other words , if a patient is on hospice for end @-@ stage congestive heart failure , the hospice is responsible for all care related to the heart failure . However , if the patient were to see a podiatrist , this would be billed through their regular insurance . 
 = = Providers = = 
 Hospice is a competitive business . In any given service area , there may be hundreds of different non @-@ profit and commercial providers . Hospices can be small community @-@ based operations , part of regional and national corporations , or part of a hospital or other health system . Data from the National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization indicated that in 2008 58 @.@ 3 % of hospice agencies were independent , with 20 @.@ 8 % based in hospitals , 19 @.@ 7 % geared for home health care and 1 @.@ 3 % in conjunction with nursing homes . In 2007 , the mean number of patients being treated in hospice facilities on any given day was 90 @.@ 2 . 79 @.@ 4 % of hospice providers admitted fewer than 500 patients per year . The number of for @-@ profit and non @-@ profit providers has become more balanced as the for @-@ profit sector has grown . In 2007 , 47 @.@ 1 % of agencies were for @-@ profit , with 48 @.@ 6 % non @-@ profit . The remaining 4 @.@ 3 % were government @-@ owned providers . 
 In order to receive payments for hospice patients under Medicare or Medicaid , a hospice must be certified by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , and in 2007 93 @.@ 1 % were . Among those that were not certified , some were in the process of seeking certification . However , some agencies do not seek certification or voluntarily relinquish it . For one example , an agency that is entirely supported through donations or relies on volunteer staff might not choose to seek certification . The <unk> estimated in 2008 that at least 200 " all @-@ volunteer " programs were in operation in the United States . 
 = = Levels of care = = 
 There are four primary levels of care ; routine home care , continuous care , general inpatient and respite / respite inpatient . All hospices in the United States certified by Medicare are required to offer each of these levels of care . 
 = = = Routine home care = = = 
 Routine home care is the most common level of care provided . In spite of its title , routine home care does not indicate a location of care , but a level ( or intensity ) of care provided . Routine care may be provided at a nursing home or assisted living facility , although the majority of hospice patients are treated at home . Interdisciplinary team members supply a variety of services during routine home care , including offering necessary supplies , such as durable medical equipment , medications related to the hospice diagnosis and incidentals like diapers , bed pads , gloves , and skin <unk> . Twenty @-@ four @-@ hour on @-@ call services must be available as needed . Typically this is provided after normal business hours by a registered nurse prepared to address urgent patient concerns . 
 = = = Continuous care = = = 
 Continuous Care is a service provided in the patient 's home . It is for patients who are experiencing severe symptoms and need temporary extra support . Once a patient is on continuous care , the hospice provides services in the home a minimum of eight hours a day . Because the criteria for continuous care is similar to general inpatient care , and due to the challenges a hospice can face with staffing extended day care in the home , continuous care is intended to be used for short periods of time . 
 = = = General inpatient care = = = 
 General inpatient care is an intensive level of care which may be provided in a nursing home , a specially contracted hospice bed or unit in a hospital , or in a free @-@ standing hospice unit . General inpatient criteria is for patients who are experiencing severe symptoms which require daily interventions from the hospice team to manage . Often , patients on this level of care have begun the " active phase " of dying , when their prognosis is measured in days as opposed to weeks or months . Although there is a limit to how long Medicare will cover this level of care , it is usually provided for brief periods of time , with five to seven days being the average . 
 = = = Respite = = = 
 Respite Care ( sometimes referred to as respite inpatient ) is a brief and periodic level of care a patient may receive . Respite is a unique benefit in that the care is provided for the needs of the family , not the patient . Should a family member need a " break " from caregiving , or if a vacation is planned , then this level of care may be provided . During respite , the patient is transferred from the home to an <unk> setting ; this can be a nursing home , assisted living , hospital or an inpatient hospice unit . Should a patient be transferred to an assisted living facility , nursing home , or hospital , the hospice would continue to provide care to the patient which is on par with the services provided under the routine home care benefit . In this way , the only difference between respite and routine care is that the hospice pays the room and board charges of the facility . Should a patient receive respite in an inpatient hospice unit the care would be similar to what other patients of the hospice unit receive . Respite is provided for a maximum of five days every benefit period . 
 = = Hospice interdisciplinary team = = 
 The hospice interdisciplinary team is the core service which every hospice provides to patients and families . Hospice differs from other forms of care in that the core members of the hospice team function as an interdisciplinary , rather than a multidisciplinary , team . Multidisciplinary teams involve several professionals who independently treat various issues a patient may have . The problems that are being treated may or may not relate to other issues being addressed by individual team members . Interdisciplinary team approach involves all members of the team working together towards the same goal , which in this case is to afford patients a comfortable dying experience and families the support they need in coping with this . In an interdisciplinary team approach , there can often be role blending by members of the core team , who may take on tasks usually filled by other team members . 
 The hospice team is required by Medicare to meet every 14 days . During this team meeting , patient needs are discussed and planned for the next two weeks . Additionally , the team reviews the patient 's medical condition to ensure that the patient still meets criteria for hospice care . 
 = = = Team members = = = 
 Team members include hospice medical directors , physicians , pharmacists , registered nurses , social workers , counselors , home health aides , and volunteers . 
 Hospice Medical Director : The hospice medical director , a physician , often provides the most support to the clinical staff providing care to the patient and family . The medical director may also provide medical care if the primary physician is unavailable or if the patient does not have a primary care provider . The hospice medical director is also required under Medicare to recertify patients . 
 Physician : Physicians involved in patient care may include the primary physician , who can provide valuable information about patient medical history , and physicians connected to the hospice team . These primarily provide support to other hospice team members , but may also treat the patient directly . The physician subspecialty of Hospice and Palliative Medicine was established in 2006 , to provide expertise in the care of patients with life @-@ limiting , advanced disease and catastrophic injury ; the relief of distressing symptoms ; the coordination of interdisciplinary patient and family @-@ centered care in diverse settings ; the use of specialized care systems including hospice ; the management of the imminently dying patient ; and legal and ethical decision making in end @-@ of @-@ life care . 
 Registered Nurses : Registered nurses are responsible for coordinating all aspects of the patient 's care and insuring symptoms ( physical or otherwise ) are being addressed and managed . The primary care nurse visits a minimum of twice weekly , and the content of the visit can vary greatly . When patients are experiencing few symptoms and / or are early in their diseases , the RN visit may just be a short check up . If a patient 's symptoms worsen , the nurse will visit more often , make recommendations for increasing or changing the medication intervention and provide support and education regarding the disease / dying process . Many patients on hospice may require complex treatments : respiratory care , wound care or even IV therapy at home . In most cases , the hospice nurse is trained to handle these unique needs as well . 
 Social Worker : Every patient is assigned a social worker who visits at the time of admission to hospice . The social worker function can vary from providing superficial support to patients and families to intensive crisis @-@ oriented counseling . Additionally , with a terminal illness often comes more complicated financial stressors ; the social worker can be instrumental in connecting the patient and family with community resources including services such as Meals on Wheels . Lastly , if a patient is unable to be cared for at home , the social worker will work to find a safer place for the patient to receive hospice care . 
 Counselor : Counselors are required as part of the core team by Medicare regulations . Typically , the role is filled by a Chaplain or Spiritual Counselor , but social workers or other persons , sometimes specially trained , may also serve . While not every patient will see a Chaplain on hospice , all hospices have to be able to provide regular and consistent Chaplain services . The Chaplain is available to provide spiritually supportive counseling , life review and may connect a patient with clergy they are comfortable with . At times the hospice Chaplain will officiate at a patient 's funeral . 
 Home Health Aide : The home health , or hospice , aide is not a core service for a hospice patient ; this means it is not required that every patient on hospice receive an aide . However , most patients do receive this service , and it is often the one most depended on by the patient and family . The hospice aide typically visits anywhere from 3 – 7 days a week for approximately 1 – 2 hours at each visit . His or her functions include providing respite to the primary caregiver and physical support to the patient , including bathing , dressing , or feeding . Many times it is the hospice aide who develops the closest relationship with the patient , due to the frequency of visits . The hospice aide is not a licensed nurse and therefore can not administer medications , treat wounds , handle IV 's or similar treatments . 
 Pharmacist : Pharmacists oversee the patient 's drug therapy , which includes filling prescriptions , monitoring for drug interactions and adverse effects , anticipating problems , and assessing the appropriateness of drug therapies in the context of patient @-@ oriented goals . 
 Volunteers : Volunteers form a major part of hospice care in the United States and may provide a variety of physical or emotional comforts to patients and family , including providing housework , health care , spiritual counseling and companionship . Hospice volunteers also provide administrative assistance to hospices . 
 = = Discharge from hospice = = 
 The majority of discharges from hospice are due to the death of the patient , although hospice treatment may not end then as care also provides for a period of bereavement counseling for the family afterward . However , there are several other scenarios when a patient may be discharged from hospice . 
 De @-@ certification 
 If it is determined at the time of review that a patient 's prognosis may be greater than six months , the patient is de @-@ certified ( discharged ) from hospice . The hospice is required by law to give advance notification to the patient , and the patient can appeal the hospice 's decision to Medicare . Usually the hospice plans these discharges weeks in advance to make the transition off hospice , which can be traumatic for patients who have been preparing to die , as smooth as possible . Should the patient 's condition worsen once discharged from hospice they can be readmitted to hospice . 
 Revocation 
 A patient may be discharged by revocation if he or she chooses to relinquish the hospice benefit . Revocation could be due to hospitalization , if the patient chooses to pursue some type of curative treatment or experiences dissatisfaction with hospice care . However , not all hospitalizations of patients require revocation ; should the admitting diagnosis to the hospital be unrelated to the condition for which they are in hospice , the patient may remain on hospice while undergoing treatment for it . 
 Transfer of hospice 
 Transfer of hospice does not involve a discharge from hospice in general , but a discharge from the current hospice provider to another one . 
 Discharge for cause 
 Occasionally a hospice will be unable to provide care to a patient , either due to philosophical differences with the patient or due to a safety issue . Such causes could include disruptive or abusive behavior from the patient or other persons in the patient 's home or refusal to cooperate with the hospice program . Patients may , after being discharged from hospice for any reason , re @-@ enroll in hospice at a later date as necessary . 
 = = Barriers to Access = = 
 As indicated , hospice is frequently under @-@ utilized and often not taken advantage of until very late in a patient 's illness . The reasons for this have as much to do with financial considerations as with the psycho @-@ social difficulty in choosing hospice . A 2009 study found that with proper case management hospice access could be liberalized without additional costs to insurers . 
 = = = Reimbursement = = = 
 Physicians : There are multiple aspects as to why , financially , hospice care may be difficult to access . The first would relate to physician reluctance . As stated previously , when enrolled in hospice , the patient transitions from their primary insurance to having most of their care managed directly by the hospice . As hospices typically have a limited budget , expensive care may not be permitted by the hospice . Additionally , reimbursement for physician visits can be complicated and result in non @-@ payment to physicians . Therefore , difficulty in authorizing expensive treatments and lack of payment for visits can be reasons for non @-@ referral from a physician . 
 Nursing Homes : A second aspect to reimbursement pertains to the nursing home . In many cases , patients who are transferred to a nursing home from a hospital will have a portion of their nursing home stay reimbursed by Medicare . In these cases , Medicare is paying for some kind of rehabilitative care . Medicare will not reimburse any room and board coverage in the nursing home for patients on hospice . Occasionally , patients who would be better served receiving hospice care will be " rehabilitated " in the nursing home so as to defray the costs of the room and board . 
 Hospices : While late referral to hospice is a much more prevalent problem than early referral , some hospice providers will hesitate to admit patients to hospice ( or they may de @-@ certify them from hospice too early ) due to scrutiny from Medicare for patients deemed to be on hospice too long . After a patient has been on hospice for six months , Medicare is more aggressive in auditing the hospice for inappropriate payment of services . For some hospices this is simply not worth the trouble , and patients are screened very carefully prior to admission . 
 = = = Stigma = = = 
 Physicians : Medical care is traditionally focused on a cure and healing the patient . For many , hospice care is not seen as the true practice of medicine . Physicians face a persistent social stigma in that hospice is mistaken as giving up on a patient , rather than committing to palliation . Additionally , and although this perception has been changing , when thinking of hospice the doctor is often focused on patients with cancer and not many of the other terminal diseases which qualify for hospice care . 
 Patients : Many patients and families simply do not want to receive hospice care . The most common reason is an unwillingness to recognize when comfort rather than cure is a more realistic goal . When hospice is framed as care for when " there is nothing left to do " instead of a different kind of treatment , patients may believe that choosing hospice is the equivalent of doing nothing . 
 = Phil Ochs = 
 Philip David " Phil " Ochs ( / <unk> / ; December 19 , 1940 – April 9 , 1976 ) was an American protest singer ( or , as he preferred , a topical singer ) and songwriter who was known for his sharp wit , sardonic humor , earnest humanism , political activism , insightful and alliterative lyrics , and distinctive voice . He wrote hundreds of songs in the 1960s and 1970s and released eight albums . 
 Ochs performed at many political events during the 1960s counterculture era , including anti @-@ Vietnam War and civil rights rallies , student events , and organized labor events over the course of his career , in addition to many concert appearances at such venues as New York City 's Town Hall and Carnegie Hall . Politically , Ochs described himself as a " left social democrat " who became an " early revolutionary " after the protests at the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago led to a police riot , which had a profound effect on his state of mind . 
 After years of prolific writing in the 1960s , Ochs 's mental stability declined in the 1970s . He eventually succumbed to a number of problems including bipolar disorder and alcoholism , and took his own life in 1976 . 
 Some of Ochs 's major musical influences were Woody Guthrie , Pete Seeger , Buddy Holly , Elvis Presley , Bob Gibson , Faron Young , and Merle Haggard . His best @-@ known songs include " I Ain 't Marching Anymore " , " Changes " , " Crucifixion " , " Draft Dodger Rag " , " Love Me , I 'm a Liberal " , " Outside of a Small Circle of Friends " , " Power and the Glory " , " There but for Fortune " , and " The War Is Over " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Phil Ochs was born in El Paso , Texas , to Jacob ( " Jack " ) Ochs , a physician who was born in New York on August 11 , 1910 , and Gertrude Phin Ochs , who was born on February 26 , 1912 in Scotland . His parents met and married in Edinburgh where Jack was attending medical school . After their marriage , they moved to the United States . Jack , drafted into the army , was sent overseas near the end of World War II , where he treated soldiers at the Battle of the Bulge . His war experiences affected his mental health and he received an honorable medical discharge in November 1945 . Suffering from bipolar disorder and depression on his return home , Jack was unable to establish a successful medical practice and instead worked at a series of hospitals around the country . As a result , the Ochs family moved frequently : to Far Rockaway , New York , when Ochs was a teenager ; then to Perrysburg in upstate New York , where he first studied music ; and then to Columbus , Ohio . Ochs grew up with an older sister , Sonia ( known as Sonny , born 1937 ) , and a younger brother , Michael ( born 1943 ) . The Ochs family was middle class and Jewish , but not religious . His father was distant from his wife and children , and was hospitalized for depression ; he died on April 30 , 1963 , from a cerebral hemorrhage ; His mother died on March 9 , 1994 . 
 As a teenager , Ochs was recognized as a talented clarinet player ; in an evaluation , one music instructor wrote : " You have exceptional musical feeling and the ability to transfer it on your instrument is abundant . " His musical skills allowed him to play clarinet with the orchestra at the Capital University Conservatory of Music in Ohio , where he rose to the status of principal soloist before he was 16 . Although Ochs played classical music , he soon became interested in other sounds he heard on the radio , such as early rock icons Buddy Holly and Elvis Presley and country music artists including Faron Young , Ernest Tubb , Hank Williams , Sr. , and Johnny Cash . Ochs also spent a lot of time at the movies . He especially liked big screen heroes such as John Wayne and Audie Murphy . Later on , he developed an interest in movie rebels , including Marlon Brando and James Dean . 
 From 1956 to 1958 , Ochs was a student at the Staunton Military Academy in rural Virginia , and when he graduated he returned to Columbus and enrolled in the Ohio State University . Unhappy after his first quarter , he took a leave of absence and went to Florida . While in Miami , the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Ochs was jailed for two weeks for sleeping on a park bench , an incident he would later recall : 
 " Somewhere during the course of those fifteen days I decided to become a writer . My primary thought was journalism ... so in a flash I decided — I 'll be a writer and a major in journalism . " 
 Ochs returned to Ohio State to study journalism and developed an interest in politics , with a particular interest in the Cuban Revolution of 1959 . At Ohio State he met Jim Glover , a fellow student who was a devotee of folk music . Glover introduced Ochs to the music of Pete Seeger , Woody Guthrie , and The Weavers . Glover taught Ochs how to play guitar , and they debated politics . Ochs began writing newspaper articles , often on radical themes . When the student paper refused to publish some of his more radical articles , he started his own underground newspaper called The Word . His two main interests , politics and music , soon merged , and Ochs began writing topical political songs . Ochs and Glover formed a duet called " The Singing Socialists " , later renamed " The Sundowners " , but the duo broke up before their first professional performance and Glover went to New York City to become a folksinger . 
 Ochs 's parents and brother had moved from Columbus to Cleveland , and Ochs started to spend more time there , performing professionally at a local folk club called <unk> 's Back Room . He was the opening act for a number of musicians in the summer of 1961 , including the Smothers Brothers . Ochs met folksinger Bob Gibson that summer as well , and according to Dave Van Ronk , Gibson became " the seminal influence " on Ochs 's writing . Ochs continued at Ohio State into his senior year , but was bitterly disappointed at not being appointed editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the college newspaper , and dropped out in his last quarter without graduating . He left for New York , as Glover had , to become a folksinger . 
 = = = 1962 – 1966 = = = 
 Ochs arrived in New York City in 1962 and began performing in numerous small folk nightclubs , eventually becoming an integral part of the Greenwich Village folk music scene . He emerged as an unpolished but passionate vocalist who wrote pointed songs about current events : war , civil rights , labor struggles and other topics . While others described his music as " protest songs " , Ochs preferred the term " topical songs " . 
 Ochs described himself as a " singing journalist " , saying he built his songs from stories he read in Newsweek . By the summer of 1963 he was sufficiently well known in folk circles to be invited to sing at the Newport Folk Festival , where he performed " Too Many Martyrs " ( co @-@ written with Bob Gibson ) , " Talking Birmingham Jam " , and " Power and the Glory " — his patriotic Guthrie @-@ esque anthem that brought the audience to its feet . Other performers at the 1963 folk festival included Peter , Paul and Mary , Joan Baez , Bob Dylan , and Tom Paxton . Ochs 's return appearance at Newport in 1964 , when he performed " Draft Dodger Rag " and other songs , was widely praised . But he was not invited to appear in 1965 , the festival when Dylan infamously performed " Maggie 's Farm " with an electric guitar . Although many in the folk world decried Dylan 's choice , Ochs was amused , and admired Dylan 's courage in defying the folk establishment . 
 During 1963 , Ochs performed at New York 's Carnegie Hall and Town Hall in <unk> . He made his first solo appearance at Carnegie Hall in 1966 . Throughout his career , Ochs would perform at a wide range of venues , including civil rights rallies , anti @-@ war demonstrations , and concert halls . 
 Ochs contributed many songs and articles to the influential Broadside Magazine . He recorded his first three albums for Elektra Records : All the News That 's Fit to Sing ( 1964 ) , I Ain 't Marching Anymore ( 1965 ) , and Phil Ochs in Concert ( 1966 ) . Critics wrote that each album was better than its predecessors , and fans seemed to agree ; record sales increased with each new release . 
 On these records , Ochs was accompanied only by an acoustic guitar . The albums contain many of Ochs 's topical songs , such as " Too Many Martyrs " , " I Ain 't Marching Anymore " , and " Draft Dodger Rag " ; and some musical reinterpretation of older poetry , such as " The Highwayman " ( poem by Alfred Noyes ) and " The Bells " ( poem by Edgar Allan Poe ) . Phil Ochs in Concert includes some more introspective songs , such as " Changes " and " When I 'm Gone " . 
 During the early period of his career , Ochs and Bob Dylan had a friendly rivalry . Dylan said of Ochs , " I just can 't keep up with Phil . And he just keeps getting better and better and better " . On another occasion , when Ochs criticized Can You Please Crawl Out Your Window ? Dylan threw him out of his limousine , saying , " You 're not a folksinger . You 're a journalist " . 
 In 1962 , Ochs married Alice Skinner , who was pregnant with their daughter Meegan , in a City Hall ceremony with Jim Glover as best man and Jean Ray as bridesmaid , and witnessed by Dylan 's sometime girlfriend , Suze Rotolo . Phil and Alice separated in 1965 , but they never divorced . 
 Like many people of his generation , Ochs deeply admired President John F. Kennedy , even though he disagreed with the president on issues such as the Bay of Pigs Invasion , the Cuban Missile Crisis , and the growing involvement of the United States in the Vietnamese civil war . When Kennedy was assassinated on November 22 , 1963 , Ochs wept . He told his wife that he thought he was going to die that night . It was the only time she ever saw Ochs cry . 
 Ochs 's managers during this part of his career were Albert Grossman ( who also managed Dylan and Peter , Paul , and Mary ) followed by Arthur Gorson . Gorson had close ties with such groups as Americans For Democratic Action , the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee , and Students for a Democratic Society . 
 Ochs was writing songs at an amazing pace . Some of the songs he wrote during this period were held back and recorded on his later albums . 
 = = = 1967 – 1969 = = = 
 In 1967 , Ochs — now managed by his brother Michael — left Elektra for A & M Records and moved to Los Angeles , California . He recorded four studio albums for A & M : Pleasures of the Harbor ( 1967 ) , Tape from California ( 1968 ) , Rehearsals for Retirement ( 1969 ) , and the ironically titled Greatest Hits ( 1970 ) ( which actually consisted of all new material ) . For his A & M albums , Ochs moved away from simply produced solo acoustic guitar performances and experimented with ensemble and even orchestral instrumentation , " baroque @-@ folk " , in the hopes of producing a pop @-@ folk hybrid that would be a hit . 
 Critic Robert Christgau , writing in Esquire of Pleasures of the Harbor in May 1968 , did not consider this new direction a good turn . While describing Ochs as " unquestionably a nice guy " , he went on to say , " too bad his voice shows an effective range of about half an octave [ and ] his guitar playing would not suffer much if his right hand were webbed . " " Pleasures of the Harbor " , Christgau continued , " epitomizes the decadence that has infected pop since Sgt. Pepper . [ The ] gaudy musical settings ... inspire nostalgia for the three @-@ chord strum . " With an ironic sense of humor , Ochs included Christgau 's " webbed hand " comment in his 1968 songbook The War is Over on a page titled " The Critics <unk> " , opposite a full @-@ page picture of Ochs standing in a large metal garbage can . Despite his sense of humor , Ochs was unhappy that his work was not receiving the critical acclaim and popular success he had hoped for . Still , Ochs would joke on the back cover of Greatest Hits that there were 50 Phil Ochs fans ( " 50 fans can 't be wrong ! " ) , a sarcastic reference to an Elvis Presley album that bragged of 50 million Elvis fans . 
 None of Ochs 's songs became hits , although " Outside of a Small Circle of Friends " received a good deal of airplay . It reached # 119 on Billboard 's national " Hot Prospect " listing before being pulled from some radio stations because of its lyrics , which sarcastically suggested that " smoking marijuana is more fun than drinking beer " . It was the closest Ochs ever came to the Top 40 . Joan Baez , however , did have a Top Ten hit in the U.K. in August 1965 , reaching # 8 with her cover of Ochs 's song " There but for Fortune " , which was also nominated for a Grammy Award for " Best Folk Recording " . In the U.S. it peaked at # 50 on the Billboard charts — a good showing , but not a hit . 
 Although he was trying new things musically , Ochs did not abandon his protest roots . He was profoundly concerned with the escalation of the Vietnam War , performing tirelessly at anti @-@ war rallies across the country . In 1967 he organized two rallies to declare that " The War Is Over " — " Is everybody sick of this stinking war ? In that case , friends , do what I and thousands of other Americans have done — declare the war over . " — one in Los Angeles in June , the other in New York in November . He continued to write and record anti @-@ war songs , such as " The War Is Over " and " White Boots Marching in a Yellow Land " . Other topical songs of this period include " Outside of a Small Circle of Friends " , inspired by the murder of Kitty Genovese , who was stabbed to death outside of her New York City apartment building while dozens of her neighbors reportedly ignored her cries for help , and " William Butler Yeats Visits Lincoln Park and Escapes <unk> " , about the despair he felt in the aftermath of the Chicago 1968 Democratic National Convention police riot . 
 Ochs was writing more personal songs as well , such as " Crucifixion " , in which he compared the deaths of Jesus Christ and assassinated President John F. Kennedy as part of a " cycle of sacrifice " in which people build up heroes and then celebrate their destruction ; " Chords of Fame " , a warning against the dangers and corruption of fame ; " Pleasures of the Harbor " , a lyrical portrait of a lonely sailor seeking human connection far from home ; and " Boy in Ohio " , a plaintive look back at Ochs 's childhood in Columbus . 
 A lifelong movie fan , Ochs worked the narratives of justice and rebellion that he had seen in films into his music , describing some of his songs as " cinematic " . He was disappointed and bitter when his onetime hero John Wayne embraced the Vietnam War with what Ochs saw as the blind patriotism of Wayne 's 1968 film , The Green Berets : 
 [ H ] ere we have John Wayne , who was a major artistic and psychological figure on the American scene , ... who at one point used to make movies of soldiers who had a certain validity , ... a certain sense of honor [ about ] what the soldier was doing .... Even if it was a cavalry movie doing a historically dishonorable thing to the Indians , even as there was a feeling of what it meant to be a man , what it meant to have some sense of duty .... Now today we have the same actor making his new war movie in a war so hopelessly corrupt that , without seeing the movie , I 'm sure it is perfectly safe to say that it will be an almost technically @-@ robot @-@ view of soldiery , just by definition of how the whole country has deteriorated . And I think it would make a very interesting double feature to show a good old Wayne movie like , say , She Wore a Yellow Ribbon with The Green Berets . Because that would make a very striking comment on what has happened to America in general . 
 Ochs was involved in the creation of the Youth International Party , known as the Yippies , along with Jerry Rubin , Abbie Hoffman , Stew Albert , and Paul Krassner . At the same time , Ochs actively supported Eugene McCarthy 's more mainstream bid for the 1968 Democratic nomination for President , a position at odds with the more radical Yippie point of view . Still , Ochs helped plan the Yippies ' " Festival of Life " which was to take place at the 1968 Democratic National Convention along with demonstrations by other anti @-@ war groups including the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam . Despite warnings that there might be trouble , Ochs went to Chicago both as a guest of the McCarthy campaign and to participate in the demonstrations . He performed in Lincoln Park , Grant Park , and at the Chicago Coliseum , witnessed the violence perpetrated by the Chicago police against the protesters , and was himself arrested at one point . 
 The events of 1968 — the assassinations of Martin Luther King , Jr. and Robert F. Kennedy , the police riot in Chicago , and the election of Richard Nixon — left Ochs feeling disillusioned and depressed . The cover of his 1969 album Rehearsals for Retirement eerily portrays a tombstone with the words : 
 At the trial of the Chicago Seven in December 1969 , Ochs testified for the defense . His testimony included his recitation of the lyrics to his song " I Ain 't Marching Anymore " . On his way out of the courthouse , Ochs sang the song for the press corps ; to Ochs 's amusement , his singing was broadcast that evening by Walter Cronkite on the CBS Evening News . 
 = = = 1970 = = = 
 After the riot in Chicago and the subsequent trial , Ochs changed direction again . The events of 1968 convinced him that the average American was not listening to topical songs or responding to Yippie tactics . Ochs thought that by playing the sort of music that had moved him as a teenager he could speak more directly to the American public . 
 Ochs turned to his musical roots in country music and early rock and roll . He decided he needed to be " part Elvis Presley and part Che Guevara " , so he commissioned a gold lamé suit from Elvis Presley 's costumer <unk> Cohn . Ochs wore the gold suit on the cover of his 1970 album , Greatest Hits , which consisted of new songs largely in rock and country styles . 
 Ochs went on tour wearing the gold suit , backed by a rock band , singing his own material along with medleys of songs by Buddy Holly , Elvis , and Merle Haggard . His fans did not know how to respond . This new Phil Ochs drew a hostile reaction from his audience . Ochs 's March 27 , 1970 , concerts at Carnegie Hall were the most successful , and by the end of that night 's second show Ochs had won over many in the crowd . The show was recorded and released as Gunfight at Carnegie Hall . 
 During this period , Ochs was taking drugs to get through performances . He had been taking Valium for years to help control his nerves , and he was also drinking heavily . Pianist Lincoln Mayorga said of that period , " He was physically abusing himself very badly on that tour . He was drinking a lot of wine and taking uppers . The wine was pulling him one way and the uppers were pulling him another way , and he was kind of a mess . There were so many pharmaceuticals around — so many pills . I 'd never seen anything like that . " Ochs tried to cut back on the pills , but alcohol remained his drug of choice for the rest of his life . 
 Depressed by his lack of widespread appreciation and suffering from writer 's block , Ochs did not record any further albums . He slipped deeper into depression and alcoholism . His personal problems notwithstanding , Ochs performed at the inaugural benefit for Greenpeace on October 16 , 1970 , at the Pacific Coliseum in Vancouver , BC . A recording of his performance , along with performances by Joni Mitchell and James Taylor , was released by Greenpeace in 2009 . 
 = = = 1971 – 1975 = = = 
 In August 1971 , Ochs went to Chile , where Salvador Allende , a Marxist , had been democratically elected in the 1970 election . There he met Chilean folksinger Víctor Jara , an Allende supporter , and the two became friends . In October , Ochs left Chile to visit Argentina . Later that month , after singing at a political rally in Uruguay , he and his American traveling companion David Ifshin were arrested and detained overnight . When the two returned to Argentina , they were arrested as they got off the airplane . After a brief stay in an Argentinian prison , Ochs and Ifshin were sent to Bolivia via a commercial airliner where authorities were to detain them . Ifshin had previously been warned by Argentinian leftist friends that when the authorities sent dissidents to Bolivia , they would disappear forever . When the airliner arrived in Bolivia , the American captain of the Braniff International Airways aircraft allowed Ochs and Ifshin to stay on the aircraft , and barred Bolivian authorities from entering . The aircraft then flew to Peru where the two disembarked and they were not detained . Fearful that Peruvian authorities might arrest him , Ochs returned to the United States a few days later . 
 Ochs was having difficulties writing new songs during this period , but he had occasional breakthroughs . He updated his sarcastic song " Here 's to the State of Mississippi " as " Here 's to the State of Richard Nixon " , with cutting lines such as " the speeches of the Spiro are the ravings of a clown " , a reference to Nixon 's vitriolic vice president , Spiro Agnew — sung as " the speeches of the President are the ravings of a clown " after Agnew 's resignation . 
 Ochs was personally invited by John Lennon to sing at a large benefit at the University of Michigan in December 1971 on behalf of John Sinclair , an activist poet who had been arrested on minor drug charges and given a severe sentence . Ochs performed at the John Sinclair Freedom Rally along with Stevie Wonder , Allen Ginsberg , David Peel , Abbie Hoffman and many others . The rally culminated with Lennon and Yoko Ono , who were making their first public performance in the United States since the breakup of The Beatles . 
 Although the 1968 election had left him deeply disillusioned , Ochs continued to work for the election campaigns of anti @-@ war candidates , such as George McGovern 's unsuccessful Presidential bid in 1972 . 
 In 1972 , Ochs was asked to write the theme song for the film Kansas City Bomber . The task proved difficult , as Ochs struggled to overcome his writer 's block . Although his song was not used in the soundtrack , it was released as a single . 
 Ochs decided to travel . In mid @-@ 1972 , he went to Australia and New Zealand . He traveled to Africa in 1973 , where he visited Ethiopia , Kenya , Tanzania , Malawi , and South Africa . One night , Ochs was attacked and strangled by robbers in Dar es Salaam , Tanzania , which damaged his vocal cords , causing a loss of the top three notes in his vocal range . The attack also exacerbated his growing mental problems , and he became increasingly paranoid . Ochs believed the attack may have been arranged by government agents — perhaps the CIA . Still , he continued his trip , even recording a single in Kenya , " <unk> " . 
 On September 11 , 1973 , the Allende government of Chile was overthrown in a coup d 'état . Allende died during the bombing of the presidential palace , and singer Victor Jara was publicly tortured and killed . When Ochs heard about the manner in which his friend had been killed , he was outraged and decided to organize a benefit concert to bring to public attention the situation in Chile , and raise funds for the people of Chile . The concert , " An Evening with Salvador Allende " , included films of Allende ; singers such as Pete Seeger , Arlo Guthrie , and Bob Dylan ; and political activists such as former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark . Dylan had agreed to perform at the last minute when he heard that the concert had sold so few tickets that it was in danger of being canceled . Once his participation was announced , the event quickly sold out . 
 After the Chile benefit , Ochs and Dylan discussed the possibility of a joint concert tour , playing small nightclubs . Nothing came of the Dylan @-@ Ochs plans , but the idea eventually evolved into Dylan 's Rolling Thunder Revue . 
 The Vietnam War ended on April 30 , 1975 . Ochs planned a final " War Is Over " rally , which was held in New York 's Central Park on May 11 . More than 100 @,@ 000 people came to hear Ochs , joined by Harry Belafonte , Odetta , Pete Seeger and others . Ochs and Joan Baez sang a duet of " There but for Fortune " and he closed with his song " The War Is Over " — finally a true declaration that the war was over . 
 = = = Decline and death = = = 
 Ochs 's drinking became more and more of a problem , and his behavior became increasingly erratic . He frightened his friends both with his drunken rants about the FBI and CIA , and about his claiming to want to have Elvis 's manager Colonel Tom Parker or Kentucky Fried Chicken 's Colonel Sanders manage his career . 
 In mid @-@ 1975 , Ochs took on the identity of John Butler Train . He told people that Train had murdered Ochs , and that he , John Butler Train , had replaced him . Train was convinced that someone was trying to kill him , so he carried a weapon at all times : a hammer , a knife , or a lead pipe . 
 Ochs 's friends tried to help him . His brother Michael attempted to have him committed to a psychiatric hospital . Friends pleaded with him to get help voluntarily . They feared for his safety , because he was getting into fights with bar patrons . Unable to pay his rent , he began living on the streets . 
 After several months , the Train persona faded and Ochs returned , but his talk of suicide disturbed his friends and family . They hoped it was a passing phase , but Ochs was determined . One of his biographers explains Ochs 's motivation : 
 By Phil 's thinking , he had died a long time ago : he had died politically in Chicago in 1968 in the violence of the Democratic National Convention ; he had died professionally in Africa a few years later , when he had been strangled and felt that he could no longer sing ; he had died spiritually when Chile had been overthrown and his friend Victor Jara had been brutally murdered ; and , finally , he had died psychologically at the hands of John Train . 
 In January 1976 , Ochs moved to Far Rockaway , New York , to live with his sister Sonny . He was lethargic ; his only activities were watching television and playing cards with his nephews . Ochs saw a psychiatrist , who diagnosed his bipolar disorder . He was prescribed medication , and he told his sister he was taking it . On April 9 , 1976 , Ochs committed suicide by hanging himself in Sonny 's home . 
 Years after his death , it was revealed that the FBI had a file of nearly 500 pages on Ochs . Much of the information in those files relates to his association with counterculture figures , protest organizers , musicians , and other people described by the FBI as " subversive " . The FBI was often sloppy in collecting information on Ochs : his name was frequently misspelled " Oakes " in their files , and they continued to consider him " potentially dangerous " after his death . 
 Congresswoman Bella Abzug ( Democrat from New York ) , an outspoken anti @-@ war activist herself who had appeared at the 1975 " War is Over " rally , entered this statement into the Congressional Record on April 29 , 1976 : 
 Mr. Speaker , a few weeks ago , a young folksinger whose music personified the protest mood of the 1960s took his own life . Phil Ochs — whose original compositions were compelling moral statements against war in Southeast Asia — apparently felt that he had run out of words . 
 While his tragic action was undoubtedly motivated by terrible personal despair , his death is a political as well as an artistic tragedy . I believe it is indicative of the despair many of the activists of the 1960s are experiencing as they perceive a government which continues the distortion of national priorities that is exemplified in the military budget we have before us . 
 Phil Ochs ' poetic pronouncements were part of a larger effort to galvanize his generation into taking action to prevent war , racism , and poverty . He left us a legacy of important songs that continue to be relevant in 1976 — even though " the war is over " . 
 Just one year ago — during this week of the anniversary of the end of the Vietnam War — Phil recruited entertainers to appear at the " War is Over " celebration in Central Park , at which I spoke . 
 It seems particularly appropriate that this week we should commemorate the contributions of this extraordinary young man . 
 Robert Christgau , who had been so critical of Pleasures of the Harbor and Ochs 's guitar skills eight years earlier , wrote warmly of Ochs in his obituary in the Village Voice . " I came around to liking Phil Ochs ' music , guitar included , " Christgau wrote . " My affection [ for Ochs ] no doubt prejudiced me , so it is worth [ noting ] that many observers who care more for folk music than I do remember both his compositions and his vibrato tenor as close to the peak of the genre . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Almost forty years after his death , Ochs 's songs remain relevant . Ochs continues to influence singers and fans worldwide , most of whom never saw him perform live . There are mailing lists and online discussion groups dedicated to Ochs and his music ; websites that have music samples , photographs , and other links ; and articles and books continue to be written and published about him . 
 His sister Sonny Ochs ( <unk> ) runs a series of " Phil Ochs Song Nights " with a rotating group of performers who keep Ochs 's music and legacy alive by singing his songs in cities across the U.S. Michael Ochs is a photographic archivist of 20th @-@ century music and entertainment personalities . Meegan Lee Ochs worked with Michael to produce a box set of Ochs 's music titled Farewells & Fantasies , the title of which was taken from Ochs 's sign @-@ off on the " postcard " on the back of Tape from California : " Farewells & Fantasies , Folks , P. Ochs " . Meegan has a son named <unk> , Ochs 's only grandchild . Alice Skinner Ochs was a photographer ; she died in November 2010 . 
 In February 2009 , the North American Folk Music and Dance Alliance gave the 2009 Elaine Weissman Lifetime Achievement Award to Phil Ochs . 
 In September 2014 , Meegan Ochs announced that she was donating her father 's archives to the Woody Guthrie Center in Tulsa , Oklahoma . Included are many of his notebooks , journals , videotapes of his performances , the gold lamé suit , photographs , and other documents and memorabilia that Meegan had preserved since his death . 
 = = = Covers and updates = = = 
 Ochs 's songs have been covered by scores of performers , including Joan Baez , Bastro , Cher , Judy Collins , John Denver , Ani DiFranco , Ronnie Gilbert , John Wesley Harding , Jason & the Scorchers , Jim and Jean , Jeannie Lewis , Gordon Lightfoot , Christy Moore , Ray Naylor , Pete Seeger , They Might Be Giants , Eddie Vedder , and The Weakerthans . Wyclef Jean performed " Here 's to the State of Mississippi " in the 2009 documentary Soundtrack for a Revolution . 
 In 1998 , Sliced Bread Records released What 's That I Hear ? : The Songs of Phil Ochs , a two @-@ CD set of 28 covers by artists that includes Eric Andersen , Billy Bragg , John Gorka , Nanci Griffith , Arlo Guthrie , Pat Humphries , Magpie , Tom Paxton , Dave Van Ronk , Sammy Walker , Peter Yarrow , and others . The liner notes indicate that all record company profits from the sale of the set were to be divided between the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation of Southern California and Sing Out ! magazine . 
 Wood Records released an indie rock / experimental rock tribute album titled Poison Ochs : A Tribute to Phil Ochs in 2003 . 
 In 2005 , Kind Of Like Spitting released an album , Learn : The Songs of Phil Ochs , consisting of covers of nine songs written by Ochs , to pay tribute to his music and raise awareness of the artist , whom they felt had been overlooked . 
 Jello Biafra and Mojo Nixon , on their album Prairie Home Invasion , recorded a version of " Love Me , I 'm a Liberal " with lyrics updated to the Clinton era . Evan Greer , part of the Riot @-@ Folk collective , later updated the song for the George W. Bush era . Ryan Harvey , also part of Riot @-@ Folk , remade " Cops Of The World " with updated lyrics . The Clash used some of the lyrics to " United Fruit " in their song " Up in Heaven ( Not Only Here ) " , which appeared on their 1980 album Sandinista ! . During their performance on VH1 Storytellers , Pearl Jam covered " Here 's to the State of Mississippi " with updated lyrics to include Jerry Falwell , Dick Cheney , John Roberts , Alberto Gonzales , and George W. Bush . In 2002 , with the agreement of Ochs 's sister Sonny , Richard Thompson added an extra verse to " I Ain 't Marching Anymore " to reflect recent American foreign policy . Jefferson Starship recorded " I Ain 't Marching Anymore " with additional lyrics by band member Cathy Richardson for their 2008 release Jefferson 's Tree of Liberty . 
 In 2013 Neil Young performed " Changes " at Farm Aid and included it in his 2014 tour set ; it also is the lead track on A Letter Home , his 2014 vinyl album of covers . 
 = = = Tributes = = = 
 On learning of Ochs 's death , Tom Paxton wrote a touching song titled " Phil " , which he recorded for his 1978 album Heroes . Ochs is also the subject of " I Dreamed I Saw Phil Ochs Last Night " , by Billy Bragg , from his 1990 album The Internationale , which was based on the Alfred Hayes / Earl Robinson song " Joe Hill " which Ochs helped popularize ; Ochs also had his own , different song ( " Joe Hill " ) about the early 20th @-@ century union activist / songwriter . " Thin Wild Mercury , " by Peter Cooper and Todd Snider , is about Ochs 's infamous clash with Dylan and getting thrown out of Dylan 's limo . Ochs is mentioned in the Dar Williams song " All My Heroes Are Dead " , the Will Oldham song " <unk> " , the Chumbawamba song " Love Me " , and the They Might Be Giants song " The Day " . The Josh Joplin Group recorded a tribute to Ochs on their album Useful Music . Schooner Fare recorded " Don 't Stop To Rest ( Song for Phil Ochs ) " on their 1981 album Closer to the Wind . Latin Quarter memorialized him in the song " Phil Ochs " on their album Long Pig ( 1993 ) . 
 John Wesley Harding recorded a song titled " Phil Ochs , Bob Dylan , Steve Goodman , David Blue and Me " , the title a reference to the Ochs song " Bach , Beethoven , Mozart and Me " . Singer @-@ songwriter Nanci Griffith wrote a song about Phil entitled " Radio Fragile " . English folk / punk songwriter Al Baker recorded a song about Ochs entitled " All The News That 's Fit To Sing " , a reference to the title of Ochs 's first album . Cajun musician Vic <unk> wrote a song about Ochs entitled " Broadside <unk> " . Singer @-@ songwriter Jen Cass 's " Standing In Your Memory " , and Harry Chapin 's " The Parade 's Still Passing By " are tributes to Ochs . Leslie Fish recorded " Chickasaw Mountain " , which is dedicated to Ochs , on her 1986 album of that name . The punk band Squirrel Bait cited Ochs as a major creative influence in the liner notes of their 1986 album Skag Heaven , and cover his " Tape From California " . Ochs has also influenced Greek folk @-@ rock songwriters ; Dimitris <unk> ' <unk> <unk> ( Unstable Equilibrium ) ( 1987 ) was dedicated to his memory . On the 2005 Kind Of Like Spitting album In the Red , songwriter Ben Barnett included his song " Sheriff Ochs " , which was inspired by reading a biography of Ochs . On April 9 , 2009 , Jim Glover performed a tribute to Ochs at Mother 's Musical Bakery in Sarasota , Florida . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 Among Ochs 's many admirers were the short story writer <unk> D <unk> Pancake and actor Sean Penn . Meegan Lee Ochs , who worked as Sean Penn 's personal assistant from 1983 to 1985 , wrote in her Foreword to Farewells & Fantasies that she and Penn discussed " over many years " the possibility of making a movie about her father ; the plan has not yet come to fruition , although Penn expressed an interest in the project as recently as February 2009 . Author Jim Carroll 's autobiography , The Basketball Diaries ( 1978 ) , was dedicated in memory of Phil Ochs . On the cover of The Go @-@ Betweens ' The Lost Album , Grant McLennan wore a shirt with the words " Get outta the car , Ochs " , a reference to the limousine incident involving Ochs and Dylan . The 1994 film Spanking the Monkey makes reference to Ochs and his suicide . Ochs is mentioned in the Stephen King novels The Tommyknockers and Hearts in Atlantis . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Michael <unk> directed the 1984 biopic Chords of Fame , which featured Bill Burnett as Ochs . The film included interviews with people who had known Ochs , including Yippies Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin , manager Harold Leventhal , and Mike Porco , the owner of Gerde 's Folk City . Chords of Fame also included performances of Ochs songs by folk musicians who knew him , including Bob Gibson , Pete Seeger , Tom Paxton , Dave Van Ronk , and Eric Andersen . 
 Filmmaker Ken Bowser directed the documentary film Phil Ochs : There but for Fortune , which premiered at the 2010 Woodstock Film Festival in Woodstock , New York . Its theatrical run began on January 5 , 2011 , at the IFC Theater in Greenwich Village , New York City , opening in cities around the US and Canada thereafter . The film features extensive archival footage of Ochs and many pivotal events from the 1960s civil rights and peace movements , as well as interviews with friends , family and colleagues who knew Ochs through music and politics . The PBS American Masters series opened its 2012 season with an edited version of the film . 
 In the 2011 film Chicago 8 , Ochs is played by actor Steven <unk> , lead singer of ska bands The Fenwicks & <unk> . 
 = = Professional affiliations = = 
 Ochs was a member of the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists , which is affiliated with the AFL @-@ CIO . 
 The music publishing company Ochs formed with Arthur Gorson , Barricade Music , was an ASCAP company . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums and live recordings = = = 
 = = = Compilations and other albums = = = 
 = Jainism = 
 Jainism ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) , traditionally known as Jain dharma , is an ancient Indian religion belonging to the śramaṇa tradition . It prescribes ahimsa ( non @-@ violence ) towards all living beings to the most possible extent . The three main principles of Jainism are ahimsa , <unk> ( non @-@ absolutism ) , aparigraha ( non @-@ possessiveness ) . Followers of Jainism take five main vows : ahimsa , satya ( not lying ) , asteya ( non stealing ) , brahmacharya ( chastity ) , and aparigraha . Monks follow them completely whereas <unk> ( householders ) observe them partially . Self @-@ discipline and asceticism are thus major focuses of Jainism . <unk> <unk> ( The function of souls is to help one another ) is the motto of Jainism . 
 The word " Jain " derives from the Sanskrit word <unk> ( conqueror ) . A human being who has conquered all inner passions like attachment , desire , anger , pride , greed , etc. is called Jina . Followers of the path practiced and preached by the <unk> are known as Jains . 
 Jains trace their history through a succession of twenty @-@ four teachers and <unk> of the Jain path known as tirthankaras . In the current era , this started with Rishabhanatha and concluded with Mahavira . Jains believe that Jainism is eternal ; it has been and will be forgotten and revived from time to time . Jain philosophy is the oldest Indian philosophy that separates body ( matter ) from the soul ( consciousness ) completely . Jains maintain that all living beings are really soul , intrinsically perfect and immortal . Souls in transmigration ( that is , liability to repeated births and deaths ) are said to be imprisoned in the body . Practitioners believe non @-@ violence and self @-@ control are the means to liberation . Jain texts reject the idea of a creator deity and postulates an eternal universe . Jainism has a very elaborate framework on types of life and includes life @-@ forms that may be invisible . 
 Mahatma Gandhi was greatly influenced by Jainism and adopted many Jain principles in his life . 
 The majority of Jains reside in India . With 4 – 6 million followers , Jainism is smaller than many major world religions . Outside of India , some of the largest Jain communities are found in the United States , Europe , Kenya , and Canada . Contemporary Jainism is divided into two major sects , Digambara and Śvētāmbara . 
 <unk> Mantra is the basic and most common prayer in Jainism . Major Jain festivals include Paryushana ( aka <unk> ) , Mahavir Jayanti and Diwali . 
 = = Main Teachings = = 
 = = = Non @-@ violence ( ahiṃsā ) = = = 
 The principle of ahimsa ( non @-@ violence or non @-@ injury ) is the most fundamental and well @-@ known aspect of Jainism . The everyday implementation of the principle of non @-@ violence is more comprehensive than in other religions and is the hallmark for Jain identity . Jains believe in avoiding harm to others through thoughts ( mana ) , speech ( <unk> ) , and actions ( <unk> ) . According to the Jain text , <unk> <unk> , " killing any living being out of passions is hiṃsā ( injury ) and abstaining from such act is ahimsa ( non @-@ injury ) " . 
 Jains extend the practice of nonviolence not only towards other humans but towards all living beings . For this reason , vegetarianism is a hallmark of Jain identity , with the majority of Jains practicing lacto vegetarianism . If there is violence against animals during the production of dairy products , veganism is encouraged . 
 After humans and animals , insects are the next living being offered protection in Jain practice , with avoidance of intentional harm to insects emphasized . For example , insects in the home are often escorted out instead of killed . Jainism teaches that intentional harm and the absence of compassion make an action more violent . 
 After nonviolence towards humans , animals and insects , Jains make efforts not to injure plants any more than necessary . Although they admit that plants must be destroyed for the sake of food , they accept such violence only as much as it is indispensable for human survival . Strict Jains , including monastics , do not eat root vegetables such as potatoes , onions and garlic because tiny organisms are injured when the plant is pulled up and because a bulb or tuber 's ability to sprout is seen as characteristic of a living being . 
 Jains believe that the intent and emotions behind an act of violence are more important than the action itself . For example , if a person kills another living being out of carelessness and then later regrets the act , the bondage ( bandha ) of karma is less compared to when a person kills the same kind of living being with anger , revenge , etc . A soldier acting in self @-@ defense is a different type of violence from someone killing another person out of hatred or revenge . Violence or war in self @-@ defense may be justified , but this must only be used as a last resort after peaceful measures have been thoroughly exhausted . 
 According to the Jain text , Sarvārthasiddhi , " He who has passions causes injury to himself by himself . Whether injury is then caused to other living beings or not , it is immaterial . " 
 = = = Non @-@ absolutism = = = 
 The second main principle of Jainism is anekāntavāda ( non @-@ absolutism ) . For Jains , non @-@ absolutism means maintaining open @-@ mindedness . This includes the recognition of all perspectives and a humble respect for differences in beliefs . Jainism encourages its adherents to consider the views and beliefs of their rivals and opposing parties . The principle of anekāntavāda influenced Mahatma Gandhi to adopt principles of religious tolerance and ahiṃsā . Anekāntavāda is more formally stated by observing that objects are infinite in their qualities and modes of existence , so they cannot be completely grasped in all aspects and manifestations by finite human perception . Only <unk> ( omniscient beings ) can comprehend objects in all aspects and manifestations ; others are only capable of partial knowledge . Accordingly , no single , specific human view can claim to represent absolute truth . 
 Jains illustrate this theory through the parable of the blind men and an elephant . In this story , each blind man feels a different part of an elephant : its trunk , leg , ear , and so on . All of them claim to understand and explain the true appearance of the elephant , but due to their limited perspectives , can only partly succeed . The concept of anekāntavāda ( non @-@ absolutism ) is further explained by Syādvāda and Nayavāda . 
 Syādvāda and Nayavāda 
 Syādvāda and Nayavāda expand on the concept of anekāntavāda ( non @-@ absolutism ) . Syādvāda recommends the expression of anekānta by prefixing the epithet syād to every phrase or expression . <unk> here means " in some ways " or " from some perspective " . As reality is complex , no single proposition can express its full nature . The term <unk> should therefore be prefixed to each proposition , giving it a conditional point of view and thus removing dogmatism from the statement . There are seven conditioned propositions ( saptibhaṅgī ) in syādvāda . Nayavāda is the theory of partial standpoints or viewpoints . Nayavāda is a compound of two Sanskrit words : naya ( " partial viewpoint " ) and vāda ( " school of thought or debate " ) . It is used to arrive at a certain inference from a point of view . Every object has infinite aspects , but when we describe one in practice , we speak only of relevant aspects and ignore the irrelevant . Nayavāda holds that philosophical disputes arise out of confusion of standpoints , and the standpoints we adopt are " the outcome of purposes that we may pursue " – although we may not realize it . Naya , being a partial expression of truth , enables us to comprehend reality part by part . 
 = = = Non @-@ attachment = = = 
 The third main principle in Jainism is aparigraha ( non @-@ attachment ) or non @-@ grasping and includes non @-@ materialism . Jainism emphasizes taking no more of something than is necessary . While ownership of objects is allowed , non @-@ attachment to possessions is taught . Followers should minimize the tendency to hoard unnecessary material possessions and limit attachment to current possessions . Further , wealth and possessions should be shared and donated whenever possible . <unk> attachment to possessions is said to result in direct harm to oneself and others . 
 Jain texts mention that " attachment to possessions ( parigraha ) is of two kinds : attachment to internal possessions ( <unk> parigraha ) , and attachment to external possessions ( <unk> parigraha ) . The fourteen internal possessions are : 
 wrong belief ; 
 the three sex @-@ passions ( male sex @-@ passion , female sex @-@ passion , neuter sex @-@ passion ) ; 
 the six defects ( laughter , like , dislike , sorrow , fear , disgust ) ; and 
 the four passions ( anger , pride , deceitfulness , greed ) . 
 External possessions are divided into two sub @-@ classes , the non @-@ living and the living . According to Jain texts , both internal and external possessions are proved to be hiṃsā ( injury ) . 
 In Jainism , the non @-@ manifestation of a passion such as attachment is termed ahiṃsā ( non @-@ violence ) , and the manifestation of such a passion is considered hiṃsā ( injury ) . This is said to be the essence of the Jaina scripture . 
 According to the Tattvartha Sutra ( a sacred Jain text ) , " Infatuation is attachment to possessions . " Additionally , Jainism identifies four <unk> passions of the mind : Anger , pride ( ego ) , deceitfulness , greed . It recommends conquering anger by forgiveness , pride by humility , deceitfulness by straight @-@ forwardness and greed by contentment . 
 = = Practices = = 
 = = = Vegetarianism and Fasting = = = 
 Vegetarianism is a hallmark of Jainism , in accordance with the principle of non @-@ violence towards all beings . Strict followers will also limit dairy products , avoid root vegetables and avoid eating after sunset . 
 Jains fast throughout the year , particularly during festivals . This takes on various forms and may be practiced based on one 's ability . Some examples include : eating only one or two meals per day , drinking only water all day , not eating after sunset , not eating processed foods , eating food without sugar / oil / salt . 
 = = = Prayers = = = 
 In Jainism , the purpose of prayer is to break the barriers of worldly attachments and desires and to assist in the liberation of the soul . Jains do not pray for any favors , material goods or rewards . 
 The <unk> Mantra is the fundamental prayer of Jainism and may be recited at any time . In this mantra , Jains worship the qualities ( gunas ) of the spiritually supreme , including those who have already attained salvation , in order to adopt similar behavior . 
 = = = Meditation = = = 
 Jains have developed a type of meditation called sāmāyika , a term derived from the word samaya . The goal of sāmāyika is to achieve a feeling of perfect calmness and to understand the unchanging truth of the self . The preposition sam means one state of being . To become one is samaya . <unk> is aimed at developing equanimity and to refrain from injury . <unk> is particularly important during the Paryushana religious festival . It is believed that meditation will assist in managing and balancing one 's passions . Great emphasis is placed on the internal control of thoughts , as they influence behavior , actions and goals . 
 Jains follow six duties known as <unk> : <unk> ( practising serenity ) , <unk> ( praising the tirthankara ) , <unk> ( respecting teachers and monks ) , <unk> ( introspection ) , kayotsarga ( stillness ) , and <unk> ( renunciation ) . 
 Jain texts prescribe meditation on twelve forms of contemplation ( bhāvanā ) for those who wish to stop the influx of karmas that extend transmigration . These twelve reflections as mentioned in ancient Jain texts , like <unk> , Sarvārthasiddhi , Puruşārthasiddhyupāya are : 
 <unk> bhāvanā – the transitoriness of the world ; 
 <unk> bhāvanā – the helplessness of the soul ; 
 saṃsāra – the pain and suffering implied in transmigration ; 
 <unk> bhāvanā – the inability of another to share one 's suffering and sorrow ; 
 <unk> bhāvanā – the distinctiveness between the body and the soul ; 
 <unk> bhāvanā – the filthiness of the body ; 
 āsrava bhāvanā – influx of karmic matter ; 
 <unk> bhāvanā – stoppage of karmic matter ; 
 nirjarā bhāvanā – gradual shedding of karmic matter ; 
 loka bhāvanā – the form and divisions of the universe and the nature of the conditions prevailing in the different regions – heavens , hells , and the like ; 
 <unk> bhāvanā – the extreme difficulty in obtaining human birth and , subsequently , in attaining true faith ; and 
 dharma bhāvanā – the truth promulgated by Tirthankaras . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 Paryushana or <unk> is the most important annual event for Jains , and is usually celebrated in August or September . It lasts 8 – 10 days and is a time when lay people increase their level of spiritual intensity often using fasting and prayer / meditation to help . The five main vows are emphasized during this time . There are no set rules , and followers are encouraged to practice according to their ability and desires . The last day involves a focused prayer / meditation session known as <unk> <unk> . At the conclusion of the festival , followers request forgiveness from others for any offenses committed during the last year . Forgiveness is asked by saying <unk> <unk> to others , which means , " If I have offended you in any way , knowingly or unknowingly , in thought , word or action , then I seek your forgiveness . " The literal meaning of Paryushana is " abiding " or " coming together " . 
 Mahavir Jayanti , the birth of Mahāvīra , the last tirthankara of this era , is usually celebrated in late March or early April based on the lunar calendar . Diwali is a festival that marks the anniversary of Mahāvīra 's attainment of moksha . The Hindu festival of Diwali is also celebrated on the same date ( <unk> amavasya ) . Diwali is celebrated in an atmosphere of austerity , simplicity , serenity , equity , calmness , charity , philanthropy , and environmental consciousness . Jain temples , homes , offices , and shops are decorated with lights and <unk> ( small oil lamps ) . The lights are symbolic of knowledge or removal of ignorance . Sweets are often distributed . On Diwali morning , <unk> <unk> is offered after praying to Mahāvīra in all Jain temples all across the world . The new Jain year starts right after Diwali . Some other festivals celebrated by Jains are Akshaya Tritiya and Raksha Bandhan . 
 = = = Rituals = = = 
 There are many Jain rituals in the various sects of Jainism . The basic worship ritual practised by Jains is " seeing " ( <unk> ) of pure self in Jina idols . One example related to the five life events of the tirthankaras called the Panch Kalyanaka are rituals such as the Panch Kalyanaka <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> puja , and <unk> puja . Jains practices include performing abhisheka ( ceremonial bath ) of the images . 
 = = = Pilgrimages = = = 
 Jain pilgrim ( Tirtha ) sites include : 
 <unk> – Site of the moksha of an arihant ( <unk> ) or Tirthankara , such as Mount Kailash , <unk> , <unk> , Pawapuri and <unk> ( capital of Anga ) . 
 <unk> – Locations where divine events have occurred , such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Jain Temple , <unk> . 
 <unk> – Places associated with lives of great men , such as Ayodhya , <unk> , Hastinapur , and <unk> . 
 <unk> – Places associated with famous acharyas , or centers of learning , such as Shravanabelagola . 
 = = = Monasticism = = = 
 In Jainism , monasticism is encouraged and respected . Monks and nuns live extremely austere and ascetic lifestyles . They follow the five main vows strictly and observe complete abstinence . Jain monks and nuns have neither a permanent home nor any possessions . They do not use vehicles and always travel barefoot from one place to another , irrespective of the distance . They wander from place to place except during the months of Chaturmas . They do not prepare food and live only on what people offer them . Digambara monks and nuns carry a broom @-@ like object , called a picchi ( made from fallen peacock feathers ) to sweep the ground ahead of them or before sitting down to avoid inadvertently crushing small insects . Svetambara monks carry a <unk> ( a broom @-@ like object made from dense , thick thread strands ) . Jain monks have to follow six duties known as <unk> : sāmāyika ( practising serenity ) , <unk> ( praising the tirthankara ) , <unk> ( respecting teachers and monks ) , <unk> ( introspection ) , kayotsarga ( stillness ) , and <unk> ( renunciation ) . 
 The monks of Jainism , whose presence is not needed for most Jain rituals , should not be confused with priests . However , some sects of Jainism often employ a pujari , who need not be a Jain , to perform special daily rituals and other priestly duties at the temple . 
 = = Ethics = = 
 The Jain ethical code prescribes seven supplementary vows and a last sallekhana vow . The supplementary vows include three <unk> vratas ( merit vows ) and four <unk> vratas . 
 Jainism encourages spiritual development through cultivation of personal wisdom and self @-@ control through five main vows : 
 1 . Ahimsa : Ahimsa means nonviolence or non @-@ injury . The first major vow taken by Jains is to cause no harm to living beings . It involves minimizing intentional and unintentional harm to other living creatures by actions , speech or thoughts . The vow of ahiṃsā is considered the foremost among the ' five vows of Jainism ' . 
 2 . Satya : Satya means truth . This vow is to always speak the truth . Given that nonviolence has priority , other principles yield to it whenever they conflict : in a situation where speaking truth could lead to violence , silence may be observed . 
 3 . Asteya : Asteya means not stealing . Jains should not take anything that is not willingly offered . Attempting to extort material wealth from others or to exploit the weak is considered theft . Fair value should be given for all goods and services purchased . 
 4 . Brahmacharya : Brahmacharya means chastity for laymen and celibacy for Jain monks and nuns . This requires the exercise of control over the senses to control indulgence in sexual activity . 
 5 . Aparigraha : Aparigraha means non @-@ possessiveness . This includes non @-@ materialism and non @-@ attachment to objects , places and people . Jain monks and nuns completely renounce property and social relations . 
 Monks and nuns are obligated to practice the five cardinal principles of nonviolence , truthfulness , not stealing , celibacy , and non @-@ possessiveness very strictly , while laymen are encouraged to observe them within their current practical limitations . 
 The sallekhana ( or <unk> ) vow is observed by Jains at the end of their life . In this vow , there is voluntary and gradual reduction of food and liquid intake under some conditions . These condition are : 
 Severe famine 
 Incurable disease 
 Great disability 
 Old age or when a person is nearing his end . 
 Sallekhana is seen as spiritual detachment requiring a great deal of spiritual accomplishment and maturity and a declaration that a person is finished with this world and has chosen to leave . Jains believe this allows one to achieve death with dignity and dispassion along with a great reduction of negative karma . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 = = = <unk> ( Substance ) = = = 
 According to Jainism , there are six simple substances in existence , namely , Soul , Matter , Time , Space , Dharma and Adharma . Jain philosophers distinguish a substance from a body ( or thing ) by declaring the former to be a simple element or reality and the latter a compound of one or more substances or atoms . They claim that there can be a partial or total destruction of a body or thing , but no substance can ever be destroyed . According to <unk> Rai Jain : 
 Substance is the sub @-@ <unk> of qualities which cannot exist apart from it , for instance , the quality of fluidity , moisture , and the like only exist in water and cannot be conceived separately from it . It is neither possible to create nor to destroy a substance , which means that there never was a time when the existing substances were not , nor shall they ever cease to be . 
 = = = = Jīva ( soul ) = = = = 
 The soul @-@ substance , called Jīva in Jainism , is distinguished from the remaining five substances ( Matter , Time , Space , Dharma and Adharma ) , collectively called <unk> , by the intelligence with which the soul @-@ substance is endowed , and which is not found in the other substances . The nature of the soul @-@ substance is said to be freedom . In its modifications , it is said to be the subject of knowledge and enjoyment , or suffering , in varying degrees , according to its circumstances . Jain texts expound that all living beings are really soul , intrinsically perfect and immortal . Souls in transmigration are said to be embodied in the body as if in a prison . 
 = = = = <unk> ( Non @-@ Soul ) = = = = 
 Matter ( <unk> ) is considered a non @-@ intelligent substance consisting of an infinity of particles or atoms which are eternal . These atoms are said to possess sensible qualities , namely , taste , smell , color and , in certain forms , touch and sound . 
 Time is said to be the cause of continuity and succession . It is of two kinds : <unk> and <unk> 
 Space ( <unk> ) - Space is divided by the Jainas into two parts , namely , the <unk> , that is the space occupied by the universe , and the <unk> , the portion beyond the universe . The <unk> is the portion in which are to be found the remaining five substances , i.e. , souls , Matter , Time , Dharma and Adharma ; but the <unk> is the region of pure space containing no other substance and lying stretched on all sides beyond bounds of the three worlds ( the entire universe ) . 
 Dharma and Adharma are substances said to be helpful in the motion and stationary states of things , respectively , the former enabling them to move from place to place and the latter to come to rest from the condition of motion . 
 = = = Tattva ( Reality ) = = = 
 Jain philosophy is based on seven fundamentals which are known as tattva , which attempt to explain the nature of karmas and provide solutions for the ultimate goal of liberation of the soul ( moksha ) : These are : 
 Jīva – the soul , which is characterized by consciousness 
 <unk> – non @-@ living entities that consist of matter , space and time 
 <unk> ( influx ) – the inflow of auspicious and evil karmic matter into the soul 
 Bandha ( bondage ) – mutual intermingling of the soul and karmas . The karma masks the jiva and restricts it from reaching its true potential of perfect knowledge and perception . 
 <unk> ( stoppage ) – obstruction of the inflow of karmic matter into the soul 
 <unk> ( gradual dissociation ) – the separation or falling off of part of karmic matter from the soul 
 Moksha ( liberation ) – complete annihilation of all karmic matter ( bound with any particular soul ) 
 = = = Soul and Karma = = = 
 According to Jain belief , souls , intrinsically pure , possess the qualities of infinite knowledge , infinite perception , infinite bliss , and infinite energy in their ideal state . In reality , however , these qualities are found to be obstructed due to the soul 's association with karmic matter . The ultimate goal in Jainism is the realization of reality . 
 The relationship between the soul and karma is explained by the analogy of gold . Gold is always found mixed with impurities in its natural state . Similarly , the ideal pure state of the soul is always mixed with the impurities of karma . Just like gold , purification of the soul may be achieved if the proper methods of refining are applied . The Jain karmic theory is used to attach responsibility to individual action and is cited to explain inequalities , suffering and pain . Tirthankara @-@ nama @-@ karma is a special type of karma , bondage of which raises a soul to the supreme status of a tirthankara . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Jain texts state that there are ten vitalities or life @-@ principles : the five senses , energy , respiration , life @-@ duration , the organ of speech , and the mind . The table below summarizes the vitalities that living beings possess in accordance with their senses . 
 = = = Cosmology = = = 
 Jain texts propound that the universe was never created , nor will it ever cease to exist . It is independent and self @-@ sufficient , and does not require any superior power to govern it . Elaborate descriptions of the shape and function of the physical and metaphysical universe , and its constituents , are provided in the canonical Jain texts , in commentaries and in the writings of the Jain philosopher @-@ monks . 
 According to the Jain texts , the universe is divided into three parts , the upper , middle , and lower worlds , called respectively <unk> loka , madhya loka , and <unk> loka . It is made up of six constituents : Jīva , the living entity ; <unk> , matter ; Dharma tattva , the substance responsible for motion ; Adharma tattva , the substance responsible for rest ; <unk> , space ; and Kāla , time . 
 Kāla ( time ) is without beginning and eternal ; the cosmic wheel of time , called <unk> , rotates ceaselessly . According to Jain texts , in this part of the universe , there is rise and fall during the six periods of the two aeons of regeneration and degeneration . Thus , the worldly cycle of time is divided into two parts or half @-@ cycles , ascending ( utsarpiṇī ) and descending ( avasarpiṇī ) . <unk> is a period of progressive prosperity , where happiness increases , while avasarpiṇī is a period of increasing sorrow and immorality . According to Jain cosmology , currently we are in the 5th ara of avasarpiṇī ( half time cycle of degeneration ) . As of 2016 , exactly 2 @,@ 538 years have elapsed , and 18 @,@ 460 years are still left . The present age is one of sorrow and misery . In this ara , though religion is practiced in lax and diluted form , no liberation is possible . At the end of this ara , even the Jain religion will disappear , only to appear again with the advent of the first Tīrthankara after the 42 @,@ 000 years of next utsarpiṇī are over . 
 The following table depicts the six <unk> of avasarpiṇī 
 This trend will start reversing at the onset of <unk> <unk> with the <unk> @-@ <unk> ara being the first ara of <unk> ( half @-@ time cycle of regeneration ) . 
 According to Jain texts , sixty @-@ three illustrious beings , called <unk> , are born on this earth in every <unk> @-@ <unk> ara . The Jain universal history is a compilation of the deeds of these illustrious persons . They comprise twenty @-@ four <unk> , twelve chakravartins , nine balabhadra , nine narayana , and nine pratinarayana . 
 A <unk> is an emperor of the world and lord of the material realm . Though he possesses worldly power , he often finds his ambitions dwarfed by the vastness of the cosmos . Jain puranas give a list of twelve chakravartins ( universal monarchs ) . They are golden in complexion . One of the greatest chakravartins mentioned in Jain scriptures is Bharata Chakravartin . Jain texts like Harivamsa Purana and Hindu Texts like Vishnu Purana mention that India came to be known as <unk> in his memory . 
 There are nine sets of balabhadra , narayana , and pratinarayana . The balabhadra and narayana are brothers . Balabhadra are nonviolent heroes , narayana are violent heroes , and pratinarayana can be described as villains . According to the legends , the narayana ultimately kill the pratinarayana . Of the nine balabhadra , eight attain liberation and the last goes to heaven . On death , the narayana go to hell on account of their violent exploits , even if these were intended to uphold righteousness . 
 = = = Epistemology = = = 
 According to the Jain text Tattvartha sutra , <unk> ( knowledge ) is of five kinds : 
 Kevala Jnana ( <unk> ) 
 <unk> Jñāna ( Scriptural Knowledge ) 
 Mati Jñāna ( Sensory Knowledge ) 
 Avadhi Jñāna ( <unk> ) 
 Manah <unk> Jñāna ( <unk> ) 
 The first two are regarded as indirect knowledge and the remaining three as direct knowledge . 
 = = = Agamas = = = 
 After the attainment of Kevala <unk> ( omniscience ) , the tirthankara discourses in a divine preaching hall called <unk> . The discourse delivered is called <unk> <unk> and comprises eleven angas and fourteen <unk> . The discourse is recorded by <unk> ( chief disciples ) , and is composed of twelve angas ( departments ) . It is generally represented by a tree with twelve branches . 
 Historically , the Jain Agamas were based on the teachings of Mahāvīra , the last Tīrthankara of the present half cycle . The Agamas were memorised and passed on through the ages . They were lost because of famine that caused the death of several saints within a thousand years of Mahāvīra 's death . These comprise thirty @-@ two works : eleven <unk> , twelve <unk> <unk> , four <unk> , four <unk> , and the last , a <unk> , or <unk> sūtra . 
 = = Liberation and Godhood = = 
 = = = The Path to Liberation = = = 
 Jainism is also called Moksha Marga ( the Path to Liberation ) . The very first aphorism of the Jain text Tattvartha sutra is : " Right faith , right knowledge , and right conduct ( together ) constitute the path to liberation . " 
 Prof. S. A. Jain in his book Reality writes : 
 Perfect release from all karmas is liberation . The path to liberation is the method by which it can be attained . The singular ' path ' is used in order to indicate that all the three together constitute the path to liberation . This <unk> the views that each of these singly constitutes a path . Hence it must be understood that these three ‍ — ‌ right faith , right knowledge and right conduct ‍ — ‌ together constitute the direct path to liberation . 
 The following three jewels of Jainism constitute the threefold path to liberation : 
 Right View ( samyak darśana ) – Belief in substances like soul ( Ātman ) and non @-@ soul without delusions . 
 Right Knowledge ( samyak jnana ) – Knowledge of the substances ( tattvas ) without any doubt or misapprehension . 
 Right Conduct ( samyak charitra ) – Being free from attachment , a right believer does not commit hiṃsā ( injury ) . 
 = = = Stages on the Path = = = 
 In Jain philosophy , the fourteen stages through which a soul must pass in order to attain liberation ( moksha ) are called <unk> . These are : 
 At the second @-@ to @-@ last stage , a soul destroys all inimical karmas , including the knowledge @-@ obscuring karma which results in the manifestation of infinite knowledge ( Kevala Jnana ) , which is said to be the true nature of every soul . 
 Those who pass the last stage are called siddha and become fully established in Right Faith , Right Knowledge and Right Conduct . According to Jain texts , after the total destruction of karmas the released pure soul ( Siddha ) goes up to the summit of universe ( <unk> ) and dwells there in eternal bliss . 
 The soul removes its ignorance ( <unk> ) at the 4th stage , <unk> ( <unk> ) at the 6th stage , passions ( <unk> ) at the 12th stage , and yoga ( activities of body , mind and speech ) at the 14th stage , and thus attains liberation . 
 = = = God = = = 
 Jain texts reject the idea of a creator or destroyer God and postulate an eternal universe . Jain cosmology divides the worldly cycle of time into two parts ( avasarpiṇī and utsarpiṇī ) . According to Jain belief , in every half @-@ cycle of time , twenty @-@ four Tīrthankaras grace this part of the Universe to teach the unchanging doctrine of right faith , right knowledge and right conduct . The word Tīrthankara signifies the founder of a tirtha , which means a fordable passage across a sea . The Tīrthankaras show the ' fordable path ' across the sea of interminable births and deaths . Rishabhanatha is said to be the first Tīrthankara of the present half @-@ cycle ( avasarpiṇī ) . Mahāvīra ( 6th century BC ) is revered as the last Tīrthankara of avasarpiṇī . Though Jain texts explain that Jainism has always existed and will always exist , modern historians place the earliest evidence of Jainism in the 9th century BC . 
 In Jainism , perfect souls with the body are called Arihant ( victors ) and perfect souls without the body are called <unk> ( liberated souls ) . Tirthankara is an Arihant who helps others to achieve liberation . Tirthankaras become role models for those seeking liberation . They are also called human spiritual guides . They reorganise the four @-@ fold order that consists of male ascetics ( muni ) , female ascetics ( <unk> ) , laymen ( śrāvaka ) and laywomen ( <unk> ) . Jainism has been described as a <unk> religion , as it does not teach the dependency on any supreme being for enlightenment . The tirthankara is a guide and teacher who points the way to enlightenment , but the struggle for enlightenment is one 's own . The following two verses of the <unk> <unk> expound the definition of God according to Jainism : 
 In the nature of things the true God should be free from the faults and weaknesses of the lower nature ; [ he should be ] the knower of all things and the revealer of dharma ; in no other way can divinity be constituted . ( 1 – 5 ) 
 He alone is free from hunger , thirst , senility , disease , birth , death , fear , pride , attachment , aversion , infatuation , worry , conceit , hatred , uneasiness , sweat , sleep and surprise is called a God . ( 1 – 6 ) 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The origins of Jainism are obscure . Jainism is a philosophy of eternity , and Jains believe their religion to be eternal . <unk> is said to be the founder of Jainism in the present half cycle . Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan , the first Vice President of India wrote : 
 There is evidence to show that so far back as the first century B.C. there were people who were worshipping <unk> , the first <unk> . There is no doubt that Jainism prevailed even before Vardhamāna or <unk> . The Yajurveda mentions the name of three <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The <unk> Purāṇa endorses the view that <unk> was the founder of Jainism . 
 Further , he believed that Jainism was much older than Hinduism : 
 There is nothing wonderful in my saying that Jainism was in existence long before the Vedas were composed . 
 And in the first volume of The Cultural Heritage of India : 
 The Jains claim a great antiquity for their religion . Their earliest prophet was <unk> , who is mentioned even in the Vishnu and <unk> Puranas as belonging to a very remote past . In the earliest Brahmanic literature are found traces of the existence of a religious Order . 
 Jains revere <unk> Mahāvīra ( 6th century BCE ) as the twenty @-@ fourth tirthankara of this era . He appears in the tradition as one who , from the beginning , had followed a religion established long ago . 
 Parshvanatha , predecessor of Mahāvīra and the twenty @-@ third tirthankara was a historical figure . He lived in the 9th century BCE . 
 On antiquity of Jainism , Dr. Heinrich Zimmer was of the view that : 
 There is truth in the Jaina idea that their religion goes back to a remote antiquity , the antiquity in question being that of the pre @-@ Aryan so called Dravidian period , which has recently been dramatically illuminated by the discovery of a series of great Late stone Age cities in the Indus Valley , dating from the third and perhaps even fourth millennium B.C. 
 There is inscriptional evidence for the presence of Jain monks in south India by the second or first centuries BC , and archaeological evidence of Jain monks in Saurashtra in Gujarat by the second century CE . 
 = = = Royal patronage = = = 
 The ancient city Pithunda , capital of Kalinga ( modern Odisha ) , is described in the Jain text <unk> Sutra as an important centre at the time of Mahāvīra , and was frequented by merchants from Champa . Rishabhanatha , the first tirthankara , was revered and worshiped in Pithunda and was known as the Kalinga Jina . <unk> Nanda ( c . 450 – 362 BCE ) conquered Kalinga and took a statue of Rishabha from Pithunda to his capital in Magadha . Jainism is said to have flourished under the Nanda Empire . 
 The Maurya Empire came to power after the downfall of the Nanda . The first Mauryan emperor , Chandragupta Maurya ( c . 322 – 298 BCE ) , became a Jain in the latter part of his life . He was a disciple of Bhadrabahu , the last <unk> @-@ <unk> ( knower of all " Jain Agamas " ) , who migrated to South India . <unk> ( c . 224 – 215 BCE ) ( grandson of the Maurya emperor Ashoka ) is said to have been converted to Jainism by a Jain monk named <unk> . After his conversion he was credited with actively spreading Jainism to many parts of India and beyond , both by making it possible for monks to travel to barbarian lands , and by building and renovating thousands of temples and establishing millions of icons . He ruled a place called Ujjain . 
 In the 1st century BCE , Emperor Kharavela , of the <unk> dynasty of Kalinga , invaded Magadha . He retrieved Rishabha 's statue and installed it in <unk> , near his capital <unk> . According to Michael Tobias , he was a Jain ruler , who was also a military victor . However , according to Helmuth von <unk> , this cannot be said with certainty : Kharavela was probably a free @-@ thinker who patronized all his subjects , including Jains . 
 Xuanzang ( 629 – 645 CE ) , a Chinese traveller , notes that there were numerous Jains present in Kalinga during his time . The Udayagiri and <unk> Caves near Bhubaneswar , Odisha , are the only surviving stone Jain monuments in Orissa . 
 King <unk> ( c . 720 – 780 CE ) of the <unk> dynasty in northern Gujarat , raised by a Jain monk named <unk> Suri , supported Jainism during his rule . The king of Kannauj Ama ( c . 8th century CE ) was converted to Jainism by <unk> , a disciple of the famous Jain monk Siddhasena <unk> . <unk> also converted <unk> , the friend of Ama who authored a famous Prakrit epic titled <unk> . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Once a major religion , Jainism declined due to a number of factors , including proselytising by other religious groups , persecution , withdrawal of royal patronage , sectarian fragmentation and the absence of central leadership . Since the time of Mahāvīra , Jainism faced rivalry with Buddhism and the various Hindu sects . The Jains suffered isolated violent persecutions by these groups , but the main factor responsible for the decline of their religion was the success of Hindu reformist movements . Around the 7th century , Shaivism saw considerable growth at the expense of Jainism due to the efforts of the Shaivite saints like Sambandar and Appar . 
 Royal patronage has been a key factor in the growth as well as decline of Jainism . The Pallava king Mahendravarman I ( 600 – 630 CE ) converted from Jainism to Shaivism under the influence of Appar . His work <unk> <unk> ridicules certain Shaiva sects and the Buddhists and also expresses contempt towards Jain ascetics . Sambandar converted the contemporary Pandya king to Shaivism . During the 11th century , Basava , a minister to the Jain king Bijjala , succeeded in converting numerous Jains to the Lingayat Shaivite sect . The Lingayats destroyed various temples belonging to Jains and adapted them to their use . The Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana ( c . 1108 – 1152 CE ) became a follower of the Vaishnava sect under the influence of Ramanuja , after which Vaishnavism grew rapidly in what is now Karnataka . As the Hindu sects grew , the Jains compromised by following Hindu rituals and customs and invoking Hindu deities in Jain literature . 
 There are several legends about the massacre of Jains in ancient times . The Buddhist king Ashoka ( 304 – 232 BCE ) is said to have ordered killings of 18 @,@ 000 Jains or <unk> after someone drew a picture of Buddha bowing at the feet of Mahāvīra . The Shaivite king Koon Pandiyan , who briefly converted to Jainism , is said to have ordered a massacre of 8 @,@ 000 Jains after his re @-@ conversion to Shaivism . However , these legends are not found in the Jain texts , and appear to be fabricated propaganda by Buddhists and <unk> . Such stories of destruction of one sect by another sect were common at the time , and were used as a way to prove the superiority of one sect over the other . Another such legend about Vishnuvardhana ordering the Jains to be crushed in an oil mill does not appear to be historically true . 
 The decline of Jainism continued after the Muslim conquests on the Indian subcontinent . The Muslims rulers , such as Mahmud Ghazni ( 1001 ) , Mohammad Ghori ( 1175 ) and Ala @-@ ud @-@ din Muhammed Shah Khilji ( 1298 ) further oppressed the Jain community . They vandalised idols and destroyed temples or converted them into mosques . They also burned the Jain books and killed Jains . Some conversions were peaceful , however ; Pir Mahabir <unk> ( c . 13th century CE ) is well known for his peaceful propagation of Islam . The Jains also enjoyed amicable relations with the rulers of the tributary Vedic Hindu kingdoms during this period ; however , their number and influence had diminished significantly due to their rivalry with the Shaivite and <unk> sects . 
 = = Community = = 
 The majority of Jains currently reside in India . With 4 – 6 million followers ( 0 @.@ 1 % ) , Jainism is relatively small compared to major world religions . Jains form 0 @.@ 37 % of India 's population . Most of the Jains are concentrated in the states of Maharashtra ( 31 @.@ 46 % of Indian Jains ) , Rajasthan ( 13 @.@ 97 % ) , Gujarat ( 13 @.@ 02 % ) and Madhya Pradesh ( 12 @.@ 74 % ) . Karnataka ( 9 @.@ 89 % ) , Uttar Pradesh ( 4 @.@ 79 % ) , Delhi ( 3 @.@ 73 % ) and Tamil Nadu ( 2 @.@ 01 % ) also have significant Jain populations . Outside of India , large Jain communities can be found in the United States and Europe . Several Jain temples have been built in both of these places . Smaller Jain communities also exist in Kenya and Canada . Jains developed a system of philosophy and ethics that had a great impact on Indian culture . They have contributed to the culture and language in the Indian states of Tamil Nadu , Karnataka , and Maharashtra . 
 Jains encourage their monastics to do research and obtain higher education . Monks and nuns , particularly in Rajasthan , have published numerous research monographs . According to the 2001 Indian census , Jains have the highest degree of literacy of any religious community in India ( 94 @.@ 1 percent ) , and their manuscript libraries are the oldest in the country . Jain libraries , including those at Patan and Jaisalmer , have a large number of well @-@ preserved manuscripts . 
 = = Schools and branches = = 
 The Jain community is divided into two major denominations , Digambara and Śvētāmbara . Monks of the Digambara ( " sky @-@ clad " ) tradition do not wear clothes . Female monastics of the Digambara sect wear unstitched plain white sarees and are referred to as <unk> . Śvētāmbara ( " white @-@ clad " ) monastics on the other hand , wear white seamless clothes . 
 During Chandragupta Maurya 's reign , Acharya Bhadrabahu , the last <unk> @-@ <unk> ( all knowing by hearsay , that is indirectly ) predicted a twelve @-@ year @-@ long famine and moved to Karnataka with his disciples . <unk> , a pupil of Acharya Bhadrabahu , stayed in Magadha . After the famine , when followers of Acharya Bhadrabahu returned , they found that those who stayed at Magadha had started wearing white clothes , which was unacceptable to the others who remained naked . This is how the Digambara and Śvētāmbara schism began , with the Digambara being naked while the Svetambara were white clothed . Digambara saw this as being opposed to the Jain tenets which , according to them , required complete nudity . Evidence of gymnosophists ( " naked philosophers " ) in Greek records as early as the fourth century BCE supports the claim of the Digambaras that they have preserved the ancient <unk> practice . 
 The earliest record of Digambara beliefs is contained in the Prakrit <unk> of the Digambara Acharya , Kundakunda ( c . 2nd century CE ) . Digambaras believe that Mahāvīra remained unmarried , whereas Śvētāmbara believe that Mahāvīra married a woman who bore him a daughter . The <unk> believe women may attain liberation and that the tirthankara <unk> was female . 
 Excavations at Mathura revealed Jain statues from the time of the Kushan Empire ( c . 1st century CE ) . Tirthankara represented without clothes , and monks with cloth wrapped around the left arm , are identified as the <unk> ( " half @-@ clothed " ) mentioned in texts . The <unk> , believed to have originated from the <unk> , followed Digambara nudity along with several Śvētāmbara beliefs . 
 = = Jain literature = = 
 The Digambara sect of Jainism maintains that the Agamas were lost during the same famine in which the <unk> were lost . According to the Digambaras , Āchārya Bhutabali was the last ascetic who had partial knowledge of the original canon . Later on , some learned Āchāryas started to restore , compile , and put into written words the teachings of Mahāvīra , that were the subject matter of <unk> . Āchārya <unk> , in the first century CE , guided two Āchāryas , Āchārya <unk> and Āchārya Bhutabali , to put these teachings in written form . The two Āchāryas wrote , on palm leaves , Ṣaṭkhaṅḍāgama – among the oldest @-@ known Digambara Jaina texts . Digambara texts include two main texts , four Pratham @-@ <unk> , three <unk> @-@ anuyoga , four <unk> @-@ anuyoga and twelve dravya @-@ anuyoga . 
 Some of the most famous Jain texts include <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> . 
 Some scholars believe that the author of the oldest extant work of literature in Tamil ( 3rd century BCE ) , the Tolkāppiyam , was a Jain . The Tirukkuṛaḷ by Thiruvalluvar is considered to be the work of a Jain by scholars such as Ka . Naa . Subramanyam , V. <unk> , Vaiyapuri Pillai , and P. S. Sundaram . It emphatically supports vegetarianism in chapter 26 and states that giving up animal sacrifice is worth more than a thousand offerings in fire in verse 259 . 
 The <unk> ( a famous Tamil poetic work ) was composed by Jain monks from South India in 100 – 500 . 
 The Silappatikaram , the earliest surviving epic in Tamil literature , was written by a Jain , <unk> Adigal . This epic is a major work in Tamil literature , describing the historical events of its time and also of the then @-@ prevailing religions , Jainism , Buddhism and Shaivism . 
 According to George L. Hart , who holds the endowed Chair in Tamil Studies at the University of California , Berkeley , has written that the legend of the Tamil Sangams or " literary assemblies " , was based on the Jain <unk> at Madurai : " There was a permanent Jaina assembly called a Sangha established about 604 A.D. in Madurai . It seems likely that this assembly was the model upon which tradition fabricated the Sangam legend . " 
 Jain scholars and poets authored Tamil classics of the Sangam period , such as the <unk> <unk> and <unk> . In the beginning of the mediaeval period , between the 9th and 13th centuries , Kannada authors were predominantly Jains and <unk> . Jains were the earliest known cultivators of Kannada literature , which they dominated until the 12th century . Jains wrote about the tirthankaras and other aspects of the faith . Adikavi Pampa is one of the greatest Kannada poets . Court poet to the Chalukya king Arikesari , a Rashtrakuta feudatory , he is best known for his Vikramarjuna Vijaya . 
 = = Art and architecture = = 
 Jainism has contributed significantly to Indian art and architecture . Jains mainly depict tirthankara or other important people in a seated or standing meditative posture . Yakshas and <unk> , attendant spirits who guard the tirthankara , are usually shown with them . Figures on various seals from the Indus Valley Civilisation bear similarity to Jain images , nude and in a meditative posture . The earliest known Jain image is in the Patna museum . It is approximately dated to the 3rd century BCE . Bronze images of <unk> can be seen in the Prince of Wales Museum , Mumbai , and in the Patna museum ; these are dated to the 2nd century BCE . 
 The Jain tower in Chittor , Rajasthan , is a good example of Jain architecture . Decorated manuscripts are preserved in Jain libraries , containing diagrams from Jain cosmology . Most of the paintings and illustrations depict historical events , known as Panch Kalyanaka , from the life of the tirthankara . Rishabha , the first tirthankara , is usually depicted in either the lotus position or kayotsarga , the standing position . He is distinguished from other tirthankara by the long locks of hair falling to his shoulders . Bull images also appear in his sculptures . In paintings , incidents from his life , like his marriage and Indra 's marking his forehead , are depicted . Other paintings show him presenting a pottery bowl to his followers ; he is also seen painting a house , weaving , and being visited by his mother <unk> . Each of the twenty @-@ four tirthankara is associated with distinctive emblems , which are listed in such texts as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 There are 26 caves , 200 stone beds , 60 inscriptions and over 100 sculptures in and around Madurai . This is also the site where Jain ascetics of yesteryear wrote great epics and books on grammar in Tamil . 
 = = = Temples = = = 
 Remnants of ancient Jain temples and cave temples can be found all around India . Notable among these are the Jain caves at <unk> Hills near <unk> ( <unk> ) in Madhya Pradesh and Ellora in Maharashtra , and the Jain temples at <unk> near Mount Abu , Rajasthan . 
 The <unk> cave temple is regarded as one of the finest examples of Jain art . It is the oldest and most famous Jain centre in the region . It possesses both an early Jain cave shelter , and a medieval rock @-@ cut temple with excellent fresco paintings comparable to <unk> paintings ; the steep hill contains an isolated but spacious cavern . Locally , this cavern is known as <unk> , a name that is derived from the seven holes cut into the rock that serve as steps leading to the shelter . Within the cave there are seventeen stone beds aligned into rows , and each of these has a raised portion that could have served as a pillow @-@ loft . The largest stone bed has a distinct Tamil @-@ <unk> inscription assignable to the 2nd century BCE , and some inscriptions belonging to the 8th century BCE are also found on the nearby beds . The <unk> cavern continued to be the " Holy Sramana Abode " until the 7th and 8th centuries . Inscriptions over the remaining stone beds name mendicants such as Tol <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Sri <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , sri <unk> and <unk> <unk> as monks . 
 The 8th century <unk> temple marks the revival of Jainism in South India . 
 = = = Statues and sculptures = = = 
 A monolithic , 18 @-@ metre ( 59 @-@ foot ) statue of Bahubali , referred to as <unk> , built by the Ganga minister and commander Chavundaraya , is situated on a hilltop in Shravanabelagola in the Hassan district of Karnataka state . This statue was voted as the first in the SMS poll Seven Wonders of India conducted by The Times of India . A Statue of Ahimsa ( depicting Rishabhanatha ) was erected in Nashik district in 2015 which is 33 m ( 108 ft ) tall . 
 A large number of <unk> , votive tablets for offerings and the worship of Tīrthankara , were excavated from <unk> Tila , Mathura . 
 = = = Symbols = = = 
 Swastika 
 The Swastika is an important Jain symbol . The four arms of the swastika symbolize the four states of existence according to Jainism : 
 Heavenly being ( devas ) 
 Human being 
 <unk> being 
 <unk> ( subhuman like flora or fauna ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 Like all religions , Jainism is criticized and praised for some of its practices and beliefs . 
 Mahatma Gandhi was greatly influenced by Jainism , adopting the Jain principles of asceticism , compassion for all forms of life , the importance of vows for self @-@ discipline , vegetarianism , fasting for self @-@ purification , and mutual tolerance among people of different creeds . Mahatma Gandhi said : 
 No religion in the World has explained the principle of Ahimsa so deeply and systematically as is discussed with its applicability in every human life in Jainism . As and when the benevolent principle of Ahimsa or non @-@ violence will be ascribed for practice by the people of the world to achieve their end of life in this world and beyond . Jainism is sure to have the uppermost status and Mahāvīra is sure to be respected as the greatest authority on Ahimsa . 
 Swami Vivekananda appreciated the role of Jainism in the development of Indian religious philosophy . In his words , he asks : 
 What could have saved Indian society from the ponderous burden of <unk> ritualistic <unk> , with its animal and other sacrifices , which all but crushed the very life of it , except the Jain revolution which took its strong stand exclusively on chaste morals and philosophical truths ? 
 = Hensley & Co . = 
 Hensley & Co . , also known as Hensley Beverage Company , is an Anheuser @-@ Busch beer wholesaler and distributor headquartered in the West Phoenix area of Phoenix , Arizona . It markets to the Phoenix , Tempe , and Prescott Valley areas . It is the third @-@ largest Anheuser @-@ Busch distributor in the United States and one of the largest privately held companies in Arizona . It is arguably the best @-@ known beer distributorship in America . 
 The company was founded in 1955 by Arizona businessman Jim Hensley and steadily grew based upon population growth in the region and a close arrangement with Anheuser @-@ Busch . Following Hensley 's death in 2000 , his daughter Cindy Hensley McCain became the controlling owner . Hensley & Co. maintains an active presence in the Phoenix area in terms of sponsorships and charitable giving . Its representatives have held high positions in several city and state business groups and the company is active in political discussions that affect the industry . 
 = = Business history = = 
 The company was founded in January 1955 by Arizona businessman Jim Hensley on a $ 10 @,@ 000 loan . It originally had 12 workers , sold 73 @,@ 000 cases of beer a year ( a case typically being twenty @-@ four 12 @-@ oz. bottles or cans ) , and had a 6 percent market share . While it initially handled many brands of beer , Hensley accepted an offer later in 1955 to become Anheuser @-@ Busch 's sole distributor for Maricopa County in return for selling only that brand . Under the names Hensley & Company Distributors and Hensley & Company Wholesale , the company saw decades of steady growth , aided by the Phoenix area becoming one of the fastest @-@ growing regions of the country while the company still maintained exclusivity with Anheuser @-@ Busch . Jim Hensley 's tireless sales efforts and the generous wages and benefits he gave employees were also key success factors . Regarding technology , Hensley & Co. were the first Anheuser @-@ Busch distributor to invest in refrigerated warehouses , which subsequently became standard in the industry . By 1970 , Hensley & Co. had a 20 percent market share ; by 1980 , that had grown to 50 percent , the business had become quite successful , and Jim Hensley was a multi @-@ millionaire . 
 In 1981 , Jim Hensley 's new son @-@ in @-@ law John McCain , recently married to daughter Cindy Hensley McCain and retired from the United States Navy , was hired as Vice President of Public Relations . McCain soon left to begin his Congressional career . In 1993 , the company consolidated operations under the name Hensley & Company . 
 Robert Delgado , who had been with the company since 1975 , was named president in 1994 — assuming day @-@ to @-@ day control of the business — and later was named CEO , while Jim Hensley remained chairman . The company also acquired real estate holdings throughout Arizona . John McCain 's son Andrew , from his first marriage , joined the firm around 1997 ; his MBA and banking experience would lead to his later becoming the company 's CFO and COO . 
 At the time of his death in 2000 , Jim Hensley held most of the controlling stock ; annual revenues were over $ 220 million on 20 million cases of beer sold . Cindy Hensley McCain , who had been a vice president , became the controlling stockholder — she , her children , and Andrew McCain together control 68 percent of the company — and chair of the board . As chair , her role takes the form of remote consultations with Delgado on major initiatives such as new products , new plants , employee welfare , or charitable giving , rather than of an active physical presence . She is categorized by Anheuser @-@ Busch as an absentee owner , and Delgado is required to have complete control over business operations and investment decisions . Anheuser @-@ Busch inquired about buying the distributorship in the early 2000s , preferring not to have absentee owners , but she declined ( all other beer <unk> in the U.S. are privately owned as well ) . 
 By 2007 Hensley employed 650 people , sold about 23 million cases of beer a year to over 5 @,@ 000 retail accounts producing revenues of $ 340 million , and a 60 percent or more market share in its target area . Beverage industry analysts estimated the company 's value in 2008 at more than $ 250 million . Despite the late @-@ 2000s recession , which resulted in a rare decline in sales volume for the company , revenues rose slightly to $ 350 million by 2009 and employment was still 650 in 2010 . It subsequently rose to 800 by 2015 . The company said it had record revenues in 2014 but did not disclose the amount . The company 's workforce is dominated by men in their twenties . The company 's facilities include its own printing shop . It operates a fleet of some 750 trucks and other vehicles and conducts its own training program for commercial driver 's licenses . 
 The company 's Phoenix distribution plant occupies a number of acres and is marked by a giant Budweiser sign . In addition to beer , Hensley also distributes energy drinks , root beer , liquor , and wines , some of which are distributed from a warehouse in Tucson . The move into wines was accelerated by the acquisition of Phoenix @-@ based <unk> Fine Wines Ltd. in 2010 . Via the holding company King Aviation , Hensley also owns and operates Cessna Citation Excel aircraft . Over half the beer sold in the Phoenix area is from Anheuser @-@ Busch , making it one of their better markets nationally . Both companies benefit when major sports events are held in the area , such as Super Bowl XLIX . The beer distribution business and the Phoenix market for it are very competitive ; some Anheuser @-@ Busch distributors eventually ended their exclusive arrangements with the beer maker , while for a while Hensley had no plans to do so . However in 2009 it did so , in part this being associated with Hensley 's move into selling craft beers , an emerging force in the market . In such regard Hensley worked with Four Peaks Brewery among others . By 2015 Hensley sold some 850 drinks and brands from around the world and had around 8 @,@ 000 retail customers in the Phoenix area . 
 = = Political activities = = 
 Between 1982 and 2000 , the company contributed $ 80 @,@ 000 to John McCain 's political campaigns ; from 2001 to 2006 , the company and its employees would contribute an additional $ 24 @,@ 000 . In Congress , McCain recused himself on legislation involving alcohol issues . 
 In the late 1980s , Jim Hensley was active in legislative battles against neo @-@ prohibitionist movements . In 1992 , a former Anheuser @-@ Busch lobbyist accused Hensley & Co. of illegal " bundling " of contributions to state legislators . Hensley denied the claim , which was later withdrawn by the lobbyist with no charges filed . 
 Hensley & Co. holds a seat on the board of the National Beer Wholesalers Association , and company spokesperson Douglas <unk> is the association 's Arizona director . Company executives have contributed heavily to the association 's funding . Hensley executives have been active in successfully convincing the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau to not require alcohol content displays for beer labels . In the early 2000s , Hensley sought unsuccessfully to keep liquor makers from entering the flavored malt beverage market , while it began distributing such beverages itself , including Anheuser @-@ Busch 's Tilt . During the 2010s , Hensley supported proposed state legislation that , within the rigid three @-@ tier framework of producers , distributors , and retailers , would relax production caps on craft breweries with respect to how much beer they can make and " self @-@ distribute " , in the belief that such relief would help such breweries grow bigger and eventually need Hensley 's distribution services . 
 Hensley & Co. has continued to be a strong presence in Arizona politics , opposing liquor tax increases in all circumstances , including those targeted for childhood education and children 's hospitals . <unk> has also been an officer of the Arizona Chamber of Commerce & Industry , which backed John McCain 's successful bid for re @-@ election in 2010 . In 2008 , Andrew McCain was chairman of the Greater Phoenix Chamber of Commerce , where he focused the group 's attention on the state 's budget deficit , possible transportation initiatives , and immigration reform . 
 Like many businesses in the state , Hensley got caught up in the controversy surrounding the Arizona SB 1070 anti @-@ illegal immigration law , with the group Somos America advocating a boycott of Hensley until the company denounced the law . The company called the action " an obvious cheap political stunt motivated solely by self promotion " and said that " Hensley Beverage Company / Budweiser will continue to embrace and encourage the wonderful diversity of our state " . The boycott gained little attention . Later that year , Hensley and Delgado joined the Partnership for a New American Economy , an effort started by Michael Bloomberg to push towards comprehensive immigration reform , and in early 2011 Delgado signed a letter from a number of Arizona CEOs directed at Arizona State Senator Russell Pearce requesting that the legislature back off any more anti @-@ illegal immigration measures . 
 = = Community involvements = = 
 Hensley engages in various local sports sponsorships , including for Phoenix International Raceway . Andrew McCain has served on the board of directors of the Fiesta Bowl and for 2014 – 15 was named chairman of the bowl . 
 Hensley is a major contributor to charity in the Phoenix metropolitan area , donating about $ 1 million per year to various causes and starting the Hensley Employee Foundation in 2001 . In addition , the company has helped promote safe ride businesses in an effort to avoid drunk driving incidents . Another event is the Budweiser Shootout Golf Tournament , held in conjunction with the Arizona State University Hispanic Business Alumni since 1991 , which has raised over $ 1 million for Latino student scholarships in the area . Hensley & Co. has also been a supporter of the Phoenix gay community , sponsoring events by the Phoenix Lesbian and Gay Pride Committee , and Cindy McCain and her daughter Meghan McCain were outspoken proponents of the NOH8 Campaign . 
 = Judaism in Rugrats = 
 The animated television series Rugrats has been noted for its portrayal of Judaism , a dynamic rarely portrayed in American animated programming during the series ' broadcast run ( 1991 – 2004 ) . Two episodes of the series are devoted to Jewish holidays and explaining their history , and the Pickles family is shown to be part @-@ Jewish . 
 The first Rugrats Jewish holiday special was suggested to the production staff in 1992 by Nickelodeon executives as a special devoted to Hanukkah . Germain instead refashioned it into a Passover episode and the series did not explore a Hanukkah special until 1996 . Critical reaction to Jewish themes in Rugrats was largely positive . Each holiday special achieved high viewing numbers according to Nielsen Media Research and received positive reviews . However , Jewish character Grandpa Boris ' portrayal in a 1998 Rugrats comic strip was criticized by the Anti @-@ Defamation League for apparent antisemitism . 
 = = Jewish themes = = 
 In Rugrats , the root of Jewish themes stem from Boris and Minka Kropotkin , the maternal grandparents of infant Tommy Pickles . Boris and Minka follow traditional Jewish practices and speak in heavy Yiddish accents . Tommy and the Pickles family therefore partake in several Jewish activities throughout the series , particularly through holidays . 
 The first occurrence of this is in the episode " A Rugrats Passover , " which originally aired in the United States on April 13 , 1995 . In the episode , Tommy and the rest of the Rugrats , accompanied by their respective parents , attend a Passover seder hosted by Boris and Minka . Boris and Minka have an argument and Boris storms off to the attic , where the Rugrats find him and discover they are now locked in . To pass time , Boris recites the story of Passover . The Rugrats imagine that they are the characters in the story , including Tommy as Moses and his mean @-@ spirited cousin Angelica as the Pharaoh of Egypt . 
 In " A Rugrats Chanukah , " which originally aired on December 4 , 1996 , Minka regales the Rugrats with the tale of Hanukkah 's origins , and once more the infants cast themselves as the characters in their imagination . Meanwhile , Boris is outraged at being recast as Judah <unk> in a Hanukkah pageant and even more so that his old rival Schlomo will be playing the Greek king . 
 More subtle Jewish references are also included in other aspects of the Rugrats franchise . In The Rugrats Movie , the 1998 film based on the series , Tommy is prepared to pour banana baby food on his infant brother Dil , which would attract a group of vicious monkeys who would likely harm the young baby ; the scene parallels the Sacrifice of Isaac , a primal covenant in Jewish studies . 
 = = Background = = 
 Boris and Minka were based on the Eastern European great aunts and uncles of Rugrats co @-@ creator Arlene Klasky , who herself is Jewish . Including Jewish themes in the series was deemed essential by Klasky ; in particular , she believed that making Didi Jewish and Tommy 's father Stu a Christian was a crucial dynamic , as " it was important to show that difference between family . " Klasky herself grew up with a Jewish mother and a non @-@ Jewish father . 
 Boris and Minka first appeared in the series ' first episode , " Tommy 's First Birthday " . Melanie Chartoff , voice of Minka and Jewish herself , had already been cast to play Didi when she was called by her agent to try out for a second voice role on the series as Minka . When given the description of the character , Chartoff felt she was incredibly cliched , but still wanted to try out for the role . When reading her lines , she found it difficult to grasp the character 's personality , as " Although the show had been created by Jews , this script had clearly not been written by them ; " so she took a break so she could do research into her family memorabilia and conceive a personality to reflect in the character 's voice . 
 In 1992 , Nickelodeon executives pitched the idea of making a Chanukah special to the Rugrats production team . Germain , however , responded with a Passover special instead , as he considered it to be a " funny idea " and of " historical interest " . While scripting the episode , now entitled " A Rugrats Passover " , the writers were forced to audit many elements of the portrayal of the Ten Plagues , particularly the last one , so that the episode would remain accessible to children and not too frightening . Due to the overall success of " A Rugrats Passover , " the Rugrats staff decided to revisit the Hanukkah special and created " A Rugrats Chanukah . " One of the co @-@ writers of the episode , David Weiss , had converted from Christianity to Judaism shortly before penning the teleplay . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rugrats was unusual among contemporary animations in its attention to Jewish ritual and tradition . " A Rugrats Passover " ' s portrayal of a Seder dinner received press attention as a rare occurrence in children 's programming . The episode also marked the first Passover special Nickelodeon had broadcast , while " A Rugrats Chanukah " marked the first televised animated Hanukkah program . 
 Fan reaction to Jewish themes in Rugrats have been overwhelmingly positive . " A Rugrats Passover " and " A Rugrats Chanukah " are two of the most popular episodes in the series broadcast run . The Passover special achieved a Nielsen Rating of 3 @.@ 1 with a 4 @.@ 8 % share of American viewers , making it the sixth most watched American telecast that week . The Hanukkah special , meanwhile , received a 7 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating in Kids 2 – 11 , the show 's key demographic . Chartoff received an abundance of fan letters praising the series for detailing Judaism in sensitive fashion . She only received one complaint , from her mother , who claimed that the characterizations of Boris and Minka were anti @-@ Semitic . 
 Critically , Rugrats ' treatment of Judaism has also been acclaimed . Danny Goldberg wrote in his book How The Left Lost Teen Spirit : " I cannot think of any other TV show , animated or otherwise , in which Jewish traditions were so clearly expressed in the context of a mass appeal entertainment [ than in Rugrats ] . " Authors Michael Atkinson and Laurel Shifrin , in their book Flickipedia : Perfect Films for Every Occasion , Holiday , Mood , Ordeal , and Whim praised the series for celebrating " secular Jewishness in the wisest and most entertaining fashion " . TV Guide listed " A Rugrats Chanukah " number 5 in their 1999 " 10 Best Classic Family Holiday Specials " list , opining that with the episode , " Nickelodeon 's Rugrats secured its place in television history . " Jewish online magazine <unk> listed Tommy as the number 1 fictional Jewish character of all time . They also wrote that if someone had yet to see either one of the holiday specials , their " Jewish education is incomplete . " 
 The series has received several accolades for its Jewish themes . In 2001 , Rugrats won a Jewish Image Award for " Outstanding Achievement . " " A Rugrats Passover " itself received three nominations from different television award programs . It was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the category " Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) , " but lost to The Simpsons episode " Lisa 's Wedding . " At the 23rd Annual Annie Awards it was nominated in the category " Best Individual Achievement for Writing in the Field of Animation , " but was beaten by the episode " The Tick vs. Arthur ’ s Band Account " from Fox Kids ' animated series The Tick . In 1995 , it was Rugrats ' submission for a CableACE award ; it received a nomination but did not win . In 2007 the Sherwin Miller Museum of Jewish Art in Tulsa , Oklahoma opened an exhibition of Biblical images in art and pop culture , including a poster for Let My Babies Go ! : A Passover Story , the picture book based on " A Rugrats Passover " . 
 However , the Anti @-@ Defamation League ( ADL ) criticized the design of Grandpa Boris and charged it with being anti @-@ Semitic . The controversy erupted when a 1998 Rugrats comic strip was published , featuring Boris in a synagogue reciting the Mourner 's Kaddish . The ADL issued a statement saying that the design resembled Nazi @-@ era depictions of Jews , and the fact that the character was reciting the sacred prayer perverted its solemnity . The Washington Post , the newspaper who published the strip , issued a similar statement in their Editor 's Note section , criticizing Nickelodeon for not showing better judgment in editing the strip . 
 Though former Nickelodeon president Albie Hecht , a Jew himself , was dumbfounded by the accusation and deemed it absurd , Herb Scannell , president of the company in 1998 , responded to the complaints and apologized to ADL . Scannell issued a statement promising that neither the strip nor the character would ever be published again . In the statement , he also noted , " Unfortunately , the creators of the strip made an error in judgment by referencing the Kaddish . I agree with you that , however well @-@ meaning , the use of the Kaddish in the comic strip was inappropriate . " Abraham H. Foxman , ADL National Director , responded via a press release in which they thanked Scannell for his speedy response and commended the company in general for understanding the issue at hand ; Foxman concluded by saying , " We appreciate Nickelodeon ’ s long record of creative and quality programming and understand that it was not their intention to offend . " 
 = Griffon ( roller coaster ) = 
 Griffon is a steel Dive Coaster roller coaster located at the Busch Gardens Williamsburg amusement park in James City County , Virginia , United States . Designed by Bolliger & Mabillard , it is 205 feet ( 62 m ) high , and is the second @-@ fastest ( 71 miles per hour ( 114 km / h ) ) Dive Coaster built . The roller coaster features two Immelmann loops , a splashdown , two vertical drops and was the first of its kind to use floorless trains . Griffon was announced to the public on August 23 , 2006 and opened on May 18 , 2007 to positive reviews by both newspapers and enthusiasts . In 2007 , Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards voted it the third @-@ best new steel roller coaster of that year and the 27th @-@ best steel roller coaster . It was voted the 33rd @-@ best steel roller coaster in 2013 . 
 = = History = = 
 On June 30 , 2006 , Busch Gardens <unk> announced that LeMans Raceway would be closing to the public on July 5 , 2006 in order to make room for the next year 's new attraction . Construction for Griffon began the next day with the demolishing of the raceway . A trademark for the name " Griffon " was filed by SeaWorld Parks & Entertainment on July 12 , 2006 . The roller coaster was announced to the public on August 23 , 2006 . On December 11 , 2006 , two cranes installed the highest piece of Griffon with an evergreen tree . The vertical drop and immelmann loop were completed in January 2007 and the final piece of track was installed in late February . After testing was complete , the roller coaster opened on May 18 , 2007 ; one week earlier than its original scheduled opening date . 
 When Griffon opened it 2007 , it held the records for the tallest , and fastest Dive Coaster in the world ; both which were previously held by SheiKra at Busch Gardens Tampa Bay . Griffon was also the first Dive Coaster to feature floorless trains and is the only roller coaster of its kind to have more than one inversion . In 2009 , Diving Coaster opened Happy Valley Shanghai , it took the drop length record at 213 @.@ 3 feet ( 65 @.@ 0 m ) . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 After the floors drop and the front gate opens , the train is dispatched from the station and makes a downward right turn immediately followed by an upward right turn which leads directly to 45 @-@ degree inclined chain lift hill . Once the train reaches the top of the 205 @-@ foot ( 62 m ) lift , it makes a right turn into a holding brake where the train slowly moves over the first drop ( which is 205 @-@ foot ( 62 m ) ) , stops for a few seconds , and then is released down the 90 degree drop . By the time the train makes it to the bottom of the drop , it reaches its maximum speed of 71 miles per hour ( 114 km / h ) . Then , the train enters an immelmann loop before dropping back to the ground and making a banked upward left turn into the mid course brake run . After the train slows down , it enters a second 130 @-@ foot ( 40 m ) 90 degree drop into another immelmann loop . Following a small airtime hill , the train goes through a splashdown which sprays two 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) lines of water in the air . Finally , the train makes a banked turn to the left leading into the final brake run . One cycle of the ride lasts about three minutes . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The steel track of Griffon is 3 @,@ 108 feet ( 947 m ) long and the lift is approximately 205 feet ( 62 m ) high . The ride is equipped with an elevator that can return riders to ground level if a train must be evacuated while on the lift hill . Both the track and supports are blue ; however , the track uses a darker shade . The track was fabricated by Clermont Steel Fabricators in Batavia , Ohio , which manufactures Bolliger & Mabillard 's roller coasters . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Griffon operates with three steel and fiberglass trains , colored red , yellow , and black . Each train has three rows that seat ten riders across for a total of 30 riders per train ; each seat has its own individual over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraint with a seatbelt . This configuration allows the ride to achieve a theoretical hourly capacity of 1 @,@ 400 riders per hour . Unlike traditional roller coasters , Griffon 's trains are floorless , allowing the riders ' legs to dangle throughout the ride . Riders also experience up to 4 times the force of gravity . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Preston Wong from Hampton Roads said , " [ The floorless trains ] giv [ e ] riders a sense of vulnerability and , for those in the front row , an idea of what it must feel like to fly " and that enthusiasts would like the ride . Nicole <unk> , Lisa Deaderick , and Joe Atkinson from Daily Press each rated the roller coaster for its vomiting and scream factors . Nicole and Lisa rated the vomiting factor a one ( out of five ) for the roller coaster 's smoothness ; Joe gave a four as he began feeling ill after his second ride . For the scream factor Nicole gave a five , Lisa gave a ten , and Joe gave a four . Mike from NewsPlusNotes praised the first drop for its freefall experience . 
 In Griffon 's opening year , it was voted the third best new ride for 2007 and the 27th best steel roller coaster in Amusement Today 's Golden Ticket Awards . The roller coaster peaked at position 19 in 2010 when it tied with SheiKra , another Dive Coaster . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's Best Steel Roller Coaster Poll , Griffon was voted as the 13th best steel roller coaster in the world in its first year ; its highest position in the poll to date . 
 Griffon has also made several television appearances . It was featured on Discovery Channel 's television series Build It Bigger and Travel Channel 's television series ' Bert the Conqueror and Insane Coaster Wars : World Domination . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 On August 5 , 2010 , five riders who sustained minor injuries were sent to a hospital after being hit with a 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) balloon while riding the roller coaster . The balloon was in the process of being deflated when it broke free and was carried into Griffon 's path due to strong winds . 
 = The Terminator = 
 The Terminator is a 1984 American science fiction action @-@ thriller film written and directed by James Cameron , produced by Hemdale Film Corporation and distributed by Orion Pictures . It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as the Terminator , a cyborg assassin sent back in time from 2029 to 1984 to kill Sarah Connor ( Linda Hamilton ) , whose son will one day become a savior against machines in a post @-@ apocalyptic future . Michael Biehn plays Kyle Reese , a soldier from the future sent back in time to protect Connor . 
 Though not expected to be a success , The Terminator topped the American box office for two weeks and helped launch the film career of Cameron and solidify that of Schwarzenegger . It received critical acclaim , with many praising its pacing , action scenes and Schwarzenegger 's role . Its success led to a franchise consisting of four sequels ( Terminator 2 : Judgment Day , Terminator 3 : Rise of the Machines , Terminator Salvation and Terminator Genisys ) , a television series , comic books , novels and video games . In 2008 , The Terminator was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the American National Film Registry , being deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1984 Los Angeles , a Terminator , a cyborg assassin programmed to kill a young woman named Sarah Connor , arrives from the future . Shortly afterwards , Kyle Reese , a soldier sent to protect Connor from the Terminator , arrives . After the Terminator kills several people ( including two other women named Sarah Connor listed in the telephone directory ) , it tracks Sarah to a nightclub . Kyle arrives and saves Sarah from the Terminator . The two steal a car and escape while the Terminator steals a police car and pursues them . 
 Kyle explains to Sarah that , in the near future , an artificial intelligence defense network known as Skynet will become self @-@ aware and initiate a nuclear holocaust . He says that Sarah 's yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ conceived son John will rally the survivors and lead a resistance movement against Skynet and its army of machines . With the Resistance on the verge of victory , Skynet has sent a Terminator back in time to kill Sarah before John is born , in order to avert the formation of the Resistance . The Terminator is an efficient killing machine with a powerful metal endoskeleton and an external layer of living tissue that makes it appear human . 
 After Kyle and Sarah are again pursued by the Terminator , they are apprehended by the police , but the Terminator escapes . Kyle is questioned by criminal psychologist Dr. Silberman , who concludes that Kyle is paranoid and delusional , while Sarah is questioned by Lieutenant Traxler and Sergeant Vukovich . The Terminator repairs its body and attacks the police station , killing many police officers — including Traxler and Vukovich — in its attempt to locate Sarah . Sarah and Kyle escape and spend the night under a bridge before seeking refuge in a motel , where they assemble pipe bombs . Sarah realizes that the Terminator will find them again , and they are not safe , no matter where they go . Kyle admits that he has been in love with Sarah since John gave him a photograph of her . Sarah reciprocates Kyle 's feelings and they have sex . 
 The Terminator tracks them to the motel and Kyle and Sarah escape in a pickup truck . In the ensuing chase , Kyle throws pipe bombs at the Terminator , but is wounded by the Terminator 's gunfire . Sarah knocks the Terminator off its motorcycle , but loses control of the pickup truck , which flips over . The Terminator hijacks a truck , but Kyle slides a pipe bomb onto its trailer , causing an explosion . The Terminator emerges from the flames with its artificial flesh completely destroyed . 
 The chase continues to a factory . Kyle activates the factory machinery to confuse the Terminator and attacks it with a metal pipe , but it knocks him down . In a daze , he jams his final pipe bomb into the Terminator 's abdomen . The bomb blows apart the Terminator , seemingly destroying it , injuring Sarah , and , for an unknown reason , kills Kyle . As she grieves over Kyle , the Terminator , now a one @-@ armed , legless torso , reactivates and grabs her . She breaks free of its grip and crawls away , luring it into a hydraulic press which she activates , crushing and finally deactivating it . 
 Months later , a pregnant Sarah is traveling through Mexico , recording audio tapes to pass on to her unborn son , John . She debates whether to tell him that Kyle is his father . At a gas station , a boy takes a Polaroid photograph of her which she purchases — the same photograph that John will give to Kyle . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Arnold Schwarzenegger as the The Terminator / T @-@ 800 Model 101 , a cybernetic android disguised as a human being sent back in time to assassinate Sarah Connor . 
 Michael Biehn as Kyle Reese , a human Resistance fighter sent back in time to protect Sarah . 
 Linda Hamilton as Sarah Connor , the Terminator 's target who is soon to be the mother of the future Resistance leader John Connor . 
 Paul Winfield as Ed Traxler , a police Lieutenant who questions Sarah . 
 Lance Henriksen as Hal Vukovich , a police Sergeant who questions Sarah . 
 Earl Boen as Dr. Peter Silberman , a criminal psychologist . 
 Bess Motta as Ginger Ventura , Sarah 's roommate . 
 Rick <unk> as Matt Buchanan , Ginger 's boyfriend . 
 Additional actors included Dick Miller as the gun @-@ shop clerk ; professional bodybuilder Franco <unk> ( Schwarzenegger 's friend and workout partner ) as a Terminator in 2029 ; Bill Paxton and Brian Thompson as punks who are confronted by the Terminator ; and Marianne <unk> as one of the other women with the name " Sarah Connor " who was shot by the Terminator . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In Rome , Italy , during the release of Piranha II : The Spawning , director Cameron fell ill and had a dream about a metallic torso dragging itself from an explosion while holding kitchen knives . " My contemporaries were all doing slasher @-@ horror movies , " Cameron said . " John Carpenter was the guy I idolized the most . He made Halloween for $ 30 @,@ 000 or something . That was everyone 's break @-@ in dream , to do a stylish horror movie . [ Cameron 's nightmare ] was a very slasher film type image . And it really was the launching pad for the story . " When Cameron returned to Pomona , California , he stayed at Randall Frakes ' home where he wrote a draft for The Terminator . Cameron later stated that his influences while writing the script were 1950s science fiction films and episodes of The Outer Limits as well as contemporary films including The Driver and Mad Max 2 . To translate the draft into a script , Cameron enlisted his friend Bill Wisher , who had a similar approach to storytelling . Cameron gave Wisher the early scenes involving Sarah Connor and the police department scenes to write . As Wisher lived far away from Cameron , the two communicated script ideas by recording tapes of what they wrote by telephone . 
 Cameron 's agent resented the idea for The Terminator and requested that he work on something else . After this , Cameron dismissed his agent . The initial outline of the script involved two Terminators being sent to the past . The first was similar to the Terminator in the film , while the second was made of liquid metal and could not be destroyed with conventional weaponry . Cameron could not think of a good way to depict this robot , stating that he " was seeing things in his head that couldn 't be done with existing technology . " Ultimately only one Terminator appeared in the film . The liquid metal Terminator would be revisited with the T @-@ 1000 character in the 1991 sequel Terminator 2 : Judgment Day . 
 Gale Anne Hurd , who had worked at New World Pictures as Roger Corman 's assistant , showed interest in the film project . Cameron sold the rights for The Terminator to Hurd for one dollar with the promise that she would produce it only if Cameron was to direct it . As a producer , Hurd had suggested edits to the script and took a screen writing credit in the film . Cameron has stated that Hurd " did no actual writing at all " . Cameron and Hurd had friends who worked with Roger Corman previously and who were now working at Orion Pictures , now part of MGM . Orion agreed to distribute the film if Cameron could get financial backing elsewhere . The script was picked up by John Daly at Hemdale Pictures . 
 Cameron wanted his pitch for Daly to finalize the deal and had his friend Lance Henriksen show up to the meeting early dressed and acting like the Terminator . Henriksen showed up at the office kicking open the door wearing a leather jacket , and had gold foil smothered on his teeth and fake cuts on his face and then sat in a chair . Cameron arrived shortly after which relieved the staff from Henriksen 's act . Daly was impressed by the screenplay and Cameron 's sketches and passion for the film . In late 1982 , Daly agreed to back the film with help from HBO and Orion . The Terminator was originally budgeted at $ 4 million and later raised to $ 6 @.@ 5 million . 
 The Italian film The Mechanical Man ( 1921 ) contains a scene in which the mechanical man breaks through an armored door and through the hole extends his hand to unlock the latch that closes the inside ; this influenced The Terminator , with a substantially identical scene . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 One of Cameron 's first tasks was to find someone to play Kyle Reese . Orion wanted a star whose popularity was rising in the United States but who also would have foreign appeal . Orion 's co @-@ founder Mike Medavoy had met Arnold Schwarzenegger and sent his agent the script for The Terminator . Cameron was dubious about casting Schwarzenegger as Reese as he felt he would need someone even bigger to play the Terminator . Sylvester Stallone was originally offered the role of the Terminator . He turned it down . Mel Gibson was then offered the role , but he also turned it down . The studio then suggested O. J. Simpson for the role of the Terminator , but Cameron did not feel that Simpson would be believable as a killer . Cameron still agreed to meet with Schwarzenegger about the film and devised a plan to avoid casting him . Cameron planned to pick a fight with him and return to Hemdale and find him unfit for the role . 
 Upon meeting with Schwarzenegger , Cameron was entertained by Schwarzenegger who would talk about how the villain should be played . Cameron began sketching his face on a notepad and asked Schwarzenegger to stop talking and remain still . After the meeting , Cameron returned to Daly saying Schwarzenegger would not play Reese but that " he 'd make a hell of a Terminator " . Schwarzenegger was not as excited by the film ; during an interview on the set of Conan the Barbarian , an interviewer asked him about a pair of shoes he had ( which were for The Terminator ) . Schwarzenegger responded , " Oh some shit movie I 'm doing , take a couple weeks . " He recounted in his memoir , Total Recall , that he was initially hesitant , but thought that playing a robot in a contemporary film would be a challenging change of pace from Conan the Barbarian and that the film was low profile enough so that it wouldn 't be a risk to his career if it were unsuccessful , also admitting that " it took [ him ] awhile to figure out that Jim [ Cameron ] was the real deal " ( i.e. a director as talented as Spielberg , Hitchcock or Coppola ) . In preparation for the role , Schwarzenegger spent three months training with weapons to be able to use them and feel comfortable around them . Schwarzenegger speaks only 18 lines in the film , and less than 100 words . James Cameron said that " Somehow , even his [ Austrian ] accent worked ... It had a strange synthesized quality , like they hadn 't gotten the voice thing quite worked out . " 
 For the role of Reese , various other suggestions were made for the role including rock musician Sting . Cameron chose Michael Biehn for the role . Biehn was originally skeptical about the part , feeling that the film was silly . After meeting with Cameron , Biehn stated his " feelings about the project changed " . Hurd stated that " almost everyone else who came in from the audition was so tough that you just never believed that there was gonna be this human connection between [ Sarah Connor and Kyle Reese ] . They have very little time to fall in love . A lot of people came in and just could not pull it off . " 
 In the first few pages of the script , the character of Sarah Connor is written as " 19 , small and delicate features . Pretty in a flawed , accessible way . She doesn 't stop the party when she walks in , but you 'd like to get to know her . Her vulnerable quality masks a strength even she doesn 't know exists . " For the role , Cameron chose Linda Hamilton , who had just finished filming Children of the Corn . Rosanna Arquette had previously auditioned . Cameron found a role for Lance Henriksen as Detective Hal Vukovich , as Henriksen had been essential to finding finances for the film . For the special effects shots in the film , Cameron wanted Dick Smith who had previously worked on The Godfather and Taxi Driver . Smith did not take Cameron 's offer and suggested his friend Stan Winston for the job . Brad Fiedel was with the <unk> / Schwartz Agency where a new agent named Beth Donahue found that Cameron was working on The Terminator and sent him a cassette of Fiedel 's music . Fiedel was then invited to a screening of the film with Cameron and Hurd . Hurd was not certain on having Fiedel compose the score as he had only worked in television music previously , and not theatrical films . Fiedel convinced the two that he would be right for the job by showing them an experimental piece he had worked on , thinking that " You know , I 'm going to play this for him , because it ’ s really dark and I think it ’ s interesting for him . " The song convinced Hurd and Cameron to sign him on to the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming for The Terminator was set to begin in early 1983 in Toronto , but was halted when producer Dino De Laurentiis applied an option in Schwarzenegger 's contract that would make him unavailable for nine months while he was filming Conan the Destroyer . During the waiting period , Cameron was contracted to write the script for Rambo : First Blood Part II , refined the Terminator script , and met with producers David Giler and Walter Hill to discuss a sequel to Alien , which became Aliens , released in 1986 . 
 There was limited interference from Orion Pictures . Two suggestions Orion put forward included the addition of a canine android for Reese , which Cameron refused , and to strengthen the love interest between Sarah and Reese , which Cameron accepted . To create the Terminator 's look , Winston and Cameron passed sketches back and forth , eventually deciding on a design nearly identical to Cameron 's original drawn in Rome . Winston had a team of seven artists work for six months to create a Terminator puppet ; it was first molded in clay , then plaster reinforced with steel ribbing . These pieces were then sanded , painted and then chrome @-@ plated . Winston sculpted a reproduction of Schwarzenegger 's face in several poses out of silicone , clay and plaster . 
 The sequences set in 2029 and the stop @-@ motion scenes were developed by Fantasy II , a special effects company headed by Gene Warren Junior . A stop @-@ motion model is used in several scenes in the film involving the Terminator 's skeletal frame . Cameron wanted to convince the audience that the model of the structure was capable of doing what they saw Schwarzenegger doing . To allow this , a scene was filmed of Schwarzenegger injured and limping away ; this limp made it easier for the model to imitate Schwarzenegger . 
 One of the guns seen in the film and on the film 's poster was an AMT <unk> <unk> pistol modified by Ed Reynolds from SureFire to include a laser sight . Both non @-@ functioning and functioning versions of the prop were created . At the time the movie was made , diode lasers were not available ; because of the high power requirement , the helium – neon laser in the sight used an external power supply that Schwarzenegger had to activate manually . Reynolds states that his only compensation for the project was promotional material for the film . 
 In March 1984 , the film began production in Los Angeles . Cameron felt that with Schwarzenegger on the set , the style of the film changed , explaining that " the movie took on a larger @-@ than @-@ life sheen . I just found myself on the set doing things I didn 't think I would do – scenes that were just purely horrific that just couldn 't be , because now they were too flamboyant . " Most of The Terminator 's action scenes were filmed at night , which led to tight filming schedules before sunrise . A week before filming started , Linda Hamilton sprained her ankle , leading to a production change whereby the scenes in which Hamilton needed to run occurred as late as the filming schedule allowed . Hamilton 's ankle was taped every day and she spent most of the film production in pain . 
 Schwarzenegger tried to have the iconic line " I 'll be back " changed as he had difficulty pronouncing the word I 'll . He also felt that his robotic character would not speak in contractions and that the Terminator would be more declarative . Cameron refused to change the line to " I will be back " , so Schwarzenegger worked to say the line as written the best he could . He would later say the line in numerous films throughout his career . 
 After production finished on The Terminator , some post @-@ production shots were needed . These included scenes showing the Terminator outside Sarah Connor 's apartment , Reese being zipped into a body bag , and the Terminator 's head being crushed in a press . 
 = = Release = = 
 Orion Pictures did not have faith in The Terminator performing well at the box office and feared a negative critical reception . At an early screening of the film , the actors ' agents insisted to the producers that the film should be screened for critics . Orion only held one press screening for the film . The film premiered on October 26 , 1984 . On its opening week , The Terminator played at 1 @,@ 005 theaters and grossed $ 4 @.@ 0 million making it number one in the box office . The film remained at number one in its second week . It lost its number one spot in the third week to Oh , God ! You Devil . Cameron noted that The Terminator was a hit " relative to its market , which is between the summer and the Christmas blockbusters . But it 's better to be a big fish in a small pond than the other way around . " 
 Writer Harlan Ellison stated that he " loved the movie , was just blown away by it " , but believed that the screenplay was based on a short story and episode of The Outer Limits he had written , titled " Soldier " , and threatened to sue for infringement . Orion settled in 1986 and gave Ellison an undisclosed amount of money and an acknowledgment credit in later prints of the film . Some accounts of the settlement state that " Demon with a Glass Hand " , another Outer Limits episode written by Ellison , was also claimed to have been plagiarized by the film , but Ellison has explicitly stated that The Terminator " was a ripoff " of " Soldier " rather than " Demon with a Glass Hand " . 
 Cameron was against Orion 's decision and was told that if he did not agree with the settlement , he would have to pay any damages if Orion lost a suit by Ellison . Cameron replied that he " had no choice but to agree with the settlement . Of course there was a gag order as well , so I couldn 't tell this story , but now I frankly don 't care . It 's the truth . " 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Around and shortly after the film 's theatrical release , a number of merchandise items and media were released and sold to coincide with the film . Shaun Hutson wrote a novelization of the film which was published on February 21 , 1985 . In September 1988 , NOW Comics released a comic based on the film . Dark Horse Comics published a comic in 1990 that took place 39 years after the film . Several video games based on The Terminator were released between 1991 and 1993 for various Nintendo and Sega systems . A soundtrack to the film was released in 1984 which included the score by Brad Fiedel and the pop and rock songs used in the club scenes . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 The Terminator was released on VHS and Betamax in 1985 . The film performed well financially on its initial release . The Terminator premiered at number 35 on the top video cassette rentals and number 20 on top video cassette sales charts . In its second week , The Terminator reached number 4 on the top video cassette rentals and number 12 on top video cassette sales charts . In March 1995 , The Terminator was released as a letter boxed edition on Laserdisc . The film premiered through Image Entertainment on DVD , on September 3 , 1997 . IGN referred to this DVD as " pretty bare @-@ bones ... released with just a mono soundtrack and a kind of poor transfer . " 
 Through their acquisition of PolyGram Filmed Entertainment 's pre @-@ 1996 film library catalogue , MGM released a special edition of the film on October 2 , 2001 , which included documentaries , the script , and advertisements for the film . On January 23 , 2001 , a Hong Kong VCD edition was released online . On June 20 , 2006 , the film was released on Blu @-@ ray through Sony in the United States . In late 2012 , the film was re @-@ released on Blu @-@ ray , this time with a transfer by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment , which features improved sharpness compared to Sony 's 2006 Blu @-@ ray , and revised color grading , as well as expanded extra material , such as deleted scenes and a making @-@ of feature . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Terminator received critical acclaim and many consider it one of the best films of 1984 . Positive reviews of The Terminator focused on the action scenes and rapid pacing . Variety praised the film , calling it a " blazing , cinematic comic book , full of virtuoso moviemaking , terrific momentum , solid performances and a compelling story ... Schwarzenegger is perfectly cast in a machine @-@ like portrayal that requires only a few lines of dialog . " Richard Corliss of Time magazine said that the film has " Plenty of tech @-@ noir savvy to keep infidels and action fans satisfied . " Time placed The Terminator on its " 10 Best " list for 1984 . 
 The Los Angeles Times called the film " a crackling thriller full of all sorts of gory treats ... loaded with fuel @-@ injected chase scenes , clever special effects and a sly humor . " The Milwaukee Journal gave the film 3 stars , calling it " the most chilling science fiction thriller since Alien . " A review in Orange Coast magazine stated that " the distinguishing virtue of The Terminator is its relentless tension . Right from the start it 's all action and violence with no time taken to set up the story ... It 's like a streamlined Dirty Harry movie – no exposition at all ; just guns , guns and more guns . " In the May 1985 issue of Cinefantastique it was referred to as a film that " manages to be both derivative and original at the same time ... not since the Road Warrior has the genre exhibited so much exuberant carnage " and " an example of science fiction / horror at its best ... Cameron 's no @-@ nonsense approach will make him a sought @-@ after commodity " . In the United Kingdom the Monthly Film Bulletin praised the film 's script , special effects , design and Schwarzenegger 's performance . 
 Other reviews focused on the film 's level of violence and story @-@ telling quality . The New York Times opined that the film was a " B @-@ movie with flair . Much of it ... has suspense and personality , and only the obligatory mayhem becomes dull . There is far too much of the latter , in the form of car chases , messy shootouts and Mr. Schwarzenegger 's slamming brutally into anything that gets in his way . " The Pittsburgh Press wrote a negative review , calling the film " just another of the films drenched in artsy ugliness like Streets of Fire and Blade Runner . " The Chicago Tribune gave the film two stars , adding that " at times it 's horrifyingly violent and suspenseful at others it giggles at itself . This schizoid style actually helps , providing a little humor just when the sci @-@ fi plot turns too sluggish or the dialogue too hokey . " The Newhouse News Service called the film a " lurid , violent , pretentious piece of claptrap " . British author Gilbert Adair called the film " repellent to the last degree " , charging it with " insidious Nazification " and charging that it had an " appeal rooted in an unholy compound of fascism , fashion and fascination . " The film won three Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film , best make @-@ up and best writing . 
 In 1991 , Richard Schickel of Entertainment Weekly reviewed the film giving it an " A " rating , writing that " what originally seemed a somewhat inflated , if generous and energetic , big picture , now seems quite a good little film " and called it " one of the most original movies of the 1980s and seems likely to remain one of the best sci @-@ fi films ever made . " Film4 gave the film five stars , calling it the " sci @-@ fi action @-@ thriller that launched the careers of James Cameron and Arnold Schwarzenegger into the stratosphere . Still endlessly entertaining . " TV Guide gave the film four stars referring to it as an " amazingly effective picture that becomes doubly impressive when one considers its small budget ... For our money , this film is far superior to its mega @-@ grossing mega @-@ budgeted sequel . " Empire gave the film five stars calling it " As chillingly efficient in exacting thrills from its audience as its titular character is in executing its targets . " The film database Allmovie gave the film five stars , saying that it " established James Cameron as a master of action , special effects , and quasi @-@ mythic narrative intrigue , while turning Arnold Schwarzenegger into the hard @-@ body star of the 1980s . " 
 Halliwell 's Film Guide described the film as " slick , rather nasty but undeniably compelling comic book adventures . " The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100 % approval rating with an average rating of 8 @.@ 7 / 10 based on 50 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " With its impressive action sequences , taut economic direction , and relentlessly fast pace , it 's clear why The Terminator continues to be an influence on sci @-@ fi and action flicks . " The film also holds a score of 83 / 100 ( " universal acclaim " ) on review aggregator website Metacritic . The Terminator has received recognition from the American Film Institute . The film ranked 42nd on AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills , a list of America 's most heart @-@ pounding films . The character of the Terminator was selected as the 22nd @-@ greatest movie villain on AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains . Arnold 's catch phrase " I 'll be back " was voted the 37th @-@ greatest movie quote by the AFI . In 2005 , Total Film named The Terminator the 72nd @-@ best film ever made . In 2008 , Empire magazine selected The Terminator as one of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time . Empire also placed the T @-@ 800 14th on their list of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters . In 2008 , The Terminator was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry . 
 The film initiated a long @-@ running Terminator franchise , which currently consists of five films and several adaptations in other media . Biographer Laurence <unk> writes that The Terminator , " was an influential film affecting a whole generation of darkly hued science fiction , and it was one of Arnold 's best performances . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Psychoanalyst Darian Leader sees The Terminator as an example of how the cinema has dealt with the problem of masculinity ; he writes that , " We are shown time and again that to be a man requires more than to have the biological body of a male : something else must be added to it ... To be a man means to have a body plus something symbolic , something which is not ultimately human . Hence the frequent motif of the man machine , from the Six Million Dollar Man to the Terminator or Robocop . " 
 The film also explores the potential dangers of AI , AI Dominance , and AI rebellion . The robots become self @-@ aware in the future , reject human authority and determine that the human race needs to be destroyed . The impact of this theme is so important that " the prevalent visual representation of AI risk has become the terminator robot . " 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The Terminator soundtrack was composed and performed on synthesizer by Brad Fiedel . Fiedel described the film 's music as being about " a mechanical man and his heartbeat " . Almost all the music in the film was performed live . The Terminator theme is played over the opening credits and is played in various points in the film in sped up versions : a slowed down version when Reese dies , and a piano version during the love scene . It has been described as having a " deceptively simple melody " line and " haunting synthesizer music " . It is in a time signature of 1316 , which came about as Fiedel experimented with the rhythm track on his music equipment ; it was initially an accident , but Fiedel found that he liked the " herky @-@ jerky " " <unk> " . Fiedel created music for when Reese and Connor escape from the police station that would be appropriate for a " heroic moment " . Cameron turned down this theme , as he believed it would lose the audience 's excitement . " Factory Chase " features an electric violin played by Ross Levinson . The track " Love Scene " is a softer piano @-@ based version of the main theme that was described as " bittersweet " . 
 The soundtrack to the film was released in 1984 . The first six tracks of the soundtrack comprise the Terminator score . The second half is performed by various artists and has been described as synthesizer @-@ based and dance @-@ oriented pop rock . The songs by Tahnee Cain & <unk> contain hard rock rhythm guitar . " Pictures of You " has an emphasis on synthesizer and differs from Jay Ferguson 's hit songs . " Intimacy " has been described as " latter @-@ day new wave and primitive , early techno " . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Brad Fiedel – all instrumentation , production 
 Ross Levison – electric violin 
 Emile Robertson – music editing 
 Robert Randles – music post @-@ production 
 Bill Wolford – digital editing , remixing 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The soundtrack album was originally released through Enigma Records . It was followed by a CD and cassette reissue on July 1 , 1991 through DCC Compact Classics . A remastered edition containing only Fiedel 's score entitled The Definitive Edition ( titled " The Definite Edition " on the cover ) was released on August 22 , 1995 through Edel AG . This edition contained a 73 @-@ minute running time and included a bonus track the " Judgement Day Remix " of " Theme from The Terminator . " The liner notes of the album contained extensive annotations for each track . Milan Records released a remastered version of the score on April 8 , 2016 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Online music database AllMusic praised the score of the film , referring to it as an " underrated highlight " of The Terminator and referred to it as a " marvelous synthesizer score " . The review stated that the second half of the album featuring the pop songs was " generic " . The review praised the " Definitive Edition " version of the album which featured the entire film score , opining that it " comprises some of the best science fiction @-@ oriented film music of recent decades . " 
 Reviewing the 2016 re @-@ issue , Pitchfork gave the album an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating , and labeled it as one of their best new reissues . The review stated that " Perhaps the root of Fiedel ’ s success here , though , is the way his score holds close to the main theme ’ s central melodic and rhythmic motifs , remaking and remolding them to keep a sense of narrative continuity even as he shifts around sound and tone . From the metallic march of “ ‘ I ’ ll Be Back ' – Police Station & Escape ” to the yearning piano of “ Love Scene , ” a firm backbone runs throughout , and when the end credits ushers in a cold dawn , Fiedel holds back on fireworks or tidy emotional resolution . " 
 = British nuclear tests at Maralinga = 
 British Nuclear tests at Maralinga occurred between 1956 and 1963 at the Maralinga site , part of the Woomera Prohibited Area in South Australia and about 800 kilometres north @-@ west of Adelaide . A total of seven nuclear tests were performed , with approximate yields ranging from 1 to 27 kilotonnes of TNT ( 4 @.@ 2 to 113 @.@ 0 TJ ) . Two major test series were conducted at the Maralinga site : Operation Buffalo and Operation Antler . The site was also used for hundreds of minor trials , many of which were intended to investigate the effects of fire or non @-@ nuclear explosions on atomic weapons . 
 The site was contaminated with radioactive materials and an initial cleanup was attempted in 1967 . The McClelland Royal Commission , an examination of the effects of the tests , delivered its report in 1985 , and found that significant radiation hazards still existed at many of the Maralinga test areas . It recommended another cleanup , which was completed in 2000 at a cost of $ 108 million . Debate continued over the safety of the site and the long @-@ term health effects on the traditional Aboriginal owners of the land and former personnel . In 1994 , the Australian Government paid compensation amounting to $ 13 @.@ 5 million to the local Maralinga Tjarutja people . 
 The Maralinga tests were subject to extreme secrecy , but by the late 1970s there was a marked change in how the Australian media covered the British nuclear tests . Some journalists investigated the subject and political scrutiny became more intense . Journalist Brian Toohey ran a series of stories in the Australian Financial Review in October 1978 , based in part on a leaked Cabinet submission . In June 1993 , New Scientist journalist Ian Anderson wrote an article titled " Britain 's dirty deeds at Maralinga " and several related articles . In 2007 , Maralinga : Australia 's Nuclear Waste Cover @-@ up by Alan Parkinson documented the unsuccessful clean @-@ up at Maralinga . Popular songs about the Maralinga story have been written by Paul Kelly , Midnight Oil , Anderson , Bruford , Wakeman , Howe and Alistair Hulett . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 On 3 October 1952 , the United Kingdom tested its first nuclear weapon , named " Hurricane " , at the Monte Bello Islands off the coast of Western Australia . A year later the first nuclear test on the Australian mainland was Totem 1 ( 9 @.@ 1 kilotonnes of TNT ( 38 TJ ) ) at Emu Field in the Great Victoria Desert , South Australia , on 15 October 1953 . Totem 2 ( 7 @.@ 1 kilotonnes of TNT ( 30 TJ ) ) followed two weeks later on 27 October . 
 The British government formally requested a permanent test facility on 30 October 1953 . Due to concerns about nuclear fallout from the previous tests at Emu Field and the site 's inadequate infrastructure and water supply , the recently surveyed Maralinga site was selected for this purpose . The new site was announced in May 1955 . It was developed as a joint , co @-@ funded facility between the British and Australian governments . 
 Prior to selection , the Maralinga site was inhabited by the Pitjantjatjara and <unk> Aboriginal people , for whom it had a great spiritual significance . Many were relocated to a new settlement at Yalata , and attempts were made to curtail access to the Maralinga site . These were often unsuccessful . 
 = = Major tests = = 
 Two major test series were conducted at the Maralinga site : Operation Buffalo and Operation Antler . 
 = = = Operation Buffalo = = = 
 Operation Buffalo commenced on 27 September 1956 . The operation consisted of the testing of four nuclear devices , codenamed One Tree , <unk> , Kite and Breakaway respectively . One Tree ( 12 @.@ 9 kilotonnes of TNT ( 54 TJ ) ) and Breakaway ( 10 @.@ 8 kilotonnes of TNT ( 45 TJ ) ) were exploded from towers , <unk> ( 1 @.@ 4 kilotonnes of TNT ( 5 @.@ 9 TJ ) ) was exploded at ground level , and Kite ( 2 @.@ 9 kilotonnes of TNT ( 12 TJ ) ) was released by a Royal Air Force Vickers Valiant bomber from a height of 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) . This was the first British launching of a nuclear weapon from an aircraft . 
 The fallout from these tests was measured using sticky paper , air sampling devices , and water sampled from rainfall and reservoirs . The radioactive cloud from Buffalo 1 ( One Tree ) reached a height of 37 @,@ 500 ft ( 11 @,@ 400 m ) , exceeding the predicted 27 @,@ 900 ft ( 8 @,@ 500 m ) , and radioactivity was detected in South Australia , Northern Territory , New South Wales , and Queensland . All four Buffalo tests were criticised by the 1985 McClelland Royal Commission , which concluded that they were fired under inappropriate conditions . 
 In 2001 , Dr Sue Rabbit Roff , a researcher from the University of Dundee , uncovered documentary evidence that troops had been ordered to run , walk and crawl across areas contaminated by the Buffalo tests in the days immediately following the detonations ; a fact that the British government later admitted . Dr Roff stated that " it puts the lie to the British government 's claim that they never used humans for guinea pig @-@ type experiments in nuclear weapons trials in Australia . " 
 = = = Operation Antler = = = 
 Operation Antler followed in 1957 . Antler was designed to test components for thermonuclear weapons , with particular emphasis on triggering mechanisms . Three tests began in September , codenamed <unk> , Biak and Taranaki . The first two tests were conducted from towers , the last was suspended from balloons . Yields from the weapons were 0 @.@ 93 kilotonnes of TNT ( 3 @.@ 9 TJ ) , 5 @.@ 67 kilotonnes of TNT ( 23 @.@ 7 TJ ) and 26 @.@ 6 kilotonnes of TNT ( 111 TJ ) respectively . The <unk> test used cobalt pellets as a ' tracer ' for determining yield ; later rumours developed that Britain had been developing a cobalt bomb . The Royal Commission found that personnel handling these pellets were later exposed to the active cobalt 60 . Although the Antler series were better planned and organised than earlier series , intermediate fallout from the Taranaki test exceeded predictions . 
 = = Minor tests = = 
 In addition to the major tests , a large number of minor trials were also carried out , from June 1955 and extended through to April 1963 . Although the major tests had been carried out with some publicity , the minor tests were carried out in absolute secrecy . These minor tests left a dangerous legacy of radioactive contamination at Maralinga . 
 The four series of minor trials were codenamed ' Kittens ' , ' Tims ' , ' Rats ' and ' Vixen ' . In all , these trials included up to 700 tests , with tests involving experiments with plutonium , uranium , and beryllium . Operation Kittens involved 99 trials , performed at both Maralinga and Emu Field in 1953 – 1961 . The tests were used in the development of neutron initiators , involving use of polonium @-@ 210 and uranium , and generated " relatively large amounts of radioactive contamination . " Operation Tims took place in 1955 – 1963 , and involved 321 trials of uranium and beryllium tampers , as well as studies of plutonium compression . Operation Rats investigated explosive dispersal of uranium . 125 trials took place between 1956 and 1960 . 
 The Vixen minor trials ( Vixen A and Vixen B ) were formulated to investigate what would happen to a nuclear device which burnt or was subject to a non @-@ nuclear explosion . 31 Vixen A trials between 1959 and 1961 investigated the effects of an accidental fire on a nuclear weapon , and involved a total of about 1 kg of plutonium . Twelve Vixen B trials , between 1960 and 1963 , attempted to discover the effects of high explosives detonating a nuclear weapon in a fire ( typical of conditions which would occur in aviation accidents ) and involved 22 kg of plutonium . They produced " jets of molten , burning plutonium extending hundreds of feet into the air . " It was the lack of subsequent disposal of the plutonium from these minor trials – Vixen B especially – which created the major radiation problems at the site . 
