 The Vixen experimental tests used TNT to blow up simulated nuclear warheads containing plutonium @-@ 239 . In total , Vixen B scattered 22 @.@ 2 kg of plutonium around the Maralinga test site known as Taranaki , in particles of widely divergent size . Plutonium is not particularly dangerous externally - it emits alpha particles which are stopped by 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) of air , or the dead layer of skin cells on the body , and is not a very intensive source of radiation , due to its long half @-@ life of 24 @,@ 000 years . It is most dangerous when it enters the body , in the worst case by breathing , and therefore tiny particles , often the result of such explosion testing , are the worst threat . The extreme biological persistence of plutonium 's radioactive contamination and the cancer threat posed by alpha radiation occurring internally together establish plutonium 's dangers . 
 In terms of regular nuclear testing , Kittens represents bomb component testing , while Tims and Rats were early subcritical <unk> tests . Vixen is " safety testing " of a bomb ; assuring that the core would not accidentally undergo criticality in the event of a fire or unintended crash . These are always messy ( see the US equivalent at Plutonium Valley in Project 56 ) , for a successful test subjects the core fuel to high explosives in the hope that it simply scatters rather than undergoes criticality . The differences in the sort of dangers presented by major vs the minor tests is that there was no critical explosion in the minor tests . In the major tests , the bomb cores reached critical mass ; the plutonium or uranium fissile materials " burned " into highly radioactive fission products , and those , along with the unspent fuel and activated bomb case , tower and soil if the explosion was close to the ground , are lofted into the stratosphere to be dropped eventually as fallout globally . In Vixen , an equivalent amount of plutonium fuel was simply smashed by explosives and spread about much more locally . In Kittens , Tims and Rats , smaller amounts of various materials were similar exploded locally and spread about . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the 1950s , Hedley Marston 's research into nuclear fallout from the Maralinga nuclear tests brought Marston into bitter conflict with the Australian government appointed Atomic Weapons Tests Safety Committee . He was vindicated posthumously by the McClelland Royal Commission , which found that significant radiation hazards existed at many of the Maralinga test sites long after the tests . His project tracked fallout across the continent by examining the <unk> of sheep and cattle as well as devices that filtered radioactive elements from air . Later the results , which showed dramatic increases of certain radioactive elements after British Nuclear Tests , caused a further , controversial study where the bones of deceased people ( especially children ) were burnt to ash and then measured for strontium @-@ 90 . These tests showed that the tests had increased the concentration of strontium @-@ 90 dramatically . As well as finding this after British tests a notable 50 % increase was noticed one year when there were no tests and it was cited as evidence that the previous year 's hydrogen bomb tests had contaminated the majority of the world . 
 A Maralinga cleanup operation codenamed Operation Brumby was conducted in 1967 . Attempts were made to dilute the concentration of radioactive material by turning over and mixing the surface soil . Additionally , the remains of the firings , including plutonium @-@ contaminated fragments , were buried in 22 concrete @-@ capped pits . 
 In the 1970s , whistle @-@ blower Avon Hudson disclosed details of the Maralinga testing program to the Australian media at risk of incarceration . His disclosures related to the inadequacy of clean @-@ up measures , persistent contamination and associated health risks of ionizing radiation . Hudson gave testimony to the Royal Commission into British nuclear tests in Australia in 1984 and 1985 and has since continued to work as a spokesperson for nuclear veterans in South Australia . 
 The McClelland Royal Commission into the tests delivered its report in late 1985 , and found that significant radiation hazards still existed at many of the Maralinga test sites , particularly at Taranaki , where the Vixen B trials into the effects of burning plutonium had been carried out . A Technical Assessment Group was set up to advise on rehabilitation options , and a much more extensive cleanup program was initiated at the site . 
 The TAG Report plan was approved in 1991 and work commenced on site in 1996 and was completed in 2000 at a cost of $ 108 million . In the worst @-@ contaminated areas , 350 @,@ 000 cubic metres of soil and debris were removed from an area of more than 2 square kilometres , and buried in trenches . Eleven debris pits were also treated with in @-@ situ vitrification . Most of the site ( approximately 3 @,@ 200 square kilometres ) is now safe for unrestricted access and approximately 120 square kilometres is considered safe for access but not permanent occupancy . Alan Parkinson has observed that " an Aboriginal living a semi @-@ traditional lifestyle would receive an effective dose of 5 mSv / a ( five times that allowed for a member of the public ) . Within the 120 km ² , the effective dose would be up to 13 times greater . " 
 A Department of Veterans ' Affairs study concluded that " Overall , the doses received by Australian participants were small . ... Only 2 % of participants received more than the current Australian annual dose limit for <unk> exposed persons ( 20 mSv ) . " However , such findings are contested . Australian servicemen were ordered to : repeatedly fly through the mushroom clouds from atomic explosions , without protection ; and to march into ground zero immediately after bomb detonation . Airborne drifts of radioactive material resulted in " radioactive rain " being dropped on Brisbane and Queensland country areas . A 1999 study for the British Nuclear Test Veterans Association found that 30 per cent of involved veterans had died , mostly in their fifties , from cancers . 
 Successive Australian governments failed to compensate servicemen who contracted cancers following exposure to radiation at Maralinga . However , after a British decision in 1988 to compensate its own servicemen , the Australian Government negotiated compensation for several Australian servicemen suffering from two specific conditions , leukemia ( except lymphatic leukemia ) and the rare blood disorder multiple myeloma . 
 One author suggests that the resettlement and denial of aboriginal access to their homelands " contributed significantly to the social disintegration which characterises the community to this day . Petrol sniffing , juvenile crime , alcoholism and chronic friction between residents and the South Australian police have become facts of life . " In 1994 , the Australian Government reached a compensation settlement with Maralinga Tjarutja , which resulted in the payment of $ 13 @.@ 5 million in settlement of all claims in relation to the nuclear testing . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 According to Liz Tynan from James Cook University , the Maralinga tests were a striking example of what can happen when the popular media are unable to report on activities that the government may be trying to hide . Maralinga was an example of extreme secrecy , but by the late 1970s there was a marked change in how the Australian media covered the British nuclear tests . Some resourceful investigative journalists emerged , whistle @-@ blowers such as Avon Hudson spoke out and political scrutiny became more intense . The investigative journalist Brian Toohey ran a series of stories in the Australian Financial Review in October 1978 , based in part on a leaked Cabinet submission . 
 In June 1993 , New Scientist journalist Ian Anderson wrote an article entitled " Britain 's dirty deeds at Maralinga " and several related articles . They are a detailed analysis of the legacy of Vixen B and the Australian government 's prolonged negotiations with the United Kingdom on cleaning up Maralinga and sharing the cost of " safe @-@ sealing " waste plutonium . Previously , much of this highly toxic nuclear waste had simply been lightly bulldozed into the soil rather than buried in deep , secure , purpose @-@ built , concrete bunkers . In 1993 , Anderson won two Michael Daley Awards for his Maralinga articles . 
 Maralinga : Australia ’ s Nuclear Waste Cover @-@ up is a book by Alan Parkinson about the clean @-@ up following the British nuclear tests at Maralinga , published in 2007 . Parkinson , a nuclear engineer , explains that the clean @-@ up of Maralinga in the late 1990s was compromised by cost @-@ cutting and simply involved dumping hazardous radioactive debris in shallow holes in the ground . Parkinson states that " What was done at Maralinga was a cheap and nasty solution that wouldn 't be adopted on white @-@ fellas land . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Ground Zero is a fictional political conspiracy thriller about what happened during the Maralinga tests . 
 The 1991 folk song " Plains of Maralinga " by Alistair Hulett describes the tests and their deadly side @-@ effects on the Pitjantjatjara people . 
 The Career Highlights of the <unk> is an Australian play by Trevor Jamieson and Scott Rankin , performed by the Adelaide Festival in February – March 2002 . The play tells the story of the <unk> Aboriginal people , who lived in the desert country between South Australia and Western Australia , and their experience with British nuclear testing at Maralinga and Emu Field . Tribal elders describe being moved out of the area , and the death and illness of their people when they attempted to return to their contaminated homelands . 
 Maralinga : The <unk> Story , by the Yalata & Oak Communities with <unk> <unk> ( Allen & Unwin , 2009 ) , is an information book about the history and culture of the region , the controversy and its original owners . Aimed at young people , the book was awarded a silver Honour medal in 2010 by the Children 's Book Council of Australia . 
 The Stranglers referenced the nuclear tests in Australia in their song " Nuclear Device ( The Wizard of Aus ) " . 
 The tests were the subject of the song " Birthright " by progressive rock group Anderson Bruford Wakeman Howe . The Australian band Midnight Oil wrote a song about the tests called " Maralinga " . 
 The Australian writer Judy Nunn published a novel titled Maralinga in 2011 . 
 The novel The Last Albatross by Ian Irvine referenced this location as the source of weapons grade plutonium used in a terror plot against Australia . 
 Web comic author Aaron Diaz wrote a one @-@ page comic re @-@ imagining the Maralinga tests . 
 The fictional story of a man with leukemia who was present during the tests featured in the 1982 A Country Practice episode " Field of Thunder . " 
 = Signal 30 ( Mad Men ) = 
 " Signal 30 " is the fifth episode of the fifth season of the American television drama series Mad Men and the 57th episode of the series overall . It was written by series creator and executive producer Matthew Weiner and writer Frank Pierson , and directed by main cast member John Slattery . It originally aired on the AMC channel in the United States on April 15 , 2012 . 
 The episode takes place between July 1966 and August 1966 , with references to the 1966 World Cup Final , the Charles Whitman shooting rampage , and the crash of Braniff Flight 250 . Business and pleasure converge on each other at both a dinner party thrown by the Campbells and a misguided whorehouse visit intended to woo a client . Pete discovers that Ken is writing science fiction under a pseudonym , which angers Roger Sterling . Pete 's emasculation continues after a routine office meeting ends in fisticuffs . 
 The episode 's title is derived from the infamous 1959 driving safety film of the same name , which Pete Campbell is required to watch as part of his driver 's education class . The film , shown widely to high school students across the country during the 1960s , was produced by the Ohio State Highway Patrol and takes its name from the radio code used by that agency for a fatal traffic accident . 
 " Signal 30 " received 2 @.@ 69 million viewers and a 1 @.@ 0 in the coveted 18 @-@ 49 demographic . It was met with rave reviews , with many commentators calling it the best episode of the season so far . Critics commended John Slattery for his directing work . Matthew Weiner and his Academy Award @-@ winning co @-@ writer Frank Pierson were also praised for the symbolism of the leaking faucet and the character study of Pete Campbell . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Pete is being kept awake by a leaking faucet in the kitchen . He eventually goes to fix it , doing so effectively and with self @-@ satisfaction . He is later shown attending a driver 's education class , where he flirts with a teenage girl about to go off to college . 
 Ken Cosgrove has continued his writing and runs into Peggy while meeting with a publisher over lunch . He is secretive about his work and attempts to politely get rid of her . Peggy is unsettled by this , until Ken later explains his actions in the office . Following a drunken celebration at a bar with other expatriates over England 's 1966 World Cup victory , Lane excitedly tells the other SCDP partners that he has arranged a lunch meeting with a fellow Englishman he met at the bar , Edwin Baker , over possible representation for Jaguar Cars in America . 
 The Campbells throw a dinner party for the <unk> and the Drapers at their home . As the night progresses , Ken 's writing career is accidentally brought up in conversation by his wife , leading to a retelling of one of his stories . The guests are unsure of how to react to the science fiction plot , apart from Don , who asks questions about the character . When Don learns of Ken 's writing success he is supportive of it ; in contrast , Pete denigrates it . Afterwards , the wives retreat to the kitchen , where the faucet Pete previously " fixed " bursts , spraying water everywhere . Pete rushes away to get his toolbox , but by the time he returns , Don has already fixed it , explaining that Pete 's previous fix was merely a coincidence . 
 Pete returns to his driver 's ed class to find that a new student , Hanson ( nicknamed " handsome " ) , has the attention of the girl Pete previously flirted with . 
 Roger advises Lane about how to ensnare a client at dinner . Roger informs Lane to find the man 's source of regret , and make it relatable to himself , forming a " conspiracy " of feeling between the pair . Pryce 's dinner does not go smoothly ; the Jaguar representative appears to have no regrets in his life , and Lane is forced to plan another lunch to try again at confirming the new business . Upon hearing of this failure , Pete tactfully tells Lane to maintain a friendly relationship with the target , and to let Accounts take the business from there . Roger compliments Pete 's letting Lane down softly and taking the task off his hands , forming a renewed alliance with Pete . At the dinner meeting , Edwin , the Jaguar representative , assures Don , Roger , and Pete they have his business , but he wants to have some fun . The executives quickly learn what kind of fun Edwin has in mind and they visit a local brothel , where Edwin , Roger , and Pete all cheat on their wives , leaving Don at the bar . Don later shares a cab with Pete on the way home in which the latter , drunk , criticizes Don as hypocritical for judging Pete 's adulterous actions . Don explains he is not judging ; he merely didn 't know Pete was miserable . Pete replies sarcastically that he has everything , and Don warns him not to throw it away . 
 The next day , Roger calls Ken into his office and bluntly tells Ken to stop writing in his spare time , as he should not be diverting any attention from his job . Roger attempts to create a bond between them , stating they are both " unappreciated authors " ( referencing the autobiography Roger was dictating in Season 4 ) , but Ken has none of it . 
 Later that day , Lane storms into a partners ' meeting , shouting at Pete about how Edwin 's wife has found out about Edwin 's adultery and is devastated ; Edwin has withdrawn his business as a result . Lane blames Pete 's methods for losing the account , and Pete responds by citing Lane 's redundant role at the firm and challenging his sexuality . To the surprise and shock of the other partners , Lane responds by challenging Pete to a fistfight . Pete and Lane exchange blows until Lane wins , leaving a bloodied Pete on the office floor . Bruised , shaken , and humiliated , Pete retreats to his office . Joan goes to comfort Lane , only Lane misinterprets her affection as romantic and kisses her . Joan , startled , stands and opens the door , but does not leave . She instead stays with Lane and forgives his blunder , claiming that he 'd done to Pete what everyone in the office had wanted to do for some time . 
 Peggy , excitedly , tells Ken about Lane 's beating up Pete . Ken takes pleasure in this , and then tells Peggy about his conversation with Roger . Ken suspects Pete informed Roger , after learning about his publishing deal during the dinner party . 
 Later , Pete talks about his despair at the day 's events with Don in the elevator , wondering how the fight occurred , when he thought they were all friends . Close to tears , he blurts out that he has nothing . Don doesn 't respond . 
 The episode ends with Ken writing in bed under a new pen name . Pete is shown back in his driver 's ed class , watching helplessly as Hanson sits with the girl Pete had his eyes on , and the dripping sound of the leaky faucet replaying in his mind . 
 = = Production = = 
 Creator Matthew Weiner co @-@ wrote the episode with 86 @-@ year @-@ old veteran screenwriter and Academy Award winner ( for Dog Day Afternoon ) Frank Pierson . Pierson offered Weiner his writing services back in 2009 , leading him to serve as a consulting producer on the third season . About Pierson , Weiner said , " He 's now in the writer 's room . Arguably one of the greatest living writers . It means you 're doing something right . " Cast member John Slattery , who portrays Roger Sterling on the series , directed the episode , the third time he has directed for the series . 
 Weiner stated that the episode was about the question -- " What do you want ? " and " Do you ever get a chance to have it ? " , as well as the " tentative nature of business friendships " . He used Lane 's friendship with the Jaguar executive and the dinner at Pete Campbell 's house as examples . Vincent Kartheiser reasoned that Pete invited them over to show off his wife , home , and success . Jon Hamm elaborated on Don 's reluctance to go as his desire to keep his relationship separate from the poisonous influence of Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce . 
 Jon Hamm pointed to Don 's bad history with <unk> as to his reluctance to take part in the festivities , while noting that " Pete has no such problem . " Of Pete 's scene with the prostitute , Weiner said , " You see what his fantasy is . You see his powerlessness " and that Pete is " trying to keep his life exciting " . Due to the desperation and unhappiness inherent in Pete Campbell 's character as demonstrated in this episode , Weiner called it " probably the saddest episode we 've ever had . " 
 The fight scene , according to Jared Harris , was Lane discovering what Pete really thought of him . Harris saw the boxing match as " a mix of so many different styles " with Lane carrying an " old school and traditional " stance . Harris saw it as Lane getting a chance to " fight for his dignity " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Signal 30 " was watched by 2 @.@ 69 million viewers and obtained a 1 @.@ 0 adults 18 @-@ 49 rating , a slight drop from the previous episode . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode opened to laudatory reviews from the television critic community , with much praise reserved for John Slattery 's direction and the acting work of Vincent Kartheiser . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode an A , his highest grade for the season so far , calling it " transfixing and incredible " and " season five 's first instant classic " . He praised the symbol of the dripping faucet as well as the editing choices that suggested " the way that time passes , so that it almost seems as if you ’ ve lost yourself in the mists of your own life " . Alan Sepinwall , writing for HitFix , exalted Slattery 's " strong command of the comedic moments " , and recognized that " most of the carnage " of the episode " comes out of failed attempts by Pete , Lane and Ken to be more than they are by building bridges from one world to another . " 
 Meredith Blake , reviewer for the Los Angeles Times , said that the episode was a sort of masculine companion piece to the fourth season episode " The Beautiful Girls " , as " Signal 30 " focuses on " collective identity crisis of the agency 's male population " . Paste magazine writer Bonnie Stiernberg called Pete Campbell " one of the most complex , underrated characters on TV today " and called the dripping sink " more like a fucking geyser in reality , and if he doesn ’ t do something to plug it up soon , he ’ s going to drown . " Jordan Bartel of the Chicago Tribune called the episode " a classic " and saw a possible Emmy nomination for Vincent Kartheiser , but felt the kitchen sink symbolism and ending voiceover was a little <unk> . Maureen Ryan of The Huffington Post praised Lane 's character and Slattery 's direction during the fight sequence , singling out Don , Bert , and Roger 's reactions as " absolute comedy gold " . She also compared the Pete character to former U.S. President Richard Nixon because : " there 's a sense with Pete that there 's always a chip on his shoulder and he 'll eternally feel misunderstood and undervalued . He 'll always inspire a mixture of pity and exasperation , because he 's smart and insightful , but he can be a piece of work . " 
 = Girly Edition = 
 " Girly Edition " is the twenty @-@ first episode in the ninth season of the American animated television series The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 19 , 1998 . In the episode , Lisa and Bart Simpson must co @-@ anchor a new news program , though when Bart is seen as a more successful news anchor , Lisa becomes jealous and seeks revenge . Meanwhile , in the subplot , Homer Simpson gets a monkey helper because of his laziness . " Girly Edition " was the first episode written by Larry Doyle and was directed by Mark Kirkland . Much of the subplot was inspired by the film Monkey Shines . Critics gave the episode positive reviews and it was well received by Lisa 's voice actress Yeardley Smith . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Groundskeeper Willie takes away Bart 's skateboard for destroying his leaf pile , Bart fills up Willie 's shack with creamed corn as he is sleeping , causing the shack to explode . As Willie is being taken away for medical attention , he swears revenge on Bart. Meanwhile , Krusty the Clown 's show comes under criticism by the FCC for not being educational enough for children . The Channel 6 executive proposes that Krusty cut ten minutes from his three @-@ hour show to make room for a kids ' news program , Kidz News , where children deliver and report news items . Lisa is recruited as a news anchor along with other Springfield Elementary School children . Bart is not chosen at first , but is made sportscaster after he complains to Marge . 
 Lisa is deemed to be boring by the channel 's staff , though they are impressed by Bart 's performance . Bart is then promoted to be the co @-@ anchor , which leads to jealousy from Lisa . After Bart hears Lisa talking behind his back , he tries to improve at being an anchor . He goes to Kent Brockman for advice , who teaches him about the power of human interest stories . Bart becomes successful after creating a segment called " Bart 's People " , which Lisa immediately disapproves of due to its sappy , emotionally manipulative content . Out of jealousy , Lisa attempts to copy it , but her filming is twice hampered by the Crazy Cat Lady . She eventually sends a letter acting as an immigrant who lives in a landfill who pleads to be on Bart 's People , causing Bart to rush to the landfill for a live broadcast . However , he learns that the immigrant is Groundskeeper Willie , wanting revenge on Bart. Lisa saves Bart by changing Willie 's mind about killing him , using similar techniques Bart used in his stories to stir up emotions . The two decide from then on to make a good educational news program , resulting in Kidz News being cancelled and replaced by The Mattel and Mars Bar Quick Energy <unk> Hour , an action cartoon which advertises toys and chocolate . 
 In the subplot , Homer obtains a monkey helper named Mojo after learning Apu has gotten one . Eventually , Mojo becomes tired , weak , and overfed from eating junk food and drinking beer with Homer . Marge forces homer to return the monkey . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Girly Edition " was the first episode Larry Doyle wrote for the show . He conceived both the main plot and the subplot . The subplot about Mojo was inspired by the film Monkey Shines ; show runner Mike Scully asked the staff to consult the film for reference when they were making the episode . The animators also studied the behavior of monkeys from other resources , looking at their movements and how they interact with humans . Eric Stefani , a former animator for the show who had left and now was part of the band No Doubt , was called back by episode director Mark Kirkland to animate the scenes with Homer and Mojo . This was the final work Stefani did for The Simpsons . At the end of the episode , an incapacitated Mojo is only able to type " Pray for Mojo " into a computer ; this line was written by George Meyer , who cited it as his favorite personal contribution to The Simpsons . Recurring character the Crazy Cat Lady was introduced in this episode . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 In his book Watching with The Simpsons : Television , Parody , and Intertextuality , Jonathan Gray analyses a scene from the episode in which it is announced that Kidz News has been replaced by the children 's cartoon The Mattel and Mars Bar Quick Energy <unk> Hour ( a reference to the Mattel toys and the Mars chocolate bar ) . He says this mocks " how many children 's programs have become little more than the ad to the merchandise " . Gray also writes that The Simpsons " illustrates how the ad as genre has itself already invaded many , if not all , genres . Ads and marketing do not limit themselves to the space between programs ; rather , they are themselves textual invaders , and part of The Simpsons ' parodic attack on ads involves revealing their hiding places in other texts . " 
 A real @-@ life journalist named Reid , who Gray interviewed for his book , states that " Girly Edition " mirrors well how some journalists actually work . She said the episode shows " the ludicrous nature of , you know , what we do in a lot of things . The kids news with Bart and Lisa : I mean , you see them do really stupid stories about the news , and ' news you can use , ' and ' how to get rid of your sheets when you wet them . ' I mean , people really do stories like that . " Steven <unk> writes in his book The World According to the Simpsons that the episode showcases the fact that " the viewing of attractive newscasters and the use of persuasive tones of voice often do have an impact on the minds of many intelligent members of American society . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 19 , 1998 . It finished 26th in the ratings for the week of April 13 – 19 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 , translating to around 8 @.@ 5 million viewing households . The episode was the third highest rated show on Fox that week , following The X @-@ Files and King of the Hill . The Fox network 's ratings average for the week was 6 @.@ 6 . 
 " Girly Edition " was well received by critics . It was named the fifth best episode with a sports theme of the series by Jerry Greene of the Orlando Sentinel . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought well of the episode , calling it " a great episode , full of more than the normal quota of good jokes " , adding , " best of all is Lisa 's revenge on Bart , and the mad cat @-@ lady who goes around chucking her cats at people . " Ryan Keefer of DVD Verdict gave the episode a B rating and stated that he enjoyed the subplot with Mojo more than the main plot . Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide commented that " Girly Edition " takes " a clever concept and turns into something more than expected as it digs into the usual Bart / Lisa rivalry . I ’ m not quite sure why Bart reacts so sadly to Lisa ’ s comments about his stupidity when ' Lisa the Simpson ' just delved into the dumbness of the male Simpsons . There ’ s enough to like here to make the episode fun , though . " 
 This episode is one of Yeardley Smith 's favorite episodes . She says , " I don 't actually remember a lot of the episodes because they all blend in together for me , and I don 't have a really good memory anyway , but I do remember this one and thinking that it was terrific . " 
 = Neal Ball = 
 Cornelius " Neal " Ball ( April 22 , 1881 – October 15 , 1957 ) was an American baseball shortstop who played seven seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He played for the New York Highlanders , Cleveland Naps and Boston Red Sox from 1907 to 1913 . Although his primary position was shortstop , Ball played at second base , third base and in the outfield as well . He is most famous for being the first player to turn an unassisted triple play in Major League Baseball history on July 19 , 1909 . 
 Ball played minor league baseball for the Montgomery Senators of the Southern League until 1907 , when he signed for the New York Highlanders . After spending less than three seasons with the organization , Ball was sold to the Cleveland Naps , where he spent the next two seasons . In the middle of the 1912 season , his contract was then purchased by the Boston Red Sox , with whom he played his last game on June 30 , 1913 . He died on October 15 , 1957 in Bridgeport , Connecticut . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ball was born on April 22 , 1881 in Grand Haven , Michigan . After his Major League career ended , he went on to coach the Baltimore Orioles ( who were a minor league team at the time ) . It was there that he was assigned to train Babe Ruth , who had just come out of St. Mary 's Industrial School for Boys . Ball described Ruth as " the dumbest and yet the strongest player " he had ever coached . The two remained good friends after Ruth broke into the Majors and even played a friendly game of bowling against one another in 1923 ( with Ball edging out Ruth , winning four out of the seven games played ) . Ruth held Ball in great respect , and because of their close friendship in baseball , he eventually became a fan of the New York Yankees . In the 1950s , an annual bowling tournament held at the Newfield <unk> near Bridgeport , Connecticut was named after Ball in order to honor the city 's famous inhabitant . On February 12 , 1952 , at the age of 71 , his health severely deteriorated due to a heart ailment and he was rushed to Bridgeport Hospital , where he was placed on the danger list and visitors were prohibited from seeing him . Five years later , he died on October 15 , 1957 and was interred at Mountain Grove Cemetery , Bridgeport . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Ball first started playing organized baseball on the semi @-@ pro team in Three Rivers , Michigan , where he played in a game against Hall of Fame Negro League star Rube Foster of the Otsego Independents during the 1902 season . He then proceeded to play for Montgomery Senators , a minor league baseball team that competed in the Southern League . He played for the team until 1907 , when he signed for the New York Highlanders . He made his major league debut for the Highlanders on September 12 , 1907 , at the age of 26 , in a 2 – 0 loss against the Washington Senators . 
 = = = New York Highlanders ( 1907 – 09 ) = = = 
 During his 1908 rookie season , Ball posted a batting average of .247 and led the Majors in strikeouts with 91 . Defensively , he committed the most errors among all fielders in the American League with 81 and most errors by a shortstop with 80 , both of which are Yankee rookie records that still stand today . However , he also set the team record for most assists by a rookie with 438 ( this record has since been broken by Derek Jeter , who had 444 assists in 1996 ) . On May 18 , 1909 , in the middle of the season , Ball was bought by the Cleveland Naps for approximately $ 5000 . 
 = = = Cleveland Naps ( 1909 – 12 ) = = = 
 Ball was brought in to serve as the temporary replacement for Cleveland 's injured starting shortstop Terry Turner , who suffered from a recurring arm injury that needed treatment . In his first season with the Indians , Ball batted .256 with one home run and 25 runs batted in . Although he was never famous for his defensive skills , he achieved baseball history when he executed the first unassisted triple play in the MLB on July 19 , 1909 , doing so against the Boston Red Sox at League Park . In the second inning of the game , Ball , playing shortstop , caught <unk> McConnell 's line drive , stepped on second base to retire Heinie Wagner , and then tagged outfielder Jake Stahl as he was advancing towards second . Because the play was unprecedented and turned so swiftly , the ballplayers on the field did not know the inning was over and the crowd of 11 @,@ 000 were unsure of how to react . Cy Young , the game 's starting pitcher , was puzzled and asked Ball why he was leaving the field . Once the fans in attendance realized what had happened , they gave him an ovation , while his teammates applauded him as he returned to the dugout . In the following inning , with the crowd still cheering , he hit an inside @-@ the @-@ park home run into center field ( the only home run he hit that season ) . After the game , he was questioned in a post @-@ game interview , a rare occurrence at the time . He remained humble about the feat and reminded the reporters that " anyone could have made the play " . The glove that he used to make the unassisted triple play is on exhibit at the Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 At the end of the 1910 season , after playing just 54 games with the team , Ball was sent down and released to the Portland Beavers . He refused to play for the minor league team and this , coupled with the underperformance of the infielders brought in to replace him , resulted in the Naps <unk> his contract . 
 The 1911 season turned out to be Ball 's best statistical year , resulting in several career high numbers being set . He batted .296 and amassed 122 hits , 9 triples , 45 RBI and hit 3 home runs , though he also recorded the third highest number of strikeouts in the AL with 93 . Although his defense was never stellar , he executed two noted plays that season . He made a one @-@ handed stop against the Chicago White Sox that was described as " marvelous " by the New York Times and held the Yankees ( his former team ) to a 3 – 3 draw when Ball , serving as the cut @-@ off man , successfully relayed the ball thrown from right fielder Shoeless Joe Jackson to catcher Gus Fisher . In doing so , he nailed Birdie Cree ( who represented the Yankees ' winning run ) at home plate and the game was immediately suspended due to darkness . However , in a rematch against the White Sox on May 5 , 1912 , Ball suffered a momentary defensive lapse that ultimately cost his team the game . In the sixth inning , he was unable to catch <unk> Collins stealing second base and then inexplicably held onto the ball . This allowed Ping Bodie to advance to home plate and score the winning run . On June 25 , the Boston Red Sox purchased Ball 's contract from the Naps for $ 2500 . 
 = = = Boston Red Sox ( 1912 – 13 ) = = = 
 Ball 's final major league team was ironically the one he turned his unassisted triple play against . The player who was final out of that play , Jake Stahl , became his manager and teammate . The Red Sox signed Ball with the intention of using him only as a utility player who would be a competent substitute to any injured players on the team . As a result , he rarely started a game for the Red Sox . The team advanced to the World Series at the end of that season , where they defeated the New York Giants 4 – 3 . Although he struck out in his only plate appearance of the series , he still received the prize money of $ <unk> rewarded to players on the winning team . This prompted the Ottawa Citizen to label him " the luckiest man in baseball . " 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 After playing his final major league season in 1913 , Ball returned to minor league baseball and played for several teams until 1924 . Most notably , in May 1916 , he was traded by the Toronto Maple Leafs to his hometown team , the Bridgeport Hustlers of the Eastern League , and became both their manager and second baseman . The Hustlers were struggling at the time and the addition of Ball did nothing to change the team 's fortunes . By July , the Hustlers were still languishing in last place and , as a result , he was dismissed from the team . 
 = John Henry Turpin = 
 John Henry " Dick " Turpin ( 20 August 1876 – 10 March 1962 ) was a sailor in the United States Navy in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Turpin was one of the first African American Chief Petty Officers in the U.S. Navy . He is also notable for surviving the catastrophic explosions of two U.S. Navy ships : USS Maine in 1898 , and USS Bennington in 1905 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Turpin was born on 20 August 1876 and enlisted in the U.S. Navy in New York City on 4 November 1896 . 
 = = USS Maine = = 
 He was a Mess Attendant on Maine when it exploded in Havana under mysterious circumstances on the night of 15 February 1898 . Turpin was in the pantry of the wardroom when the explosion occurred , and felt the ship " heave and lift " before all went dark . He worked his way aft and climbed out of the wardroom on the captain 's ladder and up onto the deck . He dove overboard and was rescued by a motor launch . Turpin was one of 90 out of the 350 officers and men aboard Maine that night to survive the explosion . 
 According to an obituary that appeared in the Los Angeles Times , Turpin ( whose next ship assignment was not reported ) saw action in China during the 1900 Boxer Rebellion . 
 = = Bennington explosion = = 
 By mid @-@ 1905 , Turpin had been assigned to the gunboat Bennington . When that ship was raising steam for a departure from San Diego , California , on 21 July 1905 , she suffered a boiler explosion that sent men and machinery into the air and killed 66 of the 102 men aboard . Turpin reportedly saved three officers and twelve men by swimming them to shore one at a time . Eleven men were awarded the Medal of Honor for " extraordinary heroism displayed at the time of the explosion " , but Turpin was not among them . 
 = = Later career = = 
 In 1915 Turpin worked as a diver in efforts to raise the sunken submarine USS F @-@ 4 in Honolulu , Hawaii . He became qualified as a " Master Diver " - most probably the first African @-@ American sailor to do so . Turpin was also credited with being involved with the development of the underwater cutting torch . 
 Turpin served on several other ships before leaving active duty service in 1916 . 
 After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Turpin was recalled to service . On 1 June 1917 , he became a Chief Gunner 's Mate on the cruiser Marblehead , which made him among the first African American Chief Petty Officers in the U.S. Navy . Turpin served at that rank until he was transferred to the Fleet Reserve in March 1919 . In October 1925 , Turpin retired at the rank of Chief Gunner 's Mate . 
 During his time in the Navy , he was the Navy boxing champion in several different weight classifications throughout is Navy career and was a boxing instructor at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis , Maryland . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his retirement from the Navy , Turpin was employed as a Master Rigger at the Puget Sound Navy Yard in Bremerton , Washington ; he was also qualified as a Master Diver in his civilian duties . 
 During World War II , Turpin tried to return to active service but was denied an account of his age . He volunteered to tour Navy training facilities and defense plants to make " inspirational visits " to African @-@ American sailors . 
 = = Death = = 
 Turpin died in Bremerton , Washington on 10 March 1962 . He was survived by his wife Faye Alice . At his funeral , his pall bearers were six Navy chief stewards . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Good Conduct Medal 
 Navy Expeditionary Medal 
 Spanish Campaign Medal 
 China Relief Expedition Medal 
 Nicaraguan Campaign Medal 
 Mexican Service Medal 
 Victory Medal 
 = Licario = 
 Licario , called <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) by the Greek chroniclers , was a Byzantine admiral of Italian origin in the 13th century . At odds with the Latin barons of his native Euboea , he entered the service of the Byzantine emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos ( r . 1259 – 1282 ) , and reconquered many of the Aegean islands for him in the 1270s . For his exploits , he was rewarded with Euboea as a fief and rose to the rank of megas konostaulos and megas doux , the first foreigner to do so . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Origins and early life = = = 
 Licario was born in Karystos in Latin @-@ held Euboea ( Negroponte ) , from a <unk> father and a local woman . He was of humble origin , but able and ambitious . Serving as a knight under the Latin triarch Giberto II da Verona , he managed to win the heart of Felisa , sister of Giberto and widow of another triarch , Narzotto dalle Carceri . The match was met with disapproval by Felisa 's family . They secretly married , but the marriage was cancelled by her relatives . Fleeing from their wrath , Licario sought refuge in the fort of <unk> near Cavo D 'Oro . He repaired the strong fortress , assembled a small group of followers , and began raiding the surrounding estates , belonging to the island 's nobles . 
 = = = Entry into Byzantine service = = = 
 At that time , the newly restored Byzantine Empire , under the leadership of Michael VIII Palaiologos , sought to recover Euboea , which was the major Latin insular possession in the Aegean Sea and a base for piratical activity directed against his lands . Furthermore , along with the Principality of Achaea it presented the major obstacle to his complete recovery of Greece . Already in 1269 / 1270 , a Byzantine fleet under Alexios Doukas Philanthropenos had attacked and captured one of the island 's major Latin strongholds , the town of Oreos . 
 Facing the persistent refusal of the island 's barons to treat with him , desiring vengeance and eager for glory and wealth , Licario presented himself to Philanthropenos , offering his services . He , in turn , took him to the Emperor , who was eager to use the services of talented Westerners whenever he could , and had already bankrolled several Latin corsairs in his service . Licario became the Emperor 's vassal according to Western feudal rules , and in turn was strengthened with imperial troops . Under the leadership of Licario , the Byzantines could now mount a serious attempt to conquer the island , while their forces were further augmented by many defections from the Greek population . 
 The Byzantine forces , under Licario 's command , now ( in 1272 / 1273 ) launched a campaign that took the fortresses of <unk> , La <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The Lombard triarchs then appealed to their liege @-@ lord , Prince William II of Achaea , and to Dreux de Beaumont , marshal of the Angevin Kingdom of Sicily . William was able to recover La <unk> , but de Beaumont was defeated in a pitched battle and was subsequently recalled by Charles of Anjou . Between then and 1275 , according to the Venetian chronicler Marino Sanudo , Licario himself served in the Byzantine army in Asia Minor , where he scored a victory against the Turks . 
 = = = Conquest of Euboea and campaigns in the Aegean = = = 
 In 1276 , following their great victory over the Lombard triarchs of Negroponte at the Battle of Demetrias , the Byzantines renewed their offensive in Euboea . Licario attacked his native Karystos , seat of the southern <unk> , and took it , after a long siege , in the same year . For this success , he was rewarded by Michael VIII with the whole island as a fief , and a noble Greek wife with a rich dowry . In turn , Licario pledged to provide 200 knights to the Emperor . Gradually , Licario reduced the Latin strongholds on the island , until , by 1278 , he had seized almost all of it except for the capital , the city of Negroponte ( Chalkis ) . 
 For his successes , Licario was rewarded with the post of megas konostaulos , head of the Latin mercenaries , and eventually appointed as megas doux after Philanthropenos 's death in ca . 1296 ; the first foreigner to be thus honoured . He commanded the Byzantine navy in a series of expeditions against the Latin @-@ held Aegean islands . The first to fall was Skopelos , whose fortress was believed to be impregnable . Licario , however , knew that it lacked water supplies . Thus , he attacked it during the hot and dry summer of 1277 and forced its surrender . Its lord , Filippo Ghisi , was captured and sent to Constantinople ; his other possessions , the islands of Skyros , Skiathos and <unk> , were also taken soon after . After that , Licario went on to capture the islands of <unk> and Antikythera off the southern coast of the Morea , and later Kea , <unk> , and Santorini in the Cyclades . The great island of Lemnos was also captured , although its lord , Paolo <unk> , withstood a three @-@ year siege before surrendering . 
 Finally , in late 1279 or early 1280 , he returned to Euboea , landing in the norther town of Oreos and moving south towards Negroponte . His forces by now included many Spanish and Catalan mercenaries ( the first time the latter are mentioned in Greece ) and even former adherents of Manfred of Sicily , who had fled to Greece after Manfred 's defeat and death at the hands of Charles of Anjou . As he reached Negroponte , the triarch Giberto II da Verona , Felisa 's brother , and John I de la Roche , the Duke of Athens , who were present at the city , rode out with their forces to meet him . The two armies met at the village of <unk> , northeast of Negroponte . The battle resulted in a major victory for Licario : John de la Roche was unhorsed and captured , while Giberto was either killed ( according to Sanudo ) or captured and taken along with de la Roche as a prisoner to Constantinople , where , according to Nikephoros Gregoras , the sight of the hated renegade , moving triumphantly among the assembled Byzantine court , caused him to drop dead . 
 After <unk> , Negroponte seemed about to fall into Licario 's hands too . The city , however , was quickly reinforced by Jacques de la Roche , lord of Argos and Nauplia , who , along with the energetic Venetian bailo , Niccolo Morosini Rosso , led its defence . Facing determined resistance and possibly fearing an intervention of John I Doukas , ruler of Thessaly , Licario was forced to raise the siege . Licario then turned to reducing the remaining Latin strongholds on the island , becoming its total master except for the city of Negroponte itself , and ruling it from the fortress of <unk> . His fleet carried out further naval expeditions : the islands of <unk> and <unk> were taken , and Licario 's ships raided the Peloponnese . 
 Licario himself sailed to Constantinople , presenting Emperor Michael VIII with his captives . Then , at the height of his fame and success in ca . 1280 , Licario disappears from the sources , and his subsequent fate is unknown . Most likely he lived in Constantinople and died there . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 His conquests proved temporary only , as the Byzantines were gradually evicted by the Venetians and the other Latin lords . Even in Euboea , Licario 's major gain and personal fief , the Lombard barons managed to complete their reconquest of the entire island by 1296 . Nevertheless , Licario proved one of the most successful military leaders in Michael VIII 's employ , and his victories greatly enhanced the emperor 's own standing and prestige amongst the Latins . The historian <unk> John <unk> ranks him , along with Michael 's brother John Palaiologos , as the two men who caused the most damage to the Latin rulers of Greece . 
 = Cephalic Carnage = 
 Cephalic Carnage is an American grindcore band formed in 1992 in Denver , Colorado . The band comprises vocalist <unk> Leal , guitarists Steve Goldberg and Brian Hopp , drummer John Merryman and bassist Nick Schendzielos . Cephalic Carnage has released six studio albums and toured in North America , Europe and Japan . 
 Cephalic Carnage play a technically proficient deathgrind style , progressively experiment with other genres , and incorporate songs of joke nature into their albums , such as parodies of black metal or metalcore . They refer themselves as " rocky mountain hydro grind " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Conforming to Abnormality , Exploiting Dysfunction ( 1992 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Cephalic Carnage formed in Denver , Colorado , in 1992 by vocalist <unk> Leal and guitarist Zac Joe . The duo recorded a demo EP titled Scrape My Lungs in 1993 , but then took a break until 1996 , when they recruited drummer John Merryman , guitarist Steve Goldberg and bassist Doug Williams . Merryman also collaborated with Secret Chiefs 3 . Soon after the reformation , their second demo EP <unk> Oddity was released . During 1997 , Cephalic Carnage financed its own tour across the United States . 
 In 1998 , the band caught the attention of Italian record label <unk> Records , which released the band 's debut album Conforming to Abnormality that year . Williams left in 1999 and joined Origin . He was replaced by <unk> Mullen , and the band toured at the Milwaukee Metalfest in 1998 , the Dallas <unk> , the Ohio Deathfest and the Denver <unk> in 1999 . 
 In 2000 , Cephalic Carnage signed to the American heavy metal record label Relapse Records and released its second album Exploiting Dysfunction , which included a tour with Napalm Death and The Dillinger Escape Plan . 
 = = = Lucid Interval and Anomalies ( 2002 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Lucid Interval , the band 's third album , was recorded in early 2002 and released in August that year . The band toured a month later in Canada and subsequently in the U.S. with German thrash metal veterans Kreator and Destruction . In May 2003 , the band undertook the " North American Contamination " tour alongside Mastodon and others . That September , Cephalic Carnage and <unk> supported Hatebreed on the North American " Rise of Brutality " tour . 
 In September 2004 , the band recorded its next album , Anomalies , with producer Dave Otero . Darren Doane directed a promotional music video for " Dying Will Be the Death of Me " , which premiered at MTV 's Headbanger 's Ball . The song parodies American metalcore with its music , lyrics and vocals . In March 2005 , Anomalies was released , and the band toured in North America once again . 
 Mullen exited in January 2006 to prioritize his education and other acts , and the band soon found replacement Nick Schendzielos . In March , the band 's recording studio was robbed . They played several shows in the United States in April , and an extensive European tour followed in June with Darkest Hour . 
 = = = Xenosapien ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = 
 The band recorded its next studio album between November and December 2006 , and its release was set for May 2007 under the title Xenosapien . In March 2007 , the band supported <unk> on U.S. dates and subsequently embarked on " Xenosapien World Tour " , which started in continental Europe on May 4 , continued in United Kingdom and Ireland in May and resumed in the " Summer Slaughter " trek ( dubbed the " Summer ’ s Laughter " by band members ) across the U.S. throughout June and July along with Decapitated among others . The band also filmed a music video for the song " Endless Cycle of Violence " . On November 20 , 2007 , the band 's van was robbed . Their " recent earnings from the tour ( close to $ 4 @,@ 000 ) , a laptop with more than $ 2 @,@ 000 in music @-@ software programs loaded , an iPod and various personal items " were stolen . 
 Cephalic Carnage reissued Conforming to Abnormality under Relapse Records on April 29 , 2008 . Cephalic Carnage participated in a " mini @-@ tour " of Japan in May 2009 , performing in Osaka , Nagoya and Tokyo . In June 2009 , Cephalic Carnage , along with Cattle Decapitation and Withered , pulled out of the <unk> tour due to organization problems and said they were " getting on with writing the next full length , ( ... ) as well as finishing construction of our late night <unk> stand , where we will serve country @-@ fried giraffe eggs and your favorite French @-@ Canadian specialty . " In October 2009 , the band released a music video for the song " <unk> " while writing a new album and announced a planned concert DVD entitled Live At Your Mom 's House . 
 = = = Misled by Certainty ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 Cephalic Carnage began recording their new album , Misled by Certainty , in May 2010 . It was released August 31 , 2010 by Relapse Records . They also reissued Lucid Interval on September 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Allmusic describes the style of Cephalic Carnage as " crazy concoction of truly experimental grindcore , death metal , and jazz " . Their music varies from death @-@ grind , technical death metal , occasional surf rock , instrumental , to flamenco interludes or violin @-@ and @-@ sax ambient jams . Their early style is typically progressive and technically proficient , with some comedic songs . Their later work developed into a more experimental , complex direction . 
 Cephalic Carnage is also known for its humorous songs . Popmatters points out some examples : " On past albums , the band has taken satirical swipes at the overtly image @-@ oriented black metal ( " Black Metal Sabbath " ) and the oversaturated , angst @-@ ridden metalcore sound ( " Dying Will Be the Death of Me " ) , and even in live settings , they ’ re not above taking the odd spontaneous piss @-@ take to bring some levity to a situation . One notorious YouTube clip has a fight starting in the pit at a Cephalic show in Toronto , and in an inspired moment , the band launches into a rousing excerpt from " Eye of the Tiger " , to a raucous ovation from the kids . " 
 = = Members = = 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Assassination of Ali = 
 Ali ibn Abi Talib , the fourth ( last ) Sunni Rashidun caliph and first Shia Imam , was assassinated by a Kharijite called Ibn Muljam on 26 January 661 at the Great Mosque of Kufa , in present @-@ day Iraq . Ali , who was then 62 or 63 years of age , died due to his injuries two days after Ibn Muljam struck him on his head by a poison @-@ coated sword , on the 21 ( or 19 ) Ramadan 40 AH ( 28 January 661 CE ) . He was the third successive caliph , after Umar and Uthman , to be assassinated . 
 Ali became the caliph after the assassination of Uthman in 656 . However he faced opposition from various factions including the Levant governor , Muawiyah I. A civil war , called the First Fitna , took place within the early Islamic state which resulted in the overthrow of the Rashidun caliphs and the establishment of the Umayyad dynasty . It began when the caliph Uthman ibn Affan was assassinated in 656 and continued through the four @-@ year reign of Ali . After Ali agreed to arbitration with Muawiyah I following the Battle of Siffin ( 657 ) , a revolt happened against him by some members of his army , later known as Kharijites ( " those who leave " ) . They killed some of Ali 's supporters , but they were crushed by Ali 's forces at the Battle of Nahrawan in July 658 . 
 Ibn Muljam met up with two other Kharijites namely al @-@ <unk> ibn Abd Allah and Amr ibn Bakr al @-@ Tamimi at Mecca , and concluded that the situation of the Muslims at the time was due to the errors of Ali , Muawiah and Amr ibn As , governor of Egypt . They decided to kill the three in order to resolve the " deplorable situation " of their time and also avenge their companions killed at Nahrawan . Aiming to kill Ali , Ibn Muljam headed toward Kufa where he fell in love with a woman whose brother and father had died at Nahrawan . She agreed to marry him if only he could kill Ali . Consequently , Ali was stabbed by Ibn Muljam at the Great Mosque of Kufa . After Ali 's death , Ibn Muljam was executed in retaliation by Hasan ibn Ali . 
 = = Background = = 
 Events leading to Ali 's assassination can be traced back to the death of Muhammad , prophet of Islam , where the community of Muslims disputed over his succession as the leader of Ummah . The assembly at the <unk> Bani Saida gave allegiance to Abu Bakr as the caliph . While Sunni <unk> believed that Muhammad had not selected a successor , Shia Muslims believed that Ali was appointed as <unk> 's successor by God referring to the event of <unk> Khumm . Abu Bakr was succeeded by Umar , who was murdered in 644 . After Umar 's death , Ali , the cousin and son @-@ in @-@ law of Muhammed , and Uthman were contenders for the post . Uthman was elected as caliph by an election council . Ali became the caliph after the assassination of Uthman in 656 . 
 Ali 's caliphate was coincident with First Fitna . Though Ali was elected as the fourth Rashidun ( the " rightly guided " ) caliph five days after Uthman 's death , he faced opposition during his rule . On one hand , A <unk> , Talhah and Al @-@ Zubayr revolted against him in Mecca and on the other hand Muawiyah I , the Umayyad governor of Levant , refused to pledge allegiance to him as the new caliph . Therefor , civil war took place which was about succession to the office of caliphate . Ali 's opponents asked the killers of Uthman should be punished . Ali , first emerged victorious at the Battle of Camel in 656 , against an army primarily led by Muhammad 's wife Aisha and other <unk> . Then , Ali also fought the Battle of Siffin in 657 against Muawiyah . The battle ended in a stalemate with Ali entering into arbitration with Muawiyah . 
 A group of Ali 's army , later known as Kharijites or <unk> ( " those who leave " ) , opposed against arbitration after the battle of Siffin , when he accepted arbitration with Mu 'awiya . They opposed to human judgement in the matter of religion and used " Judgment belongs to God alone , " as their slogan . In 658 they violated their oath of allegiance , revolted and openly threatened to kill any Muslim who would not join them . Ali defeated them at the Battle of Nahrawan . The killing of the Kharijites was " the most problematic event " during Ali 's caliphate , because they had been among his most vigorous allies in the war against Muawiah . 
 Ibn Muljam along with two other men , namely al @-@ <unk> ibn Abd Allah and Amr ibn Bakr al @-@ Tamimi , all considered as belonging to Kinda , met at Mecca and had a long discussion after the pilgrimage ceremony . They concluded that the situation of Muslims at the time was due to Ali , <unk> and Amr ibn al @-@ As , " whom they regarded as being in error " , and swore to kill them to also " avenge their companion 's massacred at al @-@ Nahrawan . " They arranged the date of assassination and each of them chose his victim . 
 = = Death = = 
 = = = Assassination = = = 
 Ali was assassinated by Ibn Muljam , a Kharijite from Egypt , at the Great Mosque of Kufa , located in Kufa , Iraq , on 26 January 661 . Ibn Muljam was of Himyar by male descent but counted among Murad due to his maternal kinship , and allied with the <unk> Jabala of Kindah . He had entered Kufa with the aim of killing Ali to avenge the Kharijite leaders at al @-@ Nahrawan . 
 In Kufa , he encountered a group of people from <unk> al @-@ <unk> tribe who were mourning ten of their <unk> killed at Nahrawan by Ali 's army . Among them was a woman named Quttaam . According to cleric Ali al @-@ <unk> , on seeing Quttaam , he " lost his senses " and " forgot the assignment " for which he was roaming , and proposed to her . Quttaam said that she would marry him if he could " heal " her by giving her three thousand dinars , a chanteuse , a male slave and the death of Ali . Quttaam wanted revenge too as her father and brother had been killed by Ali 's forces at Al @-@ Nahrawan . Ibn Muljam persuaded a man called <unk> to assist him in killing Ali . Besides <unk> ibn <unk> , Wardan ibn al @-@ <unk> also were Ibn Muljam 's accomplice . The conspirators stationed themselves opposite the door from which Ali would enter the Mosque . 
 On Friday , 19 ( or 17 ) Ramadan , Ali entered Kufa mosque to perform the morning prayer . Ibn Muljam wounded Ali on the " crown of his head " by a poisoned sword after Ali had recited verses from the Sura al @-@ <unk> as part of the worship , or when he was entering the mosque . <unk> 's sword did not hit Ali and instead " hit the wooden frame of the door or the arch . " He fled and was caught near the gates of Kinda by ' <unk> ' , but could finally escape through the crowd . Wardan ran away to his home and was killed there by a relative , " ' Abd Allah b . <unk> b . Ubayd , after confessing his involvement . " Ibn Muljam was caught by the <unk> al @-@ <unk> ibn Nawfal ibn al @-@ Harith . 
 = = = The role of Al @-@ Ash 'ath ibn Qays = = = 
 al @-@ Ash 'ath ibn Qays was the chief of Kindah tribe in Kufa . According to <unk> Madelung , in the final years of Ali 's reign he had tendency towards Muawiah and received letter including offers of money from him to show reluctance about Ali 's campaign against Muawiah . Some sources have accused al @-@ Ash 'ath of being informed of the plot of the assassination of Ali . According to al @-@ Yaqubi , Ibn Muljam was hosted by al @-@ Ash 'ath for a month when Ibn Muljam had been preparing his sword . Another report by Ibn Sa 'd says that al @-@ Ash 'ath stayed the night of the killing at mosque counseling Ibn Muljam and that al @-@ Ash 'ath signaled the time of attempting the assassination by saying " the morning has smiled . " The majority of the sources narrates an ambiguous phrase from Al @-@ Ash 'ath : " the dawn has risen for thee " and those who has Shia tendency give it as a clear encouragement to Ibn Muljam : " Deliverance , deliverance ! The dawn has risen for thee . " After assassination , Hujr ibn ' Adi accused him for Ali 's murder . There is even a report which says he warned Ali about Ibn Muljam . According to Laura Veccia Vaglieri , the sources narrate different reports which vary from outright accusation to a suspicion of complicity and even to an act of loyalty . 
 However al @-@ <unk> believes that these accusations against al @-@ Ash 'ath seem baseless as he was a loyalist and was against Kharijites from the time they first appeared and fought them at Nahrawan . He was also the first one to fight against the people of Syria in the battle for the water . Moreover , he believes there exists no narration from the family of Ali ibn Abi Talib supporting these accusations against al @-@ Ash 'ath , neither his family did not discuss it with any member of al @-@ Ash 'ath 's family . After Ali was injured by Ibn Muljam , al @-@ Ashʿath sent his son to determine Ali 's condition , his words suggesting that he knew Ali would not survive . 
 = = = Death and burial = = = 
 Ali ordered that if he died from the wound , Ibn Muljam had to be executed in retaliation . Otherwise , if he survived , he would decide on how to treat him . Ali died two days later on 21 Ramadan 40 / 30 January 661 ( or 19 Ramadan 40 / 28 January 661 ) at the age of 62 or 63 , and Ibn Muljam was killed in retaliation ( Qisas ) by Hasan ibn Ali , in accordance to Ali 's instruction . 
 Ali 's body was washed by his sons , Hasan , Husayn , Muhammad ibn al @-@ <unk> and one of his nephew , Abdullah ibn Ja 'far . Then secretly buried by those men and ' <unk> ibn al @-@ Abbas , since it was feared that his body would be " exhumed and profaned " . Some sources claim Ali was buried at the Imam Ali Mosque at Najaf in present @-@ day Iraq , while others , usually Afghans , say he was buried at the <unk> @-@ e @-@ Sharif in the Afghan city of Mazar @-@ e @-@ Sharif . Ali 's death is commemorated by Shia Muslims every year . 
 = = = Ali 's prediction of his fate = = = 
 Two types of traditions exist regrading Ali 's awareness of his fate long before the assassination . This foreknowledge was through his own " premonition of it " or by Muhammad . Based on numerous traditions , Ali 's beard staining with " blood flowing from his head " had been revealed by Muhammad or Ali . Another set of traditions by Muhammad says that " the most evil man among the ancients was he who had killed the camel of the prophet Salih and among his contemporaries , he who would kill Ali . " The night of the assassination , Ali said that his fate was about to come true , and when he left home in the morning , " geese followed him , cackling " weeping for his funeral , as he said later . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 According to <unk> Madelung , a small minority of people were convinced that " he was the best of Muslims after the Prophet and the only one entitled to rule them , " and after Ali 's death people were divided regarding their view toward him . " Distrust of , and opposition to , Mu 'awiya and his Syrian cohorts " was what united the majority . Ali 's admirers then turned into majority due to " <unk> , misrule and repression " of Umayyad . 
 After Ali 's death , the Shias of Iraq declared Ali 's eldest son Hasan the successor to Ali , thus proclaiming him as their new caliph . However , Hasan was not interested in becoming caliph , and to prevent further bloodshed , he signed the Hasan – <unk> treaty and abdicated in favor of Muawiyah , who became the first caliph of the Umayyad caliphate . Muawiyah died in Medina at the age of forty @-@ five in 669 , and was succeeded by Yazid I in 61 AH ( 680 CE ) but Hasan 's brother Husayn ibn Ali refused to accept Yazid 's leadership . After being invited by the Shiites of Iraq in the same year , Husayn started his march to Iraq . However , during their stay at Karbala , his army was massacred by Yazid at the Battle of Karbala on 10 Muharram ( 10 October ) and his death is commemorated by Shia every year during Muharram . 
 = Tea processing = 
 Tea processing is the method in which the leaves from the tea plant Camellia sinensis are transformed into the dried leaves for brewing tea . 
 The categories of tea are distinguished by the processing they undergo . In its most general form , tea processing involves different manners and degree of oxidation of the leaves , stopping the oxidation , forming the tea and drying it . 
 The innate flavour of the dried tea leaves is determined by the type of cultivar of the tea bush , the quality of the plucked tea leaves , and the manner and quality of the production processing they undergo . After processing , a tea may be blended with other teas or mixed with <unk> to alter the flavour of the final tea . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the tea processing corresponds intimately with the role that tea played in Chinese society and the preferred methods of its consumption in Ancient Chinese society . 
 = = = Green = = = 
 The ancient Chinese society first encountered the tea plant in what is now southern China and processed it as another medicinal herb for use in Chinese herbology . The processing technique used to process fresh tea leaves was to immediately steam the fresh tea leaves and dry them for preservation , which is likely the most ancient Chinese form of tea leaf processing . This processing method was perfected near the end of the Han Dynasty ( 206 BCE @-@ 220 CE ) and produced a dried tea that would be classified today as " green tea " and quite similar to modern Japanese <unk> . For consumption , dried tea leaves were either <unk> with water around with other herbs , or ground into a powder to be taken straight or in a liquid . 
 With the increase of tea 's use in Chinese herbology , production methods changed , where the processed green tea leaves were not immediately dried after steaming . Rather the steamed tea leaves were first pulverized into a paste form , with the paste then formed in moulds and slowly dried into brick tea , a technique well described by Lu Yu in his work The Classic of Tea . Tender leaves and leaf buds were generally not used , as older mature tea leaves were preferred for tea production . Some tea bricks were also produced from mature whole leaves , which typically required the use of a cooked rice slurry ( <unk> ) to bind the tea brick together . The preference of producing tea in brick form possibly stems from the fact that it can be more easily transported and stored . 
 = = = Yellow and fermented = = = 
 This use of steam in fixation ( <unk> ) for tea leaf enzymes is an important step in processing tea , with the leaves to be quickly cooled down and undergo further processing . The less tightly controlled methods of it in the past resulted in the creation of " yellow tea " when the tea leaves were over @-@ steamed for fixation or were not quickly spread out , doused with water and cooled . Although green tea was the most popular in Lu Yu 's time , he personally considered yellow tea to be superior to green . 
 Even when the leaves were quickly cooled , if they are left in piles ( <unk> ) for too long before processing , the leaves will begin to undergo microbial fermentation to produce " post @-@ fermented tea " . This technique is somewhat similar to composting , albeit tightly controlled , and still used in the production of Liu 'an tea ( <unk> ) and was more recently introduced for the production of the " ripe " type pu @-@ erh tea . The production of tea in brick forms and their storage also resulted in another type of post @-@ fermented tea , which was produced by aging . The long transport and storage times of the day unwittingly allowed the tea bricks to undergo prolonged exposure to the elements and to various microflora , which resulted in the aging , oxidation , and fermentation of green brick teas . A brick of green tea that had been stored and aged into post @-@ fermented tea was charred over charcoal to rid it of the layer of detritus , dust , and shiny multicoloured growths before being broken down into a powder , cooked , and then consumed . By the end of Tang Dynasty ( 618 @-@ <unk> ) green , yellow , and post @-@ fermented tea was commonly used in China and moved from purely being used in herbology to becoming a beverage drunk for pleasure . 
 = = = Oolong and white = = = 
 The Qing Dynasty was also the period when oolong tea was first developed in the Fujian province . It was originally produced in thin brick form , known then under then name " <unk> " tea ( <unk> ) . The importance of the withering process for producing oolong tea was described by poet Huang <unk> ( <unk> ) in his poem " <unk> " , which indicated that the processing of tea leaves is not a simple task , requiring the scaling of steep cliffs to pick the choicest leaves and the withering of the leaves under the sun and warm winds ( " <unk> ， <unk> 。 <unk> ， <unk> ... " ) . 
 White tea ( <unk> ) was also developed in the Fujian province with its first mentions in the Song Dynasty document Treatise on Tea , where the delicate buds used for producing white tea , the difficulty in producing it , its taste , and its rarity were lauded . The production method of white tea was described by Ming Dynasty author Tian <unk> ( <unk> ) in " <unk> <unk> " ( <unk> ) ( produced in the 33rd year of the Jiajing Emperor ) regarding Fuding white tea ( <unk> ) . In this work , he stated that tea buds that have undergone fixation by panning over flames ( as with green tea ) is second to a white tea that was simply allowed to dry under the sun , since it is more natural in taste and lacks flavours imparted by the smoke and flames ( " <unk> ， <unk> , <unk> ， <unk> " ) 
 = = = Black = = = 
 The technique for producing black tea was first developed during the late Ming Dynasty <unk> , Fujian either resulting from the over @-@ oxidation of tea @-@ leaves during the manufacture of oolong tea or indirectly from the methods of manufacturing green and white teas . In the early 1600s , tea producers in the <unk> Mountains began kneading the sun @-@ withered tea leaves to macerate them , then allowed them to dry under the sun , thus reaching full oxidation and producing " <unk> " black tea ( <unk> ) . When there was insufficient sun and temperatures were low , the withered leaves would be processed indoors in warmed rooms and allowed to fully oxidize , then smoked dry over pine fires thus producing lapsang souchong . According to oral traditions of the region , the discovery of lapsang souchong processing was due to military troops passing through a <unk> 's tea factory during the last years of the Ming Dynasty , causing delays to tea leaf processing thus resulting in a completely oxidized leaf that the producer salvaged by drying over a fire built from pine branches . By the Qing Dynasty , both lapsang souchong and <unk> black tea were well recognized in China and noted in " Records on Yiwu mountain " ( <unk> ) by the scholar Dong Tiangong ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Procedure = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 Although each type of tea has different taste , smell , and visual appearance , tea processing for all tea types consists of a very similar set of methods with only minor variations . Without careful moisture and temperature control during its manufacture and life thereafter , fungi will grow on tea . This form of fungus causes real fermentation that will contaminate the tea and may render the tea unfit for consumption . 
 <unk> : Tea leaves and flushes , which includes a terminal bud and two young leaves , are picked from Camellia sinensis bushes typically twice a year during early spring and early summer or late spring . Autumn or winter pickings of tea flushes are much less common , though they occur when climate permits . Picking is done by hand when a higher quality tea is needed , or where labour costs are not prohibitive . Depending on the skill of the picker , hand @-@ picking is performed by pulling the flush with a snap of the forearm , arm , or even the shoulders , with the picker grasping the tea shoot using the thumb and forefinger , with the middle finger sometimes used in combination . Tea flushes and leaves can also be picked by machine , though there will be more broken leaves and partial flushes reducing the quality of the tea . However , it has also been shown that machine plucking in correctly timed harvesting periods can produce good leaves for the production of high quality teas . 
 Withering / <unk> : The tea leaves will begin to wilt soon after picking , with a gradual onset of enzymatic oxidation . Withering is used to remove excess water from the leaves and allows a very slight amount of oxidation . The leaves can be either put under the sun or left in a cool breezy room to pull moisture out from the leaves . The leaves sometimes lose more than a quarter of their weight in water during withering . The process is also important in promoting the breakdown of leaf proteins into free amino acids and increases the availability of freed caffeine , both of which change the taste of the tea . 
 Disruption : Known in the Western tea industry as " disruption " or " leaf maceration " , the teas are bruised or torn in order to promote and quicken oxidation . The leaves may be lightly bruised on their edges by shaking and tossing in a bamboo tray or tumbling in baskets . More extensive leaf disruption can be done by kneading , rolling , tearing , and crushing , usually by machinery . The bruising breaks down the structures inside and outside of the leaf cells and allows from the co @-@ mingling of oxidative enzymes with various substrates , which allows for the beginning of oxidation . This also releases some of the leaf juices , which may aid in oxidation and change the taste profile of the tea . 
 Oxidation / Fermentation : For teas that require oxidation , the leaves are left on their own in a climate @-@ controlled room where they turn progressively darker . This is accompanied by agitation in some cases . In this process the chlorophyll in the leaves is enzymatically broken down , and its tannins are released or transformed . This process is sometimes referred to as " fermentation " in the tea industry . The tea producer may choose when the oxidation should be stopped , which depends on the desired qualities in the final tea as well as the weather conditions ( heat and humidity ) . For light oolong teas this may be anywhere from 5 @-@ 40 % oxidation , in darker oolong teas 60 @-@ 70 % , and in black teas 100 % oxidation . Oxidation is highly important in the formation of many taste and aroma compounds , which give a tea its liquor colour , strength , and briskness . Depending on the type of tea desired , under or over @-@ oxidation / fermentation can result in grassy flavours , or overly thick <unk> flavours . 
 Fixation / Kill @-@ green : Kill @-@ green or <unk> ( <unk> ) is done to stop the tea leaf oxidation at a desired level . This process is accomplished by moderately heating tea leaves , thus deactivating their oxidative enzymes and removing unwanted scents in the leaves , without damaging the flavour of the tea . Traditionally , the tea leaves are panned in a wok or steamed , but with advancements in technology , kill @-@ green is sometimes done by baking or " panning " in a rolling drum . In some white teas and some black teas such as CTC blacks , kill @-@ green is done simultaneously with drying . 
 <unk> / <unk> : Unique to yellow teas , warm and damp tea leaves from after kill @-@ green are allowed to be lightly heated in a closed container , which causes the previously green leaves to turn yellow . The resulting leaves produce a beverage that has a distinctive yellowish @-@ green hue due to transformations of the leaf chlorophyll . Through being <unk> for 6 – 8 hours at close to human body temperatures , the amino acids and polyphenols in the processed tea leaves undergo chemical changes to give this tea its distinct briskness and mellow taste . 
 Rolling / Shaping : The damp tea leaves are then rolled to be formed into wrinkled strips , by hand or using a rolling machine which causes the tea to wrap around itself . This rolling action also causes some of the sap , essential oils , and juices inside the leaves to ooze out , which further enhances the taste of the tea . The strips of tea can then be formed into other shapes , such as being rolled into spirals , kneaded and rolled into pellets , or tied into balls , cones and other elaborate shapes . In many types of oolong , the rolled strips of tea leaf are then rolled to spheres or half spheres and is typically done by placing the damp leaves in large cloth bags , which are then kneaded by hand or machine in a specific manner . 
 Drying : Drying is done to " finish " the tea for sale . This can be done in a myriad of ways including panning , sunning , air drying , or baking . Baking is usually the most common . Great care must be taken to not over @-@ cook the leaves . The drying of the produced tea is responsible for many new flavour compounds particularly important in green teas . 
 Aging / <unk> : While not always required , some teas required additional aging , secondary fermentation , or baking to reach their drinking potential . For instance , a green tea <unk> , prior to curing into a post @-@ fermented tea , is often bitter and harsh in taste , but becomes sweet and mellow through fermentation by age or dampness . Additionally , oolong can benefit from aging if fired over charcoal . <unk> teas are manufactured in this stage by spraying the tea with aromas and flavours or by storing them with their <unk> . 
 = = = Type @-@ specific = = = 
 Tea is traditionally classified based on the degree or period of " fermentation " the leaves have undergone : 
 White tea 
 Young leaves or new growth buds that have undergone minimal oxidation through a slight amount of withering before halting the oxidative processes by being baked dry , with the optimal withering conditions at 30 degrees Celsius ( 65 % relative humidity ) for 26 hours . Withering of the leaves can last from around one to three days depending on the season and temperature of the processing environment . The buds may be shielded from sunlight to prevent the formation of chlorophyll . White tea is produced in lesser quantities than most other styles , and can be correspondingly more expensive than tea from the same plant processed by other methods . It is less well known in countries outside of China , though this is changing with increased western interest in the tea . There is an international disagreement on definition of white tea between China and other producing countries . In China , White tea is fully oxidized by letting the tea naturally dry out in sunlight . It is different from traditional black teas because it does not undergo any manmade processing such as rolling or curling . 
 Green tea 
 This tea has undergone the least amount of oxidation . The oxidation process is halted by the quick application of heat after tea picking , either with steam , the Japanese method , or by dry cooking in hot pans , the traditional Chinese method . Tea leaves may be left to dry as separate leaves or they may be rolled into small pellets to make gunpowder tea . This process is time consuming and is typically done with <unk> of higher quality . The tea is processed within one to two days of harvesting , and if done correctly retains most of the chemical composition of the fresh leaves from which it was produced . Variation in steaming time for fixation or processing from additional stages of rolling and drying are sometimes used to improve or altering the flavour for types of green tea . 
 Yellow tea 
 This tea is processed in a similar manner to green tea , but instead of immediate drying after fixation , it is stacked , covered , and gently heated in a humid environment . This initiates oxidation in the chlorophyll of the leaves through non @-@ enzymatic and non @-@ microbial means , which results in a yellowish or greenish @-@ yellow colour . 
 Oolong tea 
 This tea 's oxidation is stopped somewhere between the standards for green tea and black tea . The processing typically takes two to three days from withering to drying with a relatively short oxidation period of several hours . In Chinese , semi @-@ oxidized teas are collectively grouped as blue tea ( <unk> , literally : blue @-@ green tea / " celadon tea " ) , while the term " oolong " is used specifically as a name for certain semi @-@ oxidized teas . Common wisdom about lightly oxidized teas in Taiwan ( a large producer of Oolong ) is that too little oxidation upsets the stomach of some consumers . Even so , some producers attempt to minimize oxidation in order to produce a specific taste or allow the tea leaves to be easily rolled into the spherical or half @-@ sphere form demanded by buyers in the market . 
 Black tea 
 The tea leaves are allowed to completely oxidize . Black tea is first withered to induce protein breakdown and reduce water content ( 68 @-@ 77 % of original ) . The leaves then undergo a process known in the industry as " disruption " or " leaf maceration " , which through bruising or cutting disrupts leaf cell structures , releasing the leaf juices and enzymes that activate oxidation . The oxidation process takes between 45 – 90 minutes to 3 hours and is done at high humidity between 20 @-@ 30 degrees Celsius , transforming much of the <unk> of the leaves into complex tannin . Orthodox processed black teas are further graded according to the post @-@ production leaf quality by the Orange Pekoe system , while crush , tear , curl ( CTC ) teas use a different grading system . Orthodox tea leaves are heavily rolled either by hand or mechanically on a cylindrical rolling table or a <unk> . The rolling table consists of a ridged table @-@ top moving in an eccentric manner to a large hopper of tea leaves , of which the leaves are pressed down onto the table @-@ top . The process produces a mixture of whole and broken leaves , and particles which are then sorted , oxidized , and dried . The <unk> consisted of an auger pushing withered tea leaves through a vane cylinder which crushes and evenly cuts the leaves . Crush , tear , curl is a production method developed by William McKercher in 1930 which uses machines with contra @-@ rotating rotors with surfaces patterning that cut and tear the leaves producing a product popular for use in tea bags . The <unk> to often use to <unk> the withered tea prior to the CTC and to create broken orthodox processed black tea . 
 Post @-@ fermented tea 
 Teas that are allowed to undergo a second oxidation after the fixation of the tea leaves , such as Pu @-@ erh , Liu 'an , and <unk> , are collectively referred to as secondary or post @-@ fermentation teas in English . In Chinese they are categorized as Dark tea or black tea . This is not to be confused with the English term Black tea , known in Chinese as red tea . Pu @-@ erh , also known as <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) in Cantonese is the most common type of post @-@ <unk> tea in the market . 
 = Fear Her = 
 " Fear Her " is the eleventh episode of the second series of the British science @-@ fiction series Doctor Who , first broadcast on BBC One on 24 June 2006 . It was written by Matthew Graham and directed by Euros Lyn . 
 The episode takes place on the day of the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , almost exclusively on a fictitious cul @-@ de @-@ sac named after the British athlete Kelly Holmes . While originally only intending to visit the ceremony , alien time traveller the Doctor ( David Tennant ) and his companion Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) investigate Chloe Webber ( Abisola Agbaje ) , who has the ability to make people disappear by drawing them . 
 The episode was brought in to be a low @-@ budget replacement for a script by Stephen Fry that had been pushed back , and was filmed mainly in the Tremorfa area of Cardiff at a housing estate . Graham was asked to write an episode primarily for children which would soften the much darker finale that would be broadcast after . The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 14 million viewers in the UK , and was given an Appreciation Index of 83 . Though Graham received letters from children who enjoyed the episode , it did not generate a positive response from adult fans and critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The TARDIS materialises on the day of the opening ceremony of the 2012 Olympic Games . The neighbourhood is preparing for the passing of the Olympic torch bearer , but the mood has been dampened by the disappearances of several children in the prior week . A council worker named Kel also mentions that cars have been breaking down momentarily for the same period . The Doctor and Rose investigate and realise that the source of the problems is a solitary 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl named Chloe Webber . She has the unique ability to cause people to disappear by drawing them . The Doctor <unk> Chloe and finds out that she is possessed by an immature Isolus , an alien life @-@ form that travels through space with a family of billions . This particular Isolus crashed its pod to Earth due to a solar flare . The Isolus relates to and befriends Chloe , who had a troubled childhood . The Isolus has also caused Chloe to draw a life @-@ sized , exaggerated figure of her late father , who is strongly implied to have abused Chloe when he was alive . 
 The Doctor explains that if they can find the Isolus pod and provide it power , the alien will leave Chloe . A frantic Chloe draws the TARDIS and the Doctor , trapping them both in one of her sketches and forcing Rose to try to find the pod herself . She rationalises that the pod is located on the hottest spot on the street , a patch of freshly laid tar , and is able to dig it up . Meanwhile , Chloe has caused the entire crowd at the Olympic stadium to disappear and now is set on making everyone in the world disappear . Rose tries to find out how to power the pod , and uses visual indications from the Doctor 's picture to understand that the pod needs heat mixed with emotion . Rose throws the pod towards the Olympic Torch - a symbol of hope , courage , and love - as it passes down the street . The missing children and the crowd at the Olympics reappear , and Rose realises that the drawing Chloe had made of her father will similarly come to life . Rose and Chloe 's mother are able to calm Chloe by singing the Kookaburra song , causing the unseen monster - having fed off of Chloe 's emotions and fears - to disappear . 
 As the torch bearer approaches the Olympic Stadium he collapses , and the Doctor promptly and suddenly appears , picks up the torch , and completes the run to light the Olympic Flame . The heat of the flame and the emotion of the crowd power the pod , allowing the Isolus to leave Chloe and return home . The Doctor and Rose walk off to watch the games , and Rose remarks that nothing will ever split the two of them up . The Doctor becomes uneasy and muses that a storm is approaching . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Torchwood is again mentioned , by commentator Huw Edwards after the Olympic crowd disappears . The Doctor again invokes the Shadow Proclamation , the intergalactic police force first mentioned in " Rose " . The Doctor mentions that his dislike of cats stems from being " threatened by one in a nun 's <unk> " , a reference to the events of " New Earth " . In a bit of non @-@ series continuity , The Doctor asks Chloe to identify a Vulcan salute , then uses a Vulcan mind meld to put Chloe into a trance that allows communication with the Isolus within her . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Fear Her " was an <unk> episode , which replaced a planned but unproduced script by Stephen Fry . Writer Matthew Graham was told by showrunner Russell T Davies that it was going to be an inexpensive episode and had to take place on a housing estate , but Graham was nevertheless thrilled to be asked to write an episode . Graham stated in 2011 that they " set out to do right from the start " making the episode more aimed at children , rather than adults and older Doctor Who fans , as the much darker finale would be broadcast following it . Davies specifically asked Graham to write for his seven @-@ year @-@ old son . 
 Graham originally suggested a story about a man who had the ability to drain Earth of its beauty , but Davies preferred his own idea about the eerie nature of paintings or illustration . The Isolus was inspired by the villains in the 1978 film Invasion of the Body Snatchers . Early drafts of this episode were titled " Chloe Webber Destroys the Earth " , and later , " You 're a Bad Girl , Chloe Webber " , with one such draft having the episode take place on another planet . Both of these titles were rejected by Davies as they were too long . 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 Dame Kelly Holmes , who was mentioned in the episode , was considered for the part of the torchbearer , but was committed to Dancing On Ice at the time . Nina Sosanya and Abdul Salis had both appeared in the 2003 film Love Actually . Abisola Agbaje , who portrayed Chloe , was discovered at an after @-@ school drama club , where casting director Andy Pryor had held auditions for the part . Agbaje had to play both Chloe 's normal character and her character while being possessed by the Isolus , which Agbaje felt was " weird " . When performing as the Isolus she had to whisper , and an echo was added in post @-@ production . Agbaje found it " a bit hard to whisper " because she had a husky voice . A hand double for Agbaje drew the pictures , while the series ' storyboarder Shaun Williams drew the father in the cupboard . 
 Due to Fry 's script being dropped , production of some episodes of the second series had to be rescheduled , with " Fear Her " being produced alongside " The Idiot 's Lantern " . The episode was filmed during late January and early February 2006 , with the cold temperatures experienced during filming being explained in the plot as part of the Isolus ' endothermic nature . The majority of the episode , including exterior shots and Chloe 's home , was filmed in the Tremorfa area of Cardiff , with a majority of the remainder filmed in the Doctor Who studios in Newport . A storage yard by the Rhymney River off Newport Road in Cardiff was used for the location the TARDIS lands in . The Millennium Stadium in Cardiff was used for the Olympic Stadium . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Fear Her " was broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 24 June 2006 . Overnight UK figures for the first broadcast of " Fear Her " was 6 @.@ 6 million viewers , with a 39 @.@ 7 % audience share . Final consolidated ratings rose to 7 @.@ 14 million , making it the twelfth most @-@ watched programme on the channel for the week . The episode received an Appreciation Index of 83 . 
 Graham was happy with the episode himself and received letters from " loads of kids " who enjoyed it . When discovering that older fans had reacted negatively , he thought , " Well , it 's a shame that they have , but it wasn 't meant for them " . IGN 's Ahsan Haque gave the episode a 5 out of 10 rating , calling it " flat and formulaic " and everything about it was " slightly underwhelming " , though he thought what did work was the mother @-@ daughter teamwork at the end . He also noted " annoying self @-@ aggrandizing moments that made no sense and served only to make the episode feel unnecessarily campy " , such as the audience disappearing from the stadium and the Doctor carrying the torch . Comparing the episode to " The Idiot 's Lantern " in terms of plot , he felt that the latter was " far more entertaining " and that " Fear Her " lacked originality and humour . Dave Bradley of SFX awarded " Fear Her " three out of five stars , describing the plot as " ordinary " but thought it was " a decent breather before grander adventures to come " . He particularly praised the dialogue and thought " the claustrophobic effect of limiting the action to one household works " . Arnold T Blumburg , writing for Now Playing , gave the episode a grade of B + . He felt that the guest cast were " only just adequate " and that the story " plods along in places " , but the story worked because of the " delightful " interactions between the Doctor and Rose and the feel @-@ good ending . 
 In 2011 , SFX published an article stating arguments for and against the episode . The " Defence " stated that , while some minor roles were played " broadly " , Nina Sosanya and Abisola Agbaje were " extremely good " , and opined that the unusual things happening in a typical housing estate and the lack of appearance from a monster were effective . The " Prosecution " , on the other hand , described it as a " cheap filler " with a " cheesy " finale and called the lack of a monster a " severe disappointment " . Topless Robot named it the third worst Tenth Doctor episode . In a poll conducted by Doctor Who Magazine in 2009 which asked readers to rank all 200 stories that had been released , " Fear Her " fell at 192 out of 200 , making it the lowest ranked story of the revived series . In another poll conducted by Doctor Who Magazine in 2014 asking readers to rank every story that has been broadcast in the first 50 years of the show , " Fear Her " fell to 240 out of 241 making it not only the lowest ranked story of the revived series , but the second lowest ranked story of all time , just coming above The Twin Dilemma . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Fear Her " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Copper = 
 Copper is a chemical element with symbol Cu ( from Latin : cuprum ) and atomic number 29 . It is a soft , malleable and ductile metal with very high thermal and electrical conductivity . A freshly exposed surface of pure copper has a reddish @-@ orange color . It is used as a conductor of heat and electricity , as a building material and as a constituent of various metal alloys , such as Sterling silver used in jewelry , cupronickel used to make marine hardware and coins and <unk> used in strain gauges and thermocouples for temperature measurement . 
 Copper is found as a pure metal in nature , and this was the first source of the metal to be used by humans , ca . 8 @,@ 000 BC . It was the first metal to be smelted from its ore , ca . 5 @,@ 000 BC , the first metal to be cast into a shape in a mold , ca . 4 @,@ 000 BC and the first metal to be purposefully alloyed with another metal , tin , to create bronze , ca . 3 @,@ 500 BC . 
 In the Roman era , copper was principally mined on Cyprus , the origin of the name of the metal , from aes <unk> ( metal of Cyprus ) , later corrupted to <unk> , from which the words copper ( English ) , <unk> ( French ) , Koper ( Dutch ) and Kupfer ( German ) are all derived . The commonly encountered compounds are copper ( II ) salts , which often impart blue or green colors to such minerals as azurite , malachite , and turquoise , and have been used widely and historically as pigments . Architectural structures built with copper ( usually roofing elements ) corrode to give green verdigris ( or patina ) . Decorative art prominently features copper , both in the elemental metal and in compounds as pigments . Copper compounds are also used as bacteriostatic agents , fungicides , and wood preservatives . 
 Copper is essential to all living organisms as a trace dietary mineral because it is a key constituent of the respiratory enzyme complex cytochrome c oxidase . In molluscs and crustacea copper is a constituent of the blood pigment hemocyanin , replaced by the iron @-@ complexed hemoglobin in fish and other vertebrates . In humans , copper is found mainly in the liver , muscle , and bone . The adult body contains between 1 @.@ 4 and 2 @.@ 1 mg of copper per kilogram of body weight . Hence a healthy human weighing 60 kilogram contains approximately 0 @.@ 1 g of copper . However , this small amount is essential to the overall human well @-@ being . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 Copper , silver and gold are in group 11 of the periodic table , and they share certain attributes : they have one s @-@ orbital electron on top of a filled d @-@ electron shell and are characterized by high ductility and electrical and thermal conductivity . The filled d @-@ shells in these elements contribute little to interatomic interactions , which are dominated by the s @-@ electrons through metallic bonds . Unlike metals with incomplete d @-@ shells , metallic bonds in copper are lacking a covalent character and are relatively weak . This observation explains the low hardness and high ductility of single crystals of copper . At the macroscopic scale , introduction of extended defects to the crystal lattice , such as grain boundaries , hinders flow of the material under applied stress , thereby increasing its hardness . For this reason , copper is usually supplied in a fine @-@ grained polycrystalline form , which has greater strength than <unk> forms . 
 The softness of copper partly explains its high electrical conductivity ( 59 @.@ 6 × 106 S / m ) and high thermal conductivity , the second highest ( second only to silver ) among pure metals at room temperature . This is because the resistivity to electron transport in metals at room temperature originates primarily from scattering of electrons on thermal vibrations of the lattice , which are relatively weak in a soft metal . The maximum permissible current density of copper in open air is approximately 3 @.@ 1 × 106 A / m2 of cross @-@ sectional area , above which it begins to heat excessively . 
 Copper is one of four metallic elements with a natural color other than gray or silver , the others being caesium ( yellow ) , gold ( yellow ) , and osmium ( bluish ) . Pure copper is orange @-@ red and acquires a reddish tarnish when exposed to air . The characteristic color of copper results from the electronic transitions between the filled 3d and half @-@ empty 4s atomic shells – the energy difference between these shells corresponds to orange light . The same mechanism causes the yellow color of gold and caesium . 
 As with other metals , if copper is put in contact with another metal , galvanic corrosion will occur . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Copper does not react with water but it does slowly react with atmospheric oxygen to form a layer of brown @-@ black copper oxide which , unlike the rust that forms on iron in moist air , protects the underlying metal from further corrosion ( passivation ) . A green layer of verdigris ( copper carbonate ) can often be seen on old copper structures , such as the roofing of many older buildings and the Statue of Liberty . Copper tarnishes when exposed to some sulfur compounds , with which it reacts to form various copper sulfides . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 There are 29 isotopes of copper . <unk> and <unk> are stable , with <unk> comprising approximately 69 % of naturally occurring copper ; both have a spin of 3 ⁄ 2 . The other isotopes are radioactive , with the most stable being <unk> with a half @-@ life of 61 @.@ 83 hours . Seven metastable isotopes have been characterized ; <unk> is the longest @-@ lived with a half @-@ life of 3 @.@ 8 minutes . Isotopes with a mass number above 64 decay by β − , whereas those with a mass number below 64 decay by β + . <unk> , which has a half @-@ life of 12 @.@ 7 hours , decays both ways . 
 62Cu and <unk> have significant applications . 62Cu is used in 62Cu @-@ <unk> as a radioactive tracer for positron emission tomography . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 Copper is produced in massive stars and is present in the Earth 's crust in a proportion of about 50 parts per million ( ppm ) . It occurs as native copper , in the copper sulfides chalcopyrite and <unk> , in the copper carbonates azurite and malachite , and in the copper ( I ) oxide mineral <unk> . The largest mass of elemental copper discovered weighed 420 tonnes and was found in 1857 on the Keweenaw Peninsula in Michigan , US . Native copper is a <unk> , with the largest single crystal ever described measuring 4 @.@ 4 × 3 @.@ 2 × 3 @.@ 2 cm . 
 = = Production = = 
 Most copper is mined or extracted as copper sulfides from large open pit mines in porphyry copper deposits that contain 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 0 % copper . Sites include Chuquicamata in Chile , Bingham Canyon Mine in Utah , United States and El Chino Mine in New Mexico , United States . According to the British Geological Survey in 2005 , Chile was the top producer of copper with at least one @-@ third world share followed by the United States , Indonesia and Peru . Copper can also be recovered through the in @-@ situ leach process . Several sites in the state of Arizona are considered prime candidates for this method . The amount of copper in use is increasing and the quantity available is barely sufficient to allow all countries to reach developed world levels of usage . 
 = = = Reserves = = = 
 Copper has been in use at least 10 @,@ 000 years , but more than 95 % of all copper ever mined and smelted has been extracted since 1900 , and more than half was extracted the last 24 years . As with many natural resources , the total amount of copper on Earth is vast , with around 1014 tons in the top kilometer of Earth 's crust , which is about 5 million years ' worth at the current rate of extraction . However , only a tiny fraction of these reserves is economically viable with present @-@ day prices and technologies . Estimates of copper reserves available for mining vary from 25 years to 60 years , depending on core assumptions such as the growth rate . Recycling is a major source of copper in the modern world . Because of these and other factors , the future of copper production and supply is the subject of much debate , including the concept of peak copper , analogous to peak oil . 
 The price of copper has historically been unstable , and it <unk> from the 60 @-@ year low of US $ 0 @.@ 60 / lb ( US $ 1 @.@ 32 / kg ) in June 1999 to US $ 3 @.@ 75 per pound ( US $ 8 @.@ 27 / kg ) in May 2006 . It dropped to US $ 2 @.@ 40 / lb ( US $ 5 @.@ 29 / kg ) in February 2007 , then rebounded to US $ 3 @.@ 50 / lb ( US $ 7 @.@ 71 / kg ) in April 2007 . In February 2009 , weakening global demand and a steep fall in commodity prices since the previous year 's highs left copper prices at US $ 1 @.@ 51 / lb ( US $ 3 @.@ 32 / kg ) . 
 = = = Methods = = = 
 The concentration of copper in ores averages only 0 @.@ 6 % , and most commercial ores are sulfides , especially chalcopyrite ( <unk> ) and to a lesser extent <unk> ( Cu2S ) . These minerals are concentrated from crushed ores to the level of 10 – 15 % copper by froth flotation or <unk> . Heating this material with silica in flash smelting removes much of the iron as slag . The process exploits the greater ease of converting iron sulfides into oxides , which in turn react with the silica to form the silicate slag that floats on top of the heated mass . The resulting copper matte , consisting of Cu2S , is roasted to convert all sulfides into oxides : 
 2 Cu2S + 3 O2 → 2 <unk> + 2 SO2 
 The cuprous oxide is converted to blister copper upon heating : 
 2 <unk> → 4 Cu + O2 
 The Sudbury matte process converted only half the sulfide to oxide and then used this oxide to remove the rest of the sulfur as oxide . It was then electrolytically refined and the anode mud exploited for the platinum and gold it contained . This step exploits the relatively easy reduction of copper oxides to copper metal . Natural gas is blown across the blister to remove most of the remaining oxygen and electrorefining is performed on the resulting material to produce pure copper : 
 Cu2 + + 2 e − → Cu 
 = = = Recycling = = = 
 Like aluminium , copper is 100 % recyclable without any loss of quality , both from raw state and from manufactured products . In volume , copper is the third most recycled metal after iron and aluminium . An estimated 80 % of all copper ever mined is still in use today . According to the International Resource Panel 's Metal Stocks in Society report , the global per capita stock of copper in use in society is 35 – 55 kg . Much of this is in more @-@ developed countries ( 140 – 300 kg per capita ) rather than less @-@ developed countries ( 30 – 40 kg per capita ) . 
 The process of recycling copper is roughly the same as is used to extract copper but requires fewer steps . High @-@ purity scrap copper is melted in a furnace and then reduced and cast into billets and ingots ; lower @-@ purity scrap is refined by electroplating in a bath of sulfuric acid . 
 = = Alloys = = 
 Numerous copper alloys have been formulated , many with important uses . Brass is an alloy of copper and zinc . Bronze usually refers to copper @-@ tin alloys , but can refer to any alloy of copper such as aluminium bronze . Copper is one of the most important constituents of silver and carat gold and carat solders used in the jewelry industry , modifying the color , hardness and melting point of the resulting alloys . Some lead @-@ free solders consist of tin alloyed with a small proportion of copper and other metals . 
 The alloy of copper and nickel , called cupronickel , is used in low @-@ denomination coins , often for the outer cladding . The US 5 @-@ cent coin ( currently called a nickel ) consists of 75 % copper and 25 % nickel in homogeneous composition . The alloy of 90 % copper and 10 % nickel , remarkable for its resistance to corrosion , is used for various objects exposed to seawater , though it is vulnerable to the sulfides sometimes found in polluted harbors and estuaries . Alloys of copper with aluminium ( about 7 % ) have a pleasant golden color and are used in decorations . <unk> is a Japanese decorative alloy of copper containing a low percentage of gold , typically 4 @-@ 10 % , that can be patinated to a dark blue or black colour . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Copper forms a rich variety of compounds , usually with oxidation states + 1 and + 2 , which are often called cuprous and cupric , respectively . 
 = = = Binary compounds = = = 
 As with other elements , the simplest compounds of copper are binary compounds , i.e. those containing only two elements , the principal examples being oxides , sulfides , and halides . Both cuprous and cupric oxides are known . Among the numerous copper sulfides , important examples include copper ( I ) sulfide and copper ( II ) sulfide . 
 <unk> halides ( with chlorine , bromine , and iodine ) are known , as are cupric halides with fluorine , chlorine , and bromine . Attempts to prepare copper ( II ) iodide yield only cuprous iodide and iodine . 
 2 Cu2 + + 4 I − → 2 <unk> + I2 
 = = = Coordination chemistry = = = 
 Copper forms coordination complexes with ligands . In aqueous solution , copper ( II ) exists as [ Cu ( H2O ) 6 ] 2 + . This complex exhibits the fastest water exchange rate ( speed of water ligands attaching and detaching ) for any transition metal aquo complex . Adding aqueous sodium hydroxide causes the precipitation of light blue solid copper ( II ) hydroxide . A simplified equation is : 
 Cu2 + + 2 OH − → Cu ( OH ) 2 
 Aqueous ammonia results in the same precipitate . Upon adding excess ammonia , the precipitate dissolves , forming <unk> ( II ) : 
 Cu ( H2O ) 4 ( OH ) 2 + 4 NH3 → [ Cu ( H2O ) 2 ( NH3 ) 4 ] 2 + + 2 H2O + 2 OH − 
 Many other oxyanions form complexes ; these include copper ( II ) acetate , copper ( II ) nitrate , and copper ( II ) carbonate . Copper ( II ) sulfate forms a blue crystalline pentahydrate , the most familiar copper compound in the laboratory . It is used in a fungicide called the Bordeaux mixture . 
 <unk> , compounds containing more than one alcohol functional group , generally interact with cupric salts . For example , copper salts are used to test for reducing sugars . Specifically , using Benedict 's reagent and Fehling 's solution the presence of the sugar is signaled by a color change from blue Cu ( II ) to reddish copper ( I ) oxide . Schweizer 's reagent and related complexes with ethylenediamine and other amines dissolve cellulose . Amino acids form very stable chelate complexes with copper ( II ) . Many wet @-@ chemical tests for copper ions exist , one involving potassium ferrocyanide , which gives a brown precipitate with copper ( II ) salts . 
 = = = <unk> chemistry = = = 
 Compounds that contain a carbon @-@ copper bond are known as organocopper compounds . They are very reactive towards oxygen to form copper ( I ) oxide and have many uses in chemistry . They are synthesized by treating copper ( I ) compounds with Grignard reagents , terminal alkynes or organolithium reagents ; in particular , the last reaction described produces a Gilman reagent . These can undergo substitution with alkyl halides to form coupling products ; as such , they are important in the field of organic synthesis . Copper ( I ) acetylide is highly shock @-@ sensitive but is an intermediate in reactions such as the <unk> @-@ Chodkiewicz coupling and the <unk> coupling . <unk> addition to enones and <unk> of alkynes can also be achieved with organocopper compounds . Copper ( I ) forms a variety of weak complexes with alkenes and carbon monoxide , especially in the presence of amine ligands . 
 = = = Copper ( III ) and copper ( IV ) = = = 
 Copper ( III ) is most often found in oxides . A simple example is potassium cuprate , <unk> , a blue @-@ black solid . The most extensively studied copper ( III ) compounds are the cuprate superconductors . Yttrium barium copper oxide ( YBa2Cu3O7 ) consists of both Cu ( II ) and Cu ( III ) centres . Like oxide , fluoride is a highly basic anion and is known to stabilize metal ions in high oxidation states . Both copper ( III ) and even copper ( IV ) fluorides are known , <unk> and <unk> , respectively . 
 Some copper proteins form oxo complexes , which also feature copper ( III ) . With <unk> , purple @-@ colored copper ( III ) complexes are stabilized by the deprotonated amide ligands . 
 Complexes of copper ( III ) are also found as intermediates in reactions of organocopper compounds . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Copper Age = = = 
 Copper occurs naturally as native metallic copper and was known to some of the oldest civilizations on record . The history of copper use is at least 11 @,@ 000 years old , estimated to have begun in 9000 BC in the Middle East ; a copper pendant was found in northern Iraq that dates to 8700 BC . Evidence suggests that gold and meteoric iron ( but not iron smelting ) were the only metals used by humans before copper . The history of copper metallurgy is thought to follow this sequence : 1 ) cold working of native copper , 2 ) annealing , 3 ) smelting , and 4 ) the lost wax casting . In southeastern Anatolia , all four of these techniques appear more or less simultaneously at the beginning of the Neolithic c . 7500 BC . 
 Just as agriculture was independently invented in several parts of the world , copper smelting was independently invented in different places . It was probably discovered in China before 2800 BC , in Central America perhaps around 600 AD , and in West Africa about the 9th or 10th century AD . Investment casting was invented in 4500 – 4000 BC in Southeast Asia and carbon dating has established mining at Alderley Edge in Cheshire , UK at 2280 to 1890 BC . Ötzi the Iceman , a male dated from 3300 – 3200 BC , was found with an axe with a copper head 99 @.@ 7 % pure ; high levels of arsenic in his hair suggest his involvement in copper smelting . Experience with copper has assisted the development of other metals ; in particular , copper smelting led to the discovery of iron smelting . Production in the Old Copper Complex in Michigan and Wisconsin is dated between 6000 and 3000 BC . Natural bronze , a type of copper made from ores rich in silicon , arsenic , and ( rarely ) tin , came into general use in the Balkans around 5500 BC . 
 = = = Bronze Age = = = 
 Alloying copper with tin to make bronze was first practiced about 4000 years after the discovery of copper smelting , and about 2000 years after " natural bronze " had come into general use . Bronze artifacts from the Vinča culture date to 4500 BC . Sumerian and Egyptian artifacts of copper and bronze alloys date to 3000 BC . The Bronze Age began in Southeastern Europe around 3700 – 3300 BC , in Northwestern Europe about 2500 BC . It ended with the beginning of the Iron Age , 2000 – 1000 BC in the Near East , and 600 BC in Northern Europe . The transition between the Neolithic period and the Bronze Age was formerly termed the Chalcolithic period ( copper @-@ stone ) , when copper tools were used with stone tools . The term has gradually fallen out of favor because in some parts of the world , the Chalcolithic and Neolithic are coterminous at both ends . Brass , an alloy of copper and zinc , is of much more recent origin . It was known to the Greeks , but became a significant supplement to bronze during the Roman Empire . 
 = = = Antiquity and Middle Ages = = = 
 In Greece , copper was known by the name <unk> ( <unk> ) . It was an important resource for the Romans , Greeks and other ancient peoples . In Roman times , it was known as aes <unk> , aes being the generic Latin term for copper alloys and <unk> from Cyprus , where much copper was mined . The phrase was simplified to cuprum , hence the English copper . Aphrodite ( Venus in Rome ) represented copper in mythology and alchemy because of its lustrous beauty and its ancient use in producing mirrors ; Cyprus was sacred to the goddess . The seven heavenly bodies known to the ancients were associated with the seven metals known in antiquity , and Venus was assigned to copper . 
 Britain first used brass in about the 3rd or 2nd Century BC . In North America , copper mining began with marginal workings by Native Americans . Native copper is known to have been extracted from sites on Isle Royale with primitive stone tools between 800 and 1600 . Copper metallurgy was flourishing in South America , particularly in Peru around 1000 AD . Copper burial ornamentals from the 15th century have been uncovered , but the metal 's commercial production did not start until the early 20th century . 
 The cultural role of copper has been important , particularly in currency . Romans in the 6th through 3rd centuries BC used copper lumps as money . At first , the copper itself was valued , but gradually the shape and look of the copper became more important . Julius Caesar had his own coins made from brass , while Octavianus Augustus Caesar 's coins were made from Cu @-@ Pb @-@ Sn alloys . With an estimated annual output of around 15 @,@ 000 t , Roman copper mining and smelting activities reached a scale unsurpassed until the time of the Industrial Revolution ; the provinces most intensely mined were those of Hispania , Cyprus and in Central Europe . 
 The gates of the Temple of Jerusalem used Corinthian bronze treated with depletion gilding . The process was most prevalent in Alexandria , where alchemy is thought to have begun . In ancient India , copper was used in the holistic medical science Ayurveda for surgical instruments and other medical equipment . Ancient Egyptians ( ~ 2400 BC ) used copper for sterilizing wounds and drinking water , and later to treat headaches , burns , and itching . 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
 The Great Copper Mountain was a mine in Falun , Sweden , that operated from the 10th century to 1992 . It satisfied two thirds of Europe 's copper consumption in the 17th century and helped fund many of Sweden 's wars during that time . It was referred to as the nation 's treasury ; Sweden had a copper backed currency . 
 Copper was used in roofing , currency , Renaissance sculpture , photographic technology known as the daguerreotype , the Statue of Liberty , and other structures . Copper plating and copper sheathing was widely used in the hulls of ships , of which the ships of Christopher Columbus were among the earliest . The Norddeutsche <unk> in Hamburg was the first modern electroplating plant starting its production in 1876 . The German scientist Gottfried Osann invented powder metallurgy in 1830 while determining the metal 's atomic mass ; around then it was discovered that the amount and type of alloying element ( e.g. , tin ) to copper would affect bell tones . Flash smelting was developed by <unk> in Finland and first applied at <unk> in 1949 ; the energy @-@ efficient process accounts for 50 % of the world 's primary copper production . 
 The Intergovernmental Council of Copper Exporting Countries , formed in 1967 by Chile , Peru , Zaire and Zambia , operated in the copper market as OPEC does in oil , though it never achieved the same influence , particularly because the second @-@ largest producer , the United States , was never a member ; it was dissolved in 1988 . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The major applications of copper are electrical wire ( 60 % ) , roofing and plumbing ( 20 % ) , and industrial machinery ( 15 % ) . Copper is used mostly as a pure metal , but when greater hardness is required , it is put into such alloys as brass and bronze ( 5 % of total use ) . For more than two centuries , copper paint has been used on boat hulls to control the growth of plants and shellfish . A small part of the copper supply is used for nutritional supplements and fungicides in agriculture . Machining of copper is possible , although alloys are preferred for good machinability in creating intricate parts . 
 = = = Wire and cable = = = 
 Despite competition from other materials , copper remains the preferred electrical conductor in nearly all categories of electrical wiring except overhead electric power transmission where aluminium is often preferred . Copper wire is used in power generation , power transmission , power distribution , telecommunications , electronics circuitry , and countless types of electrical equipment . Electrical wiring is the most important market for the copper industry . This includes structural power wiring , power distribution cable , appliance wire , communications cable , automotive wire and cable , and magnet wire . Roughly half of all copper mined is used for electrical wire and cable conductors . Many electrical devices rely on copper wiring because of its multitude of inherent beneficial properties , such as its high electrical conductivity , tensile strength , ductility , creep ( deformation ) resistance , corrosion resistance , low thermal expansion , high thermal conductivity , ease of soldering , malleability , and ease of installation . 
 For a short period from the late 1960s to the late 1970s , copper wiring was replaced by aluminum in many housing construction projects in America ( see Aluminum wire for main article ) . The new wiring was implicated in a number of house fires and the industry returned to copper . 
 = = = Electronics and related devices = = = 
 Integrated circuits and printed circuit boards increasingly feature copper in place of aluminium because of its superior electrical conductivity ( see Copper interconnect for main article ) ; heat sinks and heat exchangers use copper because of its superior heat dissipation properties . <unk> , vacuum tubes , cathode ray tubes , and magnetrons in microwave ovens use copper , as do wave guides for microwave radiation . 
 = = = Electric motors = = = 
 Copper 's superior conductivity enhances the efficiency of electrical motors . This is important because motors and motor @-@ driven systems account for 43 % <unk> % of all global electricity consumption and 69 % of all electricity used by industry . Increasing the mass and cross section of copper in a coil increases the efficiency of the motor . Copper motor rotors , a new technology designed for motor applications where energy savings are prime design objectives , are enabling general @-@ purpose induction motors to meet and exceed National Electrical Manufacturers Association ( <unk> ) premium efficiency standards . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Copper has been used since ancient times as a durable , corrosion resistant , and weatherproof architectural material . Roofs , flashings , rain gutters , downspouts , domes , spires , vaults , and doors have been made from copper for hundreds or thousands of years . Copper 's architectural use has been expanded in modern times to include interior and exterior wall cladding , building expansion joints , radio frequency shielding , and antimicrobial and decorative indoor products such as attractive handrails , bathroom fixtures , and counter tops . Some of copper 's other important benefits as an architectural material include low thermal movement , light weight , lightning protection , and recyclability . 
 The metal 's distinctive natural green patina has long been coveted by architects and designers . The final patina is a particularly durable layer that is highly resistant to atmospheric corrosion , thereby protecting the underlying metal against further weathering . It can be a mixture of carbonate and sulfate compounds in various amounts , depending upon environmental conditions such as sulfur @-@ containing acid rain . Architectural copper and its alloys can also be ' finished ' to embark a particular look , feel , and / or color . Finishes include mechanical surface treatments , chemical coloring , and coatings . 
 Copper has excellent brazing and soldering properties and can be welded ; the best results are obtained with gas metal arc welding . 
 = = = <unk> applications = = = 
 Copper is <unk> , meaning bacteria and many other forms of life will not grow on it . For this reason it has long been used to line parts of ships to protect against barnacles and mussels . It was originally used pure , but has since been superseded by Muntz metal and copper @-@ based paint . Similarly , as discussed in copper alloys in aquaculture , copper alloys have become important netting materials in the aquaculture industry because they are antimicrobial and prevent biofouling , even in extreme conditions and have strong structural and corrosion @-@ resistant properties in marine environments . 
 = = = Antimicrobial applications = = = 
 Copper @-@ alloy touch surfaces have natural properties that destroy a wide range of microorganisms ( e.g. , E. coli O157 : H7 , methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) , Staphylococcus , Clostridium difficile , influenza A virus , adenovirus , and fungi ) . Some 355 copper alloys were proven to kill more than 99 @.@ 9 % of disease @-@ causing bacteria within just two hours when cleaned regularly . The United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) has approved the registrations of these copper alloys as " antimicrobial materials with public health benefits " ; that approval allows manufacturers to make legal claims to the public health benefits of products made of registered alloys . In addition , the EPA has approved a long list of antimicrobial copper products made from these alloys , such as <unk> , handrails , over @-@ bed tables , sinks , faucets , door knobs , toilet hardware , computer keyboards , health club equipment , and shopping cart handles ( for a comprehensive list , see : Antimicrobial copper @-@ alloy touch surfaces # Approved products ) . Copper doorknobs are used by hospitals to reduce the transfer of disease , and Legionnaires ' disease is suppressed by copper tubing in plumbing systems . Antimicrobial copper alloy products are now being installed in healthcare facilities in the U.K. , Ireland , Japan , Korea , France , Denmark , and Brazil and in the subway transit system in Santiago , Chile , where copper @-@ zinc alloy handrails will be installed in some 30 stations between 2011 – 2014 . 
 = = = Folk medicine = = = 
 Copper is commonly used in jewelry , and according to some folklore , copper bracelets relieve arthritis symptoms . In various studies , though , no difference is found between arthritis treated with a copper bracelet , magnetic bracelet , or placebo bracelet . Medical science has not demonstrated any benefits in copper jewelry for any medical condition . A human being can have a dietary copper deficiency , but the condition is very rare because copper is present in many common foods , including legumes ( beans ) , grains , and nuts . 
 No evidence shows that copper can be absorbed through the skin . If it were , it might lead to copper poisoning . 
 = = = = Compression clothing = = = = 
 Recently , some compression clothing with inter @-@ woven copper has been marketed with the same folk medicine claims . Because compression clothing is a valid treatment for some ailments , the clothing may appear to work , but the added copper may have no benefit beyond a placebo effect . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Solutions of copper compounds are used as a wood preservative , particularly in treating the original portion of structures during restoration of dry rot damage . Together with zinc , copper wires may be installed over non @-@ conductive roofing materials to discourage the growth of moss . Textile fibers are blended with copper to create antimicrobial protective fabrics . Copper alloys are used in musical instruments , particularly : the body of brass instruments ; circuitry for all those that are electronically amplified ; the bodies of brass percussion such as gongs , bells , and kettle drums ; the metallic reeds of harmonicas , reed organs , and accordions ; tuning heads on guitars and other string instruments ; string windings on harps , pianos , harpsichords , and string instruments ; and the frame elements of pianos and harps . Copper is commonly used as a base on which other metals such as nickel are electroplated . 
 Copper is one of three metals , along with lead and silver , used in the museum materials testing procedure called the <unk> test to detect chlorides , oxides , and sulfur compounds . 
 Copper is used as the printing plate in etching , engraving and other forms of intaglio printmaking . 
 Copper oxide and carbonate are used add color in stain glass works , in glassmaking , and in ceramic glazes to impart turquoise blue , green , and brown colors . 
 = = Degradation = = 
 <unk> violaceum and Pseudomonas <unk> can both mobilize solid copper as a cyanide compound . The ericoid mycorrhizal fungi associated with Calluna , Erica and Vaccinium can grow in <unk> soils containing copper . The ectomycorrhizal fungus Suillus luteus protects young pine trees from copper toxicity . A sample of the fungus Aspergillus niger was found growing from gold mining solution and was found to contain <unk> complexes of such metals as gold , silver , copper , iron , and zinc . The fungus also plays a role in the <unk> of heavy metal sulfides . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 Copper proteins have diverse roles in biological electron transport and oxygen transportation , processes that exploit the easy interconversion of Cu ( I ) and Cu ( II ) . The biological role for copper commenced with the appearance of oxygen in earth 's atmosphere . 
 Copper is essential in the aerobic respiration of all eukaryotes . In mitochondria it is found in cytochrome c oxidase , which is the last protein in oxidative phosphorylation . Cytochrome c oxidase is the protein that binds the O2 between a copper and an iron ; the protein transfers 8 electrons to the O2 molecule to reduce it to two molecules of water . 
 Copper is also found in many superoxide dismutases , proteins that catalyze the decomposition of superoxides by converting it ( by disproportionation ) to oxygen and hydrogen peroxide : 
 2 <unk> → H2O2 + O2 
 The protein hemocyanin is the oxygen carrier in most mollusks and some arthropods such as the horseshoe crab ( Limulus polyphemus ) . Because hemocyanin is blue , these organisms have blue blood rather than the red blood of iron @-@ based hemoglobin . Structurally related to hemocyanin are the <unk> and <unk> . Instead of reversibly binding oxygen , these proteins <unk> substrates , illustrated by their role in the formation of lacquers . 
 Several copper proteins , such as the " blue copper proteins " , do not interact directly with substrates , hence they are not enzymes . These proteins relay electrons by the process called electron transfer . 
 A unique <unk> copper center has been found in nitrous @-@ oxide reductase . 
 = = = Dietary needs = = = 
 Copper is an essential trace element in plants and animals , but not all microorganisms . The human body contains copper at a level of about 1 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 1 mg per kg of body mass . Copper is absorbed in the gut , then transported to the liver bound to albumin . After processing in the liver , copper is distributed to other tissues in a second phase , which involves the protein ceruloplasmin , carrying the majority of copper in blood . <unk> also carries the copper that is excreted in milk , and is particularly well @-@ absorbed as a copper source . Copper in the body normally undergoes enterohepatic circulation ( about 5 mg a day , vs. about 1 mg per day absorbed in the diet and excreted from the body ) , and the body is able to excrete some excess copper , if needed , via bile , which carries some copper out of the liver that is not then reabsorbed by the intestine . 
 = = = Dietary reference intake = = = 
 The Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. Institute of Medicine updated Estimated Average Requirements ( EARs ) and Recommended Dietary Allowances ( RDAs ) for copper in 2001 . The current EAR for copper for people ages 14 and up is 0 @.@ 7 mg / day . The RDA is 0 @.@ 9 mg / day . RDAs are higher than EARs so as to identify amounts that will cover people with higher than average requirements . RDA for pregnancy equals 1 @.@ 0 mg / day . RDA for lactation equals 1 @.@ 3 mg / day . For infants up to 12 months the AI is 0 @.@ 22 mg / day and for children ages 1 – 13 years the RDA increases with age from 0 @.@ 34 to 0 @.@ 7 mg / day . As for safety , the Food and Nutrition Board also sets Tolerable Upper Intake Levels ( known as ULs ) for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient . In the case of copper the UL is set at 10 mg / day . Collectively the EARs , RDAs , AIs and ULs are referred to as Dietary Reference Intakes . The European Food Safety Authority reviewed the same safety question and set its UL at 5 mg / day . 
 For U.S. food and dietary supplement labeling purposes the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value ( % DV ) . For copper labeling purposes 100 % of the Daily Value was 2 @.@ 0 mg , but as of May 2016 it has been revised to 0 @.@ 9 mg . Food and supplement companies have until July 28 , 2018 to comply with the change . A table of the pre @-@ change adult Daily Values is provided at Reference Daily Intake . 
 In the United States , copper deficiency is not common . A federal survey of food consumption determined that for women and men over the age of 19 , average consumption from foods and beverages was 1 @.@ 11 and 1 @.@ 54 mg / day , respectively . For women , 10 % consumed less than the EAR , for men < 3 % . 
 = = = Copper @-@ based disorders = = = 
 Because of its role in facilitating iron uptake , copper deficiency can produce anemia @-@ like symptoms , neutropenia , bone abnormalities , <unk> , impaired growth , increased incidence of infections , osteoporosis , hyperthyroidism , and abnormalities in glucose and cholesterol metabolism . Conversely , Wilson 's disease causes an accumulation of copper in body tissues . 
 Severe deficiency can be found by testing for low plasma or serum copper levels , low ceruloplasmin , and low red blood cell superoxide dismutase levels ; these are not sensitive to marginal copper status . The " cytochrome c oxidase activity of <unk> and platelets " has been stated as another factor in deficiency , but the results have not been confirmed by replication . 
 Gram quantities of various copper salts have been taken in suicide attempts and produced acute copper toxicity in humans , possibly due to redox cycling and the generation of reactive oxygen species that damage DNA . Corresponding amounts of copper salts ( 30 mg / kg ) are toxic in animals . A minimum dietary value for healthy growth in rabbits has been reported to be at least 3 ppm in the diet . However , higher concentrations of copper ( 100 ppm , 200 ppm , or 500 ppm ) in the diet of rabbits may favorably influence feed conversion efficiency , growth rates , and carcass dressing percentages . 
 Chronic copper toxicity does not normally occur in humans because of transport systems that regulate absorption and excretion . <unk> recessive mutations in copper transport proteins can disable these systems , leading to Wilson 's disease with copper accumulation and cirrhosis of the liver in persons who have inherited two defective genes . 
 Elevated copper levels have also been linked to worsening symptoms of Alzheimer 's disease . 
 = = = Occupational exposure = = = 
 In the US , the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has designated a permissible exposure limit ( PEL ) for copper dust and fumes in the workplace as a time @-@ weighted average ( TWA ) of 1 mg / m3 . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set a Recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 1 mg / m3 , time @-@ weighted average . The IDLH ( immediately dangerous to life and health ) value is 100 mg / m3 . 
 = The Jungle Book ( 1967 film ) = 
 The Jungle Book is a 1967 American animated musical comedy film produced by Walt Disney Productions . Inspired by Rudyard Kipling 's book of the same name , it is the 19th animated feature in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series . Directed by Wolfgang Reitherman , it was the last film to be produced by Walt Disney , who died during its production . The plot follows Mowgli , a feral child raised in the Indian jungle by wolves , as his friends Bagheera the panther and Baloo the bear try to convince him to leave the jungle before the evil tiger Shere Khan arrives . 
 The early versions of both the screenplay and the soundtrack followed Kipling 's work more closely , with a dramatic , dark , and sinister tone which Disney did not want in his family film , leading to writer Bill Peet and composer Terry Gilkyson being replaced . The casting employed famous actors and musicians Phil Harris , Sebastian Cabot , George Sanders and Louis Prima , as well as Disney regulars such as Sterling Holloway , J. Pat O 'Malley and Verna Felton , and the director 's son , Bruce Reitherman , as Mowgli . 
 The Jungle Book was released on October 18 , 1967 , to positive reception , with acclaim for its soundtrack , featuring five songs by the Sherman Brothers and one by Gilkyson , " The Bare Necessities " . The film grossed over $ 23 @.@ 8 million worldwide in its first release , and as much again from two re @-@ releases . Disney released a live @-@ action remake in 1994 and a theatrical sequel , The Jungle Book 2 , in 2003 ; another live @-@ action adaptation was released in 2016 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mowgli , a young orphan boy , is found in a basket in the deep jungles of India by Bagheera , a black panther who promptly takes him to a mother wolf who has just had cubs . She raises him along with her own cubs and Mowgli soon becomes well acquainted with jungle life . Mowgli is shown ten years later , playing with his wolf siblings . 
 One night , when the wolf tribe learns that Shere Khan , a man @-@ eating Bengal tiger , has returned to the jungle , they realize that Mowgli must be taken to the " Man @-@ Village " for his own safety . Bagheera volunteers to escort him back . They leave that very night , but Mowgli is determined to stay in the jungle . He and Bagheera rest in a tree for the night , where Kaa , a hungry python , tries to devour Mowgli , but Bagheera intervenes . The next morning , Mowgli tries to join the elephant patrol led by Colonel Hathi and his wife Winifred . Bagheera finds Mowgli , but after a fight decides to leave Mowgli on his own . Mowgli soon meets up with the laid @-@ back , fun @-@ loving bear Baloo , who promises to raise Mowgli himself and never take him back to the Man @-@ Village . 
 Shortly afterwards , a group of monkeys kidnap Mowgli and take him to their leader , King Louie the orangutan . King Louie offers to help Mowgli stay in the jungle if he will tell Louie how to make fire like other humans . However , since he was not raised by humans , Mowgli does not know how to make fire . Bagheera and Baloo arrive to rescue Mowgli and in the ensuing chaos , King Louie 's palace is demolished to rubble . Bagheera speaks to Baloo that night and convinces him that the jungle will never be safe for Mowgli so long as Shere Khan is there . In the morning , Baloo reluctantly explains to Mowgli that the Man @-@ Village is best for the boy , but Mowgli accuses him of breaking his promise and runs away . As Baloo sets off in search of Mowgli , Bagheera rallies the help of Hathi and his patrol . However , Shere Khan himself , who was eavesdropping on Bagheera and Hathi 's conversation , is now determined to hunt and kill Mowgli himself . 
 Meanwhile , Mowgli has encountered Kaa once again , but thanks to the unwitting intervention of the suspicious Shere Khan , Mowgli escapes . As a storm gathers , a depressed Mowgli encounters a group of friendly vultures who accept Mowgli as a fellow outcast . Shere Khan appears shortly after , scaring off the vultures and confronting Mowgli . Baloo rushes to the rescue and tries to keep Shere Khan away from Mowgli , but is injured . When lightning strikes a nearby tree and sets it ablaze , the vultures swoop in to distract Shere Khan while Mowgli gathers flaming branches and ties them to Shere Khan 's tail . Terrified of fire , the tiger panics and runs off . 
 Bagheera and Baloo take Mowgli to the edge of the Man @-@ Village , but Mowgli is still hesitant to go there . His mind soon changes when he is smitten by a beautiful young girl from the village who is coming down by the riverside to fetch water . After noticing Mowgli , she " accidentally " drops her water pot . Mowgli retrieves it for her and follows her into the Man @-@ Village . After Mowgli chooses to stay in the Man @-@ Village , Baloo and Bagheera decide to head home , content that Mowgli is safe and happy with his own kind . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Bruce Reitherman as Mowgli , an orphaned boy , commonly referred to as " man @-@ cub " by the other characters . 
 Phil Harris as Baloo , a sloth bear who leads a carefree life and believes in letting the good things in life come by themselves . 
 Sebastian Cabot as Bagheera , a serious black panther who is determined to take Mowgli back to the village and disapproves of Baloo 's carefree approach to life . 
 Louis Prima as King Louie , an orangutan who wants to be a human , and wants Mowgli to teach him how to make fire . 
 George Sanders as Shere Khan , an intelligent and sophisticated yet merciless Bengal tiger who hates all humans for fear of their guns and fire and wants to kill Mowgli . 
 Sterling Holloway as Kaa , an Indian python who also seeks Mowgli as prey , but comically fails each time he attempts to eat him . 
 J. Pat O 'Malley as Colonel Hathi the Indian elephant / Buzzie the Vulture 
 Verna Felton as Winifred , Colonel Hathi 's wife . 
 Clint Howard as Junior , Colonel Hathi 's son . 
 Chad Stuart as <unk> the Vulture 
 Lord Tim Hudson as <unk> the Vulture 
 John Abbott as Akela the Indian wolf 
 Ben Wright as Rama the Father Wolf 
 <unk> Carr as The Human Girl 
 Leo De Lyon as <unk> the <unk> * 
 Hal Smith as The Slob Elephant * 
 Ralph Wright as The Gloomy Elephant * 
 Digby Wolfe as Ziggy the Vulture * 
 Bill Skiles and Pete Henderson as monkeys * 
 Asterisks mark actors listed in the opening credits as " Additional Voices " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 After The Sword in the Stone was released , <unk> Bill Peet claimed to Walt Disney that " we [ the animation department ] can do more interesting animal characters " and suggested that Rudyard Kipling 's The Jungle Book could be used for the studio 's next film . Disney agreed and Peet created an original treatment , with little supervision , as he had done with One Hundred and One Dalmatians and The Sword in the Stone . However , after the disappointing reaction to The Sword in the Stone , Walt Disney decided to become more involved in the story than he had been with the past two films , with his nephew Roy E. Disney saying that " [ he ] certainly influenced everything about it . ( ... ) With Jungle Book , he obviously got hooked on the jungle and the characters that lived there . " 
 Peet decided to follow closely the dramatic , dark , and sinister tone of Kipling 's book , which is about the struggles between animals and man . However , the film 's writers decided to make the story more straightforward , as the novel is very episodic , with Mowgli going back and forth from the jungle to the Man @-@ Village , and Peet felt that Mowgli returning to the Man @-@ Village should be the ending for the film . Following suggestions , Peet also created two original characters : The human girl for which Mowgli falls in love , as the animators considered that falling in love would be the best excuse for Mowgli to leave the jungle ; and Louie , king of the monkeys . Louie was a less comical character , enslaving Mowgli trying to get the boy to teach him to make fire . The orangutan would also show a plot point borrowed from The Second Jungle Book , gold and jewels under his ruins — after Mowgli got to the man village , a poacher would drag the boy back to the ruins in search for the treasure . Disney was not pleased with how the story was turning out , as he felt it was too dark for family viewing and insisted on script changes . Peet refused , and after a long argument , Peet left the Disney studio in January 1964 . 
 Disney then assigned Larry Clemmons as his new writer and one of the four story men for the film , giving Clemmons a copy of Kipling 's book , and telling him : " The first thing I want you to do is not to read it . " Clemmons still looked at the novel , and thought it was too disjointed and without continuity , needing adaptations to fit a film script . Clemmons wanted to start in medias res , with some flashbacks afterwards , but then Disney said to focus on doing the storyline more straight - " Let 's do the meat of the picture . Let 's establish the characters . Let 's have fun with it . " . Although much of Bill Peet 's work was discarded , the personalities of the characters remained in the final film . This was because Disney felt that the story should be kept simple , and the characters should drive the story . Disney took an active role in the story meetings , acting out each role and helping to explore the emotions of the characters , help create gags and develop emotional sequences . Clemmons would write a rough script with an outline for most sequences . The story artists then discussed how to fill the scenes , including the comedic gags to employ . The script also tried to incorporate how the voice actors molded their characters and interacted with each other . 
 The Jungle Book also marks the last animated film from the company to have Disney 's personal touches , before his death on December 15 , 1966 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Many familiar voices inspired the animators in their creation of the characters and helped them shape their personalities . This use of familiar voices for key characters was a rarity in Disney 's past films . The staff was shocked to hear that a wise cracking comedian , Phil Harris was going to be in a Kipling film . Disney suggested Harris after meeting him at a party . Harris improvised most of his lines , as he considered the scripted lines " didn 't feel natural " . After Harris was cast , Disneyland Records president Jimmy Johnson suggested Disney to get Louis Prima as King Louie , as he " felt that Louis would be great as foil " . Walt also cast other prominent actors such as George Sanders as Shere Khan and Sebastian Cabot as Bagheera . Additionally , he cast regular Disney voices such as Sterling Holloway as Kaa , J. Pat O 'Malley as Colonel Hathi and Buzzie the Vulture and Verna Felton as Hathi 's wife . This was her last film before she died . David Bailey was originally cast as Mowgli , but his voice changed during production , leading Bailey to not fit the " young innocence of Mowgli 's character " at which the producers were aiming . Thus director Wolfgang Reitherman cast his son Bruce , who had just voiced Christopher Robin in Winnie the Pooh and the Honey Tree . The animators shot footage of Bruce as a guide for the character 's performance . Child actress Darlene Carr was going around singing in the studio when composers Sherman Brothers asked her to record a demo of " My Own Home " . Carr 's performance impressed Disney enough for him to cast her as the role of the human girl . 
 In the original book , the vultures are grim and evil characters who feast on the dead . Disney lightened it up by having the vultures bearing a physical and vocal resemblance to The Beatles , including the signature mop @-@ top haircut . It was also planned to have the members of the band to both voice the characters and sing their song , " That 's What Friends Are For " . However , the Beatles member John Lennon 's refusal to work on animated films in that period led to the idea being discarded . The casting of the vultures still brought a British Invasion musician , Chad Stuart of the duo Chad & Jeremy . In earlier drafts of the scene the vultures had a near @-@ sighted rhinoceros friend named Rocky , who was to be voiced by Frank Fontaine . However , Walt decided to cut the character for feeling that the film had already much action with the monkeys and vultures . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 While many of the later Disney feature films had animators being responsible for single characters , in The Jungle Book the animators were in charge of whole sequences , since many have characters interacting with one another . The animation was done by xerography , with character design , led by Ken Anderson , employing rough , artistic edges in contrast to the round animals seen in productions such as Dumbo . Anderson also decided to make Shere Khan resemble his voice actor , George Sanders . Backgrounds were hand @-@ painted — with exception of the waterfall , mostly consisting of footage of the Angel Falls - and sometimes scenery was used in both foreground and bottom to create a notion of depth . Following one of Reitherman 's trademarks of reusing animation of his previous films , the wolf cubs are based on dogs from 101 Dalmatians . Animator Milt Kahl based Bagheera and Shere Kahn 's movements on live @-@ action felines , which he saw in two Disney productions , A Tiger Walks and the " Jungle Cat " episode of True @-@ Life Adventures . Baloo was also based on footage of bears , even incorporating the animal 's penchant for scratching . Since Kaa has no limbs , its design received big expressive eyes , and parts of Kaa 's body did the action that normally would be done with hands . The monkeys ' dance during " I Wan 'na Be Like You " was partially inspired by a performance Louis Prima did with his band at Disney 's soundstage to convince Walt Disney to cast him . 
 = = Music = = 
 The instrumental music was written by George Bruns and orchestrated by Walter Sheets . Two of the cues were reused from previous Disney films . The scene where Mowgli wakes up after escaping King Louie used one of Bruns ' themes for Sleeping Beauty ; and the scene where Bagheera gives a eulogy to Baloo when he mistakenly thinks the bear was killed by Shere Khan used Paul J. Smith 's organ score from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs . 
 The score features eight original songs : seven by the Sherman Brothers and one by Terry Gilkyson . Longtime Disney collaborator Gilkyson was the first songwriter to bring several complete songs which followed the book closely but Walt Disney felt that his efforts were too dark . The only piece of Gilkyson 's work which survived to the final film was his upbeat tune " The Bare Necessities " , which was liked by the rest of the film crew . The Sherman Brothers were then brought in to do a complete rewrite . Disney asked the siblings if they had read Kipling 's book and they replied that they had done so " a long , long time ago " and that they had also seen the 1942 version by Alexander Korda . Disney said the " nice , mysterious , heavy stuff " from both works was not what he aimed for , instead going for a " lightness , a Disney touch " . Disney frequently brought the composers to the storyline sessions . He asked them to " find scary places and write fun songs " for their compositions that fit in with the story and advanced the plot instead of being interruptive . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 The Jungle Book was released in October 1967 , just 10 months after Walt 's death . Some copies were in a double feature with Charlie , the Lonesome Cougar . Produced on a budget of $ 4 million , the film was a massive success , finishing 1967 as the fourth highest @-@ grossing movie of the year . The Jungle Book was re @-@ released theatrically in North America three times , 1978 , 1984 , and 1990 , and also in Europe throughout the 1980s . The total gross is $ 141 million in the United States and $ 205 million worldwide . The North American total , after adjustments for inflation , is estimated to be the 29th highest grossing film of all time in the United States . An estimated $ 108 million alone came from Germany making it the third highest @-@ grossing film of all time there only behind Avatar ( $ 137 million ) and Titanic ( $ 125 million ) . However , it is Germany 's highest @-@ grossing film of all time in terms of admissions with 27 @.@ 3 million tickets sold , nearly 10 million more than Titanic 's 18 @.@ 8 million tickets sold . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Jungle Book was released in the United States on VHS in 1991 as part of the Walt Disney Classics product line , and in 1997 as part of the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection for the film 's 30th anniversary . A Limited Issue DVD was released by Buena Vista Home Entertainment in 1999 . The film was released once again as a 2 @-@ disc Platinum Edition DVD on October 2 , 2007 to commemorate its 40th anniversary . Its release was accompanied by a limited 18 @-@ day run at Disney 's own El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles , with the opening night featuring a panel with composer Richard Sherman and voice actors Bruce Reitherman , Darlene Carr and Chad Stuart . The Platinum DVD was put on moratorium in 2010 . The film was released in a Blu @-@ Ray / DVD / Digital Copy Combo pack on February 11 , 2014 as part of Disney 's Diamond Edition line . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The Jungle Book received positive reviews upon release , undoubtedly influenced by a nostalgic reaction to the death of Disney . Time noted that the film strayed far from the Kipling stories , but " the result is thoroughly delightful ... it is the happiest possible way to remember Walt Disney . " The New York Times called it " a perfectly dandy cartoon feature , " and Life magazine referred to it as " the best thing of its kind since Dumbo , another short , bright , unscary and blessedly uncultivated cartoon . " Variety 's review was generally positive , but they stated that " the story development is restrained " and that younger audiences " may squirm at times . " The song " The Bare Necessities " was nominated for Best Song at the 40th Academy Awards , losing to " Talk to the Animals " from Doctor Dolittle . Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences president Gregory Peck lobbied extensively for this film to be nominated for Best Picture , but was unsuccessful . 
 Retrospective reviews were also positive , with the film 's animation , characters and music receiving much praise throughout the years . On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 86 % . In 1990 , when the film had its last theatrical re @-@ release , Entertainment Weekly considered that The Jungle Book " isn 't a classic Walt Disney film on the order of , say , Cinderella or Pinocchio , but it 's one of Disney 's liveliest and funniest " , while the Los Angeles Times thought the film 's crew was " near the height of their talents " and the resulting film " remains a high @-@ spirited romp that will delight <unk> parents weary of action films with body counts that exceed their box @-@ office grosses . " In 2010 , Empire described the film as one that " gets pretty much everything right " , regarding that the vibrant animation and catchy songs overcame the plot deficiencies . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1968 , Disneyland Records released the album More Jungle Book , an unofficial sequel also written by screenwriter Larry Simmons , which continued the story of the film , and included Phil Harris and Louis Prima voicing their film roles . In the record , Baloo ( Harris ) is missing Mowgli ( Ginny Tyler ) , so he teams up with King Louie ( Prima ) and Bagheera ( Dal <unk> ) to take him from the man village . On February 14 , 2003 , DisneyToon Studios in Australia released a film sequel , The Jungle Book 2 , in which Mowgli runs away from the man village to see his animal friends , unaware that Shere Khan is more determined to kill him than ever . In 2005 , screenwriter Robert Reece pitched Jungle Book 3 to Disney execs . However , the project never materialized . 
 Elements of The Jungle Book were recycled in the later Disney feature film Robin Hood due to that film 's limited budget , such as Baloo being inspiration for Little John ( who not only was a bear , but also voiced by Phil Harris ) . In particular , the dance sequence between Baloo and King Louie was simply rotoscoped for Little John and Lady Cluck 's dance . It has been widely acclaimed by animators , with Eric Goldberg declaring The Jungle Book " boasts possibly the best character animation a studio has ever done " . The animators of Aladdin , The Lion King and Lilo & Stitch took inspiration from the design and animation of the film , and four people involved with Disney 's animations , director Brad Bird and animators Andreas Deja , Glen Keane and Sergio <unk> , have declared the film to be their inspiration for entering the business . 
 Many characters appear in the 1990 – 91 animated series <unk> . Between 1996 and 1998 , the TV series Jungle Cubs told the stories of Baloo , <unk> , Bagheera , Louie , Kaa , and Shere Khan when they were children . Disney later made a live @-@ action remake of the film , which was more of a realistic action @-@ adventure film with somewhat @-@ more adult themes . The film , released in 1994 , differs even more from the book than its animated counterpart , but was still a box @-@ office success . In 1998 , Disney released a direct to video film entitled The Jungle Book : Mowgli 's Story . A new live @-@ action version of The Jungle Book was released by Disney in 2016 , which even reused most of the songs of the animated movie , with some lyrical reworking by original composer Richard M. Sherman . 
 There are two video games based on the film : The Jungle Book was a platformer released in 1993 for Master System , Mega Drive , Game Gear , Super NES , Game Boy and PC . A version for the Game Boy Advance was later released in 2003 . The Jungle Book Groove Party was a dance mat game released in 2000 for PlayStation and PlayStation 2 . Kaa and Shere Khan have also made cameo appearances in another Disney video game , <unk> . A world based on the film was intended to appear more than once in the Square Enix @-@ Disney Kingdom Hearts video game series , but was omitted both times , first in the first game because it featured a similar world based on Tarzan , and second in Kingdom Hearts : Birth by Sleep , although areas of the world are accessible via hacking codes . 
 Since the film 's release , many of the film 's characters appeared in House of Mouse , The Lion King 1 ½ , Who Framed Roger Rabbit , and Aladdin and the King of Thieves . In December 2010 , a piece of artwork by British artist Banksy featuring the jungle book characters which had been commissioned by Greenpeace to help raise awareness of deforestation went on sale for the sum of £ 80 @,@ 000 . 
 = Pyramid Head = 
 Pyramid Head , also known as " Red Pyramid Thing " ( <unk> , Akai <unk> ) , " Red Pyramid " , or " Bogeyman " , and <unk> <unk> ( <unk> , lit . " Triangle Head " ) , is a fictional character from the Silent Hill series of survival horror video games published by Konami . 
 Introduced in the 2001 installment Silent Hill 2 , he is the main antagonist and he stalks James Sunderland , the primary player character , who comes to the town of Silent Hill after receiving a letter from his deceased wife , Mary . The Silent Hill series , particularly the second installment , frequently utilizes psychology and symbolism : Pyramid Head represents James ' wish to be punished for Mary 's death . Masahiro Ito , the designer of Silent Hill 2 's monsters , created him because he wanted " a monster with a hidden face " . Known for his large triangular head , Pyramid Head lacks a voice , and his appearance stems from the town 's past as a place of execution . 
 Pyramid Head has since appeared in other media in and outside the Silent Hill media franchise . Positively received in Silent Hill 2 for his role as an element of James ' psyche , he has been cited by reviewers as an iconic villain of the series and part of Silent Hill 2 's appeal . 
 = = Concept and design = = 
 Ito wanted to create " a monster with a hidden face " , but became unhappy with his designs , which resembled humans wearing masks . He then drew a monster with a pyramid @-@ shaped head . According to Ito , the triangle 's sharp right and acute angles suggest the possibility of pain . Of the creatures that appear in Silent Hill 2 , only Pyramid Head features an " overtly masculine " appearance . He resembles a pale , muscular man covered with a white , blood @-@ soaked robe reminiscent of a butcher 's smock . He does not speak , but grunts and moans painfully . His most outstanding feature is his large red , triangular head . His weapons consist of the deadly and heavy Great Knife , which the player can find and use for the rest of the game , and later a spear . 
 According to Konami 's Lost Memories , his appearance was a variation of the outfits of the executioners from the fictional history of the town . They wore red hoods and ceremonial robes to make themselves similar to Valtiel , a monster who appears in Silent Hill 3 . Like Valtiel , Pyramid Head dresses in gloves and stitched cloth and pursues the game 's main protagonist . According to Silent Hill 2 's character designer Takayoshi Sato , he appears as a " distorted memory of the executioners " and of the town 's past as a place of execution . 
 Christophe Gans , the director of the film adaptation of Silent Hill , suggested that Pyramid Head " was one of the executioners in the original history of the town " and " there is not one particular or exclusive manifestation of him as an entity . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 In Silent Hill 2 , after receiving a letter from his deceased wife , Mary , and arriving in the foggy town of Silent Hill to search for her , the game 's protagonist and primary player character , James Sunderland , encounters Pyramid Head several times over the course of the game . He first appears from behind a gate , making no attempt to attack James . Later , in an apartment , James walks in on Pyramid Head raping two Mannequins — creatures made of two sets of feminine hips and legs . Terrified , James hides in a closet and shoots Pyramid Head with a handgun several times , causing him to leave . When James asks another character , Eddie , about the monster , Eddie denies knowing about Pyramid Head . Later , near a flooded stairway , James witnesses Pyramid Head killing another creature , and Pyramid Head attempts to kill him . After a few minutes , sirens sound in the distance and Pyramid Head descends the stairway and disappears . James does not meet him again until in Brookhaven Hospital , where Pyramid Head knocks him through a safety railing and he falls , sustaining injuries . Pyramid Head does not pursue him or continue the attack . Later , he stalks James ' companion Maria , who closely resembles his wife Mary , through a lengthy corridor . As James flees into an elevator , the doors shut before she can join him . He struggles to open the doors to save her , but Pyramid Head kills her . However , in the labyrinth beneath Toluca Prison , James finds her alive and unharmed in a locked cell . Before trying to seduce him , she reminisces about a trip that only he and Mary took to a hotel in Silent Hill . He leaves , promising to find a way to free her , and discovers that Pyramid Head walks a corridor nearby , now carrying a spear . Afterwards , James reaches Maria 's side of the cell , but finds her dead . Pyramid Head makes his final appearance just before the final boss , where two Pyramid Heads take part in the encounter . They kill Maria yet again and , after pursuing James around the room for a while , both commit suicide . 
 Pyramid Head , under the new moniker " Bogeyman " , makes a significant appearance in 2009 's Silent Hill Homecoming , but his role is limited to non @-@ interactive scenes , appearing only twice to the game 's main protagonist Alex Shepherd : once in the Grand Hotel in Silent Hill ; and , much later , in a church , where he executes Alex 's father by splitting him in half . His last appearance is in a possible ending to the game : Alex wakes up in a wheelchair as two Pyramid Heads appear , each with part of a helmet , which they use to turn Alex into one of them . After this ending is played , the player obtains the Bogeyman 's costume for Alex to wear . Mindful of Pyramid Head 's role in Silent Hill 2 , the developers chose to include him as " the embodiment of a myth [ that ] parents started to keep the children out of trouble " and " the accretion of the activities going on in the town of Shepherd ’ s Glen . " 
 Pyramid Head appears as a boss in the 2007 first @-@ person shooter Silent Hill : The Arcade , as well as Silent Hill : The Escape , but with a composite design with the Butcher , and as a super @-@ deformed selectable character in the 2008 Nintendo DS title New International Track & Field , an installment of the Track & Field series and another spin @-@ off Krazy Kart Racing alongside Robbie the Rabbit . The 2007 game Silent Hill : Origins also included a similar monster named " The Butcher " , whom the protagonist occasionally encounters killing other monsters ( unlike other versions of Pyramid Head , the Butcher can and must be fought and killed in combat ) and a painting of Pyramid Head is seen in the burning house of Alessa . Pyramid Head appears in the " Surprise ! " ending of 2012 's Silent Hill : <unk> , along with various characters from the franchise . Pyramid Head 's most recent appearance was in 2012 's Silent Hill : Book of Memories , where he is a monster that can spawn randomly to fight the player . Pyramid Head appeared as a costume for the Playstation home . Silent Hill 3 where you see a picture of God with his angels one on the left resembles Valtiel while the one on the right looks similar to Pyramid Head . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Pyramid Head makes an appearance in the 2006 film adaptation of Silent Hill as " Red Pyramid " , and is portrayed by Roberto Campanella . In the film , the psyche of the female characters shaped the character 's physical appearance . Gans claimed that replicating the character 's head exactly and having the actor move while wearing it proved to be impractical ; he noted that , despite the name , Pyramid Head actually wore " a basin " instead of a triangle @-@ shaped head . Red Pyramid 's sword and head were constructed out of lightweight material painted to appear heavy . For the role , Campanella wore a " five @-@ part prosthetic " ; it took two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half to three hours to get him into costume and make @-@ up . His boots had a hidden 15 @-@ inch ( 38 cm ) sole which made him just under 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) tall . Patrick Tatopoulos , who worked on the make @-@ up effects and monsters , enjoyed the project of designing the character . According to him , Red Pyramid serves as a symbol of the town 's darkness and harbinger of its changed character . Gans considered the monsters of the film " a mockery of human beings " , and commented : " The real monsters are the people , the cultists who tortured Alessa . When I approached the film , I knew that it was impossible to represent the monsters as simply beasts that jump on you . " 
 In the 2012 film Silent Hill : Revelation 3D , the Pyramid Head , once more portrayed by Roberto Campanella , is both a monster and a guardian . More than once , it saves Sharon from the forces of Silent Hill . This is explained by its loyalty to Alessa : since Heather is the good half of Alessa 's soul , it sees them as the same being and is thus bound to protect both from harm . Pyramid Head is also seen controlling the carousel where Heather and Alessa face off against each other , then it kills the cult leader Claudia Wolf after the amulet shows her inner , monstrous nature . 
 He also makes a cameo appearance in the 2008 Silent Hill comic book Sinner 's Reward , published by IDW Publishing . The writer , Tom Waltz , later said he regretted the cameo , which only functioned as fan service . To him , Pyramid Head is a psychological construct created for James ; however , he stated that : " At the same time , I don 't think that ruined the comic . Some people really liked it . To some people , Pyramid Head should be in all the stories because they do like him . " Additionally , the character was portrayed from October 2 to 31 , 2009 , in the haunted attraction Sinister Pointe , based on Silent Hill , in Orange County , California , United States . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The Silent Hill series uses symbolism and psychology ; the town of Silent Hill draws upon the psyche of its visitors , ultimately creating an " otherworld , " a twisting of reality that manifests delusions and elements of their subconscious minds , varying from character to character . Specifically , in the case of Silent Hill 2 's primary player character James Sunderland , the version of the town he explores is influenced by him . Many of the monsters that roam the town symbolize his guilt , wish for punishment , or sexual repression during his wife 's three @-@ year @-@ long illness , and cease to exist after James comes to terms with the fact that he killed his wife Mary , partially to end her suffering and partially out of resentment and frustration . James knew she had a terminal illness , which has been speculated to be cancer , and he often read medical textbooks , searching for something to help her . During her last days alive , she became physically repulsive as a result of the illness and treated James abusively , ordering him to leave one moment and begging him to comfort her the next . The knowledge of her terminal illness caused her to become angry and to hurt her loved ones , particularly James , and it pained him to visit her in the hospital . Pyramid Head functions as an executioner of Maria , a delusion of James ' who strongly resembles Mary . Through Maria 's repeated deaths , Pyramid Head reminds James of Mary 's death and causes him to experience guilt and suffering . His appearance as an executioner stems from a picture that James saw while visiting the town three years ago with Mary . 
 Reviewers have suggested various interpretations . According to Christina González of The Escapist , Pyramid Head acts as " judgement personified , a sexually dark butcher , " and " James ' masochistic delusion " which punishes him for Mary 's death . Ken Gagne of Computerworld suggested that the monster " represents James ' anger and guilt . " A critic for IGN , Jesse Schedeen , considered Pyramid Head 's role throughout the Silent Hill series to be " a manifestation of a person 's guilt " , commenting : " Pyramid Head is just there to help you serve your penance in the most painful and grotesque way possible . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reaction to Pyramid Head has been favorable because of his distinctive appearance and role as an element of James ' psyche . Critics cite him as an iconic villain of the Silent Hill series , a favorite among fans , and part of the appeal of Silent Hill 2 . GameSpot compared Pyramid Head 's appearance to Leatherface , the main antagonist of The Texas Chainsaw Massacre series of slasher films , and found him the most terrifying monster in Silent Hill 2 . Computerworld named Pyramid Head as one of the most terrifying villains in computer and video games . GamesRadar felt that the scene in which he rapes the two other monsters was unsettling , since the subject of rape is not often tackled in video games , and disliked the final battle with him because of how anti @-@ climactic it was , in comparison with his role throughout the rest of the game . 
 GameDaily ranked Pyramid Head first on their 2008 list of the scariest video game monsters . GamesRadar listed him as one of the 25 best new characters of the decade and ranked him second on its 2009 list of the scariest video game villains , calling him the " most horrifying character ever to have a cult following " . In a 2009 retrospective on the survival horror genre , IGN noted that Silent Hill 2 incorporated " a ' stalker ' element similar to Clock Tower and Resident Evil 3 , " and wrote : " To this day , Pyramid Head is remembered as one of gaming 's most frightening villains . " PlayStation Universe ranked him as the first on their 2009 list of the scariest monster " to infest a Sony platform " , also noting his " prolific reputation as one of video game ’ s most fearsome monsters . " In 2010 , Pyramid Head as named as the scariest character in video game history by Joystick Division , who added that " being chased by him in Silent Hill 2 ranks with all of the scariest moments in video gaming history . " UGO.com ranked him as number one on their 2011 list of the scariest characters in video games , commenting he is " too mainstream to be all that scary , except he 's still really super scary . " In 2012 , PlayStation Official Magazine included him on their lists of the biggest freaks and scariest characters in the PlayStation games , commenting : " Ol ’ Metal Top is easily the best thing about Silent Hill – and maybe even survival horror in general – completely encapsulating that intoxicating dread of knowing that it ’ s not if you ’ ll fight him , but when . " That same year , FHM included him on their list of ten scariest game characters ever ; on the list of the " coolest " video game villains by Complex , Pyramid Head placed as 15th . GamesRadar too praised Pyramid Head 's role as an antagonist , putting him in their 2013 list of the best villains in video game history at number 18 . 
 His appearances outside Silent Hill 2 have received mixed critical reaction . Critics generally agreed that Pyramid Head 's appearance in Homecoming struck them as fan service , though Chris Hudak of Game Revolution called it " damned effectively @-@ employed . " Film critics commented on his role in the film adaption , with several finding him disturbing . DVD Reviews praised Campanella 's portrayal of Pyramid Head and another monster , writing : " These are without a doubt some of the most striking bogeymen that I have seen on screen in a long time . " His appearance in New International Track & Field received mixed critical reaction . GameDaily disliked it , finding it awkward that a character like Pyramid Head was competing in sporting events with characters like Frogger and <unk> , while The Escapist called it enjoyable and " hilarious " . 
 = Player One = 
 For the band , see Space Invaders ( Player One song ) . 
 Player One : What Is to Become of Us is a novel written by Douglas Coupland for the 2010 Massey Lectures . Each of the book 's five chapters was delivered as a one @-@ hour lecture in a different Canadian city : Vancouver on October 12 , Regina on October 14 , Charlottetown on October 19 , Ottawa on October 25 and ending in Toronto on October 29 . The lectures were broadcast on CBC Radio One 's Ideas , November 8 – 12 . The book was published by House of Anansi Press . 
 The plot follows four characters , Karen , Rick , Luke , and Rachel , as they arrive in the lounge of an airport bar , as they interact with one another , and as they cope with chaos that erupts as cataclysmic events occur . The story addresses their motivations and perceptions , as well as their thoughts on certain themes . There are several minor characters and a fifth main character , Player One , who retells the events that the four main characters experience but from the perspective of an outside observer , like someone exploring a video game environment . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2009 a panel of representatives , including Sarah MacLachlan of House of Anansi Press , John Fraser of Massey College and Ideas executive producer Bernie Lucht , selected Douglas Coupland to deliver the 2010 Massey Lectures . Coupland , a West Vancouver resident who would be 48 years old during the lectures , was best known for his previous novels Generation X ( 1991 ) , <unk> ( 2006 ) , and Generation A ( 2009 ) , but also had written non @-@ fiction works and screenplays . Coupland did not immediately agree but after some thought , accepted the panel 's offer . He was given the creative freedom to select how the lecture would be delivered , and chose to write a novel . While previous novelists , such as Margaret Atwood and Thomas King , had delivered traditional academic lectures , Coupland felt that " a narrative seemed like the most efficient and accessible way of putting forth a large number of propositions about life in the year 2010 . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The book is divided into five chapters . Each chapter is divided into five parts , each describing events from the perspective of one of the five main characters : Karen , Rick , Luke , Rachel , and Player One . The first chapter , " Hour One : Cue the Flaming Zeppelin " , has Karen arriving at the Toronto airport on a flight from Winnipeg to meet a man she met online . She sits on a stool at the airport hotel bar in which Rick is the bartender , Rachel is at a computer terminal , and Luke is sitting at a table drinking scotch . Rachel is there with the expectation to meet a man who can father her child and approaches Luke . Karen 's date goes badly as she finds the man too assertive physically and too distant intellectually . A self @-@ help guru , Leslie Freemont , enters with his assistant Tara to welcome Rick into his empowerment program ; Leslie gives a speech to the group , takes Rick 's money , and leaves . Meanwhile , oil prices rapidly increase and explosions start to occur outside . With the power unreliable , Karen , Rick , Luke , and Rachel run to Rick 's vehicle to listen to the radio . Karen 's date , Warren , is killed by a sniper as he runs to the group , who quickly return to the bar lounge where they barricade themselves in . 
 In " Hour Three : God 's little <unk> " Karen 's daughter tells them , over the phone , of rioting and general chaos that is occurring . Rick and Luke crawl through the ventilation shafts to the roof to overpower the sniper but fail and retreat to the lounge . As chemical fall @-@ out starts to land on the airport , the sniper seeks shelter in the lounge and is taken prisoner by the other characters . In " Hour Four : Hello , My Name Is : Monster " Rick and Rachel have sex , the sniper explains his motivations , and a teenager suffering from chemical burns seeks their help . In the final chapter " Hour Five : The View From Inside Daffy Duck 's Hole " Karen and Luke tend to the teenager 's wounds . Rachel discovers that the sniper is actually Leslie Freemont 's son , and upon stating this , the sniper panics , manages to get his gun back and shoots Rachel . The final part of the final chapter is told from the combined point @-@ of @-@ view of Rachel and Player One , who exist in what is labeled as Eternity , and provide an epilogue revealing the fates of the characters . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Karen — A divorced mother of one daughter , and a receptionist at a psychiatrist office , who travels from Winnipeg to Toronto to meet Warren , whom she met in an online forum . 
 Rick — A divorced father of one son , and a recovering alcoholic , who works as a bartender at the Toronto Airport Camelot Hotel . He has been saving money to enroll in an empowerment program operated by Leslie Freemont . 
 Luke — A pastor of a church in Nipissing , Ontario who lost his faith in religion , stole $ 20 @,@ 000 from the church and fled to Toronto . 
 Rachel — A young woman who operates a business that breeds lab mice and lives with psychological conditions on the Autism spectrum . Among her psychological conditions is prosopagnosia , as well as an inability to understand humour , metaphors , irony , or social cues . She wants to become pregnant to prove to her parents that she can lead what they consider a normal life . 
 Player One — A disembodied voice who watches the events and comments on the character 's past , present , and future actions and circumstances . 
 Warren — The man who Karen is scheduled to meet at the hotel bar . 
 Leslie Freemont — A self @-@ help guru who operates the Power Dynamics Seminar System . He arrives with his assistant Tara to accept Rick into the program . 
 Bertis — A religious fanatic , the son of Leslie Freemont , and the sniper on the bar 's roof . 
 Max — A teenager who tries to covertly take photos of Karen during their flight . He stumbles upon the group as he flees the chemical fall @-@ out . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 Player One is the first Massey Lecture to be delivered as a work of fiction : a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ word novel . The story is told as a first @-@ person narrative with the perspective rotated between the five main characters : Karen , Luke , Rick , Rachel , and Player One . The narrative voice was described as being the typical " Coupland @-@ esque coolness " with the " same apocalyptic feel " as his previous novel , Generation A. Rachel , though , speaks with a unique tone , devoid of emotion and unable to detect emotion in the voice of others , similar to how people communicate online without seeing one another , like via email . 
 The story 's themes reflect many of the themes Coupland has addressed in his other works , including themes on time , religion , an afterlife , and communication . One reviewer mentioned that the book has " quintessential Coupland themes , chiefly , how the speed of change , both technologically and socially driven , is altering the world , our own sense of self and our souls " . In relation to the Future Legend glossary at the end of the book Coupland said " The future is happening so fast and furious right now , there 's no language to describe all these new sensations , so we have to begin inventing one " . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 The book was published by House of Anansi Press and released in October 2010 as Coupland began the Massey lecture series in Vancouver on October 12 . Each lecture consisted of Coupland reading aloud one chapter , followed by questions from the audience and a book signing . The second lecture took place in Regina on October 14 , followed by Charlottetown on October 19 , Ottawa on October 25 , and ending on October 29 in Toronto . The series was recorded then aired on CBC Radio One 's Ideas between November 8 and 12 . The book was long @-@ listed for the Scotiabank <unk> Prize . 
 The review in the Library Journal wrote that the book is " eminently readable , humorous , and philosophical if at times slightly lightweight " and that it " is a worthwhile novel that may also appeal to younger readers " . By selecting Coupland , the Massey Lecture selection committee did intend to appeal to " a slightly younger demographic than previous Massey Lectures " . In the Booklist review , Jonathan Fullmer writes , " A taut and scintillating exploration of time , Coupland 's tale is both smart and suspenseful while simultaneously questioning the meaning of narration . " 
 = Tom Simpson = 
 Thomas Simpson ( 30 November 1937 – 13 July 1967 ) was one of Britain 's most successful professional cyclists . He was born in Haswell , County Durham and later moved to Harworth , Nottinghamshire . Simpson began road cycling as a teenager before taking up track cycling , specialising in pursuit races . He won a bronze medal for track cycling at the 1956 Summer Olympics and a silver at the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games . 
 In 1959 , at age 21 , Simpson was signed by the French professional road @-@ racing team St. Raphaël @-@ Géminiani @-@ Dunlop . He advanced to their first team ( Rapha @-@ Gitane @-@ Dunlop ) the following year , and won the 1961 Tour of Flanders . Simpson then joined Gitane @-@ Leroux @-@ Dunlop ; in the 1962 Tour de France he became the first British rider to wear the yellow jersey , finishing sixth overall . 
 In 1963 Simpson moved to Peugeot @-@ BP @-@ <unk> , winning Bordeaux – Paris that year and the 1964 Milan – San Remo . In 1965 he became Britain 's first world road race champion and won the Giro di Lombardia ; this made him the BBC Sports Personality of the Year , the first cyclist to win the award . Injuries hampered much of Simpson 's 1966 season . He won two stages of the 1967 Vuelta a España before he won the general classification of Paris – Nice that year . 
 In the thirteenth stage of the 1967 Tour de France , Simpson collapsed and died during the ascent of Mont Ventoux . He was 29 years old . The post @-@ mortem examination found that he had mixed amphetamines and alcohol ; this diuretic combination proved fatal when combined with the heat , the hard climb of the Ventoux and a stomach complaint . A memorial near where he died has become a place of pilgrimage for many cyclists . Simpson was known to have taken performance @-@ enhancing drugs during his career , when no doping controls existed . He is held in high esteem by many cyclists for his character and will to win . 
 = = Early life and amateur career = = 
 = = = Childhood and club racing = = = 
 Simpson was born on 30 November 1937 in Haswell , County Durham , the youngest of six children of coal miner Tom Simpson and his wife Alice ( née Cheetham ) . His father had been a semi @-@ professional sprinter in athletics . The family lived modestly in a small terraced house until 1943 , when his parents took charge of the village 's working men 's club and lived above it . In 1950 the Simpsons moved to Harworth on the Nottinghamshire – Yorkshire border , where young Simpson 's maternal aunt lived ; new coalfields were opening , with employment opportunities for him and older brother Harry , by now , the only children left at home . Simpson rode his first bike , his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's , at age 12 , sharing it with Harry and two cousins for time trials around Harworth . Following Harry , Tom joined Harworth and District Cycling Club aged 13 . He delivered groceries in the <unk> district by bicycle and traded with a customer for a better road bike . He was often left behind in club races ; members of his cycling club nicknamed him " four @-@ stone Coppi " , after Italian rider Fausto Coppi , due to his slim physique . 
 Simpson began winning club time trials , but sensed resentment of his boasting from senior members . He left Harworth and District and joined Rotherham 's Scala Wheelers at the end of 1954 . Simpson 's first road race was as a junior at the Forest Recreation Ground in Nottingham . After leaving school he was an apprentice draughtsman at an engineering company in Retford , using the 10 mi ( 16 @.@ 1 km ) commute by bike as training . He placed well in half mile races on grass and cement , but decided to concentrate on road racing . In May 1955 Simpson won the National Cyclists ' Union South Yorkshire individual pursuit track event as a junior ; the same year , he won the British League of Racing Cyclists ( BLRC ) junior hill climb championship and placed third in the senior event . 
 Simpson immersed himself in the world of cycling , writing letters asking for advice . Naturalised Austrian rider George Berger responded , travelling from London to Harworth to help him with his riding position . In late 1955 , Simpson ran a red light in a race and was suspended from racing for six months by the BLRC . During his suspension he dabbled in motorcycle trials , nearly quitting cycling but unable to afford a new motorcycle necessary for progress in the sport . 
 = = = Track years = = = 
 Berger told Simpson that if he wanted to be a successful road cyclist , he needed experience in track cycling , particularly in the pursuit discipline . Simpson competed regularly at Fallowfield Stadium in Manchester , where in early 1956 he met amateur world pursuit silver medallist Cyril Cartwright , who helped him develop his technique . At the national championships at Fallowfield the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Simpson won a silver medal in the individual pursuit , defeating amateur world champion Norman Sheil before losing to Mike Gambrill . 
 Simpson began working with his father as a draughtsman at the glass factory in Harworth . He was riding well ; although not selected by Great Britain for the amateur world championships , he made the 4 @,@ 000 @-@ metre team pursuit squad for the 1956 Olympics . In mid @-@ September , Simpson competed for two weeks in Eastern Europe against Russian and Italian teams to prepare for the Olympics . The seven @-@ rider contingent began with races in Leningrad , continuing to Moscow before finishing in Sofia . He was nicknamed " the Sparrow " by the Soviet press because of his slender build . The following month he was in Melbourne for the Olympics , where the team qualified for the team @-@ pursuit semi @-@ finals against Italy ; they were confident of defeating South Africa and France but lost to Italy , taking the bronze medal . Simpson blamed himself for the loss for pushing too hard on a turn and being unable to recover for the next . 
 After the Olympics , Simpson trained throughout his winter break into 1957 . In May , he rode in the national 25 @-@ mile championships ; although he was the favourite , he lost to Sheil in the final . In a points race at an international event at Fallowfield a week later Simpson crashed badly , almost breaking his leg ; he stopped working for a month and struggled to regain his form . At the national pursuit championships , he was beaten in the quarter @-@ finals . After this defeat Simpson returned to road racing , winning the BLRC national hill climb championship in October before taking a short break from racing . In spring 1958 he traveled to Sofia with Sheil for two weeks ' racing . On his return he won the national individual pursuit championship at Herne Hill Velodrome . In July Simpson won a silver medal for England in the individual pursuit at the British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Cardiff , losing to Sheil by one @-@ hundredth of a second in the final . A medical exam taken with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) revealed Simpson to be colour blind . 
 In September 1958 , Simpson competed at the amateur world championships in Paris . Against reigning champion Carlo <unk> of Italy in the opening round of the individual pursuit , he crashed on the concrete track at the end of the race . Simpson was briefly knocked unconscious and sustained a dislocated jaw ; however , he won the race since he crashed after the finish line . Although he was in pain , team manager Benny Foster forced Simpson to race in the quarter @-@ final against New Zealand 's Warwick Dalton , hoping to unsettle Dalton ahead of a possible meeting with Simpson 's <unk> Sheil . Simpson wanted to turn professional , but needed to prove himself first , setting his sights on the world amateur indoor hour record . Reg Harris arranged for an attempt at Zürich 's <unk> velodrome on Simpson 's birthday in November . He failed by 320 metres , covering a distance of 43 @.@ 995 km ( 27 @.@ 337 mi ) and blaming his failure on the low temperature generated by an ice rink in the centre of the velodrome . The following week he travelled to Ghent , in the Flanders region of Belgium , to ride amateur track races . He stayed at the Café Den Engel , run by Albert Beurick , who organised for him to ride at Ghent 's <unk> velodrome in the <unk> ( English : Sport Palace ) . 
 Simpson decided to move to the continent for a better chance at success , and contacted French brothers Robert and Yvon Murphy , whom he met while racing . They agreed that he could stay with them in the Breton fishing port of Saint @-@ <unk> . His final event in Britain was at Herne Hill , riding motor @-@ paced races . Simpson won the event and was invited to Germany to train for the 1959 motor @-@ paced world championships , but declined the opportunity in favour of a career on the road . Bicycle manufacturer Elswick Hopper invited him to join their British @-@ based team , but Benny Foster advised him to continue with his plans to move to France . 
 = = = Move to Brittany = = = 
 In April 1959 , Simpson left for France with £ 100 savings and two Carlton bikes , one road and one track , given in appreciation of his help promoting the company . His last words to his mother before the move were , " I don 't want to be sitting here in twenty years ' time , wondering what would have happened if I hadn 't gone to France " . The next day , his National Service papers were delivered ; although willing to serve before his move , he feared the call @-@ up would put his potential career at risk . His mother returned them , with the hope they would understand this . 
 He applied to local cycling clubs , and joined Club Olympique <unk> , racing with an independent ( semi @-@ professional ) licence from the British Cycling Federation . When settled with the Murphy family , 21 @-@ year @-@ old Simpson met 19 @-@ year @-@ old Helen Sherburn , an au pair from Sutton , Yorkshire . Simpson began attracting attention , winning races and criteriums . He was invited to race in the eight @-@ day stage race Route de France by the St. Raphaël VC 12e , the amateur club below the professional team St. Raphaël @-@ Géminiani @-@ Dunlop . Simpson won the final stage , breaking away from the peloton and holding on for victory . After this win , he declined an offer to ride in the Tour de France for the professional team . Simpson had contract offers from two professional teams , Mercier – BP – Hutchinson and St. Raphaël @-@ Géminiani @-@ Dunlop , which had a British cyclist , Brian Robinson ; opting for the latter team , on 29 June he signed a contract for 80 @,@ 000 francs ( £ 80 a month ) . 
 On Simpson 's return to Harworth for Christmas , the RAF were notified and the press ran stories on his apparent draft avoidance . He passed a medical in Sheffield , but history repeated itself and the papers arrived the day after his departure for his team 's training camp in Narbonne in southern France . The French press , unlike the British , found the situation amusing . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 1959 : Foundations = = = 
 In July , four months after leaving England , Simpson rode his first race as a professional , the Tour de l 'Ouest in west France . He won the fourth stage and took the overall race leader 's jersey . He won the next stage 's individual time trial , increasing his lead . On the next stage he lost the lead with a punctured tyre , finishing the race in fourteenth place overall . 
 In August Simpson competed at the world championships in the 5000 m individual pursuit at Amsterdam 's large , open @-@ air velodrome and the road race on the nearby Circuit Park Zandvoort motor @-@ racing track . He placed fourth in the individual pursuit , losing by 0 @.@ 3 seconds in the quarter @-@ finals . He prepared for the 180 mi ( 290 km ) road race , eight laps of the track . After 45 mi ( 72 km ) a ten @-@ rider breakaway formed ; Simpson bridged the gap . As the peloton began to close in , he tried to attack . Although he was brought back each time , Simpson placed fourth in a sprint for the best finish to date by a British rider . He was praised by the winner , André Darrigade of France , who thought that without Simpson 's work on the front , the breakaway would have been caught . Darrigade helped him enter criteriums for extra money . His fourth placed earned Simpson his nickname , " Major Simpson " , from French sports newspaper L 'Équipe . They ran the headline : " Les <unk> du Major Simpson " ( " The notes of Major Simpson " ) , referencing the 1950s series of books , Les <unk> du Major Thompson by Pierre <unk> . 
 Simpson moved up to St. Raphaël @-@ Géminiani @-@ Dunlop 's first team , Rapha @-@ Gitane @-@ Dunlop , for the end @-@ of @-@ season one @-@ day classic races . In his first appearance in the Giro di Lombardia , one of the five " monuments " of cycling , he retired with a tyre puncture while in the lead group of riders . In Simpson 's last race of the season , he finished fourth in the Trofeo <unk> , a two @-@ man team time trial with Gérard Saint , racing against his boyhood idol , Fausto Coppi ; it was Coppi 's final race before his death . Simpson finished the season with twenty @-@ eight wins . 
 = = = 1960 : Tour de France debut = = = 
 His first major race of the 1960 season was the one @-@ day " monument " Milan – San Remo in March , in which the organisers introduced the Poggio climb ( the final climb ) to keep the race from finishing with a bunch sprint . Simpson broke clear from a breakaway group over the first climb , the Turchino , leading the race for 45 km ( 28 mi ) before being caught . He lost contact over the Poggio , finishing in 38th place . In April he moved to the Porte de Clichy district of Paris , sharing a small apartment with his teammate Robinson . 
 Days after his move , Simpson rode in Paris – Roubaix , known as " The Hell of the North " , the first cycling race to be shown live on Eurovision . He launched an attack as an early breakaway , riding alone at the front for 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) , but was caught around a mile from the finish at Roubaix Velodrome , coming in ninth . Simpson rode a lap of honour after the race at the request of the emotional crowd . His televised effort gained him attention throughout Europe . He then won the Mont Faron hill climb and the overall general classification of the Tour du Sud @-@ Est , his first overall win in a professional stage race . He planned to ride in the Isle of Man International road race , excited to see to his home fans . There were rumours , which proved correct , that the Royal Military Police were waiting for him at the airport , so he decided not to travel . This was the last he heard from the authorities regarding his call @-@ up . The British Cycling Federation fined him £ 25 for his absence . 
 In June , Simpson made his Grand Tour debut in the Tour de France aged 22 . Rapha directeur sportif ( team manager ) Raymond Louviot opposed his participation , but since the race was contested by national teams Simpson accepted the invitation from the British squad . During the first stage , he was part of a thirteen @-@ rider breakaway which finished over two minutes in front of the field ; he crashed on the cinder track at Heysel Stadium in Brussels , finishing thirteenth , but received the same time as the winner . Later that day he finished ninth in the time trial , moving up to fifth place overall . During the third stage Simpson was part of a breakaway with two French riders who repeatedly attacked him , forcing him to chase and use energy needed for the finish ; he finished third , missing the thirty @-@ second bonus for a first @-@ place finish , which would have put him in the overall race leader 's yellow jersey . He dropped to ninth overall by the end of the first week . During stage ten , Simpson crashed descending the Col d 'Aubisque in the Pyrenees but finished the stage in fourteenth place . In the following stage he was dropped , exhausted , from a chasing group ; failing to recover . He finished the Tour in twenty @-@ ninth place overall , losing 2 st ( 13 kg ; 28 lb ) in weight over the three weeks . 
 After the Tour , Simpson rode criteriums around Europe until crashing in central France ; he returned home to Paris and checked himself into a hospital . Following a week 's bed @-@ rest , he rode in the road world championships at the <unk> in East Germany . During the race Simpson stopped to adjust his shoes on the right side of the road and was hit from behind by a car , sustaining a cut to his head which required five stitches . In the last of the classics , the Giro di Lombardia , he struggled , finishing eighty @-@ fourth . Simpson had been in constant contact with Helen , who was now working in Stuttgart , Germany , meeting with her between races . They became engaged on Christmas Day , and originally planned to marry at the end of 1961 , but in fact wed on 3 January 1961 in Doncaster , Yorkshire . 
 = = = 1961 : Tour of Flanders and injury = = = 
 Simpson 's first major event of the 1961 season was the Paris – Nice stage race in March . In stage three he helped his team win the team time trial and took the general classification lead by three seconds ; however , he lost it in the next stage . In the final stages of the race Simpson 's attacks were thwarted , and he finished fifth overall . 
 On 26 March , Simpson rode in the one @-@ day Tour of Flanders . With <unk> 's Nino Defilippis , he chased down an early breakaway . Simpson worked with the group ; with about 8 km ( 5 mi ) to go he attacked , followed by Defilippis . The finish , three circuits around the town of <unk> , was flat ; Defilippis , unlike Simpson , was a sprinter and was expected to win . One kilometre from the finish , Simpson launched a sprint ; he eased off with 300 m to go , tricking Defilippis into thinking he was exhausted . As Defilippis passed , Simpson jumped again to take victory , becoming the first Briton to win a " monument " classic . Defilippis protested that the finishing banner had been blown down , and he did not know where the finish was ; however , the judges noted that the finish line was clearly marked on the road itself . Defilippis ' team asked Simpson to agree to a tie , saying no Italian had won a classic since 1953 . He replied : " An Englishman had not won one since 1896 ! " 
 A week later , Simpson rode in Paris – Roubaix in the hope of bettering his previous year 's ninth place . As the race reached the paved section he went on a solo attack , at which point he was told him that Mercier – BP – Hutchinson rider Raymond Poulidor was chasing him down . Simpson increased his speed , catching the publicity and press vehicles ahead ( known as the <unk> ) . A press car swerved to avoid a pothole ; this forced him into a roadside ditch . Simpson fell , damaging his front wheel and injuring his knee . He found his team car and collected a replacement wheel , but by then the front of the race had passed . Back in the race he crashed twice more , finishing 88th . 
 At Simpson 's next race , the four @-@ day Grand Prix d <unk> , his first in Spain , his knee injury still bothered him . He won the second stage , but was forced to quit during the following stage . His injury had not healed , even after treatment by various specialists , but for financial reasons he was forced to enter the Tour de France with the British team . He abandoned on stage three , which started in Roubaix , struggling to pedal on the cobbles . Three months after his fall at Paris – Roubaix he saw a doctor at St. Michael 's Hospital in Paris . He gave Simpson injections in his knee , which reduced the inflammation . Once healed , he competed in the road world championships in Berne , Switzerland . On the track he qualified for the individual pursuit with the fourth @-@ fastest time , losing in the quarter @-@ finals to Peter Post of the Netherlands . In the road race , Simpson was part of a seventeen @-@ rider breakaway that finished together in a sprint ; he crossed the line in ninth place . 
 Helen became pregnant ; Simpson 's apartment in Paris was now unsuitable and a larger home in France was not in their means . In October , with help from his friend , Albert Beurick , they moved into a small cottage in Ghent . Low on funds , Simpson earned money in one @-@ day track races in Belgium . 
 = = = 1962 : Yellow jersey = = = 
 Simpson 's contract with Rapha @-@ Gitane @-@ Dunlop had ended with the 1961 season . Tour de France winner Jacques Anquetil signed with them for 1962 , but Simpson wanted to lead a team , and signed with Gitane @-@ Leroux @-@ Dunlop for the 1962 season . After training camp at <unk> in southern France , he rode in Paris – Nice . He helped his team win the stage @-@ 3a team time trial and finished second overall , behind Flandria – Faema – Clément 's Jef Planckaert . He was unable to ride in Milan – San Remo when its organisers limited the race to Italian @-@ based teams ; instead he rode in Gent – Wevelgem , finishing sixth , then defended his Tour of Flanders title . At the end of the latter , Simpson was in a select group of riders at the head of the race . Although he led over each of the final climbs , at the finish he finished fifth and won the King of the Mountains prize . A week later Simpson finished thirty @-@ seventh in Paris – Roubaix , delayed by a crash . 
 Coming into the Tour de France , Simpson was leader of his team ; it was the first time since 1929 that company teams were allowed to compete . He finished ninth in the first stage , in a group of twenty @-@ two riders who finished over eight minutes ahead of the rest . Simpson 's team finished second to Flandria – Faema – Clément in the stage @-@ 2b team time trial ; he was in seventh place in the general classification , remaining in the top ten the rest of the first week . During stage 8a he was in a thirty @-@ rider group which gained about six minutes , moving him to second overall behind teammate André Darrigade . At the end of the eleventh stage Simpson was third in the overall , over a minute behind race leader Willy Schroeders ( Flandria – Faema – Clément ) and fifty @-@ one seconds behind Darrigade . Stage twelve from Pau to Saint @-@ Gaudens , the hardest stage of the 1962 Tour ( known as the " Circle of Death " ) , was the Tour 's first mountain stage . Simpson saw an opportunity to lead the race . The team now solely concentrated on his interests , since Darrigade was a sprinter and would no longer be involved in the general classification . As the peloton reached the Col du Tourmalet , Simpson attacked with a small group of select riders , finishing eighteenth place in a bunch sprint . As he finished ahead of all the other leaders in the general classification , he became the overall new leader of race , and the first British rider to wear the leader 's yellow jersey . Simpson lost the lead on the following stage , a short time trial ending with a steep uphill finish at <unk> . He finished thirty @-@ first and dropped to sixth overall . On stage nineteen he advanced recklessly descending the Col de Porte in the Alps , crashing on a bend and only saved from falling over the edge by a tree , leaving him with a broken left middle finger . He lost almost eleven minutes in the next stage 's time trial , finishing the Tour at Paris ' Parc des Princes stadium 17 minutes and 9 seconds behind in 6th place . 
 After the Tour Simpson rode criteriums before the road world championships in Salò , Italy , where he retired after missing a large breakaway . He began riding six @-@ day track races into his winter break . In December he made an appearance at the Champions ' Concert cycling awards held at Royal Albert Hall in London . Separately , he won the British Cycling Federation 's Personality of the Year . Simpson and Helen were expecting their second child and upgraded to a larger house in Sint @-@ Amandsberg , a sub @-@ municipality of Ghent . 
 = = = 1963 : Bordeaux – Paris = = = 
 Leroux withdrew its sponsorship of the Gitane team for the 1963 season . Simpson was contracted to their manager , Raymond Louviot ; Louviot was rejoining St. Raphaël @-@ Gitane @-@ <unk> and Simpson could follow , but he saw that as a step backwards . Peugeot @-@ BP @-@ <unk> bought the contract from Louviot , which ran until the end of the season . Simpson 's season opened with Paris – Nice ; he fell out of contention after a series of tyre punctures in the opening stages , using the rest of the race as training . He withdrew from the race on the final stage to rest for his next race , Milan – San Remo ; after breaking away by himself he stopped beside the road , which annoyed his fellow riders . At Milan – San Remo , Simpson was in a four @-@ rider breakaway ; his tyre punctured , and although he got back to the front , he finished nineteenth . He placed third in the Tour of Flanders in a three @-@ rider sprint . In Paris – Roubaix Simpson worked for teammate , and winner , Emile <unk> , finishing ninth . In the one @-@ day Paris – Brussels he was in a breakaway near the Belgian border ; with 50 km ( 31 @.@ 1 mi ) remaining he was left with world road race champion Jean Stablinski of St. Raphaël @-@ Gitane @-@ <unk> , who attacked on a cobbled climb in <unk> outside Brussels . Simpson 's bike slipped a gear , and Stablinski stayed away for the victory . After his second @-@ place finish , Simpson led the Super Prestige Pernod International season @-@ long competition for world 's best cyclist . The following week he raced in the Ardennes classics , placing thirty @-@ third in Liège – Bastogne – Liège , after he rode alone for about 100 km ( 62 mi ) before being caught in the closing kilometres . 
 On 26 May , Simpson rode in the one @-@ day , 557 km ( 346 mi ) Bordeaux – Paris . Also known as the " Derby of the Road " , it was the longest he had ever ridden . The race began at 1 : 58 am ; the initial 161 km ( 100 mi ) were <unk> until the town of Châtellerault , where <unk> ( motorised bicycles ) paced each rider to the finish . Simpson broke away in a group of three riders . Simpson 's pacer , Fernand Wambst , increased his speed , and Simpson dropped the other two . He caught the lead group , thirteen minutes ahead , over a distance of 161 km ( 100 mi ) . Simpson attacked , and with 36 km ( 22 @.@ 4 mi ) remaining , opening a margin of two minutes . His lead steadily increased , and he finished in the Parc des Princes over five minutes ahead of teammate Piet <unk> . 
 Simpson announced that he would not ride the Tour de France , concentrating on the world road championships instead . Before , he won the Isle of Man International in treacherous conditions where only sixteen out of seventy riders finished . At the road world championships in Ronse , Belgium , the Belgians controlled the race until Simpson broke free , catching two riders ahead : Henry Anglade ( France ) and Seamus Elliott ( Ireland ) . Anglade was dropped , and Elliott refused to work with Simpson . They were caught ; the race finished in a bunch sprint , with Simpson crossing the line in 29th . Simpson 's season ended with six @-@ day races across Europe and an invitation only race on the Pacific island of New Caledonia , along with other European riders . He skipped his usual winter training schedule for his first skiing holiday at Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains in the Alps , taking Helen and his two young daughters , Jane and Joanne . 
 = = = 1964 : Milan – San Remo = = = 
 After a training camp near Nice in southern France Simpson rode in the one @-@ day Kuurne – Brussels – Kuurne in Belgium , finishing second to Solo @-@ Superia 's Arthur <unk> . The conditions were so cold , he only completed the race to keep warm . Albert Beurick started Simpson 's supporters club at the Café Den Engel , raising £ 250 for him in the first nine months . In Paris – Nice , his tyre punctured during stage four , losing five minutes and used the rest of the race for training . 
 On 19 March , two days later , Simpson rode in Milan – San Remo . Before the race , French journalist René de Latour advised Simpson not to attack early : " If you feel good then keep it for the last hour of the race . " In the final 32 km ( 19 @.@ 9 mi ) , Simpson escaped in group of four riders , which including the 1961 winner , Poulidor of Mercier – BP – Hutchinson . On final climb , the Poggio , Poulidor launched a series of attacks on the group ; only Simpson managed to stay with him and they crossed the summit and descended into Milan . With 500 m to go , Simpson began his sprint ; Poulidor could not respond , leaving Simpson to take the victory with a record average speed of 27 @.@ 1 mph ( 43 @.@ 6 km / h ) . 
 Simpson spent the next two months training for the Tour de France at the end of June . After the first week of the Tour , Simpson was in tenth place overall . On the ninth stage , he was part of 22 @-@ rider breakaway which finished together at Monaco 's Stade Louis II ; he placed second to Anquetil , moving up to eighth overall . The next day , he finished 20th in the 20 @.@ 8 km ( 12 @.@ 9 mi ) time trial . During the 16th stage , which crossed four cols , Simpson finished 33rd , 25 minutes and 10 seconds behind the stage winner , and dropped to 17th overall . He finished the Tour in 14th place overall . Simpson later discovered that he rode the Tour suffering from tapeworms . 
 After the race , Simpson prepared for the world road championships with distance training and criteriums . At the world championships on 3 September , the 290 km ( 180 mi ) road race consisted of twenty @-@ four laps of a varying circuit at Sallanches in the French Alps . Simpson crashed on the third lap while descending in wet conditions , damaging a pedal . He got back to the peloton , launching a solo attack on a descent ; he then chased down the group of four leaders with two laps to go . On the last lap he was dropped by three riders , finishing six seconds behind . On 17 October , Simpson rode in the Giro di Lombardia . Halfway through the race he was given the wrong <unk> ( bag ) by his team in the feed zone , and threw it away . With the head of the race reduced to five riders , Molteni 's Gianni Motta attacked . Simpson was the only one who could follow , but he began to feel the effects of not eating . Motta gave him part of his food , which sustained him for a while . On the final climb Simpson led Motta , but was exhausted . Over the remaining 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) of flat terrain , Motta dropped him ; Simpson cracked , and was repeatedly overtaken , finishing twenty @-@ first . He closed the year riding track races . 
 = = = 1965 : World championship and Lombardia = = = 
 The Simpson family spent Christmas in England , before a trip to Saint @-@ Gervais @-@ les @-@ Bains , where Simpson injured himself skiing , suffering a broken foot and a sprained ankle . He recovered , riding six @-@ day races . At the Antwerp six @-@ day , he dropped out on the fourth day with a cold . His cold worsened and he missed most of March . He abandoned Milan – San Remo at the foot of the Poggio . On 11 April , he finished seventh in Paris – Roubaix after crashing in the lead group . The crash forced him to miss the Tour of Flanders as he struggled to walk on his injured foot . In Liège – Bastogne – Liège he attacked with <unk> 's Felice Gimondi , catching an early break . They worked together for 25 km ( 15 @.@ 5 mi ) , until Gimondi gave up . Simpson rode alone before slipping on oil mixed with water ; he stayed with the front group , finishing tenth . 
 On 29 May , Simpson rode in the London – Holyhead race , the longest <unk> one @-@ day race , with a distance of 265 mi ( 426 km ) ; he won in a bunch sprint , setting a record of ten hours and twenty @-@ nine minutes . He followed with an appearance at Bordeaux – Paris . François Mahé ( <unk> @-@ Sauvage @-@ Lejeune ) went on a lone break , Simpson attacked in pursuit , followed by Jean Stablinski . Simpson 's derny broke down , and he was delayed changing motorbikes . He caught Stablinski , and was joined by Anquetil . Outside Paris Mahé was caught and dropped , after 200 km ( 124 mi ) on his own . Anquetil won the race by fifty @-@ seven seconds ahead of Stablinski , who beat Simpson in a sprint . Peugeot manager Gaston Plaud ordered Simpson to ride the Midi Libre stage race to earn a place in the Tour de France , and he finished third overall . The 1965 Tour was considered open due to Anquetil 's absence , and Simpson was among the riders favoured by L 'Équipe . During stage nine he injured his hand crashing on the descent of the Col d 'Aubisque in the Pyrenees , finishing tenth in the stage and seventh in general classification . Simpson developed bronchitis after stage fifteen and cracked on the next stage , losing nearly nineteen minutes . His hand became infected , but he rode the next three stages before the Tour doctor stopped him from racing . He was taken to hospital , where they operated on his hand and treated him for blood poisoning , bronchitis and a kidney infection . 
 After ten days off his bike , Simpson was only contracted to three post @-@ Tour criteriums . His training for the road world championships included <unk> circuit races in Flanders . Simpson 's last race before the world championships was the Paris – Luxembourg stage race , riding as a super @-@ domestique ( lieutenant ) . On 5 September , Simpson rode in the road race at the world championships in San Sebastián , Spain . The race was a 267 @.@ 4 km ( 166 mi ) hilly circuit of fourteen laps . The British team had no support ; Simpson and his friend Albert Beurick obtained food and drink by stealing from other teams . During the first lap , a strong break was begun by British rider Barry Hoban . As his lead stretched to one minute , Simpson and teammates Vin Denson and Alan Ramsbottom bridged the gap , followed by Germany 's Rudi Altig . Hoban kept the pace high enough to prevent any of the favourites from joining . Simpson and Altig broke clear with two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half laps remaining , staying together until the final kilometre , when Simpson launched his sprint ; he held off Altig for victory by three bike lengths , becoming the first British world road race champion . 
 On 16 October , Simpson rode in the Giro di Lombardia , which featured five mountain passes . He escaped with Motta , and dropped him before the finish in Como to win his third " monument " classic over three minutes ahead of the rest . Simpson was the second world champion to win in Italy ; the first was Alfredo Binda in 1927 . Simpson was offered lucrative contracts by teams , including Flandria – Faema – Clément who were prepared to pay him the year 's salary in advance . He could not escape his contract with Peugeot , which ran until the end of the 1967 season . For the next three weeks he rode contract races , riding an estimated 12 @,@ 000 mi ( 19 @,@ 000 km ) . He rode 18 races , with each earning him £ 300 – £ 350 . 
 Simpson ended the year second to Anquetil in the Super Prestige Pernod International , and won the Daily Express Sportsman of the Year , the Sports Journalists ' Association Sportsman of the Year , presented by the Prime Minister Harold Wilson , and the BBC Sports Personality of the Year . In British cycling Simpson won the British Cycling Federation Personality of the Year and the Bidlake Memorial Prize . He was given the freedom of Sint @-@ Amandsberg ; his family , including his parents , were driven in an open @-@ top car along the crowd @-@ lined route from the Café Den Engel to the Town Hall . 
 = = = 1966 : An injury @-@ ridden season = = = 
 As in the previous winter , Simpson went on a skiing holiday . On 25 January he fell , breaking his right tibia , and his leg was in a plaster cast until the end of February . He missed contract races , crucial training and most of the spring classics . Simpson began riding again in March , and in late April started , but did not finish , Liège – Bastogne – Liège . 
 Simpson 's injury did not stop the press from naming him a favourite for the Tour de France . He was subdued in the race until stage twelve , when he forced a breakaway with Altig ( Molteni ) , finishing second . Simpson again finished second in the next stage , jumping clear of the peloton in a three @-@ rider group in the final kilometres . After the stage he was eighteenth overall , over seven minutes down . Simpson moved up to 16th after finishing 5th in stage 14b – a short time trial . As the race reached the Alps , he decided to make his move . During stage sixteen he attacked on the descent of the first of three cols , the Croix de Fer . He crashed but continued , attacking again . Simpson was joined by Ford France @-@ Hutchinson 's Julio Jiménez on the climb of the <unk> to the Galibier . Simpson was caught by a chase group descending the Galibier before he crashed again , knocked off his bike by a press motorcycle . The crash required five stitches in his arm . The next day he struggled to hold the handlebars and could not use the brake lever with his injured arm , forcing him to abandon . His answer to journalists asking about his future was , " I don 't know . I 'm heartbroken . My season is ruined . " 
 After recovering from his injury Simpson rode 40 criteriums in 40 days , capitalising on his world championship and his attacks in the Tour . He retired from the road world championships at the Nürburgring with cramp . His road season ended with retirements from autumn classics Paris – Tours and the Giro di Lombardia . He rode six @-@ day races , finishing fourteenth in the winter rankings . The misfortune he endured during the season made him the first rider named as a victim of the " curse of the rainbow jersey " . For the winter Simpson took his family to the island of Corsica , planning the build of his retirement home . 
 = = = 1967 : Paris – Nice and Vuelta stages = = = 
 Simpson 's primary objective for 1967 was overall victory in the Tour de France ; in preparation , he planned to ride stage races instead of one @-@ day classics . Simpson felt his chances were good because this Tour was contested by national , rather than professional teams . He would lead the British team , which – although one of the weakest – would support him totally , unlike Peugeot . During Simpson 's previous three years with Peugeot , he was only guaranteed a place on their Tour team if he signed with them for the following year . Free to join a new team for the 1968 season , he was offered at least ten contracts ; Simpson had a verbal agreement with Italian team <unk> , and would share its leadership with Felice Gimondi . In an interview with Cycling ( now Cycling Weekly ) journalist , Ken Evans , in April , Simpson revealed his intention to attempt the hour record in the 1967 season . He also said he wanted retire from road racing aged 33 , to ride on the track and spend more time with his family . 
 In March he rode in the Paris – Nice . After stage two his teammate , Eddy Merckx , took the overall lead . Simpson moved into the lead the next day as part of a breakaway , missed by Merckx , which finished nearly twenty minutes ahead . Merckx thought Simpson double @-@ crossed him , but Simpson was a passive member of the break . At the start of stage six , Simpson was in second place behind Bic 's Rolf <unk> . Merckx drew clear as the race approached Mont Faron , with Simpson following . They stayed together until the finish in Hyères , with Simpson allowing Merckx to take first place . Simpson finished over a minute ahead of <unk> , putting him in the race leader 's white jersey . He held the lead in the next two stages to win the race . Three days later Simpson and Merckx both raced in Milan – San Remo . Simpson escaped early in a five @-@ rider breakaway lasting about 220 km ( 137 mi ) , before Merckx won in a bunch sprint with assistance from Simpson , who finished in seventieth placed . After 110 mi ( 177 km ) of Paris – Roubaix , Simpson 's bike was <unk> and he retired from the race . 
 In late April Simpson rode in his first Vuelta a España , using the eighteen @-@ stage race to prepare for the Tour . During stage two a breakaway group gained over thirteen minutes , dashing his hopes for a high placing . Simpson nearly quit the race before the fifth stage , from Salamanca to Madrid , but rode it because it was easier to get home by air from Madrid . He won the stage , attacking from a breakaway , and finished second in stage seven . On the eleventh stage , concluding in Andorra , Simpson rode away from the peloton on his own . With 30 km ( 18 @.@ 6 mi ) remaining , he began to lose control of his bike and was halted by Peugeot manager Gaston Plaud until he had recovered , by which time the race had passed . In an interview with L 'Équipe 's Philippe Brunel in February 2000 , Tour de France physician Pierre Dumas revealed that Simpson told him that he was taken to hospital during the Vuelta . Simpson won stage sixteen , which ended in San Sebastián , and finished the Vuelta thirty @-@ third overall . 
 Simpson was determined to make an impact in the Tour de France ; in his eighth year as a professional cyclist , he hoped for larger appearance fees in post @-@ Tour criteriums to help secure his financial future after retirement . His plan was to finish in the top three , or to wear the yellow jersey at some point in the race . He targeted three key stages , one of which was the thirteenth , over Mont Ventoux , and planned to ride conservatively until the race reached the mountains . In the prologue , Simpson finished thirteenth . After the first week he was in sixth place overall , leading the favourites . As the race crossed the Alps , Simpson fell ill , across the Col du Galibier , with diarrhoea and stomach pains . Unable to eat , he finished stage ten in 16th place and dropped to seventh overall as his rivals passed him . Teammate Vin Denson advised Simpson to limit his losses and accept what he had . He placed in 39th position on stage 11 and 7th on 12 . In Marseille , on the evening before stage thirteen , Simpson 's manager , Daniel <unk> , pressured him for good results . Plaud begged Simpson to quit the race . 
 = = Death = = 
 The thirteenth stage ( 13 July ) of the 1967 Tour de France measured 211 @.@ 5 km ( 131 @.@ 4 mi ) ; it started in Marseille , crossing Mont Ventoux ( the " Giant of Provence " ) before finishing in <unk> . At dawn Tour doctor , Pierre Dumas , met journalist , Pierre Chany , near his hotel . Dumas noted the warm temperature , " If the boys stick their nose in a ' <unk> ' [ bag of drugs ] today , we could have a death on our hands " . At the start line , a journalist noticed Simpson looked tired and asked him if the heat was the problem . Simpson replied , " No , it 's not the heat , it 's the Tour . " The temperature reportedly reached as high as 54 ° C ( 129 ° F ) during the stage . 
 As the race reached the lower slopes of Ventoux , Simpson 's team mechanic Harry Hall , witnessed Simpson , still ill , putting the lid back on his water bottle as he exited a building . Race <unk> ( official ) , Jacques <unk> , later confirmed to Hall that he also saw the incident and that Simpson was putting brandy in his bottle . Near the summit of Ventoux , the peloton began to fracture . Simpson was in the front group before slipping back to a group of chasers about a minute behind . He then began losing control of his bike , zig @-@ zagging across the road . A kilometre from the summit , Simpson fell off his bike . Team manager Alec Taylor and Hall arrived in the team car to help him . Hall tried to persuade Simpson to stop , saying : " Come on Tom , that 's it , that 's your Tour finished " , but Simpson said he wanted to continue . Taylor said , " If Tom wants to go on , he goes " . Noticing his toe straps were still undone , Simpson said , " Me straps , Harry , me straps ! " They got him on his bike and pushed him off . Simpson 's last words , as remembered by Hall , were " On , on , on . " Hall estimated Simpson rode a further 500 yd ( 457 m ) before he began to wobble , and was held upright by spectators ; he was unconscious , with his hands locked on the handlebars . Hall and a nurse from the Tour 's medical team took turns giving Simpson mouth @-@ to @-@ mouth resuscitation , before Dumas arrived with an oxygen mask . Approximately forty minutes after his collapse , a police helicopter took Simpson to nearby Avignon hospital , where he was pronounced dead at 5 : 40 p.m. Two empty tubes and a half @-@ full one of amphetamines , one of which was labelled " <unk> " , were found in the rear pocket of his jersey . The official cause of death was " heart failure caused by exhaustion . " 
 On the next racing day , the other riders were reluctant to continue racing and asked the organisers for a postponement . France 's Stablinski suggested that the race continue , with a British rider , whose team would wear black armbands , allowed to win the stage . Hoban won the stage , although many thought the stage winner should have been Denson , Simpson 's close friend . Media reports suggested that his death was caused by heat exhaustion , until , on 31 July 1967 British journalist J. L. Manning of the Daily Mail broke the news about a formal connection between drugs and Simpson 's death . French authorities confirmed that Simpson had traces of amphetamine in his body , impairing his judgement and allowing him to push himself beyond his limits . His death contributed to the introduction of mandatory testing for performance @-@ enhancing drugs in cycling , leading to tests in 1968 at the Giro d 'Italia , Tour de France and Summer Olympics . Simpson was buried in Harworth Cemetery , after a service at the 12th @-@ century village church attended by an estimated 5 @,@ 000 mourners , including Peugeot teammate Eddy Merckx , the only continental rider in attendance . The epitaph on Simpson 's gravestone in Harworth cemetery reads , " His body ached , his legs grew tired , but still he would not give in " , taken from a card left by his brother , Harry , following his death . 
 = = Doping = = 
 Unlike the majority of his contemporaries , Simpson was open about the use of drugs in professional cycling . In 1960 , interviewed by Chris Brasher for The Observer newspaper , Simpson spoke about his understanding of how riders could beat him , saying : " I know from the way they ride the next day they are taking dope . I don 't want to have to take it – I have too much respect for my body . " Two years before his death , Simpson hinted in the newspaper , The People , at drug @-@ taking in races , although he implied that he himself was not involved . Asked about drugs by Eamonn Andrews on the BBC Home Service radio network , Simpson did not deny taking them ; however , he said that a rider who frequently took drugs might get to the top but would not stay there . 
 In his biography of Simpson , Put Me Back on My Bike , William Fotheringham quoted Alan Ramsbottom as saying , " Tom went on the [ 1967 ] Tour de France with one suitcase for his kit and another with his stuff , drugs and recovery things " , which Fotheringham said was confirmed by Simpson 's roommate Colin Lewis . Ramsbottom added , " Tom took a lot of chances . He took a lot of it [ drugs ] . I remember him taking a course of strychnine to build up to some big event . He showed me the box , and had to take one every few days . " although he implied that other competitors were involved . Lewis recalled Simpson acquiring a small box at their hotel . Simpson explained to him : " That 's my year 's supply of Micky Finns ' . That lot cost me £ 800 . " 
 Commentator and Simpson 's close friend David Saunders stated in his 1971 book , Cycling in the Sixties , that although he did not condone Simpson 's use of drugs , he thought it was not the reason for his death . He said : " I am quite convinced that Simpson killed himself because he just did not know when to stop . All his racing life he had punished his frail body , pushing it to the limits of endurance with his tremendous will @-@ power and single @-@ mindedness and , on Mont Ventoux , he pushed it too far , perhaps the drug easing the pain of it all . " Saunders went on to say that Simpson was not alone in the taking of drugs in professional cycling and that the authorities ignored their use . His opinion was that Simpson did not take drugs to gain an unfair advantage , but because " he was not going to be beaten by a pill " . 
 = = Riding style and legacy = = 
 Simpson in his adolescence was described as fearsome in descent by fellow Scala Wheelers club member George Shaw , who explained that if Simpson dropped behind on a climb , he would come back on the descent . Simpson 's risk @-@ taking on descents was evident throughout his career , crashing in four out of the seven Tour de Frances he competed in . Track rider Norman Sheil recalled : " When racing on a banked velodrome , Simpson would sometimes ride up the advertising boards at the top of the bankings , Wall of Death @-@ style , to please the crowds . " Simpson 's death was attributed to his unwillingness to admit defeat ascending Mont Ventoux . He described a near @-@ death experience during a race in 1964 , the Trofeo <unk> two @-@ man time trial , to Vin Denson , who recalled : " He said he felt peace of mind and wasn 't afraid to die . He said he would have been happy dying . " 
 Simpson looked for any advantage over his opponents . He made his own saddle , a design which is now standard . During his time with Peugeot , he rode bikes made by Italian manufacturer Masi that resembled Peugeots . Simpson was obsessed with dieting since 1956 , when he was mentored by Cyril Cartwright . Simpson understood the value of fruit and vegetables after reading Les Cures de jus by nutritionist Raymond <unk> ; during the winter , he would consume 10 lb ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) of carrots a day . Other unusual food preferences included pigeons , duck and trout skin , raspberry leaves and garlic in large quantities . 
 A granite memorial to Simpson , with the words " Olympic medallist , world champion , British sporting ambassador " , stands on the spot where he collapsed and died on Ventoux , one kilometre east of the summit . Cycling began a fund for a monument a week after Simpson 's death , raising about £ 1 @,@ 500 . The memorial was unveiled in 1968 . It has become a site of pilgrimage for cyclists , who frequently leave cycling @-@ related objects , such as water bottles and caps , in tribute . In nearby <unk> , a plaque was installed in the town square by journalists following the 1967 Tour . The Harworth and <unk> Sports and Social Club has a small museum dedicated to Simpson , opened by Belgian cyclist Lucien Van Impe in August 2001 . In 1997 , to commemorate the 30th anniversary of his death , a small plaque was added to the Mont Ventoux memorial , with the words " There is no mountain too high . Your daughters Jane and Joanne , July 13 , 1997 " , and a replica of the memorial was erected outside the museum . In his adopted hometown of Ghent , there is a bust of Simpson at the entrance to the <unk> velodrome . Every year since his death , the Tom Simpson Memorial Race has taken place in Harworth . 
 Ray Pascoe , a fan , made the 1995 film Something To Aim At , a project he began in the years following Simpson 's death ; the film includes interviews with those closest to Simpson . The 2005 documentary Wheels Within Wheels follows actor Simon Dutton as he searches for people and places in Simpson 's life . Dutton 's four @-@ year project chronicles the midlife crisis that sparked his quest to rediscover Simpson . British rider David Millar won stage twelve of the 2012 Tour de France on the 45th anniversary of Simpson 's death ; previously banned from cycling for using performance @-@ enhancing drugs , he paid tribute to Simpson and reinforced the importance of learning from his – and Simpson 's – mistakes . Millar wrote the introduction for a reissue of Simpson 's autobiography , Cycling is My Life , published in 2009 . In 2010 Simpson was inducted into the British Cycling Hall of Fame . He inspired Simpson Magazine , which began in March 2013 . According to the magazine 's creators , “ It was Simpson 's spirit and style , his legendary tenacity and his ability to suffer that endeared him to cycling fans everywhere as much as the trophies he won ” . 
 = = Family and interests = = 
 Soon after moving to France in 1959 Simpson met Helen Sherburn . They married in 1961 , before moving to Ghent , Belgium , the following year . They had two daughters , Jane ( born April 1962 ) and Joanne ( born May 1963 ) , who were brought up , and live , in Belgium . After his death , Helen Simpson married Barry Hoban in December 1969 . Simpson is the maternal uncle of retired Belgian @-@ Australian cyclist Matthew Gilmore , whose father , Graeme , was also a cyclist . The 2000 book Mr. Tom : The True Story of Tom Simpson , written by Simpson 's nephew , Chris <unk> , focuses on his career and family life . 
 Simpson spoke fluent French , also competent Flemish and Italian . He was interested in vintage cars , and his driving and riding styles were similar ; Helen remembered , " Driving through the West End of London at 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , was nothing . " In January 1966 , Simpson was a guest " castaway " on BBC Radio 4 's Desert Island Discs ; his favourite musical piece was " Ari 's Theme " from Exodus by the London Festival Orchestra , his book choice was The Pickwick Papers and his luxury item was golf equipment . Helen said that she chose his records for the show , since he was not interested in music . Simpson 's autobiography , Cycling Is My Life , was first published in 1966 . 
 = = Career achievements = = 
 = = = Major results = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Grand Tour general classification results timeline = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Monuments results timeline = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = Awards and honours = = = 
 British Cycling Federation Personality of the Year : 1962 , 1965 
 BBC Sports Personality of the Year : 1965 
 Bidlake Memorial Prize : 1965 
 Daily Express Sportsman of the Year : 1965 
 Freedom of Sint @-@ Amandsberg : 1965 
 Sports Journalists ' Association Sportsman of the Year : 1965 
 British Cycling Hall of Fame : 2010 
 = Controversies surrounding Grand Theft Auto IV = 
 Grand Theft Auto IV is an open world , action @-@ adventure video game developed by Rockstar North and published by Rockstar Games . Upon its release on 29 April 2008 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 , Grand Theft Auto IV generated controversy . The game 's depiction of violence received mass commentary from journalists and government officials , occasionally being referred to as a " murder simulator " . The ability to drive under the influence of alcohol in the game also received criticism , resulting in a request for the ESRB to change the game 's rating . Similarly , some gameplay features were censored for the Australian and New Zealand versions of the game , though these censors were subsequently removed . Several crimes that were committed following the game 's release , such as murder and sexual violence , were attributed to the perpetrators ' experience with the game , generating further controversy . Former attorney Jack Thompson , known for his campaigns against the series , heavily criticised Grand Theft Auto IV prior to its release , filing lawsuits against parent company Take @-@ Two Interactive , and threatening to ban distribution of the game if some gameplay features were not removed . The game also generated further controversy and lawsuits from city officials and organisations . 
 = = Gameplay features = = 
 = = = Depiction of violence = = = 
 Grand Theft Auto IV has been widely criticised for its depiction of violence and murder . On his program , conservative American talk @-@ radio host Glenn Beck used Grand Theft Auto IV as an example to make wider claims about the use of violent video games by the US military , repeating claims made by Lt. Col. Dave Grossman that the military uses shooting games to <unk> soldiers to killing . Beck also spoke to Jack Thompson , who labelled the game as a " murder simulator " . Gavin McKiernan , national grass roots director for the Parents Television Council , added that the game is an " adult product " , claiming that research displays the potential effect violent media has on children . Thompson reiterated that the game should be re @-@ rated in the United States , referring to the Australian release as an example . 
 There have been a number of reported crimes in which the perpetrators cited Grand Theft Auto IV as their primary influence . On 27 June 2008 , six teenagers were arrested after participating in a crime spree in New Hyde Park , New York . The teenagers mugged a man , knocking his teeth out , attempted to hijack a car , and smashed a passing van with a bat . According to the Nassau County Police , the teenagers claimed that they were inspired by Grand Theft Auto IV . On 4 August 2008 , BBC Newsbeat reported that an 18 @-@ year @-@ old student had been arrested in Bangkok , Thailand for the murder of a taxi driver after attempting to hijack the vehicle . Bangkok police captain <unk> <unk> stated that the student " wanted to find out if it was as easy in real life to rob a taxi as it was in the game " . Grand Theft Auto IV was subsequently banned in Thailand as a result . On 24 August 2013 , Sky News reported that a 90 @-@ year @-@ old woman was killed in Slaughter , Louisiana when an eight @-@ year @-@ old boy grabbed a handgun and shot her in the head after playing Grand Theft Auto IV . 
 = = = Drunk driving option = = = 
 Grand Theft Auto IV lets players become intoxicated , resulting in a shaky and blurry gameplay vision . Players also have the option to enter cars while intoxicated , and to drive under the influence of alcohol . This gameplay feature received criticism , particularly from the nonprofit organisation Mothers Against Drunk Driving ( MADD ) . MADD referred to the action as a " choice , a violent crime " , and that it is " 100 percent preventable " . As a result , MADD requested for the Entertainment Software Rating Board to change the rating of the game from Mature ( 17 + ) to Adults Only ( 18 + ) , effectively removing the game from retail stock . They also asked Take @-@ Two Interactive and Rockstar Games to consider halting the game 's distribution out of a sense of social responsibility , or out of respect for victims of driving under the influence . Rockstar later issued a statement to the Associated Press : 
 We have a great deal of respect for MADD 's mission , but we believe the mature audience for Grand Theft Auto IV is more than sophisticated enough to understand the game 's content . 
 = = = Sexual and nudity allegations = = = 
 On 16 June 2008 , British newspaper The Sun reported the presence of an in @-@ game Internet resource titled Little Lacy Surprise Pageant — a reference to the fake commercials featured in Grand Theft Auto : Vice City Stories ( 2006 ) . The in @-@ game resource warns that anyone caught viewing the website will be investigated , followed by a statement similar to the quote found at <unk> which results in the player being pursued by the in @-@ game FIB and SWAT ( <unk> ) teams . In November 2008 , 19 @-@ year @-@ old Ryan Chinnery was jailed for performing two sex attacks on women at night . During the court hearings , it was told that Chinnery had spent considerable hours playing Grand Theft Auto IV . The judge said that Chinnery 's experience with the game " cannot have helped him in all the circumstances of this case " . 
 Grand Theft Auto : The Lost and Damned , the first episodic expansion to Grand Theft Auto IV , features a cutscene displaying full @-@ frontal male nudity . As a result , parents group Common Sense Media condemned the expansion , issuing a public warning against the nudity . The organisation claimed that the inclusion of nudity resulted in the game 's status as " more controversial than its predecessors " . Rockstar vice president Dan Houser stated that the game 's depiction of sexual content is intended as humorous , hoping that " the fans " recognise the humour . 
 = = = Censored release = = = 
 Despite confirmation in February 2008 that the Australian version of Grand Theft Auto IV would not be edited , Rockstar later revealed that some features would be censored . The game was assigned an MA15 + rating on 11 December 2007 . Rockstar stated that a special version of the game was produced to comply with the Australian classification system . Features censored in the Australian versions include : the inability to select a " service " when hiring a prostitute , and the restriction of animation and camera angles ; the lack of blood pools and bloody footprints ; the replacement of bullet wounds and blood patches with " slight discolouration " . For the game 's PC release , the uncensored version of the game was awarded MA15 + in Australia . Following the release of The Lost and Damned , Rockstar distributed a patch which uncensored the Australian release for consoles . 
 On 15 April 2008 , it was announced that the New Zealand release of the game would be identical to the censored Australian release , with Take @-@ Two Interactive attributing " time scales and logistical reasons " . Bill Hastings , Chief Censor for the New Zealand Office of Film and Literature Classification ( OFLC ) , stated that Rockstar " did not tell [ the OFLC ] which version of the game they submitted " , and that " the version [ Rockstar ] submitted for classification was the version they intended to market in New Zealand " . However , the game was resubmitted to the OFLC by Stan Calif , a 21 @-@ year @-@ old student who was unhappy that New Zealand received an edited version of the game as a result of Australian censorship laws . The unedited version was subsequently given an R18 rating and cleared for sale in New Zealand . 
 = = Political response = = 
 In 2007 , then Florida lawyer Jack Thompson , who had previously campaigned against other games from Rockstar , stated that he would take measures to prevent the sale of Grand Theft Auto IV to minors . On 14 March 2007 , Rockstar 's parent company Take @-@ Two Interactive filed a lawsuit against Thompson in an attempt to preemptively restrict him from his attempts to declare Rockstar 's games as a nuisance . Games declared to be a nuisance are effectively banned for sale , which Take @-@ Two believed would be a violation of First Amendment rights . Thompson responded by filing a countersuit , accusing Take @-@ Two of violating federal RICO statues , committing perjury , obstruction of justice , and conspiring against him with third parties to deprive him of his civil rights . 
 Both parties reached a settlement on 20 April 2007 , agreeing to drop their respective lawsuits . Under the terms of the settlement , Thompson has been barred from suing to ban the sale or distribution of games by Take @-@ Two or its subsidiaries . He is restricted to communicating through Take @-@ Two 's attorneys on any future matter , but is able to maintain his outspoken stance against their titles and may act as counsel in lawsuits against Take @-@ Two by other parties . For their part , Take @-@ Two agreed to drop the contempt of court lawsuit against Thompson regarding alleged improper conduct during the court hearings for Rockstar 's game Bully in 2006 . 
 Thompson filed a document with a federal court in Florida on 18 September 2007 , claiming that the assassination target of a mission in Grand Theft Auto IV is a lawyer character based upon himself . When the player enters his office and brandishes a weapon , the lawyer yells " Guns don 't kill people , video games do ! " , a phrase often attributed to Thompson . Thompson threatened that he will " take necessary and proper means to stop release of the game " if the similarities were not removed ; the similarities were not removed , and Thompson did not follow through . On 25 April 2008 , Metro reported that Thompson had written a letter to the mother of Strauss Zelnick , director of Take @-@ Two Interactive . In the letter , which strongly criticised both the game and Zelnick 's upbringing , Thompson labelled Grand Theft Auto as a " murder simulator " . He follows : 
 The pornography and violence that your son <unk> [ sic ] in is the kind of stuff that most mother would be ashamed to see their son putting into the hands of other mothers ' children ... Maybe you , Mrs. Zelnick , were so taken by your handsome son that you spared the rod and spoiled the child . That would explain why he has brought you , by the way he presently acts , " to shame . " ... Happy Mother 's day , Mrs. Zelnick , which this year is ... two weeks after your son unleashes porn and violence upon other mothers ' boys . I 'm sure you 're very proud . 
 Thompson subsequently claimed that he sent the letter to Zelnick 's lawyer , as opposed to his mother , formulated as a parody intended to induce feelings of " shame " in Zelnick . 
 Following the release of the game 's first trailer , New York City officials were appalled with the choice of their city as the inspiration for the setting of the game , stating that a game like Grand Theft Auto does not represent the city 's crime levels accurately . A spokesperson for Mayor Michael Bloomberg said that Bloomberg " does not support any video game where you earn points for injuring or kill police officers " . Although points are not awarded in the game and the murder of police officers is discouraged to the player , the game often suggests to players that police officers must be killed in order to advance in the game 's main story without difficulty . As a response , Jason Della Rocca , executive director of the International Game Developers Association , accused New York City officials of double standards , for criticising video games of using the city , but avoiding the argument in terms of other forms of entertainment , such as books , films and television shows . 
 = = Legal action = = 
 Take @-@ Two Interactive filed a lawsuit in response to the Chicago Transit Authority ( CTA ) removing advertisements promoting the game from their property , which violates a contract that requires the advertisements to remain until June 2008 . In response , a representative from the CTA attributed the removal of the advertisements to the controversy surrounding the advertisement campaign for Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas in 2004 . 
 = Evansville Tornado of November 2005 = 
 The Evansville Tornado of November 2005 was an F3 tornado that formed early in the morning of November 6 , 2005 , outside of Evansville , Indiana , USA . It was the first of several tornado events that November . The tornado resulted in 25 confirmed fatalities across the region , making it the deadliest and most destructive November tornado in Indiana 's history . The Evansville tornado was part of a small outbreak that produced 8 tornadoes . 
 = = Meteorological analysis = = 
 The system formed on a cold front that tracked across the Midwest and stretched from the northern Great Lakes to Tennessee . The front was enhanced by a strong jet stream and warm , humid air ahead of it , allowing thunderstorms to develop . A severe thunderstorm watch was issued for the region just west of Evansville as the main threat appeared to be straight @-@ line winds . The system had formed into a squall line but at about 1 : 30 am CST ( 0730 UTC ) , the squall line broke up in the Ohio Valley area , as the low level jet intensified , allowing embedded tornadoes to form rapidly out of newly formed supercells . They were fairly isolated ( only seven were confirmed across the entire region over a 24 @-@ hour period ) but three significant tornadoes formed from two simultaneous supercells in southern Indiana and western Kentucky — one of them was the deadly Evansville tornado . 
 = = Confirmed tornadoes = = 
 = = = November 5 event = = = 
 = = = November 6 event = = = 
 = = Evansville area tornado = = 
 On Sunday , November 6 , 2005 at around 1 : 50 am CST ( 0750 UTC ) , an F3 tornado touched down 2 miles ( 3 km ) north @-@ northwest of Smith Mills in Henderson County , Kentucky . The tornado moved northeast , snapping numerous trees , destroying a farmhouse , and throwing a pickup truck into a field . The tornado then crossed the Ohio River and moved across a rural peninsula of Vanderburgh County , Indiana . Few structures were impacted in this rural area , though a two @-@ story house built in 1875 sustained major roof damage , and tree branches were embedded into the walls of the house . One farm equipment shed was demolished , and another sustained major damage . A 10 @,@ 000 @-@ pound truck was flipped over , and heavy farm equipment was moved several feet . Aerial surveys revealed distinct spiral @-@ shaped scour marks in farm fields in this area . The tornado crossed the river again back into Kentucky , causing extensive tree damage on both sides of the river . Almost immediately after crossing the river , the tornado slammed into the Ellis Park horse racing facility . There was extensive damage to grandstands and housing facilities for jockeys . A few race horses were killed there . 
 The tornado crossed the Ohio River a third time back into Indiana and across the southern fringes of Evansville . Here , the tornado ripped directly through the <unk> Mobile Home Park , obliterating numerous mobile homes and killing 20 people . Of about 350 mobile homes in the park , 100 were destroyed and another 125 were damaged . The coroner reported that most of the victims were probably killed instantly , many by spine and skull fractures . Several bodies were carried almost two hundred yards . The tornado then crossed into Warrick County , Indiana at the Angel Mounds State Historic Site . Several permanent homes were destroyed in this area , along with many others on the north side of Newburgh . Past Newburgh , the tornado reached its peak intensity ( high @-@ end F3 ) as it tore through an industrial park near Paradise . Further northeast , the tornado passed just south of Boonville and caused a fatality in a mobile home . The tornado then tore directly through the small community of <unk> Springs , tossing vehicles and destroying homes . Some of the homes in the community were leveled , and three people were killed in a mobile home in this area . The tornado began to rapidly weaken as it passed just south of Tennyson , and then dissipated as it crossed into Spencer County , Indiana . Overall , the tornado damaged or destroyed 500 buildings , killed 25 people , and injured 230 others . 
 Tornado warnings were in effect at the time and issued on average about 30 minutes before the tornado hit , but few people were alerted as many were asleep as the tornado hit in the overnight hours . The local NOAA Weather Radio transmitter was experiencing technical difficulties at the time , causing some weather radios to not sound an alarm . Damages were estimated at around $ 85 million . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The community 's response to the tornado garnered national praise . Brad Gair , a coordinating officer for the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) noted , " I don 't think I 've ever seen a community of people come out so quickly to help each other . All communities come together after a disaster , but this one is exceptional . " A local telethon helped raise the funds . " Just having a telethon that quickly was amazing , " said Gair , " Then to raise that kind of money ... That 's unusual . " 
 On August 12 , 2006 a granite monument memorial was built at <unk> Mobile Home Park , along with a new playground dedicated to the children lost in the tornado . It was part of a campaign launched by two parents that lost children in the tornado . In addition , Rep. Phil Hoy introduced a bill called " CJ 's law " which mandates that manufacturers of mobile homes install an operating weather radio with a separate power outlet in order to alert residents . It was named after victim C.J. Martin , who was two years old . Vanderburgh County also passed legislation toughening safety standards for their 3 @,@ 100 mobile homes , requiring them to be more securely anchored with additional straps and braces , to try to prevent another tornado disaster . 
 Ellis Park was rebuilt and reopened on June 1 , 2006 , for training . The first races at the rebuilt facility were held on July 19 , 2006 . 
 Local television station WEHT began a campaign after the tornado to provide weather radios to tornado victims for free , and to all for a discounted price . Even WEHT 's competitors have now posted how to program a weather radio on their websites . This program has since spread to many different areas of the country . 
 " Habitat for Humanity " Evansville Chapter launched construction of " Operation Home Again , " the New Haven Subdivision , which are new homes dedicated to the survivors of the tornado at Green River Road and <unk> Road . The subdivision has 55 homes and playground / park . There are four streets in the subdivision – Inspiration Street , Healing Street , Promise Street , and Belief Street . 
 = = Fatalities = = 
 = Battle of Yongdong = 
 The Battle of Yongdong was an engagement between United States and North Korean forces early in the Korean War . It occurred on July 22 – 25 , 1950 , in the village of Yongdong in southern South Korea . The newly arrived US Army 's 1st Cavalry Division was ordered there to cover the retreat of the US 24th Infantry Division after the Battle of Taejon . The 1st Cavalry Division soldiers , however , were untried in combat , and the North Korean People 's Army 's 3rd Division ( NK 3rd Division ) was able to outmaneuver them and force them back . 
 Though the Americans lost the town , their artillery inflicted substantial casualties on the North Koreans and delayed them for several crucial days , allowing the United Nations Command time to set up the Pusan Perimeter . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Following the invasion of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) by its neighbor , the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) , the United Nations committed troops to the conflict in support of South Korea . The United States sent ground forces to the Korean peninsula with the goal of fighting back the North Korean invasion and preventing South Korea from collapsing . However , US forces in the Far East had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II in 1945 , and at the time the closest forces were the 24th Infantry Division of the Eighth United States Army , which was headquartered in Japan . The division was understrength , and most of its equipment was antiquated due to reductions in military spending . Regardless , the 24th Infantry Division was ordered into South Korea . 
 The 24th Infantry Division was the first US unit sent into Korea with the mission to take the initial " shock " of North Korean advances , delaying much larger North Korean units to buy time to allow follow @-@ on forces to arrive . The division 's delaying actions allowed the 7th Infantry Division , 25th Infantry Division , 1st Cavalry Division , and other Eighth Army supporting units to move into position . South Korean forces in the meantime were systematically defeated and forced south along Korea 's east coast , with entire divisions being overrun by the North Koreans ' superior firepower and equipment . Advance elements of the 24th Infantry Division were badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on July 5 , during the first battle between American and North Korean forces . For the first month after the defeat at Osan , 24th Infantry Division soldiers were repeatedly defeated and forced south by the North Korean force 's superior numbers and equipment . The division 's regiments were systematically pushed south in battles around Chochiwon , Chonan , and Pyongtaek . The division made a final stand in the Battle of Taejon and was almost completely destroyed , but delayed North Korean forces from advancing until July 20 . By that time , the Eighth Army 's combat troops were roughly equal to North Korean forces attacking the region at around 70 @,@ 000 for each side , with new UN units arriving every day . 
 = = = US 1st Cavalry Division arrival = = = 
 On July 6 , Major General Hobart R. Gay , Commanding General of the 1st Cavalry Division , was ordered by General of the Army Douglas MacArthur to prepare the 1st Cavalry Division to move into Korea . Between July 12 and 14 the division was moved from its garrisons in central Honshu , Japan and loaded onto ships in the Yokohama area . It was then ordered to land on the east coast of Korea at P 'ohang @-@ dong , a fishing town 60 miles ( 97 km ) northeast of Pusan , in order to immediately reinforce the faltering 24th Infantry Division . From P 'ohang @-@ dong the division could moved promptly toward the Taejon area . The command ship USS Mount McKinley and first elements of the division sailed for Korea on July 15 . The 1st Cavalry Division 's transportation was provided by Task Force 90 , commanded by Rear Admiral James H. Doyle . Lead elements of the division 's first regiment , the 8th Cavalry Regiment were ashore by 06 : 10 on July 18 , and the first troops of the division 's US 5th Cavalry Regiment came in at 06 : 30 . Typhoon Helene ( 1950 ) swept over the Korean coast and prevented landing of the third regiment , the 7th Cavalry Regiment and the 82nd Field Artillery Battalion until July 22 . For three days ships could not be unloaded at Pusan and Eighth Army rations dropped to one day 's supply . However , the landings were entirely unopposed by North Korean forces . 
 The transfer of 750 noncommissioned officers ( NCOs ) from the 1st Cavalry Division to the 24th and 25th Infantry Divisions , a move aimed at strengthening the infantry divisions combat missions in Korea , had weakened the 1st Cavalry Division . It had been stripped of practically every NCO except the first sergeants of companies and batteries in the division . Even though it had received 1 @,@ 450 replacements before it left Japan , 100 of them from the Eighth Army stockade , the division was understrength when it landed in Korea and , like the preceding divisions , it had only two battalions in its three regiments , two firing batteries in the artillery battalions , and one tank company with M24 light tanks . 
 On July 19 , the 5th Cavalry Regiment started toward Taejon . The next day the 8th Cavalry Regiment followed by railroad and in trucks , and reformed in an assembly area east of Yongdong that evening . Brigadier General Charles D. Palmer , the division artillery commander , took charge of these two forward regiments . On July 22 the 8th Cavalry Regiment relieved the US 21st Infantry Regiment , US 24th Infantry Division from its positions at Yongdong . At that point , the 1st Cavalry Division assumed responsibility for blocking the North Koreans along the main Taejon – Taegu corridor to Pusan . The 24th Division 's troops retreated through the 1st Cavalry Division 's lines as the newly arrived soldiers advanced to their new defensive positions that day . 
 Protect Yongdong . Remember there are no friendly troops behind you . You must keep your own back door open . You can live without food but you cannot last long without ammunition , and unless the Yongdong – Taegu road is kept open you will soon be without ammunition . 
 <unk> General Walton Walker 's orders to Gay 
 Once it was fully assembled in the city , the 1st Cavalry Division was ordered to move north of Yongdong and set up defensive positions . The division moved one battalion of the 8th Cavalry 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) northwest of Yongdong on the south side of the Kum River , and another battalion 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southwest of Yongdong . The first would cover the approach along the main Taejon – Taegu highway , the second the approach on the <unk> @-@ ni – <unk> – <unk> road . Gay placed the 5th Cavalry Regiment on the high ground east of the town in a blocking position . By July 19 , the division numbered 10 @,@ 027 men in Korea . This move coincided with a reorganization of the ROK Army consolidating their lines and making room for the new division . On July 22 , the 1st Cavalry Division had finished preparing its defensive positions north of Yongdong , as the battered 24th Infantry Division was moved to the Naktong Bulge area along the Naktong River . At the same time , the US 25th Infantry Division moved to Sangju where it was caught in a battle with North Korean forces in that town . 
 = = Battle = = 
