 = = = Opening moves = = = 
 The North Koreans quickly advanced after the Battle of Taejon , with four of their divisions attacking south from the city along four different roads . The NK 3rd Division departed the city on July 22 , advancing down the main highway toward Taegu and Yongdong , to where the 1st Cavalry Division was emplaced . The next morning , July 23 , the 1st Battalion , 8th Cavalry Regiment , in front of Yongdong , reported it had destroyed three North Korean T @-@ 34 tanks with 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch rocket launchers in its first use of that weapon . 
 On July 23 the 7th and 9th Regiments of the NK 3rd Division began their attack on the Yongdong defensive positions held by the 1st Cavalry Division . They made their first penetration southwest of Yongdong , establishing a roadblock behind the 2nd Battalion , 8th Cavalry , and at the same time other North Korean units heavily engaged the 1st Battalion northwest of Yongdong in frontal attack . 
 The next day , American M24 tanks attacked the roadblock behind the 2nd Battalion four times in an attempt to break it , but all were unsuccessful , and Lieutenant Colonel Eugene J. Field , the 2nd Battalion commander , was wounded at the roadblock . Palmer sent the 1st Battalion , 5th Cavalry Regiment , and the 16th Reconnaissance Company toward the cut @-@ off battalion . By 12 : 00 , North Korean troops were attacking the 99th and 61st Field Artillery Battalions which were supporting the 2nd Battalion , 8th Cavalry Regiment , indicating that the North Korean infiltration had been extensive by that point . 
 = = = Fighting on the roads = = = 
 On the other main approach to Yongdong , a road northwest of the city , heavy machine gun fire and 37 @-@ mm fire from A Battery of the 92nd Antiaircraft Artillery Battalion , and artillery fire from the 77th Field Artillery Battalion helped the 1st Battalion there to repel North Korean attacks . However , the large numbers of civilian refugees crowding the Yongdong area trying to move south helped the North Koreans infiltrate the 1st Cavalry Division positions . Eighth Army tried to control the refugee movement through the Korean National Police , permitting it only during daylight hours and along predetermined routes . The North Koreans continued to move into the city in civilian clothing with concealed weapons , and US troops started shooting any Koreans moving through their lines at night . The chain of command which issued these orders is not clear as they were generally not put on paper . However , these orders are thought to have contributed to war crimes committed against civilians by the 1st Cavalry Division , namely the No Gun Ri massacre which took place around the time of the fighting at Yongdong . In the No Gun Ri <unk> , US soldiers are alleged to have killed a number of Korean civilians , thinking them military infiltrators . 
 By the morning of July 25 North Korean forces had infiltrated the positions of the 1st Cavalry Division so thoroughly that they were disrupting its lines of supply , and Gay ordered the division to withdrawal and re @-@ form its lines further south . Northwest of Yongdong , 1st Battalion executed an orderly withdrawal , covered by the fire of the Heavy Mortar Company and the two batteries of the 77th Field Artillery Battalion . The mortar operators fought as infantry in the withdrawal . During these retreats North Korean troops disguised themselves as refugees and would form roadblocks in the UN troops ' rear areas , or used hidden communications equipment to inform higher commands of UN concentrations so those concentrations could be attacked when they were most vulnerable . 
 Meanwhile , the North Koreans intensified their attack on the 2nd Battalion on the road southwest of Yongdong . Concentrated artillery support , with the shells falling so close to the 2nd Battalion positions that they wounded four US troops , together with an attack by the 2nd Battalion , briefly opened the North Korean roadblock at 04 : 30 July 25 , and the bulk of the battalion escaped to Yongdong . However , F Company of the 8th Cavalry , the 16th Reconnaissance Company , and the 1st Platoon of A Company , 71st Tank Battalion , at the rear of the column were cut off . Only four of 11 light tanks broke through the North Korean positions . Crews abandoned the other seven tanks and walked over the hills in a two days ' journey as part of a group of 219 men , most of them from F Company . All equipment except individual arms was abandoned by this group . Others groups of US troops escaped in the same manner . The North Koreans had flanked the 1st Cavalry Division in a double envelopment and forced them to withdraw . In the process , the division lost much of its equipment in its quick withdrawal actions . 
 On this same road , closer to Yongdong , the 2nd Battalion , 5th Cavalry , which was trying to help the cutoff units of the 8th Cavalry , was itself attacked by strong North Korean units . Through some error , the US battalion 's F Company advanced to the wrong hill and stumbled into a concentration of North Korean soldiers . Only 26 men from F Company returned , the rest were killed or captured in the subsequent ambush . Altogether , the 5th Cavalry Regiment suffered 275 casualties on July 25 . 
 = = = American withdrawal = = = 
 The NK 3rd Division used essentially the same tactics it employed against the 24th Infantry Division at Taejon that it did against the 1st Cavalry Division at Yongdong . In both fights , the North Koreans opened with a direct frontal attack to hold the US division 's elements in combat , and then the bulk of the North Korean force enveloped the American left flank and established strongly held roadblocks behind the front positions and forced the Americans in them to retreat from the untenable positions . The NK 3rd Division entered Yongdong the night of July 25 . At least one North Korean unit was in the town by 20 : 00 . The North Koreans expected a counterattack and immediately took up defensive positions at the eastern edge of the town . However , the US troops had withdrawn . The 1st Cavalry Division troops set up another delaying action around Hwanggan and hit the North Korean advance a second time in the Battle of Hwanggan several days later . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 North Korean prisoners of war captured by the US troops during the battle reported that the NK 3rd Division suffered about 2 @,@ 000 casualties , mostly from artillery fire , in the attack on Yongdong on July 24 – 25 . This brought it down to a strength of about 5 @,@ 000 men , approximately half the strength it had when the war began . The 1st Cavalry Division 's actions were able to delay the North Korean advance for several days , giving the UN forces valuable time to set up the Pusan Perimeter . The UN losses after this battle and the subsequent fight at Hwanggan cost the 1st Cavalry Division 916 casualties . The defeat was a poor showing for the division , but its record quickly improved with experience and it became a more reliable fighting unit by the time it was placed on Pusan Perimeter . 
 = New Jersey Route 79 = 
 Route 79 is a state highway located in Monmouth County in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs 12 @.@ 13 mi ( 19 @.@ 52 km ) from an intersection with U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) in Freehold Township north to an intersection with Route 34 and County Route 516 Spur ( CR 516 Spur ) in Matawan . The route is a mostly two @-@ lane undivided road that passes through both suburban residential areas and rural areas . The route intersects Route 33 in Freehold Township , Route 33 Business and CR 537 in Freehold Borough , Route 18 and CR 520 in Marlboro Township , and CR 516 in Matawan . 
 In 1927 , the current alignment of Route 79 was designated as a part of Route 4 , which was to run from Cape May to the George Washington Bridge , with US 9 additionally being designated along the route by the 1940s . After US 9 and Route 4 were moved to a new routing between Freehold and Cheesequake , the former route became Route 4A , a spur of Route 4 . In 1953 , Route 4A became Route 79 between Freehold and Matawan and an extension of Route 34 between Matawan and Cheesequake . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 79 begins at an intersection with US 9 in Freehold Township , heading north on South Street , a two @-@ lane divided highway that soon becomes an undivided road . It interchanges with Route 33 and continues through a mix of residential and commercial areas The route enters Freehold Borough , where it crosses Route 33 Business . Route 79 heads into downtown Freehold , where it intersects CR 537 . Here , the route heads northeast on Main Street to run concurrent with County Route 537 for a short distance . It eventually splits from CR 537 by forking to the left to head northeast on Broadway . The route heads past homes , intersecting CR 46 . Route 79 crosses back into Freehold Township , where it continues through suburban residential areas , with intermittent farms and woods . It heads into Marlboro Township , where the name becomes Marlboro Road . The route passes some businesses before it widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway and comes to an interchange with Route 18 . 
 Past this interchange , Route 79 heads through a mix of homes and businesses , narrowing back into a two @-@ lane undivided road . The name of the road changes to North Main Street at the School Road intersection . The road passes through residential and commercial areas with some farm fields , where it intersects CR 520 . Past this intersection , Route 79 continues north and heads into more suburban areas . The road heads through wooded areas with some development , intersects CR 3 in <unk> , forming a short concurrency with that route that lasts until CR 3 heads northeast on Lloyd Road . Route 79 continues north through wooded neighborhoods and enters Matawan , where it becomes Main Street . It passes through residential areas before the road crosses CR 516 in a commercial area . Route 79 continues a short distance north past this intersection to its northern terminus at Route 34 . At this intersection , unsigned CR 516 Spur continues northeast on Main Street . 
 = = History = = 
 What has become Route 79 is an original road for the area . On June 7 , 1701 a patent was granted to John Johnstone for a road from old <unk> Landing ( Matawan Creek ) to <unk> . This would have roughly followed that Route 79 path . Before 1927 , what is today Route 79 was an unnumbered road . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the route was legislated as part of Route 4 , which was to run from Cape May to the George Washington Bridge . By the 1940s , US 9 was realigned to follow this portion of road along with Route 4 . Eventually , US 9 and Route 4 were moved to a new alignment between Freehold and Cheesequake , and the former alignment between these two points became Route 4A , a spur of Route 4 . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 4A became Route 79 between Freehold and Matawan and an extension of Route 34 between Matawan and Cheesequake . On December 15 , 2006 , the intersection between US 9 and Route 79 was rebuilt to improve safety and reduce traffic congestion . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Monmouth County . 
 = Republic of Loose = 
 Republic of Loose were an Irish funk rock band from Dublin . Formed in 2001 , the band formerly consisted of lead vocalist Mick Pyro , bass guitarist and vocalist Benjamin Loose , keyboardist Darragh , guitarists and vocalists Dave Pyro and <unk> O ' <unk> and drummers and percussionists Andre Lopes . Additional percussion and vocals are provided by Orla La and Emily Rose 
 With a self @-@ described musical style of " the stuff your dad likes " , the band signed to Big Cat Records in 2003 , recording their debut album This is the Tomb of the Juice which was released in 2004 . They were named " Hope for 2004 " at the 2004 Meteor Awards . In 2005 , the singles " Comeback Girl " and " You Know It " received significant airplay on Irish radio . Republic of Loose 's second album Aaagh ! , released in April 2006 , reached number two in the Irish Albums Chart , achieving platinum sales and a Choice Music Prize nomination in the process . It spawned several more successful singles , including " Break " which achieved notoriety in South Africa where a radio station banned it following complaints regarding its allegedly explicit lyrics . Vol IV : Johnny Pyro and the Dance of Evil , Republic of Loose 's third album , was released in 2008 . That album produced their highest chart performer to date , " The Steady Song " , which peaked at number twelve and stayed in the Irish Singles Chart for thirteen weeks . Bounce at the Devil , the band 's fourth album , was released in 2010 . 
 Having earned the admiration of several musicians , including members of Snow Patrol and U2 , as well as Sinéad O 'Connor — with whom they recorded , released and performed a duet at the 2008 Meteor Awards — , the band have had their music played on radio stations in Africa , Asia , Europe and North America . The Irish Times placed them at number thirty @-@ seven in a list of " The 50 Best Irish Acts Right Now " published in April 2009 , referring to them as " one of Ireland 's most original bands " led by " the gruff singer with the extraordinary soul voice [ ... ] simultaneously channelling the spirits of James Brown and James Joyce in one fell swoop . " Aside from U2 and Bell X1 , they are the Irish band with the most airplay in their native country . In August 2014 , vocalist Mick Pyro confirmed that the band had split . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Mick Pyro performed with self @-@ described " rubbish rock bands " for several years before the formation of The Republic of Loose . During this time , he was , according to himself , " depressed out of my brains " and listened to artists such as Manic Street Preachers . Experiencing what he termed " a huge metaphysical overturning of my value system " , Pyro had developed a fascination with musicians such as James Brown and The Rolling Stones , or " the stuff your Dad likes " . This change of musical interest prompted him to create Johnny Pyro , an alter @-@ ego , who , according to Pyro , " disassociated himself from the normal lifestyle of an Irish bourgeois kid " . This alter @-@ ego would later develop into Johnny Pyro And The Rock Coma ( Mik Pyro , Dave Pyro , Coz Noleon , Mark Dennehy and Emmet Cole ) . The band recorded an EP , which featured four of the songs that later appeared on the Republic of Loose 's first album , ' This Is The Tomb Of The Juice . ' Following the departure of guitarist Emmet Cole ( who wrote the song " Black Bread " ) and bassist Mark <unk> " To Texas and Ringsend , " respectively , Johnny Pyro and Rock Coma split . 
 About a year later the Republic of Loose was formed . Benjamin Loose studied theology in Trinity College , Dublin before performing in a country band with Mick Pyro . Dave Pyro used to play guitar with Brez and Deco joined them to play keys . The name Republic of Loose was settled upon in 2001 when Dave and Mick , combined with Brez , Deco , Coz Noleon , who had been Mick 's schoolfriend , and Benjamin Loose . 
 = = = This is the Tomb of the Juice = = = 
 The band 's break , according to Mick Pyro , came as a result of ten days recording time they won in " some competition or something , some fucking battle of the bands " . In 2003 , Republic of Loose signed to Big Cat Records . The single " Girl I 'm Gonna Fuck You Up " , released in late 2003 , was largely ignored by daytime radio in Ireland , with Mick Pyro commenting in an early Hot Press interview : " We were never going to be the type of band that Larry Gogan or Ian Dempsey would play anyway , regardless of the lyric " . The band 's debut album , This is the Tomb of the Juice , was partially recorded in the ten days studio time they had won in the aforementioned competition . This is the Tomb of the Juice was recorded in 2003 then released in 2004 . 2004 was also the year in which Republic of Loose débuted at Oxegen ( on the New Band Stage ) , a festival at which they have since regularly performed . Singles " Comeback Girl " and " You Know It " were released in July and October 2005 respectively , both achieving significant airplay on Irish radio and entering the top thirty of the Irish Singles Chart . By 2006 the band had toured Ireland , the United Kingdom , where they performed at festivals such as Glastonbury and T in the Park , and France , where they performed at Furia Sound Festival , Nice Jazz Festival and Les <unk> . They also performed alongside veteran rock band Lir at Vicar Street in January 2006 . 
 = = = Aaagh ! = = = 
 At a cost of € 70 @,@ 000 to make , the band 's second album , Aaagh ! was released in 2006 . Sunday Tribune journalist Una Mullally called it " one of the most original and progressive Irish albums ever made " . Aaagh ! reached number two in the Irish Albums Chart , going platinum in the process , received regular airplay on Irish radio and produced five singles , including " The Idiots " , a song about Mick Pyro 's former girlfriend which also features her on vocals . " Break " , a top ten single in Ireland and top forty single in South Africa , was temporarily banned by South African radio station <unk> when a female DJ declared on air that it promoted anal sex without contraception , a comment which led to several complaints from listeners . The band 's 2006 summer tour included a performance where fans danced outside despite " the lashing rain " at Oxegen 2006 , with the Irish Independent 's Larissa Nolan saying " their scheduling on the main stage was a testament to just how big their army of fans is " , and <unk> . In 2007 , Republic of Loose performed at several festivals in Ireland and the United Kingdom , including Reading and Leeds Festivals , Cois <unk> and a headline slot at Indie @-@ pendence . Aaagh ! was released in the United Kingdom on 15 October 2007 . In January 2008 , Republic of Loose were one of the acts who recorded " The Ballad of Ronnie Drew " at Dublin 's Windmill Lane Studios ; the sessions led to a meeting with Sinéad O 'Connor , with whom the band recorded and released a duet which was then performed live at the 2008 Meteor Awards the following month . 
 = = = Vol IV : Johnny Pyro and the Dance of Evil = = = 
 On 27 March 2008 , Republic of Loose announced the tracklist and title for their third album . Vol IV : Johnny Pyro and the Dance of Evil was released in May 2008 , featuring contributions from Sinéad O 'Connor , rapper Styles P and hip hoppers Millionaire Boyz . In the run @-@ up to the release , the band uploaded free downloadable songs to their MySpace profile , including b @-@ sides , live tracks and songs from Aaagh ! . Vol IV : Johnny Pyro and the Dance of Evil spent more than three months in the top thirty of the Irish Albums Chart , spawning the successful singles , " I Like Music " and " The Steady Song " , the latter their highest chart performer to date , having peaked at number twelve and stayed in the charts for thirteen weeks . Mick Pyro has described Vol IV : Johnny Pyro and the Dance of Evil as the first album the band feel proud of . 
 In support of the album 's release , the band embarked on a small national tour and received an invitation to perform a sell @-@ out month @-@ long residency at The Dublin Academy for four consecutive Fridays , thus ending their habit of playing Dublin only once per year . This involved two @-@ hour sets featuring new material and duets with Sinéad O 'Connor — on her song " Nothing Compares 2 U " — and Damien Dempsey — on the Thin Lizzy song " Dancing in the Moonlight " . The Academy residency led to a Meteor Award nomination for Best Irish Live Performance the following year and they would return for another performance at the same venue that September . A couple were engaged as part of a BBC television series prior to the Sunday evening appearance of Republic of Loose on the O2 Stage at Oxegen 2008 — a performance which also featured collaborator Styles P — whilst the band also performed for several journalists backstage . They performed a DJ set at <unk> before headlining <unk> Festival on 17 August 2008 . Republic of Loose featured on Today FM 's The Ray D 'Arcy Show 's charity album Even Better Than the Disco Thing released in December 2008 , finishing off the year with three shows in Cork . 
 Republic of Loose were one of several acts to perform cover versions at a show in The Academy titled " Inspirations " , held in honour of the actor Paul Newman 's Irish charity in February 2009 . In June 2009 , the band were part of a collaboration of musicians calling themselves The Troublemakers who recorded a cover version of the Horslips song " Trouble with a Capital T " for charity . The recording session was part of The Raw Sessions and the song was performed by The Troublemakers on The Late Late Show . The band performed on the Heineken Green Spheres Stage at Oxegen 2009 before supporting U2 during one of their U2 360 ° Tour concert dates at Croke Park in July 2009 . Republic of Loose participated in the international celebration of the 250th birthday of Guinness — known as Arthur 's Day — which took place on 24 September 2009 . 
 = = = Bounce at the Devil = = = 
 In July 2010 , Republic of Loose returned to Oxegen . Their fourth album , Bounce at the Devil , was released later that year and led to an appearance on The Late Late Show . The album , recorded in Baltimore , " blends a myriad of influences -- from plastic soul to the sort of ' big hair ' rock of the 80s " , according to Irish Independent reviewer John Meagher . Entertainment.ie 's Jenny Mulligan describes it as good craic but occasionally bordering on obnoxious . 
 = = Influences , praise and style = = 
 Republic of Loose 's genre has been defined by various sources as blues , funk , metal , R 'n'B , pop , rock and soul . They are influenced by acts such as Bobby Brown , James Brown , Al Green , Howlin ' Wolf , Michael Jackson , Prince and The Rolling Stones . They perform as a six @-@ piece band complete with backing singers . The chant , " Loose ! Loose Loose ! " , is commonly heard from the crowd during their performances . 
 Republic of Loose have earned the admiration of several musicians . Damien Dempsey called them the " best band in Ireland " after performing alongside them . Sinéad O 'Connor , in an e @-@ mail to the Irish Independent , asked to become a member of what she described as " simply the best Irish band ever " . Bono has described them as " sophisticated soul <unk> " , " trailblazers " and proclaimed that " the Celtic Twilight turned into Celtic soul with Van Morrison , then Republic of Loose grabbed the Celtic Tiger by the tail , swung it around their heads and threw it out the window into the cosmos " . Snow Patrol 's Gary Lightbody , who called them " the best band in the country this year [ 2007 ] and for many years to come " . Snow Patrol have also remixed " Comeback Girl " . Praise has come from other musicians too , including Jake Shears of Scissor Sisters . Marcus Russell , manager of Oasis , is reported as having called Republic of Loose the " most exciting new band " since Oasis . Novelist Irvine Welsh has referred to " Comeback Girl " as " one of the greatest songs ever recorded " . Actress Mischa Barton is also a fan . 
 Paul Lester , writing in British newspaper The Guardian in July 2007 , described Republic of Loose as an " Irish OutKast " to be filed next to Danny Wilson , Hall & Oates and N.E.R.D and least likely to be compared to The Pogues . John Meagher , writing in the Irish Independent in April 2008 , said the band were " out of step entirely with prevailing trends [ ... ] almost like they stopped listening to music after hearing the young Prince and early Dexys Midnight Runners " . Vocalist Mick Pyro has commented that there are very few musicians performing " authentic modern soul " and that the band 's aim is to " combine the energy of the New York Dolls with the funk and soul qualities of The Roots " . When writing a piece on The Script in August 2008 , Brian Boyd of The Irish Times claimed that they were " as un @-@ Irish sounding as The Republic of Loose [ sic ] " . Internationally , they have established fan bases in London and New York and have achieved regular airplay on Los Angeles radio in the United States , as well as France , Indonesia and the Philippines . Bunim / Murray Productions has licensed their music for use on American television . They have , however , refused several indie contracts in the United States . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = = Current members = = = 
 Mick Pyro — Lead vocalist 
 Dave Pyro — Guitar , vocalist 
 Andre Lopes — Drums , percussion 
 = = = Additional members = = = 
 <unk> <unk> — Backing vocalist 
 Darragh - Keyboards 
 <unk> O <unk> - Guitar 
 = = = Previous members = = = 
 Benjamin Loose — Bass guitar , vocalist 
 Coz Noleon — Drums , percussion , Backing Vocals 
 Mark Dennehy ( Bass ) 
 Brez - Guitar , Vocalist 
 Deco — Keyboards 
 Eve Ill Jones — Backing vocalist 
 <unk> — Percussion 
 Emily Rose — Backing vocalist 
 Orla La — Backing vocalist 
 Kieran J. Sims — Live Bass ( 2008 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 From " This Is The Tomb of the Juice " 
 Girl I 'm Gonna Fuck You Up 
 Hold Up 
 Tell More Lies 
 From " Aaagh ! " 
 Comeback Girl ( IRE # 19 ) 
 You Know It ( IRE # 22 ) 
 Shame ( IRE # 20 ) 
 Break / The Translation ( IRE # 29 ) 
 The Idiots 
 From " Vol IV : Johnny Pyro and the Dance of Evil " 
 I Like Music ( IRE # 41 ) 
 The Steady Song ( IRE # 12 ) 
 The Ritual 
 Awful Cold 
 From " Bounce At the Devil " 
 The Man 
 99 ( feat . Bo Starks ) 
 The Blah Bounce 
 Non @-@ album singles 
 They Pay For Love ( 2012 ) 
 Thinking of You ( 2013 ) IRE # 16 
 The Punishment ( 2013 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = Choice Music Prize = = = 
 Republic of Loose 's second album Aaagh ! was nominated for the Choice Music Prize , an award won by The Divine Comedy for the album Victory for the Comic Muse . The band performed at the award ceremony in Vicar Street on 28 February 2007 . Surprise was expressed within the industry when they were not nominated again for the 2009 award . 
 = = = Meteor Music Awards = = = 
 Republic of Loose won the Hope for 2004 award at the 2004 Meteor Awards . They were nominated in the Best Irish Band category at 2007 Meteor Awards . 
 Republic of Loose were nominated in the Best Irish Band and Best Irish Live Performance categories at the 2009 Meteor Awards . They lost to The Script and The Blizzards in those respective categories . 
 In addition to this , they have performed at both the 2006 and 2008 awards ceremonies , the latter of which involved a duet with Sinéad O 'Connor on the Curtis Mayfield song " We People Who Are Darker Than Blue " . 
 = Frankenstein , MD = 
 Frankenstein , MD is a 2014 American Gothic horror comedy webseries with transmedia elements . Produced in partnership between Pemberley Digital and PBS Digital Studios , the show is a modern adaptation of Frankenstein by Mary Shelley , replacing the eponymous character with Victoria Frankenstein , a medical student near graduation . The show , which represents PBS Digital 's first foray into scripted content , was created by Bernie Su , Brett Register , and Lon Harris and premiered on YouTube on August 19 , 2014 . It has been generally well received by critics . Its season finale debuted on October 31 , 2014 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Frankenstein , MD is presented as an educational webseries presented by medical students ( and later doctors ) Victoria Frankenstein and Iggy DeLacey from the fictional Engle State University . Each episode generally consists of Frankenstein experimenting with cutting @-@ edge medical technologies or theories , often using DeLacey or her childhood friends Eli Lavenza and Rory Clerval as subjects . Dr. Abraham Waldman serves as an adviser to Frankenstein , usually acting as a foil and reminding her of the impracticality or perceived impossibility of her experiments and theories . 
 Partway through the series , the show 's unseen camera operator and editor , Robert Walton , dies from a fall while adventuring in Alaska , where his body is left partially preserved in the snow . Frankenstein becomes distraught and attempts to revive Walton 's corpse with DeLacey 's help in secret using the medical technologies she had expounded upon earlier in the show . The attempt is successful , but the revived creature is startled by light and escapes the lab , running into the woods . Later , as Frankenstein and Lavenza are trying to locate the creature from her father 's basement , Clerval is killed mysteriously while camping . The creature confronts Frankenstein and asks her to make him a friend . She grows morally opposed to the idea of recreating her experiment and agrees to run off to Costa Rica with Lavenza after he confesses his love to her . The creature returns to her makeshift lab and kills Lavenza in anger after he tries to stop it from hurting Frankenstein . 
 = = Production = = 
 Frankenstein , MD was announced in May 2014 , in a partnership between PBS Digital Studios , the online arm of the American Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) , and Pemberley Digital whose previous webseries included The Lizzie Bennet Diaries ( an adaptation of Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice ) and Emma Approved ( based on Austen 's Emma ) . The show is a transmedia adaptation of Frankenstein ; or , The Modern Prometheus by Mary Shelley that reimagines the story 's male protagonist Victor Frankenstein as a female student of medicine named Victoria Frankenstein . The show is PBS Digital 's first scripted program , though it also includes educational elements . 
 According to its writers , Frankenstein , MD 's narrative fills a two @-@ year gap left by Shelley 's source text between Victor Frankenstein 's time at medical school and his reappearance as a mad scientist . The original Frankenstein is driven to insanity by his ostracization and Frankenstein , MD attempted to recontextualize this concept by gender @-@ swapping its lead . Victoria Frankenstein is a medical student and later doctor grappling with institutional sexism in what the creators called the " sort of a male @-@ dominated profession " of medicine . 
 The show is produced by Bernie Su who was previously responsible for Pemberley Digital 's other webseries . Filmed at YouTube 's Space LA production studio , it premiered on the site on August 19 , 2014 . Prior to the show 's premiere , accounts on social media for various characters in the show were created , allowing viewers to interact with Frankenstein 's protagonists . Joe Hanson , host of PBS Digital 's It 's Okay To Be Smart , acts as the show 's science consultant . In early episodes of the show , Frankenstein neglected to wear gloves during her experiments which Su claimed was because , " real science and real @-@ life procedures aren 't sexy for entertainment " . During its run , fans noticed this and called the show out for the error ; in later episodes she is depicted with gloves on for all of her scientific work . The first season of the show concluded after 24 five- to eight @-@ minute episodes on October 31 , 2014 . 
 Episodes of Frankenstein , MD are directed by Brett Register , executive produced by Su , and produced by Tracy <unk> with consulting producer by Frederick Kim . Register and Lon Harris serve as showrunners with the latter also working as head writer . Other writers include Kim , Danielle Evenson , and Taylor Brogan . The series 's cinematographer is Matt Ryan . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Victoria Frankenstein ( Anna Lore ) – Analogous to Victor Frankenstein , she is a medical student described by The New York Observer as " smart , strong willed and filled with both an insatiable desire to learn about science and an unwavering belief in the field itself . " According to Register , Frankenstein 's character was not fully understood by the creators of the show until after Lore was cast on July 23 , 2014 . She helped them view the role as " this very confident but almost introverted character " . 
 Ludwig " Iggy " DeLacey ( Steve Zaragoza ) – Analogous to Igor , he is Frankenstein 's fellow student and co @-@ host of her show . Zaragoza mailed an audition tape to the show 's producers before in @-@ person auditions began which " set the bar for the character of Iggy " according to Register . 
 Dr. Abraham Waldman ( Kevin Rock ) – Analogous to M. Waldman , he serves as a mentor to Frankenstein . 
 Eli Lavenza ( Brendan Bradley ) – Analogous to Elizabeth Lavenza , he is one of Frankenstein 's close friends . 
 Rory Clerval ( Sara Fletcher ) – Analogous to Henry Clerval , she is another of Frankenstein 's close friends . 
 Robert Walton / The Creature ( Evan Strand ) – A combination of both Robert Walton and Frankenstein 's monster from the novel , Walton is the camera operator for Frankenstein 's vlog . He dies and is reanimated by her experiments . Lon Harris , a producer and writer of the series , chose Strand to perform The Creature because Strand 's performance was very different from Boris Karloff 's , and Tracy <unk> , a producer , praised Strand 's control of his body . Strand described his performance as being inspired by a five year old child , a silverback gorilla , and a rhinoceros . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviewing the first three episodes of the show for The A.V. Club , Myles McNutt felt that the fact that the show was a coproduction of PBS and Pemberley Digital was " the most exciting part " but that it was also the element " that takes the most time to negotiate in the series ’ first three episodes , as the writers and the audience alike adjust to the distinct goals of the science fiction vlog webseries . " McNutt declared the first three episodes " a solid start " and rated them B + , B , and A- , respectively . Nicole <unk> wrote in The New York Observer that the show " has a definite juvenile feel and is likely best suited for scientifically curious Jr . High students " and that its message " that being smart is cool ... sets a standard for television that more TV shows should get behind " . After viewing the first six episodes , Atiya Abbas noted in Vox Magazine that " [ t ] he series is light @-@ hearted compared to the dark subject of the novel " . On Hypable , Marama Whyte called the show " highly comedic " and noted its high production value and Anna Lore 's " standout performance " as positive aspects . 
 = Surtr = 
 In Norse mythology , Surtr ( Old Norse " black " or " the swarthy one " ) is a jötunn . Surtr is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In both sources , Surtr is foretold as being a major figure during the events of Ragnarök ; carrying his bright sword , he will go to battle against the Æsir , he will do battle with the major god Freyr , and afterward the flames that he brings forth will engulf the Earth . 
 In a book from the Prose Edda additional information is given about Surtr , including that he is stationed guarding the frontier of the fiery realm Múspell , that he will lead " Múspell 's sons " to Ragnarök , and that he will defeat Freyr . Surtr has been the subject of place names and artistic depictions , and scholarly theories have been proposed about elements of Surtr 's descriptions and his potential origins . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 Surtr is mentioned twice in the poem Völuspá , where a völva divulges information to the god Odin . The völva says that , during Ragnarök , Surtr will come from the south with flames , carrying a very bright sword : 
 Following this , the völva says that " stone peaks clash " , " troll wives take to the road " , " warriors tread the path from Hel " , and the heavens " break apart " . The next stanza relates that Odin is to be killed by the wolf Fenrir , and that Surtr will go to battle against " Beli 's bane " , a kenning for the god Freyr , who slew the giant Beli . No further detail is given about the fight between Surtr and Freyr in the poem . In the stanzas that follow , a number of gods and their opponents are described as doing battle at Ragnarök , and that the world will be consumed in flames , yet afterward a new world rises from the sea , fertile and teeming with life , and the surviving gods will meet again . 
 In the poem Vafþrúðnismál , the wise jötunn Vafþrúðnir poses the question to Odin ( disguised as " Gagnráðr " ) " what the plain is called where in battle Surt and the sweet gods will meet " . Odin responds that the " ordained field " is Vígríðr , and that it stretches " a hundred leagues " in every direction . Later in the poem , Odin , still disguised and now questioning Vafþrúðnir , asks which of the Æsir will " rule over the possessions of the gods when Surt 's fire is slaked " . Vafþrúðnir responds that , " when Surt 's fire is slaked " the god Thor 's sons Móði and Magni shall possess Thor 's hammer Mjöllnir . 
 In the poem Fáfnismál , the hero Sigurd asks the mortally wounded dragon Fáfnir the name of the island where Surtr and the Æsir " will mingle sword @-@ liquid together " . Fáfnir says that the island is called Óskópnir , that all of the gods shall go there bearing spears , and that on their way there the bridge Bifröst will break beneath them , causing their horses to " flounder in the great river " . The late Eddic poem Fjölsvinnsmál , stanza 24 , contains the line " Surtur sinn <unk> " or " <unk> sinn <unk> " according to the best manuscripts . The last two words , which are otherwise without meaning , are sometimes emended to " <unk> " and the entire phrase is taken to mean that Surtr has a female companion named <unk> . Based on the same passage , Lee Hollander tentatively identifies <unk> as Surt 's wife , stating that she is " unknown elsewhere . " 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In chapter 4 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , the enthroned figure of Third tells Gangleri ( described as King Gylfi in disguise ) about the location of Múspell . Third says that the bright and flaming region of Múspell existed prior to Niflheim , and it is impassable to those not native to the region . To defend Múspell , Surtr is stationed at its frontier . Third adds that Surtr has a flaming sword , and that " at the end of the world he will go and wage war and defeat all the gods and burn the whole world with fire " . The stanza from Völuspá that foretells Surtr moving from the south is then quoted . In chapter 18 , Gangleri asks what will protect the fair hall Gimlé " when Surtr 's fire burns heaven and earth " . 
 In chapter 51 of Gylfaginning , High describes the events of Ragnarök . High says that " amid this turmoil the sky will open and from it will ride the sons of Muspell . Surtr will ride in front , and both before and behind him there will be burning fire . His sword will be very fine . Light will shine from it more brightly than from the sun . " High continues that when the sons of Múspell ride over the bridge Bifröst it will break , and that they will continue to the field of Vígríðr . The wolf Fenrir and the Midgard Serpent will also arrive there . By then , Loki will have arrived with " all of Hel 's people " , Hrym , and all of the frost jötnar ; " but Muspell 's sons will have their own battle array ; it will be very bright " . Further into the chapter , High describes that a fierce battle will erupt between these forces and the Æsir , and that during this , Surtr and Freyr will engage in battle " and there will be a harsh conflict before Freyr falls " . High adds that the cause of Freyr 's death will be that Freyr is lacking " the good sword " that he once gave his servant Skírnir . 
 As foretold by High further into chapter 51 Gylfaginning , Once Heimdallr and Loki fight ( and mutually kill one another ) , Surtr " will fling fire over the earth burn the whole world " . High quotes ten stanzas from Völuspá in support , and then proceeds to describe the rebirth and new fertility of the reborn world , and the survivors of Ragnarök , including various gods and the two humans named Líf and <unk> that will have hid from " Surtr 's fire " in the wood Hoddmímis holt . 
 In the Epilogue section of the book Skáldskaparmál , a euhemerized monologue states that " what they called Surt 's fire was when Troy burned " . In chapter 2 , a work by the skald Eyvindr skáldaspillir is quoted that mentions " Surt 's deep vales " , using the name Surtr as a common noun for a jötunn , with " deep vales " referring to the depths of the mountains ( specifically <unk> ) . In chapter 75 , Surtr is included within a list of " very powerful " jötnar . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Scholar Rudolf Simek theorizes that " the concept of Surtr is undoubtedly old " , citing examples of Surtr being mentioned in works by the 10th century skalds Eyvindr skáldaspillir and Hallfreðr <unk> , in poems collected in the Poetic Edda , and that the name of the volcanic caves Surtshellir in western Iceland was already recorded in the Landnámabók manuscript . Simek notes that jötnar are usually described as living to the east in Old Norse sources , yet Surtr is described as being from the south , and that this " surely has to do with his association with fire and heat " . Simek says that " in Iceland Surtr was obviously thought of as being a mighty giant who ruled the powers of ( volcanic ) fire of the Underworld " , and Simek theorizes that the notion of Surtr as an enemy of the gods likely did not originate in Iceland . Simek compares Surtr to the jötnar <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , noting that they all appear to be personifications of fire . 
 Scholar Bertha Phillpotts theorizes that the figure of Surtr was inspired by Icelandic eruptions , and that he was a volcano demon . Scholar Andy Orchard theorizes that the description of Surtr found in Gylfaginning " appears to owe something to biblical and patristic notions of the angel with a flaming sword who expelled Adam and Eve from paradise and who stands guard over the Garden of Eden . " Scholar John Lindow states that the name Surtr may imply Surtr 's charred appearance . 
 = = Place names and modern influence = = 
 Surtshellir , a group of volcanic tunnels in western Iceland recorded in the Landnámabók manuscript , is named after Surtr . In modern Iceland , the notion of Surtr as a giant of fire lives on ; Surtsey ( " Surtr 's island " ) , a volcanic island that appeared in 1963 in Vestmannaeyjar , Iceland , is named after Surtr . The description found in Gylfaginning of Surtr guarding the frontier of Múspell is depicted in John Charles Dollman 's painting The Giant with the Flaming Sword . Surtur , a natural satellite of the planet Saturn , and Surt , a volcano on the planet Jupiter 's moon Io , are both named after Surtr . Surtur , a character from the American comic series Thor , is based on Surtr ( 1963 ) . In David Lindsay 's A Voyage to Arcturus , the character Surtur is based on Surtr . In the video game series Golden Sun there is a sword called <unk> , based on Surtr 's sword . 
 = The X @-@ Files ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files commenced airing on the Fox network in the United States on September 10 , 1993 , and concluded on the same channel on May 13 , 1994 , after airing all 24 episodes . 
 The first season introduced main characters of the series , including Fox Mulder and Dana Scully who were portrayed by David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson respectively , and recurring characters Deep Throat , Walter Skinner and Cigarette Smoking Man . The season introduced the series ' main concept , revolving around the investigation of paranormal or supernatural cases , known as X @-@ Files , by the Federal Bureau of Investigation ; it also began to lay the groundwork for the series ' overarching mythology . 
 Initially influenced by Kolchak : The Night Stalker and The Twilight Zone , series creator Chris Carter pitched the idea for the series to Fox twice before it was accepted for production . The season saw the series quickly gaining popularity , with ratings rising steadily throughout its run ; and garnered generally positive reviews from critics and the media . It helped to make stars of its two lead roles , and several of its taglines and catchphrases have since become cultural staples . 
 = = Concept and themes = = 
 Although Carter initially conceived of the series based on the influence of Kolchak and The Twilight Zone , he has stated that the " leaping @-@ off point " for the series ' overall concept came from UFO lore . After being introduced to the works of John E. Mack — especially a study by Mack which had reported that three percent of Americans claimed to have been abducted by aliens — Carter believed he had found his central theme . It was decided that the series would focus on the FBI in order to avoid something Carter had seen as a failing in Kolchak , whereby mysterious events would continually occur in one locale and be accidentally uncovered by the same character — by creating a fictional FBI unit which actively uncovered these paranormal cases , it was felt that the series would be " sustainable week after week without stretching the parameters of credibility " . Early in the planning stages , Carter had envisioned that a significant proportion of the episodes would deal with investigations which uncovered hoaxes or cases which had been mistakenly viewed as paranormal . Although this decision never came to pass , the third season episode " Jose Chung 's From Outer Space " can be seen as a holdover from the idea . 
 The series revolves around its two main characters , which had been defined early in conception as the " believer " and the " skeptic " . Of these , the " believer " , Fox Mulder , was created with a character @-@ defining personal motivation , involving the disappearance of his younger sister during his childhood , which he would believe to be a result of alien abduction . The creation of the " skeptic " , Dana Scully , was influenced by Jodie Foster 's portrayal of Clarice Starling in The Silence of the Lambs , leading the crew to decide that the character needed to seem " real " , as opposed to the " bombshell " type of character the studio was pressing for . 
 Thematically , although the series focused heavily on alien abduction lore , the decision was made early on to allow the plots of individual episodes to branch out into different territories in order to prevent the overarching plot from running out of momentum , which led to standalone episodes such as " Squeeze " being developed . The variety of storylines which the series has shown has led director Daniel Sackheim to note that " The X @-@ Files has sort of found its own style in that it doesn 't have a confined style to it " , adding that the series ' " fluid " approach has meant that " everybody who comes on the show attempt to make a little scary movie " . To this end , several episodes feature varying plots , with alien @-@ influenced storylines varying between " Ice " , a " briskly @-@ paced " episode set in a single location , and the character @-@ driven " Conduit " , which served to fill in background on the characters . Elsewhere , plots focused on soul transference or reincarnation , with the episodes " Shadows " , " Born Again " and " Lazarus " sharing similar storylines . The " tired " plot of " Ghost in the Machine " featured a malevolent artificial intelligence ; while " Shapes " introduced the first of what would become several Native American @-@ themed episodes . 
 The first season also introduced a number of minor characters who would go on to become central figures to the series — The Lone Gunmen , first seen in " E.B.E. " , would become regular characters beginning the second season , eventually starring in the spin @-@ off series The Lone Gunmen ; whilst the episode " Tooms " introduced Walter Skinner , portrayed by Mitch Pileggi , who would go on to be billed as a series star by the ninth season . The abduction of Mulder 's sister Samantha was explored in the episodes " Pilot " , " Conduit " and " Miracle Man " , and would go on to become one of the central themes of the series as a whole . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 California native Chris Carter was given the opportunity to produce new shows for the Fox network in the early 1990s . Tired of the comedies he had been working on for Walt Disney Pictures , inspired by a report that 3 @.@ 7 million Americans may have been abducted by aliens , and recalling memories of Watergate and the 1970s horror series Kolchak : The Night Stalker , Carter came up with the idea for The X @-@ Files and wrote the pilot episode himself in 1992 . He initially struggled over the untested concept — executives wanted a love interest for Scully — and casting . The network wanted either a more established or a " taller , <unk> , blonder and <unk> " actress for Scully than the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Gillian Anderson , a theater veteran with minor film experience , who Carter felt was the only choice after auditions . 
 Carter 's initial pitch for The X @-@ Files was rejected by Fox executives . He fleshed out the concept and returned a few weeks later , leading to the commission of the pilot . Carter worked with NYPD Blue producer Daniel Sackheim in further developing the pilot , drawing stylistic inspiration from the 1988 documentary The Thin Blue Line , and the English television series Prime Suspect . Inspiration was also taken from Carter 's memories of watching Kolchak : The Night Stalker and The Twilight Zone in his youth ; as well as from the then @-@ recently released film The Silence of the Lambs , which was the impetus for framing the series around agents from the FBI , in order to provide the characters with a more plausible reason for being involved in each case than Carter believed was present in Kolchak . Carter was also keen on keeping the relationship between the two lead roles strictly platonic , basing their interactions on the characters of Emma Peel ( Diana Rigg ) and John Steed ( Patrick Macnee ) in the series The Avengers . 
 During the early stages of production for the series , Carter founded Ten Thirteen Productions , and began to plan for filming the pilot in Los Angeles . However , unable to find suitable locations for many of the scenes , Ten Thirteen Productions made the decision to " go where the good forests are " , and moved production to Vancouver , where the series would remain for the next five seasons ; production would eventually shift to Los Angeles beginning with the sixth season . It was soon realized by the production crew that since so much of the first season would require filming on location , rather than on sound stages , two location managers would be needed , rather than the usual one . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 David Duchovny had worked in Los Angeles three years prior to The X @-@ Files , and at first had wanted to base his acting career around films . But in 1993 his manager , Melanie Green , gave him a script for the pilot episode of series . Green and Duchovny were both convinced it was a good script , so Duchovny auditioned for the lead . When Duchovny was auditioning for the part of Fox Mulder , he made a " terrific " audition , but spoke rather slowly . Chris Carter thought at the beginning of the auditioning for the character , he was a " good judge of character " , and thought that Duchovny wasn 't rather " bright " . So he went and talked to Duchovny and asked him if he could " please " imagine himself as an FBI agent for the " future " week . The casting director of the show was very positive towards him . According to Carter , Duchovny turned out to be one of the best @-@ read people he knew . Carter recalls being contractually obliged to provide Fox with a choice of two actors for the role ; however , he was confident Duchovny was the right choice from the outset . After getting the role , Duchovny thought the show wouldn 't last for long or that it wouldn 't make much impact . 
 Gillian Anderson was cast due to insistence from Carter that she would fit the role perfectly ; however , Fox executives had wanted a more glamorous " bombshell " for the part , hoping that this would lead to the series involving a romantic element . This led Carter to insist that he did not want the roles of Mulder and Scully to become romantically involved , citing the relationship between the lead roles in Moonlighting as an example to avoid . Anderson called her early work on the show " a complete learning experience for me – the pilot was only the second time I 'd been in front of a camera " . 
 The series also introduced the character of Walter Skinner , played by Mitch Pileggi , who would go on to become a recurring , and later , main character in the show . The character had been conceived as playing against the stereotypical bureaucratic " paper @-@ pusher " , being instead someone more " quietly dynamic " . Pileggi had auditioned unsuccessfully for several other parts on the series before being cast as Skinner . At first , the fact that he was asked back to audition for the role had puzzled him , until he discovered the reason he had not cast for the previous parts — Chris Carter had been unable to imagine Pileggi as any of those characters , due to the fact that the actor had been shaving his head . When Pileggi attended the audition for Walter Skinner , he had been in a grumpy mood and had allowed his small amount of hair to grow back . Pileggi 's attitude fit well with the character of Skinner , causing Carter to assume that the actor was only pretending to be grumpy . After successfully auditioning for the role , Pileggi thought he had been lucky that he had not been cast in one of the earlier roles , as he believed he would have appeared in only a single episode and would have missed the opportunity to play the recurring role of Walter Skinner . 
 Glen Morgan and James Wong 's early influence on The X @-@ Files mythology led to their introduction of popular secondary characters who would continue for years in episodes written by others , such as the Scully family — Dana 's father William ( Don S. Davis ) , mother Margaret ( Sheila Larken ) and sister Melissa ( Melinda McGraw ) — as well as conspiracy @-@ buff trio The Lone Gunmen . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Initially , there was no certainty as to how long the series would go on for , and as a result there was no long @-@ term plan in the beginning to guide its writers . Although the initial impetus for the show was based on alien abduction lore , the crew believed that the series would not be able to maintain its momentum for long if it did not branch out into different plot ideas . The show 's first season thus featured numerous standalone stories involving monsters , and also diverse alien or governmental cover @-@ ups , often with no apparent connection to each other — such as the Arctic space worms in " Ice " , and the conspiracy of genetically engineered twins in " Eve . " Carter himself wrote " Space " , an intended bottle episode about the manifestation of an alien " ghost " in the NASA space shuttle program , which was subject to cost overruns and became the most expensive of the first season . 
 By the end of the first season , Carter and his staff had come up with many of the general concepts of the mythology that would last throughout all nine seasons . The first season introduced the series ' primary antagonist , Cigarette Smoking Man , and gave early insight into the disappearance of Mulder 's sister Samantha , whose abduction provided one of the main plot threads of the series as a whole . The emergent mythology was further solidified in the Carter @-@ penned , Edgar Award @-@ nominated season finale " The Erlenmeyer Flask " . The episode was written in early 1994 before it was known whether or not the series would be renewed for a second season , and featured the closure of the X @-@ Files unit and the reassignment of Fox Mulder and Dana Scully to new jobs within the FBI . The finale was the first episode directed by R. W. Goodwin , who had served as producer for the series . 
 = = Cast and crew = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox Mulder ( 24 episodes ) 
 Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully ( 24 episodes ) 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = = Writers and producers = = = 
 Series creator Chris Carter also served as executive producer and showrunner and wrote nine episodes . Co @-@ executive producers and writing team Glen Morgan and James Wong wrote six episodes . Supervising producers and writing team Alex Gansa and Howard Gordon wrote five episodes together , with Gordon co @-@ writing an additional script with Carter . Co @-@ producers and writing team Larry and Paul Barber wrote one episode . Kenneth Biller and Chris Brancato co @-@ wrote a freelance script . Other freelance writers included Scott Kaufer , Marilyn Osborn and Chris Ruppenthal , who each wrote one episode . Other producers included line producer Joseph Patrick Finn and co @-@ producer Paul Rabwin . 
 = = = Directors = = = 
 David Nutter directed the most episodes of the first season , directing six . " Pilot " supervising producer Daniel Sackheim directed two episodes . Other directors that directed two episodes included Jerrold Freedman , William Graham , Michael Lange , Joe Napolitano and Larry Shaw . One @-@ episode directors included Rob Bowman , Fred Gerber , co @-@ executive producer R. W. Goodwin , Michael Katleman , Harry Longstreet and Robert Mandel who directed the pilot episode . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Episodes marked with a double dagger ( ) are episodes in the series ' Alien Mythology arc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 From the outset , viewing figures for the series were good , with the initial broadcast of " Pilot " being watched by 7 @.@ 4 million households , which constituted 15 percent of the viewing audience at the time . The series was broadcast directly after episodes of The Adventures of Brisco County , Jr . , and saw a decline in viewing figures when that series began to falter . The season — and series as a whole — reached a low with " Fallen Angel " , which was viewed by only 5 @.@ 1 million households . However , after the episode aired , the numbers began to rise steadily once again , reaching a peak for the season with " The Erlenmeyer Flask " , which was viewed by 8 @.@ 3 million households , 16 percent of the available audience . At the conclusion of the 1993 – 94 television season , The X @-@ Files ranked 105th out of 128 shows . The ratings were not spectacular , but the series had attracted enough fans to be classified as a " cult hit " , particularly by Fox standards , and was subsequently renewed for a second season . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Reviews for the first season were mostly positive , with the series being described as " the most paranoid , subversive show on TV " , and the writing being called " fresh without being self @-@ conscious , and the characters are involving . Series kicks off with drive and imagination , both innovative in recent TV " . The season as a whole currently holds a 100 % rating on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , based on eleven reviews . On Metacritic , the season scored 70 out of 100 , based on 13 reviews , indicating " Generally favorable reviews " . Writing for IGN , Mike <unk> noted that " some of the episodes were at a level of excellence that still hasn 't been matched since " ; adding that the series has " become nearly as integral to pop culture today as any show in history " . Bill Hunt of The Digital Bits gave the season an " A " , stating " The X @-@ Files is a show that dared to be different , and different it was " . Hunt described the show 's cinematography as " striking and noir @-@ ish " . Anna Johns , writing for TV Squad , called the season " phenomenal " and added that it contains " many terrific episodes " . 
 Several episodes were widely praised , including " Squeeze " , which has been called " profoundly creepy " ; the " taut and briskly paced " Arctic @-@ set " Ice " ; and the " remarkably chilling " Scully @-@ centered episode " Beyond the Sea " . However , not all episodes of the season were as well received . Despite the costly production of " Space " , the episode was derided as " decidedly unscary " and " a little tasteless " in its treatment of the Challenger disaster . " The Jersey Devil " was described as " pretty silly " ; whilst the plots for " Shadows " , " Born Again " and " Roland " were panned for being much too similar to each other . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The first season received two Primetime Emmy Award nominations , with one win . Composer Mark Snow was nominated for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Main Title Theme Music , while title designers Bruce Bryant , James Castle and Carol Johnsen won for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Graphic Design and Title Sequences . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = Beware of the Dog ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Beware of the Dog " is the second episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on September 26 , 1997 . The episode was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Allen Coulter . " Beware of the Dog " featured guest appearances by Randy Stone and R. G. Armstrong . 
 Millennium centers on offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , who investigates unusual crimes as part of the private investigative organisation the Millennium Group . In this episode , when Black investigates several killings by a pack of savage dogs , he discovers a strange old man who teaches him more than he ever knew about the Group . 
 Guest star Armstrong would reprise his role later in the season , while Stone was the casting director for both Millennium and its sister show The X @-@ Files . " Beware of the Dog " received mixed reviews from television critics , and was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 37 million households during its original broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A couple in a camper van get lost along a country road . They stop near a small town to read their map , but a pack of dogs break into their van , mauling them to death . 
 Meanwhile , Millennium Group member Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) tries to convince fellow Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) to investigate the case . Black is experiencing a separation from his wife and daughter after killing his wife 's kidnapper ; he initially refuses the case but Watts ' insistence sways him . Black arrives in the isolated town of <unk> , and visits a local diner . Standing out amongst the residents is Michael Beebe ( Randy Stone ) , who has moved there from Los Angeles . Beebe believes his elderly neighbour may be responsible for the attack and asks Black to investigate . 
 Black instead examines the crime scene . At sunset , he sees a group of five dogs beginning to follow him . He returns to his hotel , but when he discovers he is locked out the dogs attack him . He fights them off , killing one , and flees to a hospital where he is refused entrance . An elderly man ( R. G. Armstrong ) drives past , stopping to pick up the dead dog , and drives off again . The remaining dogs follow his pickup truck . Black passes out and is helped into the hospital . The locals believe he is unconscious and discuss the " situation " ; however Black is awake and overhears everything , realising there is a greater threat than savage dogs at hand . 
 The next day , Black finds a group of obelisks in the woods . He is about to examine one when Beebe appears , chased by dogs . The Old Man also arrives , and Black asks him to call off his dogs . The Old Man denies the dogs are his , but they retreat regardless . Black then sees that the obelisks all bear an ouroboros , the symbol of the Millennium Group . He visits the Old Man 's home , where the two speak about the Group and its symbolism , and the coming millennium . The Old Man then brings Black to a clearing full of the wild dogs , where the latter realizes they are embodiments of the evil in the world . He approaches them as stands his ground , being struck by several visions as he does so . The Old Man then explains that the world 's balance between good and evil is being lost as the millennium approaches , and that Beebe 's home , built on sacred ground , is one of the many small things upsetting this balance . 
 Black rushes to Beebe 's home , knowing the dogs will attack it . Beebe refuses to leave , but the house has been surrounded by five dogs ; as they are killed they are seemingly endlessly replaced by others . The Old Man arrives , and insists the only way to rid the town of the dogs is burn down Beebe 's house , which the trio do before fleeing . Back home in Seattle , Black refuses to sell his own home , telling his wife that they will move back into it together when their problems are resolved . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Beware of the Dog " was written by frequent collaborators Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by Allen Coulter . The episode was Coulter 's first credit for the series , and he would return to helm " The Pest House " and " Siren " later in the second season . " Beware of the Dog " was the fifth episode to have been written by Morgan and Wong , after " Dead Letters " , " 522666 " and " The Thin White Line " in the first season ; and the second season première " The Beginning and the End " . The duo would go on to pen a further ten episodes over the course of the second season , having taken the roles of co @-@ executive producers for the season . 
 Guest star Randy Stone was the casting director for Millennium and its sister show The X @-@ Files . Stone was responsible for the casting of Henriksen in the role of Frank Black , and of the two lead roles in The X @-@ Files . " Beware of the Dog " features the first appearance by R. G. Armstrong as The Old Man , a recurring character who would reappear in the two @-@ part episodes " Owls " and " Roosters " . Armstrong has been described as " a long @-@ time favorite " of Morgan 's . 
 The episode makes use of Bobby Darin 's song " As Long As I 'm Singing " in a diegetic manner . Darin 's music has been noted by Millennium 's resident composer Mark Snow as a hallmark of the works of Morgan and Wong . " Beware of the Dog " marked the pair 's first use of the singer in Millennium , but his music would later feature in the episodes " Sense and Antisense " , " Monster " and " Goodbye Charlie " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Beware of the Dog " originally aired on the Fox network on September 26 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 6 @.@ 5 during its original broadcast , meaning that 6 @.@ 5 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 6 @.@ 37 million households , and left the episode the sixty @-@ ninth most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen gave the episode a B + , finding it " endearingly batshit " . Handlen felt that the episode was not entirely cohesive and that its ending was somewhat disappointing , but felt that overall the episode 's imagery made up for this — summing up this idea by saying " Millennium often seems to be at its best when sense is a secondary consideration " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , noting that its " atmospheric elements do not quite add up to a cohesive whole " . Gibron felt that this resulted in " an episode that feels like the first half of a bad b @-@ movie " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , awarded " Beware of the Dog " one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . Shearman felt the episode was so similar to The X @-@ Files that it gave the impression that Millennium had " lost its own identity " . He found that the script contained " enough wit in the dialogue " but that its plot seemed too " vague and elliptical " . Writing for the Star Tribune , Bill Ward felt that the episode featured a " lighter " tone than usual , comparing it to The X @-@ Files . Ward described the episode as taking " some nice turns en route to an ambivalent <unk> " . 
 = Enter Sandman = 
 " Enter Sandman " is a song by American heavy metal band Metallica . It was released as the first single from their eponymous fifth album , Metallica in 1991 . The music was written by Kirk Hammett , James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich . Vocalist and rhythm guitarist Hetfield wrote the lyrics , which deal with the concept of a child 's nightmares . 
 The single achieved platinum certification for more than 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies shipped in the United States , spurring sales of over 30 million copies for Metallica and propelling Metallica to worldwide popularity . Acclaimed by critics , the song is featured in all of Metallica 's live albums and DVDs released after 1991 and has been played live at award ceremonies and benefit concerts . 
 It is among Metallica 's most @-@ played songs , having been performed live by the band 1 @,@ 133 times , behind only " For Whom the Bell Tolls " ( 1 @,@ 278 ) , " One " ( 1 @,@ 297 ) , " Seek & Destroy " ( 1 @,@ 369 ) , " Creeping Death " ( 1 @,@ 389 ) and " Master of Puppets " ( 1 @,@ 439 ) — all songs that were released before " Enter Sandman " . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Enter Sandman " was the first song Metallica had written for their 1991 eponymous album , Metallica . Metallica 's songwriting at that time was done mainly by rhythm guitarist James Hetfield and drummer Lars Ulrich , after they gathered tapes of song ideas and concepts from the other members of the band , lead guitarist Kirk Hammett and bassist Jason Newsted . Ulrich 's house in Berkeley , California was used for this purpose . " Enter Sandman " evolved from a guitar riff that Hammett wrote . Originally , the riff was two bars in length , but Ulrich suggested the first bar be played three times . The instrumental parts of the song were quickly finished , but Hetfield did not come up with vocal melodies and lyrics for a long time . The song was among the album 's last to have lyrics , and the lyrics featured in the song are not the original ; Hetfield felt that " Enter Sandman " sounded " catchy and kind of commercial " and so to counterbalance the sound , he wrote lyrics about " destroy [ ing ] the perfect family ; a huge horrible secret in a family " that included references to crib death . For the first time in Metallica 's history , however , Ulrich and producer Bob Rock told Hetfield that they felt he could write better lyrics . Nevertheless , according to Ulrich , the song was the " foundation , the guide to the whole record " even before it had lyrics . 
 An instrumental demo was recorded on August 13 , 1990 . The album Metallica was mostly recorded in Los Angeles at One on One Studios , between October 6 , 1990 and June 16 , 1991 , although Ulrich , Hetfield , and Rock also recorded for a week in Vancouver , Canada between April and May 1991 . As the first to be produced by Bob Rock , it was recorded differently than previous Metallica albums ; Rock suggested that the band members record in the studio while playing together , rather than separately . 
 " Enter Sandman " had what Hetfield described as a " wall of guitars " — three rhythm guitar tracks of the same riff played by himself to create a " wall of sound " . According to engineer Randy Staub , close to 50 takes of the drums were recorded because Ulrich did not record the song in its entirety , but rather recorded each section of the song separately . Because it was difficult to get in one take the " intensity " that the band wanted , numerous takes were selected and edited together . Staub mentioned that the producing team spent much time in getting the best sound from each part of the room and used several combinations of 40 to 50 microphones in recording the drums and guitars to simulate the sound of a live concert . The bass guitar sound also gained importance with Rock ; as Newsted states , Metallica 's sound was previously " very guitar @-@ oriented " and that " when he [ Rock ] came into the picture , bass frequencies also came into the picture . " As the first single , " Enter Sandman " was also the first song to be mixed , a task that took roughly ten days because the band and Bob Rock had to create the sound for the entire album while mixing the song . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The simpler songs in the album Metallica , including " Enter Sandman " , are a departure from the band 's previous , more musically complex album ... And Justice for All . Ulrich described " Enter Sandman " as a " one @-@ riff song " , in which all of its sections derive from the main riff credited to Kirk Hammett . 
 " Enter Sandman " moves at a tempo of 123 beats per minute for 5 : 32 , running slightly above the average song length of the album . It begins with a clean guitar intro similar to the main riff ; an E minor chord on a guitar using the wah @-@ wah pedal is then introduced , followed by heavy use of tom @-@ tom drums . Distorted guitars then build up to the main riff , which starts 56 seconds into the song and utilizes variations of the E / B ♭ tritone . P. J. <unk> , in The Wah Wah Book , characterized the main riff as " sinister " . The song then follows a common structure , playing two iterations of a verse , a pre @-@ chorus , and a chorus . On the chorus and pre @-@ chorus , the song modulates one whole tone , up to F ♯ , and after the second chorus , Hammett plays a guitar solo with the main , pre @-@ chorus , and chorus riffs in the background . Hammett makes use of the wah @-@ wah pedal and a wide range of scales , including e minor pentatonic , B minor , F ♯ minor , E minor , and the E <unk> mode . One of the final licks of the solo was inspired by the Heart song " Magic Man " as used in Ice @-@ T 's " Personal " . Just a few seconds before the solo ends , the breakdown starts , in which the clean drum intro starts , then the clean guitar intro when the last notes of Kirk 's solo echo over it into the background , are heard together with Hetfield teaching a child the " Now I Lay Me Down to Sleep " bedtime prayer and reciting a variation of the lullaby rhyme " Hush Little Baby " where he is heard saying " Hush little baby don 't say a word , and never mind that noise you heard . It 's just the beasts under your bed , in your closet , in your head " . After building again to a chorus , the song starts to fade out while the band plays the same riffs as the buildup intro in reverse order . Lyrically , the song is about " nightmares and all that come with them " , according to Chris True of Allmusic . The title is a reference to the sandman , a character from Western folklore who makes children sleep . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Initially , the song " Holier Than Thou " was slated to be the opening track and first single from Metallica ; according to the documentary A Year and a Half in the Life of Metallica , producer Bob Rock told Ulrich and Hetfield that the album has " five or six songs that are going to be classics " , not only with fans but also on the radio , and that " the first song that should come out is ' Holier Than Thou ' " . According to Rock , Ulrich was the only band member who felt , even before recording , that " Enter Sandman " was the ideal song to be the first single . Ulrich has said that there was a " big argument " ; however , after explaining his point of view to the rest of the band , " Enter Sandman " eventually became the opening track and first single of the album . 
 The single was released on July 30 , 1991 , two weeks before the release of Metallica . The album debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 in the United States and nine other countries , and sold over 22 million copies worldwide , allowing " Enter Sandman " to become , as Chris True describes it , " one of the most recognizable songs of all time in rock " . The single peaked at No. 16 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and at No. 5 on the UK Singles Chart . On September 30 , 1991 , it became Metallica 's second single to achieve gold status in the United States , for shipping more than 500 @,@ 000 copies . In addition to the nominations received by the album as a whole , the song was nominated for Best Rock Song at the 34th Grammy Awards in 1992 , ultimately losing to " The Soul Cages " by Sting . It was also voted Song of the Year in Metal Edge 's 1991 Readers Choice Awards . 
 " Enter Sandman " was acclaimed by critics . Chris True of Allmusic declared it " one of Metallica ’ s best moments " and a " burst of stadium level metal that , once away from the buildup intro , never lets up " . According to him , the song 's breakdown " brilliantly utilizes that ' Now I Lay Me Down to Sleep ' bedtime prayer in such a way as to add to the scary movie aspect of the song " . Steve Huey , in Allmusic review of Metallica , described it as one of the album 's best songs , with " crushing , stripped @-@ down grooves " . Robert Palmer of Rolling Stone described " Enter Sandman " as " possibly the first metal lullaby " and wrote that the song " tell [ s ] the tale " of the album 's " detail and dynamic , [ ... ] song structures and impact of individual tracks " . Sid Smith from the BBC called the song " psycho @-@ dramatic " and noted that the " terse motifs served notice that things were changing " with Metallica 's new album . Blender magazine 's Tim Grierson says that the lyrics " juxtapose childhood bedtime rituals and nightmarish imagery " and praises the " thick bottom end and propulsive riff " . 
 " Enter Sandman " has received many accolades . Rolling Stone magazine listed it as the <unk> song on their " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " list , and VH1 placed it 22nd in their list of the " 40 Greatest Metal Songs of All Time " , 18th in their list of the " 100 Greatest Songs of the ' 90s " and 88th in their 2003 list of " The 100 Greatest Songs from the Past 25 Years " . Blender magazine included the song in their " The Greatest Songs Ever ! " series of articles and placed it 65th on their list of " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " . Q magazine listed it 81st in their list of " The 100 Songs That Changed The World " and 55th in their list of " The 1001 Best Songs Ever " . Total Guitar magazine readers chose the song 's riff as the fifth greatest ever , while Kerrang ! places it fourth on their list of the " 100 Greatest Singles of All Time " . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame includes it in their list of the " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock " . It was also featured in Triple J 's " Hottest 100 of All Time " . In 2009 , it was named the 5th greatest hard rock song of all time by VH1 . In 2010 , " Enter Sandman " was included in Kerrang 's Top 100 , as decided by fans . 
 Since the song 's release , there have been claims that the main riff was taken from the song " Tapping into the Emotional Void " by Excel . " Tapping into the Emotional Void " was released originally on their 1989 album The Joke 's on You . In 2003 , it was reported that Excel members were considering legal action against Metallica due to the similarities between the songs . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " Enter Sandman " was the second music video from Metallica . It was also the first of six Metallica music videos directed by Wayne Isham . Recorded on July 3 , 1991 in Los Angeles , it premiered on July 30 , 1991 , two weeks before the release of the album . The plot of the music video directly relates to the theme of the song , combining images of a child having nightmares and images of an old man ( R. G. Armstrong ) with shots of the band playing the song . The child dreams that he is drowning , falling from the top of a building , covered in snakes , being chased by a truck and finally falling from a mountain while escaping the truck . During the part of the song in which the child recites a prayer , he is being watched by the Sandman . Throughout the video , the picture flickers continuously . The music video won Best Hard Rock Video at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards and was nominated for Best Cinematography and Best Editing . Andrew Blackie of PopMatters has said the video 's " narrative suits the sludgy riffs and James Hetfield ’ s twisted lullaby lyric " . 
 British alternative rock band Skunk Anansie did a homage to the video for their video " Charlie Big Potato " . 
 = = Appearances and covers = = 
 " Enter Sandman " has been played in almost every Metallica live performance since its release . The band released live versions of the song in the videos Live Shit : Binge & Purge , Cunning Stunts , and S & M where the band played with the San Francisco Symphony led by maestro Michael Kamen . The song is discussed in the videos A Year and a Half in the Life of Metallica and Classic Albums : Metallica - Metallica , and its video is available in The Videos 1989 @-@ 2004 . Metallica has played the song live at awards ceremonies and benefit concerts , such as the 1991 MTV Video Music Awards , the 1992 Grammy Awards , the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert , and Live Earth . Explosives are occasionally set off at 0 : 49 of the song , when the main riffs start . Following its UK terrestrial broadcast of Live Earth , the BBC received 413 complaints and apologized to Metallica fans for cutting the band 's set before " Enter Sandman " . 
 On tours after the release of their album Load , Metallica staged accidents at indoor shows while playing the song . Among other stunts , a light tower would come crushing down with electrical wires sparking , and a crew member would run onto the stage on fire ; such scenes can be seen in the live video Cunning Stunts . On June 6 , 2004 , at Download Festival , in England the song was performed with Joey Jordison of Slipknot playing the drums replacing Ulrich after he suffered a medical emergency . 
 " Enter Sandman " has been covered by many artists , including acts as diverse as Injustice ( 2010 ) , Alter Bridge , Sum 41 , Lemmy of Motörhead with Zebrahead , Zac Brown Band , Apocalyptica , " Weird Al " Yankovic ( for his " Polka Your Eyes Out " medley ) , Richard Cheese , The Mighty Mighty Bosstones , Reel Big Fish , <unk> Forever , Ween , Die Krupps , Björn Again , Youn Sun Nah and Pat Boone . Lemmy & Zebrahead 's cover of the song was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 42nd Grammy Awards in 2000 but lost to Black Sabbath 's " Iron Man " . The song was also covered on the album Metallic Assault : A Tribute to Metallica , and is notable for featuring Robert Trujillo playing bass on the track several years before he became a member of Metallica . Country singer Luke Bryan routinely performs the song as part of a medley along with his own song " All My Friends Say " . Widespread Panic performed the song once as part of a live set on October 31 , 2007 at the Asheville Civic Center in Asheville , NC . Parody band Beatallica recorded a mashup of the song and the Beatles ' " Taxman " titled " Sandman " , on their 2007 album Sgt. Hetfield 's Motorbreath Pub Band . In October 2011 , a video of British children aged 8 – 10 covering the song at the <unk> Beer Festival as The Mini Band went viral , eventually gaining more than 9 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 views on YouTube . Punk rock band L7 covered fragments of the song at their concerts . 
 The song 's driving , building intro has made it popular as entrance music in sports – first used by the Louisville Cardinals and later most notably for New York Yankees closer Mariano Rivera ( and he also got his nickname " Sandman " due to the association between the song and him ) . Metallica performed " Enter Sandman " live at Yankee Stadium on September 22 , 2013 , in a pregame ceremony honoring Rivera 's career . It has also been used by Billy Wagner , the Virginia Tech Hokies football team , ECW pro wrestler The Sandman , and former UFC Heavyweight Champion Brock Lesnar in the UFC . It is also played for the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim home games , Bradford Bulls rugby team , the Rutgers Scarlet Knights football team , the Iowa Hawkeyes football team , the Wisconsin Badgers men 's hockey team , New Zealand Breakers , and the Southern Illinois Salukis football team . 
 It is also popular in the entertainment field being used in the opening of the Tom <unk> radio show , and for the entrance music of Larry the Cable Guy during his Comedy Central Roast . In 2010 , the song was parodied by The <unk> to recap Fringe episode 2 @.@ 14 , " Jacksonville . " The song is also played during the first ascent on the X ² roller coaster at Six Flags Magic Mountain in Valencia , California . It is also featured in the video games Rock Band and Guitar Hero : Metallica . 
 The song was also used by NASA mission control CAPCOM B. Alvin Drew to wake up space shuttle astronauts aboard STS @-@ 123 . The song was selected for Mission Specialist Robert L. <unk> by his fiance . 
 During the 2003 invasion of Iraq , uncooperative prisoners were exposed to the song for extended periods by American interrogators . According to United States Psychological Operations , the intention was to " break a prisoner 's resistance [ ... by ] playing music that was culturally offensive to them " . Upon discovering that the song was used for these purposes , drummer Lars Ulrich commented saying " If there are people that are dumb enough to use Metallica to interrogate prisoners , you 're forgetting about all the music that 's to the left of us . I can name , you know , 30 Norwegian death metal bands that would make Metallica sound like Simon & Garfunkel " . 
 Canadian indie rock artist Mac DeMarco often performs the song as an encore performance . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 US single 
 " Enter Sandman " – 5 : 37 
 " Stone Cold Crazy " – 2 : 19 
 International CD single 
 " Enter Sandman " – 5 : 37 
 " Stone Cold Crazy " – 2 : 19 
 " Enter Sandman ( Demo ) " – 5 : 05 
 International 12 " vinyl single ( 4 tracks ) 
 " Enter Sandman " – 5 : 34 
 " Holier Than Thou " ( Work in Progress ... ) – 3 : 48 
 " Stone Cold Crazy " – 2 : 17 
 " Enter Sandman ( Demo ) " – 5 : 05 
 International 12 " vinyl single ( 3 tracks ) 
 " Enter Sandman " – 5 : 34 
 " Stone Cold Crazy " – 2 : 17 
 " Enter Sandman ( Demo ) " – 5 : 05 
 International 7 " vinyl single 
 " Enter Sandman " – 5 : 34 
 " Stone Cold Crazy " – 2 : 17 
 International 7 " vinyl picture disc single 
 " Enter Sandman " – 5 : 34 
 " Stone Cold Crazy " – 2 : 17 
 Australian 2 @-@ track CD single 
 " Enter Sandman " – 5 : 37 
 " Stone Cold Crazy " – 2 : 19 
 Japanese 2 @-@ track 3 " CD single 
 " Enter Sandman " 
 " Stone Cold Crazy " 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Certification = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 James Hetfield – rhythm guitar , lead vocals 
 Kirk Hammett – lead guitar 
 Jason Newsted – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Lars Ulrich – drums 
 = Bill Mosienko = 
 William Mosienko ( November 2 , 1921 – July 9 , 1994 ) was a Ukrainian Canadian professional ice hockey right winger who played 14 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Chicago Black Hawks . He is best noted for recording the fastest hat trick in NHL history . In a 1952 game against the New York Rangers , Mosienko scored three goals in 21 seconds . 
 In the NHL , Mosienko won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy in 1945 as the most gentlemanly player in the league , played in five All @-@ Star Games and was twice named to the second All @-@ Star Team . He left the league in 1955 to help bring professional hockey to his hometown of Winnipeg . He helped create the Winnipeg Warriors of the Western Hockey League and was a three @-@ time All @-@ Star in his four years of play in the league . He won the league championship in 1956 . 
 Mosienko was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1965 and into the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum in 1980 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mosienko was born on November 2 , 1921 in Winnipeg , Manitoba . He was one of 14 children , having nine brothers and four sisters . His father was a Ukrainian immigrant and worked as a boilermaker with the Canadian Pacific Railway . Mosienko grew up in Winnipeg 's north end . 
 He developed a passion for hockey and began playing at the age of 10 with the <unk> and later Sherburn athletic clubs . At 17 , he sought to try out with the St. James Canadians junior team in 1939 and after being told he was too young , instead joined the Winnipeg Monarchs . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Chicago Blackhawks = = = 
 Chicago Black Hawks player Joe Cooper discovered Mosienko playing on outdoor rinks in Winnipeg and recommended that Hawks management sign him . Mosienko signed with Chicago at the age of 18 and was assigned to their minor league team , the Kansas City Americans . In his first two seasons , he split time between the Americans , the Providence Reds and the Black Hawks . The Black Hawks first recalled Mosienko in 1942 , replacing players who had left to fight World War II . He scored his first two NHL goals on February 9 , 1942 , 21 seconds apart . 
 <unk> from military service for medical reasons likely related to his small size , Mosienko was unable to cross into the United States as a result of travel restrictions and played the 1942 – 43 season primarily with the Quebec Aces of the Quebec Senior Hockey League . He appeared in two games when the Hawks traveled to Toronto . He finally established himself as an NHL regular in 1943 – 44 and scored a career high 70 points . Mosienko and his linemates Clint Smith and Doug Bentley combined to score 219 points , at that time an NHL record . His 70 points set a team rookie record that stood for 37 years until broken by Denis Savard in 1980 – 81 . 
 In 1944 – 45 , Mosienko finished sixth in league scoring with 54 points and did not record a single penalty minute throughout the course of the season . He was awarded the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy as the NHL 's most gentlemanly player and named a Second @-@ Team All @-@ Star . He was also voted the most popular player on the team by its fans . 
 The following season , Chicago coach Johnny Gottselig paired Mosienko with the Bentley brothers : Max and Doug . The trio formed what came to be known as the " Pony Line " due to their speed and small size and emerged as one of the top scoring trios in the NHL . Max Bentley led the league in scoring in 1945 – 46 , and despite missing time with a knee injury , Mosienko finished sixth . He was again named a Second @-@ Team All @-@ Star . He played in the first National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game prior to the start of the 1947 – 48 season , during which he suffered a broken leg and was initially feared lost for the year . He ultimately missed the first two months of play , while the Pony Line was broken up for good shortly after his injury when Max Bentley was traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 Mosienko remained a key contributor to the Black Hawks offence , appearing in five All @-@ Star Games during his career . His most famous moment came on March 23 , 1952 , in a game against the New York Rangers on the final night of the regular season . He scored three goals in a 21 @-@ second span of the third period against New York 's Lorne Anderson to set a new record for the fastest hat @-@ trick by one player . <unk> Gus Bodnar assisted on all three goals , and he nearly had a fourth goal 45 seconds later on a shot that deflected off the goalpost . Mosienko 's feat remains an NHL record . 
 Due to his small size , Mosienko was a frequent target of physical abuse from larger opponents , and suffered numerous injuries as a result . Despite this , he refrained from retaliation and was well regarded across the league for his gentlemanly conduct . In 14 NHL seasons , he totaled only 121 penalty minutes and had just one fight . 
 = = = Winnipeg Warriors = = = 
 Mosienko left the NHL in 1955 and joined fellow player Alf Pike in bringing professional hockey back to Winnipeg . They established the Winnipeg Warriors of the Western Hockey League . He led the Warriors to the President 's Cup championship in the team 's first year of 1955 – 56 and helped the Warriors defeat the Quebec Hockey League 's Quebec Aces for the Edinburgh Cup , Canada 's minor professional championship . He scored two goals in the deciding sixth game of a 3 – 1 victory to capture the trophy . He was named to the WHL All @-@ Star Team three times : 1957 , 1958 and 1959 . Though he scored 88 points in the 1958 – 59 season , Mosienko announced his retirement after 18 seasons of professional hockey . He coached the team for one season in 1959 – 60 . 
 At the time of his retirement from the NHL , Mosienko was seventh all @-@ time in league scoring with 540 points . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1965 , and to the Manitoba Sports Hall of Fame and Museum in 1980 . Additionally , Mosienko is honoured by the Manitoba Hockey Hall of Fame and in 2000 was named to its provincial All @-@ Century First All @-@ Star Team . 
 = = Off the ice = = 
 Following his retirement , Mosienko and Joe Cooper operated a string of bowling alleys in Winnipeg , one of which continues to be operated by his family . He was a supporter of Winnipeg minor hockey and Manitoba oldtimers associations . There is an arena named in Mosienko 's honor in his hometown of Winnipeg . 
 Mosienko died of cancer in Winnipeg in 1994 at the age of 72 . He had a wife , Wanda , two sons and one daughter . His grandson , Tyler , is also a professional hockey player . The younger Mosienko remembers his grandfather as a humble man who would join him on the family 's backyard rink when he was learning to skate as a child . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn = 
 Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Level @-@ 5 . It was released in Japan for the Nintendo DS on December 9 , 2010 . Players control Oliver , a young boy who sets out on a journey to save his mother . The game is played from a third @-@ person perspective and its world is navigated on foot or by boat . While players navigate Oliver throughout the game 's world , other characters can be controlled during battles against enemies ; during these battles , players use magic abilities and creatures known as " imajinn " , which can be captured and tamed . 
 Development of Dominion of the Dark Djinn began in 2008 . The game 's animated sequences were produced by Studio Ghibli , while the original score was co @-@ composed by Joe Hisaishi . The artwork was also inspired by Studio Ghibli 's other productions . The character development of Oliver was a large focus of the game , intending to make children empathize with the character and for adults to relive their adolescence . The developers chose to develop for the Nintendo DS due to its suitability for gameplay . 
 Following its announcement , Ni no Kuni was widely anticipated . It was acclaimed by reviewers , with praise particularly directed at its story , art style and music . An enhanced version of the game , titled Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch , was released in November 2011 for the PlayStation 3 , featuring similar gameplay and story elements . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn is a role @-@ playing game that uses a fixed third @-@ person perspective . Players complete quests — linear scenarios with set objectives — to progress through the story . Outside of quests , players can freely roam the open world . Players explore towns , villages , dungeons and dangerous places scattered throughout the world , and possess the ability to travel between the world and Oliver 's hometown of Hotroit . Upon leaving a location , players enter the World Map , which can be navigated , or used to select a destination . The world may be fully explored from the beginning of the game without restrictions , although story progress unlocks more gameplay content and forms of transport to navigate the world . 
 When players encounter enemies , they enter a battle mode . The battles employ a grid layout , whereby players can create formations to avoid attacks , or lessen damage . During battles , players command a single human ally , or one of the " imajinn " accompanying them ; changing primary command to a different human ally allows players to control their imajinn . To fight enemies , players use magical abilities and imajinn . <unk> are creatures that can be tamed , in order to be suitable to send out in battle to fight for players . Familiars level up and evolve alongside the human characters ; each have unique statistics and capabilities , and can be guided through their upgrades with treats and equipped with items . When all enemies in a battle are defeated , players may receive experience points , currency and items . When a specific amount of experience is earned , characters ' levels will increase , and their abilities improve . Should a party member lose health or mana points , they can be restored by using provisions . 
 The errands that can be undertaken at the request of townspeople and the bounty hunts available from the Taskmaster are collectively known as " tasks " . When tasks are completed , players will earn a number of stamps for their current merit stamp card , which can be exchanged for upgrades . Players take part in battles using the Wizard Companion book , which contains various spells that are activated using drawings with the stylus . During battles , players can arrange their characters anywhere on the bottom screen to implement various tactics ; for example , a character that can block certain attacks can be placed in front of others to shield them . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ni no Kuni follows the journey of Oliver , a resident of Hotroit . While trying out a new vehicle designed by his friend Mark , Oliver almost drowns , but is saved by his mother Allie ; however , she immediately dies from heart problems after saving him . As Oliver cries , his tears cause his doll , a gift from his mother , to come to life and reveal itself as a fairy named Shizuku , who tells Oliver that he is from another world where an evil wizard named Jabou took control . He also tells Oliver that each person from his world has a " soulmate " , a person that shares a link with someone in Oliver 's world , and that his mother looks very much like a great sage , Alicia , who was captured by Jabou . Realizing that Alicia must have been Allie 's soulmate , Oliver sets out with Shizuku to travel to the other world and rescue Alicia in the hope that doing so will bring Allie back in his world . 
 In the other world , Oliver finds a multitude of broken @-@ hearted people affected by Jabou , and uses his new @-@ found magic abilities to restore those pieces of heart which they lack , and travels the world to seek out the four great sages who may be able to help . Along the way , he meets Maru , daughter of one of the great sages , and Jairo , a thief who initially steals a crucial item from them , but who ultimately decides to help . As they enlist the sages ' help , they learn of a wand that could be used to defeat Jabou , but are at a loss as to how to retrieve it , as it was recently destroyed by Jabou . Soon after , they find themselves many years in the past by the actions of a stranger , and are able to retrieve the wand there . 
 After returning to the present and retrieving three magical stones to complete the wand , Oliver learns that his mother Allie was in fact the great sage , Alicia . Realizing she could not defeat Jabou , and that he had destroyed his soulmate in the other world to avoid the possibility of being defeated through them , she chose to travel into both the future and into Oliver 's world in the hopes of finding his next soulmate ; after settling in to this new world , she eventually gave birth to her son , Oliver , who unknowingly became Jabou 's soulmate . After he is defeated , Jabou 's past is shown . He was once a soldier who helped a young girl against orders , and whose hometown was destroyed to set an example . The spirit of Alicia talks to the dying Jabou , who realises that the girl he saved was the young Alicia herself . Jabou then uses his power to sever the link between himself and Oliver , in order to save Oliver from dying as well . 
 = = Development = = 
 Conceived as a project for Level @-@ 5 's tenth anniversary in 2008 , Ni no Kuni : The Another World was announced in the September 2008 issue of Famitsu , as a title for the Nintendo DS . In June 2010 , Level @-@ 5 announced that the game would also be released for the PlayStation 3 , with significant differences ; the DS version was renamed Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn , while the PlayStation 3 version was given the title Ni no Kuni : Wrath of the White Witch . Both versions were revealed to be in development separately , only retaining the same " story axle " , while features such as artwork , graphics and specifications all received significant changes . Journalists noted that the game 's announcement ignited widespread anticipation within the gaming industry . 
 The development team found that the Nintendo DS was best suited to the game 's development . The team planned to bring the game to PlayStation 3 from the beginning of development , but opted to work on the DS version of the game beforehand due to the larger number of DS users in Japan at the time . 
 = = = Art design = = = 
 Level @-@ 5 collaborated with Studio Ghibli to produce the game 's animated sequences , and the game features graphics and visuals replicating the traditional animation style of Studio Ghibli films . The collaboration began when musician Naoya Fujimaki , who had previously worked with both companies , introduced Level @-@ 5 president Akihiro Hino to Studio Ghibli president Toshio Suzuki . At the time , Studio Ghibli had completed work on Ponyo ( 2008 ) , and the animation team had no ongoing projects , which influenced Suzuki 's decision to collaborate with Level @-@ 5 . Another influencing factor of the collaboration was witnessing Hino 's passion for the project . Studio Ghibli approached the production process in the same way that they would create an animated film . Work on the animation began in July 2008 , and took much longer than the predicted three months . 
 Studio Ghibli 's Yoshiyuki Momose served as the game 's director of animation , staging the scenes and directing actors during the motion capture sessions . He was also assigned to drawing character designs and storyboards , incorporating a " Ghibli @-@ like " style . Hino wished to incorporate the " heartwarming touch " of Studio Ghibli productions into the game ; the artwork and character movements was greatly inspired by Studio Ghibli 's work , particularly due to their attention to detail , as well as their talent in creating storyboards and utilizing camera control . The development team constantly watched Studio Ghibli 's films during development . Game director Ken <unk> regularly worked with Studio Ghibli , swapping and reviewing assets , while Hino worked with the studio in regards to the game 's dialogue and animated sequences . When designing the familiars , the team accounted for the characteristics of their surrounding area , which inspired the later design . Some of the initial familiar designs were deemed either creepy or " overly @-@ cute " , and adapted accordingly to match the style of Studio Ghibli 's artwork . 
 = = = Story and setting = = = 
 The team wanted the theme of the game to resonate with children ; they initially considered the idea of expressing adventure and dreams . They later explored the concept of a child 's greatest influence , their mother , and the possibility of losing them . Although the framework of the story was completed prior to Studio Ghibli 's involvement with the game , they still took part in many discussions regarding some ideas , including the game 's final scenes . 
 The majority of the game takes place in a magical world , referred to as the " other world " . To avoid making the world map feel outdated , the team modernized the design by arranging the terrain in " fun and fascinating ways " . The game 's open world was designed to remind players of a " miniature diorama " , intending to invoke reminiscence to an older time , as well as the feeling of freshness . Other segments of the game are set in Oliver 's fictional hometown of Hotroit . The town is modelled after an American town in the peak of the automotive industry during the 1950s and 1960s ; this decision was made due to Oliver 's interest in cars and machines . 
 = = = Character development = = = 
 The game 's characters were particularly inspired by Level @-@ 5 's previous work on the Professor Layton series ( 2007 – present ) . During development , Momose suggested that the team design the clothes in a modern fashion , in order for players to gain a " stronger sense that you have stepped out of the familiar and into a different world " . The game 's main playable character , Oliver , is a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy . The team decided to make him a child as they wished to showcase a coming of age story . They wanted children to empathize with Oliver 's development , and adults to relive the excitement of their adolescence . A major part of the story is Oliver 's personal development , which Hino describes as " the process of how a child grows into an adult " . In regards to Oliver 's physical appearance , Momose made his outfit represent a young boy in 1950s America , which was the inspiration for his hometown . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn received high acclaim upon release . Reviewers highly praised the art style , unique gameplay , story and characters , and the soundtrack . Michael Baker of RPGamer named it the " best overall game " at the time , and Janelle Hindman of RPGLand wrote that the game is " a reminder of why people used to flock to the JRPG genre in the first place " . Nintendo Gamer 's Matthew Castle called it " one of the best experiences on DS " . Editors of the magazine Famitsu felt that game 's animation , music and story are effectively utilized to maintain excitement . 
 The game 's artistic design received acclaim , being favorably compared to Studio Ghibli 's previous work ; Gigazine found the art style to be " <unk> @-@ ish " . Famitsu praised the gimmicks in the design , similarly calling them " extremely Level @-@ 5 like " . RPGamer 's Baker felt that the graphics are the best in a Nintendo DS game , particularly praising the animated cutscenes . Nintendo Gamer 's Castle echoed these remarks , calling it " visual perfection " . RPGLand 's Hindman called the graphics " beautiful and lovingly rendered " , praising their effective use of building the world , and its lack of repetition . Chris Carter of Destructoid approved of the visuals , though found the graphics in Wrath of the White Witch to be far superior . 
 The gameplay was met with positive reactions . Hindman of RPGLand found the battle system " fun " , and admired the variety of styles present in battles . Baker of RPGamer praised the simplicity of the battles , but reprimanded the puzzles and level design for their lack of depth . Gigazine found the touchscreen controls " innovative " and unique , yet felt that the battle sequences were " not very thrilling " and lacking excitement . <unk> felt that game 's combat was frustrating for the game 's first half , until enough resources had been obtained . Edge found that the gameplay was too similar to other games , noting the collaboration with Studio Ghibli was the game 's only unique point . The inclusion of the Wizard 's Companion book with the game was also met with positive reactions ; Famitsu called it " innovative " , and RPGLand 's Hindman praised the presentation , although criticized the constant necessity of the book for gameplay . Castle of Nintendo Gamer called the book a " genuine work of art " , praising its relevance to the gameplay . 
 Reviewers commended the game 's story and characters . RPGLand 's Hindman appreciated the genuineness of the characters , and found that the script makes the game unique compared to other role @-@ playing games . Edge favorably compared the characters to previous works by Level @-@ 5 and Studio Ghibli , the former for their ability to present believable worlds , and the latter for their presentation of " complex , adult problems from a child 's perspective " . Baker of RPGamer felt that the story is " comfortably cliché @-@ ridden " , noting that the writing " really shines " due to the characters . Tomomi Yamamura of Game Watch praised the game 's voice acting , comparing it favorably to Studio Ghibli films . Conversely , <unk> found the story to be " flat " , criticising the repetitive tasks . 
 Baker of RPGamer found the game 's music to be " top @-@ notch " , noting its appropriation for gameplay . Patrick Gann of RPGFan called the soundtrack " beautiful " , comparing it favorably to Koichi Sugiyama 's work on the Dragon Quest series . RPGLand 's Hindman lauded the music as " gorgeously crafted " , appreciating the lack of electronic or synthesized songs , and Gigazine named it " magnificent " . Nintendo Gamer 's Castle lauded the music , favorably comparing it to film soundtracks . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Within three days of release , Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn sold over 170 @,@ 000 units , charting second for the week behind Monster Hunter Portable 3rd . Within one month , it had sold over 330 @,@ 000 units , making it the 33rd best @-@ selling game in Japan for 2010 . By March 2011 , over 500 @,@ 000 units had been sold . By the end of 2011 , sales figures had reached over 560 @,@ 000 units ; the additional 230 @,@ 000 sold units sold in 2011 made it the 45th best @-@ selling game of the year . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Ni no Kuni : Dominion of the Dark Djinn received nominations and awards from gaming publications . It won the award for Future Division from the Japan Game Awards in 2009 and 2010 , and the Excellence Award in 2011 . The game was also awarded the Rookie Award from Famitsu in 2011 . 
 = Nancy Drew = 
 Nancy Drew is a fictional American character in a mystery fiction series created by publisher Edward Stratemeyer . The character first appeared in 1930 . The books are ghostwritten by a number of authors and published under the collective pseudonym Carolyn Keene . Over the decades , the character evolved in response to changes in US culture and tastes . The books were extensively revised and shortened , beginning in 1959 , in part to lower printing costs and to eliminate racist stereotypes , with arguable success . In the revision process , the heroine 's original character was changed to be less assertive and more feminine . In the 1980s , an older and more professional Nancy emerged in a new series , The Nancy Drew Files , that included romantic subplots for the sleuth . The original Nancy Drew Mystery Stories series started in 1930 , and ended in 2004 . Launched that same year , the Girl Detective series features Nancy driving a hybrid electric vehicle and using a cell phone . In 2013 , the Girl Detective series ended , and a new current series called Nancy Drew Diaries was launched . Illustrations of the character evolved over time to reflect contemporary styles . The character proves continuously popular worldwide : at least 80 million copies of the books have been sold , and the books have been translated into over 45 languages . Nancy Drew is featured in five films , two television shows , and a number of popular computer games ; she also appears in a variety of merchandise sold around the world . 
 A cultural icon , Nancy Drew is cited as a formative influence by a number of women , from Supreme Court Justices Sandra Day O 'Connor and Sonia Sotomayor to Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and former First Lady Laura Bush . Feminist literary critics have analyzed the character 's enduring appeal , arguing variously that Nancy Drew is a mythic hero , an expression of wish fulfillment , or an embodiment of contradictory ideas about femininity . 
 = = Character = = 
 Nancy Drew is a fictional amateur sleuth . In the original versions of the series , she is a 16 @-@ year @-@ old high school graduate , and in later versions , is rewritten and aged to be an 18 @-@ year @-@ old high school graduate and detective . In the series , she lives in the fictional town of River Heights with her father , attorney Carson Drew , and their housekeeper , Hannah Gruen . As a child ( age ten in the original versions and age three in the later version ) , she loses her mother . Her loss is reflected in her early independence — running a household since the age of ten with a clear @-@ cut servant in early series and deferring to the servant as a surrogate parent in later ones . As a teenager , she spends her time solving mysteries , some of which she stumbles upon and some of which begin as cases of her father 's . Nancy is often assisted in solving mysteries by her two closest friends : cousins Bess Marvin and George Fayne . Bess is delicate and feminine , while George is a tomboy . Nancy is also occasionally joined by her boyfriend Ned Nickerson , a student at Emerson College . 
 Nancy is often described as a super girl . In the words of Bobbie Ann Mason , she is " as immaculate and self @-@ possessed as a Miss America on tour . She is as cool as Mata Hari and as sweet as Betty Crocker . " Nancy is well @-@ off , attractive , and amazingly talented : 
 At sixteen she ' had studied psychology in school , and was familiar with the power of suggestion and association . ' Nancy was a fine painter , spoke French , and had frequently run motor boats . She was a skilled driver who at sixteen ' flashed into the garage with a skill born of long practice . ' The prodigy was a sure shot , an excellent swimmer , skillful oarsman , expert seamstress , gourmet cook , and a fine bridge player . Nancy brilliantly played tennis and golf , and rode like a cowboy . Nancy danced like Ginger Rogers and could administer first aid like the Mayo brothers . 
 Nancy never lacks money , and in later volumes of the series often travels to faraway locations , such as France in The Mystery of the 99 Steps ( 1966 ) , Nairobi in The Spider Sapphire Mystery ( 1968 ) , Austria in Captive Witness ( 1981 ) , Japan in The Runaway Bride ( 1994 ) , Costa Rica in Scarlet Macaw Scandal ( 2004 ) , and Alaska in Curse of The Arctic Star ( 2013 ) . Nancy is also able to travel freely about the United States , thanks in part to her car , which is a blue roadster in the original series and a blue convertible in the later books . Despite the trouble and presumed expense to which she goes to solve mysteries , Nancy never accepts monetary compensation ; however , by implication , her expenses are often paid by a client of her father 's , as part of the costs of solving one of his cases . 
 = = Creation of character = = 
 The character was conceived by Edward Stratemeyer , founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate . Stratemeyer had created the Hardy Boys series in 1926 ( although the first volumes were not published until 1927 ) , which had been such a success that he decided on a similar series for girls , featuring an amateur girl detective as the heroine . While Stratemeyer believed that a woman 's place was in the home , he was aware that the Hardy Boys books were popular with girl readers and wished to capitalize on girls ' interest in mysteries by offering a strong female heroine . 
 Stratemeyer initially pitched the new series to Hardy Boys publishers Grosset & Dunlap as the " Stella Strong Stories " , adding that " they might also be called ' Diana Drew Stories ' , ' Diana Dare Stories ' , ' Nan Nelson Stories ' , ' Nan Drew Stories ' , or ' Helen Hale Stories ' . " Editors at Grosset & Dunlap preferred " Nan Drew " of these options , but decided to lengthen " Nan " to " Nancy " . Stratemeyer accordingly began writing plot outlines and hired Mildred Wirt , later Mildred Wirt Benson , to ghostwrite the first volumes in the series under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene . Subsequent titles have been written by a number of different ghostwriters , all under the pseudonym Carolyn Keene . 
 The first four titles were published in 1930 and were an immediate success . Exact sales figures are not available for the years prior to 1979 , but an indication of the books ' popularity can be seen in a letter that Laura Harris , a Grosset and Dunlap editor , wrote to the Syndicate in 1931 : " can you let us have the manuscript as soon as possible , and no later than July 10 ? There will only be three or four titles brought out then and the Nancy Drew is one of the most important . " The 6 @,@ 000 copies that Macy 's ordered for the 1933 Christmas season sold out within days . In 1934 Fortune magazine featured the Syndicate in a cover story and singled Nancy Drew out for particular attention : " Nancy is the greatest phenomenon among all the fifty @-@ centers . She is a best seller . How she crashed a Valhalla that had been rigidly restricted to the male of her species is a mystery even to her publishers . " 
 = = = Ghostwriters = = = 
 Consistent with other Stratemeyer Syndicate properties , the Nancy Drew novels were written by various writers , all under the pen name Carolyn Keene . In accordance with the customs of Stratemeyer Syndicate series production , ghostwriters for the Syndicate signed contracts that have sometimes been interpreted as requiring authors to sign away all rights to authorship or future royalties . Contracts stated that authors could not use their Stratemeyer Syndicate pseudonyms independently of the Syndicate . In the early days of the Syndicate , ghostwriters were paid a fee of $ 125 , " roughly equivalent to two month 's wages for a typical newspaper reporter , the primary day job of the syndicate ghosts . " 
 During the Great Depression this fee was lowered to $ 100 and eventually $ 75 . All royalties went to the Syndicate , and all correspondence with the publisher was handled through a Syndicate office . The Syndicate was able to enlist the cooperation of libraries in hiding the ghostwriters ' names ; when Walter <unk> , who wrote volumes eight through ten of the original Nancy Drew Mystery Stories , tried to claim rights with the Library of Congress in 1933 , the Syndicate instructed the Library of Congress not to reveal the names of any Nancy Drew authors , a move with which the Library of Congress complied . 
 The Syndicate 's process for creating the Nancy Drew books consisted of creating a detailed plot outline , drafting a manuscript , and editing the manuscript . Edward Stratemeyer and his daughters Harriet Adams and Edna Stratemeyer Squier wrote most of the outlines for the original Nancy Drew series until 1979 . Volume 30 , The Clue of the Velvet Mask ( 1953 ) , was outlined by Andrew Svenson . Usually , other writers wrote the manuscripts . Most of the early volumes were written by Mildred Wirt Benson . Other volumes were written by Walter <unk> , George Waller , Jr . , Margaret Scherf , Wilhelmina Rankin , Alma Sasse , Charles S. Strong , Iris Vinton , and Patricia Doll . Edward Stratemeyer edited the first three volumes , and Harriet Adams edited most subsequent volumes until her death in 1982 . In 1959 , the earlier titles were revised , largely by Adams . From the late 1950s until her death in 1982 , Harriet Adams herself wrote the manuscripts for most of the books . 
 After Adams 's death , series production was overseen by Nancy <unk> ( who also wrote several volumes ) . The rights to the character were sold in 1984 , along with the Stratemeyer Syndicate itself , to Simon & Schuster . Book packager Mega @-@ Books subsequently hired authors to write the main Nancy Drew series and a new series , The Nancy Drew Files . 
 = = = Legal disputes = = = 
 In 1980 , Harriet Adams switched publishers to Simon & Schuster , dissatisfied with the lack of creative control at Grosset & Dunlap and the lack of publicity for the Hardy Boys ' 50th anniversary in 1977 . Grosset & Dunlap filed suit against the Syndicate and the new publishers , Simon & Schuster , citing " breach of contract , copyright infringement , and unfair competition . " 
 Adams filed a countersuit , claiming the case was in poor taste and frivolous , and that , as author of the Nancy Drew series , she retained the rights to her work . Although Adams had written many of the titles after 1953 , and edited others , she claimed to be the author of all of the early titles . In fact , she had rewritten the older titles and was not their original author . When Mildred Benson was called to testify about her work for the Syndicate , Benson 's role in writing the manuscripts of early titles was revealed in court with extensive documentation , contradicting Adams ' claims to authorship . The court ruled that Grosset had the rights to publish the original series as they were in print in 1980 , but did not own characters or trademarks . Furthermore , any new publishers chosen by Adams were completely within their rights to print new titles . 
 = = Evolution of character = = 
 The character of Nancy Drew has gone through many permutations over the years . The Nancy Drew Mystery series was revised beginning in 1959 ; with commentators agreeing that Nancy 's character changed significantly from the original Nancy of the books written in the 1930s and 1940s . Commentators also often see a difference between the Nancy Drew of the original series , the Nancy of The Nancy Drew Files , and the Nancy of Girl Detective series . Nevertheless , some commentators find no significant difference between the different permutations of Nancy Drew , finding Nancy to be simply a good role model for girls . Despite revisions , " [ w ] hat hasn 't changed , however , are [ Nancy 's ] basic values , her goals , her humility , and her magical gift for having at least nine lives . For more than six decades , her essence has remained intact . " Nancy is a " teen detective queen " who " offers girl readers something more than action @-@ packed adventure : she gives them something original . Convention has it that girls are passive , respectful , and emotional , but with the energy of a girl shot out of a cannon , Nancy bends conventions and acts out every girl 's fantasies of power . 
 Other commentators see Nancy as " a paradox — which may be why feminists can laud her as a formative ' girl power ' icon and conservatives can love her well @-@ scrubbed middle @-@ class values . " 
 = = = 1930 – 1959 = = = 
 The earliest Nancy Drew books were published as dark blue hardcovers with the titles stamped in orange lettering with dark blue outlines and no other images on the cover . They went through several changes in early years : leaving the orange lettering with no outline and adding an orange silhouette of Nancy peering through a magnifying glass ; then changing to a lighter blue board with dark blue lettering and silhouette ; then changing the position of the title and silhouette on the front with black lettering and a more " modern " silhouette . Nancy Drew is depicted as an independent @-@ minded 16 @-@ year @-@ old who has already completed her high school education ( 16 was the minimum age for graduation at the time ) ; the series also occurs over time , as she is 18 by the early 1940s . Apparently affluent ( her father is a successful lawyer ) , she maintains an active social , volunteer , and sleuthing schedule , as well as participating in athletics and the arts , but is never shown as working for a living or acquiring job skills . Nancy is affected neither by the Great Depression — although many of the characters in her early cases need assistance as they are poverty @-@ stricken — nor by World War II . Nancy lives with her lawyer father , Carson Drew , and their housekeeper , Mrs. Hannah Gruen . Some critics prefer the Nancy of these volumes , largely written by Mildred Benson . Benson is credited with " [ breathing ] ... a feisty spirit into Nancy 's character . " The original Nancy Drew is sometimes claimed " to be a lot like [ Benson ] herself – confident , competent , and totally independent , quite unlike the cardboard character that [ Edward ] Stratemeyer had outlined . " 
 This original Nancy is frequently outspoken and authoritative , so much so that Edward Stratemeyer told Benson that the character was " much too flip , and would never be well received . " The editors at Grosset & Dunlap disagreed , but Benson also faced criticism from her next Stratemeyer Syndicate editor , Harriet Adams , who felt that Benson should make Nancy 's character more " sympathetic , kind @-@ hearted and lovable . " Adams repeatedly asked Benson to , in Benson 's words , " make the sleuth less bold ... ' Nancy said ' became ' Nancy said sweetly , ' ' she said kindly , ' and the like , all designed to produce a less abrasive more caring type of character . " Many readers and commentators , however , admire this original Nancy 's outspoken character . 
 A prominent critic of the Nancy Drew character , at least the Nancy of these early Nancy Drew stories , is mystery writer Bobbie Ann Mason . Mason contends that Nancy owes her popularity largely to " the appeal of her high @-@ class advantages . " Mason also criticizes the series for its racism and classism , arguing that Nancy is the upper @-@ class WASP defender of a " fading aristocracy , threatened by the restless lower classes . " Mason further contends that the " most appealing elements of these daredevil girl sleuth adventure books are ( secretly ) of this kind : tea and fancy cakes , romantic settings , food eaten in quaint places ( never a Ho @-@ Jo 's ) , delicious pauses that refresh , old @-@ fashioned picnics in the woods , precious jewels and heirlooms .... The word dainty is a subversive affirmation of a feminized universe . " 
 At bottom , says Mason , the character of Nancy Drew is that of a girl who is able to be " perfect " because she is " free , white , and sixteen " and whose " stories seem to satisfy two standards – adventure and domesticity . But adventure is the superstructure , domesticity the bedrock . " 
 Others argue that " Nancy , despite her traditionally feminine attributes , such as good looks , a variety of clothes for all social occasions , and an awareness of good housekeeping , is often praised for her seemingly masculine traits ... she operates best independently , has the freedom and money to do as she pleases , and outside of a telephone call or two home , seems to live for solving mysteries rather than participating in family life . " 
 = = = 1959 – 1979 = = = 
 At the insistence of publishers Grosset & Dunlap , the Nancy Drew books were revised beginning in 1959 , both to make the books more modern and to eliminate racist stereotypes . Although Harriet Adams felt that these changes were unnecessary , she oversaw a complete overhaul of the series , as well as writing new volumes in keeping with the new guidelines laid down by Grosset & Dunlap . The series did not so much eliminate racial stereotypes , however , as eliminate non @-@ white characters altogether . For example , in the original version of The Hidden Window Mystery ( 1956 ) , Nancy visits friends in the south whose African @-@ American servant , " lovable old Beulah ... serves squabs , sweet potatoes , corn pudding , piping hot biscuits , and strawberry shortcake . " The mistress of the house waits until Beulah has left the room and then says to Nancy , " I try to make things easier for Beulah but she insists on cooking and serving everything the old @-@ fashioned way . I must confess , though , that I love it . " In the revised 1975 version , Beulah is changed to Anna , a " plump , smiling housekeeper " . 
 Many other changes were relatively minor . The new books were bound in yellow with color illustrations on the front covers . Nancy 's age was raised from 16 to 18 , her mother was said to have died when Nancy was three , rather than ten , and other small changes were made . Housekeeper Hannah Gruen , sent off to the kitchen in early stories , became less of a servant and more of a mother surrogate . 
 Critics saw this Nancy of the 1950s , 1960s , and 1970s as an improvement in some ways , a step back in others : " In these new editions , an array of elements had been modified ... and most of the more overt elements of racism had been excised . In an often overlooked alteration , however , the <unk> of the text 's title character was also tamed . " 
 Nancy becomes much more respectful of male authority figures in the 1950s , 1960s , and 1970s , leading some to claim that the revised Nancy simply becomes too agreeable , and less distinctive , writing of her , " In the revised books , Nancy is relentlessly upbeat , puts up with her father 's increasingly protective tendencies , and , when asked if she goes to church in the 1969 The Clue of the Tapping Heels , replies , ' As often as I can ' ... Nancy learns to hold her tongue ; she doesn 't sass the dumb cops like she used to . " 
 = = = 1980 – 2003 = = = 
 After Harriet Adams died in 1982 , her protégé , Nancy <unk> , oversaw production of the Nancy Drew books briefly before the Stratemeyer Syndicate was sold to Simon & Schuster . Simon & Schuster turned to book packager Mega @-@ Books for new writers . The books and Nancy 's character began to change as a result , although there is disagreement on the nature of this change . Some contend that Nancy 's character becomes " more like Mildred Wirt Benson 's original heroine than any [ version ] since 1956 . " Others criticize the series for its increasing incorporation of romance and " [ dilution ] of pre @-@ feminist moxie . " For example , volume 78 in the series Update on Crime ( 1992 ) opens with Nancy wondering in italics , " Am I or am I not in love with Ned Nickerson ? " Nancy begins dating other young men and acknowledges sexual desires : " ' I saw [ you kissing him ] ... You don 't have to apologize to me if some guy turns you on . ' ' Gianni doesn 't turn me on ! ... Won 't you please let me explain . ' " 
 In 1986 , the character of Nancy Drew was used in a new series , The Nancy Drew Files , which lasted until 1997 . The Nancy of the Files series is also interested in romance and boys , a fact which led to much criticism of the series : " Millie [ Mildred Wirt Benson ] purists tend to look askance upon the Files series , in which fleeting pecks bestowed on Nancy by her longtime steady , Ned Nickerson , give way to lingering embraces in a Jacuzzi . " Cover art for Files titles , such as Hit and Run Holiday ( 1986 ) , reflects these changes ; Nancy is often dressed provocatively , in short skirts , shirts that reveal her stomach or breasts , or a bathing suit . She is often pictured with an attentive , handsome male in the background , and frequently appears aware of and interested in that male . Nancy also becomes more vulnerable , being often chloroformed into unconsciousness , or defenseless against <unk> . The books place more emphasis on violence and character relationships . 
 Nancy Drew finally goes to college in the Nancy Drew on Campus series , which ran from 1995 to 1998 . Again , the books focus on romance plots , and , by reader request , Nancy broke off her long @-@ term relationship with boyfriend Ned Nickerson in the second volume of the series , On Her Own ( 1995 ) . 
 In 1997 , Simon & Schuster announced a mass cancellation of Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys spin @-@ offs except ones for younger children . 
 = = = 2003 – 2012 = = = 
 In 2003 , publishers Simon & Schuster decided to end the original Nancy Drew series and feature Nancy 's character in a new mystery series , Girl Detective . The Nancy Drew of the Girl Detective series drives a hybrid car , uses a mobile phone , and recounts her mysteries in the first person . Many applaud these changes , arguing that Nancy has not really changed at all other than learning to use a cell phone . Others praise the series as more realistic ; Nancy , these commentators argue , is now a less @-@ perfect and therefore more likable being , one whom girls can more easily relate to – a better role model than the old Nancy because she can actually be emulated , rather than a " prissy automaton of perfection . " 
 Some , mostly fans , vociferously lament the changes , seeing Nancy as a silly , air @-@ headed girl whose trivial adventures ( discovering who squished the zucchini in Without a Trace ( 2003 ) ) " hold a shallow mirror to a pre @-@ teen 's world . " Leona Fisher argues that the new series portrays an increasingly white River Heights , partially because " the clumsy first @-@ person narrative voice makes it nearly impossible to interlace external authorial attitudes into the discourse " , while it continues and worsens " the implicitly xenophobic cultural representations of racial , ethnic , and linguistic others " by introducing gratuitous speculations on characters ' national and ethnic origins . 
 The character is also the heroine of a series of graphic novels , begun in 2005 and produced by <unk> . The graphic novels are written by Stefan Petrucha and illustrated in manga @-@ style artwork by Sho Murase . The character 's graphic novel incarnation has been described as " a fun , sassy , modern @-@ day teen who is still hot on the heels of criminals . " 
 The 2007 film was also tied into the books . A novelization of the movie was written to look like the older books . Two books were also written for the Girl Detective and Clue Crew series that deal with a mystery on a movie set . In 2008 , the Girl Detective series was re @-@ branded into trilogies and to have a model on the cover . The mysteries became deeper , with Nancy often making mistakes . These trilogies were also met with negative fan reception due to Nancy 's constant mistakes , shortness of the books , and lack of action . With the new trilogy format , sales began slipping . Simon & Schuster then cut back from six to four books per year . In December 2011 , they finally announced that the series was cancelled along with the Hardy Boys Undercover Brothers series . 
 = = = 2013 – present = = = 
 With the sudden cancellation of the Girl Detective series , Simon & Schuster needed to find new Nancy Drew and Hardy Boys series . The Diaries series was brought to be the next series . Though Nancy 's age is not given , she has a boyfriend in college and drives with a <unk> license . 
 = = Evolution of character 's appearance = = 
 Nancy Drew has been illustrated by many artists over the years , and her look constantly updated . Both the Stratemeyer Syndicate and the books ' publishers have exercised control over the way Nancy is depicted . 
 Jennifer Stowe contends that Nancy 's portrayal devolves significantly over the years : 
 The 1930s Nancy Drew is characterized as bold , capable and independent . She actively seeks out clues , and is shown in the center of the compositions . In subsequent characterizations Nancy Drew becomes progressively weaker , less in control . By the 1990s there is a complete reversal in the representation of her character . She is often shown being chased or threatened , the confidence of 1930s being replaced by fear . 
 Some aspects of Nancy 's portrayal have remained relatively constant through the decades . Arguably her most characteristic physical depiction is that she is shown holding a flashlight . 
 = = = Russell H. Tandy = = = 
 Commercial artist Russell H. Tandy was the first artist to illustrate Nancy Drew . Tandy was a fashion artist and infused Nancy with a contemporary fashion sensibility : her early style is that of a <unk> flapper : heeled Mary Janes accompany her blue flapper skirt suit and cloche hat on three of the first four volume dust jackets . As styles changed over the next few years , Nancy began to appear in glamorous frocks , with immaculately set hair , pearls , matching hats , gloves , and handbags . By the 1940s , Nancy wore simpler , tailored suits and outfits ; her hair was often arranged in a pompadour . In the post @-@ war era , Tandy 's Nancy is shown hatless , wearing casual skirt and blouse ensembles , and carrying a purse , like most teens of the late 1940s . 
 Tandy drew the inside sketches for the first 26 volumes of the series as well as painting the covers of the first 26 volumes with the exception of volume 11 – the cover artist for volume 11 is unknown . Tandy read each text before he began sketching , so his early covers were closely connected to specific scenes in the plots . He also hand @-@ painted the cover lettering and designed the original Nancy Drew logo : a silhouette of Nancy bending slightly and looking at the ground through a quizzing glass . 
 Tandy often portrays Nancy Drew with confident , assertive body language . She never appears " shocked , <unk> , or scared " . Nancy is shown either boldly in the center of the action or actively , but secretively , investigating a clue . She is often observed by a menacing figure and appears to be in imminent danger , but her confident expression suggests to viewers that she is in control of the situation . 
 Tandy 's home was struck by fire in 1962 , and most of his original paintings and sketches were destroyed . As a result , the Tandy dust @-@ jackets are considered very valuable by collectors . 
 = = = Bill Gillies and others = = = 
 Beginning with Tandy in 1948 and continuing into the early 1950s , Nancy 's appearance was updated to follow the current styles . In postwar opulence , a trend emerged for young adults to have their own casual style , instead of dressing in the same styles as more mature adults , and Nancy becomes less constrained . Sweater or blouse and skirt ensembles , as well as a pageboy hairstyle , were introduced in 1948 , and continued with new artist Bill Gillies , who updated 10 covers and illustrated three new jackets from 1950 to 1952 . Gillies used his wife for a model , and Nancy reflects the conservative 1950s , with immaculately waved hair and a limited wardrobe – she wears similar sweater , blouse , and skirt ensembles , in different combinations , on most of these covers . Gillies also designed the modern @-@ era trademark as a spine symbol which was used for decades : Nancy 's head in profile , looking through a quizzing glass . 
 In the later Tandy period ( 1946 – 1949 ) and continuing throughout the 1950s , Nancy is depicted less frequently in the center of the action . " The Ghost of Blackwood Hall " shows an assertive Nancy leading more timid friends up the front steps of the haunted house , and marks a transition to later illustrations . From 1949 forward , she is likely to be observing others , often hiding or concealing herself . Her mouth is often open in surprise , and she hides her body from view . However , although Nancy " expresses surprise , she is not afraid . She appears to be a bit taken aback by what she sees , but she looks as if she is still in control of the situation . " Many of these covers feature Nancy poised in the observation of a clue , spying on criminal activity , or displaying her discoveries to others involved in the mystery . Only occasionally is she shown in action , such as running from the scene of a fire , riding a horse , or actively sleuthing with a flashlight . At times she is only involved in action as her hiding place has been discovered by others . In most cases , more active scenes are used for the frontispiece , or in books after 1954 , illustrations throughout the text drawn by uncredited illustrators . 
 = = = Rudy Nappi and others = = = 
 Joseph Rudolf " Rudy " Nappi , the artist from 1953 to 1979 , illustrated a more average teenager . Nappi was asked by Grosset & Dunlap 's art director to update Nancy 's appearance , especially her wardrobe . Nappi gave Nancy Peter Pan collars , shirtwaist dresses , a pageboy ( later a flip ) haircut , and the occasional pair of jeans . Nancy 's hair color was changed from blonde to strawberry @-@ blonde , reddish @-@ blonde , or <unk> by the end of the decade . The change was long rumored to have been the result of a printing ink error , but was considered so favorable that it was adopted in the text for books published after 1959 , and by illustrator Polly Bolian for volumes she created for a special book club in 1959 – 60 . 
 In 1962 , all Grosset & Dunlap books become " picture covers " , books with artwork and advertising printed directly on their covers , as opposed to books with a dust jacket over a tweed volume . The change was to reduce production costs . Several of the 1930s and 1940s cover illustrations were updated by Nappi for this change , depicting a Nancy of the Kennedy era , though the stories themselves were not updated . Internal illustrations , which were dropped in 1937 , were returned to the books beginning in 1954 , as pen and ink line drawings , mostly by uncredited artists , but usually corresponding with Nappi 's style of drawing Nancy on the covers . Nappi followed trends initiated by Gillies and often illustrated Nancy wearing the same clothing more than once , including a mustard shirtwaist dress . 
 Unlike Tandy , Nappi did not read the books before illustrating them ; instead , his wife read them and provided him with a brief plot summary before Nappi began painting . Nappi 's first cover was for The Clue of the Velvet Mask , where he began a trend of portraying Nancy as " bobby @-@ soxer ... a contemporary sixteen @-@ year @-@ old . This Nancy was perky , clean @-@ cut , and extremely animated . In the majority of his covers Nancy looks startled – which , no doubt , she was . " Nancy 's style is considerably conservative , and remains so during the psychedelic period . Although she wears bold colors and prints , or the background colors are shades of electric yellow , shocking pink , turquoise , or apple green , her clothing is high @-@ necked and with long hemlines . Earlier Nappi covers show Nancy in poses similar to those in the covers by Tandy and Gillies ; for many updated covers he simply updated the color scheme , clothing style , and hairstyles of the characters but retains their original poses in similar settings . Later Nappi covers show only Nancy 's head or part of her body , surrounded by spooky or startling elements or clues from the story . These Nappi covers would later be used for the opening credits of the television production , with photos of Pamela Sue Martin inserted on the book covers . 
 Often , " Nancy 's face wears the blank expression of one lost in thought , " making her appear passive . On the cover of The Strange Message in the Parchment ( 1977 ) , for example , in contrast to earlier covers , Nancy " is not shown in the midst of danger or even watching a mystery unfold from a distance . Instead , Nancy is shown thinking about the clues " ; in general , Nancy becomes less confident and more puzzled . 
 = = = Nancy in the 1980s , 1990s , and 2000s = = = 
 Ruth Sanderson and Paul Frame provided cover art and interior illustrations for the first Nancy Drew paperbacks , published under the Wanderer imprint . Other artists , including <unk> Jenks and others whose names are unknown , provided cover art , but no interior illustrations , for later paperbacks . Nancy is portrayed as " a wealthy , privileged sleuth who looks pretty and alert .... The colors , and Nancy 's facial features , are often so vivid that some of the covers look more like glossy photographs than paintings . " 
 Nancy is frequently portrayed pursuing a suspect , examining a clue , or observing action . She is often also shown in peril : being chased , falling off a boat , or hanging by a rope from rafters . These covers are " characterized by frenetic energy on Nancy 's part ; whether she is falling , limbs flailing , an alarmed look on her face , or whether she is running , hair flying , body bent , face breathless . Nancy does not have any control over the events that are happening in these covers . She is shown to be a victim , being hunted and attacked by unseen foes . " 
 Nancy is also sometimes pursued by a visibly threatening foe , as on the cover of The Case of the Vanishing Veil ( 1988 ) . 
 The covers of the The Nancy Drew Files and Girl Detective series represent further departures from the bold , confident character portrayed by Tandy . The Nancy portrayed on the covers of The Nancy Drew Files is " a markedly sexy Nancy , with a handsome young man always lurking in the background . Her clothes often reveal an ample <unk> and her expression is mischievous . " In the Girl Detective series , Nancy 's face is depicted on each cover in fragments . Her eyes , for example , are confined to a strip across the top of the cover while her mouth is located near the spine in a box independent of her eyes . The artwork for Nancy 's eyes and mouth is taken from Rudy Nappi 's cover art for the revised version of The Secret of the Old Clock . 
 = = Books = = 
 The longest @-@ running series of books to feature Nancy Drew is the original Nancy Drew series , whose 175 volumes were published from 1930 to 2003 . Nancy also appeared in 124 titles in The Nancy Drew Files and is currently the heroine of the Diaries series . Various other series feature the character , such as the Nancy Drew Notebooks and Nancy Drew on Campus . While Nancy Drew is the central character in each series , continuity is preserved only within one series , not between them all ; for example , in concurrently published titles in the Nancy Drew series and the Nancy Drew on Campus series , Nancy is respectively dating her boyfriend Ned Nickerson or broken up with Ned Nickerson . 
 = = = International publications = = = 
 The main Nancy Drew series , The Nancy Drew Files , and Girl Detective books have been translated into a number of languages besides English . Estimates vary from between 14 and 25 languages , but 25 seems the most accurate number . Nancy Drew books have been published in many European countries ( especially in Nordic countries and France ) as well as in Latin America and Asia . The character of Nancy Drew seems to be more popular in some countries than others . Nancy Drew books have been in print in Norway since 1941 ( the first country outside USA ) , in Denmark since 1958 , in France since 1955 and in Italy since 1970 by <unk> Mondadori <unk> . Other countries , such as Estonia , have only recently begun printing Nancy Drew books . 
 Nancy 's name is often changed in translated editions : in France , she is known as Alice Roy ; in Sweden , as Kitty Drew ; in Finland , as Paula Drew ; and in Norway the book series has the name of <unk> <unk> ( Miss Detective ) , though the heroine 's name is still Nancy Drew inside the books . In Germany , Nancy is a German law student named Susanne Langen . George Fayne 's name is even more frequently changed , to Georgia , Joyce , Kitty , or Marion . Cover art and series order is often changed as well , and in many countries only a limited number of Drew books are available in translation . 
 = = Film and television = = 
 Five feature films , two television shows , and four television pilots featuring Nancy Drew have been produced to date . No television show featuring Nancy Drew has lasted longer than two years , and film portrayals of the character have met with mixed reviews . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Former child actress Bonita Granville portrayed Nancy Drew in four Warner Bros. films directed by William Clemens in the late 1930s : Nancy Drew ... Detective ( loosely based on The Password to Larkspur Lane ) ( December 1938 ) , Nancy Drew ... Reporter ( March 1939 ) , Nancy Drew … Trouble Shooter ( September 1939 ) , and Nancy Drew and the Hidden Staircase ( November 1939 ) . A fifth movie may have been planned or even produced , but it was never released ; actor Frankie Thomas believes that he and Granville made five films , not four , and in August 1939 Harriet Adams wrote to Mildred Benson , " three have been shown in this area , and I have just heard that a fifth is in production . " The films were in part based on the Torchy Blane film series with Glenda Farrell and Barton MacLane , also made by Warner Bros. Nancy & Torchy have very similar hair styles , almost always wear a hat , were told to stay off the case ( but were stubborn and continued to sleuth ) , were assisted by their boyfriends , and even had the same writers . 
 Nancy Drew and the Hidden Staircase was the only film to borrow its title from a book in the series , although the plot was altered substantially . One critic wrote that " the only similarity between the book and the film was the word staircase . " Nancy 's boyfriend Ned Nickerson became Ted Nickerson , as Ned was considered too old @-@ fashioned , and housekeeper Hannah Gruen was replaced by Effie Schneider , a minor character who had appeared in only a few books as the <unk> ' part @-@ time maid ; in the films , Effie 's traits are combined with Hannah 's . Nancy 's friends George and Bess were eliminated completely , " mystery elements were downplayed , plots simplified , and the romance spiced up . " To promote the film , Warner Bros. created a Nancy Drew fan club that included a set of rules , such as : " Must have steady boy friend , in the sense of a ' pal ' " and must " Take part in choosing own clothes . " These rules were based on some research Warner Bros. had done on the habits and attitudes of " typical " teenage girls . 
 Critical reaction to these films is mixed . Some find that the movies did not " depict the true Nancy Drew " , in part because Granville 's Nancy " blatantly used her feminine wiles ( and enticing bribes ) " to accomplish her goals . The films also portray Nancy as childish and easily flustered , a significant change from her portrayal in the books . Nevertheless , Mildred Benson , the author of most Nancy Drew books at the time , liked the films . 
 A film adaptation of Nancy Drew was released on June 15 , 2007 by Warner Bros. Pictures , with Emma Roberts as Nancy Drew , Max Thieriot as Ned Nickerson and Tate Donovan as Carson Drew . As with the earlier Drew films , reactions were mixed . Some see the film as updated version of the basic character : " although it has been glammed up for the lucrative tween demographic , the movie retains the best parts of the books , including , of course , their intelligent main character . " Others find the movie " jolting " because Nancy 's " new classmates prefer shopping to sleuthing , and Nancy 's plaid skirt and magnifying glass make her something of a dork , not the town hero she was in the Midwest . " 
 = = = Television = = = 
 In 1957 , Desilu and CBS developed a show , Nancy Drew , Detective , based on the movies from the 1930s . Roberta Shore was in the title role as Nancy Drew , with Tim Considine as Ned Nickerson , and Frankie Thomas , Jr. as Carson Drew . Although a pilot was produced in April 1957 , the series could not find a sponsor , and , with the disappointment and later disapproval of Harriet Adams , the idea of a series was abandoned . 
 A television series called The Hardy Boys / Nancy Drew Mysteries ran from 1977 to 1979 on American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) . It initially starred 24 @-@ year @-@ old Pamela Sue Martin as Nancy . For the first season , episodes featuring Nancy alternated with episodes featuring the Hardy Boys . The stories were new stories based on the original stories , with Nancy solving mysteries with her friends George and Ned . Beginning in the second season , the format of the series changed to focus more on the Hardy Boys , with Nancy Drew primarily appearing as a guest star in several crossover story lines ; Martin left the series midway through the second season and was replaced by 19 @-@ year @-@ old Janet Louise Johnson for the final few episodes . The series continued for a third season as The Hardy Boys Mysteries , dropping Nancy Drew completely , but the series was cancelled mid @-@ way through the season . 
 In October 1989 , Canadian production company Nelvana began filming for a 13 @-@ episode Nancy Drew television series called Nancy Drew and Daughter for USA Network . Margot Kidder was cast as an adult Nancy Drew and her daughter as Nancy 's daughter . Kidder was injured during filming of the first episode when the brakes failed on the car she was driving , and production was canceled the next month . 
 Nelvana began production of another Nancy Drew television show in 1995 . Tracy Ryan starred as Nancy Drew , with <unk> Erwin as Bess Marvin , Joy Tanner as George Fayne , and , in a recurring role , Scott Speedman as Ned Nickerson . The show was cancelled midway through its first season due to low ratings , possibly due to its being in syndication . The entire series has since been released on DVD . 
 On December 15 , 2002 , ABC aired Nancy Drew , with Maggie Lawson in the title role , as part of The Wonderful World of Disney series . The movie was intended to be a pilot for a possible weekly series . Additional scripts were ordered , but a series was not forthcoming . 
 On October 5 , 2015 , CBS announced that it would be developing a new series titled Drew . In January 2016 , they announced that the pilot would feature Nancy as a non @-@ Caucasian New York City police detective in her thirties . The pilot episode will revolve around Nancy investigating the death of Bess Marvin , who had died six months prior . As of March 2016 , Sarah Shahi is cast as Nancy , Anthony Edwards is set to play Carson Drew , Felix Solis as Lieutenant Ford , Vanessa Ferlito as George Fayne , Steve <unk> as Ned Nickerson , and Debra Monk as Hannah Gruen . The pilot was written by Joan Rater and Tony Phelan and was directed by James Strong . The pilot was shot in New York City . On May 14 , 2016 , it was announced that CBS passed on the Drew pilot , so CBS Studios is shopping it to other networks for series consideration . However , it was not picked up by any of the other networks . 
 = = Video games = = 
 Computer games publisher Her Interactive began publishing Nancy Drew computer games in 1998 . Some titles are taken from published Nancy Drew books , such as The Secret of the Old Clock ; others are not . The games are targeted at teens " ages 10 and up " and are rated " E " ( " Everyone " ) by the ESRB . They follow the popular adventure game style of play . Players must move Nancy around in a virtual environment to talk to suspects , pick up clues , solve puzzles , and eventually solve the crime . 
 Lani Minella has voiced the Nancy character since the first game in 1998 up to the most recent game , Sea of Darkness , the 32nd game . The 33rd game , Midnight in Salem , which will be coming out in 2016 , will be voiced by a new actress . Minella , who has voiced Nancy for 17 years , will be stepping down from the role . Her Interactive said that the community has been nothing but supportive of Minella , and that their overall goal is to keep creating noteworthy games . 
 In addition to the games created by Her Interactive , a game for the Nintendo DS was released in September 2007 by Majesco Entertainment . In the game , developed by Gorilla Systems Co and called Nancy Drew : Deadly Secret of Olde World Park , players help Nancy solve the mystery of a missing billionaire . Majesco has also released two other Nancy Drew games for the DS , entitled Nancy Drew : The Mystery of the Clue Bender Society ( released July 2008 ) and Nancy Drew : The Hidden Staircase , based on the second book in the original Nancy Drew Mystery Stories series ( released September 2008 ) . Nancy Drew : The Hidden Staircase and Nancy Drew : The Model Mysteries , both by THQ , are also available on the Nintendo DS system . 
 Some games , like Secrets Can Kill , Shadow at the Water 's Edge , and The Captive Curse , are rated " E10 + " . The games have received recognition for promoting female interest in video games . Her Interactive has also released several versions of their Nancy Drew games in French , as part of a series called Les <unk> de Nancy Drew , and shorter games as part of a new series called the Nancy Drew Dossier . The first title , Lights , Camera , <unk> , was released in 2008 and the second , <unk> to Danger , was released in 2009 . While most of the games are computer games , with most available only on PC and some newer titles also available on Mac , Her Interactive also have released some of the titles on other platforms , like DVD and Nintendo Wii system . 
 On May 13 , 2016 , Her Interactive introduced and released Nancy Drew : Codes & Clues , which was designed to help children develop skills in computer programming . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 A number of Nancy Drew products have been licensed over the years , primarily in the 1950s , 1960s , and 1970s . Parker Brothers produced a " Nancy Drew Mystery Game " in 1957 with the approval of the Stratemeyer Syndicate . In 1967 Madame Alexander produced a Nancy Drew doll . The doll carried binoculars and camera and was available in two outfits : with a plaid coat or a dress and short jacket . Harriet Adams disapproved of the doll 's design , believing Nancy 's face to be too childish , but the doll was marketed nonetheless . Various Nancy Drew coloring , activity , and puzzle books have also been published , as has a Nancy Drew puzzle . A Nancy Drew Halloween costume and a Nancy Drew lunchbox were produced in the 1970s as television show tie @-@ ins . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 According to commentators , the cultural impact of Nancy Drew has been enormous . The immediate success of the series led directly to the creation of numerous other girls ' mysteries series , such as The Dana Girls mystery stories and the Kay Tracey mystery stories , and the phenomenal sales of the character Edward Stratemeyer feared was " too flip " encouraged publishers to market many other girls ' mystery series , such as the Judy Bolton Series , and to request authors of series such as the Cherry Ames Nurse Stories to incorporate mystery elements into their works . 
 Many prominent and successful women cite Nancy Drew as an early formative influence whose character encouraged them to take on unconventional roles , including Supreme Court Justices Sandra Day O 'Connor , Ruth Bader Ginsburg , and Sonia Sotomayor ; TV personalities Oprah Winfrey and Barbara Walters ; singers Barbra Streisand and Beverly Sills ; mystery authors Sara <unk> and Nancy Pickard ; scholar Carolyn Heilbrun ; actresses Ellen Barkin and Emma Roberts ; former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton ; former First Lady Laura Bush ; and former president of the National Organization for Women Karen <unk> . Less prominent women also credit the character of Nancy Drew with helping them to become stronger women ; when the first Nancy Drew conference was held , at the University of Iowa , in 1993 , conference organizers received a flood of calls from women who " all had stories to tell about how instrumental Nancy had been in their lives , and about how she had inspired , comforted , entertained them through their childhoods , and , for a surprising number of women , well into adulthood . " 
 Nancy Drew 's popularity continues unabated : in 2002 , the first Nancy Drew book published , The Secret of the Old Clock , alone sold 150 @,@ 000 copies , good enough for top @-@ 50 ranking in children 's books , and other books in the series sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies each . Sales of the hardcover volumes of the original Nancy Drew series alone has surpassed sales of Agatha Christie titles , and newer titles in the Girl Detective series have reached The New York Times bestseller lists . Entertainment Weekly ranked her seventeenth on its list of " The Top 20 Heroes " ahead of Batman , explaining that Drew is the " first female hero embraced by most little girls ... [ Nancy lives ] in an endless summer of never @-@ ending adventures and unlimited potential . " The magazine goes on to cite Scooby @-@ Doo 's Velma <unk> as well as Veronica Mars as Nancy Drew 's " copycat descendants " . 
 Many feminist critics have pondered the reason for the character 's iconic status . Nancy 's car , and her skill in driving and repairing it , are often cited . Melanie <unk> points to Nancy 's famous blue roadster ( now a blue hybrid ) as a symbol of " ultimate freedom and independence . " Not only does Nancy have the freedom to go where she pleases ( a freedom other , similar characters such as The Dana Girls do not have ) , but she is also able to change a tire and fix a flawed distributor , prompting <unk> to argue that in " a nation where car mechanics still mock or brush off complaints by women Nancy remains a significant role model . " 
 Nancy is also treated with respect : her decisions are rarely questioned and she is trusted by those around her . Male authority figures believe her statements , and neither her father nor Hannah Gruen , the motherly housekeeper , " place ... restrictions on her comings and goings . " Nancy 's father not only imposes no restrictions on his daughter , but trusts her both with her own car and his gun ( in the original version of The Hidden Staircase [ 1930 ] ) , asks her advice on a frequent basis , and accedes to all her requests . Some critics , such as Betsy <unk> and Ilana Nash , argue that Nancy 's relationship with her continually approving father is satisfying to girl readers because it allows them to vicariously experience a fulfilled Electra complex . 
 Unlike other girl detectives , Nancy does not go to school ( for reasons that are never explained , but assuming because she has finished ) , and she thus has complete autonomy . Similar characters , such as Kay Tracey , do go to school , and not only lose a degree of independence but also of authority . The fact of a character 's being a school @-@ girl reminds " the reader , however fleetingly , of the prosaic realities of high @-@ school existence , which rarely includes high adventures or an authoritative voice in the world of adults . " 
 Some see in Nancy 's adventures a mythic quality . Nancy often explores secret passages , prompting Nancy Pickard to argue that Nancy Drew is a figure equivalent to the ancient Sumerian deity Inanna and that Nancy 's " journeys into the ' underground ' " are , in psychological terms , explorations of the unconscious . Nancy is a heroic figure , undertaking her adventures not for the sake of adventure alone , but in order to help others , particularly the disadvantaged . For this reason , Nancy Drew has been called the modern embodiment of the character of " Good Deeds " in Everyman . 
 In the end , many critics agree that at least part of Nancy Drew 's popularity depends on the way in which the books and the character combine sometimes contradictory values , with Kathleen Chamberlain writing in The Secrets of Nancy Drew : " For over 60 years , the Nancy Drew series has told readers that they can have the benefits of both dependence and independence without the drawbacks , that they can help the disadvantaged and remain successful capitalists , that they can be both elitist and democratic , that they can be both child and adult , and that they can be both ' liberated ' women and Daddy 's little girls . " As another critic puts it , " Nancy Drew ' solved ' the contradiction of competing discourses about American womanhood by entertaining them all . " 
 In 2010 , Nancy Drew ( and her novels ) were discussed in the Young Adult themed issue of the academic journal Studies in the Novel . See Jennifer M. Woolston 's essay entitled " Nancy Drew 's Body : The Case of the Autonomous Female Sleuth " for a detailed discussion of the heroine 's impact on popular culture . The essay also discusses links to Nancy Drew and feminist theory . 
 = Chase XCG @-@ 20 = 
 The Chase XCG @-@ 20 , also known as the XG @-@ 20 and by the company designation MS @-@ 8 <unk> , was a large assault glider developed immediately after World War II by the Chase Aircraft Company for the United States Air Force , and was the largest glider ever built in the United States . The XG @-@ 20 did not see production due to a change in USAF requirements , however , it was modified into the successful Fairchild C @-@ 123 Provider twin @-@ engined transport aircraft which saw extensive service in the Vietnam War . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Following the end of World War II , the United States Army Air Forces , which became the United States Air Force ( USAF ) in 1947 , developed a requirement for a new , large assault glider type to replace smaller types that were then in service , all existing gliders having been declared obsolete . The new gliders were to be constructed entirely of metal , and were also required to be easily adaptable to a powered configuration . As part of a five @-@ year development program , a contract was awarded to the Chase Aircraft Company of Trenton , New Jersey , in August 1946 for the construction of two types of gliders . These included a smaller model being designated XCG @-@ 18A , and the larger , definitive model being designated XCG @-@ 20 . 
 The XCG @-@ 20 , redesignated XG @-@ 20 in 1948 with the establishment of the USAF , was the largest glider ever constructed in the United States , and the last combat glider to be built for the U.S. military . It featured a high @-@ mounted wing and retractable tricycle landing gear , with an auxiliary power unit supplied hydraulic power to the landing gear and flaps . The nose section was reinforced to provide optimal protection to the pilots in the event of a crash on landing , and to allow for the strongest possible towing connection . The cargo hold was 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) long and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide ; it featured an innovative configuration , the rear fuselage being upswept with an integrated loading ramp . This allowed vehicles to be driven directly on and off of the aircraft , speeding loading and unloading times . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Although the first prototype XG @-@ 20 never flew as a glider , the second prototype conducted the aircraft 's first flight in April 1950 . Following being displayed to the public at Pope Air Force Base as part of Exercise <unk> during that month , the XG @-@ 20 underwent thorough flight testing ; during the late summer , it was evaluated against a variety of other transport aircraft at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida . Although it possessed no obvious faults , the test program confirmed that the powered " assault transport " was the equal of the glider in landing performance ; having been rendered obsolete , the assault glider fell out of favor with the Air Force , and the XG @-@ 20 project was cancelled . 
 However , Chase had designed the aircraft to allow for the easy installation of engines ; the first XG @-@ 20 had already been modified with two radial piston engines , becoming the XC @-@ 123 , the prototype of the long @-@ serving C @-@ 123 Provider family of transports . Meanwhile , the second prototype XG @-@ 20 was returned to Chase Aircraft , to be fitted with two twin pods for General Electric <unk> turbojets , becoming the XC @-@ 123A , the first jet @-@ powered transport aircraft built in the United States . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from " C @-@ 123 Provider in action " 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 3 
 Length : 77 ft 1 in ( 23 @.@ 50 m ) 
 Wingspan : 110 ft 0 in ( 33 @.@ 53 m ) 
 Height : 33 ft 10 in ( 10 @.@ 31 m ) 
 Wing area : 1 @,@ 222 @.@ 78 sq ft ( 113 @.@ 600 m2 ) 
 Airfoil : NACA <unk> 
 Max takeoff weight : 70 @,@ 000 lb ( 31 @,@ 751 kg ) limited by tow aircraft to 40 @,@ 000 pounds ( 18 @,@ 000 kg ) 
 = Raja of Panagal = 
 Sir <unk> Ramarayaningar KCIE , ( 9 July 1866 – 16 December 1928 ) , also known as the Raja of Panagal , was a zamindar of Kalahasti , a Justice Party leader and the Chief Minister or Premier of Madras Presidency from 11 July 1921 to 3 December 1926 . 
 Ramarayaningar was born in Kalahasti , Chittoor District , Madras Presidency on 9 July 1866 . He was educated in Madras and obtained degrees in Sanskrit , law , philosophy and Dravidian languages before entering politics . He was one of the founder @-@ members of the Justice Party and served as its President from 1925 to 1928 . 
 From 17 December 1920 to 11 July 1921 , Ramarayaningar served as the Minister of Local Self @-@ Government in the first Justice Party government led by A. Subbarayalu Reddiar . He served as the Chief Minister of Madras Presidency from 11 July 1921 to 3 December 1926 . He introduced a number of reforms during his tenure . The Theagaroya Nagar locality in Chennai was developed during his Chief @-@ Ministership . Ramarayaningar resigned as Chief Minister in 1926 when the Justice Party failed to obtain a majority in the 1926 elections to the Madras Legislative Council . He , however , continued to remain active in politics and served as the President of the Justice Party until his death on 16 December 1928 . 
 Ramarayaningar was regarded as an advocate of democracy and a staunch supporter of empowerment of the depressed classes . Historians generally attribute the decline of the Justice Party in the mid @-@ 1930s to the absence of charismatic leaders in the Justice Party following his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ramarayaningar was born in a family of landlords . He belonged to the Telugu Velama community . Ramarayaningar 's family patronised Brahmins and the Raja had his early education in the household of <unk> Sundara Sastri , the father @-@ in @-@ law of C. P. Ramaswami Iyer . He completed his schooling from Triplicane High School in 1886 and graduated in Sanskrit from the Presidency College in 1893 with Advanced Chemistry as his optional subject . He graduated in BL and M.A. ( Philosophy and Dravidian Languages ) in 1899 . In 1919 , he was appointed a fellow of the Presidency College . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Ramarayaningar got his first taste of politics when he was appointed to the district board of North Arcot . In 1912 , he was nominated to the Imperial Legislative Council of India and represented the landlords and zamindars of South India . He served as a legislator until 1915 . During this period , Ramarayaningar earned the praise of the Viceroy , Lord Hardinge . He actively supported reforms in the Hindu society . In 1914 , Ramarayaningar moved a legislation for the creation of separate Provincial departments for the welfare of depressed classes . In 1915 , he was elected President of the Third Andhra Congress . 
 In 1914 , the Madras Dravidian Association was established by C. <unk> Mudaliar . Ramarayaningar was elected as the first President of the Association . On 19 July 1917 , at a conference in Coimbatore presided over by the Ramarayaningar , the four different non @-@ Brahmin associations got together to form the South Indian Liberal Federation , unofficially known as the Justice Party . In 1921 , Ramarayaningar was sent along with Kurma Venkata Reddy Naidu and <unk> Appa Rao Naidu to lobby on behalf of the Justice Party before the authorities in England . 
 Ramarayaningar was also active in the All @-@ India Non @-@ Brahmin movement . He was a friend of <unk> Maharaj and was closely associated with the former 's Satya <unk> Samaj . He attended the All India Non @-@ Brahmin Conference held at Belgaum on 26 December 1924 and presided over the Second All @-@ India Non @-@ Brahmin Conference held at Victoria Hall , Madras on 25 May 1925 . 
 When the Government of India Act was passed in 1919 , provisions were made to hold elections in the Madras Presidency for the first time in history . The Justice Party unanimously decided to contest the elections and was elected to power in the province . A. Subbarayalu Reddiar became the first Chief Minister of the Madras Presidency . Ramarayaningar served as Minister of Local Self @-@ Government in the Subbarayalu Reddiar Government . When Subbarayalu Reddiar resigned , citing health reasons , Ramarayaningar was appointed Chief Minister . 
 = = Chief Minister of Madras = = 
 Ramarayaningar served as the Chief Minister of Madras from 11 July 1921 till 3 December 1926 . A. P. Patro of <unk> was appointed to fill the vacancy caused by Subbarayalu Reddiar 's resignation , and he took the portfolio of education . 
 = = = B & C Mills strike of 1921 = = = 
 In 1921 , a labour strike erupted in the Buckingham and Carnatic Mills in Madras . This strike was led by V. Kalyanasundara Mudaliar , a leader of the Indian National Congress . The strike lasted for over six months during which around 10 @,@ 000 workers struck work . A crackdown was ordered . Eventually , two factions emerged ; one group of workers desired to return to work while another wished to continue the strike . Violent riots broke out when striking workers prevented the others from returning to work . The riots began to assume communal colours as the workers who wished to continue the strike were mostly caste Hindus while those who desired to end it were largely untouchables or Dalits . 
 Ministers in the Madras government and ruling party members supported the strike . On 29 August 1921 , the police opened fire killing six of the workers on the spot . Top Justice Party leaders like O. <unk> Chetti severely censured the police for the measures they adopted . The main reason was the fact that the police was under the control of the Governor and the government was looking for an opportunity to harass the executive . Another probable reason was that the striking workers had the caste sympathies of the Justice Party Government whose ministers and chief whips were caste Hindus like themselves . 
 The Justice Party leaders were extremely vociferous in their attacks on Dalits and the Labour Department . Their views were endorsed by the Raja of Panagal who joined <unk> Chetti in admonishing the Dalits . The party 's organ Justice blamed the riots on the " pampering " of Dalits by the Labour Department . M. C. Rajah , the leader of the Dalits in the Justice Party , in turn , retorted by describing the criticism of Dalits by Justice Party members as " the high @-@ handed poisonous action of members of a party who after inflicting all known and unknown injury on our community shed crocodile tears and pose as friends of the Depressed classes " . Though the B & C mills strike was eventually settled through the mediation of C. <unk> Mudaliar , the communal riots which had accompanied it estranged Dalits from the Justice <unk> and was one of the reasons for Rajah quitting the party at a later stage . 
 = = = Second general elections = = = 
 Polling for the second general elections in the Madras Presidency began on 11 September 1923 . However , owing to heavy rains , polling was not completed until 10 November . Though the Justice Party returned to power , its majority had been considerably reduced . Observers attribute this decline in performance to the rift between the Tamil and Telugu members of the Justice party . Ramarayaningar assumed office as Chief Minister on 19 November 1923 and retained the same Cabinet with one change – K. V. Reddi Naidu , the Minister of Development was replaced with T. N. Sivagnanam Pillai . In 1923 , the British government bestowed upon Ramarayaningar , the honorific title of " Raja of Panagal " . 
 = = = No @-@ confidence motion = = = 
 In 1923 , a few prominent members of the Justice Party broke off to form the United Nationalist Party and projected themselves as " Democrats " . The dissidents were led by C. R. Reddy , a leader of the Justice Party , who complained of the dictatorial rule of the Raja and his insensitive , unimaginative policies . On 27 November 1923 , a no @-@ confidence motion was introduced against the government of the Raja of Panagal . The no @-@ confidence motion was defeated by a margin of 65 votes to 44 . 
 = = = Reforms = = = 
 Ramarayaningar introduced a number of reforms during his tenure as Chief Minister . 
 Hindu Religious Endowments Bill 
 In 1921 , the Raja of Panagal introduced the Hindu Religious Endowments Bill . As per this bill , trusts were established to maintain temple funds and given complete power over the administration of temples . This act evoked severe protests from some sections of the assembly which felt that this was an intrusion in the religious affairs of the populace . However , the Shankaracharya of Kanchi gave his support to the bill even while expressing his concern over some of its provisions . 
 Madras State Aid to Industries Act 
 In 1922 , the Madras State Aid to Industries Act was passed . Through this act , the government made it a state policy to advance loans to developing industries . It received less opposition in the assembly . This eventually became Madras Act V of 1923 . 
 Educational reforms 
 The Madras University Act was passed in the year 1923 . The bill was introduced by Education Minister Sir A. P. Patro . As per the provisions of this bill , the governing body of the Madras University was completely reorganised on democratic lines . The bill asserted that the governing body would henceforth be headed by a Chancellor who would be assisted by a pro @-@ Chancellor who was usually the Minister of Education . Apart from the Chancellor and the pro @-@ Chancellor who were elected , there was to be a Vice @-@ Chancellor appointed by the Chancellor . In 1925 , the Andhra University Act was passed which included similar reforms in Andhra University . 
 However , the tenure of the Justice Party government of the Raja of Panagal is largely remembered for the introduction of caste @-@ based reservations in 1921 . In August 1921 , the First communal Government Order ( G.O. <unk> ) was passed . As per the order , 44 percent of jobs were reserved for non @-@ Brahmins , 16 percent for Brahmins , 16 percent for Muslims , 16 percent for Anglo @-@ Indians and Christians and eight percent for the Scheduled Castes . 
 In 1923 , M. C. Rajah , a Justice Party leader from the Dalit community protested against the government order arguing that the act did not guarantee adequate representation of Dalits who he felt deserved 30 % reservation in the administration and the services . When the Justice Party failed to respond , he resigned from the primary membership of the party . 
 Dr. Gour 's Bill 
 Dr. Gour 's Bill , introduced in 1921 , brought about an amendment in the Special Marriages Act , sanctioning the legal validity of inter @-@ caste marriages . 
 Municipal development 
 The rapid growth of the population of Madras necessitated the expansion of the city and the creation of more residential colonies . To fulfill this requirement , the Madras Town Planning Act of 1920 had been passed on 7 September 1920 before the dyarchy was established . As per the provisions of this Act , numerous town planning measures were taken during the tenure of the Raja of Panagal . The 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) long and 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) broad Long Tank , which extended from Nungambakkam to <unk> , forming an arc along the city 's western frontier , was drained out in 1923 . The development of the tract to the west of the Long Tank had been initiated by the British Government in 1911 with the construction of a railway station at the village of <unk> or <unk> . Following the draining out of the Long Tank , the Justice Party government of the Raja of Panagal conceived the creation of a residential colony adjoining this little village . 
 The residential colony was named Theagaroya Nagar after Justice Party stalwart Sir Pitti Theagaroya Chetty , who had died shortly before the township was inaugurated , and was centred around a park named Panagal Park after the Raja of Panagal . The streets in this new locality were named after prominent members of the Justice Party or officials in the municipal administration . 
 Other reforms 
 The Raja of Panagal reorganised the Public Works Department in the Presidency , improved medical facilities , water supply and communications in rural areas and patronised Siddha medicine . Sir Muhammed Usman , later minister in the government of the Raja of Bobbili was appointed Secretary of the Committee on siddha medicine . He also sponsored endowments to the University of Madras to produce scientific literature in Telugu . 
 = = President of the Justice Party = = 
 Theagaroya Chetty , the founder @-@ President of the Justice Party died in 1925 and the Raja , then Chief Minister of Madras succeeded Chetty as the second President of the Justice Party . The Raja served as the President of the party until his death in 1928 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Ramarayaningar was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire on 5 June 1926 . In the Assembly elections which took place on 8 November 1926 , no party was able to get a clean majority . The Swarajya Party won 41 of the 98 seats and emerged as the single largest party while the Justice party won 21 . The Raja resigned as the Chief Minister of the Presidency as the popular verdict appeared to be against the Justice Party . As no party had a clean majority and the Swarajya Party which was the single largest party in the assembly was reluctant to form the government , the Governor appointed P. Subbarayan as the independent Chief Minister and nominated 34 members to the Council to support him . 
 In 1927 , the Simon Commission which was appointed to report on the working of the progress of the Montagu @-@ Chelmsford reforms landed in India . The Swarajya Party moved a resolution to boycott the Commission and this was passed 61 to 50 with 12 remaining neutral . The Justice Party and the Swarajists supported the resolution while the Chief Minister P. Subbarayan opposed it and requested his ministers to resign . However , Lord Goschen , the Governor , was able to obtain the support of the Raja of Panagal by making a Justice Party member , M. Krishnan Nair , a Cabinet minister . Led by the Raja of Panagal , the Justice Party switched sides and lent its support to the Subbarayan government . Soon afterwards , the Justice Party passed a resolution welcoming the Simon Commission . The Simon Commission visited Madras on 28 February 1928 and 18 February 1929 and was boycotted by the Swarajya Party and the Indian National Congress . However , the <unk> and the Subbarayan Government accorded the Commission a warm reception . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Ramarayaningar died on 16 December 1928 of influenza . 
 He was succeeded as the President of the Justice Party by B. Munuswamy Naidu . On his death , leading newspapers and magazines poured accolades on him . S. Srinivasa Iyengar , a political opponent of the Raja , said of him : 
 The Rajah Sahib had singular gifts to leadership , tact and of high diplomacy . He had not only led his party with remarkable success but he fought the bureaucracy with even greater skill and courage 
 The Hindu paid rich tributes to the Raja : 
 Essentially a conservative by instinct and training , he showed remarkable ability to perceive the trend of the popular upheaval in our province no less in social than in political matters and he showed consummate strategy and great ability in maintaining the influence and integrity of his party , when the mantle of leadership fell on him after the death of Sir P. <unk> Chetti a few years ago . In many respects he was a contrast to the other leader who was frank , outspoken and vehement in his lift and conduct . The Rajah Saheb was , on the other hand , reserved and restrained , tactful and polished to a degree and his courtesy and consideration to friends and opponents alike has always been marked 
 The Justice Party began to decline with the death of the Raja of Panagal . The lack of efficient leadership in the party is regarded as the main reason for its decline . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 Despite his aristocratic birth , Ramarayaningar was known for his egalitarian views . Despite the fact that he was regarded as a <unk> and anti @-@ Brahmin , he nominated a Brahmin , T. Sadasiva Iyer as the Commissioner of the Hindu Religious Endowment Board . 
 Ramarayaningar , however , strongly opposed what he perceived as the monopolisation of education by Brahmins . On being interviewed by Katherine Mayo , he responded : 
 What did the Brahmans do for our education in the five thousand years before Britain came ? I remind you : They asserted their right to pour hot lead into the ears of the low @-@ caste man who should dare to study books . All learning belonged to them , they said . When the <unk> swarmed in and took us , even that was an improvement on the old Hindu régime . But only in Britain 's day did education become the right of all , with state schools , colleges , and universities accessible <unk> all castes , communities , and peoples 
 = French submarine Mariotte = 
 The French submarine Mariotte ( <unk> ) was a submarine built for the French Navy prior to World War I. Intended to accompany the fleet , she was designed for high speed on the surface . Although the navy was unsatisfied with her performance on the surface , the boat had a higher underwater speed than any French submarine before or during the following 35 years . Mariotte was plagued with engine problems during her construction and the navy spent years fixing the various issues before finally commissioning her five years after beginning construction . During the war , she participated in the Dardanelles Campaign , but had to be scuttled after she became entangled in the cables of a minefield on her first attempt to penetrate the Dardanelles . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Mariotte was the winning design in a competition conducted by the Ministère de la Marine ( Navy Ministry ) in 1906 for a submarine ( displacing 530 metric tons ( 520 long tons ) that could accompany a squadron of battleships on the surface and had a submerged range of 100 nautical miles ( 190 km ; 120 mi ) . The winning design , by Constructor , First Class ( Ingénieur de 1ère <unk> ) Charles <unk> , was optimized for good sea @-@ keeping qualities and high speed with moderate buoyancy , a long , thin hull , and high freeboard . The most unusual feature of his design was the prominent forecastle that was built atop the forward part of the pressure hull , while the rear was virtually awash . This odd configuration gave the boat her nickname of toothbrush ( <unk> à dents ) . 
 The submarine actually displaced slightly more than planned , 545 metric tons ( 536 long tons ) surfaced and 634 metric tons ( 624 long tons ) submerged . She measured 64 @.@ 75 meters ( 212 ft 5 in ) between perpendiculars and had a beam of 4 @.@ 3 meters ( 14 ft 1 in ) . Mariotte had a maximum draft of 3 @.@ 82 meters ( 12 ft 6 in ) and had a depth of 7 @.@ 25 meters ( 23 ft 9 in ) from the bottom of her keel to the top of the conning tower . This latter was faired into the rear of the forecastle . Two lead weights were located in the keel and could be dropped in an emergency . 
 Her hull was divided into nine compartments and she was fitted with five internal trim tanks , an internal central ballast tank and three external ballast tanks . She had a test depth of 35 meters ( 115 ft ) . Mariotte had two rudders , one above the waterline for submerged use and the other below the waterline for regular use . She had two sets of diving planes , fore and aft , to control her depth below the water . The boat was evaluated in 1914 and the commission felt that she was generally successful except for her surface speed and range . It noted that she had problems with a following sea as the superstructure rapidly filled with water , but drained slowly so that she was much heavier by the bow and would tend to wallow . It also felt that she was insufficiently buoyant and had mediocre stability on the surface . 
 For surface running , the boat was powered by two Sautter & Harlé six @-@ cylinder , 700 @-@ metric @-@ horsepower ( 690 bhp ; 515 kW ) diesel engines , each driving a 1 @.@ 72 @-@ meter ( 5 ft 8 in ) propeller . When submerged each propeller was driven by a Breguet 500 @-@ metric @-@ horsepower ( 493 shp ; 368 kW ) electric motor using electricity from two 124 @-@ cell batteries . Mariotte could reach 14 @.@ 2 knots ( 26 @.@ 3 km / h ; 16 @.@ 3 mph ) on the surface and 11 @.@ 7 knots ( 21 @.@ 7 km / h ; 13 @.@ 5 mph ) underwater . This latter speed was a record that would not be exceeded by a French submarine for 35 years . On the surface , the boat had a range of 1 @,@ 658 nmi ( 3 @,@ 071 km ; 1 @,@ 908 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , submerged , she had a range of 143 nmi ( 265 km ; 165 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) . 
 She was armed with four internal 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes in the bow and two <unk> drop collars in the forecastle . Two reloads were stowed internally , which gave her a total of eight torpedoes . During World War I , the boat probably used Modèle <unk> torpedoes . These had a 110 @-@ kilogram ( 240 lb ) warhead and a range of 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 2 @,@ 200 yd ) at a speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Mariotte , named after the physicist Edme Mariotte , was ordered from the Arsenal de Cherbourg on 31 December 1906 . The boat was laid down on 30 March 1908 and launched on 2 February 1911 with only the starboard electric motor in place . The port electric motor was under repair at the time and was installed from 3 May to 21 June and a brief series of trials were conducted . The boat was refitted and further repairs were made to the port @-@ side motor , although continuing problems with her propulsion system often immobilized Mariotte into 1912 . She was able , however , to conduct diving , torpedo and underwater speed trials in August and September 1911 . The boat was lightly damaged when the air heater of a Modèle <unk> torpedo exploded in its tube on 27 December . Her diesel engines , three years delayed by problems during factory testing , were installed from 1 March to 28 July 1912 . They were judged satisfactory after the oil sump and the compressors were changed . After repeated breakdowns , Mariotte conducted her testing of the diesels from 23 October to 11 December and she was finally commissioned ( armament <unk> ) on 5 February 1913 after a complete overhaul of her propulsion system . 
 The boat was assigned to the 2nd Division ( escadrille ) of the Light Squadron of submarines on 16 January and she joined them at Calais on 11 February . Mariotte visited Brest on 20 February and was inspected by Rear Admiral Charles Eugène <unk> . During the inspection the oil @-@ fired galley stove in the forecastle exploded , lightly burning two sailors . The boat was in Calais for the visit of King Christian X of Denmark later in the year . 
 When World War I began in August 1914 , Mariotte was transferred to the Mediterranean Squadron at Toulon where she patrolled off the coast of Provence . In July 1915 , she was transferred to Mudros to attempt to penetrate the Dardanelles . After making a reconnaissance flight over the straits and having studied the reports of the British submarines that had successfully entered the Dardanelles , Lieutenant de vaisseau Auguste <unk> ordered his crew to cast off on the evening of 25 July . Escorted by the French destroyer Poignard to the mouth of the Dardanelles , she rounded Cape Helles on the surface , but dived to avoid being spotted by a searchlight about an hour later and attempted to pass underneath a minefield near Çanakkale . The boat became entangled in the cables and when she surfaced in an unsuccessful attempt to free herself , she was immediately engaged by a Turkish gun battery at close range . Mariotte could not submerge because her conning tower had been penetrated by shells so <unk> decided to scuttle the boat and surrender . The Turks ceased fire when he signaled his surrender and so his crew was able to destroy documents and equipment before opening the seacocks to sink the submarine . The wreck lies off Cape Nara near a Turkish naval base at a depth of 5 meters ( 16 ft ) . 
 = Sprain Brook Parkway = 
 The Sprain Brook Parkway ( also known as The Sprain ) is a 12 @.@ 65 @-@ mile ( 20 @.@ 36 km ) long north – south parkway in Westchester County , New York , United States . It begins at an interchange with the Bronx River Parkway in the city of Yonkers , and ends at the former site of the Hawthorne Circle , where it merges into the Taconic State Parkway . The parkway serves an alternate to the Bronx River Parkway , boasting an interchange connection through western Westchester with Interstate 287 . New York 's Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) refers to it internally as New York State Route 987F ( NY 987F ) , an unsigned reference route . 
 The Sprain Brook was first proposed in the early 1920s as a parkway between the Bronx River Parkway and the Hawthorne Circle . The parkway sold a majority of its right @-@ of @-@ way in the 1920s , but the proposed parkway met strong opposition from the village of Bronxville and Yonkers . The Sprain Brook proposal sat on the table until 1949 , when the State Council of Parks , run by Robert Moses , sought to ease congestion on the Bronx River Parkway . Moses proposed that a new state park would be constructed in Westchester , with the Sprain Brook Parkway serving as a traffic alternative to the Bronx River , and nearly a decade and a half after the parkway was deeded land . This time , Bronxville opposed the project rather than Yonkers , but an agreement was worked out in 1951 . This new alignment would bypass the parts of Bronxville and Yonkers to construct the freeway . 
 Construction of the alternative highway began in 1958 , with the stretch from the Bronx River Parkway to Tuckahoe Road in Greenburgh This section was completed in 1961 . The next piece , from Tuckahoe Road to Jackson Avenue , was constructed during 1962 and 1963 , with it opening in the latter . Construction continued to the Cross Westchester Expressway ( I @-@ 287 ) and was completed in 1969 . At this point , the last missing piece was between the Cross Westchester and the Hawthorne Circle . This piece was delayed until 1976 , when construction began on the last 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) of parkway . The last piece of the parkway was opened on October 28 , 1980 at the cost of $ 25 million ( 1980 USD ) . 
 From its opening in 1961 until 1979 , the parkway was maintained by the East Hudson Parkway Authority , a commission created to maintain tolls on the Saw Mill River Parkway , the Bronx River Parkway and to provide general maintenance for the Taconic State Parkway . The authority was abolished in 1979 , at which time , all maintenance of the Sprain Brook Parkway was turned over to NYSDOT . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Sprain Brook Parkway , designated by the New York State Department of Transportation as NY 987F , a state reference route , begins at a fork from the Bronx River Parkway along the latter 's right @-@ of @-@ way along the Bronx River in the city of Yonkers . Crossing through the Northeast Yonkers neighborhood as a six @-@ lane freeway design , the Sprain Brook crosses an interchange with NY 100 ( Central Park Avenue ) south of Andrus Park . Bending to the north through Yonkers , the Sprain Brook reaches an interchange with Tuckahoe Road , with the northbound and southbound lanes splitting around the Grassy Sprain Reservoir . The two directions bend northeast along the reservoir . The southbound lanes cross Sprain Ridge Park , while the northbound lanes cross through a golf course . Leaving Yonkers for the town of Greenburgh , the lanes of the Sprain Brook come back together , reaching an interchange with Jackson Avenue . The six lane parkway continues northward and to the northeast through Greenburgh , crossing under Ardsley Road . After turning northward once again , the Sprain Brook crosses under a former alignment of NY 131 ( Underhill Road ) and passes by the Sunningdale Country Club . 
 Continuing its north / northeast winding , the Sprain Brook enters an interchange with NY 100B ( Dobbs Ferry Road ) , passing by East <unk> Park . Crossing over NY 119 in Elmsford , the parkway enters an interchange with Interstate 287 ( the Cross Westchester Expressway ) . After crossing through the interchange , the Spain continues northward as a six @-@ lane parkway back through the town of Greenburgh , entering an interchange with NY 100C ( Grasslands Road ) . Paralleling NY 100 to the west , the parkway , bending northward into Mount Pleasant and an interchange with County Route 301 ( Bradhurst Entrance North Road ) , which connects to NY 100 ( Bradhurst Avenue ) . North of that junction , the southbound lanes of the Sprain Brook interchange with a crossing NY 100 . After several bends to the north , the Sprain Brook enters the merging Taconic State Parkway and terminates as the right @-@ of @-@ way continues as the Taconic . 
 The Sprain Brook Parkway sees an average of 95 @,@ 442 vehicles per day throughout its entire length . The stretch between I @-@ 287 and NY 100C sees the highest amount , with 101 @,@ 460 cars in a 2011 report . The stretch between NY 100 in Yonkers and Jackson Avenue in Greenburgh sees the second @-@ highest , at 100 @,@ 900 , which is an upgrade of over 19 @,@ 000 vehicles since the same report in 1997 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original proposal = = = 
 What ultimately became the Sprain Brook Parkway began taking form in the 1920s , when the Westchester County Road Commission acquired the right @-@ of @-@ way for a planned 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) extension of the Taconic State Parkway . The land , bought from 1925 to 1927 for $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( $ 20 @.@ 4 million in modern dollars ) , was , however , not used as a parkway , and in 1938 , was proposed to be used instead as an arterial state highway , rather than a parkway . The commission sent a request in April 1938 to the State Council of Parks to have the state take over the right @-@ of @-@ way after the state withdrew its support for the parkway extension . In April 1938 , the county was approached by the Westchester County Park Commission to transfer the new project to the state for construction by the State Council of Parks . The project , which at the time would have cost $ 7 million ( $ 118 million in modern dollars ) , was to connect to the Robert Moses @-@ proposed highway between New York City and Albany . 
 Opposition to this plan was immediate . Yonkers officials publicly disapproved , saying that the county would lose any hope for state aid . In January 1939 , the village of Bronxville joined the opposition , deeming the new parkway as a " needless expenditure of public money " that would adversely affect local property values and cause flooding . At the same time , proposals in the state legislature provided a sum of $ 25 @,@ 000 for the project . County executive William <unk> said that a new parkway should be built , but not so close to the Saw Mill River and Bronx River parkways . He argued instead for the use of New York Central Railroad 's right @-@ of @-@ way , or a parkway on the Hudson River . There were also fears a new parkway would siphon off toll @-@ paying drivers who previously used the Cross County Parkway and its new Fleetwood Viaduct . Nor would it help the county 's largest bottleneck , the Hawthorne Circle . The county 's Board of Supervisors , however , disagreed with the executive . 
 In April 1941 , county officials admitted that it was likely that the $ 7 million appropriated would not be enough , and instead it would be better spent on improving other nearby parkways . The proposed parkway would have needed $ 400 @,@ 000 more for additional right @-@ of @-@ way , and the construction costs would leave no money to repave the Bronx River Parkway , the link to the Cross County Parkway , and to extend the Saw Mill River Parkway . The county would have had to spend $ 8 million of its own money as well . The parkway was instead shortened from Bronxville to Elmsford . 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 In March 1949 , the State Council of Parks , led by Robert Moses , recommended the development of a new state park in the Sprain Valley . This new state park , which would also have a parkway built through it , would intend to take traffic off the congested Bronx River Parkway . This new parkway would be one of the construction projects involved , which included rebuilding the Bronx River and the development of Ridge Road Park . The Moses @-@ led committee also suggested that $ 25 @,@ 000 be appropriated for a study , survey and report on the new parkway and possible expansion of the Ridge Road Park . The city of Yonkers also became involved in the proposal because a 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) section of land needed between NY 100 ( Central Park Avenue ) and Palmer Road was deeded over to the state by Westchester County for the new $ 13 million ( 1949 USD ) parkway . Residents in Yonkers protested that this December 1949 transfer would require the demolition or defacing of $ 1 million worth of homes in the city . 
 In April 1950 , the State Council of Parks met in Ardsley . Bronxville opposed the construction , claiming that there would be property value depreciation . However , there was no cited opposition for the parkway from any communities further north of Bronxville , and that officials from Westchester County were looking into ideas for an alternate route around Bronxville . At the time , the county had most of the right @-@ of @-@ way in Bronxville claimed , short of one piece . The need for the parkway was helped by the fact that widening of the Bronx River Parkway was not applicable due to land limitations and the prohibitory cost of acquiring land for a widening . The parkway , while creating a needed connection between the Saw Mill River Parkway and the Bronx River Parkway , would not answer the need for diverting traffic off the Hawthorne Circle and the issue of what to do with truck traffic . The parkway , if started , would take about three years to complete and would be constructed by the Taconic State Park Commission . 
 = = = " Route A " = = = 
 In February 1951 , Westchester County started getting ready to approve the new parkway plans from the State of New York . The new $ 16 – 18 million ( 1950 USD ) parkway still had a short section still in question , with various groups preferring two different alignments . The State Council of Parks wanted to use the alignment used by the Odell Parkway , which still would require demolition of thirty homes in the Cedar Knolls section of Yonkers , while other groups wanted the parkway to be aligned through Crestwood , which would cost 100 homes . Five different sites were proposed at the meeting with the Westchester County Board of Supervisors on February 15 . However , an agreement could not be reached by the committee and it was delayed to the next week . On February 19 , the county board gave approval to the state plans , at a vote of 32 to 9 . The letters of discontent amounted to fifty @-@ nine letters or telegrams . Chairman Jefferson Armstrong spoke that the new parkway would lead to the " planning for the destruction of Westchester . " He stated that the county was giving away $ 8 million in taxpayer funds to the state with a debt of $ 2 @.@ 3 million after collecting tolls on the Saw Mill River and Hutchinson River parkways . Residents of the town of Greenburgh protested the county 's decision to give the undeveloped Rochambeau Park for development into a state park . 
 In July 1951 , the county of Westchester approved " Route A " , one of the proposed alignments for the Sprain Brook through the city of Yonkers . Costing $ 10 @.@ 512 million ( 1951 USD ) , the route was approved by the state and the fact that the county still owned the right @-@ of @-@ way would determine whether the county would give it to the state . This 4 @.@ 98 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 01 km ) section of parkway as part of Route A began at the Bronx River Parkway , extending to a point just north of Jackson Avenue . A hearing was held on June 18 that mentioned that only " Route F @-@ 1 " , which would cost $ 14 @.@ 579 million , and was longer would be the only other acceptable proposal . People living along the " Route A " track preferred " Route F @-@ 1 " , which would take fifty @-@ four homes , over the thirty from the accepted proposal . 
 During the meeting of the Westchester County Board of Supervisors on August 6 , two officials from Yonkers attempted to filibuster the meeting to avoid the transfer of the Sprain Brook right @-@ of @-@ way , along with the " Route A " proposal , to the state . This filibuster failed , as the board voted 39 to 2 to transfer the right @-@ of @-@ way . The Taconic State Parkway Commission , Westchester County Park Commission , and the Westchester County Planning Commission all endorsed " Route A " over " Route F @-@ 1 " . However , the Ridge Road picnic area in Greenburgh was not given to the state . Remaining opposition stated that the route would cut $ 517 @,@ 000 from tax revenue , and damage now $ 3 million worth of homes in the " Route A " section , which included the house of Jefferson Armstrong . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 In December 1953 , the county executive for Westchester County , Herbert Gerlach , proposed that the now $ 22 million ( 1953 USD ) parkway should be constructed with tolls to help pay for the new roadway . At this time , the southern 2 @.@ 6 miles ( 4 @.@ 2 km ) of the Bronx River Parkway was being reconstructed for use in the new Sprain Brook Parkway , with funds received before the Korean War . Jefferson Armstrong declared the new plan as a scheme by Robert Moses to " spend beyond his pocketbook " and that Gerlach was " intolerant " for proposing this just before the start of the holiday season . At the same time , the proposal was made that the county could gain funds by re @-@ appropriating usage of Westchester County Airport , which would cost the county $ 11 million a year , but would only gain the county $ 26 @,@ 000 in revenue . 
 On September 30 , 1958 , the State Department of Public Works notified Westchester County that it would begin construction of the Sprain Brook Parkway . Bids on the new parkway through Yonkers , with 2 @.@ 27 miles ( 3 @.@ 65 km ) of six @-@ lane divided parkway plus 4 @.@ 69 miles ( 7 @.@ 55 km ) of access roads to the new roadway , would be opened on October 30 , estimating the cost at $ 11 @.@ 116 million . Slated to open in August 1961 , this first leg of the Sprain Brook Parkway would connect from the Bronx River Parkway near Bronxville to 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) north of Tuckahoe Road in North Yonkers . At that point in North Yonkers , it would meet with a connector to the New York State Thruway , which could open doors to getting tolls on the new roadway . <unk> would be constructed at Midland Avenue , DeWitt Avenue , Central Park Avenue , Tuckahoe Road , Palmer Road , Kimball Avenue and the Bronx River Parkway , along with overpasses over the Sprain Brook , Sunny Brook and Grassy Sprain Brook . 
 The section of the Sprain Brook Parkway between Tuckahoe Road and Jackson Avenue in the town of Greenburgh was slated to cost $ 4 @.@ 103 million ( 1961 USD ) , a stretch of 2 @.@ 6 miles ( 4 @.@ 2 km ) with 3 @.@ 45 miles ( 5 @.@ 55 km ) of access roads . This new portion would have six lanes , with three on each side of the Grassy Sprain Reservoir , which would split the parkway in each direction . Bids were expected to be opened on November 16 , 1961 for the extension of the new parkway , maintained by the East Hudson Parkway Authority . The new stretch of parkway was constructed throughout 1962 and 1963 , with the East Hudson Parkway Authority announcing the opening of the extension on December 23 , 1963 at a cost of $ 3 @.@ 6 million ( 1963 USD ) . The new interchange with Jackson Avenue would also serve Sprain Ridge Park , which was also being opened at the same time as the new parkway . 
 The 5 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 4 km ) long section of the Sprain Brook Parkway was opened on November 27 , 1969 from Jackson Avenue in Greenburgh to the Cross Westchester Expressway in Elmsford . This new section of Sprain Brook Parkway cost $ 15 @.@ 4 million , extending the parkway to a length of 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the Bronx to Elmsford . Then @-@ Governor of New York Nelson Rockefeller also noted that the extension of the parkway north from the Cross Westchester to the Hawthorne Traffic Circle was still in final design and would begin construction in 1971 with completion of a new interchange in Hawthorne . 
 = = = Completion = = = 
 The delay of the final 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) long portion of the Sprain Brook from the Cross Westchester Expressway and the Taconic State Parkway near Hawthorne Circle spent multiple years without progress until demands were placed upon Governor Hugh Carey to get state funds attached to the project . The project had been delayed multiple times and local lobbying interests including Union Carbide threatened to back out of opening corporate locations in the area of the new extension , which in 1976 was slated to cost $ 20 million ( 1976 USD ) . The East Hudson Parkway Authority ( <unk> ) originally proposed raising the tolls on the Saw Mill River and Hutchinson River parkways and building new tolls on the Hutchinson , along with the Bronx River and Taconic parkways . However , NYSDOT reported during a meeting in Albany that contracts on the new extension would be given in 1978 . However , the <unk> also wanted more monetary funds for the maintenance of the parkway system in Westchester and wanted to raise the tolls to help pay for that cost . 
 Along the state funding from Albany , the rest of the money for the Sprain Brook extension was to be paid for through federal funds . The new parkway extension , which had a slated completion in December 1980 , was bid on in 1978 and won by Yonkers Contracting Company for a total of $ 22 @.@ 8 million ( 1978 USD ) . Various materials in the extension included 100 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 2 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of gravel , 37 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of concrete , 24 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 650 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of asphalt and 1 @,@ 900 pounds ( 860 kg ) of steel . While the project started under the eyes of NYSDOT and <unk> , when the new parkway was complete , the East Hudson Parkway Authority had been disestablished in 1979 and control of the Sprain Brook had been turned back to NYSDOT . 
 The new parkway would lower traffic on NY 9A through Elmsford while also connecting to the Westchester County Medical Center , a local jail , and Westchester Community College . Economic improvements of the parkway extension would include nearly 6 @,@ 000 new jobs and over $ 2 million ( 1978 USD ) in tax rebates . The fourth and final section of the Sprain Brook Parkway was opened on October 28 , 1980 at the cost of $ 25 million ( 1980 USD ) . The last section , deemed a 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) long missing link , finished the parkway to its full length between the Bronx River Parkway and the traffic circle in Hawthorne . This new piece of the parkway was built with 70 % of the required funds provided by the federal government , and was designed to redistribute traffic along different parkways , with NYSDOT estimating about 44 @,@ 000 cars daily using the completed roadway . 
 The effects of the completion of the parkway were nearly immediate . Traffic on the Saw Mill River Parkway lessened with the new parkway , along with a 20 % reduction on the Taconic State Parkway . However , while the route south of the Sprain Brook was seeing less traffic , the portion north of Hawthorne to Campfire Road , a 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) section , was seeing much more traffic with the new parkway . Proposals for solving this problem included a $ 50 million ( 1982 USD ) proposal to widen the Taconic State Parkway to six lanes . NY 9A south of Hawthorne also saw a considerable reduction in traffic and an improvement in the corridor north of NY 100C , becoming more of a commercial center . New industrial parks and office parks were being constructed within a couple years of completion of the new parkway along NY 9A . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Westchester County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Ladislaus IV of Hungary = 
 Ladislaus the Cuman ( Hungarian : IV . ( Kun ) László , Croatian : Ladislav IV . <unk> , Slovak : Ladislav IV . <unk> ; 5 August 1262 – 10 July 1290 ) , also known as Ladislas the Cuman , was King of Hungary and Croatia from 1272 to 1290 . His mother , Elizabeth , was the daughter of a chieftain from the pagan Cumans who had settled in Hungary . At the age of seven , he married Elisabeth ( or Isabella ) , a daughter of King Charles I of Sicily . Ladislaus was only ten when a rebellious lord , Joachim Gutkeled , kidnapped and imprisoned him . 
 Ladislaus was still a prisoner when his father , Stephen V , died on 6 August 1272 . During his minority , many groupings of barons — primarily the Abas , Kőszegis , and <unk> — fought against each other for supreme power . Ladislaus was declared to be of age at an assembly of the prelates , barons , noblemen , and Cumans in 1277 . He allied himself with Rudolf I of Germany against Ottokar II of Bohemia . His forces had a preeminent role in Rudolf 's victory over Ottokar in the Battle on the Marchfeld on 26 August 1278 . 
 However , Ladislaus could not restore royal power in Hungary . A papal legate , Philip , Bishop of Fermo , came to Hungary to help Ladislaus to consolidate his authority , but the prelate was shocked at the presence of thousands of pagan Cumans in Hungary . Ladislaus promised that he would force them to adopt a Christian lifestyle , but they refused to obey the legate 's demands . Ladislaus decided to support the Cumans , for which Philip of Fermo excommunicated him . The Cumans imprisoned the legate , and the legate 's partisans captured Ladislaus . In early 1280 , Ladislaus agreed to persuade the Cumans to submit to the legate , but many Cumans preferred to leave Hungary . 
 Ladislaus vanquished a Cuman army that invaded Hungary in 1282 . Hungary also survived a Mongol invasion in 1285 . Ladislaus had , by that time , become so unpopular that many of his subjects accused him of inciting the Mongols to invade Hungary . After he imprisoned his wife in 1286 , he lived with his Cuman mistresses . During the last years of his life , he wandered throughout the country with his Cuman allies , but he was unable to control the most powerful lords and bishops any more . Pope Nicholas IV planned to declare a crusade against him , but three Cuman assassins murdered Ladislaus . 
 = = Childhood ( 1262 – 1272 ) = = 
 Ladislaus was the elder son of Stephen V , son of Béla IV of Hungary , and Stephen 's wife , Elizabeth the Cuman . Elizabeth was the daughter of a chieftain of the Cumans who had settled in Hungary . She was born as a pagan and was only baptized before her marriage to Stephen . Ladislaus was born under the sign of Mars in 1262 , according to Simon of Kéza , who was his chaplain in the 1270s . 
 Conflicts between Ladislaus 's father and grandfather developed into a civil war in 1264 . Béla IV 's troops , which were under the command of Ladislaus 's aunt , Anna , captured the castle of Sárospatak , where Ladislaus and his mother were staying , and imprisoned them . Ladislaus was initially kept in the <unk> Castle , but two months later , he was sent to the court of Boleslaw the Chaste , Duke of Cracow , who was Béla IV 's son @-@ in @-@ law . After his grandfather and father made peace in March 1265 , Ladislaus was set free and returned to his father . 
 Ladislaus 's father made an alliance with Charles I , King of Sicily , in September 1269 . According to the treaty , Charles I 's daughter , Elizabeth , who was about four years old at that time , was engaged to the seven @-@ year @-@ old Ladislaus . The children 's marriage took place in 1270 . 
 Béla IV died on 3 May 1270 and Ladislaus 's father was crowned king two weeks later ; the new monarch , however , could not stabilize his rule . Béla IV 's closest advisors — Duchess Anna , and Béla IV 's former palatine , Henry Kőszegi — left Hungary and sought assistance from Anna 's son @-@ in @-@ law , King Ottokar II of Bohemia . The newly appointed Ban of Slavonia , Joachim Gutkeled , also turned against Stephen V and kidnapped Ladislaus in the summer of 1272 . Gutkeled held Ladislaus in captivity in the fortress of Koprivnica in Slavonia . Historian Pál Engel suggests that Joachim Gutkeled planned to force Stephen V to divide Hungary with Ladislaus . Stephen V besieged Koprivnica , but could not take it . Stephen fell seriously ill and died on 6 August . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Minority ( 1272 – 1277 ) = = = 
 Joachim Gutkeled departed for Székesfehérvár as soon as he was informed of Stephen V 's death , because he wanted to arrange the boy – king 's coronation . Ladislaus 's mother joined him , infuriating Stephen V 's partisans who accused her of having conspired against her husband . Stephen V 's master of the treasury , <unk> <unk> , laid siege to her palace in Székesfehérvár , but Gutkeled 's supporters routed him . <unk> fled to Pressburg ( now Bratislava , Slovakia ) ; he captured the town and ceded it to Ottokar II of Bohemia . 
 Archbishop Philip of Esztergom crowned Ladislaus king in Székesfehérvár on about 3 September . In theory , the ten @-@ year @-@ old Ladislaus ruled under his mother 's regency , but in fact , baronial parties administered the kingdom . In November of that year , Henry Kőszegi returned from Bohemia and assassinated Ladislaus 's cousin , Béla of Macsó . Duke Béla 's extensive domains , which were located along the southern borders , were divided among Henry Kőszegi and his supporters . In retaliation for Hungarian incursions into Austria and Moravia , Austrian and Moravian troops invaded the borderlands of Hungary in April 1273 . They captured Győr and <unk> , plundering the western counties . Joachim Gutkeled recaptured the two forts two months later , but Ottokar II of Bohemia invaded Hungary and seized many fortresses , including Győr and Sopron in the autumn . 
 Peter Csák and his allies removed Joachim Gutkeled and Henry Kőszegi from power , but Gutkeled and Kőszegi seized Ladislaus and his mother in June 1274 . Although Peter Csák liberated the king and his mother , Gutkeled and Kőszegi captured Ladislaus 's younger brother , Andrew , and took him to Slavonia . They demanded Slavonia in Duke Andrew 's name , but Peter Csák defeated their united forces near <unk> at the end of September . Kőszegi was killed in the battle . Peter Csák then launched a campaign against Kőszegi 's son and Ladislaus accompanied him . At the end of 1274 , Rudolf I , the new King of Germany , and Ladislaus concluded an alliance against Ottokar II of Bohemia . 
 Ladislaus contracted an unidentified serious illness , but recovered from it . He attributed this recovery to a miracle by his deceased saintly aunt , Margaret , and approached the Holy See to promote her canonization in 1275 . In the same year , a new civil war broke out between Joachim Gutkeled and Peter Csák . Ladislaus took part in Csák 's military expedition against the Kőszegis , who were Gutkeled 's supporters . However , Gutkeled and his supporters removed their opponents from power at an assembly of the barons and noblemen at Buda around 21 June 1276 . 
 Taking advantage of the war between Rudolf I and Ottokar II , Ladislaus made an incursion into Austria in the autumn . Sopron soon accepted Ladislaus 's suzerainty and Ottokar II promised to renounce of all towns he occupied in western Hungary . However , new armed conflicts began in Hungary during 1277 : the Transylvanian Saxons captured and destroyed Gyulafehérvár ( now Alba Iulia in Romania ) , the see of the Bishop of Transylvania , and the Babonići rose up in rebellion in Slavonia . 
 = = = First years of majority ( 1277 – 1278 ) = = = 
 Joachim Gutkeled died while battling against the Babonići in April 1277 . A month later , an assembly of the prelates , barons , noblemen , and Cumans declared Ladislaus to be of age . The Estates of the realm also authorized the fifteen @-@ year @-@ old monarch to restore internal peace with all possible means . Ladislaus then invaded the Kőszegis 's domains in Transdanubia , but could not defeat them . He met Rudolf I of Germany in Hainburg an der Donau on 11 November to confirm their alliance against Ottokar II of Bohemia . 
 After the royal army captured the rebellious Nicholas <unk> 's fortress at Adorján ( now Adrian in Romania ) , Ladislaus held a " general assembly " for seven counties along the River Tisza in early summer of 1278 . The assembly condemned two rebellious local noblemen to death . In Transdanubia , Ivan Kőszegi attempted to play off Ladislaus 's father 's first cousin , Andrew the Venetian , against Ladislaus . Andrew demanded Slavonia for himself , but returned to Venice without success . 
 Ladislaus joined forces with Rudolf I of Germany to launch a campaign against Ottokar II . Ladislaus 's troops played a decisive role in Rudolf 's victory in the Battle on the Marchfeld on 26 August . Ottokar was killed in the battlefield . After the battle , King Rudolf I gave Ladislaus " his thanks , declaring that through his help all Austria and Styria had been restored to him " , according to Ladislaus 's chronicler , Simon of Kéza . 
 = = = The Cuman question ( 1278 – 1285 ) = = = 
 Pope Nicholas III sent Philip , Bishop of Fermo , to Hungary to help Ladislaus restore royal power on 22 September 1278 . The papal legate arrived in Hungary in early 1279 . With the legate 's mediation , Ladislaus concluded a peace treaty with the Kőszegis . Bishop Philip soon realized , however , that most Cumans were still pagans in Hungary . He extracted a ceremonious promise from the Cuman chieftains of giving up their pagan customs , and persuaded the young King Ladislaus to swear an oath to enforce the keeping of the Cuman <unk> ' promise . An assembly held at Tétény passed laws which , in accordance with the legate 's demand , prescribed that the Cumans should leave their tents and live " in houses attached to the ground " . The Cumans did not obey the laws , however , and Ladislaus , himself a half @-@ Cuman , failed to force them . In retaliation , Bishop Philip excommunicated him and placed Hungary under interdict in October . Ladislaus joined the Cumans and appealed to the Holy See , but the Pope refused to absolve him . 
 On Ladislaus 's demand , the Cumans seized and imprisoned Philip of Fermo in early January 1280 . However , <unk> Aba , Voivode of Transylvania captured Ladislaus and handed him over to Roland Borsa . In less than two months , both the legate and the king were set free and Ladislaus took a new oath to enforce the Cuman laws . However , many Cumans decided to leave Hungary instead of obeying the legate 's demands . Ladislaus followed the moving Cumans as far as <unk> ( now Stari <unk> in Serbia ) , but could not hinder them from crossing the frontier . 
 Ladislaus launched a campaign against <unk> Aba and seized his castles in the summer of 1281 . According to the Austrian Rhymed Chronicle , Bishop Philip of Fermo left Hungary around the same time , stating that he would never come back , " not for the sake of the Holy Father " . A Cuman army invaded the southern parts of Hungary in 1282 . The Illuminated Chronicle writes that Ladislaus , " like the brave Joshua , went out against " the Cumans " to fight for his people and his realm . " He vanquished the invaders 's army at Lake <unk> , near <unk> . 
 At the end of 1282 , Ladislaus laid siege to Borostyánkő ( now Bernstein im Burgenland in Austria ) , which was held by the Kőszegis . The Kőszegis resisted , forcing the king to lift the siege in early 1283 . Ladislaus even reconciled with Ivan Kőszegi and appointed him palatine before 6 July . Ladislaus abandoned his wife , Isabella , and settled among the Cumans by the end of the year . 
 = = = Last years ( 1285 – 1290 ) = = = 
 The Mongols of the Golden Horde invaded Hungary under the command of Khans <unk> and Nogai in January 1285 . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , they " spread a terrible devastation of fire throughout the whole country " to the east of the Danube . Local forces resisted the invaders at many places , including , for example , at <unk> . The invasion lasted for two months before the Mongols withdrew . 
 Ladislaus 's favoritism towards the Cumans made him so unpopular that many of his subjects accused him of inciting the Mongols to invade Hungary . In fact , Ladislaus employed Mongol prisoners of war , known as <unk> , when he subjugated a rebellion in the Szepesség in September 1285 . The king preferred the Cumans ' way of life , including their costumes and hairstyle , and took Cuman girls as his mistresses . According to Lodomer , Archbishop of Esztergom , Ladislaus copulated with his favorite concubine , <unk> — whom the Archbishop described as a " poisonous viper " — in public . 
 In September 1286 , Ladislaus imprisoned his wife and granted all her revenues to his mistress . Archbishop Lodomer liberated Queen Isabella the following September . The Archbishop summoned the prelates , the barons , and the noblemen to an assembly in Buda and excommunicated Ladislaus . In response , the infuriated king stated that " beginning with the Archbishop of Esztergom and his suffragans , I shall exterminate the whole lot right up to Rome with the aid of Tartar swords " , according to Archbishop Lodomer . 
 The barons captured Ladislaus in the Szepesség in January 1288 . Although his partisans soon liberated him , he acquiesced in concluding an agreement with Archbishop Lodomer . The Archbishop absolved Ladislaus on condition that the king would live in accordance with Christian morals . However , Ladislaus broke his promise . He abducted his sister , Elizabeth , Prioress of the Dominican Monastery of the Blessed Virgin on Rabbits ' Island and gave her in marriage to a Czech aristocrat , <unk> of Falkenstein . According to Archbishop Lodomer , Ladislaus even stated , " If I had fifteen or more sisters in as many cloistered communities as you like , I would snatch them from there to marry them off <unk> or illicitly ; in order to procure through them a kin @-@ group who will support me by all their power in the fulfillment of my will " . 
 Ladislaus spent the last years of his life wandering from place to place . Hungary 's central government lost power , since the prelates and the barons ruled the kingdom independently of the monarch . For example , Ivan Kőszegi and his brothers waged wars against Albert I , Duke of Austria , but Ladislaus did not intervene , although the Austrians captured at least 30 fortresses along the western borders . 
 The Kőszegis offered the crown to Andrew the Venetian , who arrived in Hungary in early 1290 . One of their opponents captured the pretender , however , and surrendered him to Duke Albert . Ladislaus appointed <unk> , who had recently converted from Islam to Christianity , palatine . Pope Nicholas IV was even planning to proclaim a crusade against Ladislaus . However , Ladislaus , who had always been partial towards his Cuman subjects , was assassinated by three Cumans , named <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , at the castle of <unk> ( now <unk> in Romania ) on 10 July 1290 . <unk> and the Cuman Nicholas , who was the brother of Ladislaus 's Cuman lover , took vengeance for Ladislaus 's death , slaughtering the murderers . 
 Upon Pope Nicholas IV 's orders , an enquiry was carried out to find out " whether the king died as a Catholic Christian " . The results of the investigation are unknown , but the Chronicon <unk> writes that Ladislaus was buried in the cathedral of Csanád ( now Cenad in Romania ) . His successor , Andrew the Venetian , and Pope Benedict VIII recalled Ladislaus as " of renowned memory " . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Day of Defeat : Source = 
 Day of Defeat : Source is a team @-@ based online first @-@ person shooter multiplayer video game developed by Valve Corporation . Set in World War II , the game is a complete remake of Day of Defeat it was updated from the GoldSrc engine used by its predecessor to the Source engine , and a remake of the game models . The game was released for Microsoft Windows on September 26 , 2005 , distributed through Valve 's online content delivery service Steam . Retail distribution of the game was handled by Electronic Arts . 
 The game was officially announced in February 2005 . During the course of its development , Day of Defeat : Source progressed from being a straight conversion of Day of Defeat , to the alteration of certain aspects of the game 's design and introduction of several new features . In addition , Day of Defeat : Source has been used by Valve to present new design features on the Source engine , such as high dynamic range rendering and cinematic effects . The game itself revolves around two teams , the US Army and the German Wehrmacht , each with access to six player classes , fighting in a variety of scenarios inspired by World War II engagements in the European Theatre of 1944 . 
 Upon release , the game received a generally favorable reception , praised for its atmospheric and strategic gameplay and its graphics , audio work and overall presentation . However , the game was criticized for the lack of content in it at the time of release , although subsequent updates to the game have added new game modes and levels . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Day of Defeat : Source is set in World War II , specifically the European Theatre in the year 1944 . Players choose to join the forces of either the United States Army or the German Wehrmacht and compete against each other in a variety of game modes . Players select from one of six classes to play as , each with its own role within the team . Player characters cannot take much damage , and in some circumstances can be killed by a single bullet , forcing players to make use of cover to stay alive . When a player character dies , that player starts a short countdown for reinforcements . When the timer runs out , the player and any friendly players killed in that time respawn into the game at their insertion point as the next wave of troops . All weapons in the game have realistic limits to their use : machine guns must be deployed to maintain accurate fire or to be reloaded , rocket launchers must be shouldered to be aimed and fired , sniper rifles are most accurate when used with the scope and grenades not " cooked off " before release may be easily fled or even thrown back by the opposition . 
 The game was initially released with four maps , although later updates have introduced five new official levels and eight community produced maps supported by Valve . The game 's levels are based after real battles in the Allied campaigns in Italy , Sicily and France , such as the Falaise pocket or the beach landings of Operation Shingle at Anzio , as well as entirely fictional battles . Combat can take place in several environments , such as city streets , buildings and sewers . Each online game can sustain a maximum of 32 players . 
 Day of Defeat : Source , like other titles developed by Valve , tracks detailed statistics for individual players . They include the time spent playing as each class , accuracy and performance for each weapon used , flag captures , and various other details . Day of Defeat : Source also features numerous " achievements " for carrying out certain tasks , such as scoring a certain number of kills with a particular weapon or completing a round within a certain time . Many of the achievements are class @-@ specific , providing incentive for a player to improve his or her abilities with each class evenly . Achievements unlocked and statistics from previously played games are displayed on the player 's Steam profile page . 
 = = = Game modes = = = 
 There are two main game modes in Day of Defeat : Source : territorial control and detonation . In territorial control maps , players must fight for control of all strategic points on the map . The strategic points take various forms , such as a destroyed tank in a street or fields and buildings , and are designated by a flag in its vicinity , which displays the army colors of the team who controls the point . Points are captured by a certain number of team members surrounding the point , with it either capturing instantly or after a couple of seconds . Players on the other side can disrupt a capture by placing themselves within the capture area during the process or by killing the enemy players at the point . The first side to hold all the points simultaneously wins the round . 
 The objective in a detonation level is to plant and detonate explosive devices on a number of enemy positions , which can consist of AA guns , tanks and armored cars . Some positions must be hit twice for them to be completely destroyed . Players can protect their positions by defusing the explosives before they detonate . In one variation of this game mode , one side has to defend their positions for a set amount of time , with the destruction of each piece of equipment giving the enemy team more time . The defenders win if they can hold their positions long enough for the time to run out , while the attackers win when all objectives have been destroyed . In the alternate version , both teams must attack the other 's objectives while defending their own . The first team to destroy all of the enemy 's equipment wins . 
 = = = Classes = = = 
 Both factions in Day of Defeat : Source have access to six classes . Each class is designed with specific combat circumstances in mind , so that teams must use teamwork to succeed . The weapons and equipment carried by the classes are based on the weapons used by both the US Army and Wehrmacht during World War II . Some of classes are armed with pistols — the American M1911 or the German Walther P38 — while others are equipped with trench knives or entrenching tools for melee combat . Grenades are carried by a number of classes , depending on their role in the game — riflemen are equipped with rifle grenades , the assault classes are armed with a single fragmentation grenade and a smoke grenade for providing concealment , while support classes have access to two standard fragmentation grenades . Riflemen are armed with their respective army 's standard infantry rifle , and are designed for medium to long range combat , while the assault classes carry submachine guns which are only effective in close quarters . The support classes are designed for medium range combat , equipped with either the M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle or the <unk> . Snipers are used for attacking enemy targets from long range , and are consequently armed with their army 's standard bolt @-@ action sniper rifle . Machine gunners carry machine guns to defend key locations on a level or to provide a base of fire for their team 's advance . Machine gunners are required to deploy their weapons on <unk> before firing in order to compensate for the machine gun 's extreme recoil . The final class is armed with an anti @-@ armor weapon , used in the game to displace enemy machine gun or sniper positions . This class is armed with either an M1 carbine or Mauser <unk> to defend themselves with when moving . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Day of Defeat : Source was first announced for Microsoft Windows during the development of Half @-@ Life 2 , the flagship game of the Source engine , as one of several of the Valve Corporation 's GoldSrc powered games to be remade on the new game engine . In the aftermath of the release of Half @-@ Life 2 and Counter @-@ Strike : Source , very little information was released regarding the development of Day of Defeat : Source until 2005 . In February 2005 , Valve officially announced Day of Defeat : Source , stating that the game was nearing its beta development phase and would be available later in the first quarter of the year . The game was opened to an internal beta test soon after , which certain members of the Day of Defeat community were invited to join . The beta version of the game was shown as a straight conversion of the most recent version of Day of Defeat , at the time even including the same player and weapon models as the game 's GoldSrc counterpart . Due to the response of the beta testers , significant changes were made to the gameplay , taking it away from being a straight conversion : the behaviour of weapons was altered and several classes from Day of Defeat were dropped entirely . Later media releases showed the revamped version of the game , including its new player and weapon models , as well as new additions to the game , such as rifle grenades and smoke grenades . On September 2 , 2005 , Valve announced that they were " confident " that the game would be released that month , and seven days later announced an official release date of September 26 , 2005 . The game was made available for <unk> via Valve 's Steam content delivery system on September 14 , 2005 , and was officially released on time on September 26 . 
 Since its release , Day of Defeat : Source has undergone several updates . These updates have consisted of gameplay tweaks , new maps and graphical effects . The first new level was released on November 30 , 2005 , and was followed on January 25 , 2005 by another new map , used as a demonstration for the Source engine 's abilities in rendering snow and ice . A major update was announced on June 22 , 2006 , adding the detonation game mode , various gameplay tweaks and two further maps to accommodate the new game mode . The update was released on June 28 , 2006 . On April 26 , 2007 , a group of maps produced by the game 's community , entitled the Community Assembled Map Pack ( <unk> ) , was released . Consisting of three maps , the pack was created with the assistance and support of Valve . This was followed by <unk> on July 26 , 2007 , a pack which consisted of a further five maps . On May 23 , 2008 , Valve announced another major update to Day of Defeat : Source , this time giving the game support for the company 's new Steamworks programmer . The update is open to any owners of Day of Defeat : Source . Along with various gameplay tweaks , the update moves the game to the Source engine version used with The Orange Box , allowing the game to utilize particle effects , as well as adding a new official map based on a long @-@ standing custom map for Day of Defeat and 54 achievement awards for players completing certain tasks . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 Day of Defeat : Source has been used by Valve as a platform for demonstrating several technologies in the Source engine . Day of Defeat : Source introduced a dynamic audio system that was limited to non @-@ player characters in Half @-@ Life 2 . The sound of each weapon firing in @-@ game is attributed with distance and occlusion variables , which are processed and then fed back to the player . Sounds far from the player lack higher frequencies and thus sound more like they naturally would , allowing for the actions of other players on a map to make up the ambient sounds for the level . The game was the first to incorporate Valve 's high dynamic range rendering , predating the official demonstration , Half @-@ Life 2 : Lost Coast . Other effects were added post @-@ release to make the game appear as if it were a World War II era film . The effects include motion blur , depth of field , film grain and color correction . Phong shading on the Source engine was added to Day of Defeat : Source with the major update in the second quarter of 2006 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 To promote the game , Valve has produced three machinima trailers depicting the game in play . The trailers are themed around wartime propaganda news reports for both Germany and the United States . To convey this effect , the trailers make extensive usage of the Source engine 's capabilities for film grain , color correction , motion blur and depth of field , as well as sepia toning . The first trailer was released as part of the game 's post @-@ release marketing on December 20 , 2005 . Entitled Prelude to Victory , the trailer depicted a large firefight in the game as a report from the German perspective , complete with a commentator speaking in the German language . Two further trailers were released to promote the major update to Day of Defeat : Source in the second quarter of 2006 . The trailers , both from the American viewpoint , displayed how the new detonation gameplay worked , emphasising teamwork as the key to success , as well as introducing the viewer to the two new maps added by the update . To further create interest in the game , Valve has opened Day of Defeat : Source to three free weekends , the first taking place on February 10 , 2006 , the second on July 8 , 2006 and the third on July 4 , 2008 , where anyone with a Steam account could download and play the game for a maximum of 48 hours free of charge . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Day of Defeat : Source was given a positive reception upon release , receiving ratings of 80 / 100 and 81 @.@ 25 % from the review aggregation sites Metacritic and GameRankings . The game 's graphics received near universal praise , with GameSpot stating that " presentation is Day of Defeat : Source 's most obvious strength " , and PC Zone citing this for creating a " tense and atmospheric " game . The ragdoll physics in the game noted by reviewers as being " amusing " , and the game 's audio work was also praised . The core gameplay , described as " lightning war meets capture the flag " by 1UP.com , was equally praised by reviewers , many appreciating the interdependence of the classes and strategic gameplay . Several reviews closed remarking that the game 's content was of a very high quality . 
 Criticism of the game principally revolved around the lack of content . While praise was bestowed upon the quality of the content already available , a number of reviewers were concerned about the small number of maps included in the initial release , even though new content was promised by Valve for later . IGN commented that the existing content had a good chance of going " stale " , while GameSpy stated that the game 's " lack of breadth " was a " serious shortcoming " . In addition , PC Zone commented that " by still clinging to the small @-@ scale skirmish atmosphere of the original , Day of Defeat : Source doesn 't make much of departure from Counter @-@ Strike " , stating that this made the game seem like a " facelift " to a " much @-@ loved mod [ ... ] before making us pay for it again " . PC Zone summed its review up by commenting that " this is an old game — an excellent old game and a beautiful old game — but an old game nonetheless " . 
 = Heterodontosauridae = 
 Heterodontosauridae is a family of early ornithischian dinosaurs that were likely among the most basal ( primitive ) members of the group . Although their fossils are relatively rare and their group small in numbers , they lived across all continents except Australia and Antarctica for approximately 100 million years , from the Late Triassic to the Early Cretaceous . 
 Heterodontosaurids were fox @-@ sized dinosaurs less than 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 feet ) in length , including a long tail . They are known mainly for their characteristic teeth , including enlarged canine @-@ like tusks and cheek teeth adapted for chewing , analogous to those of Cretaceous hadrosaurids . Their diet was herbivorous or possibly omnivorous . 
 = = Description = = 
 Among heterodontosaurids , only Heterodontosaurus itself is known from a complete skeleton . Fragmentary skeletal remains of Abrictosaurus are known but have not been fully described , while most other heterodontosaurids are known only from jaw fragments and teeth . Consequently , most heterodontosaurid synapomorphies ( defining features ) have been described from the teeth and jaw bones . Heterodontosaurus measured just over 1 meter ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in length , while the fragmentary remains of Lycorhinus may indicate a larger individual . 
 = = = Skull and teeth = = = 
 Both Abrictosaurus and Heterodontosaurus had very large eyes . Underneath the eyes , the jugal bone projected sideways , a feature also present in ceratopsians . As in the jaws of most ornithischians , the anterior edge of the premaxilla ( a bone at the tip of the upper jaw ) was toothless and probably supported a keratinous beak ( rhamphotheca ) , although heterodontosaurids did have teeth in the posterior section of the premaxilla . A large gap , called a diastema , separated these premaxillary teeth from the those of the maxilla ( the main upper jaw bone ) in many ornithischians , but this diastema was characteristically arched in heterodontosaurids . The mandible ( lower jaw ) was tipped by the predentary , a bone unique to ornithischians . This bone also supported a beak similar to the one found on the premaxilla . All the teeth in the lower jaw were found on the dentary bone . 
 Heterodontosaurids are named for their strongly heterodont dentition . There were three premaxillary teeth . In the Early Jurassic Abrictosaurus , Heterodontosaurus , and Lycorhinus , the first two premaxillary teeth were small and conical , while the much larger third tooth resembled the canines of carnivoran mammals and is often called the caniniform or ' tusk ' . A lower caniniform , larger than the upper , took the first position in the dentary and was accommodated by the arched diastema of the upper jaw when the mouth was closed . These caniniforms were serrated on both the anterior and posterior edges in Heterodontosaurus and Lycorhinus , while those of Abrictosaurus bore serrations only on the anterior edge . In the Early Cretaceous Echinodon , there may have been two upper caniniforms , which were on the maxilla rather than the premaxilla , and Fruitadens from the Late Jurassic may have had two lower caniniforms on each dentary . 
 Like the characteristic tusks , the cheek teeth of derived heterodontosaurids were also unique among early ornithischians . Small ridges , or denticles , lined the edges of ornithischian cheek teeth in order to crop vegetation . These denticles extend only a third of the way down the tooth crown from the tip in all heterodontosaurids ; in other ornithischians , the denticles extend further down towards the root . Basal forms like Abrictosaurus had cheek teeth in both maxilla and dentary that were generally similar to other ornithischians : widely spaced , each having a low crown and a strongly @-@ developed ridge ( cingulum ) separating the crown from the root . In more derived forms like Lycorhinus and Heterodontosaurus , the teeth were chisel @-@ shaped , with much higher crowns and no cingula , so that there was no difference in width between the crowns and the roots . 
 These derived cheek teeth were overlapping , so that their crowns formed a continuous surface on which food could be chewed . The tooth rows were slightly inset from the side of the mouth , leaving a space outside the teeth that may have been bounded by a muscular cheek , which would have been necessary for chewing . The hadrosaurs and ceratopsians of the Cretaceous Period , as well as many herbivorous mammals , would convergently evolve somewhat analogous dental batteries . As opposed to hadrosaurs , which had thousands of teeth constantly being replaced , tooth replacement in heterodontosaurids occurred far more slowly and several specimens have been found without a single replacement tooth in waiting . Characteristically , heterodontosaurids lacked the small openings ( foramina ) on the inside of the jaw bones which are thought to have aided in tooth development in most other ornithischians . Heterodontosaurids also boasted a unique spheroidal joint between the dentaries and the predentary , allowing the lower jaws to rotate outwards as the mouth was closed , grinding the cheek teeth against each other . Because of the slow replacement rate , this grinding produced extreme tooth wear that commonly obliterated most of the denticles in older teeth , although the increased height of the crowns gave each tooth a long life . 
 = = = Skeleton = = = 
 The postcranial anatomy of Heterodontosaurus tucki has been well @-@ described , although H. tucki is generally considered the most derived of the Early Jurassic heterodontosaurids , so it is impossible to know how many of its features were shared with other species . The forelimbs were long for a dinosaur , over 70 % of the length of the hindlimbs . The well @-@ developed deltopectoral crest ( a ridge for the attachment of chest and shoulder muscles ) of the humerus and prominent olecranon process ( where muscles that extend the forearm were attached ) of the ulna indicate that the forelimb was powerful as well . There were five digits on the manus ( ' hand ' ) . The first was large , tipped with a sharply curved claw , and would rotate inwards when flexed ; Robert Bakker called it the ' twist @-@ thumb ' . The second digit was the longest , slightly longer than the third . Both of these digits bore claws , while the <unk> fourth and fifth digits were very small and simple in comparison . In the hindlimb , the tibia was 30 % longer than the femur , which is generally considered an adaptation for speed . The tibia and fibula of the lower leg were fused to the astragalus and calcaneum of the ankle , forming a ' <unk> ' convergently with modern birds . Also similarly to birds , the lower tarsal ( ankle ) bones and metatarsals were fused to form a ' tarsometatarsus . ' There are four digits in the pes ( hindfoot ) , with only the second , third , and fourth contacting the ground . The tail , unlike many other ornithischians , did not have ossified tendons to maintain a rigid posture and was probably flexible . The fragmentary skeleton known for Abrictosaurus has never been fully described , although the forelimb and manus were smaller than in Heterodontosaurus . Also , the fourth and fifth digits of the forelimb each bear one fewer phalanx bone . 
 = = = Proto @-@ feathers = = = 
 Tianyulong from China appears to preserve filamentous integument which has been interpreted to be a variant of the proto @-@ feathers found in some theropods . These filaments include a crest along its tail . The presence of this filamentous integument has been used to suggest that both ornithischians and saurischians were endothermic . 
 = = Classification = = 
 South African paleontologist Robert Broom created the name Geranosaurus in 1911 for dinosaur jaw bones missing all of the teeth . In 1924 , Lycorhinus was named , and classified as a <unk> , by Sidney Haughton . Heterodontosaurus was named in 1962 and it , Lycorhinus and Geranosaurus were recognized as closely related ornithischian dinosaurs . Alfred Romer named Heterodontosauridae in 1966 as a family of ornithischian dinosaurs including Heterodontosaurus and Lycorhinus . It was defined as a clade in 1998 by Paul Sereno and redefined by him in 2005 as the stem clade consisting of Heterodontosaurus tucki and all species more closely related to Heterodontosaurus than to Parasaurolophus walkeri , Pachycephalosaurus wyomingensis , Triceratops horridus , or Ankylosaurus magniventris . 
 Heterodontosauridae includes the genera Abrictosaurus , Lycorhinus , and Heterodontosaurus , all from South Africa . While Richard Thulborn once reassigned all three to Lycorhinus , all other authors consider the three genera distinct . Within the family , Heterodontosaurus and Lycorhinus are considered sister taxa , with Abrictosaurus as a basal member . Geranosaurus is also a heterodontosaurid , but is usually considered a nomen dubium because the type specimen is missing all its teeth , making it indistinguishable from any other genus in the family . More recently , the genus Echinodon has been considered a heterodontosaurid in several studies . <unk> was named for an upper jaw in 1975 , but more recent discoveries have shown that it belongs to Lycorhinus instead , making <unk> a junior synonym of that genus . <unk> was once considered a heterodontosaurid from Asia , but it has since been shown that the remains were a chimera of prosauropod and <unk> remains . José Bonaparte also classified the South American Pisanosaurus as a heterodontosaurid at one time , but this animal is now known to be a more basal ornithischian . 
 The membership of Heterodontosauridae is well @-@ established in comparison to its uncertain phylogenetic position . Several early studies suggested that heterodontosaurids were very primitive ornithischians . Due to supposed similarities in the morphology of the forelimbs , Robert Bakker proposed a relationship between heterodontosaurids and early sauropodomorphs like <unk> , bridging the orders Saurischia and Ornithischia . The dominant hypothesis over the last several decades has placed heterodontosaurids as basal ornithopods . However , others have suggested that heterodontosaurids instead share a common ancestor with Marginocephalia ( ceratopsians and pachycephalosaurs ) , a hypothesis that has found support in some early 21st century studies . The clade containing heterodontosaurids and marginocephalians has been named <unk> . Heterodontosaurids have also been seen as basal to both ornithopods and marginocephalians . In 2007 , a cladistic analysis suggested that heterodontosaurids are basal to all known ornithischians except Pisanosaurus , a result that echoes some of the very earliest work on the family . Butler et al . ( 2010 ) found the Heterodontosauridae to be the most basal known significant ornithischian radiation . 
 The cladogram below shows the interrelationships within Heterodontosauridae , and follows the analysis by Sereno , 2012 : 
 = = Distribution = = 
 While originally known only from the Early Jurassic of southern Africa , heterodontosaurid remains are now known from four continents . Early in heterodontosaurid history , the supercontinent Pangaea was still largely intact , allowing the family to achieve a near @-@ worldwide distribution . The oldest known remains are a jaw fragment and isolated teeth from the Laguna Colorada Formation of Argentina , which dates back to the Late Triassic . These remains have a derived morphology similar to Heterodontosaurus , including a caniniform with serrations on both anterior and posterior edges , as well as high @-@ crowned maxillary teeth lacking a cingulum . The most diverse heterodontosaurid fauna comes from the Early Jurassic of southern Africa , where fossils of Heterodontosaurus , Abrictosaurus , Lycorhinus , and the dubious Geranosaurus are found . 
 <unk> Early Jurassic heterodontosaurids are also known from the United States and Mexico , respectively . In addition , beginning in the 1970s , a great deal of fossil material was discovered from the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation near Fruita , Colorado in the United States . Described in print in 2009 , this material was placed in the genus Fruitadens . <unk> teeth lacking a cingulum have also been described from Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous formations in Spain and Portugal . The remains of Echinodon were redescribed in 2002 , showing that it may represent a late @-@ surviving heterodontosaurid from the Berriasian stage of the Early Cretaceous in southern England . <unk> from the Early Jurassic of China is no longer considered a heterodontosaurid ; though one late surviving Asian form is known ( Tianyulong ) . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 Most heterodontosaurid fossils are found in geologic formations that represent arid to semi @-@ arid environments , including the Upper Elliot Formation of South Africa and the Purbeck Beds of southern England . It has been suggested that heterodontosaurids underwent seasonal aestivation or hibernation during the driest times of year . Due to the lack of replacement teeth in most heterodontosaurids , it was proposed that the entire set of teeth was replaced during this dormant period , as it seemed that continual and sporadic replacement of teeth would interrupt the function of the tooth row as a single chewing surface . However , this was based on a misunderstanding of heterodontosaurid jaw mechanics . It was thought that heterodontosaurids actually did replace their teeth continually , though more slowly than in other reptiles , but CT scanning of skulls from juvenile and mature Heterodontosaurus shows no replacement teeth . There is currently no evidence that supports the hypothesis of aestivation in heterodontosaurids , but it cannot be rejected , based on the skull scans . 
 While the cheek teeth of heterodontosaurids are clearly adapted for grinding tough plant material , their diet may have been omnivorous . The pointed premaxillary teeth and sharp , curved claws on the forelimbs suggest some degree of predatory behavior . It has been suggested that the long , powerful forelimbs of Heterodontosaurus may have been useful for tearing into insect nests , similarly to modern anteaters . These forelimbs may have also functioned as digging tools , perhaps for roots and tubers . 
 The length of the forelimb compared to the hindlimb suggests that Heterodontosaurus might have been partially quadrupedal , and the prominent olecranon process and <unk> digits of the forelimb are found in many quadrupeds . However , the manus is clearly designed for grasping , not weight support . Many features of the hindlimb , including the long tibia and foot , as well as the fusion of the <unk> and tarsometatarsus , indicate that heterodontosaurids were adapted to run quickly on the hindlegs , so it is unlikely that Heterodontosaurus moved on all four limbs except perhaps when feeding . 
 The short tusks found in all known heterodontosaurids strongly resemble tusks found in modern musk deer , peccaries and pigs . In many of these animals ( as well as the longer @-@ tusked walrus and Asian elephants ) , this is a sexually dimorphic trait , with tusks only found in males . The type specimen of Abrictosaurus lacks tusks and was originally described as a female . While this remains possible , the unfused sacral vertebrae and short face indicate that this specimen represents a juvenile animal , while a second , larger specimen of Abrictosaurus clearly possesses tusks . Therefore , it is possible that tusks are found only in adults , rather than being a secondary sexual characteristic of males . These tusks could have been used for combat or display with members of the same species or with other species . The absence of tusks in juvenile Abrictosaurus could also be another characteristic separating it from other heterodontosaurids as well , as tusks are known in juvenile Heterodontosaurus . Other proposed functions for the tusks include defense and use in an occasionally omnivorous diet . 
 = 75 ( album ) = 
 75 is a live album by Austrian @-@ American jazz musician Joe Zawinul and his band the Zawinul Syndicate . It was recorded in 2007 at two performances in Switzerland and Hungary , among bandleader Joe Zawinul 's final performances . The album was produced by Joachim Becker and originally released in 2008 by JVC Compact Discs , with the Zawinul Estate and Becker serving as executive producers . It was later released by <unk> Productions and Heads Up International , the <unk> release with the alternate title 75th . It peaked at number eighteen on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart and won the 2010 Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Jazz Album . The album received a generally positive critical reception . 
 = = Overview = = 
 With the exception of one track , 75 was recorded during the Zawinul Syndicate 's 7 July 2007 appearance at a festival in Lugano , Switzerland , which happened to be bandleader Joe Zawinul 's seventy @-@ fifth birthday . The concert was a part of the Zawinul Syndicate 's twentieth anniversary world tour . The remaining track , " In a Silent Way " , was recorded from their 2 August 2007 show in Veszprém , Hungary . Zawinul was joined on stage by Wayne Shorter on soprano saxophone for this track . This marked a reunion for Zawinul and Shorter , two original members of Weather Report , both of whom played on the original version of this song from Miles Davis 's 1969 album of the same name . Shortly after these performances , on 11 September 2007 , Zawinul died of Merkel cell carcinoma . The Veszprém concert was Zawinul 's penultimate performance . 
 = = Composition = = 
 75 opens with " Orient Express " from Zawinul 's 1992 solo album My People . Zawinul plays the vocoder on this track . The second track , " Madagascar " , also features Zawinul on vocoder and is one of two tracks that originally appeared on Weather Report 's album Night Passage . Another Weather Report piece , " Scarlet Woman " , follows and features a bass solo by Linley Marthe . " <unk> II " is a duet with Paco Sery on kalimba and Zawinul on synthesizer and vocoder . The first disc concludes with " Cafe Andalusia " . Sabine Kabongo provides scat vocals on this track . 
 A combination of two Weather Report pieces " Fast City " and " Two Lines " opens disc two and features more scat singing by Kabongo . Next , " <unk> " features vocals by Alegre Corrêa . Another melding of Weather Report tunes , " Badia " and " Boogie Woogie Waltz " , follows and features Corrêa on <unk> and Kabongo on vocals . The next track is a recording of <unk> leading the audience in a chorus of " Happy Birthday " directed at Zawinul . " In a Silent Way " , a duet between Shorter and Zawinul originally from Miles Davis 's album of the same name , follows . The album closed with " Hymn " , which seemed to one reviewer " as though [ Zawinul ] knew the end was near " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 75 received a generally positive critical reception . Michael G. <unk> of Allmusic wrote that the album exemplified Zawinul 's " personalized direction " before he died and that it " exudes all of the energy the group produced in concert " . JazzTimes 's Bill Milkowski described Zawinul 's keyboard playing as creating " dazzling , free @-@ flowing lines with the right hand while deftly orchestrating dense chords and <unk> shout choruses with the left hand " . All About Jazz 's Woodrow Wilkins called the album a " musical adventure " and Zawinul 's performance " a testament to his talent and dedication in sharing his gift " . John Kelman , managing editor for All About Jazz , wrote that based on his performance Zawinul gave " no indicators that he was ill , let alone approaching death " . He closed his review by calling 75 a " fitting finale to the career of an artist whose creativity , forward thinking and extensive discography mean that he may be gone , but he 'll never be forgotten . " In the Pittsburgh Tribune @-@ Review , Bob <unk> called the release " a great statement about [ Zawinul 's ] creativity " . He described the album 's opening piece , " Orient Express " as " almost tiring in its energy " . 
 The BBC 's Jon Lusk did not share the high opinions of other critics . He was " not mad about " vocalists Aziz <unk> and Sabine Kabongo but found Alegre Corrêa " agreeable enough " . He liked " In a Silent Way " , calling it " beautifully serene " but wished there were other performances with similar " reflective moments " . The review in The Times by John <unk> was more positive . He noted that it was not a " generally sad affair , hard @-@ to @-@ take document " as are most final recordings of great artists , but instead " a compelling last testament of a mighty group and a fine human being " . Nick Coleman 's review in The Independent was mixed ; he wrote that the " tempos border on the frantic , phrases are spat , the will to trade licks is never less than <unk> " but quipped that for " every sublime passage there 's a butch one " . John Fordham of The Guardian contrasted the release to Zawinul 's 2005 live album Vienna Nights . One difference he emphasized was " the typhoon drumming of Paco Sery and a battalion of percussionists [ that ] gives Zawinul the option of letting long stretches of the music simply groove " . He also noted that there was no comparable track with the duet with Shorter on Vienna Nights . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Performance 
