 Joe Zawinul – keyboards , vocoder 
 Jorge Bezerra – percussion , vocals 
 Alegre Corrêa – berimbau , guitar , vocals 
 Sabine Kabongo – percussion , vocals 
 Linley Marthe – bass 
 Abdelaziz <unk> – percussion , vocals 
 Paco Sery – drums , kalimba , vocals 
 Wayne Shorter – soprano sax on " In a Silent Way " 
 Production 
 Joachim Becker – executive producer , mixing , producer 
 Klaus <unk> – mixing 
 Holger <unk> – portraits 
 Knut <unk> – cover design 
 <unk> <unk> – photos 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic and album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 75 reached a peak position of number eighteen on Billboard 's Top Jazz Albums chart . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The album won the 2010 Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Jazz Album . The other nominees for the award were Urbanus by Stefon Harris , Sounding Point by Julian Lage , At World 's Edge by Philippe <unk> , and Big Neighborhood by Mike Stern . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tropical Storm Faxai ( 2007 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Storm Faxai , known in the Philippines as Tropical Storm Juaning , was a short @-@ lived tropical storm that had minor effects on land . The twentieth named storm of the 2007 Pacific typhoon season , Faxai originated from a tropical depression over the open waters of the western Pacific Ocean in late October . The storm quickly strengthened , becoming a severe tropical storm on October 26 as it rapidly traveled towards the northeast . The storm became extratropical the following day as it brushed Japan . The remnants dissipated on October 28 . 
 Although Faxai never made landfall , outer bands associated with the storm produced torrential rains , amounting to 458 mm ( 18 in ) on Miyakejima . A Japan Airlines flight to Narita Airport encountered severe turbulence during the afternoon of October 27 . One person sustained serious injures , and five others received minor injuries ; the plane was damaged during the event . One person was killed near Tokyo as the storm passed by , and three others were injured . Damages from the storm amounted to ¥ 150 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 5 million ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Faxai began as an area of convection that persisted about 805 kilometers ( 500 mi ) west of Guam on October 24 . Satellite imagery indicated broad cyclonic turning in the lower levels of the atmosphere , and a trough was located near the surface . Convection consolidated around the center of the low @-@ level circulation , and the upper @-@ level environment — low wind shear and good divergence — favored development . The following day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression . Shortly after , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert as convection deepened around a partially exposed low . The storm traveled northwest under the influences of a subtropical ridge to the north . At 0000 UTC on October 26 , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) designated the system as a tropical depression and gave it the local name Juaning . Around the same time , the JMA upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and gave it the name Faxai . 
 The JTWC issued advisories on Faxai , designating it as 20W ; however , they classified it as a tropical depression . Several hours later , the storm began to undergo an extratropical transition , with convection persisting mainly in the northwestern portion of the storm and cold , dry air entering into the southwestern portion . At 1200 UTC , PAGASA issued their final advisory on Tropical Storm Juaning as it moved out of their area of responsibility . The JTWC reported that Tropical Depression 20W ( Faxai ) had become extratropical around this time as it merged with a baroclinic zone . A cold front developed along the southern portion of Faxai , a feature of extratropical cyclones . Around that time , the JMA upgraded Faxai to a severe tropical storm with winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) . 
 The JTWC subsequently upgraded the depression to a tropical storm based on the development of a well @-@ defined central dense overcast . A shortwave trough located over the Korean peninsula provided a favorable upper @-@ level environment for Faxai to intensify . Early the next day , Faxai began accelerating rapidly towards the northeast in the mid @-@ latitude westerlies . An anticyclone located over Japan created a strong pressure gradient between it and the tropical storm , causing the wind field of Faxai to expand significantly to the northeast . As the JTWC issued their final advisory , they assessed the storm to have reached its peak intensity , with winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph one @-@ minute sustained ) . The JMA also assessed Faxai to have reached its peak intensity at that time , with winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) and a minimum pressure of 975 hPa ( mbar ) ; however , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) reported that Faxai had attained hurricane @-@ force winds by this time , peaking at 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . The storm continued towards the northeast at a rapid pace and became extratropical off the eastern coast of Honshu around 1200 UTC on October 27 . The extratropical remnants persisted for more than a day before dissipating over open waters late on October 28 . NOAA , on the other hand , continued to monitor the remnants of Faxai , with the system reaching the Aleutian Islands on October 29 . The following day , the storm rapidly intensified , with the central pressure dropping to 957 hPa ( mbar ) by 1800 UTC . On October 31 , the system tracked into Alaska and weakened . 
 The Japan Meteorological Agency uses 10 @-@ minute sustained winds , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center uses one @-@ minute sustained winds . The conversion factor between the two is 1 @.@ 14 . JMA 's peak intensity for Faxai was 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained , or 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) one @-@ minute sustained . The JTWC 's peak intensity for Faxai was 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) one @-@ minute sustained , or 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 As Faxai approached Japan , All Nippon Airways canceled day flights between Tokyo and the Izu Islands . Tokai <unk> , which operates ferries between Tokyo , the Izu Islands , and Shizuoka Prefecture , canceled some services due to the storm . Areas around Tokyo were notified of the expected heavy rains , waves up to 6 m ( 19 @.@ 6 ft ) , and high winds . Residents were advised to stay indoors during the storm , especially after sunset , and to avoid possible flying debris . 
 Although Faxai did not make landfall , the outer bands produced heavy rains , which caused minor damage along the eastern coast of Japan . The highest total rainfall was recorded on Miyakejima at 458 mm ( 18 in ) and in the Ōshima <unk> of Tokyo , 192 mm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) was recorded . The rainfall in Miyakejima nearly surpassed the record daily rainfall for October 27 . Rainfall rates peaked at 95 mm / h ( 3 @.@ 7 in / h ) on <unk> , which triggered seven mudslides throughout the country . One woman was killed near Tokyo , and three people were injured . One home , two hectares of farmland , 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of roads , and one ship were damaged by the storm . At the height of the storm , 9 @,@ 605 residences were without power throughout Japan . Damages from cyclone totaled ¥ 150 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 5 million ) . 
 At 5 : 31 pm Japan Standard Time ( <unk> UTC ) on October 27 , a Japan Airlines Boeing 767 @-@ 300 heading to Narita International Airport , encountered severe turbulence from Faxai about 74 km ( 46 mi ) southeast of Narita . The turbulence caused seven injuries on the flight , as well as some damage to the plane . 
 = Voices of the Lifestream = 
 Voices of the Lifestream is an unofficial tribute album released by OverClocked ReMix in honor of Nobuo Uematsu 's score for the popular video game , Final Fantasy VII . The album was released on September 14 , 2007 , to coincide with the 10th anniversary of Final Fantasy VII . Since its release , the collection has received praise from numerous video game sites and professional composers . 
 = = Development = = 
 Production of Voices of the Lifestream began in January 2006 as a personal endeavor by OverClocked ReMix Judge and <unk> Andrew " zircon " Aversa to recreate the soundtrack of Final Fantasy VII . In a director ’ s note , Aversa credits his nostalgic experiences with the game as his motivation towards the project . A private forum was created to house development on the project and many community members were contacted to aid in developing a track list . Development of the project lasted over 20 months encompassing over 40 remixers credited with creating 45 tracks . The compilation was released on September 14 , 2007 , in correlation with Final Fantasy VII 's 10th anniversary . Few physical copies of the compilation were made . The tracks were instead made available through digital distribution in lossless WAV and MP3 formats . Voices of the Lifestream is OC ReMix 's ninth project to be released . 
 = = Music video competition = = 
 On October 4 , 2007 , OverClocked ReMix announced a competition , in conjunction with Piano Squall and <unk> , regarding the creation of a music video set to a track from Voices of the Lifestream . There were three different categories to enter including Final Fantasy VII , anime , and original . The winners were awarded a signed limited edition of Voices of the Lifestream among other prizes , as well as having their video presented at anime and gaming conventions that OC ReMix attends . The contest ended on December 14 , 2007 . The winners were announced on the OverClocked ReMix forums two months later : 
 Final Fantasy VII Category 
 Winner : " Compiled Memories " by <unk> ( David Lee ) 
 Runner @-@ up : " Black @-@ Winged Angel " by <unk> ( Chris Cook ) 
 Honorable Mention : " Wheels of Lifestream " by Big Paul ( Paulo Augusto ) 
 Anime Category 
 Winner : " Final Moments of Clarity " by <unk> ( Saša <unk> ) 
 Runner @-@ up : " Sweetest Embrace " by <unk> ( Chris Studer ) 
 Original Category 
 Winner : " Stone Eyes " by <unk> ( Ian <unk> ) 
 Runner @-@ up : " Lunatic Hero " by <unk> ( Matt <unk> ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 Public reception has been generally positive , with Voices of the Lifestream being the most downloaded project created by OverClocked ReMix to date according to a BitTorrent tracker on OC ReMix ’ s website . 
 Editors of video game music websites , and video game websites in general , have been typically positive in their reviews . Kotaku has referred to the project as being “ a massive labor of love … truly amazing . ” Game Tabs has called the compilation a “ masterpiece , ” expressing surprise at the quality of the compilation , but criticizing the vocals in some of the tracks . <unk> gave the project a 90 % , praising the musicianship exhibited by the OC ReMix community and recommending immediate download . <unk> also criticized some of the tracks , feeling that they got “ lost ” attempting to reinterpret the source material . In an advance review , Jayson Napolitano of Music4Games called Voices of the Lifestream “ one of the most impressive and encompassing listening experiences in the world of video game music . ” 
 News of the album is not limited to the U.S. Finnish video game magazine Pelit gave the album a score of 5 out of 5 stars , lauding its diverse content but also pointing out a few unnecessary tracks which should have been excluded from the album while it was still in development . Voices of the Lifestream was nonetheless described as “ the most interesting event on the Internet music scene in a long time . ” 
 Two professional video game composers have also given their approval of the compilation . Tommy Tallarico , video game composer and co @-@ creator of Video Games Live , praised the album , stating “ OC ReMix has done it again ! I 'm always impressed with the amazing talent that comes from the OCR community . ” Michael Gluck , better known as Piano Squall , has also voiced approval of the compilation , stating “ … this is without a doubt the most fantastic project to ever hit the videogame music scene . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The project is spread out over four discs although few physical copies of the album are available . Most of the content was distributed via download links and torrents . The names of the discs coincide with the titles of releases made for the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII : Crisis Core ; Dirge of Cerberus ; Advent Children ; and Last Order . 
 All music composed by Nobuo Uematsu . 
 = Bobby Eaton = 
 Robert Lee " Bobby " Eaton ( born August 14 , 1958 ) is an American retired professional wrestler , who made his debut in 1976 . Eaton is most famous for his work in tag teams , especially his days as one @-@ half of the team the Midnight Express . Under the management of Jim Cornette , Eaton originally teamed with Dennis Condrey and , later on , with Stan Lane . He has also worked with a number of other tag team partners , including Koko B. Ware , Steve Keirn , and " Lord " Steven Regal . 
 In his career , Eaton wrestled for extended periods of time for various wrestling promotions : Mid @-@ America Wrestling , Continental Wrestling Association , Mid @-@ South Wrestling , World Class Championship Wrestling , Jim Crockett Promotions , World Championship Wrestling , and Smoky Mountain Wrestling . He has also made brief guest appearances for Extreme Championship Wrestling and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling , in addition to appearances for a considerable number of independent wrestling promotions over the years . He retired in 2015 after nearly 40 years in the ring . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 Growing up in Huntsville , Alabama , Eaton was a fan of professional wrestling , especially the NWA Mid @-@ America professional wrestling promotion . This promotion was operated by Nick Gulas , who staged wrestling shows in the Alabama and Tennessee region . Eaton 's first involvement in the sport came at the age of 13 , while attending Chapman Middle School , when he helped set up wrestling rings in his hometown . He later trained under Tojo Yamamoto to become a professional wrestler . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In May 1976 , at the age of 17 , Eaton made his debut in NWA Mid @-@ America . He entered his first match , a loss to Bearcat Wright , as a last @-@ minute substitute for Wright 's absent opponent . He quickly became a regular in Mid @-@ America and continued to train with the more experienced wrestlers . Before long , fans , as well as promoter Nick Gulas , noticed Eaton 's athleticism and showmanship . Gulas decided to " promote " Eaton up the ranks of NWA Mid @-@ America , giving him matches later in the show , closer to the main event . The angle that really helped elevate Eaton 's name up the card in the promotion took place after the introduction of the tag team The Hollywood Blonds ( Jerry Brown and Buddy Roberts ) . Eaton fought the Blonds with a variety of partners , including his old trainer Yamamoto and " Pistol " Pez Whatley . When the Blonds decided to move to a different wrestling promotion , the storyline maintained that Eaton was responsible for driving them out of NWA Mid @-@ America . 
 In 1978 , Eaton teamed with Leapin ' Lanny Poffo ( brother of the more well @-@ known " Macho Man " Randy Savage ) , and together they won the NWA Mid @-@ America Tag Team Championship from Gypsy Joe and Leroy Rochester . It was Eaton 's first title win , and he and Poffo held it for a little over a month . Eaton went on to form a team , known as The Jet Set , with George Gulas , Nick Gulas 's son . Together , Eaton and Gulas held the tag team title three times . During their time as a team , the two were involved in a storyline feud with Terry Gordy and Michael Hayes before Gordy and Hayes became famous under the name The Fabulous Freebirds . 
 = = = Singles competition = = = 
 In the spring of 1979 , Eaton started a feud with Chris Colt , designed to establish Eaton as more than just a good tag team competitor . The feud between the two was so heated that it saw Colt suspended for <unk> Eaton on the concrete floor , making it appear Eaton had been seriously injured . Eaton suffered no injuries , however . At that time , the piledriver was banned in most federations and treated as a move that could potentially paralyze a wrestler . This was done to give the move more " shock value " . Eaton conclusively defeated Colt , earning a place as one of the top faces ( good guys ) in NWA Mid @-@ America . During 1979 and 1980 , Eaton worked a series of singles matches against Dennis Condrey , a man he would later team up with to gain worldwide fame . 
 At the end of 1979 , Eaton turned heel ( bad guy ) for the first time in his career by joining Tojo Yamamoto 's group of wrestlers , whom the fans hated . Although Eaton is now thought of mainly as a heel , his fans were surprised at the time . Eaton 's heel run did not last long before he rescued his former Jet Set partner , George Gulas , from a two @-@ on @-@ one attack by The Blond Bombers ( Larry Latham and Wayne Ferris ) to return to the fan @-@ favorite side once more . After reuniting the team , Eaton and Gulas had one final run with tag team champions and worked an intense feud with Latham and Ferris . 
 When Nick Gulas ' wrestling promotion closed due to dwindling ticket sales , Eaton briefly wrestled for a promotion in Georgia . Before long Eaton returned closer to home , working for promoter Jerry Jarrett 's Continental Wrestling Association ( CWA ) , which was centered in Memphis , Tennessee . During his early days in the promotion , Eaton faced Stan Lane several times in tag team competition . Eaton 's most successful partnership in the CWA , in terms of title wins , was with Sweet Brown Sugar ( later known as Koko B. Ware ) , nicknamed " the New Wave " . The two wrestlers blended their athleticism and high flying abilities to form a very successful team . The New Wave held the AWA Southern Tag Team Championship three times ( twice with manager Jimmy Hart in their corner ) . After achieving success as a tag team , it was decided that Eaton and Sugar should split up and feud with each other . This storyline resulted in Eaton " forcing " Sugar out of the promotion after he won a " Losers Leaves Town " match against Sugar . 
 Sugar 's disappearance was soon followed by the appearance of a masked man called Stagger Lee , who looked and wrestled like Sugar . The storyline of Sugar returning under the mask to fight the heels helped make the masked man instantly popular with the crowd . Eaton , along with the rest of Jimmy Hart 's stable " the First Family " , tried in vain to unmask Stagger Lee . 
 Eaton turned face and re @-@ teamed with Sugar , although they maintained the storyline that Eaton 's partner was actually " Stagger Lee " and not Sugar . The team regained the tag team title before losing it to The Fabulous Ones ( Stan Lane and Steve Keirn ) . Afterward , Eaton teamed up with The Moondogs ( Rex and Spot ) to face Jerry Lawler and the Fabulous Ones . During the match , one of the Moondogs accidentally hit Eaton with their trademark bone , costing their side the match . After the match ended , the Moondogs , as well as Jimmy Hart , turned on Eaton , beating him down until he was saved by Stagger Lee . 
 = = = The Midnight Express = = = 
 Soon after Eaton joined Mid @-@ South Wrestling under promoter Bill Watts , he became part of the Midnight Express . Eaton teamed with former rival Dennis Condrey under the management of Jim Cornette to form a new version of the tag team . The Express had previously been a group of wrestlers consisting of Condrey , Randy Rose and Norvell Austin , but with Eaton 's arrival , the Midnight Express worked exclusively as a two @-@ man team . To complement the nickname " Lover Boy " Dennis , Eaton was nicknamed " Beautiful " Bobby , a nickname he still uses when wrestling . At first , The Express was booked in an angle with the Mid @-@ South Tag Team Champions Magnum T.A. and Mr. Wrestling II . The highlight of the angle saw Eaton and Condrey tarring and feathering Magnum T.A. in the middle of the ring . The Express first won the tag team title when Mr. Wrestling II turned on Magnum T.A. , attacking him during the title match and allowing Eaton and Condrey to win the title without much opposition . 
 With Mr. Wrestling II and Magnum T.A. splitting up , the Midnight Express needed a new team to defend their newly won title against . They began a long series of matches against The Rock ' n ' Roll Express ( Ricky Morton and Robert Gibson ) which ran well into the 1990s and spanned several wrestling promotions . The two teams feuded throughout 1984 in Mid @-@ South Wrestling before the Midnight Express left the promotion . The Midnight Express versus Rock ' n ' Roll Express series of matches were so well received by the fans that independent promoters all over the United States still book those two teams against each other today , 20 years after the rivalry started . 
 The Midnight Express had a short stay in World Class Championship Wrestling in Texas , where they feuded mainly with The <unk> ( Bobby Fulton and Tommy Rogers ) . 
 = = = National spotlight = = = 
 In 1985 Eaton , Condrey and Cornette signed with Jim Crockett Promotions ( JCP ) and were given national exposure on JCP 's televised programs on <unk> TBS . Shortly after joining JCP , the Midnight Express reignited their feud with the Rock ' n ' Roll Express and won the NWA World Tag team title from them in February 1986 . During the course of their heated angle , Eaton and Condrey re @-@ lost the title to the Rock ' n ' Roll Express six months later . Eaton and Condrey also had long running feuds with The New Breed ( Chris Champion and Sean Royal ) as well as The Road Warriors ( Animal and Hawk ) . The feud with the Road Warriors included a high profile Scaffold match at Starrcade 1986 , which the Midnight Express lost . 
 In early 1987 , Condrey left JCP for undisclosed reasons , and " Sweet " Stan Lane took his place as part of the Midnight Express . In May 1987 , after teaming for only a few months , Eaton and Lane became champions when they won the NWA United States Tag team title for the first time , a title they would win three times during their time together . A year later the team was cheered on despite being heels , as the Midnight Express won the NWA World Tag Team Title from Arn Anderson and Tully Blanchard on September 10 , 1988 . This feud was cut short when Anderson & Blanchard signed with the WWF over money issues . The Midnight Express ' run with the title lasted a little over a month @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half before the Road Warriors took the gold from them in a brutal match up , which saw the heel Road Warriors brutalize the now @-@ popular Midnight Express . 
 Now the fan favorites , the Midnight Express had to contend with a team thought to be disbanded forever : the Original Midnight Express , which consisted of Condrey and Randy Rose , who joined JCP after a brief run in the AWA . The duo was led by long @-@ time Jim Cornette nemesis Paul E. Dangerously , in a storyline that saw them trying to prove the originals were better than the new version . The surprise appearance of the Original Midnight Express gave Dangerously 's team the initial momentum in the feud , but soon after , Condrey left the promotion once more . This forced the bookers to bring in Jack Victory as a replacement as Condrey 's disappearance cut the promising feud short . 
 The Midnight Express then turned their attention to Paul E. ' s new team , The Samoan S.W.A.T. Team as well as a new version of The Fabulous Freebirds . Eaton and Lane were defeated by the Freebirds in the finals of a tournament for the vacated World Tag Team Titles . Following this loss , the Midnight Express teamed with their former enemies The Road Warriors and " Dr. Death " Steve Williams to defeat the SST and the Freebirds in a WarGames match at The Great American Bash . Following this feud , Lane and Eaton began having issues with a young new team in the NWA known as " the Dynamic Dudes " ( Shane Douglas and Johnny Ace ) . The Dudes admitted that the Midnight Express was one of their favorite teams and asked if Cornette would be their manager as well . Cornette agreed to manage the young team , to the displeasure of the Midnight Express . After arguing with the Express , Jim Cornette stopped accompanying Eaton and Lane to the ring , choosing to only actively manage the Dudes . At the Clash of Champions IX , the two teams met with Jim Cornette appearing in a neutral corner , forced to choose between the teams . The Express started out very aggressively , especially for a team that was supposed to be fan favorites , and when the night was over , the Midnight Express had once again established themselves as heels with Jim Cornette in their corner ; Cornette had never stopped siding with the Express . 
 After returning to their cheating ways , the Midnight Express started a storyline with the up @-@ and @-@ coming team of Flyin ' Brian and " Z @-@ Man " Tom Zenk over the United States Tag team title . The Express won the title from the young team in early 1990 , but lost the belts to The Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott ) three months later . After a loss at the WCW pay @-@ per @-@ view Halloween Havoc 1990 , the Midnight Express split up , as Jim Cornette and Stan Lane left the federation , while Eaton chose to remain in WCW . For the first time in almost a decade , there was no Midnight Express . 
 = = = Dangerous Alliance = = = 
 For the first time since 1979 , Eaton was a singles competitor , and he faced an uphill struggle to establish himself . He wrestled his former opponents in tag team competition such as Brad Armstrong ( whom he defeated at Wrestle War ' 91 ) , Ricky Morton and " Z @-@ Man " Tom Zenk ( whom he defeated at Starrcade ' 90 , but lost to at the Clash of the Champions XIV ) , but it was not until he turned face during the early parts of 1991 that he started to move up the rankings . At SuperBrawl I , Eaton defeated Arn Anderson to win the WCW World Television Championship . Eaton 's highest profile match as a singles wrestler came when he faced off against WCW World Champion " Nature Boy " Ric Flair at Clash of the Champions XV in a two @-@ out @-@ of @-@ three falls match . Eaton pinned Flair in the first fall , but ultimately lost to Flair two falls to one . His TV Title reign was short @-@ lived , as he came face to face with newcomer " Stunning " Steve Austin , who cheated his way to win the title from Eaton . After dropping out of the Television Title picture , Eaton went on to feud with The York Foundation until Paul E. Dangerously reappeared in WCW . 
 Late in 1991 , Paul E. Dangerously formed the faction The Dangerous Alliance . Eaton joined the group when he assisted Rick Rude , whom Dangerously had ( kayfabe ) brought into WCW , in defeating Sting for the United States Championship . In joining the group , Eaton became allies with Rude , Larry Zbyszko , and his two former rivals for the World Television Championship in Arn Anderson and Steve Austin . Shortly after the group was formed , Anderson and Eaton became its tag team specialists . This seemed to make sense , as both men had been successful tag team wrestlers in their careers ; Anderson himself had been a two @-@ time world champion teaming with Tully Blanchard in the Four Horsemen and had also won the belts with Zbyszko earlier in the year . Eaton and Anderson quickly won the WCW World Tag Team Championship by defeating Ricky Steamboat and Dustin Rhodes , the team to whom Anderson and Zbyszko lost the belts , for the championship and held on to the belts for five months before they lost them to the Steiner Brothers . 
 The Dangerous Alliance was a dominant force in WCW . At one point during 1992 , they held every title except the WCW World Title , which was held by their main opponent and arch enemy Sting . The war between the Dangerous Alliance and Sting and friends escalated until it was decided to settle it in a double ring War Games Match at <unk> 1992 . Sting 's team won when Sting forced Eaton to give up after Larry Zbyszko accidentally struck Eaton in the arm with a metal rod . This match would be given a 5 @-@ star rating from Dave Meltzer of the Wrestling Observer Newsletter . 
 In the aftermath of the War Games match , Zbyszko was kicked out of the Alliance for causing the Alliance loss . Soon after the Alliance disintegrated , Paul E. Dangerously left WCW . Eaton and Anderson continued to team after the Alliance fell apart , now managed by Michael Hayes . Eaton and Anderson worked in the tag team division until new WCW booker Bill Watts fired Eaton along with a number of other WCW regulars in a cost @-@ cutting measure . 
 = = = Departure and return = = = 
 When Eaton found himself without a job , he reached out to former manager Jim Cornette . Cornette had started his own wrestling federation , Smoky Mountain Wrestling ( SMW ) and welcomed Eaton with open arms . Eaton joined up with " The Heavenly Bodies " ( Stan Lane and Tom Prichard ) , and the three were booked as the top heels of the federation for a while . Eaton also won the federation 's version of the TV title , known as the SMW Beat the Champ Television Championship . 
 When Bill Watts was ousted from his position in WCW in favor of Eric Bischoff , Eaton was rehired . Once back on the roster , Eaton teamed up with a young Chris Benoit in Benoit 's first stint with WCW . Together they were mainly used to help establish rising teams or give established teams opposition . Benoit and Eaton , while gelling in the ring , never showed any signs of being presented as a permanent team ; they did not have matching ring outfits or a team name . 
 After Benoit left to return to Japan , in Eaton 's next venture in tag teaming , under the name " Bad Attitude " , he teamed up with Steve Keirn , formerly of the Fabulous Ones . Bad Attitude 's single noteworthy moment together came when they were present as Arn Anderson turned on tag team partner Dustin Rhodes . Otherwise , the team did not get much exposure . 
 During this time , Eaton also made a couple of appearances in ECW due to a talent trade arrangement between WCW and ECW . His most well known appearance was at the " When Worlds Collide " show on May 14 , 1994 , where he teamed with Sabu to beat Arn Anderson and Terry Funk . 
 = = = The Blue Bloods = = = 
 After Bad Attitude quietly ended , Eaton was placed with British snob " Lord " Steven Regal . A series of vignettes followed , in which Regal educated Eaton on how to be a man of class and sophistication . Eaton was then shown being knighted as " Earl Robert Eaton " by the ( supposed ) Queen of England on WCW Main Event , April 2 , 1995 . The team made their ring debut , dubbed The Blue Bloods , on WCW Saturday Night , April 8 , 1995 . The duo was later joined by " Squire " David Taylor , with all three alternating in the ring under the name of the Blue Bloods . Originally , The Blue Bloods was supposed to be a tag team consisting of Regal and Jean @-@ Paul Levesque , with Sherri Martel as their valet , but Martel had since been placed as the manager of Harlem Heat while Levesque had left for the WWF , where he would first gain fame as Hunter Hearst Helmsley . 
 The Blue Bloods initially feuded with the Nasty Boys ( Brian Knobs and Jerry Sags ) , their complete opposites in terms of " sophistication " and presentation . They also feuded with Harlem Heat ( Booker T and Stevie Ray ) over the WCW World Tag Team Championship , but never took the belts , and engaged in a short " Snobs versus Rednecks " program with the Stud Stable ( Bunkhouse Buck and Dick Slater ) . In all of 1996 the team members made only one pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) appearance , as individuals in the " Lethal Lottery " during May 's Slamboree . The next year , Regal became WCW World Television Champion , but the team only appeared on PPV once together , when Regal and Taylor lost to the Steiner Brothers at World War 3 in November . Not long after , Eaton was moved out of the group , turning on and feuding with his partners after finally rejecting the snob nature of the gimmick . 
 The Blue Bloods storyline represented the last serious push that Eaton was given by the WCW booking team . After the run with Regal and Taylor ended , Eaton wrestled mainly on WCW 's weekend show , WCW Saturday Night , occasionally winning against wrestlers low in the rankings and losing to wrestlers above him . He also became a trainer at the WCW Power Plant and worked backstage for WCW as a road agent until he was released in early 2000 , before the Eric Bischoff / Vince Russo reboot . In July 2000 , Eaton made a surprise appearance in ECW , some time before Heat Wave . 
 = = = Independent circuit = = = 
 In 2003 , Eaton worked for NWA Mid @-@ Atlantic , forming a new version of the Midnight Express with Ricky Nelson . This Midnight Express version was very short lived , and Eaton instead began touring with Dennis Condrey ( and sometimes Stan Lane ) as the Midnight Express . This version of the Midnight Express still performs together on select independent wrestling cards in the United States . 
 Eaton made a one night only appearance for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling on August 13 , 2003 , as a part of a Kid Kash storyline where Kash faced off against a series of 1980s wrestling stars such as Larry Zbyszko and Ricky Morton . Eaton lost to Kid Kash in his only TNA appearance to date . On October 23 , 2015 , Eaton wrestled his last match of his nearly 40 @-@ year career , losing to Ricky Morton , also ending the 30 @-@ plus year feud between The Rock ' n ' Roll Express and The Midnight Express . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 Eaton is often regarded as one of the nicest guys in the wrestling business , even though he wrestled as a heel for a majority of his career . In his 1999 book Have a Nice Day , Mick Foley praised Eaton as being one of the most underrated superstars in the business , and its nicest , commenting that " it was damn near impossible to pay for anything with Bobby around , though I will confess to not trying that hard " . This opinion was supported in The Stone Cold Truth by Steve Austin . 
 In addition to his personality , he is also popular with other wrestlers due to his wrestling style . Wrestling Eaton is known as " a night off " , because Eaton is so skilled that the action looks very convincing but does not hurt the opponent . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Eaton is married to Bill Dundee 's daughter , Donna . When they first started dating , they had to keep the relationship secret from her father , as her father had forbidden her from dating the wrestlers he was booking . When Dundee found out she was dating Eaton , he relented because Eaton was such a nice guy . Eaton and Donna have three children : Dustin , Dylan , and Taryn . Dylan is a professional wrestler . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 On September 6 , 2006 Dave Meltzer reported that Eaton was hospitalized after suffering a heart attack . Two days later , after being released from the hospital , Eaton released a statement through the Wrestling Observer website saying that he did not have a heart attack but was diagnosed with high blood pressure with a hint of diabetes . Since then , he has suffered with several health issues , especially cardiac problems which have seen him hospitalized on several occasions . In June 2013 , Eaton underwent successful surgery to have a pacemaker inserted . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Alabama Jam / Tower of London ( Diving leg drop ) 
 Signature moves 
 Diving knee drop 
 Figure four leglock 
 Missile dropkick 
 Slingshot backbreaker 
 Swinging neckbreaker 
 Vertical suplex 
 Managers 
 Jim Cornette 
 Paul E. Dangerously 
 Jimmy Hart 
 Jeeves 
 Nicknames 
 " Beautiful " 
 " Earl " 
 " The Sultan of Swing " 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Georgia Championship Wrestling 
 NWA Georgia Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 International Wrestling Cartel 
 IWC Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Dennis Condrey 
 Jim Crockett Promotions / World Championship Wrestling 
 NWA United States Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) – with Stan Lane 
 NWA ( Mid @-@ Atlantic version ) / WCW World Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) – with Dennis Condrey ( 1 ) , Stan Lane ( 1 ) and Arn Anderson ( 1 ) 
 WCW World Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Mid @-@ Atlantic Championship <unk> Mid @-@ Atlantic Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Rikki Nelson 
 NWA Mid @-@ America / Continental Wrestling Association 
 AWA Southern Tag Team Championship ( 4 times ) – with Sweet Brown Sugar ( 2 ) and Duke Myers ( 2 ) 
 CWA World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Mid @-@ America Heavyweight Championship ( 11 times ) 
 NWA Mid @-@ America Tag Team Championship ( 6 times ) – with Lanny Poffo ( 1 ) , George Gulas ( 3 ) , Mexican Angel ( 1 ) and Great Togo ( 1 ) 
 NWA Mid @-@ America Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA World Six @-@ Man Tag Team Championship ( 4 times ) – with George Gulas and Jerry Barber ( 1 ) , George Gulas and <unk> Hutto ( 1 ) , George <unk> and The Mexican Angel ( 1 ) , and Secret Weapon and Tojo Yamamoto ( 1 ) 
 Mid @-@ South Wrestling Association 
 Mid @-@ South Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Dennis Condrey 
 NWA Bluegrass 
 NWA Bluegrass Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Dennis Condrey 
 NWA Rocky Top 
 NWA Rocky Top Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Dennis Condrey 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 27 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 1992 
 PWI ranked him # 91 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the " PWI Years " in 2003 
 PWI Tag Team of the Year ( 1987 ) with Stan Lane 
 Smoky Mountain Wrestling 
 SMW Beat the Champ Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Class Championship Wrestling 
 NWA American Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Dennis Condrey 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards 
 Hall of Fame ( Class of 2009 ) with Dennis Condrey and Stan Lane as the Midnight Express 
 Most Underrated Wrestler ( 1985 , 1986 , 1990 , 1993 ) 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 1986 ) with Dennis Condrey 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 1987 , 1988 ) with Stan Lane 
 Worst Worked Match of the Year ( 1991 ) with P.N. News vs. Terrance Taylor and Steve Austin in a Scaffold match at The Great American Bash 
 5 Star Match ( 1992 ) War Games 
 = Dr. No ( film ) = 
 Dr. No is a 1962 British spy film , starring Sean Connery , with Ursula Andress and Joseph Wiseman , filmed in Jamaica and England : it is the first James Bond film . Based on the 1958 novel of the same name by Ian Fleming , it was adapted by Richard Maibaum , Johanna Harwood , and Berkely Mather and was directed by Terence Young . The film was produced by Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli , a partnership that would continue until 1975 . 
 In the film , James Bond is sent to Jamaica to investigate the disappearance of a fellow British agent . The trail leads him to the underground base of Dr. No , who is plotting to disrupt an early American space launch with a radio beam weapon . Although the first of the Bond books to be made into a film , Dr. No was not the first of Fleming 's novels , Casino Royale being the debut for the character ; the film makes a few references to threads from earlier books . This film also introduced the criminal organisation SPECTRE , which would also appear in six subsequent films . 
 Dr. No was produced on a low budget and was a financial success . While critical reaction was mixed upon release , over time the film has gained a reputation as one of the series ' best instalments . The film was the first of a successful series of 24 Bond films . Dr. No also launched a genre of " secret agent " films that flourished in the 1960s . The film also spawned a spin @-@ off comic book and soundtrack album as part of its promotion and marketing . 
 Many of the iconic aspects of a typical James Bond film were established in Dr. No : the film begins with an introduction to the character through the view of a gun barrel and a highly stylised main title sequence , both created by Maurice Binder . Production designer Ken Adam established an elaborate visual style that is one of the hallmarks of the film series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Strangways , the British Intelligence ( SIS ) Station Chief in Jamaica , is ambushed and killed , and his body is taken by a trio of assassins known as the " Three Blind Mice " . In response , MI6 agent James Bond is summoned to the office of his superior , M. Bond is briefed to investigate Strangways ' disappearance and to determine whether it is related to his co @-@ operation with the American Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) on a case involving the disruption of rocket launches from Cape Canaveral by radio jamming . 
 Upon his arrival at Kingston Airport , a female photographer tries to take Bond 's picture and he is shadowed from the airport by two men . He is picked up by a chauffeur , whom Bond determines to be an enemy agent . Bond instructs him to leave the main road and , after a brief fight , Bond starts to interrogate the driver , who then kills himself with a cyanide @-@ laced cigarette . 
 During his investigation in Strangways ' house , Bond sees a photograph of a boatman with Strangways . Bond locates the boatman , named Quarrel , but finds him to be uncooperative . Bond also recognises Quarrel to have been the driver of the car that followed him from the airport . Bond follows Quarrel and manages to overpower both him and a friend when the fight is interrupted by the second man who followed Bond from the airport : he reveals himself to be CIA agent Felix Leiter and explains that not only are the two agents on the same mission but also that Quarrel is helping Leiter . The CIA has traced the mysterious radio jamming of American rockets to the vicinity of Jamaica , but aerial photography cannot determine the exact location of its origin . Quarrel reveals that he has been guiding Strangways around the nearby islands to collect mineral samples . He also talks about the reclusive Dr. No , who owns the island of Crab Key , on which there is a bauxite mine : the island and mine are rigorously protected against trespassers by an armed security force and radar . 
 During a search of Strangways ' house , Bond finds a receipt , signed by Professor R.J. Dent , concerning rock samples . Bond meets with Dent who says he assayed the samples for Strangways and determined them to be ordinary rocks . This visit makes Dent wary and he takes a boat to Crab Key where Dr. No expresses displeasure at Dent 's visiting Crab Key in daylight and his failure to kill Bond , ordering him to try again , this time with a tarantula . Bond survives and after a final attempt on his life , sets a trap for Dent , whom he captures , interrogates and then kills . 
 Having detected radioactive traces in Quarrel 's boat , where Strangways ' mineral samples had been , Bond convinces a reluctant Quarrel to take him to Crab Key . There Bond meets the beautiful Honey Ryder , dressed only in a white bikini , who is collecting shells . At first she is suspicious of Bond but soon decides to help him , leading them all inland to an open swamp . After nightfall they are attacked by the legendary " dragon " of Crab Key , which turns out to be an armoured tractor equipped with a flamethrower . In the resulting gun battle , Quarrel is incinerated by the flame @-@ thrower whilst Bond and Ryder are taken prisoner . They are decontaminated , quartered in Dr. No 's lair , and given drugged food to render them unconscious . 
 Upon waking they are escorted to dine with Dr. No . He reveals that he is a member of SPECTRE ( <unk> Executive for Counter @-@ intelligence , Terrorism , Revenge , and Extortion ) and plans to disrupt the Project Mercury space launch from Cape Canaveral with his atomic @-@ powered radio beam . After dinner , Ryder is taken away and Bond is beaten by the guards . 
 Bond is imprisoned in a holding cell but escapes by crawling through an obstacle @-@ filled air vent . Disguising himself as a worker , he finds his way to Dr. No 's control centre , which contains a nuclear reactor submerged in a pool of water . As the American rocket lifts off , Bond overloads the reactor and fights Dr. No , knocking him into the pool so that he boils to death . Bond finds and frees Ryder , and the two escape the island in a boat as the entire lair explodes . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sean Connery as James Bond : A British MI6 agent , codename 007 . 
 Ursula Andress as Honey Ryder ( spoken voice by Nikki van der Zyl and singing voice by Diana Coupland ) : A local shell diver , making a living by selling Jamaican seashells to dealers in Miami . 
 Joseph Wiseman as Dr. No : The antagonist , a reclusive member of SPECTRE 
 Jack Lord as Felix Leiter : A CIA operative sent to liaise with James Bond while he is in Kingston . 
 Bernard Lee as M : The head of the British Secret Service . 
 Anthony Dawson as Professor R.J. Dent : A geologist with a practice in Kingston , who also secretly works for Doctor No . 
 John Kitzmiller as Quarrel : A Cayman Islander who was employed by John Strangways to secretly go to Crab Key to collect rock samples ; he also worked with Felix Leiter before Bond 's arrival . 
 Zena Marshall as Miss Taro : The secretary to Mr. <unk> @-@ Smith at Government House in Kingston . She is actually a double agent working for Dr. No . 
 Eunice Gayson as Sylvia Trench ( spoken voice by Nikki van der Zyl ) : Trench first meets Bond during a game of Baccarat at the London club Le Cercle . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny : The secretary to M. 
 Peter Burton as Major Boothroyd : The head of Q @-@ Branch , Boothroyd is brought in by M to replace Bond 's Beretta M 1934 with a Walther PPK . This was Burton 's only appearance as Q. 
 Timothy Moxon as Strangways ( voiced by Robert <unk> ) : Strangways is the head of the Kingston station for the British Secret Service , murdered by Dr. No 's henchmen , the ' Three Blind Mice ' . ( uncredited ) 
 Reginald Carter as Mr. Jones : A henchman of Dr. No who was sent to pick up 007 at the Palisadoes Airport . 
 Yvonne Shima as Sister Lily : A Prison Warden working at Dr. No 's lair . 
 Michel Mok as Sister Rose : Also working at Dr. No 's lair . 
 Marguerite LeWars as The Photographer : One of Dr. No 's operatives who trails Bond . 
 Dolores <unk> as Mary : Strangways ' P.A. , also murdered by the ' Three Blind Mice ' . 
 Bettina Le Beau as Dent 's Secretary . ( uncredited ) 
 = = Production = = 
 When Harry Saltzman gained the rights for the novel , he initially did not go through with the project . Instead , Albert R. " Cubby " Broccoli wanted the rights to the novels and attempted to buy them from Saltzman . Saltzman did not want to sell the rights to Broccoli and instead they formed a partnership to make the films . A number of Hollywood film studios did not want to fund the films , finding them " too British " or " too blatantly sexual " . Eventually the two received authorisation from United Artists to produce Dr. No , to be released in 1962 . Saltzman and Broccoli created two companies : Danjaq , which was to hold the rights to the films , and Eon Productions , which was to produce them . The partnership between Broccoli and Saltzman lasted until 1975 , when tensions during the filming of The Man with the Golden Gun led to an acrimonious split and Saltzman sold his shares of Danjaq to United Artists . 
 Initially Broccoli and Saltzman had wanted to produce the eighth Bond novel , 1961 's Thunderball , as the first film , but there was an ongoing legal dispute between the screenplay 's co @-@ author , Kevin McClory and Ian Fleming . As a result , Broccoli and Saltzman chose Dr. No : the timing was <unk> , with claims that American rocket testing at Cape Canaveral had problems with rockets going astray . 
 The producers offered Dr. No to Guy Green , Guy Hamilton , Val Guest and Ken Hughes to direct , but all of them turned it down . They finally signed Terence Young who had a long background with Broccoli 's Warwick Films as the director . Broccoli and Saltzman felt that Young would be able to make a real impression of James Bond and transfer the essence of the character from book to film . Young imposed many stylistic choices for the character which continued throughout the film series . Young also decided to inject much humour , as he considered that " a lot of things in this film , the sex and violence and so on , if played straight , a ) would be objectionable , and b ) we 're never gonna go past the censors ; but the moment you take the mickey out , put the tongue out in the cheek , it seems to disarm . " 
 The producers asked United Artists for financing , but the studio would only put up $ 1 million . Later , the UK arm of United Artists provided an extra $ 100 @,@ 000 to create the climax where Dr. No 's base explodes . As a result of the low budget , only one sound editor was hired ( normally there are two , for sound effects and dialogue ) , and many pieces of scenery were made in cheaper ways , with M 's office featuring cardboard paintings and a door covered in a leather @-@ like plastic , the room where Dent meets Dr. No costing only £ 745 to build , and the aquarium in Dr. No 's base being magnified stock footage of goldfish . Furthermore , when art director Syd Cain found out his name was not in the credits , Broccoli gave him a golden pen to compensate , saying that he did not want to spend money making the credits again . Production designer Ken Adam later told UK daily newspaper The Guardian in 2005 : 
 " The budget for Dr No was under $ 1m for the whole picture . My budget was £ 14 @,@ 500 . I filled three stages at Pinewood full of sets while they were filming in Jamaica . It wasn 't a real aquarium in Dr No 's apartment . It was a disaster to tell you the truth because we had so little money . We decided to use a rear projection screen and get some stock footage of fish . What we didn 't realise was because we didn 't have much money the only stock footage they could buy was of goldfish @-@ sized fish , so we had to blow up the size and put a line in the dialogue with Bond talking about the magnification . I didn 't see any reason why Dr No shouldn 't have good taste so we mixed contemporary furniture and antiques . We thought it would be fun for him to have some stolen art so we used Goya 's Portrait of the Duke of Wellington , which was still missing at the time . I got hold of a slide from the National Gallery - this was on the Friday , shooting began on the Monday - and I painted a Goya over the weekend . It was pretty good so they used it for publicity purposes but , just like the real one , it got stolen while it was on display . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Broccoli had originally hired Richard Maibaum and his friend Wolf Mankowitz to write Dr. No 's screenplay , partly because of Mankowitz 's help in brokering the deal between Broccoli and Saltzman . An initial draft of the screenplay was rejected because the scriptwriters had made the villain , Dr. No , a monkey . Mankowitz left the movie , and Maibaum then undertook a second version , more closely in line with the novel . Mankowitz eventually had his name removed from the credits after viewing early rushes , as he feared it would be a disaster . Johanna Harwood and thriller writer Berkely Mather then worked on Maibaum 's script , . Terence Young described Harwood as a script doctor who helped put elements more in tune with a British character . Harwood stated in an interview in a Cinema Retro special on the making of the film that she had been a screenwriter of several of Harry Saltzman 's projects ; and claimed both her screenplays for Dr. No and her screenplay for From Russia with Love had followed Fleming 's novels closely . 
 During the series ' fifty @-@ year history only a few of the films have remained substantially true to their source material ; Dr. No has many similarities to the novel and follows its basic plot , but there are a few notable omissions . Major elements from the novel that are missing from the film include Bond 's fight with a giant squid , and the escape from Dr. No 's complex using the dragon @-@ disguised swamp buggy . Elements of the novel that were significantly changed for the film include the use of a ( non @-@ venomous ) tarantula spider instead of a centipede ; Dr. No 's secret complex being disguised as a bauxite mine instead of a guano quarry ; Dr. No 's plot to disrupt NASA space launches from Cape Canaveral using a radio beam instead of disrupting US missile testing on Turks Island ; the method of Dr. No 's death by boiling in overheating reactor coolant rather than a burial under a chute of guano , and the introduction of SPECTRE , an organisation absent from the book . Components absent from the novel but added to the film include the introduction of the Bond character in a gambling casino , the introduction of Bond 's semi @-@ regular girlfriend Sylvia Trench , a fight scene with an enemy chauffeur , a fight scene to introduce Quarrel , the seduction of Miss Taro , Bond 's recurring CIA ally Felix Leiter , Dr. No 's partner in crime Professor Dent and Bond 's controversial cold @-@ blooded killing of this character . 
 Sometimes episodes in the novel retained in the film 's altered narrative introduce elements of absurdity into the plot . Bond 's " escape " from his cell via the air shaft , for instance , originally conceived as a ruse of Dr. No 's to test Bond 's skill and endurance , becomes an authentic break @-@ out in the film . Features carried over from the novel 's obstacle course , however , such as the torrent of water and scalding surface , have no logical justification in the script . Such incongruities would recur in subsequent Bond films . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 = = = = James Bond = = = = 
 While producers Broccoli and Saltzman originally sought Cary Grant for the role , they discarded the idea as Grant would be committed to only one feature film , and the producers decided to go after someone who could be part of a series . Richard Johnson has claimed to have been the first choice of the director , but he turned it down because he already had a contract with MGM and was intending to leave . Another actor purported to have been considered for the role was Patrick McGoohan on the strength of his portrayal of spy John Drake in the television series Danger Man : McGoohan turned down the role . Another potential Bond included David Niven , who would later play the character in the 1967 parody Casino Royale . 
 There are several apocryphal stories as to whom Ian Fleming personally wanted . Reportedly , Fleming favoured actor Richard Todd . In his autobiography When the Snow <unk> , Cubby Broccoli said Roger Moore had been considered , but had been thought " too young , perhaps a shade too pretty . " In his autobiography , My Word Is My Bond , Moore says he was never approached to play the role of Bond until 1973 , for Live and Let Die . Moore appeared as Simon Templar on the television series The Saint , airing in the United Kingdom for the first time on 4 October 1962 , only one day before the premiere of Dr. No . 
 Ultimately , the producers turned to 30 @-@ year @-@ old Sean Connery for five films . It is often reported that Connery won the role through a contest set up to " find James Bond " . While this is untrue , the contest itself did exist , and six finalists were chosen and screen tested by Broccoli , Saltzman , and Fleming . The winner of the contest was a 28 @-@ year @-@ old model named Peter Anthony , who , according to Broccoli , had a Gregory Peck quality , but proved unable to cope with the role . When Connery was invited to meet Broccoli and Saltzman he appeared scruffy and in unpressed clothes , but Connery " put on an act and it paid off " as he acted in the meeting with a macho , devil @-@ may @-@ care attitude . When he left both Saltzman and Broccoli watched him through the window as he went to his car , both agreeing that he was the right man for Bond . After Connery was chosen , Terence Young took the actor to his tailor and hairdresser , and introduced him to the high life , restaurants , casinos and women of London . In the words of Bond writer Raymond Benson , Young educated the actor " in the ways of being dapper , witty , and above all , cool " . 
 = = = = Secondary cast = = = = 
 For the first Bond girl Honey Ryder , Julie Christie was considered , but discarded as the producers felt she was not voluptuous enough . Just two weeks before filming began , Ursula Andress was chosen to play Honey after the producers saw a picture of her taken by Andress ' then @-@ husband John Derek . To appear more convincing as a Jamaican , Andress had a tan painted on her and ultimately had her lines redubbed by voice actress Nikki van der Zyl due to Andress ' heavy Swiss German accent . For Bond 's antagonist Dr. No , Ian Fleming wanted his friend Noël Coward , and Coward answered the invitation with " No ! No ! No ! " Fleming considered that his step @-@ cousin , Christopher Lee , would be good for the role of Dr. No , although by the time Fleming told the producers , they had already chosen Joseph Wiseman for the part . Harry Saltzman picked Wiseman because of his performance in the 1951 film Detective Story , and the actor had special make @-@ up applied to evoke No 's Chinese heritage . 
 The role as the first Felix Leiter was given to Jack Lord . This is Bond and Leiter 's first time meeting each other on film and Leiter does not appear in the novel . Leiter returns for many of Bond 's future adventures and in the 2006 reboot of the film series , Casino Royale , Leiter and Bond are seen meeting one another again for the first time . This was Lord 's only appearance as Leiter , as he asked for more money and a better billing to return as Leiter in Goldfinger and was subsequently replaced . 
 The cast also included a number of actors who were to become stalwarts of the future films , including Bernard Lee , who played Bond 's superior M for another ten films , and Lois Maxwell , who played M 's secretary Moneypenny in fourteen instalments of the series . Lee was chosen because of being a " prototypical father figure " , and Maxwell after Fleming thought she was the perfect fit for his description of the character . Maxwell was initially offered a choice between the roles of Moneypenny or Sylvia Trench and opted for Moneypenny as she thought the Trench role , which included appearing in immodest dress , was too sexual . Eunice Gayson was cast as Sylvia Trench and it was planned that she would be a recurring girlfriend for Bond throughout six films , although she appeared only in Dr. No and From Russia with Love . She had been given the part by director Terence Young , who had worked with her in <unk> and invited Gayson saying " You always bring me luck in my films " , although she was also cast due to her voluptuous figure . One role which was not given to a future regular was that of Major Boothroyd , the head of Q @-@ Branch , which was given to Peter Burton . Burton was unavailable for the subsequent film , From Russia with Love , and the role was taken by Desmond Llewelyn . 
 Anthony Dawson , who played Professor Dent , met director Terence Young when he was working as a stage actor in London , but by the time of the film 's shooting Dawson was working as a pilot and crop duster in Jamaica . Dawson also portrayed Ernst Stavro Blofeld , head of SPECTRE , in From Russia with Love and Thunderball , although his face was never seen and his voice was redubbed by Austrian actor Eric Pohlmann . Zena Marshall , who played Miss Taro , was mostly attracted by the humorous elements of the script , and described her role as " this attractive little siren , and at the same time I was the spy , a bad woman " , who Young asked to play " not as Chinese , but a Mid @-@ Atlantic woman who men dream about but is not real " . The role of Taro was previously rejected by Marguerite LeWars , the Miss Jamaica 1961 who worked at the Kingston airport , as it required being " wrapped in a towel , lying in a bed , kissing a strange man " . LeWars appeared as a photographer hired by Dr. No instead . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Dr. No is set in London , England , Kingston , Jamaica and Crab Key , a fictional island off Jamaica . Filming began on location in Jamaica on 16 January 1962 . The primary scenes there were the exterior shots of Crab Key and Kingston , where an uncredited Syd Cain acted as art director and also designed the Dragon Tank . They shot a few yards from Fleming 's Goldeneye estate , and the author would regularly visit the filming with friends . Location filming was largely in Oracabessa , with additional scenes on the Palisadoes strip and Port Royal in St Andrew . On 21 February , production left Jamaica with footage still unfilmed due to a change of weather . Five days later , filming began at Pinewood Studios , Buckinghamshire , England with sets designed by Ken Adam , which included Dr. No 's base , the ventilation duct and the interior of the British Secret Service headquarters . The studio would later be used on the majority of later Bond films . Adam 's initial budget for the entire film was just £ 14 @,@ 500 ( £ 278 @,@ 974 in 2016 ) , but the producers were convinced to give him an extra £ 6 @,@ 000 out of their own finances . After 58 days of filming , principal photography wrapped on 30 March 1962 . 
 The scene where a tarantula walks over Bond was initially shot by pinning a bed to the wall and placing Sean Connery over it , with a protective glass between him and the spider . Director Young did not like the final results , so the scenes were interlaced with new footage featuring the tarantula over stuntman Bob Simmons . Simmons , who was uncredited for the film , described the scene as the most frightening stunt he had ever performed . The book features a scene where Honey is tortured by being tied to the ground along with crabs , but since the crabs were sent frozen from the Caribbean , they did not move much during filming , so the scene was altered to have Honey slowly drowning . Simmons also served as the film 's fight choreographer , employing a rough fighting style . The noted violence of Dr. No , which also included Bond shooting Dent in cold blood , caused producers to make adaptations to get an " A " rating – allowing minors to enter accompanied by an adult – from the British Board of Film Classification . 
 When he is about to have dinner with Dr. No , Bond is amazed to see Goya 's Portrait of the Duke of Wellington . The painting had been stolen from the National Gallery by a 60 @-@ year @-@ old amateur thief in London just before filming began . Ken Adam had contacted the National Gallery in London to obtain a slide of the picture , painting the copy over the course of the weekend , prior to filming commencing on the Monday . 
 Editor Peter R. Hunt used an innovative editing technique , with extensive use of quick cuts , and employing fast motion and exaggerated sound effects on the action scenes . Hunt said his intention was to " move fast and push it along the whole time , while giving it a certain style " , and added that the fast pacing would help audiences not notice any writing problems . As title artist Maurice Binder was creating the credits , he had an idea for the introduction that would appear in all subsequent Bond films , the James Bond gun barrel sequence . It was filmed in sepia by putting a pinhole camera inside an actual .38 calibre gun barrel , with Bob Simmons playing Bond . Binder also designed a highly stylised main title sequence , a theme that has been repeated in the subsequent Eon @-@ produced Bond films . Binder 's budget for the title sequence was £ 2 @,@ 000 ( £ 38 @,@ 479 in 2016 ) . 
 = = = The introduction of James Bond = = = 
 The character James Bond was introduced towards , but not at , the beginning of the film in a " now @-@ famous nightclub sequence featuring Sylvia Trench " , to whom he makes his " immortal introduction " . The introduction to the character in Le Cercle at Les <unk> , an upmarket gambling club , is derived from Bond 's introduction in the first novel , Casino Royale , which Fleming had used because " skill at gambling and knowledge of how to behave in a casino were seen ... as attributes of a gentleman " . After losing a hand of Chemin de Fer to Bond , Trench asks his name . There is the " most important gesture [ in ] ... the way he lights his cigarette before giving her the satisfaction of an answer . ' Bond , James Bond ' . " Once Connery says his line , Monty Norman 's Bond theme plays " and creates an indelible link between music and character . " In the short scene introducing Bond , there are portrayed " qualities of strength , action , reaction , violence – and this elegant , slightly brutal gambler with the quizzical sneer we see before us who answers a woman when he 's good and ready . " Raymond Benson , author of the continuation Bond novels , has stated that as the music fades up on the scene , " we have ourselves a piece of classic cinema " . 
 Following the release of Dr. No , the quote " Bond ... James Bond " , became a catch phrase that entered the lexicon of Western popular culture : writers Cork and Scivally said of the introduction in Dr. No that the " signature introduction would become the most famous and loved film line ever " . In 2001 it was voted as the " best @-@ loved one @-@ liner in cinema " by British cinema goers . In 2005 , it was honoured as the 22nd greatest quotation in cinema history by the American Film Institute as part of their 100 Years Series . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Monty Norman was invited to write the soundtrack because Broccoli liked his work on the 1961 theatre production Belle , a musical about murderer Hawley Harvey Crippen . Norman was busy with musicals , and only accepted to do the music for Dr. No after Saltzman allowed him to travel along with the crew to Jamaica . The most famous composition in the soundtrack is the " James Bond Theme " , which is heard in the gunbarrel sequence and in a calypso medley over the title credits , and was written by Norman based on a previous composition of his . John Barry , who would later go on to compose the music for eleven Bond films , arranged the Bond theme , but was uncredited — except for the credit of his orchestra playing the final piece . It has occasionally been suggested that Barry , not Norman , composed the " James Bond Theme " . This argument has been the subject of two court cases , the most recent in 2001 , which found in favour of Norman . The theme , as written by Norman and arranged by Barry , was described by another Bond film composer , David Arnold , as " bebop @-@ swing vibe coupled with that vicious , dark , distorted electric guitar , definitely an instrument of rock ' n ' roll ... it represented everything about the character you would want : It was cocky , swaggering , confident , dark , dangerous , suggestive , sexy , unstoppable . And he did it in two minutes . " 
 The music for the opening scene is a calypso version of the nursery rhyme " Three Blind Mice , " with new lyrics to reflect the intentions of the three assassins hired by Dr. No . Other notable songs in the film are the song " Jump Up , " played in the background , and the traditional Jamaican calypso " Under the Mango Tree , " famously sung by Diana Coupland ( then Norman 's wife ) , the singing voice of Honey Ryder , as she walked out of the ocean on Crab Key . Byron Lee & the <unk> appeared in the film and performed some of the music on the later soundtrack album . Lee and other Jamaican musicians who appear in the soundtrack , including Ernest Ranglin and Carlos Malcolm , were introduced to Norman by Chris Blackwell , the owner of then @-@ small label Island Records who worked in the film as a location scout . The original soundtrack album was released by United Artists Records in 1963 as well as several cover versions of " The James Bond Theme " on Columbia Records . A single of the " James Bond Theme " entered the UK Singles Chart in 1962 , reaching a peak position of number thirteen during an eleven @-@ week spell in the charts . Ranglin , who had acted as arranger on several tracks , and Malcolm sued Eon for unpaid fees , both settling out of court ; Malcolm and his band performed a year later at the film 's premiere in Kingston . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Dr. No introduced the many recurring themes and features associated with the suave and sophisticated secret agent : the distinctive " James Bond Theme " , the gun barrel sequence , his initial mission briefing with M , " Bond girls " , the criminal organisation SPECTRE , narrow escapes , Bond 's luck and skill , his signature Walther PPK and the licence to kill , over @-@ ambitious villains , henchmen and allies . Many characteristics of the following Bond films were introduced in Dr. No , ranging from Bond 's introduction as " Bond , James Bond " ( although he seems to be mimicking Sylvia Trench who introduces herself first as " Trench . Sylvia Trench " ) , to his taste for vodka martinis " shaken , not stirred " , love interests , and weaponry . 
 Dr. No also establishes the oft @-@ repeated association ( in this case , Project Mercury ) between the Bond series and the US manned space programme — which would be repeated with Project Gemini in You Only Live Twice , Project Apollo in Diamonds Are Forever , and the space shuttle in Moonraker ( not to mention several outer space sequences involving fictional satellite programmes in GoldenEye , Tomorrow Never Dies , and Die Another Day ) . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 As soon as late 1961 , United Artists started a marketing campaign to make James Bond a well @-@ known name in North America . Newspapers received a box set of Bond 's books , as well as a booklet detailing the Bond character and a picture of Ursula Andress . Eon and United Artists made licensing deals revolving around the character 's tastes , having merchandising tie @-@ ins with drink , tobacco , men 's clothing and car companies . The campaign also focused on Ian Fleming 's name due to the minor success of the books . After Dr. No had a successful run in Europe , Sean Connery and Terence Young did a cross @-@ country tour in March 1963 , which featured screening previews for the film and press conferences . It culminated in a well @-@ publicised premiere in Kingston , where most of the film is set . Some of the campaign emphasised the sex appeal of the film , with the poster artwork , by Mitchell Hooks , depicting Sean Connery and four scantily clad women . The campaign also included the 007 logo designed by Joseph <unk> with a pistol as part of the seven . 
 Dr. No had its worldwide premiere at the London Pavilion , on 5 October 1962 , expanding to the rest of the United Kingdom three days later . The North American premiere on 8 May 1963 was more low @-@ profile , with 450 cinemas in Midwest and Southwest regions . On 29 May it opened in both Los Angeles and New York City – in the former as a double @-@ bill with The Young and the Brave and the latter in United Artists ' " Premiere Showcase " treatment , screening in 84 screens across the city to avoid the costly Broadway cinemas . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon release , Dr. No received a mixed critical reception . Time called Bond a " <unk> bounder " and " a great big hairy marshmallow " who " almost always manages to seem slightly silly " . Stanley Kauffmann in The New Republic said that he felt the film " never decides whether it is suspense or suspense @-@ spoof . " He also did not like Connery , or the Fleming novels . The Vatican condemned Dr. No because of Bond 's cruelty and the sexual content , whilst the Kremlin said that Bond was the personification of capitalist evil – both controversies helped increase public awareness of the film and greater cinema attendance . However Leonard Mosely in The Daily Express said that " Dr No is fun all the way , and even the sex is harmless " , whilst Penelope Gilliatt in The Observer said it was " full of submerged self @-@ parody " . The Guardian 's critic called Dr. No " crisp and well @-@ tailored " and " a neat and gripping thriller . " 
 In the years that followed its release it became more popular . Writing in 1986 , Danny Peary described Dr. No as a " cleverly conceived adaption of Ian Fleming 's enjoyable spy thriller ... Picture has sex , violence , wit , terrific action sequences , and colorful atmosphere ... Connery , Andress and Wiseman all give memorable performances . There 's a slow stretch in the middle and Dr. No could use a decent henchman , but otherwise the film works marvelously . " Describing Dr. No as " a different type of film " , Peary notes that " Looking back , one can understand why it caused so much excitement . " 
 The 2005 American Film Institute 's ' 100 Years ' series also recognised the character of James Bond himself in the film as the third greatest film hero . He was also placed at number eleven on a similar list by Empire . Premiere also listed Bond as the fifth greatest movie character of all time . 
 = = = Popular reaction = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , playing in 168 cinemas , Dr. No grossed $ 840 @,@ 000 in just two weeks and wound up being the fifth most popular movie of the year there . The box office results in mainland Europe were also positive . The film ended up grossing $ 6 million , making it a financial success compared to its $ 1 million budget . The original North American gross rental was $ 2 million , increasing to $ 6 million after its first reissue in 1965 , as a double feature with From Russia with Love . The following reissue was in 1966 paired with Goldfinger , to compensate the fact that the next Bond movie would only come out in the following year . The total gross of Dr. No ended up being $ 59 @.@ 6 million worldwide , IGN listed it as sixth @-@ best Bond film ever , Entertainment Weekly put it at seventh among Bond films , and Norman Wilner of MSN as twelfth best . Dr. No currently has a 96 % rating at Rotten Tomatoes . President John F. Kennedy was a fan of Ian Fleming 's novels and requested a private showing of Dr. No in the White House . 
 In 2003 , the scene of Andress emerging from the water in a bikini topped Channel 4 's list of one hundred sexiest scenes of film history . The bikini was sold in 2001 at an auction for $ 61 @,@ 500 . Entertainment Weekly and IGN ranked her first in a top ten " Bond babes " list . 
 = = Comic book adaptation = = 
 Around the time of Dr. No 's release in October 1962 , a comic book adaptation of the screenplay , written by Norman J. <unk> , was published in the United Kingdom as part of the Classics Illustrated anthology series . It was later reprinted in the United States by DC Comics as part of its Showcase anthology series , in January 1963 . This was the first American comic book appearance of James Bond and is noteworthy for being a relatively rare example of a British comic being reprinted in a fairly high @-@ profile American comic . It was also one of the earliest comics to be censored on racial grounds ( some skin tones and dialogue were changed for the American market ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Dr. No was the first of 24 James Bond films produced by Eon , which have grossed just over $ 5 billion in box office returns alone , making the series one of the highest @-@ grossing ever . It is estimated that since Dr. No , a quarter of the world 's population have seen at least one Bond film . Dr. No also launched a successful genre of " secret agent " films that flourished in the 1960s . The UK Film Distributors ' Association have stated that the importance of Dr. No to the British film industry cannot be overstated , as it , and the subsequent Bond series of films , " form the backbone of the industry " . 
 Dr. No – and the Bond films in general – also inspired television output , with the NBC series The Man from U.N.C.L.E. , which was described as the " first network television imitation " of Bond . The style of the Bond films , largely derived from production designer Ken Adam , is one of the hallmarks of the Bond film series , and the effect of his work on Dr. No 's lair can be seen in another film he worked on , Dr. Strangelove . 
 As the first film in the series , a number of the elements of Dr. No were contributors to subsequent films , including Monty Norman 's Bond theme and Maurice Binder 's gun barrel sequence , variants of which all appeared in subsequent films . These conventions were also lampooned in spoof films , such as the Austin Powers series . The first spoof films happened relatively soon after Dr. No , with the 1964 film Carry On Spying showing the villain Dr. Crow being overcome by agents who included Charlie Bind ( Charles Hawtrey ) and Daphne <unk> ( Barbara Windsor ) . 
 A further legacy saw the sales of Fleming 's novels rise sharply after the release of Dr. No and the subsequent films . In the seven months after Dr. No was released , 1 @.@ 5 million copies of the novel were sold . Worldwide sales of all the Bond books rose throughout the sixties as Dr. No and the subsequent films – From Russia with Love and Goldfinger – were released : in 1961 500 @,@ 000 books had been sold , which rose to six million in 1964 and seven million in 1965 . Between the years 1962 to 1967 , a total of nearly 22 @.@ 8 million Bond novels were sold . 
 The film had an impact on ladies ' fashion , with the bikini worn by Ursula Andress proving to be a huge hit : " not only sent sales of two @-@ piece swimwear skyrocketing , it also made Andress an international celebrity " . Andress herself acknowledged that the " bikini made me into a success . As a result of starring in Dr. No as the first Bond girl I was given the freedom to take my pick of future roles and to become financially independent " . It has been claimed that the use of the swimwear in Dr. No led to " the biggest impact on the history of the bikini " . 
 = = = Global James Bond Day = = = 
 On 5 October 2012 , fifty years after the release of the film , Eon Productions celebrated " Global James Bond Day " , a series of events around the world . Events included a film festival of showings of the James Bond films , a documentary of the series , an online auction for charity and further events at the Museum of Modern Art and the Toronto International Film Festival . A concert of various music was held in Los Angeles in conjunction with the New York event . The day also saw the release of " Skyfall " , the theme song of the 2012 James Bond film of the same name ; the song was released at 0 : 07 BST . 
 = Reina Victoria Eugenia @-@ class battleship = 
 The Reina Victoria Eugenia class was a class of three battleships of the Spanish Navy authorized as the Plan de la Segunda Escuadra under the Navy Law of 1913 . The class , as well as the lead ship , were named for King Alfonso XIII 's English queen consort , Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg . The other two ships were classified as " B " and " C " . It was supposed to be designed by Vickers @-@ Armstrongs , and built by John Brown . The ships were never built due to Britain 's involvement in World War I , which halted all foreign projects being constructed in British yards . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following disastrous losses in the Spanish – American War of 1898 , Spain lacked the money to rebuild its navy , so it was not until the Navy Law of 7 January 1908 that a new program authorizing three new battleships , the España class ( España , Alfonso XIII , and Jaime I ) , along with other ships , was passed . The delay enabled Spain to take advantage of experience gained by Britain with the world 's first commissioned dreadnought , HMS Dreadnought , and by the United States with its first dreadnought , USS South Carolina . As Spain was incapable of building the España class herself due to a lack of resources , Armstrongs were contracted for the design and John Brown for the construction of the shipyard and ships themselves . 
 A second Navy Law was passed in 1912 named the Plan de la Segunda Escuadra ( Second Squadron Plan ) . It called for , among several other ships , three dreadnoughts to supplement the España class . These dreadnoughts were named the Reina Victoria Eugenia class . They were to be in laid down in 1914 and 1915 and completed around 1920 . 
 = = Design history = = 
 The class consisted of three ships , Reina Victoria Eugenia , the lead ship , and two others named B and C. The lead ship was named after King Alfonso 's English wife . They were designed by Vickers @-@ Armstrongs and were planned to displace 21 @,@ 000 long tons ( 21 @,@ 000 t ) with a speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Early plans for the type called for an armament of four twin 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) guns ; however , financial difficulties resulted in the selection of an armament of four twin 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) guns instead , which still would have had a longer range than most contemporary ships . The secondary armament would have been 20 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns . Other specifications of the ships were never decided upon , although it is probable that they would have resembled contemporary British ships , with two closely spaced funnels along with super @-@ imposed turrets fore and aft . 
 As with the España @-@ class battleships , significant technical assistance from Britain would have been required . The outbreak of the First World War led to both the delay of the España class and the cancellation of the Reina Victoria Eugenia project . Since Spain did not sign the Washington Naval Treaty , whose signatories were forced to limit their ships to no more than 35 @,@ 000 tons , the class was available for future Spanish governments to construct , either as a main ship or as support to other planned designs , like a possible Littorio @-@ class battleship or a ship based on the Gneisenau . However , the class was never constructed . 
 = 20th Engineer Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 20th Engineer Brigade is a combat engineer brigade assigned to the XVIII Airborne Corps of the United States Army stationed at Fort Bragg , North Carolina . Although the brigade was identified as an airborne unit , not all of its subordinate units were airborne qualified — despite the airborne tab as part of the unit patch . Soldiers of the 20th Engineer Brigade provide various supportive duties to other Army units , including construction , engineering , and mechanical work on other Army projects . 
 Though its predecessor units have lineage that dates back before the American Civil War , the formation was not formally designated as the 20th Engineer Brigade until its activation on 16 August 1950 , at Fort Leonard Wood , Missouri . Deploying overseas in November 1952 , it supported construction projects in southwestern France until its return to the US on 10 September 1954 . From then until its inactivation on 12 December 1958 , it provided support to XVIII Airborne Corps . 
 Reactivated on 1 May 1967 , at Fort Bragg , the brigade deployed to Vietnam where it supported American forces for several years and a dozen campaigns . The brigade was deactivated on 20 September 1971 , as American forces withdrew from the country . 
 Reactivated as an airborne brigade on 21 June 1974 at Fort Bragg , NC , the unit has since seen numerous overseas tours , including to Kuwait during the Gulf war , Kosovo , Afghanistan during Operation Enduring Freedom , and Iraq during Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation New Dawn . It has also independently conducted various humanitarian missions in the United States and in other nations throughout the world . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 20th Engineer Brigade currently consists of five engineer battalions headquartered throughout the eastern United States . The Brigade Headquarters and Headquarters Company ( HHC ) as well as the 27th Engineer Battalion are headquartered at Fort Bragg , North Carolina while the 19th Engineer Battalion ( Construction Effects ) is located at Fort Knox , Kentucky . The 46th Engineer Battalion is located at Fort Polk , LA and the 92nd Engineer Battalion is located at Fort Stewart , Georgia . 
 The 307th Engineer Battalion , formerly assigned to the 82d Airborne Division , was reactivated effective 16 September 2010 by reflagging the existing 37th Engineer Battalion . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] In 2014 the 307th was transferred to the 3rd Infantry Combat Team of the 82nd Airborne Division . 
 The insignia was originally authorized on 30 June 1967 . It was amended on 14 January 1975 to add the blue and white " Airborne " tab . The tab is part of the unit insignia and does not indicate whether an individual soldier is Airborne @-@ qualified . Parachute wings on an individual soldier indicate Airborne @-@ qualification . While the brigade headquarters was on jump status , some subordinate elements were not . 
 On 16 September 2009 , the brigade 's Airborne status was terminated and the " Airborne " tab on the brigade 's shoulder sleeve insignia was removed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Lineage = = = 
 The lineage and honors of the 20th Engineer Brigade date back to the American Civil War . First designated as the Battalion of Engineers on 3 August 1861 , the battalion participated in 10 campaigns during the Civil War . Since that time , unit designations have changed many times as predecessors of the 20th Engineer Brigade have served in the Spanish – American War , the Philippine – American War , the Mexican Expedition , World War I and World War II . Though it was not officially designated as the 20th Engineer Brigade during all of these wars , the Brigade received campaign participation credit for all of these campaigns , and has numerous campaign streamers for what its previous incarnations did during these conflicts . 
 On 16 August 1950 the brigade was first designated as the 20th Engineer Brigade and activated at Camp Leonard Wood , Missouri . It deployed overseas to France in November 1952 and established headquarters in Croix <unk> . Comprising two battalions and six separate companies , the brigade provided engineer construction support to the Base Section of the European <unk> in southwestern France . In August 1954 , it redeployed back to the United States and was activated at Fort Bragg , North Carolina , on 10 September 1954 . From that time until its inactivation on 12 December 1958 , the brigade provided engineer support to the XVIII Airborne Corps . 
 = = = Vietnam War and aftermath = = = 
 In response to the buildup of U.S. forces in the Republic of Vietnam , the brigade headquarters was reactivated 1 May 1967 , at Fort Bragg and deployed to Vietnam in August 1967 . During the Vietnam War , the brigade numbered over 13 @,@ 000 officers and enlisted men organized into three engineer groups , with 14 battalions and 31 separate companies and detachments . One of these soldiers , Al Gore , would later become Vice President of the United States . 
 The brigade provided all non @-@ divisional engineer support in Military Regions III and IV during eleven campaigns . Units cleared more than one @-@ half million acres ( 2 @,@ 000 km ² ) of jungle , paved 500 kilometers of highway , and constructed bridges totaling more than six miles ( 10 km ) in length . As American forces were withdrawing from Vietnam , the brigade was inactivated 20 September 1971 . 
 As the organization of the Army changed following Vietnam , the 20th Engineer Brigade was again reactivated at Fort Bragg , North Carolina as an airborne brigade on 21 June 1974 . Assigned as a subordinate command of the XVIII Airborne Corps , which comprised one airborne combat engineer battalion , a heavy construction battalion and four separate companies . Additionally , the <unk> Engineer Detachment ( Terrain Analysis ) provided terrain intelligence needs of the brigade 's mission . Since that time the brigade and its subordinate units supported the XVIII Airborne Corps , fulfilling critical combat engineer , construction , topographic , and bridging missions . 
 The brigade participated in the recovery efforts following the Great Lakes Blizzard of 1977 . Over 300 members of the unit were dispatched to New York State to help with recovery efforts . As requirements and the engineer force structure changed , the brigade inactivated the combat heavy battalion in 1987 and activated another combat airborne battalion . In 1989 , the 30th Engineer Battalion ( Topographic ) was added to the brigade . Over the years , the brigade has provided engineer support to XVIII Airborne Corps and other Army commands . In addition to training , it has deployed in support of operations across the entire spectrum of conflict from disaster relief to combat operations . 
 = = = Gulf War = = = 
 The brigade was called to support the multinational response to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on 2 August 1990 . The brigade grew to a 7 @,@ 700 soldier force composed of three groups , ten battalions , four separate companies , and eight detachments in support of XVIII Airborne Corps during Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm . The brigade completed 1 @,@ 500 combat heavy battalions equivalent days of work constructing roads , airfields , heliports , ammunition / fuel / water storage points , life support areas and forward landing strips , distributed over ten million maps , trained over 5 @,@ 000 coalition engineers , and supported the French attack on <unk> airfield . During follow @-@ on missions the brigade destroyed over 6000 enemy bunkers and one million tons of munitions . 
 After the Gulf War , elements of the brigade were dispatched to Haiti on a humanitarian mission . The 20th Engineer Brigade was assigned to construct base camps , improve the Haitian infrastructure , participate in humanitarian service projects , and assist with the reestablishment of public services , with a goal of improving overall quality of life within the country . 
 Since 11 September 2001 , it has participated in repeated operations in Kosovo , Afghanistan , and Iraq . 
 = = = First Iraq tour = = = 
 In November 2004 the brigade headquarters deployed to Camp Victory , Iraq in support of OIF 04 @-@ 06 . The brigade grew to a size of 6 @,@ 100 personnel in of three brigade headquarters companies , seven battalions , six separate companies and nine detachments . The brigade served as the Multi @-@ National Corps - Iraq corps @-@ level engineer headquarters for all echelon @-@ above @-@ division engineers in Iraq , providing command and control for general support combat and construction engineer missions across the country . During its deployment , the 20th Engineer Brigade patrolled 57 @,@ 950 kilometers of roads for Improvised Explosive Devices , expanded 14 bases in support of the MNC @-@ I basing plan ; emplaced or maintained 16 bridges ; expanded detention capacity for 6 @,@ 000 detainees ; trained over 53 @,@ 000 coalition soldiers on explosives hazards awareness ; reduced over 11 @,@ 000 caches and over 80 @,@ 000 tons of explosive munitions . Other missions included repair of an airfield known as " Key West " by light equipment elements , support of the Long Range Surveillance Detachment , 313th Military Intelligence Battalion , 82nd Airborne Division based in <unk> , located in Iraqi Kurdistan . Another task for the Brigade was to assist British engineers in a systematic mapping of the entire nation and creating an Iraqi Geospatial Reference System , in order to make national reconstruction easier and more organized . The 20th Brigade suffered at least one casualty during its tour in Iraq , with a soldier killed by an enemy Improvised Explosive Device on 22 August 2005 in Ad <unk> when an explosive device destroyed his vehicle . During its deployment to Iraq , the Unit assumed command of several additional battalions from the Army National Guard , forcing existing formations of the unit to cope with additional responsibilities . Seemingly elements of the 107th and 507th Engineer Battalions of the Michigan Army National Guard and the 194th Engineer Brigade of the Tennessee National Guard were part of the brigade . 
 = = = Second Iraq tour = = = 
 The brigade again deployed to Iraq for the OIF 07 @-@ 09 rotation . This time , the brigade was headquartered in Balad , Iraq . The brigade was given Husky Mine Detection vehicles and Buffalo mine protected carrier vehicles for the deployment . The brigade was responsible for providing combat , geospatial and general engineering and reconstruction operations in partnership with Provincial Reconstruction Teams , Civil Service Corps , Sons of Iraq and Iraqi Army engineers , as well as training and assisting the Iraqi Army and provincial engineers in the rebuilding of the infrastructure of Iraq . As of May 2008 , the brigade had constructed 10 major bridges and destroyed or captured IED cells in nine of the country 's provinces . During the deployment it was visited by Lieutenant General Lloyd J. Austin III , the commanding general of Multi @-@ National Corps Iraq . The brigade was scheduled to return to Fort Bragg in the fall of 2008 , to be replaced by the 555th Engineer Brigade . This was completed during a transfer of authority ceremony on 29 September 2008 . The brigade then began redeploying to Fort Bragg , completing its return by November 2008 . A year later , in August 2009 , the brigade held a ceremony promoting dozens of its soldiers to the rank of Sergeant . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = = Notable soldiers = = 
 Numerous soldiers who have served in the 20th Engineer Brigade have later achieved fame for various reasons , most of them having served the 20th in Vietnam . Former 20th Engineer Brigade soldiers and engineers include Chief of Engineers Robert B. Flowers , Governor of the Panama Canal Zone Harold Parfitt , Vice President of the United States and Nobel Peace Prize winner Al Gore , and Sergeant Major of the Army Leon L. Van <unk> . 
 = John Conroy = 
 Sir John Ponsonby Conroy , 1st Baronet KCH ( Irish : Seán Ó Maolchonaire ; 21 October 1786 – 2 March 1854 ) was a British army officer who served as comptroller to the Duchess of Kent and her young daughter , Princess Victoria , the future Queen of the United Kingdom . 
 Conroy was born in Wales to Irish parents and , after holding several ranks in the military , became the equerry of Prince Edward , Duke of Kent and Strathearn in 1817 . Kent died two years later , leaving a widow and infant daughter . Becoming comptroller of the Duchess of Kent 's household for the next nineteen years , Conroy also acted as her confidant and political agent , among other roles . Together , they designed the Kensington System , an elaborate and strict system of rules for the upbringing of young Victoria , designed to render her weak @-@ willed and utterly dependent upon them in the hopes of allowing them to wield power through her . 
 Princess Victoria grew to hate Conroy over the oppressive system and he was unpopular among the British Royal Family . His efforts to place the Duchess in the role of regent were ultimately unsuccessful , as Victoria ascended the throne after reaching her majority in 1837 . Conroy was immediately expelled from Victoria 's household , though he remained in the Duchess of Kent 's service for several more years . Given a pension and baronetcy , Conroy retired to his estate near Reading , Berkshire in 1842 and died in substantial debt twelve years later . 
 Historians have often referred to Conroy as someone with strong ambition , with varying degrees of positive or negative opinion . Rumours circulated during and after his lifetime that he was perhaps the Duchess of Kent 's lover . Queen Victoria was shocked to learn this , stating that her mother 's piety would have prevented it . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Conroy was born on 21 October 1786 in Maes @-@ y @-@ <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Wales . He was one of six children born to John Ponsonby Conroy , Esq. and Margaret Wilson , both native to Ireland . His father was a barrister and the younger Conroy was privately educated in Dublin . On 8 September 1803 , he was commissioned in the Royal Artillery as a Second Lieutenant and was promoted to First Lieutenant on 12 September . In 1805 , Conroy enrolled in the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich . He made his career during the Napoleonic Wars , though his ability to avoid battle attracted disdain from other officers . Conroy did not participate in the Peninsular War or the Waterloo Campaign . 
 Further advancement of rank was facilitated with Conroy 's marriage to Elizabeth Fisher on 26 December 1808 in Dublin , though not as far as Conroy felt he deserved . Elizabeth was the daughter of Colonel ( later Major @-@ General ) Benjamin Fisher and Conroy served under him in Ireland and England while performing various administrative duties . Conroy was promoted to Second Captain on 13 March 1811 and appointed adjutant in the Corps of Artillery Drivers on 11 March 1817 . 
 Conroy and Elizabeth had six children together : 
 Sir Edward Conroy , 2nd Baronet ( 6 December 1809 – 3 November 1869 ) , married Lady Alice Parsons , daughter of Laurence Parsons , 2nd Earl of Rosse . They were the parents of the analytical chemist Sir John Conroy , 3rd Baronet . 
 Elizabeth Jane Conroy ( 1811 – 1855 ) . 
 Arthur Benjamin Conroy ( 1813 – 1817 ) . 
 Stephen Rowley Conroy ( 15 August 1815 – 1841 ) , served with the Coldstream Guards . 
 Henry George Conroy ( 4 June 1817 – 5 October 1890 ) , served with the Grenadier Guards , aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the commander of the forces in Ireland . 
 Victoria Maria Louisa Conroy ( 1819 – 9 February 1866 ) , married Sir Wyndham Edward Hanmer , 4th Baronet . 
 = = Employment with the Kents = = 
 Through the connection of his wife 's uncle , Conroy came to the attention of Prince Edward , Duke of Kent and Strathearn , the fourth son of King George III . Conroy was appointed as an equerry in 1817 , shortly before the Duke 's marriage to Princess Victoria of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld . An efficient organiser , Conroy 's planning ensured the Duke and Duchess ' speedy return to England in time for the birth of their first child . The child was Princess Alexandrina Victoria of Kent , later Queen Victoria . 
 While Kent had promised Conroy military advancement , he was still a captain by the time of the Duke 's death in 1820 . Conroy was however named an executor of the Duke 's will , though he was unsuccessful in persuading the dying man to name him Victoria 's guardian . Aware that he needed to find another source of revenue quickly , Conroy offered his services as comptroller to the now @-@ widowed Duchess of Kent and her infant daughter . Conroy 's native language was of particular value to the Duchess because she had not yet acquired fluency in English . Conroy retired from military service on half @-@ pay in 1822 . 
 = = = Kensington system = = = 
 Together in a hostile environment , Conroy 's relationship to the Duchess was very close , with him serving as her comptroller and private secretary for the next nineteen years , as well as holding the unofficial roles of public relations officer , counsellor , confidant and political agent . While it is not clear which of the two was more responsible for devising the Kensington System , it was created to govern young Victoria 's upbringing . An elaborate and oppressive system of rules regulating every facet of Victoria 's life , it kept her in reclusive isolation most of the time , with the goal of making her weak , compliant and utterly dependent upon her mother and Conroy . The intention was for the Duchess to be appointed regent upon Victoria 's ( assumed youthful ) ascension and for Conroy to be created Victoria 's private secretary and given a peerage . Aware of the reasons behind King George IV 's unpopularity , Conroy promoted a public image of the Duchess that was pure , modest and decorous , while at the same time increasing her paranoia against the British Royal Family , particularly the Duke of Cumberland . 
 Princess Victoria soon came to hate Conroy who bullied and insulted her , mocking her economical habits . Some historians have conjectured that Conroy 's arrogant behaviour towards Victoria may have stemmed from a personal belief that his wife Elizabeth was secretly the illegitimate child of the Duke of Kent . While the rumour was later proven false , Conroy 's strong ambition may have stemmed from this self @-@ perceived connection to the aristocracy . Ambition may also have been influenced by Conroy 's claim of descent from the ancient kings of Ireland . Regardless of his claims of grandeur , Conroy belonged to the middle class and recognised the growing power of this group within British society . 
 Conroy effectively barred Victoria from anyone other than the Duchess or his relatives and the princess was prevented from becoming close to her extended family . The enforced isolation meant the only companions of her own age whom she frequently came into contact with were Conroy 's daughters , who included Victoire , a girl a few months older than Victoria . Victoria does not appear to have been fond of either Conroy sister as there is little positive comment in her personal journals . The young princess depended on her devoted governess Louise Lehzen , who defended her against Conroy 's machinations . As Victoria grew older , attempts were made by Conroy and the Duchess for Lehzen 's removal , or at least the lessening of her influence . Such tactics proved unsuccessful , as the princess became more devoted to Lehzen than before , as evident in her journals . 
 Early in his stay at Kensington Palace , Conroy made an effort to become close to Princess Sophia , an elderly sister of George IV who also resided at the Palace . Described by Christopher Hibbert as an " impressionable and mentally unstable woman " , Conroy had little difficulty in persuading Sophia to let him take control of her finances . In return for making Sophia a member of the Duchess ' social circle , the princess reported back to Conroy on activities at St. James 's Palace and Kensington when he was absent . 
 = = = Victoria as heir presumptive = = = 
 In 1827 , the Duke of York died , making the Duke of Clarence heir presumptive and Victoria second @-@ in @-@ line to the throne . Conroy complained that the princess should not be surrounded by commoners , leading King George IV to appoint Conroy a Knight Commander of the Hanoverian Order and a Knight Bachelor that year . The Duchess and Conroy continued to be unpopular with the Royal Family and , in 1829 , the Duke of Cumberland spread rumours that they were lovers in an attempt to discredit them . The Duke of Clarence referred to Conroy as " King John " , while the Duchess of Clarence wrote to the Duchess of Kent to advise that she was increasingly isolating herself from the Royal Family and that she must not grant Conroy too much power . 
 The Duke of Clarence became King William IV in 1830 , by which point Conroy felt very confident of his position ; his control of the household was secure . The Duchess prevented her daughter from attending William 's coronation out of a disagreement of precedence , a decision attributed by the Duke of Wellington to Conroy . By then , it had become clear to Victoria that she would succeed to the throne . The new king and queen attempted to gain custody of their niece , but Conroy quickly replied that Victoria could not be " tainted " by the moral atmosphere at court . Conroy solidified the stance that mother and daughter could not be separated , and continued to promote the Duchess ' virtue as a fit regent . 
 As King William intensely disliked the Duchess and Conroy , he vowed to wait until Victoria came of age to die simply to keep them from a regency . In 1831 , the year of William 's coronation , Conroy and the Duchess embarked on a series of royal tours with Victoria to expose her to the people and solidify their status as potential regents . On one trip Conroy was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Oxford . Their efforts were ultimately successful and , in November 1831 , it was declared that the Duchess would be sole regent in the event of Victoria 's young queenship , while Conroy could claim to be the closest adviser to the Duchess and her daughter . 
 Aware that a regency was becoming increasingly unlikely , Conroy and the Duchess began promoting the view of Victoria as a " weak @-@ minded , frivolous and foolish " girl in need of guidance . While increasing their bullying of the princess , they implied that Victoria desired a regency even if she succeeded later than her majority at eighteen . Victoria was forbidden to be alone with her beloved Lehzen ; either the Duchess ' ally Lady Flora Hastings or a Conroy sister ( now appointed as companions ) were required to accompany her . 
 In 1835 , Victoria became seriously ill of typhoid fever on the last of the royal tours . Exploiting her weakened state , the Duchess and Conroy unsuccessfully tried to force her into signing a document ; this document would have appointed Conroy her personal secretary upon her ascension . Victoria emerged from the incident more determined than ever to become self @-@ reliant . Her increased intransigence alarmed the Duchess . At her behest , family adviser Baron Stockmar investigated , recommending to the Duchess that she dismiss Conroy and make peace with her daughter . But Conroy easily convinced the Duchess to ignore Stockmar 's advice . Even after Victoria 's eighteenth birthday on 24 May 1837 , Conroy continued to pressure her to appoint him as her private secretary or acknowledge her need for a regent until she turned twenty @-@ one . 
 = = = Victoria in power = = = 
 The king died just weeks after Victoria 's eighteenth birthday and she succeeded him as queen . Conroy was the subject of numerous discussions Victoria had with Stockmar on the first day of her reign . At the same time , Conroy created a list of demands to give to Stockmar with the intent that he pass them on to Prime Minister , Lord Melbourne . Conroy demanded " a pension of 3 @,@ 000 pounds a year , the Grand Cross of the Bath , a peerage and a seat on the Privy Council . " Victoria left the negotiating to Melbourne , who agreed to most of Conroy 's demands , most likely to avoid a scandal . On the advice of Melbourne , Conroy was granted a baronetcy and a pension of £ 3 @,@ 000 per annum . This did not satisfy Conroy , who continued in the following years to petition Victoria for an Irish peerage . Each request was refused , as the peerage would have enabled him to attend court . 
 One of Victoria 's first acts as queen was to dismiss Conroy from her own household , though she could not dismiss him from her mother 's . Queen Victoria , as an unmarried young woman , was still expected to live with her mother , but she relegated the Duchess and Conroy to remote apartments at Buckingham Palace , cutting off personal contact with them . The Duchess unsuccessfully insisted that Conroy and his family be allowed at court ; Victoria disagreed , saying : " I thought you would not expect me to invite Sir John Conroy after his conduct towards me for some years past . " In 1839 , the Duke of Wellington convinced Conroy to leave the Duchess 's household and take his family to the Continent in effective exile . The Times reported that he no longer had official duties , though they were unsure if he had resigned or been dismissed . That year rumours abounded that Lady Flora Hastings , whose abdomen had grown large , was pregnant by Conroy . A subsequent medical investigation concluded that Lady Flora was a virgin and she died from liver cancer several months later . This scandal , in tandem with the Bedchamber Crisis , damaged Victoria 's reputation . 
 In 1842 , Conroy settled at his family home in <unk> Hall near Reading , Berkshire and became a gentleman farmer , winning prizes for his pig breeding . He founded the Montgomery Regiment of Militia in 1849 . Despite his pensions and ownership of properties and lead mines in Wales , Conroy was in substantial debt when he died on 2 March 1854 at <unk> . His eldest son Edward succeeded him to the baronetcy . After his death , the Duchess of Kent finally agreed to open her financial accounts and acknowledged that significant funds were missing . She was moved to admit that Conroy had swindled her while at the same time hurting her relationship with Victoria for his own benefit . A rapprochement followed between mother and daughter . 
 = = = = Finances of Princess Sophia = = = = 
 Princess Sophia 's substantial income , provided from the civil list , had allowed Conroy to enjoy a wealthy lifestyle . The princess died in 1848 , leaving only £ 1 @,@ 607 19s 7d in her bank accounts despite a lifestyle of savings and low expenses . The Duke of Cambridge and the Duchess of Gloucester had a lawyer write to Conroy demanding that he account for the rest of their sister Sophia 's funds , but Conroy simply ignored it . According to Flora Fraser , the most recent biographer of George III 's daughters , Princess Sophia had in fact personally spent huge sums on Conroy , including heavy contributions to the purchase prices of his residences and supporting his family in a style he judged appropriate to their position . Conroy ultimately received £ 148 @,@ 000 in gifts and money from Sophia . 
 In 1850 , the Duchess of Kent 's new comptroller , Sir George Couper , studied the old accounts . He found huge discrepancies . No records for her household or personal expenses had been kept after 1829 . There was also no record of nearly £ 50 @,@ 000 the Duchess had received from her brother , Leopold , nor of an additional £ 10 @,@ 000 from William IV . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 After Conroy 's departure from Victoria 's service in 1837 , a popular song read : 
 Conroy goes not to Court , the reason 's <unk> John has played his part and ceased to reign . 
 Following his death in 1854 , The Times published a positive obituary that declared " the name , person and character of Sir John Conroy are so well and , in many respects , so favourably known in English society that we have no doubt the announcement of his death will be received with feelings of general regret " . The article briefly summarised his lifetime and praised Conroy for " considerable shrewdness , no small knowledge of human nature and a very winning address " as well as " devoting himself with great zeal and assiduity " to members of the Royal Family . 
 Described in his own lifetime as a " ridiculous fellow " , Conroy has not been the recipient of much recent positive historical opinion . Twentieth @-@ century historian Christopher Hibbert writes that Conroy was a " good @-@ looking man of insinuating charm , tall , imposing , vain , clever , unscrupulous , plausible and of limitless ambition . " For her part , twenty @-@ first century historian Gillian Gill describes Conroy as " a career adventurer , expert manipulator and domestic martinet " who came to England with " small means , some ability and mighty ambition . " In 2004 , Elizabeth Longford wrote that Conroy " was not the arch @-@ villain Victoria painted , but the victim of his own inordinate ambition . " 
 = = = Suspected lover of the Duchess = = = 
 Conroy 's relationship with the Duchess was the subject of much speculation both before and after his death in 1854 . When the Duke of Wellington was asked if the Duchess and Conroy were lovers , he replied that he " supposed so " . In August 1829 , Wellington reported to court diarist Charles Greville that Victoria , then ten years old , had caught Conroy and her mother engaged in " some familiarities " . Victoria told her governess , Baroness Lehzen , who in turn told Madame de Spaeth , one of the Duchess 's ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting . De Spaeth confronted the Duchess about the relationship and was immediately dismissed . All of this was recorded by Greville ; his subsequent diary entry has led to the persistent belief that the Duchess and Conroy were lovers . Later , as an aged Queen , Victoria was aghast to discover that many people did indeed believe that her mother and Conroy were intimate and stated that the Duchess ' piety would have prevented this . 
 = = = Rumour that Conroy was Queen Victoria 's father = = = 
 During Victoria 's lifetime and after her death in 1901 , there have been rumours that Conroy or someone else , and not the Duke of Kent , was her biological father . Historians have continued to debate the accuracy and validity of these claims . In his 2003 work The Victorians , biographer A. N. Wilson suggests that Victoria was not actually descended from George III because several of her descendants had haemophilia , which was unknown among her recognised ancestors . <unk> is a genetic disease that impairs the body 's ability to control blood clotting , which is used to stop bleeding when a blood vessel is broken ; it is carried in the female line but the symptoms manifest mostly in males . Wilson proposes that the Duchess of Kent took a lover ( not necessarily Conroy ) to ensure that a Coburg would sit on the British throne . 
 Likewise , medical historian W. T. W. Potts considers it a possibility that the Duchess took a lover under pressure from her brother Leopold . He cites the rarity of genetic mutations as evidence , as well as the " remarkable " circumstances surrounding Victoria 's conception . Potts makes no mention of Conroy specifically , only that the father would have been a haemophiliac himself or would have had a mutated gene . 
 <unk> B has been known to arise spontaneously in the children of older fathers , and Victoria 's father was fifty @-@ one when she was born . Nicholas Wright <unk> proposes that the haemophilia mutation could have first occurred with either Victoria or the Duke of Kent . Gillian Gill and her son Christopher , an infectious disease specialist , also view a genetic mutation as the most likely possibility ; Gillian Gill writes that " a few historians in recent years have found it seductive " to doubt Victoria 's stated paternity because a random mutation is " an unexciting solution " . Helen Rappaport concurs , remarking that " the best and most logical " explanation is that haemophilia first appeared in Victoria as a mutation . 
 Alan Rushton adds that no one in the household of the newly married Duchess of Kent , including Conroy , is known to have had haemophilia , and that her probable awareness of the scandals surrounding the behaviour of Caroline of Brunswick and Caroline Matilda of Great Britain would have deterred her from seeking an affair elsewhere . Furthermore , Princess Victoria was said to have borne a strong family resemblance to her father and grandfather George III . 
 There is evidence that some of Victoria 's descendants did have mild porphyria , most notably Princess Feodora of Saxe @-@ Meiningen . This disease may have affected her grandfather , George III and this could give credence to Victoria 's legitimate birth . There is more reliable documentation that one of her great @-@ great @-@ grandsons , Prince William of Gloucester , was diagnosed with the disease shortly before his death when his aircraft crashed during an air race . Concrete evidence on the origins of the disease and paternity of Victoria could be achieved with a DNA test of her or her parents ' remains , but no such study has been sanctioned by the Royal Family . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Conroy has been portrayed numerous times in film and television . Herbert Wilcox 's Victoria the Great ( 1937 ) depicted Conroy as a " smarmy character " who is not well developed in the film . The baronet was played by Stefan <unk> in 1954 's The Story of Vickie , and Herbert Hübner in <unk> einer Königin ( 1936 ) . Patrick Malahide played Conroy in Victoria & Albert , a 2001 TV miniseries that depicted Victoria 's early influences . English actor Mark Strong played him in the 2009 film The Young Victoria . The film depicts Conroy as a maniacal controlling pseudo @-@ father to the young Victoria during the year preceding her ascension even going so far as depicting him assaulting the princess twice . The film goes on to depict Conroy 's expulsion from Queen Victoria 's household . 
 Conroy also appears in numerous historical fiction novels about Queen Victoria . Writing under the pen names Jean Plaidy and Eleanor Burford , author Eleanor Hibbert published a series of novels in the 1970s and 1980s , which included The Captive of Kensington Palace ( 1972 ) , The Queen and Lord M ( 1973 ) and Victoria Victorious : The Story of Queen Victoria ( 1985 ) . A. E. <unk> released the parody novel Queen Victoria : Demon Hunter in 2009 . 
 = = <unk> Descent = = 
 Conroy was descended from the Ó <unk> family of Elphin , <unk> The family had been the hereditary <unk> to the O 'Connor Kings of Connacht . He was descended from <unk> Ó Maolchonaire who was the last recognised Chief of the Sept . 
 Torna Mór Ó Maolchonaire , Chief of the Sept , d . 1435 
 Seán Rua Ó Maolchonaire 
 Domhnall Rua Ó Maolchonaire , d . 1504 
 <unk> Ó Maolchonaire , Chief of the Sept , d . 1533 
 <unk> Ó Maolchonaire , Chief of the Sept 
 <unk> Ó Maolchonaire , Last Chief of the Sept , d . 1637 
 Torna Ó Maolchonaire 
 Seán Ó Maolchonaire , d . 1672 fighting for the French during the Franco @-@ Dutch War 
 <unk> Conry , d . 1746 
 John Conry of Elphin , d . 1769 
 John Conry , d . 1795 
 Sir John Ponsonby Conroy , 1st Baronet ( 1786 <unk> ) 
 = Hurricane Diane = 
 Hurricane Diane was the costliest Atlantic hurricane of its time . One of three hurricanes to hit North Carolina during the 1955 Atlantic hurricane season , it formed on August 7 from a tropical wave between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . Diane initially moved west @-@ northwestward with little change in its intensity , but began to strengthen rapidly after turning to the north @-@ northeast . On August 12 , the hurricane reached peak sustained winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) , making it a Category 2 hurricane . Gradually weakening after veering back west , Diane made landfall near Wilmington , North Carolina , as a strong tropical storm on August 17 , just five days after Hurricane Connie struck near the same area . Diane weakened further after moving inland , at which point the United States Weather Bureau noted a decreased threat of further destruction . The storm turned to the northeast , and warm waters from the Atlantic Ocean helped produce record rainfall across the northeastern United States . On August 19 , Diane emerged into the Atlantic Ocean southeast of New York City , becoming extratropical two days later and completely dissipating by August 23 . 
 The first area affected by Diane was North Carolina , which suffered coastal flooding but little wind and rain damage . After the storm weakened in Virginia , it maintained an area of moisture that resulted in heavy rainfall after interacting with the Blue Ridge Mountains , a process known as orographic lift . Flooding affected roads and low @-@ lying areas along the Potomac River . The northernmost portion of Delaware also saw freshwater flooding , although to a much lesser extent than adjacent states . Diane produced heavy rainfall in eastern Pennsylvania , causing the worst floods on record there , largely in the Poconos and along the Delaware River . Rushing waters demolished about 150 road and rail bridges and breached or destroyed 30 dams . The swollen Brodhead Creek virtually submerged a summer camp , killing 37 people . Throughout Pennsylvania , the disaster killed 101 people and caused an estimated $ 70 million in damage ( 1955 USD ) . Additional flooding spread through the northwest portion of neighboring New Jersey , forcing hundreds of people to evacuate and destroying several bridges , including one built in 1831 . Storm damage was evident but less significant in southeastern New York . 
 Damage from Diane was heaviest in Connecticut , where rainfall peaked at 16 @.@ 86 in ( 428 mm ) near Torrington . The storm produced the state 's largest flood on record , which effectively split the state into two by destroying bridges and cutting communications . All major streams and valleys were flooded , and 30 stream gauges reported their highest levels on record . The Connecticut River at Hartford reached a water level of 30 @.@ 6 ft ( 9 @.@ 3 m ) , the third highest on record there . The flooding destroyed a large section of downtown Winsted , much of which was never rebuilt . Record @-@ high tides and flooded rivers heavily damaged Woonsocket , Rhode Island . In Massachusetts , flood water levels surpassed those during the 1938 Long Island hurricane , breaching multiple dams and inundating adjacent towns and roads . Throughout New England , 206 dams were damaged or destroyed , and about 7 @,@ 000 people were injured . Nationwide , Diane killed at least 184 people and destroyed 813 houses , with another 14 @,@ 000 homes heavily damaged . Monetary losses totaled $ 754 @.@ 7 million , although the inclusion of loss of business and personal revenue increased the total to over $ 1 billion . In the hurricane 's wake , eight states were declared federal disaster areas , and the name Diane was retired . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Diane originated in a tropical wave first observed as a tropical depression on August 7 between the Lesser Antilles and Cape Verde . The system moved generally to the west @-@ northwest , intensifying into a tropical storm on August 9 . By the time the Weather Bureau first classified the storm on August 10 , Diane was south of the Bermuda high , a semi @-@ permanent ridge in the jet stream just east of Nova Scotia . Ships in the region of the storm reported winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . During the next day , the Hurricane Hunters reported no increase in strength , and Diane initially remained disorganized . The storm interacted with Hurricane Connie to its northwest in a process known as the Fujiwhara effect , in which Diane turned toward the north . Quick intensification ensued , potentially due to interaction with a cold @-@ core low that increased atmospheric instability . On August 12 , the storm rapidly intensified into a hurricane . The intensification was so quick that a ship southeast of the center believed Diane was undergoing a loop due to a steady drop in barometric pressure , despite moving away from the hurricane . 
 At its peak , Diane developed a well @-@ defined eye about 30 mi ( 48 km ) in diameter , described by reconnaissance aircraft as taking the shape of an " inverted teacup " . The strongest winds were located in the northeast quadrant , where there was a secondary pressure minimum located 62 mi ( 100 km ) northeast of the eye . After moving to the north for about a day , Diane resumed its westward motion on August 13 , after Hurricane Connie to the northwest had weakened . That day , Diane reached its lowest pressure of 969 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) , and peak winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) ; originally the hurricane was analyzed to reach peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) , although the large size and slow forward speed suggested the lower winds . It maintained its peak winds for about 12 hours , after which it weakened due to cooler air in the region . By August 15 , the eye had become poorly defined , and winds steadily weakened . As it approached land , its center deteriorated , with minimal precipitation near the center ; the eye was observed on a radar installed in July 1955 . On August 17 , Diane made landfall on the coast of North Carolina near Wilmington . Pressure at landfall was estimated at 986 millibars ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) , accompanied by winds just under hurricane intensity . Diane struck the state only five days after Hurricane Connie struck the same general area . 
 Diane quickly weakened as a tropical storm over the mountainous terrain of central North Carolina . The associated area of precipitation expanded and spread away from the center to the north and northeast . The weakening system turned to the north and recurved toward the northeast through Virginia after a ridge built in from the west . It did not interact much with the non @-@ tropical westerlies , and as a result it remained a distinct tropical cyclone over land . Convection redeveloped as the storm approached the Atlantic coast once again . Diane passed through the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , exiting New Jersey on August 19 into the Atlantic Ocean southeast of New York City . Paralleling the southern coast of New England , the storm later accelerated east @-@ northeastward , becoming extratropical on August 21 . Passing south and east of Newfoundland , the remnants of Diane accelerated and restrengthened slightly while moving to the northeast . Late on August 23 , the storm dissipated between Greenland and Iceland . 
 = = Preparations and background = = 
 Late on August 14 , more than two days before Diane made landfall , the United States Weather Bureau issued a hurricane alert from Georgia through North Carolina . On August 15 , the agency issued a hurricane warning from Brunswick , Georgia to Wilmington , North Carolina , although the warning was later extended to the south and north to Fernandina , Florida and Cape Hatteras , North Carolina , respectively . The agency also issued storm warnings southward to Saint Augustine , Florida and northward to Atlantic City , New Jersey , including the Chesapeake and Delaware bays . Throughout the warned region , small ships were advised to remain at port . Before Diane made landfall , the North Carolina National Guard assisted in evacuating people near the Pamlico River , and 700 residents left their homes near New Bern ; thousands of tourists also evacuated . The threat of the hurricane forced the planned retirement ceremony for Admiral Robert Carney to be transferred from an aircraft carrier in Norfolk , Virginia to an academy dormitory . All aircraft at Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point were flown to safer locations further inland . 
 All hurricane warnings were dropped after Diane moved inland . Forecasters downplayed the threat of Diane after it weakened over Virginia ; the Weather Bureau agreed they did not foresee the extent of the rain that would occur , instead calling for just " some local flooding " . The agency later admitted they " goofed " in downplaying the storm 's destructive potential after weakening , noting their lack of experience with extreme rainfall events . Once the storm moved ashore , the Weather Bureau transferred official forecasting duties to regional offices , and local newspapers also issued their own forecasts . The Springfield Daily News in Massachusetts noted that " moderate rains [ were ] possible " in its daily weather forecast ahead of the storm . Still , flood warnings were issued , with stream flooding forecasts of over 12 hours in advance . Along smaller rivers , including the Lehigh , Schuylkill , and Farmington , forecasts were issued every few hours . 
 In the summer of 1955 , the eastern United States experienced generally hot and dry weather , leading to drought conditions and decreased water levels . When Hurricane Connie struck , its rainfall moistened the soil and heightened creeks throughout the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England . Hurricane Diane struck North Carolina just five days later and affected the same general area . After floods in 1936 , the United States federal government enacted plans to prevent future devastating floods , although they made no progress by the time Connie and Diane struck in 1955 . Along the Delaware River in the 1930s , state legislatures in New Jersey and Pennsylvania had established a commission that worked to clean up polluted water , but the legislators and commission blocked federal help , comparing it to European socialism ; this was in contrast to the federally funded Tennessee Valley Authority , which mitigated flooding along the Tennessee River . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Diane 's path over the eastern United States brought heavy rainfall , fueled by unusually moist air resulting from abnormally high sea surface temperatures . The worst flooding was in eastern Pennsylvania , northern New Jersey , southeastern New York , and southern New England . Of the 287 stream gauges in the region , 129 reported record levels during the course of the event . Many streams reported discharge rates of more than double the previous records . Most of the flooding occurred along small rivers that rose to flood stage within hours , largely impacting populated areas ; there were around 30 million people in the region affected by the floods . Overall , 813 houses were destroyed , with 14 @,@ 000 heavily damaged . The floods severed infrastructure and affected several summer camps . Damage to public utilities was estimated at $ 79 million . Flooding in rural areas resulted in landslides in the mountains , while destroyed crops cost an estimated $ 7 million . Hundreds of miles of roads and bridges were also destroyed , accounting for $ 82 million in damage . Damage from Diane 's winds were generally minor . The hurricane caused $ 754 @,@ 706 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1955 USD ) , of which $ 600 million was in New England , making it the costliest hurricane in American history at the time . Taking into account indirect losses , such as loss of wages and business earnings , Diane was described as " the first billion dollar hurricane . " This contributed to 1955 being the costliest Atlantic hurricane season on record at the time . Overall , there were at least 184 deaths , potentially as many as 200 . 
 = = = Carolinas = = = 
 The strongest sustained winds associated with Diane 's landfall in North Carolina reached 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) in Hatteras , with gusts to 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) in Wilmington . Any hurricane @-@ force gusts were likely very sporadic and isolated in nature . Tides ran 6 to 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal near Wilmington , and waves 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) in height struck the coast . The resultant storm surge damaged beach houses , flooded coastal roads , and destroyed seawalls damaged by Hurricane Connie a few days prior . The center of the hurricane passed over Wilmington without much of a decrease in winds , suggesting the eye was disorganized or even nonexistent . Little precipitation fell in and around the city , though precipitation was more substantial elsewhere in the state , peaking at 7 @.@ 04 in ( 179 mm ) in New Bern . At <unk> in neighboring South Carolina , rainfall amounted to 2 @.@ 39 in ( 61 mm ) . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 After Diane crossed into Virginia , it dropped heavy rainfall of over 10 in ( 250 mm ) in 24 hours in the Blue Ridge Mountains , peaking at 11 @.@ 72 in ( 298 mm ) in Big Meadows . There , the rains were enhanced by moist air rising over the mountain peaks and condensing , a process known as orographic lift . Rainfall of over 3 in ( 76 mm ) occurred throughout Virginia , as well as into the Eastern Panhandle of West Virginia , where 5 @.@ 71 in ( 145 mm ) was reported at Stony River Reservoir . Similar precipitation amounts fell through Delaware , including 3 @.@ 27 in ( 83 mm ) at the National Arboretum in Washington , D.C. Rivers across the region rose above flood stage , including the James River which crested at 30 @.@ 4 ft ( 9 @.@ 3 m ) in Columbia , Virginia , which was 14 @.@ 6 ft ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) above flood stage . High amounts of rainfall accrued in eastern Pennsylvania , peaking at 11 @.@ 11 in ( 282 mm ) in Pecks Pond in the northeast portion of the state . As with Virginia , the heaviest rainfall occurred due to orographic lift near a mountain . In neighboring New Jersey , the highest precipitation was 8 @.@ 10 in ( 206 mm ) near Sussex . Rainfall in New York peaked at 9 @.@ 05 in ( 230 mm ) in Lake Mohonk . 
 In Virginia , severe flooding occurred near Richmond and along the Blue Ridge Mountains . Near the coast , Diane damaged large areas of farmlands due to slow @-@ moving floods . In the state , 21 gauges reported their highest levels on record . High levels along the Potomac River flooded low @-@ lying portions of Virginia and Washington , D.C. Wind gusts reached 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) in Roanoke . In the state , flooding covered several roads , prompting closures . Due to the flat terrain , flooding in Delaware was described by the United States Geological Survey as " comparably mild " . Flooding along the Brandywine Creek was at least the fifth highest in 45 years . Flooding was worst in the northernmost portion of the state . 
 Flooding began in many streams in eastern Pennsylvania on August 18 . The Delaware River crested at over 40 ft ( 12 m ) in Easton , which was 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above the previous record set in 1903 . In Allentown , the Lehigh River crested at 23 @.@ 4 ft ( 7 @.@ 1 m ) , surpassing the previous record of 21 @.@ 7 ft ( 6 @.@ 6 m ) set in 1942 . The floods were the worst in record across eastern portions of the state , notably in the Poconos and along all tributaries of the Delaware River from Honesdale to Philadelphia . Lake <unk> and other reservoirs mitigated flooding . Floods destroyed 17 bridges and 55 mi ( 89 km ) of track along the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad , which is the primary rail line in northeastern Pennsylvania . Damage to the line totaled several million dollars , and overall railroad damage in the state totaled $ 16 million . Hundreds of cars were damaged in the region . Damage extended into Philadelphia due to flooding along the Schuylkill River , but the damage was minor . In the small village of Upper Black Eddy , hundreds of people became homeless , and the post office was washed away . Statewide , the floods destroyed or breached 30 dams , and destroyed about 150 road of rail bridges . Flooding left home and factory damage in the Allentown area . In the Poconos in Pennsylvania , the Brodhead Creek nearly destroyed a camp , killing 37 people , mostly children . Many people at the camp fled to a lodge that was ultimately destroyed . The Brodhead Creek also washed out a bridge along U.S. Route 209 between Stroudsburg and East Stroudsburg , flooding both cities . There were about 75 deaths in the area , and another 10 deaths occurred in Greentown due to flooding along the Lackawaxen River . Overall , there were 101 deaths in the state , and damage totaled at least $ 70 million . 
 In New Jersey , flooding largely occurred north of Trenton and west of Perth Amboy ; rainfall in the southern two – thirds of the state was less than 3 in ( 76 mm ) . The three major rivers in the area - the Delaware , Passaic , and Raritan - had severe flooding , and damage was widespread . When the Millstone River flooded , two teenagers drowned while canoeing , and a police officer drowned while attempting to rescue them . About 200 families were evacuated in Oakland along the Ramapo River . Damage in the state was heaviest along the Delaware from Port Jervis , New York to Trenton , where flooding inundated adjacent towns . Between the two towns , all but two bridges were damaged , including four that were destroyed . About 500 children had to be rescued from camps on three islands in the Delaware River ; they were airlifted to a high school in Frenchtown . In that city , about 200 people were forced to evacuate their houses along the water . In Trenton , workers used sandbags to prevent flooding from affecting government buildings . Flooding destroyed the Portland – Columbia Pedestrian Bridge , first constructed in 1831 , after most of it was submerged . The center of the Northampton Street Bridge between Easton , Pennsylvania and Phillipsburg , New Jersey collapsed . A dam near <unk> collapsed , flooding the town and causing heavy damage . About 200 homes were damaged or destroyed in Lambertville . Statewide , 93 homes were destroyed . Damage was estimated at $ 27 @.@ 5 million . 
 Flash floods occurred in mountainous regions of southeastern New York , including Port Jervis along the Delaware River . Wappinger Creek flooded to cause heavy damage . Most streams in the Rondout Creek basin left damage due to fast @-@ moving waters , including heavy damage near <unk> . Damage in New York was largely limited to an area between Port Jervis and Poughkeepsie . Several bridges were destroyed along the Bash Bish Brook , and portions of U.S. Route 209 were flooded . Damage totaled $ 16 @.@ 2 million , and there was one death in the state . 
 = = = New England = = = 
 Diane produced heavy rainfall after recurving inland , setting rainfall records in several areas . Windsor Locks , Connecticut reported 12 @.@ 05 in ( 306 mm ) in a 23 ‑ hour period ; the station 's total , located near Hartford , was 5 @.@ 32 in ( 135 mm ) higher than the 24 ‑ hour rainfall record in Hartford . Some locations along the Housatonic River experienced 0 @.@ 75 in ( 19 mm ) per hour over 24 hours . The highest total in the state was 16 @.@ 86 in ( 428 mm ) at a station near Torrington . This is the highest rainfall on record in the state . The highest rainfall in the United States related to the storm was 19 @.@ 75 in ( 502 mm ) in Westfield , Massachusetts , which was also the wettest known storm in the state 's history as well as throughout New England . Other statewide rainfall maxima in New England included 8 @.@ 45 in ( 215 mm ) in Greenville , Rhode Island , 4 @.@ 34 in ( 110 mm ) in Essex Junction , Vermont , 3 @.@ 31 in ( 84 mm ) in Fitzwilliam , New Hampshire , and 0 @.@ 62 in ( 16 mm ) at Long Falls Dam in Maine . Throughout New England , 206 dams were damaged or destroyed , mostly in the region south of Worcester , Massachusetts . About 7 @,@ 000 people were injured throughout New England , most of whom in Connecticut . 
 Damage was greatest in Connecticut , where floods affected about two @-@ thirds of the state . It was the largest flood on record in the state 's history . All major streams and valleys were flooded during the storm , including hundreds of tributaries , and 30 gauges in the state reported the highest level on record . The Connecticut River at Hartford reached the third @-@ highest level on record at the time , cresting at 30 @.@ 6 ft ( 9 @.@ 3 m ) , or 14 @.@ 6 ft ( 4 @.@ 5 m ) above flood stage . Although there was rural damage , the city of Hartford was spared from flooding due to previously constructed dykes . The Naugatuck River had significant flooding that damaged or destroyed every bridge across it and did extensive damage in Ansonia . In Waterbury , the river washed buildings and railroad girders into a bridge . In the city , 30 people were killed , including 26 in 13 houses that were washed away in one block . The <unk> River flooded the city of Putnam at the same time that a major fire originated at a magnesium plant . Much of the commercial district of Winsted was destroyed by the Mad River , which reached 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) deep ; the floods destroyed most buildings on the south side of the town 's Main Street , and carried away several cars from a car dealership . The local newspaper reported that 95 % of businesses were destroyed or severely damaged in Winsted . High rivers destroyed historical sites and buildings , and statewide Diane destroyed 563 houses . There were 77 deaths in the state and $ 350 million in damage . Most of the damage in the state was industrial or commercial damage . 
 In Rhode Island , flooding was worst in the northern portion of the state , mostly along the Blackstone River , which expanded to a width of about 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . The Horseshoe Dam was washed out , causing heavy damage in Woonsocket . There , about 6 @,@ 000 of its 50 @,@ 000 residents were left unemployed . Record high tides were also reported . In Rhode Island , damage was estimated at $ 21 million , mostly in Woonsocket , and there were three deaths . 
 Much of southern Massachusetts , from its border with New York toward Worcester and to the ocean , experienced flooding . Most streams in western Massachusetts overflowed their banks , and in southeastern Massachusetts , which is largely flat terrain , streams flooded large areas along their channels ; these streams moved slowly , while other areas in New England sustained damage due to the fast @-@ moving nature of the floods . Record flooding was reported along 24 stream gauges in the state , including ones that surpassed the peak set by the 1938 New England hurricane . Both the Charles and Neponset rivers were among those that flooded . About 40 % of the city of Worcester was flooded during Diane , and in Russell , the state police forced many residents to evacuate . In Weymouth , the floods were considered at least a 1 in 50 year event . The Little River in <unk> , Massachusetts had a peak discharge of 8 @,@ 340 ft ³ / s ( 236 m ³ / s ) , which was 6 @.@ 2 times greater than the previous peak and 28 @.@ 5 times the average annual flooding . Flooded rivers breached run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ river dams and covered nearby roadways , although dams with reservoirs resulted in less flooding . Nearly all dams along the French River were severely damaged or destroyed . One failed dam in West Auburn washed out a portion of U.S. Route 20 , and the same route was washed out near Charlton . An overflown brook also damaged the Massachusetts Turnpike . A train on the Boston and Albany Railroad line plunged into a washed out portion along the Westfield River . Along the same river , floods destroyed roads and tobacco farms . In the state , 97 houses were destroyed . Damage in Massachusetts was second worst of the affected states , totaling $ 110 million ; the damage was largely due to flooded basements . There were 12 deaths in the state . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In Diane 's immediate aftermath , one of the first priorities in response was to distribute adequate inoculations for typhoid amongst the widespread areas left without clean drinking water . The United States Army assisted in search and rescue operations using helicopters . After the floods of Hurricane Diane , more than 100 @,@ 000 people fled to shelter or away from their houses . The American Red Cross quickly provided aid to the affected residents , using churches and public buildings to house homeless people . In the two weeks after the storm , Americans donated about $ 10 million to the Red Cross . The countries of Great Britain , Netherlands , Australia , Canada , France , Austria , and Venezuela offered aid to help the flood victims , sending emergency supplies . Additional flooding affected New England in September and October 1955 , although neither was as major as those caused by Hurricane Diane . Following Diane , hundreds of companies affected by the flooding installed waterproof doors and windows to preempt similar disasters in the future . 
 President Dwight Eisenhower declared eight states as disaster areas , making them eligible for federal aid . The Small Business Administration opened 18 temporary offices in the eastern United States for people to take out disaster loan applications . In the months after the storm , both the United States federal government and the American Red Cross had difficulty raising enough funds for the storm victims ; collectively , the Red Cross , the Small Business Administration , and Farmers Home Administration raised $ 37 million , which was less than 8 % of Diane 's damage total . Throughout 1955 , the Red Cross assisted about 10 @,@ 000 families in New England and the Mid @-@ Atlantic states ; some of the families received aid to move to a new house not in a flood zone . The Small Business Administration provided about 1 @,@ 600 loans , totaling $ 25 million , for small businesses . Senator Herbert H. Lehman proposed a $ 12 billion federal flood insurance program . In 1956 , the United States Congress passed the Federal Flood Insurance Act , but the program was not enacted due to lack of funding . A nationwide flood program was not enacted until the passage of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 . After the floods from Diane , the American federal government provided funding for the Army Corps of Engineers to construct dams and reservoirs throughout New England to mitigate future flooding . In about 14 years , the Corps built 29 dams in Connecticut alone at the cost of $ 70 million , including three along the Connecticut River . The federal government restored plans from the 1930s to build dams along the Delaware River , one of which along Tocks Island . A controversy arose there due to the 40 mi ( 64 km ) long reservoir the dam would have created , causing 600 families to be displaced . The project was canceled in 1975 , and the acquired lands became the Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area . 
 In Pennsylvania , washed @-@ out rail lines prevented operation along the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad for several weeks , and lines reopened after about two months . The expense of reopening , and the loss of being closed , led to the railroad merging with the Erie Railroad to become the Erie Lackawanna Railway in 1960 . One stranded train along the line prompted a helicopter to rescue 235 people . Flooding along the Lehigh River destroyed 15 industrial plants , which left more than 15 @,@ 000 people near Allentown , Pennsylvania without work temporarily . The mayor of Scranton declared a state of emergency due to the floods , ordering all businesses to close . United States Army soldiers provided water to residents after the town lost its water supply . Elsewhere , the Pennsylvania National Guard was on duty on streets in damaged towns , including 50 to prevent looting in Upper Black Eddy , which was one of the hardest hit towns . Helicopters assisted in discovering bodies at Camp David , where many deaths occurred during the storm . Statewide , thousands of people were left homeless . In Stroudsburg , there was a food shortage , and officials enacted a curfew , after reports of looting . In the same city , water was shipped in milk cartons to the flood victims , which later inspired a Federal Civil Defense Administration proposal to use water packaged in milk containers in the event of a nuclear attack . The state government implemented a tax on cigarettes to help pay for storm damage , which lasted for about two years ; this was partially due to a lack of significant funding from the federal government . Pennsylvania also enacted an increase in the gasoline tax that was later made permanent to pay for the Interstate Highway System . The two taxes , each an increase of 1 penny , totaled $ 71 million , a part of which was set aside for future disasters . The experience of the storm 's aftermath provided the basis for the aftermath for Hurricane Agnes in 1972 . In New Jersey , Governor Robert B. Meyner declared the floods as the state 's worst natural disaster . 
 After the Naugatuck River flood in Connecticut cut off communications and bridges , the state was effectively cut in two . The state 's National Guard used helicopters to rescue people . Governor Abraham A. Ribicoff visited areas affected by the flooding , due to the damage , Connecticut was declared a federal disaster area on August 20 . The declaration allocated $ 25 million in assistance to the state . Governor Ribicoff requested $ 34 million in funds to rebuild and produce future flood mitigation projects ; the state 's funding was paid by a combination of bonds and tax increases . Including subsequent storms , the 1955 floods cumulatively killed 91 people and left 1 @,@ 100 families homeless . Flooding occurred in 67 towns , resulting in damage to 20 @,@ 000 families . About 86 @,@ 000 people were left unemployed after the floods . In Winsted , the buildings that were washed away along the south side of Main Street were never rebuilt . 
 Massachusetts Governor Christian Herter also issued a state of emergency , due to the widespread flooding damage . As a result , the state 's National Guard and the Army Corps assisted in cleanup , and most roads took three weeks to clear . Residents in areas affected by Diane 's flooding were advised to boil water and not to use gas cooking equipment . Diane 's historic rainfall resulted in the wettest month on record in Boston with a total of 17 in ( 430 mm ) , a record that stands as of 2010 ; Boston 's 24 ‑ hour total of 8 @.@ 4 in ( 210 mm ) remained the highest daily total as of 1996 . Following Diane 's floods , cities in Massachusetts enlarged culverts and improved draining systems , as well as constructing weirs ; these systems helped mitigate against future flooding . 
 The name Diane was retired from the Atlantic hurricane naming list . Due to the damage from hurricanes in 1954 and 1955 , including Diane , public outcry over storm damage led to the creation of the National Hurricane Center in 1956 . Using a monetary <unk> in 2010 United States dollars , the damage from Diane would be about $ 7 @.@ 4 billion , which would have been the 17th highest in the United States . Accounting for inflation , changes in personal wealth , and population changes , it is estimated Diane would have caused $ 18 billion in damage in 2010 , or the 15th highest for a United States hurricane . 
 = David Carradine = 
 David Carradine ( born John Arthur Carradine ; December 8 , 1936 – June 3 , 2009 ) was an American actor and martial artist , best known for his leading role as a peace @-@ loving Shaolin monk , Kwai Chang Caine , in the 1970s television series Kung Fu . He was a member of a productive acting family that began with his father , John Carradine . Carradine 's acting career , which included major and minor roles on stage and television , and in cinema , spanned over four decades . A prolific " B " movie actor , he appeared in more than 100 feature films and was nominated four times for a Golden Globe Award . The last nomination was for his title role in Quentin Tarantino 's Kill Bill : Volume 2 ( 2004 ) . 
 Films that featured Carradine continued to be released after his death . These posthumous credits were from a variety of genres including action , documentaries , drama , horror , martial arts , science fiction , and westerns . In addition to his acting career , Carradine was a director and musician . Moreover , influenced by his most popular acting role , he studied martial arts . 
 He had been frequently arrested and prosecuted for a variety of offenses , which often involved substance abuse . He died on June 3 , 2009 , from asphyxiation , in a hotel room in Bangkok , Thailand ; the main report states it was an auto @-@ erotic asphyxiation ; though some have said he may have been murdered . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Carradine was born on December 8 , 1936 as John Arthur Carradine , in Hollywood , California , the oldest child of actor John Carradine and his wife <unk> ( McCool ) . He was a half @-@ brother of Bruce , Keith , Christopher , and Robert Carradine , and an uncle of Ever Carradine and Martha Plimpton . Primarily of Irish descent , he was a great @-@ grandson of Methodist evangelical author Beverly Carradine and a grandnephew of artist Will Foster . 
 Called Jack by his family , Carradine 's childhood was turbulent . For example , his parents divorced and repeatedly remarried ; he was born to his mother 's second marriage of three , and his father 's first of four . At the time of Carradine 's parents ' marriage , his mother already had a son by her first husband , whom John adopted . John Carradine planned a large family , but after his wife had a series of miscarriages , he discovered she had had numerous illegal abortions without his knowledge . This rendered her unable to carry a baby to full term . Against this backdrop of marital discord , Jack almost succeeded in committing suicide by hanging at the age of five . He said the incident followed his discovery that he and his older half @-@ brother Bruce , who had been adopted by John , had different biological fathers . Carradine added , " My father saved me , and then confiscated my comic book collection and burned it – which was scarcely the point " . 
 After three years of marriage , <unk> filed for divorce from John , but the couple remained married for another five years . Divorce finally came in 1944 , when Jack was seven years old . His father left California to avoid court action in the alimony settlement . After the couple engaged in a series of court battles over child custody and alimony , which at one point landed John in jail , Jack joined his father in New York City . By this time , his father had remarried . For the next few years Jack was shuffled between boarding schools , foster homes , and reform school . He also would often accompany his father while the elder Carradine performed summer theater throughout the Northeast . The boy spent time in Massachusetts and even one miserable winter milking cows on a farm in Vermont . 
 Eventually , Jack Carradine returned to California , where he graduated from Oakland High School . He attended Oakland Junior College ( currently Laney College ) for a year before transferring to San Francisco State College , where he studied drama and music theory , and wrote music for the drama department 's annual revues while juggling work at menial jobs , a fledgling stage acting career , and his studies . After he dropped out of college , Carradine spent some time with the " beatniks " of San Francisco 's North Beach and southern California 's Venice . During this time he collected unemployment insurance and sold baby pictures . He was also prosecuted for disturbing the peace . 
 Despite an attempt to dodge the draft , in 1960 Carradine was inducted into the United States Army , where he drew pictures for training aids . That Christmas he married his high school sweetheart , Donna Lee Becht . While stationed at Fort Eustis , Virginia he helped to establish a theater company which became known as the " entertainment unit " . He met fellow inductee , Larry Cohen , who later cast him in Q , The Winged Serpent . He also faced court @-@ martial for shoplifting . In 1962 , Donna gave birth to their daughter , Calista . Carradine was honorably discharged after a two @-@ year tour . 
 = = Film and television career = = 
 = = = Early successes = = = 
 Upon leaving the Army , Carradine became serious about his acting pursuits . It was at that time that he was advised to change his name to avoid confusion with his famous father . In 1963 , he made his television debut on an episode of Armstrong Circle Theatre . Several other television roles were to follow including appearances on Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre , and The Alfred Hitchcock Hour . He made his feature film debut in 1964 in Taggart , a western based on a novel by Louis L 'Amour . 
 His first " big break " , however , came with his second Broadway part in The Royal Hunt of the Sun , a play by Peter Shaffer about the destruction of the Inca empire by conquistador Francisco Pizarro . He said of this performance , " Many of the important roles that I got later on were because the guy who was going to hire me was in that audience and had his mind blown . " For that part , Carradine won a Theatre World Award for Best Debut Performance in 1965 . 
 With the closing of The Royal Hunt of the Sun , and the failing of his marriage , Carradine left New York and headed back to California . He returned to TV to star in the short @-@ lived series Shane , a 1966 western based upon a 1949 novel of the same name and previously filmed in 1953 . 
 Carradine guest @-@ starred opposite David McCallum in a 1971 episode of Night Gallery entitled " The Phantom Farmhouse . " 
 In 1972 , he co @-@ starred as ' Big ' Bill Shelly in one of Martin Scorsese 's earliest films , Boxcar Bertha , which starred Barbara Hershey , his domestic partner at the time ( see Personal life ) . This was one of several Roger Corman productions in which he was to appear . It was also one of a handful of acting collaborations he made with his father , John . 
 = = = Kung Fu = = = 
 For three seasons , David Carradine starred as a half @-@ Chinese , half @-@ white Shaolin monk , Kwai Chang Caine , on the ABC hit TV series Kung Fu ( 1972 – 1975 ) and was nominated for an Emmy and a Golden Globe Award for the role . The show , which took place in the Old West , helped to popularize the martial arts and Eastern philosophy in the west , and immortalized the character of Kwai Chang Caine , also referred to as " Grasshopper " , in popular culture . 
 Although the choice of a white man to play the role of Kwai Chang Caine stirred controversy , the show served as steady employment for several Asian @-@ American actors in the U.S. In addition to Keye Luke and Philip Ahn , who held leading roles in the cast as Caine 's Shaolin masters , Robert Ito , James Hong , Benson Fong , Richard Loo , and Victor Sen Yung frequently appeared in the series . Kung Fu ended when Carradine quit to pursue a movie career , but he reprised the role of Kwai Chang Caine in 1986 in Kung Fu : The Movie . Brandon Lee , son of Bruce Lee , in his acting debut , portrayed his son . 
 In 1991 , he reprised the role of Caine in a cameo appearance in the TV movie The Gambler Returns : The Luck of the Draw , in which Caine uses his Chinese friends to help the title character in 1903 San Francisco . 
 Early in the 1990s , Carradine once again reprised the role of Kwai Chang Caine in Kung Fu : The Legend Continues ( 1993 – 97 ) playing the grandson of the original character of the same name . Carradine starred in the program and served as executive producer and director . The program offered him the opportunity to recreate the character for which he was most widely recognized . The show was canceled in 1997 , after four seasons and 88 episodes . 
 = = = Movie career = = = 
 Immediately following the Kung Fu series , Carradine accepted the role as the race car driver Frankenstein in Death Race 2000 ( 1975 ) , he said , to " kill the image of Caine and launch a movie career " . The Roger Corman exploitation film became a cult classic . It was based on Ib Melchior 's first science fiction work , a short story called The Racer . 
 In 1976 , Carradine earned critical praise for his portrayal of folksinger Woody Guthrie in Hal Ashby 's Bound for Glory ( 1976 ) for which he won a National Board of Review Award for Best Actor . He was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award and New York Film Critics Circle Award for his role as Guthrie . Carradine worked very closely with his friend , singer @-@ songwriter @-@ guitarist Guthrie Thomas , on the Bound for Glory film . Thomas assisted Carradine in the guitar style of the period and the songs that had been chosen to be in the film itself . 
 Next came the role of the alcoholic , unemployed trapeze artist , Abel Rosenberg in The Serpent 's Egg ( 1977 ) . Set in post @-@ World War I Berlin , The Serpent 's Egg , which also starred Liv Ullmann , is together with The Touch one of the two only English @-@ language films made by legendary Swedish director Ingmar Bergman . Bergman said of his leading man , " I don 't believe in God , but Heaven must have sent him . " Carradine said that he and Bergman had plans for further collaboration , but the director 's affection for the actor waned when the latter passionately protested a scene which included the butchering of a horse . The altercation caused Carradine to question the fate of Bergman 's soul while the director declared , " Little Brother , I am an old whore . I have shot two other horses , burned one and strangled a dog . " 
 In 2000 he had a small part in the movie " By Dawn 's Early Light " . 
 When Bruce Lee died in 1973 , he left an unreleased movie script that he had developed with James Coburn and Stirling Silliphant called The Silent Flute . The script became Circle of Iron ( 1978 ) , and in the film , Carradine played the four roles that were originally intended for Lee . Carradine considered this to be among his best work . 
 In 1980 Carradine appeared in The Long Riders ( 1980 ) , with his half @-@ brothers Keith and Robert Carradine . The ensemble cast included three other brother / actor groupings : Stacy and James Keach ; Dennis and Randy Quaid , and Christopher and Nicholas Guest . The movie , which was about the Jesse James gang , gave Carradine , who played Cole Younger , one of his most memorable roles . 
 Throughout most of the 1980s and 1990s , David Carradine 's acting career suffered a decline . Although he continued to amass movie and television credits , few of his roles garnered much attention . Most of his work was released straight to video . However , a few of his movies , such as The Warrior and the Sorceress ( 1984 ) , Sundown : The Vampire in Retreat ( 1990 ) and Sonny Boy ( 1989 ) , developed cult followings . In 1989 , he starred in the low budget direct @-@ to @-@ video Swedish action movie The Mad Bunch directed by Mats Helge Olsson , making him one of three actors ( including Heinz Hopf and Tor <unk> ) who have starred in both an Ingmar Bergman movie and an Olsson movie . In 1997 , Carradine was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . The presenters played an " April Fool 's Day " prank on him by first unveiling a star bearing the name of his brother , Robert . 
 Carradine enjoyed a revival of his fame when he was cast in Quentin Tarantino 's sequential Kill Bill movies , in 2003 and 2004 . Among those who thought his portrayal of Bill , the assassin extraordinaire , would earn him an Academy Award nomination was Scott Mantz , of The <unk> , who said , " Carradine practically steals every scene he 's in with confident gusto , and he gives a soulful performance that should all but ensure a spot on next year 's Oscar ballot . " Roger Ebert and Richard Roeper each had Kill Bill Vol . 2 on their top ten list for of Academy Awards predictions . Although the films received no notice from the Academy , Carradine did receive a Golden Globe nomination and a Saturn Award , for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Bill . 
 Carradine also appeared as a mysterious martial artist , The Master , in the 2009 DVD premier Big Stan . 
 = = = Television appearances = = = 
 Carradine attracted notice in 1985 when he appeared in a major supporting role in North and South , a miniseries about the American Civil War , as the evil and abusive Justin <unk> . He was nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor for his performance . He also appeared in North and South , Book II , telecast in May 1986 . 
 In addition , he was featured in a Lipton Tea commercial , which first aired during the broadcast of Super Bowl XXVIII . The advertisement paid tribute to The Three Stooges while satirizing his role in Kung Fu . In 2001 , he appeared in the episode The Serpent of the syndicated TV series Queen of Swords as the sword @-@ wielding bandit El Serpiente filmed at Texas Hollywood studios in Almeria , Spain , home of many spaghetti westerns . David also did a guest appearance in episode 11 of Lizzie McGuire as himself . David Carradine took over hosting duties from his brother Keith on Wild West Tech on the History Channel , in 2005 . The same year he also played both himself and the ghost of a dead man for an episode of the NBC TV show Medium . By 2006 , he had become the spokesperson for <unk> , a publisher of independent telephone directories in the United States . He also appeared as the ghost of time , Clockwork , in two episodes of the animated series , Danny Phantom . He also starred in the 2008 TV movie , Kung Fu Killer , in which he played a Chinese martial arts master very similar to his Kung Fu series " Caine " persona — his character in this movie named " White Crane " , and mostly referred to or addressed as " Crane " , frequently spoken with a sort of accent that minimized the R sound . 
 = = = Posthumous releases = = = 
 The actor , who once received an award for being the hardest working member of his profession in Hollywood , still had approximately a dozen films in " post @-@ production " at the time of his death in 2009 . Most of these roles were cameos or small parts in independent , direct to DVD productions . Among them , a horror film , Dark Fields ( 2009 ) ; an action film , Bad Cop ( 2009 ) ; and a western , All Hell Broke Loose ( 2009 ) . 
 Carradine also appeared in a minor role in Yuen Woo @-@ ping 's Chinese kung fu epic True Legend . Carradine and Yuen first met while filming Kill Bill . Yuen eulogized Carradine on the True Legend website , describing him as a " good friend " . Yuen said of Carradine , " ' He is among the first Hollywood actors to perform Chinese martial arts on the big screen . In real life he is also a genuine kung fu fan , and knows tai chi , qi gong and Chinese medicine . Same as I , people shall always remember his role as Caine , the grasshopper , in Kung Fu , in the ' 70s , which was a really unforgettable performance . I feel both great honour and regret that True Legend is one of David Carradine 's last works . ' " 
 One of Carradine 's last leading roles was in the period drama Golden Boys , set in 1905 . It had only a limited theater run , and received little critical attention . It was released on DVD shortly after his death . 
 His final released movie was the Cult Indy Film , Night of the Templar , directed by his friend Paul Sampson , in which David wielded a sword ( katana ) for the final time on screen . Almost like a foreshadowing , there are several peculiar and eerie references in the film that are coincidental to Mr. Carradine 's untimely passing which include cross dressing and auto erotic asphyxiation . His last scene on screen ended in the following dialog : " Well , old friend , see you in the next life time ... " Yeah , Old Friends , Old Soul Mates " ... " Yes , we are . 
 Carradine co @-@ produced a full @-@ length documentary about luthier Stuart Mossman , which has been identified as the actor 's last film appearance . The Legend of Stuart Mossman : A Modern <unk> , directed by Barry Brown , premiered at the Santa Barbara International Film Festival , in February 2010 . It featured David , Keith and Robert Carradine performing their music on Mossman guitars . Mossman had appeared with Carradine in Cloud Dancer ( 1980 ) , which Brown also directed , and in The Long Riders . 
 On the small screen , Carradine appeared in a guest spot on the television series Mental that was broadcast just days after his death . On October 3 , 2009 , Celebrity Ghost Stories premiered on the Biography Channel with an interview of David Carradine discussing his belief that his closet was haunted by his wife 's deceased previous husband . The segment , which was described as " eerie " , was filmed four months before his own death . In his last of many collaborations with producer Roger Corman , Carradine appeared in the Syfy Channel 's science fiction monster movie <unk> Vs . <unk> , over a year after he died . Ken Tucker , writing for Entertainment Weekly , said the film was " impeccable " and " goofy fun all the way " . At the time of this release , there were still four more unreleased films that credited David Carradine , including Stretch , which he was filming at the time of his death . 
 = = Directing career = = 
 Carradine made his directorial debut on three episodes of Kung Fu . While still performing on Kung Fu , he tried his hand at directing some independent films of his own . Americana ( 1983 ) , took ten years to complete due to difficulty in financing . It featured Carradine in the starring role and several of his friends and family members in supporting roles . The film won the People 's Choice Award at the Director 's Fortnight at Cannes , but failed to achieve critical support or adequate distribution . Other directorial attempts included You and Me ( 1975 ) , and two unreleased productions : Mata Hari , an epic that starred his daughter , Calista ; and a short musical called A Country Mile . 
 = = Martial artist = = 
 Carradine knew nothing of the practice of kung fu at the time he was cast in the role of Kwai Chang Caine , instead he relied on his experience as a dancer for the part . He also had experience in sword fighting , boxing , and street fighting on which to draw . For the first half of the original series , David Chow provided technical assistance with kung fu . He never considered himself a master of the art , but rather an " evangelist " of kung fu . By 2003 he had acquired enough expertise in martial arts to produce and star in several instructional videos on T 'ai chi and Qigong . In 2005 , Carradine visited the Shaolin Monastery in Henan , China as part of the extra features for the third season of the Kung Fu DVDs . During his visit , the abbot , Shi <unk> , said that he recognized Carradine 's important contribution to the promotion of the Shaolin Monastery and kung fu culture , to which Carradine replied , " I am happy to serve . " 
 = = Music career = = 
 In addition to his acting career , David Carradine was a musician . He sang and played the piano , the guitar and the flute among other instruments . In 1970 , Carradine played one half of a flower power beatnik duo in the season 4 Ironside episode ' The <unk> ' , performing the songs ' I Stepped on a Flower ' , ' Lonesome Stranger ' and ' Sorrow of the Singing Tree ' . He recorded an album titled Grasshopper , which was released on Jet Records in 1975 . His musical talents were often integrated into his screen performances . He performed several of Woody Guthrie 's songs for the movie Bound for Glory . For the Kung Fu series he made flutes out of bamboo that he had planted on the Warner Brothers lot which he played on the program . He later made several flutes for the movie Circle of Iron , one of which he later played in Kill Bill . Carradine wrote and performed the theme songs for at least two movies that he starred in , Americana and Sonny Boy . The first line from the Sonny Boy theme , " Paint " , which he wrote while filming Americana in Drury , Kansas , in 1973 , is engraved on his headstone . He wrote and performed several songs for American Reel ( 2003 ) and wrote the score for You and Me . He and his brother , Robert , also performed with a band , the Cosmic Rescue Team ( also known as Soul Dogs ) . The band performed primarily in small venues and benefits . 
 = = Reports of arrests and prosecutions = = 
 By his own account , in the late 1950s , while living in San Francisco , young John A. Carradine was arrested for assaulting a police officer ; he pleaded to a lesser charge of disturbing the peace . While in the Army ( 1960 – 62 ) he faced court @-@ martial , on more than one occasion , for shoplifting . After he became an established actor and had changed his name to David , he was arrested , in 1967 , for possession of marijuana . 
 At the height of his popularity in Kung Fu , in 1974 , Carradine was arrested again , this time for attempted burglary and malicious mischief . While under the influence of peyote , Carradine , nude , began wandering around his Laurel Canyon neighborhood . He broke into a neighbor 's home , breaking a window and cutting his arm . He then bled all over the homeowner 's piano . At some time during this episode he accosted two young women , allegedly assaulting one while asking , or demanding of her , if she was a witch . The police literally followed a trail of blood to his home . The burglary charges were dropped , as nothing was found to be missing , while Carradine pleaded " no contest " to the mischief charge and was given probation . He was never charged with assault , but the young woman sued him for $ 1 @.@ 1 million and was awarded $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1980 , while in South Africa filming Safari 3000 ( also known as Rally ) , which co @-@ starred Stockard Channing , Carradine was arrested for possession of marijuana . He was convicted and given a suspended sentence . He claimed that he was framed , in this case , by the apartheid government as he had been seen dancing with Tina Turner . 
 During the 1980s , Carradine was arrested at least twice for driving under the influence of alcohol , once in 1984 and again in 1989 . In the second case , Carradine pleaded " no contest " . Of this incident , the Los Angeles Times reported : " legal experts say Carradine was handed a harsher @-@ than @-@ average sentence , even for a second @-@ time offender : three years ' summary probation , 48 hours in jail , 100 hours of community service , 30 days ' work picking up trash for the California Department of Transportation , attendance at a drunk driving awareness meeting and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program . " 
 In 1994 , while in Toronto filming Kung Fu : The Legend Continues , Carradine was arrested for kicking in a door at SkyDome while attending a Rolling Stones concert . When asked his reasoning , Carradine claimed he was " worried about getting swarmed by people who recognized him so he wanted to get into the building . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Shortly after being drafted into the Army in 1960 , Carradine proposed marriage to Donna Lee Becht ( born September 26 , 1937 ) , whom he had met while they were students at Oakland High School . They were married on Christmas Day that year . She lived with him off @-@ base in Virginia while he was stationed at Fort Eustis . In April 1962 , she gave birth to their daughter Calista . After Carradine 's discharge , the family lived in New York while Carradine established his acting career , appearing on Broadway in The Deputy and Royal Hunt of the Sun . The marriage dissolved in 1968 , whereupon Carradine left New York and headed back to California to continue his television and film careers . 
 In 1969 , Carradine met actress Barbara Hershey while the two of them were working on Heaven with a Gun . The pair lived together until 1975 . They appeared in other films together , including Martin Scorsese 's Boxcar Bertha . In 1972 , they appeared together in a nude Playboy spread , recreating some sex scenes from Boxcar Bertha . That year , Hershey gave birth to their son , Free ( who at age nine changed his name to Tom , much to his father 's chagrin ) . The couple 's relationship fell apart around the time of Carradine 's 1974 burglary arrest , when Carradine began an affair with Season Hubley , who had guest @-@ starred on Kung Fu . Carradine was engaged to Hubley for a time , but they never married . 
 In February 1977 , Carradine married , in a civil ceremony in Munich , Germany , his second wife , Linda ( née Linda Anne Gilbert , born March 16 , 1950 ) , immediately following the filming of The Serpent 's Egg . Linda is the former wife of The Byrds lead guitarist , Roger McGuinn , Her and Carradine 's daughter Kansas was born April 19 , 1978 . 
 Carradine 's second marriage ended in divorce , as did the two that followed . He was married to Gail Jensen , from 1986 – 1997 . She died in April 2010 , at the age of 60 , of an alcohol @-@ related illness . He was married to Marina Anderson from 1998 to 2001 . By this time , Carradine had proclaimed himself to be a " serial monogamist . " 
 On December 26 , 2004 , Carradine married the widowed Annie Bierman ( née Anne Kirstie Fraser , born December 21 , 1960 ) at the seaside Malibu home of his friend , Michael Madsen . Vicki Roberts , his attorney and a longtime friend of his wife 's , performed the ceremony . With this marriage he acquired three stepdaughters , Amanda <unk> ( born 1989 ) , Madeleine Rose ( born 1995 ) , and Olivia Juliette ( born 1998 ) as well as a stepson , actor Max Richard Carradine ( born 1998 ) . 
 In one of his final interviews , Carradine stated that at 71 , he was still " in excellent shape , " attributing it to a good diet and having a youthful circle of friends . " Everybody that I know is at least 10 or 20 years younger than I am . My wife Annie is 24 years younger than I am . My daughter asks why I don 't hang with women my age and I say ' Most of the women my age are a lot older than me ! ' " 
 = = Death = = 
 On June 3 , 2009 , at the age of 72 , David Carradine was found dead in his room at the Swissôtel Nai <unk> Park Hotel on Wireless Road , near <unk> Road , in central Bangkok , Thailand . He was in Bangkok to shoot his latest film , titled Stretch . A police official said that Carradine was found naked , hanging by a rope in the room 's closet , causing immediate speculation that his death was suicide . However , reported evidence suggested that his death was accidental , the result of autoerotic asphyxiation . Two autopsies were conducted , one involving the celebrity pathologist <unk> <unk> , and both concluded that the death was not a suicide . The cause of death became widely accepted as " accidental asphyxiation " . 
 Immediately following his death , two of Carradine 's former wives , Gail Jensen and Marina Anderson , stated publicly that his sexual interests included the practice of self @-@ bondage . Anderson , who had plans to publish a tell @-@ all book about her marriage to Carradine , said in an interview with Access Hollywood , " There was a dark side to David , there was a very intense side to David . People around him know that . " Previously , in her divorce filing , she had claimed that " it was the continuation of abhorrent and deviant sexual behavior which was potentially deadly . " 
 Photographs of Carradine at the death scene , as well as photographs of his autopsied body , were circulated in newspapers and on the Internet . His family , represented by his brothers , Keith and Robert , pleaded with the public and the press to let them mourn their loved one in peace . 
 Carradine 's funeral was held on June 13 , 2009 , in Los Angeles . His bamboo casket was buried at Forest Lawn Memorial Park . Among the many stars and family members who attended his private memorial were Tom Selleck , Lucy Liu , Frances Fisher , James Cromwell , Steve Railsback , and Chris Potter . His grave was marked on December 3 , 2009 . The monument proclaimed him to be " The Barefoot Legend " and included a quote from " Paint " , a song he wrote and performed as the theme to Sonny Boy , as an epitaph . 
 = = = Wrongful death suit and murder accusations = = = 
 On the first anniversary of his death , Carradine 's widow , Annie , announced that she had filed a lawsuit for wrongful death against the company that produced the film Carradine was working on at the time of his death . The lawsuit claimed that the company failed to provide assistance to the actor that had been agreed upon in his contract . " The suit alleges , the assistant left him behind for dinner on the night before the actor was found dead . The assistant and other film staffers apparently could not reach Carradine and decided to leave without him . Carradine called the assistant an hour later but was told the group was across town , and he would have to make his own arrangements that evening . " Annie Carradine reached a settlement with MK2 Productions in August 2011 . She was reported to be receiving about US $ 400 @,@ 000 from the company for Carradine 's death . 
 Also , in June 2010 , Marina Anderson , Carradine 's fourth ex @-@ wife , published David Carradine : The Eye of My Tornado , a memoir that discusses intimate details of their marriage . She also claimed publicly that she had conducted her own investigation of his death and concluded that he was murdered . Close friend Guthrie Thomas stated , upon hearing that suicide was the cause of Carradine 's death , " No one ties both of their hands behind their back previous to taking one 's own life . There had to be a second individual on the scene . " Thomas also is convinced that this tragedy appeared to be murder . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Saints Row ( 2006 ) - William Sharp ( voice ) 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 1966 Theatre World Award , Royal Hunt of the Sun 
 1974 TP de Oro , Spain . Best Foreign Actor , Kung Fu 
 1997 Gold Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame , Television 
 1998 : Honoree — The 16th Annual Golden Boot Awards ( along with brothers Keith and Robert ) 
 2005 : Action on Film International Film Festival Lifetime Achievement Award — First annual recipient 
 2005 : Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films , Saturn Award , Best Supporting Actor , Kill Bill : Volume 2 
 2008 Honoree — Walk of Western Stars 
 = Lathrop House ( Vassar College ) = 
 Lathrop House ( known officially as Edward Lathrop House ) was the third quadrangle dormitory built on Vassar College 's campus in the town of Poughkeepsie , New York . Constructed in 1901 and designed by Boston @-@ based Allen & Vance , the brick dorm stands five stories tall . Lathrop houses 180 students who may be any grade or gender . 
 = = History = = 
 Lathrop House was the third residential quadrangle ( quad ) dormitory built on the campus of Vassar College in the town of Poughkeepsie , New York . The college built Lathrop during a period of rapid dorm construction spanning 1893 – 1902 during which the older seminary @-@ style model of housing — a single large hall in which all a college 's residents lived , in Vassar 's case Main Building — was quickly waning in popularity in favor of smaller individual houses . The project began with the opening of Strong House in 1893 and continued with Raymond House in 1897 ; Lathrop followed in 1901 , and Davison House 's erection completed the quad in 1902 . Construction of the dorm was paid for with Vassar 's funds , unlike Strong House which had been paid for by a gift from John D. Rockefeller . 
 The dormitory is named after Dr. Edward Lathrop , one of Vassar 's charter trustees , and carries the full name Edward Lathrop House . Lathrop 's daughter , Julia , was a graduate of the Vassar class of 1880 . 
 In 1979 , the Intercultural Center , a multicultural student space , moved into Lathrop in spite of initial disagreement by members of the house two years earlier when the idea was first proposed . The Intercultural Center later moved out of Lathrop 's basement and into its own dedicated space in the early 1990s , at which point it was replaced by a Jewish co @-@ op and kitchen . In 1995 , the Kosher Co @-@ Op moved out of Lathrop and into a newly acquired Jewish house across the street from the college . 
 = = Architecture and features = = 
 Lathrop was designed by the Boston architectural firm of Francis Richmond Allen and J. McArthur Vance who were also responsible for the design of its neighbor , Davison House , in 1902 . <unk> a design for these two buildings was not difficult as a template had already been set by way of the preexisting Strong and Raymond Houses . Frederick Law Olmsted , a consultant of design for the college , recommended that any new dorms in the area be built in an " echelon formation " in order to provide for a greater sense of openness . Allen disregarded this advice , instead opting to place the dorm , along with Davison , in " two long unbroken rows of buildings on the bias " . Lathrop was ultimately placed north of Strong , across the quad to the east of Davison , and diagonally across from Raymond . 
 Lathrop stands five stories tall with an additional basement level . The dormitory , Elizabethan in style , is a brick building with elements of brownstone trim . The roof is a Vermont slate and from it rise five chimneys , each built with two wythes of brick and capped with bluestone . There are also multiple cupolas that are framed with wood , include painted louvered slats , and have topped with a coat of <unk> . The building also has parapets , unlike neighboring Strong . 
 The house is co @-@ ed and currently has a capacity of 180 students . Students in Lathrop , which houses students of all grades , may live in either single rooms , one @-@ room doubles , or three @-@ room triples . Bathrooms are shared by all members of a hall . 
 = Leeds Country Way = 
 The Leeds Country Way is a circular long @-@ distance footpath of 62 miles ( 99 km ) around Leeds , West Yorkshire , England . It is never more than 7 miles ( 11 km ) from Leeds City Square , but is mainly rural with extensive views in the outlying areas of the Leeds metropolitan district . It follows public Rights of Way including footpaths , bridleways and minor lanes , with a few short sections along roads . 
 = = History = = 
 A route was first devised by Fred Andrews of the Ramblers Association , and then developed by West Yorkshire County Council in the early 1980s . This council was abolished in 1986 , and the path is now under the care of the Countryside section of Leeds City Council . The Leeds Country Way was realigned in 2006 , using a route devised by Bob Brewster , to bring it entirely within the boundary of the Leeds metropolitan district ( previously it crossed the boundary into Wakefield ) , and the path was officially relaunched on 26 September 2006 with a revised set of map leaflets ( see external links ) and improved waymarking . 
 = = Route = = 
 The path is waymarked in both directions and can be started at any point , but is described here clockwise from the A660 road at Golden Acre Park ( grid reference <unk> ) , divided into parts and sections which correspond with the official map leaflets . 
 = = = Part 1 : Golden Acre to Barwick @-@ in @-@ Elmet = = = 
 Section 1 : The path crosses Golden Acre Park and passes the Yorkshire Wildlife Trust 's Adel Dam Nature Reserve , following the route of the <unk> Valley Trail . It coincides briefly with the Leeds link to the Dales Way north of Eccup Reservoir , before crossing the Ebor Way and entering the Harewood Estate . Here there is a glimpse of what looks like a small village , not marked on any map , but which is actually the set for the TV series Emmerdale . Walkers may also see red kites which have been successfully reintroduced in this area . 
 Section 2 : After crossing the A61 , the way passes north of Wike and reaches the village of Bardsey with its Anglo @-@ Saxon church tower and the Bingley Arms public house , which claims to be the oldest in England . The way turns south , crossing the <unk> , to <unk> . 
 Section 3 : The path continues through <unk> , crossing the A64 before entering Barwick @-@ in @-@ Elmet ( <unk> ) with England 's tallest maypole , a Norman motte and an Iron Age fort . 
 = = = Part 2 : Barwick @-@ in @-@ Elmet to Carlton = = = 
 Section 1 : From Barwick the way passes the southern corner of Scholes , then crosses the M1 motorway and enters Garforth . 
 Section 2 : It leaves Garforth along the disused Garforth @-@ Kippax railway line ( part of the North Eastern Railway and earlier the Leeds , Castleford and Pontefract Junction Railway ) , then approaches <unk> and passes Little Preston Old Hall . It skirts St Aidan 's Country Park , and crosses the River Aire at <unk> Bridge . The path follows the river downstream , past the marina at Fleet Bridge . 
 Section 3 : The path continues along the river , here forming the Aire and Calder Navigation , to <unk> , and then turns south to <unk> . It swings eastward , crosses the <unk> and continues to Carlton ( <unk> ) , heart of the West Yorkshire Rhubarb Triangle . 
 = = = Part 3 : Carlton to Cockersdale = = = 
 Section 1 : From Carlton the path crosses fields before briefly joining the A61 and recrossing the M1 south of Robin Hood . It turns south across the M62 , follows the valley of Dolphin Beck , and reaches East Ardsley on the <unk> . 
 Section 2 : From here the path skirts south of West Ardsley , and reaches <unk> with its historic church , on the <unk> . It passes the ruins of Howley Hall ( built 1590 for Sir John Savile ) before dropping down to reach Scotchman Lane . 
 Section 3 : A track through <unk> Brow Wood , just inside the Leeds @-@ <unk> boundary , leads to the <unk> , which is followed to recross the M62 . The path 's longest section of road walking follows the <unk> through Gildersome , then a series of field paths leads to Cockersdale ( <unk> ) , on the <unk> near Tong . 
 = = = Part 4 : Cockersdale to Golden Acre = = = 
 Section 1 : The path follows the valley of Cockersdale , and then goes along Tong Beck , below <unk> Moravian Settlement , skirting the south of Pudsey . At this point Tong Beck forms the Leeds @-@ Bradford boundary . The path crosses the Leeds to Bradford railway and meets the busy <unk> at Thornbury . 
 Section 2 : Passing playing fields and old quarries , the path crosses the Woodhall Hills and follows <unk> Beck to cross the Leeds and Liverpool Canal and the River Aire at <unk> Bridge , then follows the river past Woodhouse Grove School before climbing up to meet the <unk> south of Rawdon . 
 Section 3 : From here the path skirts Horsforth , follows for a time the southern boundary of Leeds Bradford International Airport , and goes round the northern edge of <unk> , before crossing Breary Marsh Local Nature Reserve to return to Golden Acre Park ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Practical aspects = = 
 As the route is circular it can be started at any point , but the description in the official leaflets starts and finishes at Golden Acre Park , going clockwise . These divide it into four parts each split into three sections , but walkers can choose to divide it in various ways as there are many bus routes and several railway stations ( <unk> , Garforth , New Pudsey and Horsforth ) on or near the path . West Yorkshire Metro provides information about bus routes serving the path and train services in the area . 
 The Ordnance Survey maps covering the route are : 
 <unk> 1 : 50 @,@ 000 sheet 104 ( Leeds : covers almost the whole route ) and 105 ( York : needed for a short distance near Garforth ) 
 Explorer 1 : 25 @,@ 000 sheets 289 ( Leeds : Golden Acre Park clockwise to Scotchman Lane ) and 288 ( Bradford : Scotchman Lane clockwise to Golden Acre Park ) . 
 The route is waymarked with an owl symbol , taken from the Leeds coat of arms . 
 The original route of the path is used for an annual trail running relay race organised by Kippax Harriers . Teams of twelve , with two runners taking each of six sections , complete the route in about seven hours . 
 = Tropical Storm Danielle ( 1980 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Danielle caused considerable flooding in the state of Texas during September 1980 . The eighth tropical cyclone and fourth named storm of the 1980 Atlantic hurricane season , Danielle developed from a tropical wave that emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on August 22 . Three days later , the tropical wave developed into a tropical depression . Four days later , the depression degenerated into a tropical wave . After tracking westward and entering the Gulf of Mexico , the system gradually developed , and became a tropical depression on September 4 . The depression gradually strengthened and became Tropical Storm Danielle only hours before landfall in eastern Texas on September 5 . Danielle steadily weakened inland and dissipated two days later . 
 Danielle produced widespread rainfall in Louisiana , though few areas reported more than 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of precipitation . Rainfall was heavier in Texas , peaking at 18 @.@ 29 inches ( 465 mm ) in Nederland . Much of the damage caused by the storm was as a resulting of flooding . In Port Arthur , twelve homes were damaged , while Interstate 10 was inundated by flood waters . Danielle also spawned several tornadoes in Texas , though none effects from them are unknown . Outside of Texas and Louisiana , the storm also dropped light rainfall in Oklahoma and Mississippi . Overall , Danielle caused three fatalities and at least $ 25 million ( 1980 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa on August 22 and tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean . On August 25 , the system developed into Tropical Depression Six . After four days , the depression degenerated back into a tropical wave , which continued westward across the Atlantic . By September 2 , the remnants of the depression then interacted with a mid @-@ level low pressure system over southern Florida . As a result , a low @-@ level circulation developed in the Gulf of Mexico as the system as a whole moved off Florida later that day . Organization continued and it is estimated that Tropical Depression Eight at 1800 UTC on September 4 , while located about 120 miles ( 190 km ) south of New Orleans , Louisiana . The National Hurricane Center began issuing advisories a few hours later . Furthermore , the National Hurricane Center later noted that strengthening was more likely if the depression remained offshore for a longer period of time . 
 Between 0600 and 1100 UTC , a barge known as the Glomar Tender II recorded sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . However , this measurement was deemed to be " small scale [ d ] " and not representative of the storm 's actual intensity . At 1700 UTC on September 5 , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Danielle , based on observations from reconnaissance aircraft and an oil rig . The oil rig , which was location near the coast of Louisiana , reported winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1 @,@ 004 mbar ( 29 @.@ 6 inHg ) ; this would later be considered the peak intensity of Danielle . A few hours later , Danielle made landfall near Galveston , Texas at the same intensity . The storm steadily weakened after moving inland and was downgraded to tropical depression by 1200 UTC on September 6 . About four hours later , the National Hurricane Center discontinued advisories on Danielle . However , the storm did not dissipate until 1200 UTC on September 7 , while located near Del Rio , Texas . The remnants of the storm continued westward for the next two days . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 As the storm was approaching , the National Weather Service issued flash flood watches from Freeport to Sabine Pass , Texas . Rainfall from the storm peaked at 18 @.@ 29 inches ( 465 mm ) in the town of Nederland . A 24 @-@ hour precipitation record of 17 @.@ 16 inches ( 436 mm ) was reported at the Southeast Texas Regional Airport in Beaumont . Due to heavy rainfall , an automobile accident in Beaumont resulted in one fatality . A police officer in Beaumont noted that almost every street in the city was flooded . The heavy rainfall resulted in considerable flash flooding in eastern Texas , causing residents to evacuate their homes . Flood waters also forced the shutdown of Interstate 10 . According to a police spokesman , at least 60 % of streets in Port Arthur were inundated by water . In Orange County , two people were injured in automobile accidents . Along Highway 124 , a bayou overflowed its bank . Because there were numerous inundated streets , police barricaded roads in Beaumont , Bridge City , Orange , Vidor , and Port Arthur . A sewer system in Roscoe was also damaged by flood waters , leaving 1 @,@ 500 residents without running water . In Port Arthur , twelve homes were reported flooded ; one house in the Lakeview neighborhood had 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) of water inside . Flood waters entered an oil pit at Port Neches , which sent at least 200 barrels of oil into the Neches River . 
 Danielle also produced tides 2 to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) above normal , causing minor beach erosion along the Texas coast . Several boats and docks on Lake Buchanan were damaged . A third fatality from the storm occurred when a fisherman 's boat on Sabine Lake capsized , causing the man to die of a heart attack during rescue . Danielle spawned several tornadoes in the state of Texas , one of which caused an estimated $ 1 @,@ 500 ( 1980 USD ) in damage to a storage barn in Galveston County on the Bolivar Peninsula . Another touched down twice in Beaumont and overturned a mobile home at a mobile home park . After the storm , the American Red Cross opened storm shelters for residents forced out of their homes because of the flooding . Due to adverse conditions , " hundreds " were left without electricity in Beaumont , Silsbee , Kountze , <unk> , and Fannett . In addition , then President of the United States Jimmy Carter declared Jefferson and Nolan counties as disaster area , allowing those areas to receive federal aid . Damage in Jefferson County alone totaled to $ 2 @.@ 7 million ( 1980 USD ) . Overall , Danielle caused two fatalities and between $ 25 million and $ 50 million ( 1980 USD ) in damage within the state of Texas . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In the Gulf of Mexico , rough seas from Danielle caused a maintenance barge to capsize , washing all 11 crewmen overboard . A fatality occurred when one of the crewmen drowned , though the other ten were rescued by the United States Coast Guard . Additionally , the storm also caused a United States Coast Guard helicopter to crash into the sea due to high winds and lack of fuel , though all twelve crewmen survived . Offshore , a barge encountered winds of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) with gusts up to 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) and light rainfall . 
 Danielle ’ s effects on southern and eastern Louisiana was minimal . The state received moderate to heavy rainfall ; there , the highest rainfall total there was 2 @.@ 23 inches ( 57 mm ) in Houma . Light rainfall was also reported in Oklahoma and Mississippi , with no areas reporting at least 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of precipitation . 
 = Tom Derrick = 
 Thomas Currie " Diver " Derrick , VC , DCM ( 20 March 1914 – 24 May 1945 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . In November 1943 , during the Second World War , Derrick was awarded the Victoria Cross for his assault on a heavily defended Japanese position at Sattelberg , New Guinea . During the engagement , he scaled a cliff face while under heavy fire and silenced seven machine gun posts , before leading his platoon in a charge that destroyed a further three . 
 Born in the Adelaide suburb of <unk> , South Australia , Derrick left school at the age of fourteen and found work in a bakery . As the Great Depression grew worse he lost his job and moved to Berri , working on a fruit farm before marrying in 1939 . In July 1941 , Derrick enlisted in the Second Australian Imperial Force , joining the 2 / 48th Battalion . He was posted to the Middle East , where he took part in the Siege of Tobruk , was recommended for the Military Medal and promoted to corporal . Later , at El Alamein , Derrick was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal for knocking out three German machine gun posts , destroying two tanks , and capturing one hundred prisoners . 
 Derrick returned to Australia with his battalion in February 1943 , before transferring to the South West Pacific Theatre where he fought in the battle to capture Lae . Back in Australia the following February he was posted to an officer cadet training unit , being commissioned lieutenant in November 1944 . In April 1945 his battalion was sent to the Pacific island of Morotai , an assembly point for the Allied invasion of the Philippines . Engaged in action the following month on the heavily defended hill Freda on Tarakan Island , Derrick was hit by five bullets from a Japanese machine gun . He died from his wounds on 24 May 1945 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Derrick was born in the Adelaide suburb of <unk> , South Australia , on 20 March 1914 to David Derrick , a labourer from Ireland , and his Australian wife , Ada ( née Whitcombe ) . The Derricks were poor , and Tom often walked barefoot to attend Sturt Street Public School and later Le Fevre Peninsula School . In 1928 , aged fourteen , Derrick left school and found work in a bakery . By this time , he had developed a keen interest in sports , particularly cricket , Australian Rules Football , boxing and swimming ; his diving in the Port River earned him the nickname of " Diver " . 
 With the advent of the Great Depression , Derrick scraped a living from odd jobs — such as fixing bicycles and selling newspapers — to supplement his job as a baker . When in 1931 , the Depression worsened , Derrick lost his bakery job and , with friends , headed by bicycle for the regional town of Berri , approximately 225 kilometres ( 140 mi ) away , in search of work . Jobs in Berri were hard to come by and Derrick and two friends spent the next few months living in a tent on the banks of the Murray River . When the annual Royal Adelaide Show opened that year , Derrick went to the boxing pavilion to accept a challenge of staying upright for three rounds with the ex @-@ lightweight champion of Australia . Although he was knocked down in the second round , he immediately got back to his feet and won the bet ; albeit at the cost of a black eye , and a few bruised ribs . 
 Eventually , towards the end of 1931 , Derrick found work picking fruit at a vineyard in Winkie , a short distance outside Berri . He later moved on to a full @-@ time job at a nearby fruit farm , remaining there for the next nine years . On 24 June 1939 , Derrick married <unk> Violet " Beryl " Leslie — his " one true love " whom he had met at a dance in Adelaide seven years earlier — at St Laurence 's Catholic Church , North Adelaide . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Derrick did not join up when war broke out in September 1939 but , like many Australians , enlisted after the fall of France in June 1940 . He joined the Second Australian Imperial Force on 5 July 1940 , and was posted to the 2 / 48th Battalion , 26th Brigade , as a private . Derrick first joined his unit at the Wayville Showgrounds , before basic training at Woodside . Derrick thrived on military life , but found discipline difficult to accept . 
 In October , the 2 / 48th Battalion paraded through the streets of Adelaide to Mitcham railway station prior to its embarkation for the Middle East . The battalion 's voyage overseas was postponed until 17 November , when the unit boarded the SS Stratheden . The ship made a stop at Perth , where Derrick was confined on board for going absent without leave to sightsee . He was soon in more trouble , and was charged and fined for punching another soldier who taunted him over this incident . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 On arrival in Palestine , the 2 / 48th Battalion encamped at El Kantara and began training in desert warfare . For relaxation , the battalion set up athletic events , and Derrick became well known for often winning cross @-@ country races — and for organising a book on the outcomes . In March 1941 , the unit went by train and truck to Alexandria , Egypt , then along the North African coast to Cyrenaica , in Libya , to join the 9th Australian Division . 
 After the 2 / 48th Battalion completed its training with the 9th Division at Cyrenaica , they were moved further along the coast to Gazala . Then , just as they began to dig in , the battalion was abruptly withdrawn to Tobruk in response to the German Afrika Korps ' advance . They entered Tobruk on 9 April 1941 , and spent the following eight months besieged by Axis forces . While there , Derrick acquired an Italian Breda machine gun and regularly led fighting patrols against both German and Italian troops . Although Derrick 's bravery was noted during the siege , he wrote in his diary about his constant fear of dying . 
 On the night of 30 April , the Axis forces assaulted Tobruk 's outer defences and managed to capture substantial ground . In response , the 2 / 48th Battalion was ordered to counter @-@ attack the following evening . During the ensuing engagement , Derrick fought as a section member in the far left flank of the attack . After suffering heavy casualties in what Derrick described as " a bobby dazzler of a fire fight " , the battalion was forced to withdraw . Praised for his leadership and bravery during the assault , Derrick was immediately promoted to corporal , and recommended for the Military Medal . The award , however , was never made . 
 In late May , Derrick discovered a German posing as a British tank officer and reported him to company headquarters ; the man was immediately arrested as a spy . Following a period of heavy fighting in June , the 2 / 48th Battalion was placed in reserve for a few days the following month . Promoted to platoon sergeant in September , Derrick — along with the rest of his battalion — was withdrawn from Tobruk and returned to Palestine aboard HMS Kingston on 22 October . Disembarking at Tel Aviv , they were given three days ' leave in the city , before returning for training . 
 Following a period of rest and light garrison duties in Syria , the 2 / 48th Battalion was rushed to El Alamein , Egypt , to reinforce the British Eighth Army . During the First Battle of El Alamein on 10 July 1942 , Derrick took part in the 26th Australian Brigade 's attack on Tel el Eisa . In the initial assault , Derrick , against a barrage of German grenades , led an attack against three machine gun posts and succeeded in destroying the positions before capturing over one hundred prisoners . During the Axis counter @-@ attack that evening , the Australian line was overrun by tanks . As the German infantry following the tanks advanced , Derrick 's company led a charge against the men . During the engagement , Derrick managed to destroy two German tanks using sticky bombs . Commended for his " outstanding leadership and courage " , Derrick was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal for his part in the fighting at Tel el Eisa . The award was announced in a supplement to the London Gazette on 18 February 1943 . 
 Promoted to sergeant on 28 July , Derrick led a six @-@ man reconnaissance on 3 October , successfully pinpointing several German machine gun positions and strongholds ; this information was to be vital for the upcoming Second Battle of El Alamein . The El Alamein offensive was launched on 23 October , with the 9th Australian Division taking part . At one point during the engagement , Derrick jumped up onto an Allied gun carrier heading towards the Germans . Armed with a Thompson submachine gun and under intense heavy fire , Derrick attacked and knocked out three machine gun posts while standing in the carrier . He then had the driver reverse up to each post so he could ensure each position was silenced . By the following morning , Derrick 's platoon occupied all three posts . The members of the 2 / 48th Battalion who witnessed Derrick 's action were sure he would be awarded the Victoria Cross , though no recommendation was made . 
 For part of 31 October , Derrick assumed command of his company after all of the unit 's officers had been killed or wounded in fierce fighting . On 21 November 1942 , Derrick was briefly admitted to the 2 / 3rd Australian Field Ambulance with slight shrapnel wounds to his right hand and buttock . Twelve days later , the 2 / 48th Battalion left El Alamein and returned to Gaza in Palestine , where , later that month , Derrick attended a corps patrolling course . In January 1943 , the 2 / 48th Battalion sailed home to Australia , aboard the S.S. Nieuw Amsterdam , along with the rest of the 9th Division . 
 = = = South West Pacific = = = 
 Disembarking at Port Melbourne in late February 1943 , Derrick was granted a period of leave and travelled by train to Adelaide where he spent time with Beryl . He rejoined his battalion — now encamped in the outskirts of Adelaide — before they went by train to the Atherton Tableland for training in jungle warfare . Brought up to full strength by the end of April , the 2 / 48th Battalion completed its training following landing @-@ craft exercises near Cairns . On 23 July , Derrick was attached to the 21st Brigade Headquarters but admitted to hospital for old injuries to his right eye later the same day . After hospital , Derrick returned briefly to Brigade before rejoining the 2 / 48th Battalion on 27 August . 
 For much of August , the 2 / 48th Battalion had been in training for the Allied attack on Lae , in Papua New Guinea . The unit 's objective was to land on a strip of land designated as " Red Beach " , and then fight their way approximately 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) west towards Lae . Following a bombardment by American destroyers , Derrick 's wave landed on the beach with minimal casualties on 4 September . Ten days later , the 2 / 48th Battalion 's C Company — led by Derrick 's platoon — captured Malahang airstrip , before Lae fell to the Allies on 16 September . Derrick was scornful of the Japanese defence of Lae , and wrote in his diary that " our greatest problem was trying to catch up " with the retreating Japanese force . 
 = = = = Victoria Cross = = = = 
 Following Lae , the 9th Division was tasked to seize Finschhafen , clear the Huon Peninsula and gain control of the Vitiaz Strait . By 2 October , one of the division 's brigades had gained a foothold on Finschhafen , but soon encountered fierce Japanese resistance . In response to a Japanese counter @-@ attack , the 26th Brigade was transferred to reinforce the Australian position on 20 October and , when the division switched to the offensive in November , the brigade was ordered to capture Sattelberg . Sattelberg was a densely wooded hill rising 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 1 @,@ 100 yd ) and dominating the Finschhafen region ; it was in an assault on this position that Derrick was to earn the Victoria Cross . 
 The Australian attack on Sattelberg began in mid @-@ November , with the Japanese slowly giving ground and withdrawing back up the precipitous slopes . Each side suffered heavy casualties , and on 20 November , Derrick — who had been acting as company sergeant major for the previous month — was given command of B Company 's 11 platoon after the unit had " lost all but one of their leaders " . By 22 November , the 2 / 23rd and 2 / 48th Battalions had reached the southern slopes of Sattelberg , holding a position approximately 600 metres ( 660 yd ) from the summit . A landslide had blocked the only road , so the final assault was made by infantry alone , without supporting tanks . 
 On 24 November , the 2 / 48th Battalion 's B Company was ordered to outflank a strong Japanese position sited on a cliff face , prior to attacking a feature 140 metres ( 150 yd ) from the Sattelberg township . The nature of the terrain meant that the only possible route was up a slope covered with kunai grass directly beneath the cliffs . Over a period of two hours , the Australians made several attempts to clamber up the slopes to reach their objective , but each time they were repulsed by intense machine gun fire and grenade attacks . As dusk fell , it appeared impossible to reach the objective or even hold the ground already gained , and the company was ordered to withdraw . In response , Derrick replied to his company commander : " Bugger the CO . Just give me twenty more minutes and we 'll have this place . Tell him I 'm pinned down and can 't get out . " 
 Moving forward with his platoon , Derrick attacked a Japanese post that had been holding up the advance . He destroyed the position with grenades and ordered his second section around to the right flank . The section soon came under heavy machine gun and grenade fire from six Japanese posts . <unk> up the cliff face under heavy fire , Derrick held on with one hand while lobbing grenades into the weapon pits with the other , like " a man ... shooting for [ a ] goal at basketball " . Climbing further up the cliff and in full view of the Japanese , Derrick continued to attack the posts with grenades before following up with accurate rifle fire . Within twenty minutes , he had reached the peak and cleared seven posts , while the demoralised Japanese defenders fled from their positions to the buildings of Sattelberg . 
 Derrick then returned to his platoon , where he gathered his first and third sections in preparation for an assault on the three remaining machine gun posts in the area . Attacking the posts , Derrick personally rushed forward on four separate occasions and threw his grenades at a range of about 7 metres ( 7 @.@ 7 yd ) , before all three were silenced . Derrick 's platoon held their position that night , before the 2 / 48th Battalion moved in to take Sattelberg unopposed the following morning . The battalion commander insisted that Derrick personally hoist the Australian flag over the town ; it was raised at 10 : 00 on 25 November 1943 . 
 The final assault on Sattelberg became known within the 2 / 48th Battalion as ' Derrick 's Show ' . Although he was already a celebrity within the 9th Division , the action brought him to wide public attention . On 23 March 1944 , the announcement and accompanying citation for Derrick 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette . It read : 
 Government House , Canberra . 23rd March 1944 . 
 The KING has been graciously pleased to approve the award of the VICTORIA CROSS to : - 
 Sergeant Thomas Currie Derrick , <unk> , Australian Military Forces . 
 For most conspicuous courage , outstanding leadership and devotion to duty during the final assault on Sattelberg in November , 1943 . 
 On 24th November , 1943 , a company of an Australian Infantry Battalion was ordered to outflank a strong enemy position sited on a precipitous cliff @-@ face and then to attack a feature 150 yards from the township of Sattelberg . Sergeant Derrick was in command of his platoon of the company . Due to the nature of the country , the only possible approach to the town lay through an open kunai patch situated directly beneath the top of the cliffs . Over a period of two hours many attempts were made by our troops to clamber up the slopes to their objective , but on each occasion the enemy prevented success with intense machine @-@ gun fire and grenades . 
 Shortly before last light it appeared that it would be impossible to reach the objective or even to hold the ground already occupied and the company was ordered to retire . On receipt of this order , Sergeant Derrick , displaying dogged tenacity , requested one last attempt to reach the objective . His request was granted . 
 Moving ahead of his forward section he personally destroyed , with grenades , an enemy post which had been holding up this section . He then ordered his second section around on the right flank . This section came under heavy fire from light machine @-@ guns and grenades from , six enemy posts . Without regard for personal safety he clambered forward well ahead of the leading men of the section and hurled grenade after grenade , so completely demoralising the enemy that they fled leaving weapons and grenades . By this action alone the company was able to gain its first foothold on the precipitous ground . 
 Not content with the work already done , he returned to the first section , and together with the third section of his platoon advanced to deal with the three remaining posts in the area . On four separate occasions he dashed forward and threw grenades at a range of six to eight yards until these positions were finally silenced . 
 In all , Sergeant Derrick had reduced ten enemy posts . From the vital ground he had captured the remainder of the Battalion moved on to capture Sattelberg the following morning . 
 Undoubtedly Sergeant Derrick 's fine leadership and refusal to admit defeat , in the face of a seemingly impossible situation , resulted in the capture of Sattelberg . His outstanding gallantry , thoroughness and devotion to duty were an inspiration not only to his platoon and company but to the whole Battalion . 
 = = = = Later war service = = = = 
 The 2 / 48th Battalion remained at Sattelberg until late December 1943 , when it returned to the coast in order to regroup . On Christmas Eve , Derrick noted in his diary that the next day would be his " 4th Xmas overseas " and " I don 't care where I spend the next one I only hope I 'm still on deck [ alive ] " . On 7 February 1944 , the battalion sailed from Finschhafen for Australia , disembarking at Brisbane . Granted home leave , Derrick made his way to South Australia for a short period with Beryl . In April , he was admitted to hospital suffering from malaria before returning to his battalion the following month . During this time , he was charged with being absent without leave and subsequently forfeited a day 's pay . 
 On 20 August 1944 , Derrick was posted to an officer cadet training unit in Victoria . He requested that he be allowed to rejoin the 2 / 48th Battalion at the end of the course ; contrary to normal Army policy that prevented officers commissioned from the ranks from returning to their previous units . An exemption was granted to Derrick only after much lobbying . While at this unit , Derrick shared a tent with Reg Saunders , who later became the Army 's first Indigenous Australian officer . 
 Commissioned as a lieutenant on 26 November 1944 , Derrick was granted twenty @-@ four days leave . Returning to the 2 / 48th Battalion as a reinforcement officer , his appointment as a platoon commander in his old company was met by " great jubilation " . During this period , the battalion had been posted to Ravenshoe on the Atherton Tablelands for " an extensive training period " , before being transported from Cairns to Morotai during April 1945 . It was around this time that Derrick converted from his Church of England religious denomination and <unk> beliefs to Catholicism — his wife 's religion — though he was not overtly religious . 
 On 1 May 1945 , Derrick took part in the landing at Tarakan ; an island off the coast of Borneo . Under the cover of a naval and aerial bombardment , he led his men ashore in the initial waves of the landing , where they were initially posted at the boundary of the 2 / 48th Battalion and 2 / 24th Battalion 's area of responsibility . The Japanese force on the island mounted a determined resistance , and Derrick was later quoted in the Sunday Sun as saying he had " never struck anything so tough as the Japanese on Tarakan " . 
 Slowly pushing inland , the 2 / 48th Battalion 's main task from 19 May was to capture a heavily defended hill code @-@ named Freda . Derrick 's platoon unsuccessfully probed Japanese positions on that day and the next , at a loss of two men killed with others wounded . He later recorded in his diary that these setbacks were a " bad show " . On 21 May , Derrick and Lieutenant Colonel Bob Ainslie , the 2 / 48th Battalion 's commander , debated the optimum size of the unit which should be used to capture the Freda position . Derrick successfully argued that a company was best , given the restrictions posed by the terrain . He was in high spirits that night , possibly in an attempt to lift his platoon 's morale . On 22 May , Derrick 's was one of two platoons that attacked a well @-@ defended knoll and captured the position . Derrick played a key role in this action , and coordinated both platoons during the final assault that afternoon . 
 After capturing the knoll , the two platoons — reinforced by two sections of the 2 / 4th Commando Squadron — dug in to await an expected Japanese counter @-@ attack . At about 03 : 30 on 23 May , a Japanese light machine gun fired into the Australian position . Derrick sat upright to see if his men were all right , and was hit by five bullets from the gun 's second burst ; striking him from his left hip to the right of his chest . His runner , " Curly " Colby , dragged him behind cover , but Derrick could not be immediately evacuated as Japanese troops attacked at about 04 : 00 . Derrick was in great pain , and told Colby that he had " had it " . Despite his wounds , he continued to issue orders for several hours . When day broke , it was discovered that Derrick 's platoon were directly overlooked by a Japanese bunker — though this would not have been visible during the assault late the previous evening . 
 When stretcher bearers reached the position at dawn , Derrick insisted that the other wounded be attended to first . Derrick was carried off Freda later that morning , where he was met by the 26th Brigade 's commander , Brigadier David Whitehead . The two men briefly conversed before Derrick excused himself , fearing that he had not much time left and wishing to see the padre . Stepping back , Whitehead saluted and sent for Father Arch Bryson . At the hospital , surgeons found that bullets had torn away much of Derrick 's liver ; he died on 24 May 1945 during a second operation on his wounds . He was buried in the 2 / 48th Battalion 's cemetery on Tarakan that afternoon , and later re @-@ interred at the Labuan War Cemetery , plot 24 , row A , grave 9 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Tom Derrick was widely mourned . His widow , Beryl , became prostrate with grief on hearing of his death ; many members of the Army were affected , with one soldier lamenting it felt as if " the whole war stopped " . By the time Derrick 's death was officially announced on 30 May , most Australians on Tarakan had heard the news and rumours had spread claiming that he had been speared or shot at short range by a sub @-@ machine gun . 
 The Japanese force on Tarakan learned of Derrick 's death and tried to exploit it for propaganda purposes . They printed a leaflet which began " We lament over the death of Lieutenant General <unk> <unk> of Allied Force in Tarakan " and later included the question " what do you think of the death in action of your Commander in Chief ... ? " This leaflet reached few Australian soldiers , and had little impact on them . " Tokyo Rose " also broadcast taunts over " <unk> 's " death . 
 Derrick 's reputation continued to grow after his death , and many Australian soldiers recalled any association , however slight , they had with him . To many Australians , he embodied the ' ANZAC spirit ' , and he remains perhaps the best @-@ known Australian soldier of the Second World War . Historian Michael McKernan later remarked that , for his war service , Derrick had arguably deserved " a VC and two bars ... at El Alamein , at Sattelberg and now at Tarakan " . In a 2004 television interview , then Chief of the Australian Defence Force , General Peter Cosgrove , was asked " Who was the best soldier of all time ? " After a short pause , he replied : " Diver Derrick " . This sentiment was endorsed by General Sir Francis Hassett . Hassett — who , as a lieutenant colonel , had served at Finschhafen with II Corps headquarters — stated : 
 From what I learnt ; not only was Derrick a magnificent soldier , but also a splendid leader who , immediately he saw a tactical problem , fixed it with either personal bravery or leadership imbued with determination and common sense . 
 Derrick is also remembered for his personal qualities . He was sensitive and reflective . Despite a limited education , he was a " forceful and logical debater , with a thirst for knowledge " . Derrick kept a diary , composed poetry , collected butterflies and frequently wrote to his wife , while on active service . Historian Peter Stanley has compared Derrick 's leadership abilities with those of Edward ' Weary ' Dunlop , Ralph Honner and Roden Cutler . 
 On 7 May 1947 , Beryl Derrick attended an investiture ceremony at the Government House , Adelaide , where she was presented with her late husband 's Victoria Cross and Distinguished Conduct Medal by the Governor of South Australia , Lieutenant General Sir Charles Norrie . Derrick 's Victoria Cross and other medals are now displayed at the Australian War Memorial , Canberra , along with a portrait by Sir Ivor Hele . A street in the neighbouring suburb of Campbell and a rest stop in the Remembrance Driveway between Sydney and Canberra were also named in his honour . In 1995 , a public park was named the Derrick Memorial Reserve on Carlisle St , Glanville in his honour , and his VC citation is displayed on a plaque there . In June 2008 , a newly built bridge over the Port River on the Port River Expressway was named the Tom ' Diver ' Derrick Bridge following a public campaign . 
 = Köllnischer Park = 
 Köllnischer Park is a public park located near the River Spree in Mitte , Berlin . It is named after Cölln , one of the two cities which came together to form Berlin ; the park location was originally just outside it . Approximately 1 hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) in area , the park came into existence in the 18th and 19th centuries on the site of fortifications . It was redesigned as a public park in 1869 – 73 and was further modified in the 20th century with the addition of first a bear enclosure , the Bärenzwinger , and later a permanent exhibition of sculpture , the Lapidary . The park is a registered Berlin landmark . 
 The park contains five buildings , the first of them being the Märkisches Museum , a complex of buildings . The complex was built between 1907 and 1907 , and was designed by Ludwig Hoffmann . The second was the Bärenzwinger , next to the south entrance to the park . This was built between 1938 and 1939 on the site of a former sanitation depot , and was designed by Ludwig Hoffmann . The Bärenzwinger has contained up to five bears at once , and currently contains three bears . At the east end of the park there is the Landesversicherungsanstalt building , a large office building designed by Alfred Messel , to be the headquarters of the Landesversicherungsanstalt , an insurance company . The fourth building is the AOK building , a six @-@ storey steel @-@ framed office building built from purplish brick , on the south side of the park , opposite the Bärenzwinger . The final building is the Volksbadeanstalt , on the western side of the park . It was built in 1888 as a public bath . 
 = = Location and name = = 
 The park lies between <unk> on the north side , the Straße am Köllnischen Park on the east side , Rungestraße on the south side and <unk> on the west side . Its boundaries are not clearly delimited ; on the west side there are some buildings between the park and the street , including the former building of the <unk> Gymnasium , built in 1865 – 68 and now used as a music school , and on the north side , facing the river , is the Märkisches Museum . The western edge is dominated by a large office building built in 1903 / 04 as the headquarters of the <unk> , which has been used for the past few years by the Department of Urban Development of the Senate of Berlin , and the southern by the 1931 / 32 building of the German health insurance group Allgemeine <unk> , which under the German Democratic Republic was the <unk> Karl Marx . 
 The park is accessible via the Märkisches Museum U @-@ Bahn station on line U2 and bus number 147 . It is also close to the promenade which has been created along the bank of the Spree south of the Jannowitzbrücke . 
 = = History = = 
 The site of Köllnischer Park was just outside Cölln in the Middle Ages . Until the mid @-@ 17th century , it was undeveloped low @-@ lying , swampy land prone to flooding by the Spree . Following the decision by Frederick William , the ' Great Elector ' to encircle Berlin with fortifications , this became the location of Bastion VII , which was known at the time as " the <unk> in the morass ' . The work required the creation of large embankments and lasted until 1683 ; the swampland around the bastion was not fully drained until 1687 . After such lengthy construction , the works were already out of date militarily , and after 1700 served only to control the comings and goings of visitors and residents , prevent desertion , and enable the collection of tolls on those entering the city . By 1700 , Mulberry trees had been planted on the walls , but only ' persons of rank ' were permitted to promenade along them . After Berlin had grown considerably and the Customs Wall had been built around it , King Frederick William I ( 1688 – 1740 ) ordered the defensive walls to be demolished . Civilian buildings had already grown up on the bastions ; a windmill and a house for the miller were built on Bastion VII , and these caused the eastern portion to be left standing longer than other parts of the fortifications . Some of the rubble from the demolished fortifications was used to build up Wilhelmstraße ; the rest was thrown into the defensive ditch outside the walls . 
 In 1736 , Frederick William I gave the site of the park and the Märkisches Museum to one of his generals , Friedrich Sebastian <unk> Truchseß , Count of Waldburg , who built a house there and laid out an extensive garden . After his death in the Battle of <unk> , David <unk> , a merchant and banker , bought the land and was also given the remaining eastern bastion section ; from 1750 onwards , he operated Berlin 's first sugar processing plant on the site , and also enlarged and improved the garden . In 1779 , the baroque garden was mentioned by the bookseller and author Friedrich Nicolai : " It has very charming areas , in particular it includes an open pavilion on a rise , which is small , but has tall trees growing upon it " . The sugar plant was forced to close in 1788 . The buildings on the site were then used in succession as tobacco storage , a hospital , a workhouse , and a men 's lunatic asylum . The Märkisches Museum was later built there . <unk> 's heirs sold the garden and in 1799 it was acquired by a Freemason lodge , the Große National @-@ <unk> zu den drei <unk> ( Grand National Mother Lodge of the Three Globes ) . The Freemasons built a lodge building which opened in December 1800 , and developed the remainder into a landscape garden , one of the most attractive gardens in Berlin . 
 In 1858 / 59 <unk> was extended through the garden to connect <unk> Straße to the city centre , and the Lodge was forced to sell the larger , eastern portion of the site to the city . The <unk> Gymnasium was then built there . How to use the remainder of the site was discussed for years ; a desire to preserve the trees led to the rejection of several commercial proposals . On 15 April 1869 , the Assembly of City Deputies ( <unk> ) decided to establish a public playground ( probably one of the first in the city ) and ' promenade location ' there on plans drawn up by the first city director of gardens , Gustav Meyer , dedicated the necessary funds , and urged rapid execution of the plan . The plan involved some new plantings , fencing , and benches . This renovation was completed in 1873 . The park reached its current dimensions in 1883 after the ditch was filled in . Ludwig Hoffmann , the architect of the Märkisches Museum ( completed in 1907 ) , then made some changes including creating views across the park to the new museum . The last major modification of the park took place in 1969 – 71 to designs by Eberhard Jaenisch , Stefan Rauner and <unk> Schulz : a mound which remained on the site of the bastion was levelled , a children 's playground was added , a terrace was built behind the museum , and the Lapidary was created . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 = = = Lapidary = = = 
 The Lapidary is an open @-@ air museum of primarily stone artworks , both originals and copies , which formerly decorated buildings that no longer exist . Some are set into the walls around a 1969 terrace , while others are freestanding at various locations in the park . For example , in the walls of the terrace there are fragments of five carved heads from the keystones over windows , supposed to be from the Old City Hall of Berlin in <unk> Straße and attributed to Georg Gottfried <unk> ; two allegorical reliefs ; 17th- and 18th @-@ century building signs ; a late Gothic vault keystone ; and a 16th @-@ century sandstone relief from the <unk> . 
 The freestanding sculptures include amongst others : 
 a larger @-@ than @-@ life sandstone sculpture of Hercules fighting the Nemean Lion , at the eastern entrance to the park , was modelled in 1787 by Gottfried <unk> and executed in 1791 by Conrad Nicolas Boy . The work originally decorated a bridge over the <unk> , was moved in 1891 to the <unk> ( Hercules Bridge ) over the Landwehr Canal , was placed in storage in 1934 and was installed in the park in 1971 . 
 two groups of putti , also in sandstone , from the balustrade of the New Palace in Potsdam . 
 a mid @-@ 19th @-@ century terracotta fountain in Italian Renaissance style from the garden of a villa in the <unk> section of <unk> 
 an oversize sandstone vase with bulls ' head handles created after a classical model by an artist in the school of Friedrich Christian <unk> ( 1714 – 1752 ) for the attic course of the colonnades at Sanssouci . 
 = = = Zille Memorial and Neo @-@ Renaissance Fountain = = = 
 Modern and thus atypical of the sculptures in the park is the bronze statue of the artist Heinrich Zille , which was created in 1964 – 65 by Heinrich Drake for an exhibition in the <unk> Park and afterwards moved to Köllnischer Park . It is listed as a landmark by the City of Berlin . 
 At the Rungestraße corner of the park there is a historic fountain from a private garden in <unk> . Moved to the park in 1971 , it was made in about 1860 and is known as the Neo @-@ Renaissance Fountain . It is currently enclosed for repairs . 
 = = = <unk> Bär = = = 
 The <unk> Bär ( or <unk> Bär ) is a small round tower , with tiled walls and a helmet @-@ shaped sandstone cupola topped with a carved trophy display of weaponry , which was formerly part of a weir regulating the water level in the ditch that formed part of the wall defences . Bär in this case derives from the Latin <unk> , meaning " weir " , and it was apparently named for <unk> because the road to that town passed by its original location at Bastion VII . It was moved to the park in 1893 and is now incorporated into the Lapidary . It is listed as a Berlin landmark . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 = = = Märkisches Museum = = = 
 The Märkisches Museum was built between 1901 and 1907 . It was designed by Ludwig Hoffmann as a complex of buildings representing architecture of the Mark Brandenburg and North Germany in general in the Romanesque , Gothic , and Renaissance periods . 
 = = = Bärenzwinger = = = 
 Next to the south entrance to the park is the Bärenzwinger ( bear pit ) . This was built in 1938 – 39 on the site of a former sanitation depot , also designed by Ludwig Hoffmann and already decorated with more than 50 plaques by Otto Lessing depicting bears , and a public lavatory , and opened on 17 August 1939 . It consists of indoor sleeping quarters and outdoor exercise areas which have held as many as five bears ( the armorial animal of Berlin ) who are the official bears or mascots of the city . The impetus for building the Bärenzwinger was a letter to the newspaper Berliner Zeitung am Mittag ( now <unk> ) from Wilfried Bade which appeared the day after the end of the celebration of the city 's 700 @-@ year anniversary , and the Lord Mayor , Julius Lippert , had it completed despite objections from some Nazi functionaries that there were more important things to be done in what proved to be the run @-@ up to World War II . Two of the original bears were gifts from Bern , which also has a bear on its arms . It remains largely unchanged , although it had to be reconstructed after the war ; it reopened in 1949 with two new bears , again from Bern ; one of these , <unk> , produced 33 cubs ( including 4 sets of triplets and 9 pairs of twins ) before being retired to the zoo . There is currently only one bear , <unk> , who is also the official city bear ; until her death in August 2013 , her daughter Maxi also lived there . The Bärenzwinger is a listed Berlin landmark . It was threatened with closure in 1990 due to lack of funds for needed modernisation , but after public protest , the Berlin Senate undertook to pay for the project . <unk> heating in the cages and a skylight dome were added , and the electricity supply was overhauled . The facility reopened in 1993 and celebrated its 70th anniversary in 2009 . Some animal protection advocates , including the city 's own animal protection officer , have called for it to be closed as <unk> and inhumane . 
 = = = Landesversicherungsanstalt building = = = 
 East of the park at Am Köllnischen Park 3 is a large office building which was designed by Alfred Messel as the headquarters of the Landesversicherungsanstalt Berlin , the social insurance for Berlin within Bismarck 's old age and disability insurance system . Built in 1903 / 04 , the building echoes the Märkisches Museum , which was built at the same time , in the use of red brick on its façade and is in Expressionist @-@ Baroque style , with giant pilasters which rise uninterrupted from the street to the roofline , between which are limestone decorative elements in the form of <unk> balustrades , allegorical figures , and cartouches with craft symbols , such as an iron between pairs of scissors . Over the southern entrance is a sculpture of a group of men in classical style with the motto " <unk> für alle — alle für einen " ( One for all — all for one ) . The building originally had a tower , which was destroyed in World War II . After the war it was the headquarters of the East German Social Security Administration . It now houses offices of the Berlin Senate Department of Urban Development , and one of the courtyards has been roofed over and houses a permanent exhibition of plans for the redevelopment of the city . It forms part of an ensemble of buildings to either side of the Märkisches Museum which are registered as a city landmark . 
 = = = AOK building = = = 
 The 6 @-@ storey steel @-@ framed office building in purplish brick on the south side of the park at Rungestraße 3 – 6 and 7 , opposite the Bärenzwinger , was designed by Albert <unk> ( his last work before he was forced to leave Berlin ) and built in 1931 – 32 as the headquarters of the Berlin affiliate of the Allgemeine <unk> ( AOK ) insurance group . The façade is " an outstanding example of late Expressionist architecture " , featuring decorative brickwork and pillars , of which the six on the flanking staircase sections are emphasised by terracotta statues . Under the German Democratic Republic , the building housed the Party Academy of the governing Socialist Unity Party from 1955 onwards ; a modern extension was built in the mid @-@ 1970s , designed by an architectural team led by Friedrich <unk> . During this period the building was renamed the Haus am Köllnischen Park . In summer 1990 , after German reunification , the institution closed and the building reverted to the possession of the AOK . As of 2007 , it houses their legal division . It is a registered city landmark . 
 = = = Volksbadeanstalt = = = 
 On the western side of the park is the Volksbadeanstalt , which was designed by Ende und <unk> and built in 1888 as a public bath . The Berliner Verein für <unk> erected it and another in the <unk> with assistance from the city , for the purpose of " enabling the less prosperous inhabitants of Berlin to receive the benefit of a warm bath in every season of the year , at the most economical price conceivable " . The buildings had an " English @-@ industrial " appearance and were horizontally organised with a taller central section giving an impression of " importance , balance and pragmatism " and ornamented with round arches over doors and windows and an acorn motif . 
 = = Historical views in and around the park = = 
 = Plas Mawr = 
 Plas Mawr ( English : Great Hall ) is an Elizabethan townhouse in Conwy , North Wales , dating from the 16th century . The property was built by Robert Wynn , a member of the local gentry , following his marriage to his first wife , Dorothy Griffith . Plas Mawr occupied a plot of land off Conwy 's High Street and was constructed in three phases between 1576 and 1585 at a total cost of around £ 800 . Wynn was known for his hospitality , and the household was supported by Wynn 's local dairy herds , orchards and gardens . On his death he laid out complex instructions for dividing his estate ; the resulting law @-@ case took years to resolve , effectively preventing the redevelopment of the house and preserving it in its original condition . 
 After 1683 Plas Mawr passed into the hands of the Mostyn family and ceased to be used as a family home . It was rented out for various purposes during the 18th and 19th centuries , including for use as a school , cheap lodgings and finally as the headquarters of the Royal Cambrian Academy of Art . In the 20th century the house became increasingly well known for its preserved Elizabethan architecture , but the costs of maintenance grew considerably and its condition deteriorated . The Welsh heritage agency Cadw took over the management of the property in 1993 and carried out an extensive , 42 @-@ month @-@ long restoration project at a total cost of £ 3 @.@ 3 million . With many of its rooms redecorated to resemble their condition in 1665 , and replanted Renaissance gardens , it is now run as a tourist attraction . 
 Architecturally , Plas Mawr is almost unchanged from the 16th century , and the historian Rick Turner considers the house to be " the finest surviving town house of the Elizabethan era " . Plas Mawr shows a blend of continental Renaissance and local North Wales influences , with an innovative floor @-@ plan and architectural detailing . The house still retains much of its original plasterwork , which incorporates symbols , badges and heraldry , which the historian Peter Smith has described as " the most perfect and the most complete memorial to Elizabethan Wales . " The architecture of the house influenced other contemporary projects in North Wales , and was later copied during the 19th and 20th centuries in buildings around the town of Conwy , including the local police station and nearby hotel . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th – 17th centuries = = = 
 Plas Mawr was built in the town of Conwy between 1576 and 1585 by Robert Wynn . Robert came from a prosperous local family and entered the service of first Sir Walter Stonor and then Sir Philip Hoby , both administrators and senior officials to King Henry VIII . Robert fought and was injured at the Siege of Boulogne in 1544 , took part in military campaigns in Scotland and traveled extensively across Europe . He invested in land across North Wales and married his first wife , Dorothy Griffith , a member of the local gentry , in 1570 . Once married , Robert needed a suitable house and chose to settle in Conwy , a prosperous town that was known in the 16th century for its genteel society . 
 In 1570 , Robert paid Hugh <unk> £ 200 for an existing " mansion house " in Conwy , positioned in the middle of a burgage plot on what is now Crown Lane . More land to the north of this was purchased from a Richard Peake in 1576 for £ 40 , and work then began on the north wing of Plas Mawr , which was completed by the following year . <unk> 's former house was pulled down to allow the preparation of the foundations of the rest of the building , including the digging of fresh drains . Robert lived in the completed north wing until 1580 , when the central and south ranges were built , finishing the main part of Plas Mawr . 
 Robert went on to rent further land around the north of Plas Mawr . The land at the south end of the burgage , however , facing onto the High Street , belonged to a Robert <unk> , who had a house there . Wynne purchased this in 1585 , probably for the relatively high price of £ 40 , and demolished it to enable the final phase of development , using the space to build a gatehouse that formed the new entrance to Plas Mawr . Further small pieces of land were bought on the north @-@ west side of the house and converted into an ornamental garden , bringing the total cost of the land to around £ 300 . The result was the grandest Elizabethan town house in Wales at the time . 
 These three phases of house construction – 1576 – 77 , 1580 and 1585 – were probably overseen by several different senior craftsmen , possibly working to an original plan determined by a surveyor or mason working at the English royal court . Judging by the details of the roof design , a single master carpenter may have been used for all three parts of the build ; he probably worked elsewhere across the region during these years , including on 15 other houses and two churches . Both of the first two phases of work were probably conducted by the same team of plasterers , possibly from London , and they used as much as 100 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 220 @,@ 000 lb ) of lime plaster on the rendering . Timber and slates were brought down the Conwy valley for the house , with grey Silurian grit rubble quarried from the hills near the town , and finer sandstone brought from nearby Deganwy . The total of the building work was probably around £ 500 . 
 Entertainment and hospitality were important to a gentleman 's 16th @-@ century social status and , according to his nephew , the antiquarian John Wynn , Robert Wynn kept a " worthy plentiful house " . The household was supported by milk from Wynn 's own dairy herds , and by food from the orchards , gardens and a fish trap that he owned around the town . The house had its own brewing , baking and dairy facilities , and further supplies were bought in from regional merchants . 
 Dorothy died in 1586 and Robert married Dorothy <unk> , with whom he had seven children at Plas Mawr . When Robert died in 1598 he left a complex will that led to legal disputes between the family and the executor , Sir Roger Mostyn . The legal case effectively halted any further development of the house , by now the most prominent in Conwy , until its resolution in 1630 . The property passed to Robert 's grandson , another Robert Wynn , in 1637 , and onto his daughter , Elin in 1683 . By 1665 , the house was equipped to a quality and style that would have put it only just behind the houses of the major gentry families in Caernarfonshire . Elin then married into the Wynne family , and made little use of the house , and it ultimately passed by marriage into the Mostyn family . 
 = = = 18th – 19th centuries = = = 
 The <unk> ' principal residence was Mostyn Hall in Flintshire and so the family rented out Plas Mawr to various tenants during the 18th and 19th centuries . In the 18th century the gatehouse was used as a courthouse and the main house as cheap housing . In the 19th century , parts of the house were converted into a school and space for other small businesses , as well as still being used for domestic accommodation : in 1881 , the house had 25 residents . Minor changes were made to Plas Mawr in the process , such as the installation of partition walls to subdivide the larger rooms , but it remained largely intact . The <unk> offered the house for sale in 1870 , as part of a package of land including Bodysgallen Hall , but there were no offers . 
 By the 1880s , the Royal Cambrian Academy of Art became concerned about the condition of Plas Mawr , and in 1887 Lord Mostyn agreed to lease the building to the Academy for use as their headquarters . The architects Arthur and Herbert Baker were commissioned to survey the building , conduct repairs and remove some of the post @-@ 17th century alterations , and J. R. Furness then carried out conservation work on much of the plasterwork . The Victoria Gallery was built onto the north @-@ west side of the house to hold artistic exhibitions , and a weather vane was added to the top of the building to celebrate Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee . 
 = = = 20th – 21st centuries = = = 
 By the early 20th century , Plas Mawr 's historical significance was increasingly well understood , but the costs of maintaining the house grew considerably . By the middle of the century , the finer sandstone had corroded and the timber beams were deteriorating ; a 1956 survey described them as " much decayed " . The plaster ceilings were bowing and coming away from their timbers . The Academy of Art sought government and private assistance to undertake temporary and partial repairs , but these were insufficient and in 1993 it moved into new accommodation and the property was passed into the control of the state , under the management of the Welsh heritage agency Cadw . 
 Cadw carried out a major restoration project on the house over the next 42 months , combining large scale conservation with detailed surveying and archaeological analysis . The 19th @-@ century Victoria Galley was demolished in 1995 , and the bare , external stonework was re @-@ rendered and lime washed . Large parts of the property were restored as they might have appeared in 1665 , assisted by the record of Robert Wynn the younger 's will , with the exception of the attic , which was restored to its probable 19th @-@ century appearance . The intention of this was to emphasize the colour and comfort of the original building , to prevent it appearing <unk> bleak and austere . Other sections of the house were redeveloped to hold exhibition displays and other visitor facilities . 
 The restoration included installing original and replica interior furnishings , using wall hangings woven from Kidderminster stuff and <unk> . In what historical consultant Charles Kightly has praised as a " brave and successful " decision , much of the plasterwork was repainted , using reversible techniques , to resemble its 17th @-@ century condition . In total the project cost £ 3 @.@ 3 million , and won the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors Building Conservation Award . Further work followed in 2006 to restore the gardens , again attempting to replicate the style prevalent in 1665 . 
 In the 21st century the house is operated as a tourist attraction by Cadw . The historian Rick Turner considers Plas Mawr to be " the finest surviving town house of the Elizabethan era " and it is protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building and as a scheduled monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Architecturally , Plas Mawr is almost unchanged from the 16th century , making it a very rare survival from this period . The architectural style is a product of the broader Renaissance influences prevalent across Europe at the time . Robert Wynn spent time in Germany , and the style of Plas Mawr makes use of North German Gothic themes , particularly in its use of symmetry , the pedimented windows at the front of the house , faceted finials and crow @-@ stepped gables . These features were already popular in England when the house was built , and indeed Plas Mawr is very similar in design to Eastbury Manor House , the two possibly being based off the same architectural plan . Some of these features had already begun to spread into Wales – crow @-@ stepped gables , for example , were already being used in Flintshire by the 1580s – but others were ground breaking in Wales , such as the use of ovolo @-@ moulded and dormer windows . Nonetheless , Robert Wynn was only an emerging member of the gentry , and his house was not as large or as sophisticated as contemporary grander Renaissance properties built in larger rural settings . 
 Some of the house 's architecture also reflects the influences from contemporary buildings across North Wales , in particular Gwydir Castle , built by Robert Wynn 's father John . Plas Mawr lacks a fashionable long gallery , for example , which was popular in England at the time , and was already beginning to appear in Welsh houses . Instead , it has a rear turret , or belvedere , which is raised prominently above the height of the rest of the house , overlooking the town : this was a slightly antiquated feature , but was widely used in other Wynn family properties , including Bodysgallen Hall . The design of Plas Mawr influenced other buildings in North Wales at the time , including the redecoration of Gwydir Castle , Maenan Hall further up the Conwy valley , Plas Mawr in Caernarfon and Hen Blas in Beaumaris . It also later shaped the architecture of 19th- and 20th @-@ century buildings in Conwy itself , surviving examples of which include the town 's police station and the <unk> Hotel . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 Modern visitors typically enter the house from the High Street to the south , passing through the gatehouse , across the lower courtyard into the hall of the main building . Plas Mawr 's gatehouse was only the third such entrance building to be built in North Wales , despite gatehouses being an important part of English Elizabethan architecture , designed to show off the house and provide a suitably dignified entry for visitors . Few houses in towns had the physical space for a gatehouse like Plas Mawr 's . Originally , the gatehouse would have contained a suite of rooms for the steward of the house , Richard Wynn . 
 The main house forms an " H " -shape , with a north and a south wing joined in the middle , all facing onto an upper courtyard . The upper courtyard was key to the way that the main house functioned : it linked almost all the ground floor rooms in the house , as well as providing access to the cellars , and gave an impressive view of the turret towers . In the south wing was the hall and the buttery , with the red and white chambers above them . Probably when Plas Mawr was first built , and certainly by 1665 , the hall would have been used to meet ordinary visitors and for servants ' meals , rather than forming the main room of the house ; the wooden benches and table on display are original to the property . Traditionally , the service rooms in houses had been placed at the far end of the main hall , but Plas Mawr departed from this design . The service area , including the kitchen and pantry , was instead placed in the centre of the building , between the parlour and the hall ; this radical redesign was copied at nearby Hafod <unk> . The restored kitchen is equipped with a batterie de cuisine , with a combination of original and replica equipment . 
 Above these rooms was the great chamber , the main room which formed the ceremonial centre of the house . In the north wing was the brewhouse and the parlour , with two chambers above them , the latter possibly used by Dorothy Wynn as her bedroom . The private bedrooms for the family and guests were each equipped with a fireplace , an important status symbol in the period . The roof attics of the house contained a great deal of space for accommodating the household servants . The attic above the great chamber has a grand timber roof with arch @-@ braced collar trusses , joined using an unusual system called " double pegging " , which is only used in the Conwy valley during the late 16th century . It appears that the great chamber 's ceiling was originally supposed to be open , looking up to the timbers with the trusses visible , but a mistake in the construction of the walls meant that one side of the chamber no longer fitted smoothly with the timbers , creating an ugly appearance ; a plaster ceiling was then added to hide the error . 
 The gardens behind the house may originally have resembled the gardens at Bodysgallen Hall , which were laid out in the Renaissance style popular across Europe . The slope of the land results in Plas Mawr 's gardens forming the upper and lower terraces , and these have been replanted and restored in an attempt to show them as they might have appeared in 1665 . The summerhouse is based on a version shown in a contemporary painting of <unk> 's gardens , and the <unk> are modeled on those found in excavations at Tredegar House . 
 = = = Plasterwork = = = 
 Seven rooms still possess elements of their original plasterwork , which the historian Peter Smith has described as " the most perfect and the most complete memorial to Elizabethan Wales " , and their original wooden carved panels that line the walls . The plasterwork includes extensive heraldry , badges and symbols : in the upper north range alone , 22 different heraldic emblems are molded into the ceilings and walls . The gatehouse shows the royal arms , as do the great chamber and the parlour , probably because they were intended to host senior guests . The badges of numerous monarchs are included throughout the house , including those of Richard II , Richard III , Henry IV and Henry VII . The badges of other prominent nobles , such as Robert Dudley , are also featured in the house . 
 The plasterwork in the parlour displays the arms of Robert Wynn himself , and Robert Wynn 's bedchamber above the brewhouse shows the combined arms of the Wynn and Griffith families , which are generally given equal prominence throughout the house . Robert Wynn 's arms are most prominent in the hall and the bedchambers , where the royal arms are smaller and less prominent . In the 16th century , Wynn 's heraldry would probably have been echoed in the furnishings of the house , including the fabrics , cups and silverware . The plasterwork also incorporates a number of classical themes , but these are not as well executed as the badges and other emblems : the historian Rick Turner describes them as " rather token additions " , and Smith considers this part of the decoration to be " naive " . 
 = 1898 Georgia hurricane = 
 The 1898 Georgia hurricane was the most recent major hurricane to hit the U.S. state of Georgia , as well as the strongest on record in the state . It was first known to exist on September 29 , although modern researchers estimated that it developed four days earlier to the east of the Lesser Antilles . The hurricane maintained a general northwest track throughout its duration , and it reached peak winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) on October 2 . That day , it made landfall on Cumberland Island in Camden County , Georgia , causing record storm surge flooding . The hurricane caused heavy damage throughout the region , and killed at least 179 people . Impact was most severe in Brunswick , where a 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) storm surge was recorded . Overall damage was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1898 USD ) , most of which occurred in Georgia . In extreme northeastern Florida , strong winds nearly destroyed the city of Fernandina , while light crop damage was reported in southern South Carolina . After moving ashore , the hurricane quickly weakened and traversed much of North America ; it continued northwestward until reaching the Ohio Valley and turning northeastward , and it was last observed on October 6 near Newfoundland . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 28 , 1898 , island stations in the Lesser Antilles indicated the presence of a tropical cyclone , which was confirmed by the next day . Modern researchers determined that the system developed on September 25 about 220 miles ( 350 km ) east of Guadeloupe . For most of its duration , the system maintained a northwest track , reaching hurricane status on September 27 . Later that day , a barometric pressure of 977 mbar , suggesting winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Its intensification rate slowed on September 28 , before strengthening continued on October 1 . The winds reached 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , which is the equivalent of a major hurricane , or Category 3 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . Around that time , the hurricane turned toward more to the west @-@ northwest , due to a large ridge across the western Atlantic . 
 On October 2 , the hurricane continued toward the west @-@ northwest , approaching the southeastern United States . That day , it made landfall on Cumberland Island in Camden County , Georgia , and initially was thought to have done so as a Category 2 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . A storm surge of 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) was observed in Brunswick , Georgia , suggesting a central pressure of 938 mbar based on the SLOSH model . Such intensity ranked the hurricane tied for the 16th strongest United States landfall , as well as the strongest in the state of Georgia . It is also the most recent major hurricane to hit the state as of 2011 . Additionally , its radius of maximum wind was estimated at 20 miles ( 33 km ) . Almost a century after the hurricane , researchers estimated the hurricane made landfall with winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) , a Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . After making landfall , the hurricane quickly weakened , deteriorating to tropical storm status within 12 hours . After moving across Georgia , the storm weakened further to tropical depression status over northeastern Alabama on October 3 . It continued northwestward through the Ohio Valley before recurving northeastward , accelerating through southeastern Canada and later dissipating over Newfoundland on October 6 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On October 1 , a day before the hurricane moved ashore , the U.S. Weather Bureau issued northeast storm signals from Key West , Florida to Norfolk , Virginia . Similar warnings were issued in the hours preceding the hurricane moving ashore . The advisories were credited with saving dozens of lives and millions of dollars in shipping cargo , due to advance warning for boats to remain ashore . 
 Before the hurricane made landfall in Georgia , it produced strong winds in northeastern Florida , reaching Category 2 strength on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . The worst effects from the storm were confined to a very small portion of extreme northeastern Florida . At Fernandina Beach , the storm surge was estimated at 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) , causing extensive flooding in the city . The October 1898 Monthly Weather Review described Fernandina as " nearly destroyed " , and most anchored boats were sunk or washed inland into the marshes . Damage along the coastline reached as far south as Mayport . The hurricane was small , and despite passing 50 miles ( 80 km ) northeast of Jacksonville , produced only 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) winds in the city . However , for the first time in the history of the city , all communications were cut between Jacksonville and cities further north , such as New York . Damage throughout the state was estimated at $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 1898 USD ) . 
 The hurricane made landfall on Cumberland Island with winds estimated at 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . It produced record storm surges across the coastline , including a 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) report in Brunswick . There , damage was heaviest , and most buildings were flooded . Similar impact was reported in Darien , where 32 people were killed . One coastal location reported the hurricane as causing the worst flooding since 1812 . Further north , all of Hutchinson Island in the Savannah River was covered with up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) of water . The storm surge flooding entered warehouses and storage areas all along the coast , leaving many small ships wrecked or sunk . Heavy damage also occurred to coastal wharves and houses . According to the Savannah Weather Bureau office , about 5 @,@ 000 barrels of rosin were dispersed , and 60 @,@ 000 bushels of rice were wrecked . Winds in the city reached 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , and the flooding severely damaged the railway to nearby Tybee Island . Along the Blackbeard Island National Wildlife Refuge , the hurricane destroyed a hospital that helped people afflicted with yellow fever . A total of 179 people were killed along the Georgia coast , and damage totaled around $ 1 million ( 1898 USD ) . In South Carolina , the hurricane produced gusty winds and storm surge flooding . Some slight damage occurred at Port Royal , and in the southern portion of the state , the high tides left damage to rice and cotton crops . The Charleston Weather Bureau reported that " a number of persons were drowned along the South Carolina coast " . Heavy rainfall was reported across northeast Florida , Georgia , and the western Carolinas . The highest amount recorded was 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 320 mm ) at Highlands , North Carolina . 
 = Effects of Tropical Storm Allison in Texas = 
 The effects of Tropical Storm Allison in Texas included 23 deaths caused by extreme flooding . The first storm of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season , Tropical Storm Allison lasted unusually long for a June storm , remaining tropical or subtropical for 15 days . The storm developed from a tropical wave in the northern Gulf of Mexico on June 4 , 2001 , and struck the northern Texas coast shortly thereafter . It drifted northward through the state , turned back to the south , and re @-@ entered the Gulf of Mexico . The storm continued to the east @-@ northeast , made landfall on Louisiana , then moved across the southeast United States and Mid @-@ Atlantic . Allison was the first storm since Tropical Storm Frances in 1998 to strike the northern Texas coastline . 
 Tropical Storm Allison was a major flood disaster throughout its path from Texas to the Mid @-@ Atlantic . The worst of the flooding occurred in Houston , Texas , where over 35 inches ( 890 mm ) of rain fell . Allison killed 41 people , of whom 27 drowned . The storm also caused over $ 5 billion in damage ( 2001 USD , $ 6 @.@ 4 billion 2007 USD ) , making Allison the costliest and second @-@ deadliest tropical storm on record in the United States . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 After the storm made landfall , flash flood watches and warnings were issued for numerous areas in eastern Texas . Travel was discouraged due to the threat of flash flood . During the flood event , the National Weather Service in Houston issued 99 flash flood warnings with an average lead time of 40 minutes ; only nine warnings were false alarms . 
 Shortly after the storm formed , officials in Galveston County , Texas issued a voluntary evacuation for the western end of Galveston Island , as the area was not protected by the Galveston Seawall . The ferry from the island to the Bolivar Peninsula was closed , while voluntary evacuations were issued in Surfside in Brazoria County . Voluntary evacuations were also suggested near Sabine Pass in Jefferson County , Texas , though few left . Also , when the National Hurricane Center issued the first advisory on Allison , officials issued Tropical Storm Warnings from Sargent , Texas to Morgan City , Louisiana , just three hours before tropical storm winds were observed . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Allison made landfall with a storm surge of two to three feet . Combined with waves on top , areas of Galveston Island experienced a wall of water 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) in height , creating overwash along the coastline . The storm caused winds of up to 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) at the Galveston Pier . While Allison was stalling over Texas , it dropped heavy rainfall across the state , including 9 @.@ 77 inches ( 248 mm ) in Galveston , 12 @.@ 13 inches ( 308 mm ) in Jamaica Beach , Texas , and other similar totals along the coast . Minimal beach erosion was reported , and impact was minimal near the coast . While moving northward through Texas as a minimal tropical depression , Allison produced minor wind gusts . Shortly after making landfall , the storm spawned a tornado in Manvel of Brazoria County , causing damage to one home . Within hours of making landfall , rainfall totals of 8 to 12 inches ( 200 to 300 mm ) were common in Galveston and Harris County . Flash flooding continued for days , with rainfall amounts across the state peaking at just over 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 033 mm ) in northwestern Jefferson County . In the Port of Houston , a total of 36 @.@ 99 inches ( 940 mm ) was reported . 
 Houston experienced torrential rainfall in a short amount of time . At one site , 6 @.@ 3 inches ( 160 mm ) fell in just one hour , while 28 @.@ 5 inches ( 724 mm ) fell in only 12 hours . The six @-@ day rainfall in Houston amounted to 38 @.@ 6 inches ( 980 mm ) . Two @-@ thirds of the bayous and creeks in Harris County experienced 500 @-@ year flood events . Houston Intercontinental Airport , which typically receives 46 @.@ 07 inches ( 1170 mm ) of rain in a year , experienced 35 @.@ 7 % of its expected total in the first nine days of June . 
 The deluge flooded 95 @,@ 000 automobiles and 73 @,@ 000 houses throughout Harris County . Tropical Storm Allison destroyed 2 @,@ 744 homes , leaving 30 @,@ 000 homeless with residential damages totaling to $ 1 @.@ 76 billion ( 2001 USD , $ 2 @.@ 05 billion 2007 USD ) . Residential neighborhoods inside and to the north of Interstate 610 were hardest hit . Additionally , five of the six bayou systems in downtown Houston were severely flooded . Four of them broke 100 @-@ year high @-@ water records , causing excessive surface run @-@ off . 
 Several hospitals in the Texas Medical Center , the largest medical complex in the world , experienced severe damage from the storm , which hit quickly and with unexpected fury on a Friday evening . Hospital personnel were forced to evacuate thousands of patients in a major effort that included Coast Guard and Army helicopters . Many of the hospitals had lost all power , including back @-@ up generators , meaning that patients had to be carried down dark stairwells by the staff in temperatures over 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) . Patients who could not breathe on their own had to be continuously manually ventilated during the evacuation , which lasted hours . Most hospitals lost power and backup power when basements , the area where power and research data were kept , flooded . The Baylor College of Medicine experienced major damage , totaling $ 495 million ( 2001 USD , $ 577 million 2007 USD ) . The medical school lost 90 @,@ 000 research animals , 60 @,@ 000 tumor samples , and 25 years of research data . The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston , across the street , lost thousands of laboratory animals , including expensive genetic @-@ specific mice . Decades of research was lost , including , for many scientists , their life 's work . The UT @-@ Houston gross anatomy lab , cyclotron , and other important facilities were completely destroyed . Throughout the Medical Center , damage totaled to over $ 2 billion ( 2001 USD , $ 2 @.@ 3 billion 2007 USD ) . Most were reopened after a month , though it took much longer to become fully operational . 
 The storm flooded the lower level of the massive law library at the University of Houston Law Center with eight feet of water . An estimated 174 @,@ 000 books and the microfiche collection were destroyed . The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) gave $ 21 @.@ 4 million to rebuild the law library collection . 
 The underground tunnel system , which connects most large office buildings in downtown Houston , was submerged , as were many streets and parking garages adjacent to Buffalo Bayou . In the Houston Theater District , also near Buffalo Bayou in the northern part of downtown , the Houston Ballet , Houston Symphony , Houston Grand Opera , and Alley Theater lost millions of dollars ' worth of costumes , musical instruments , sheet music , archives , props , and other artifacts . 
 Local television stations ran all @-@ night coverage of the deluge from June 8 through the next day , including KHOU @-@ TV 11 , which was forced to transmit its broadcast to a satellite truck when floodwaters entered its production studio on the Allen Parkway near <unk> / Montrose , near downtown along the banks of Buffalo Bayou . By midnight on June 9 nearly every freeway and major road in the city was under several feet of water , forcing hundreds of motorists to abandon their vehicles for higher ground . Eighteen @-@ wheeled trucks were filmed floating down major freeways and highways , swept along by floodwaters . 
 Despite massive flooding and damage to entire neighborhoods , there were no drowning deaths in flooded homes . In the area , there were 12 deaths from driving , 6 from walking , 3 from electrocution , and 1 in an elevator . Elsewhere in Texas , a man drowned when swimming in a ditch in <unk> . Damage totaled to $ 5 @.@ 2 billion ( 2001 USD , $ 6 billion 2007 USD ) throughout Texas . 
 Though Allison 's flooding was extreme , it was not unprecedented . Tropical Storm Amelia in 1978 dropped over 46 inches ( 1170 mm ) of rainfall in Bluff , Texas , which remains the record highest rainfall for a single storm in the state of Texas . In addition , Tropical Storm Claudette in 1979 and a hurricane in 1921 produced rainfall totals of over 40 inches ( 1015 mm ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Within weeks of the disaster , President George W. Bush declared 28 counties in Texas as disaster areas . The declarations allowed affected citizens to receive aid for temporary housing , emergency home repairs , and other serious disaster @-@ related expenses . The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) also provided 75 % for the cost of debris removal , emergency services related to the disaster , and repairing or replacing damaged public facilities , such as roads , bridges and utilities . 
 A few weeks after Allison , FEMA opened six disaster recovery centers across southeast Texas , which provided recovery information to those who applied for disaster assistance . The American Red Cross and the Salvation Army opened 48 shelters at the peak of need for people driven from their homes , which served nearly 300 @,@ 000 meals . After the extensive damage to Houston hospitals , the U. S. Public Health Service team set up a temporary hospital at the Houston Police Academy . The team of 87 medical personnel served over 1 @,@ 000 patients within two weeks of Allison 's passage . Similarly , the National Disaster Medical System deployed a temporary hospital to Houston with 88 professionals , aiding nearly 500 people . Debris removal , which was initially slow , was aided by FEMA to expedite the removal process . FEMA provided 75 % of the federal cost of the removal . Thirty @-@ five volunteer services provided aid for the flood victims in Texas , including food , clothing , and volunteers to help repair the houses . 
 After nearly 50 @,@ 000 cars were flooded and ruined , many people attempted to sell the cars across the country without telling of the car 's history . Following the extreme flooding , a mosquito outbreak occurred , though FEMA provided aid to control the problem . Health officials also recommended disinfecting private wells with bleach , due to possible contamination from the severe flooding . Many people took advantage of the flood victims , including fraudulent contractors and suppliers raising the price of goods more than is actually justified . 
 By six months after the storm , around 120 @,@ 000 Texas citizens applied for federal disaster aid , totaling to $ 1 @.@ 05 billion ( 2001 USD , $ 1 @.@ 22 billion 2007 USD ) . Of that amount , 17 % of that was spent for temporary housing . In addition , Disaster Unemployment Assistance totaled to just under $ 1 million , while business loans totaled to $ 389 million ( 2001 USD , $ 454 million 2007 USD ) . 
 = Trade dollar ( United States coin ) = 
 The United States trade dollar was a dollar coin minted by the United States Mint to compete with other large silver trade coins that were already popular in East Asia . The idea first came about in the 1860s , when the price of silver began to decline due to increased mining efforts in the western United States . A bill providing in part for the issuance of the trade dollar was eventually put before Congress , where it was approved and later signed into law as the Coinage Act of 1873 . The act made trade dollars legal tender up to five dollars . A number of designs were considered for the trade dollar , and an obverse and reverse created by William Barber were selected . 
