 The coins were first struck in 1873 , and most of the production was sent to China . Eventually , bullion producers began converting large amounts of silver into trade dollars , causing the coins to make their way into American commercial channels . This caused frustration among those to whom they were given in payment , as the coins were largely maligned and traded for less than one dollar each . In response to their wide distribution in American commerce , the coins were officially demonetized in 1876 , but continued to circulate . Production of business strikes ended in 1878 , though the mintage of proof coins officially continued until 1883 . The trade dollar was re @-@ monetized when the Coinage Act of 1965 was signed into law . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the California gold rush that began in 1849 and the Australian gold rush that began in 1851 , a larger amount of gold was put into commerce than could be easily absorbed by the normal channels . This resulted in a decrease in the value of gold and an increase in the relative value of silver . As a result , silver coins rapidly disappeared from circulation due either to hoarding or melting . In response , Congress authorized the Mint to reduce the quantity of silver in all denominations except the three @-@ cent piece and silver dollar . Beginning in the 1860s , silver production rose and the price decreased . During this time , silver coins largely disappeared from circulation and were replaced by paper and copper currency . 
 In China , the Mexican peso ( successor to the Spanish dollar ) was greatly valued in commerce . However , the Chinese were sensitive to any changes in the coin 's design , and were reluctant to accept newer coins due to a minor design change . The American silver dollar , 7 @.@ 5 grains ( 0 @.@ 49 g ) lighter than its Spanish counterpart , was unpopular in the Orient due to its light weight , forcing American merchants to purchase the Spanish or Mexican pieces to use in trade . Beginning in 1866 , during the reign of Emperor Maximilian , the design was changed to show the Emperor 's portrait ; this caused widespread <unk> of the coins in China . 
 While conducting an investigation of the Mint at San Francisco , deputy comptroller of the currency John Jay Knox began discussing the monetary situation with Louis A. Garnett , a man who had worked as both the treasurer and assayer of the San Francisco Mint . Garnett recommended that the United States mint a commercial dollar that would be exported to the Orient to compete with other large silver trade coins that were already popular in that region . Garnett 's rationale was that the coins would be hoarded or melted in Asia and would never be presented for redemption , allowing the government to make a profit from the seigniorage . During his time in San Francisco , Knox also discussed the proposed commercial dollar with Henry Linderman , who was working as a special agent for the Treasury Department at that time . In 1870 , Knox wrote a report to the Treasury and wrote the draft for a bill on coinage . Knox 's bill was approved by George Boutwell , Secretary of the Treasury . After modification and review from current and former government officials , the bill was put before Congress . 
 On November 19 , 1872 , while the coinage bill was still before Congress , Linderman made a report to the Secretary of the Treasury . In the report , Linderman argued that the coin need not hold legal tender status , and that it could simply be a piece of silver imprinted with its weight and fineness . Linderman also notes that such a product could supersede the Mexican dollar and eventually command a six to eight percent premium ; at that time , American silver exported to the Orient was being sold at a two percent discount . Linderman proposed that the coin be named the " silver union " in order to distinguish it from the standard coins then in production . 
 In February 1872 , the bill was amended by a House of Representatives committee to include authorization for a commercial dollar weighing 420 grains ( 27 g ) ; but this proposal was replaced three months later when the House voted to include provisions for the production of a standard silver dollar weighing 384 grains ( 24 @.@ 9 g ) . While in the Senate , a provision was added to the bill requiring the Treasury to coin a trade dollar of 420 grains ( 27 g ) , as had been done earlier in the House . The revised bill , which came to be known as the Coinage Act of 1873 , was approved in the House and Senate and was signed by President Ulysses S. Grant on February 12 , 1873 . 
 The bill provided , in part , for the striking of trade dollars which held legal tender status up to five dollars . The legal tender provision was added by a last @-@ minute rider at the behest of silver interests . At the insistence of Ohio Senator John Sherman , the weight and fineness of the piece was indicated on the reverse , an attribution which numismatic historian Don Taxay found incomprehensible as " Chinese merchants would never understand them " . 
 Prior to the passage of the Coinage Act , the director of the Philadelphia Mint oversaw all branch mints . After the Act , the office of director was transferred to Washington , D.C. , and responsibility for each mint was handed over to a superintendent . 
 = = = Design selection = = = 
 Throughout the year of 1872 , the Mint struck a series of commercial dollar patterns in anticipation of the passage of the coinage bill . Production of patterns continued into 1873 , but the denomination of the pattern coins was changed from " commercial dollar " to " trade dollar " before the bill was signed into law . After passage of the Coinage Act , Linderman met with Director of the Mint James Pollock to discuss the design of the newly authorized trade dollar . The two men agreed to request a jewelry and engraving firm , Bailey Banks & Biddle of Philadelphia , to create designs that would be compared to those already created by Chief Engraver William Barber . 
 After examining the designs of both parties , Linderman ordered that the design would depict a seated figure representing Liberty facing to the viewer 's left , representing the direction of the Orient . Linderman apparently selected the designs from two different patterns . In June 1873 , Linderman reviewed the various patterns created by Barber ; he chose an obverse which one contemporary reporter described as " a female figure seated on bales of merchandise , holding in her left hand a scroll bearing the word ' Liberty ' . At her back is a sheaf of wheat , expressing , with the bales of goods , the commercial character of the coin : the right hand extended holds the olive branch . " The selected reverse depicts the bald eagle as required by law . The eagle has three arrows in the right claw and an olive branch in the left , a reversal to most other U.S. silver coins of the era . A set of six patterns , four with variations on the adopted obverse , and two showing portraits of Liberty , was sold by the Mint to the public in limited quantities . 
 = = Production = = 
 Linderman assumed the position of Director of the Mint and Pollock became Superintendent of the Philadelphia Mint . In July 1873 , production began on the dies needed to strike the coins . During this time , in a telegram to Pollock , Linderman asked that production of trade dollars be hastened because Mexico was preparing to issue another series of dollars with the older design popular in Asia , a design that was discontinued in 1866 . The first trade dollars were struck during a ceremony held on July 11 , 1873 . Forty thousand pieces were issued in the first release , on July 14 . The Carson City Mint received its first dies for the new coins on July 22 , and those intended for the San Francisco Mint arrived shortly after . In total , 396 @,@ 635 business strikes and 865 proof coins were struck at the Philadelphia Mint during the first year of production . The Carson City and San Francisco mints struck 124 @,@ 500 and 703 @,@ 000 coins respectively . 
 There were complaints that year from officials at all three of the mints concerning the quality of the coins produced . In the summer of 1874 , coiner A. Loudon Snowden issued a formal complaint to Pollock about the quality of the strikings , most notably on the high points of the design ; Barber began modifying the design later that year , reducing the relief . The modified dies began service in 1875 . In the fall of that year , Linderman suggested that the reverse of the trade dollar should be altered in 1876 to commemorate the centennial of American independence ; Pollock opposed the idea , noting that such a change would be difficult to carry out because Congressional approval would be necessary and that it might cause the coin to lose favor in the Orient . In May 1876 , former assistant engraver Anthony C. Paquet created a reverse die after being hired by Linderman to improve the striking quality of the coins . Linderman approved of the new design , but it was ultimately rejected by Mint officials due to fears of Chinese disapproval . 
 Though production of business strikes ended in 1878 , the striking of proof coins continued in limited numbers until 1883 , when the final mintage of 979 coins was struck at the Philadelphia Mint . In 1908 , it was discovered that ten proofs dated 1884 and five dated 1885 were produced , but these pieces are not listed in official records and it is unknown when they were created . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Most of the 1873 production was exported to China , and in October of that year , the <unk> Emperor had an assay test conducted on the coins . In a proclamation translated by Chinese consul and interpreter Walter Hillier , the Emperor stated : 
 This Proclamation , therefore , is for the information of you merchants , traders , soldiers and people of every district . You must know that the ' Eagle Trade Dollar ' that has lately come to Hong Kong has been jointly assayed by officers specially appointed for the purpose , and it can be taken in payment of duties , and come into general circulation . You must not look upon it with suspicion . At the same time rogues , <unk> , and the like , are hereby strictly forbidden to fabricate spurious imitations of this new Eagle Dollar , with a view to their own profit . 
 And should they dare to set this prohibition at defiance , and fabricate false coin , they shall , upon discovery , most assuredly be arrested and punished . Let every one obey with trembling ! Let there be no disobedience ! 
 In 1874 , trade dollars began appearing in American commerce . In early 1875 , Congress passed the Specie Redemption Act , allowing the Treasury to pay out silver coins in exchange for paper currency . That act , combined with a drop in the price of silver , caused hoarded or exported silver coins to reappear in commerce within the United States . Many trade dollars were <unk> , especially to California . After the value of silver began to decline and the intrinsic value of the coins fell below one dollar , bullion depositors began having their silver struck as trade dollars and selling them wholesale to be distributed throughout the country . Bullion producers opted to coin their silver into trade dollars because the Coinage Act of 1873 specified that silver brought to the Mint could only be struck as such or cast into bars . 
 Congress considered raising the five @-@ dollar legal tender limit on trade dollars , but instead passed a bill that officially demonetized the trade dollar on July 22 , 1876 ; the Secretary of the Treasury was directed by the act to strike no more of the coins than necessary for use in trade . Despite the demonetization of the trade dollar , bullion producers continued to place the coins into the American market , resulting in an estimated seven million coins circulating within the United States , of which more than four million were placed in circulation in 1877 . Despite the 1876 act , it was not until October 15 , 1877 that Sherman ( now Secretary of the Treasury ) finally ordered that the mints not accept orders for trade dollars . On November 5 , apparently believing a false report that additional supplies were needed for the Chinese New Year , he rescinded his order , finally ending orders for trade dollars on February 22 , 1878 . 
 Linderman ordered a review of the success of the trade dollar in China . It was discovered that the coins circulated reasonably well in southern China , but usage in the north was limited . As the price of silver decreased , employers in the United States began paying workers in trade dollars purchased at a discount . The situation frustrated the public , as the coins were widely disliked and many banks and businesses refused to accept the coins . In response , many towns set a fixed value on trade dollars . Businesses which did accept trade dollars to avoid offending customers could not deposit them in banks or use them to pay taxes , and sold them to brokers . The brokers in turn recirculated the coins by selling them at a discount from face value to employers who included them in workers ' pay packets . In 1883 , members of the New York Mercantile Exchange petitioned Congress to allow redemption of the coins by the government . 
 Bullion prices continued to drop through the 1880s , increasing the loss by anyone forced to sell at melt value after accepting a trade dollar at face value . Despite the support of Secretary of the Treasury Charles J. Folger , the question of the redemption of the trade dollar became caught up in controversy over the heavy coinage of the new Morgan dollar under the inflationary Bland – Allison Act . Silver interests objected to the silver from redeemed trade dollars being counted towards the Mint 's monthly quota under the act , preferring to sell newly mined silver instead , and opposed acts which so provided . It was not until 1887 that Congress , ostensibly to relieve the poor ( though most trade dollars were by then in the hands of speculators ) , provided for the redemption of unmutilated trade dollars . The act , which did not count the redeemed silver towards the Bland – Allison Act quota , passed into law on February 14 , 1887 , when the ten @-@ day period which President Grover Cleveland had to either sign or veto it expired with no action by the President . Many coins were not redeemable due to chop marks applied by Chinese businessmen , which was done to affirm the coin 's silver content . The dollars were only redeemable for six months , and the recovered silver was struck into dimes , quarters , and half dollars . 
 Numismatic historian Walter Breen criticized both the legal tender provision and the coin in general , stating that the coin 's issuance was " an expensive mistake – its motivation mere greed , its design a triumph of dullness , its domestic circulation and legal tender status a disastrous provision of law leading only to ghastly abuses . " During the 1870s an attempt by Japan to introduce its own trade dollar to China fared no better . 
 Trade dollars were again made legal tender by the Coinage Act of 1965 , which stated in part " All coins and currencies of the United States ( including Federal Reserve notes and circulating notes of Federal Reserve banks and national banking associations ) , regardless of when coined or issued , shall be legal tender for all debts , public and private , public charges , taxes , duties and dues . " However , the numismatic and bullion value of any trade dollar far exceeds its face value of one dollar . Because of its demand by collectors a large number of counterfeits exist made with base metal , and buyers should exercise caution when purchasing specimens . 
 = New Brunswick Theological Seminary = 
 New Brunswick Theological Seminary , which has its main campus in New Brunswick , New Jersey , was founded in 1784 , and is the oldest independent Protestant seminary extant in the United States . It is one of two operated by the Reformed Church in America ( RCA ) , a mainline Reformed Protestant denomination in Canada and the United States that follows the theological tradition and Christian practice of John Calvin . First established in New York City under the leadership of the Rev. John Henry Livingston , who instructed aspiring ministers in his home , the seminary established its presence in New Brunswick in 1810 . Although a separate institution , the seminary 's early development in New Brunswick was closely connected with that of Rutgers University ( formerly Queen 's College and Rutgers College ) before establishing its own campus in the city in 1856 . Since 1986 , the seminary has offered classes at a satellite campus on the grounds of St. John 's University in the Jamaica neighborhood of Queens , New York . 
 New Brunswick Theological Seminary offers professional and graduate degree programs for candidates for ministry , and to those pursuing careers in academia or non @-@ theological fields . It also offers certificates and training programs to lay church leaders seeking advanced courses in Theology , Bible studies , Church History , and Servant Leadership . While rooted in the Reformed faith , New Brunswick Theological Seminary is dedicated to providing a comprehensive Christian education as " an inter @-@ cultural , ecumenical school of Christian faith , learning , and scholarship committed to its metro @-@ urban and global contexts . " As of the fall semester of 2012 , the seminary enrolled 197 students . 
 = = Administration and organization = = 
 The Reformed Church in America ( RCA ) operates two seminaries in the United States — New Brunswick Theological Seminary and the Western Theological Seminary founded in 1866 in Holland , Michigan . New Brunswick Theological Seminary , was established in 1784 , and offers classes on two campuses . The seminary 's campus in New Brunswick , built in 1856 , is at the corner of College Avenue and Seminary Place . Since 1986 , courses have been offered on the campus of St. John 's University in the Jamaica neighborhood of Queens , New York . 
 According to the seminary 's by @-@ laws , the RCA 's General Synod entrusts the management of the seminary to a Board of Trustees empowered to exercise control of institution 's finances , securities , and property for the purpose of participating " in God ’ s own laboring to fulfill God ’ s reign on earth . " The board consists of twelve to twenty @-@ four trustees , serving for three @-@ year terms , who are required to be " confessing Christians who acknowledge a commitment to the authority of the Bible over all matters of faith and practice , the sovereignty of God , and the Lordship of Jesus Christ over all of life . " A majority of the board 's members must be RCA members , and each of the church 's regional synods are represented by one member . The president and the General Secretary of the RCA 's General Synod serve as ex officio members of the board without a vote . The by @-@ laws further empower the seminary 's trustees to provide it " with such property and buildings ; faculty , administration , and staff ; library and information resources ; equipment and supplies as are necessary for the effective accomplishment of the Seminary 's purpose . " The board of trustees selects the seminary 's president , who is elected for a five @-@ year term and can be reelected to successive terms by the board . The president can be removed by a two @-@ thirds vote of the trustees . 
 The current president of the New Brunswick Theological Seminary is the Rev. Gregg A. Mast , a clergyman who has served congregations in New Jersey , New York , and Johannesburg , South Africa , and held leadership positions within the Reformed Church of America . Mast is an alumnus of the seminary , having received a Master of Divinity ( M.Div. ) degree in 1976 . He was appointed by the trustees as the seminary 's 14th president in 2006 as a replacement for Norman J. <unk> , who was suspended from the ministry and dismissed as the seminary president in 2005 after officiating at his daughter Ann 's same @-@ sex marriage . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment and early history ( 1784 – 1810 ) = = = 
 The Dutch Reformed Synod of New York recognized that there was a shortage of adequately trained ministers to supply the church ’ s congregations in the British American colonies . Young men had to journey to the Netherlands to pursue several years of theological studies at a Dutch university . Church leaders sought to obtain the right to examine and ordain ministers in the colonies ( later in the United States ) , and to operate a school to train them . In 1766 , several clergymen secured a charter from New Jersey 's Royal Governor William Franklin for the creation of Queen 's College , now Rutgers University , in New Brunswick , New Jersey " for the education of youth in the learned languages , liberal and useful arts and sciences , and especially in divinity ; preparing them for the ministry and other good offices . " 
 However , in these early years , the trustees of Queen 's College and the Synod of New York disagreed on the purpose of the new institution . With uncertainty about the college 's financial stability , the Synod desired to directly oversee the theological training of their ministerial candidates . However , the question of whether to open a seminary was delayed because of the ongoing hostilities of the American Revolution . After the war concluded , the Synod decided in 1784 that it was necessary to support the study of theology and recommenced the effort to establish a seminary . The Rev. John Henry Livingston , a graduate of both Yale College ( 1762 ) in Connecticut and the University of Utrecht ( 1770 ) in the Netherlands , was appointed to be the Synod ’ s Professor of Sacred Theology and to organize theological education at Queen 's College . However , Queen 's College did not provide Livingston a salary , compelling him to lecture on fees paid by the students directly . Livingston remained in New York overseeing a parish and instructing theology students through lectures given in his home . 
 In 1792 , the Synod became aware that many students were prevented from pursuing their studies in the " commercial emporium of New York " because of the high cost of living and a lack of sufficient funds . To address this difficulty , the Synod decided to locate the seminary outside of the city . However , as Queen 's College had severe financial difficulties and was forced to close by 1795 , New Brunswick was not considered a viable option . In 1796 , Livingston was directed by the Synod to relocate his theological classes to a small school in Flatbush ( now in Queens , New York ) where it remained for the next 14 years . 
 = = = A seminary in New Brunswick ( 1810 – 1856 ) = = = 
 After being closed for twelve years , the Rev. Ira Condict ( 1764 – 1811 ) and other church leaders began an effort in 1807 to revive Queen 's College . Condict , the college 's third president , and the college 's trustees agreed to coordinate with the Synod on theological education , to hire professors , and establish a library . In 1810 , Condict declined the post of president of Queen 's College in a full capacity ( he had been serving in a pro tempore capacity since 1795 ) , and the trustees of the college offered the post to Livingston who accepted . The seminary was relocated to New Brunswick . The college closed again in 1816 , but the trustees permitted the theological seminary to remain on the Queen 's College campus and expressed hope that the college would be revived . At this time , the Rev. Elias van <unk> , a Princeton @-@ trained minister residing in Sussex County , New Jersey , established funded a trust for assisting indigent young men in pursuing their studies preparing for ministry . 
 In 1823 , the Synod paid a significant portion of Queen 's College 's debts in order to place the institution on a secure financial footing and enable it to reopen . With the second reopening , the Synod provided clergymen to serve at the college as theology professors . Livingston had dedicated several years to raising money for the effort but died shortly before Queen 's College reopened in 1825 . The Rev. Philip Milledoler , a Reformed clergyman from New York City , was appointed to fill the vacancy created by Livingston 's death . Milledoler persuaded one of his parishioners , Colonel Henry Rutgers ( 1745 – 1830 ) , to support the college . The trustees subsequently renamed it Rutgers College in his honour . At first , the Synod exercised oversight over the operations of the college , but by 1840 directed its attentions solely to the operation of the seminary . During this period Rutgers College , the college 's grammar school ( now Rutgers Preparatory School ) , and the seminary shared one building , known as Old Queens ( built 1809 @-@ 1823 ) until the two schools separated operations entirely in 1856 . 
 According to <unk> and Baker , in 1792 ( seven years after Livingston began to teach in his home ) , there were 116 Reformed churches served by 40 ministers . In 1830 , twenty years after starting instruction in New Brunswick and organizing the seminary , there were 159 ministers serving 194 churches . 
 = = = Campus on " Holy Hill " ( 1856 – 2012 ) = = = 
 In the 1850s , the student bodies of Rutgers College and the Seminary began to expand , overcrowding the space provided at the Queens Campus . The seminary professors realized that students renting rooms at boarding houses in the city were paying more for their housing than students at other seminaries — over double the costs of housing at New York City 's Union Theological Seminary or at nearby Princeton Theological Seminary . The professors surmised that it would be cheaper to build a seminary building that provided both student housing and instruction space . 
 When the seminary 's leaders proposed the idea , the Synod of New York removed financial support from both Rutgers and the seminary . Colonel James Nielson , David Bishop , and Charles Dayton — prominent citizens in New Brunswick — donated plots of land totaling almost 8 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 m ² ) consisting of part of a hill extending from George Street to College Avenue . At the same time , Ann Hertzog of Philadelphia donated $ 30 @,@ 000 for the construction of a building to be named " Peter Hertzog Theological Hall " in memory of her husband . Hertzog Hall ( built 1855 – 1856 ) became a dominant feature on the hill , which became known locally as " Holy Hill " . In November 1776 , during the American Revolution , the hill was the site of a British artillery redoubt during the occupation of New Brunswick . 
 Throughout the nineteenth century , the institution became known because of the efforts of missionaries serving throughout the world . In the 1870s , the campus was expanded with the construction of two buildings — one housing a gymnasium and additional lecture space ; the second , a library . The seminary desired to build a library first , citing the need to house its expanding collection of books . However , local businessman and seminary benefactor James Suydam donated funds to build the <unk> , to be named Suydam Hall , because he was extremely concerned with student health . Suydam Hall was built in 1873 and was designed by architect Henry Janeway Hardenbergh . Hardenbergh had finished completing the design for Kirkpatrick Chapel and Geology Hall on the Rutgers campus and later would become known for buildings in New York City , including the Plaza Hotel and Dakota Apartments . After receiving a donation from Gardner A. Sage earmarked for the construction of a library , the trustees commissioned Hardenbergh 's former teacher , German @-@ American architect Detlef Lienau , to design it . The Sage Library was completed in 1875 . Lienau designed the library to complement Hardenbergh 's ( style ) design for Suydam Hall . In the 1960s , Suydam Hall and Hertzog Hall were deemed to be inadequate for the administrative and instructional needs of the seminary . The trustees voted in 1966 to demolish both buildings and replace it with a modern one @-@ story all @-@ purpose building , Zwemer Hall , containing the seminary 's chapel , faculty offices , and classroom facilities . 
 In the late 1970s , during the tenure of seminary president Howard Hageman , the seminary revised its academic programs to focus on serving the needs of second career and bi @-@ vocational students . This was intended to make theological education more accessible as the seminary transitioned from the 1980s to 2010s from " a predominantly residential school to one that is more than 90 percent commuter based . " This transition meant that the seminary would serve an increasing number of second @-@ career pastors who would study part @-@ time . Another result of this transition was that the seminary 's student body became the " most richly diverse " seminary in North America . Today , the New Brunswick Theological Seminary offers classes through two campuses , the first in New Brunswick , New Jersey and since 1986 on the campus of St. John 's University in Jamaica , New York . 
 Today , the seminary focuses on providing a comprehensive Christian education as " an inter @-@ cultural , ecumenical school of Christian faith , learning , and scholarship committed to its metro @-@ urban and global contexts " and preparing its graduates to " inspire missions in a post @-@ colonial world where the gospel is taking deep root , especially in urban areas of Africa , Asia , and Central and South America . " The seminary seeks to achieve this mission by expanding through distance @-@ learning technology and online classes to reach new constituencies . As of the fall semester of 2012 , the seminary enrolled 197 students . 
 = = = College Avenue redevelopment ( 2012 – 2014 ) = = = 
 New Brunswick Theological Seminary has partnered with Rutgers University , and the New Brunswick Development Corporation ( <unk> ) on a $ 300 million project to redevelop the seminary 's campus and a portion of the Rutgers campus in New Brunswick . Citing declining enrollment and financial constraints , and recognizing the maintenance needs of an aging campus including empty and unused on @-@ campus student housing ( as their student body transitioned to commuter students ) , the seminary sold a five @-@ acre ( 20 @,@ 000 m ² ) portion of their eight @-@ acre ( 32 @,@ 000 m ² ) campus to Rutgers . On 20 June 2012 , the outgoing president of Rutgers University , Richard L. McCormick announced that Rutgers will " integrate five acres ( 20 @,@ 000 m ² ) along George Street between Seminary Place and Bishop Place into the College Avenue Campus " to build a 500 @-@ student Honors College , a dining facility , and a major academic building featuring lecture halls and departmental offices . The seminary 's Board of Trustees approved this plan and the sale on 20 May 2013 . 
 The seminary reconstructed its New Brunswick campus on three acres ( 12 @,@ 000 m ² ) at the corner of Seminary Place and College Avenue , with a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 800 m ² ) central building featuring " a chapel , classrooms , offices , conference facilities and space for commuting students as well as a 100 @-@ car parking lot " while preserving the Gardner A. Sage Library . The seminary 's planned new campus is described as being " technologically smart and environmentally green . " The seminary relocated to its new <unk> in July 2014 . 
 = = Degrees and programs = = 
 New Brunswick Theological Seminary is accredited by the Commission on Accrediting of the Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada . The seminary offers admission to students after the review of a submitted application accompanied by college transcripts and letters of recommendation . It offers courses and programs leading to three degrees : the Master of Divinity ( M.Div. ) , Master of Arts ( M.A. ) and Doctor of Ministry ( D.Min. ) degree ; as well as certificates and training programs to lay church leaders seeking advanced courses in Theology , Bible studies , Church History , and Servant Leadership . Students are able to take advantage of opportunities to register in classes or complete joint degree programs with Rutgers University , St. John 's University , Princeton Theological Seminary ( Presbyterian ) , Western Theological Seminary ( Reformed ) , and the Wesley Theological Seminary ( Methodist ) . 
 The Master of Divinity ( M.Div. ) is a degree required by many Christian denominations for ordination , and spans a three @-@ year full @-@ time program . The core of the academic studies falls into three fields : Biblical Studies ; Historical , Theological and Ethical Studies ; and Ministry Studies . This is combined with obtaining practical experience in the field learning the practice of " varieties of ministry . " A student 's studies toward the Master of Divinity degree can be directed toward a concentration in Urban Ministry with coursework that is focused specifically on preparing candidates " for the opportunities and challenges of urban ministry . " 
 The Master of Arts ( M.A. ) program requires eighteen months to two years of full @-@ time coursework and offers degree concentrations in Biblical Studies , Pastoral Care , Historical and Constructive Theology , Church and Society . The program is intended for ministry candidates who do not require an M.Div. , those who desire to enrich their studies , and for those looking to supplement a professional degree or prepare for a theological Ph.D. program . 
 The Doctor of Ministry ( D.Min. ) is a three @-@ year program with a specialized focus toward Metro @-@ Urban Ministry . It is a research degree that combines academic research and a focus on ministry or mission work through " a theological understanding of the life and work of the church in urban communities . " A D.Min. degree candidate has the option of two courses of study : one concerning the challenges of ministry in an ethnically @-@ diverse urban environment ; or the challenges of a " Prisons , Public Policy , and Transformative Justice " ministry . Students in both programs engage in coursework and research augmented by a collaboration between the seminary and Rutgers University ’ s Edward J. <unk> School of Planning and Public Policy . 
 = = Gardner A. Sage Library = = 
 The Gardner A. Sage Library was built in 1873 – 75 and was designed by nineteenth @-@ century German @-@ American architect Detlef Lienau . Lienau combined the elements of a Romanesque fourth @-@ century basilica and a " Victorian <unk> " to create a space conducive to " the contemplation of God . " According to the seminary , the Sage Library 's collection contains more than 150 @,@ 000 books and 10 @,@ 000 bound periodicals , spanning the topics of biblical studies , theology , Reformed Church studies , general church history and denominational history . The collection includes many rare manuscripts and printed books dating as early as the fifteenth century . The library maintains subscriptions for more than 300 periodicals . It is expanding its collection with the acquisition of books and materials on urban ministry and the religious experience of African @-@ American and Asian immigrant communities . The library presently houses the official archives of the Reformed Church in America and contains comprehensive resources regarding Dutch history , culture , and Dutch Colonial Studies . The seminary 's collection is augmented by reciprocal borrowing rights with the Rutgers University library system ( over 10 @.@ 5 million holdings ) , the libraries at St. John 's University , access to libraries nationwide , and direct affiliations with the libraries at thirty other theological schools . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 The New Brunswick Theological Seminary 's bylaws establish its mission " to educate persons and strengthen communities for transformational , public ministries in church and society . " In its 230 @-@ year history , the seminary 's faculty and alumni have taken leading roles in the ministry and missions of the Reformed Church and other Christian denominations , in academia , and in the professional world . 
 Because of the work and reputation of alumni who became prominent missionaries , the seminary became well known in the nineteenth century . David Abeel ( B.D. 1826 ) , served as a missionary throughout the world , including in Indonesia , Southeast Asia and China . Several members of the Scudder family , including Jared Waterbury Scudder ( B.D. 1855 ) , received their theological training at the seminary before serving as missionaries in India . Alumnus John Van Nest Talmage ( B.D. 1845 ) served for over forty years in China for the American Reformed Mission . His younger brother , the Rev. Dr. Thomas DeWitt Talmage ( B.D. 1856 ) became known for his pulpit oratory , drawing large crowds to hear his sermons . Talmage 's sermons were later published in 3 @,@ 000 journals and said to reach 25 million readers worldwide . One of the main buildings on the seminary 's campus , Zwemer Hall ( built 1966 , razed 2013 ) was named for Samuel Marinus Zwemer ( M.A. 1890 ) , a missionary in the Middle East who was nicknamed the " Apostle to Islam . " Zwemer served in Basra , Bahrain , the Arabian peninsula , later in Egypt from 1891 to 1929 , and believed that distributing literature was effective in spreading God 's word . Horace Grant Underwood ( B.D. 1884 ) , served as a missionary in Korea , and was influential in establishing several educational institutions with the financial support of his brother , John T. Underwood , a typewriter entrepreneur and manufacturer . A financial gift in Spring 2011 to the seminary from the Luce Foundation and Korean Christians established an endowed professorship , the Underwood Chair for Global Christianity . 
 Many of the seminary 's graduates have served as faculty and administrators at Rutgers , Western Theological Seminary , Hope College and several other institutions . Hope , an RCA @-@ affiliated liberal arts college in Michigan founded in 1851 , was founded upon a vision of becoming " a point of life for the whole Western Church , a Western New Brunswick . " Two seminary graduates served as president of Rutgers — the Rev. William Henry Steel Demarest , a clergyman and ecclesiastical history scholar , and Philip Milledoler Brett , a prominent New York City attorney ( both also alumni of Rutgers College ) . Demarest served as the seminary 's president for ten years from 1925 to 1935 . Several other seminary alumni have served on the seminary 's faculty and as its leaders — including its first dean and faculty president , Samuel Merrill Woodbridge ( A.M. 1841 ) , and its current president , Gregg A. Mast ( M.Div. 1976 ) . 
 = Hilary Putnam = 
 Hilary Whitehall Putnam ( July 31 , 1926 – March 13 , 2016 ) was an American philosopher , mathematician , and computer scientist who was a central figure in analytic philosophy from the 1960s , especially in philosophy of mind , philosophy of language , philosophy of mathematics , and philosophy of science . He was known for his willingness to apply an equal degree of scrutiny to his own philosophical positions as to those of others , subjecting each position to rigorous analysis until he exposed its flaws . As a result , he acquired a reputation for frequently changing his own position . At the time of his death , Putnam was Cogan University Professor Emeritus at Harvard University . 
 In philosophy of mind , Putnam is known for his argument against the type @-@ identity of mental and physical states based on his hypothesis of the multiple realizability of the mental , and for the concept of functionalism , an influential theory regarding the mind – body problem . In philosophy of language , along with Saul Kripke and others , he developed the causal theory of reference , and formulated an original theory of meaning , introducing the notion of semantic externalism based on a famous thought experiment called Twin Earth . 
 In philosophy of mathematics , he and his mentor W. V. Quine developed the " Quine – Putnam indispensability thesis " , an argument for the reality of mathematical entities , later espousing the view that mathematics is not purely logical , but " quasi @-@ empirical " . In the field of epistemology , he is known for his critique of the well known " brain in a vat " thought experiment . This thought experiment appears to provide a powerful argument for epistemological skepticism , but Putnam challenges its coherence . 
 In metaphysics , he originally espoused a position called metaphysical realism , but eventually became one of its most outspoken critics , first adopting a view he called " internal realism " , which he later abandoned . Despite these changes of view , throughout his career he remained committed to scientific realism , roughly the view that mature scientific theories are approximately true descriptions of ways things are . 
 In the philosophy of perception Putnam came to endorse direct realism , according to which perceptual experiences directly present one with the external world . In the past , he further held that there are no mental representations , sense data , or other intermediaries that stand between the mind and the world . By 2012 , however , he rejected this further commitment , in favor of " <unk> " , a view that accepts both that perceptual experiences are world @-@ involving transactions , and that these transactions are functionally describable ( provided that worldly items and intentional states may be referred to in the specification of the function ) . Such transactions can further involve qualia . 
 In his later work , Putnam became increasingly interested in American pragmatism , Jewish philosophy , and ethics , thus engaging with a wider array of philosophical traditions . He also displayed an interest in <unk> , seeking to " renew philosophy " from what he identifies as narrow and inflated concerns . 
 Outside philosophy , Putnam contributed to mathematics and computer science . Together with Martin Davis he developed the Davis – Putnam algorithm for the Boolean satisfiability problem and he helped demonstrate the <unk> of Hilbert 's tenth problem . He was at times a politically controversial figure , especially for his involvement with the Progressive Labor Party in the late 1960s and early 1970s . 
 = = Life = = 
 Putnam was born in Chicago , Illinois , in 1926 . His father , Samuel Putnam , was a scholar of Romance languages , columnist , and translator who wrote for the Daily Worker , a publication of the American Communist Party , from 1936 to 1946 ( when he became disillusioned with communism ) . As a result of his father 's commitment to communism , Putnam had a secular upbringing , although his mother , Riva , was Jewish . The family lived in France until 1934 , when they returned to the United States , settling in Philadelphia . Putnam attended Central High School ; there he met Noam Chomsky , who was a year behind him . The two had been friends — and often intellectual opponents — ever since . Putnam studied mathematics and philosophy at the University of Pennsylvania , receiving his BA ( undergraduate degree ) and becoming a member of the Philomathean Society , one of the oldest collegiate literary societies in the U.S. He went on to do graduate work in philosophy at Harvard University , and later at UCLA 's Philosophy Department , where he received his Ph.D. in 1951 for a dissertation entitled " The Meaning of the Concept of Probability in Application to Finite Sequences " . Putnam 's teacher Hans Reichenbach ( his dissertation supervisor ) was a leading figure in logical positivism , the dominant school of philosophy of the day ; one of Putnam 's most consistent positions has been his rejection of logical positivism as self @-@ defeating . 
 After teaching at Northwestern ( 1951 – 52 ) , Princeton ( 1953 – 61 ) , and MIT ( 1961 – 65 ) , he moved to Harvard in 1965 . His wife , Ruth Anna Jacobs took a teaching position in philosophy at Wellesley College . Hilary and Ruth Anna were married in 1962 . Ruth Anna Jacobs , descendant of a family with a long scholarly tradition in Gotha ( her ancestor was the German classical scholar Christian Friedrich Wilhelm Jacobs ) , was born in Berlin , Germany , in 1927 to anti @-@ Nazi political @-@ activist parents and , like Putnam himself , she was raised an atheist ( her mother was Jewish and her father had been from a Christian background ) . Putnam was also an atheist . The <unk> , rebelling against the antisemitism that they had experienced during their youth , decided to establish a traditional Jewish home for their children . Since they had no experience with the rituals of Judaism , they sought out invitations to other Jews ' homes for Seder . They had " no idea how to do it [ themselves ] " , in the words of Ruth Anna . They therefore began to study Jewish ritual and Hebrew , and became more <unk> interested , identified , and active . In 1994 , Hilary Putnam celebrated a belated Bar Mitzvah service . His wife had a Bat Mitzvah service four years later . 
 Hilary was a popular teacher at Harvard . In keeping with the family tradition , he was politically active . In the 1960s and early 1970s , he was an active supporter of the American Civil Rights Movement and an opponent of American military intervention in Vietnam . In 1963 , he organized one of the first faculty and student committees at MIT against the war . Putnam was disturbed when he learned from reading the reports of David Halberstam that the U.S. was " defending " South Vietnamese peasants from the Vietcong by poisoning their rice crops . After moving to Harvard in 1965 , he organized campus protests and began teaching courses on Marxism . Hilary became an official faculty advisor to the Students for a Democratic Society and , in 1968 , became a member of the Progressive Labor Party ( PLP ) . 
 He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1965 . After 1968 , his political activities were centered on the PLP . The Harvard administration considered these activities disruptive and attempted to censure Putnam , but two other faculty members criticized the procedures . Putnam permanently severed his ties with the PLP in 1972 . In 1997 , at a meeting of former draft resistance activists at Arlington Street Church in Boston , Putnam described his involvement with the PLP as a mistake . He said that he had been impressed at first with the PLP 's commitment to alliance @-@ building and its willingness to attempt to organize from within the armed forces . 
 In 1976 , he was elected President of the American Philosophical Association . The following year , he was selected as Walter Beverly Pearson Professor of Mathematical Logic , in recognition of his contributions to the philosophy of logic and mathematics . While breaking with his radical past , Putnam never abandoned his belief that academics have a particular social and ethical responsibility toward society . He continued to be forthright and progressive in his political views , as expressed in the articles " How Not to Solve Ethical Problems " ( 1983 ) and " Education for Democracy " ( 1993 ) . 
 Putnam was a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy . He retired from teaching in June 2000 , but , as of 2009 , he continued to give a seminar almost yearly at Tel Aviv University . He also held the Spinoza Chair of Philosophy at the University of Amsterdam in 2001 . He was the Cogan University Professor Emeritus at Harvard University and a founding patron of the small liberal arts college Ralston College . His corpus includes five volumes of collected works , seven books , and more than 200 articles . Putnam 's renewed interest in Judaism inspired him to publish several books and essays on the topic . With his wife , he has co @-@ authored several books and essays on the late @-@ 19th @-@ century American pragmatist movement . He began a blog in May 2014 . 
 For his contributions in philosophy and logic , he was awarded the Rolf Schock prize in 2011 and the Nicholas Rescher Prize for Systematic Philosophy in 2015 . 
 He delivered his last Skype talk , entitled " Thought and Language " , at an international conference on " The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam " held at the Indian Institute of Technology , Bombay , on October 3 , 2015 and organized by his student Sanjit Chakraborty . 
 = = Philosophy of mind = = 
 = = = Multiple realizability = = = 
 Putnam 's best @-@ known work concerns philosophy of mind . His most noted original contributions to that field came in several key papers published in the late 1960s that set out the hypothesis of multiple realizability . In these papers , Putnam argues that , contrary to the famous claim of the type @-@ identity theory , it is not necessarily true that " Pain is identical to C @-@ fibre firing . " Pain , according to Putnam 's papers , may correspond to utterly different physical states of the nervous system in different organisms , and yet they all experience the same mental state of " being in pain " . 
 Putnam cited examples from the animal kingdom to illustrate his thesis . He asked whether it was likely that the brain structures of diverse types of animals realize pain , or other mental states , the same way . If they do not share the same brain structures , they cannot share the same mental states and properties . The answer to this puzzle had to be that mental states were realized by different physical states in different species . Putnam then took his argument a step further , asking about such things as the nervous systems of alien beings , artificially intelligent robots and other silicon @-@ based life forms . These hypothetical entities , he contended , should not be considered incapable of experiencing pain just because they lack the same neurochemistry as humans . Putnam concluded that type @-@ identity theorists had been making an " ambitious " and " highly implausible " conjecture which could be disproven with one example of multiple realizability . This argument is sometimes referred to as the " likelihood argument " . 
 Putnam formulated a complementary argument based on what he called " functional isomorphism " . He defined the concept in these terms : " Two systems are functionally isomorphic if ' there is a correspondence between the states of one and the states of the other that preserves functional relations ' . " In the case of computers , two machines are functionally isomorphic if and only if the sequential relations among states in the first are exactly mirrored by the sequential relations among states in the other . Therefore , a computer made out of silicon chips and a computer made out of cogs and wheels can be functionally isomorphic but constitutionally diverse . Functional isomorphism implies multiple realizability . This argument is sometimes referred to as an " a priori argument " . 
 Jerry Fodor , Putnam , and others noted that , along with being an effective argument against type @-@ identity theories , multiple realizability implies that any low @-@ level explanation of higher @-@ level mental phenomena is insufficiently abstract and general . Functionalism , which identifies mental kinds with functional kinds that are characterized exclusively in terms of causes and effects , abstracts from the level of <unk> , and therefore seemed to be a better explanation of the relation between mind and body . In fact , there are many functional kinds , such as <unk> , software and bookshelves , which are multiply realized at the physical level . 
 = = = Machine state functionalism = = = 
 The first formulation of such a functionalist theory was put forth by Putnam himself . This formulation , which is now called " machine @-@ state functionalism " , was inspired by analogies noted by Putnam and others between the mind and Turing machines . The point , for functionalism is the nature of the states of the Turing machine . Each state can be defined in terms of its relations to the other states and to the inputs and outputs , and the details of how it accomplishes what it accomplishes and of its material constitution are completely irrelevant . According to machine @-@ state functionalism , the nature of a mental state is just like the nature of a Turing machine state . Just as " state one " simply is the state in which , given a particular input , such @-@ and @-@ such happens , so being in pain is the state which disposes one to cry " <unk> " , become distracted , wonder what the cause is , and so forth . 
 = = = Rejection of functionalism = = = 
 In the late 1980s , Putnam abandoned his adherence to functionalism and other computational theories of mind . His change of mind was primarily due to the difficulties that computational theories have in explaining certain intuitions with respect to the externalism of mental content . This is illustrated by Putnam 's own Twin Earth thought experiment ( see Philosophy of language ) . He also developed a separate argument against functionalism in 1988 , based on Fodor 's generalized version of multiple realizability . Asserting that functionalism is really a watered @-@ down identity theory in which mental kinds are identified with functional kinds , Putnam argued that mental kinds may be multiply realizable over functional kinds . The argument for functionalism is that the same mental state could be implemented by the different states of a universal Turing machine . 
 Despite Putnam 's rejection of functionalism , it has continued to flourish and has been developed into numerous versions by thinkers as diverse as David Marr , Daniel Dennett , Jerry Fodor , and David Lewis . Functionalism helped lay the foundations for modern cognitive science and is the dominant theory of mind in philosophy today . 
 By 2012 Putnam accepted a modification of functionalism called " liberal functionalism " . The view holds that " what matters for consciousness and for mental properties generally is the right sort of functional capacities and not the particular matter that <unk> those capacities " . The specification of these capacities ( 1 ) may refer to what goes on outside the organism 's " brain " , ( 2 ) may include intentional idioms , and ( 3 ) need not describe a capacity to compute something or other . 
 = = Philosophy of language = = 
 = = = Semantic externalism = = = 
 One of Putnam 's contributions to philosophy of language is his claim that " meaning just ain 't in the head " . He illustrated this using his " Twin Earth " thought experiment to argue that environmental factors play a substantial role in determining meaning . Twin Earth shows this , according to Putnam , since on Twin Earth everything is identical to Earth , except that its lakes , rivers and oceans are filled with XYZ whereas those of earth are filled with H2O . Consequently , when an earthling , Fredrick , uses the Earth @-@ English word " water " , it has a different meaning from the Twin Earth @-@ English word " water " when used by his physically identical twin , <unk> , on Twin Earth . Since Fredrick and <unk> are physically indistinguishable when they utter their respective words , and since their words have different meanings , meaning cannot be determined solely by what is in their heads . This led Putnam to adopt a version of semantic externalism with regard to meaning and mental content . The late philosopher of mind and language Donald Davidson , despite his many differences of opinion with Putnam , wrote that semantic externalism constituted an " anti @-@ subjectivist revolution " in philosophers ' way of seeing the world . Since the time of Descartes , philosophers had been concerned with proving knowledge from the basis of subjective experience . Thanks to Putnam , Tyler Burge and others , Davidson said , philosophy could now take the objective realm for granted and start questioning the alleged " truths " of subjective experience . 
 = = = Theory of meaning = = = 
 Putnam , along with Saul Kripke , Keith Donnellan , and others , contributed to what is known as the causal theory of reference . In particular , Putnam maintained in The Meaning of " Meaning " that the objects referred to by natural kind terms — such as tiger , water , and tree — are the principal elements of the meaning of such terms . There is a linguistic division of labor , analogous to Adam Smith 's economic division of labor , according to which such terms have their references fixed by the " experts " in the particular field of science to which the terms belong . So , for example , the reference of the term " lion " is fixed by the community of zoologists , the reference of the term " elm tree " is fixed by the community of botanists , and the reference of the term " table salt " is fixed as " NaCl " by chemists . These referents are considered rigid designators in the <unk> sense and are disseminated outward to the linguistic community . 
 Putnam specifies a finite sequence of elements ( a vector ) for the description of the meaning of every term in the language . Such a vector consists of four components : 
 the object to which the term refers , e.g. , the object individuated by the chemical formula H2O ; 
 a set of typical descriptions of the term , referred to as " the stereotype " , e.g. , " transparent " , " colorless " , and " hydrating " ; 
 the semantic indicators that place the object into a general category , e.g. , " natural kind " and " liquid " ; 
 the syntactic indicators , e.g. , " concrete noun " and " mass noun " . 
 Such a " meaning @-@ vector " provides a description of the reference and use of an expression within a particular linguistic community . It provides the conditions for its correct usage and makes it possible to judge whether a single speaker attributes the appropriate meaning to that expression or whether its use has changed enough to cause a difference in its meaning . According to Putnam , it is legitimate to speak of a change in the meaning of an expression only if the reference of the term , and not its stereotype , has changed . However , since there is no possible algorithm that can determine which aspect — the stereotype or the reference — has changed in a particular case , it is necessary to consider the usage of other expressions of the language . Since there is no limit to the number of such expressions which must be considered , Putnam embraced a form of semantic holism . 
 = = Philosophy of mathematics = = 
 Putnam made a significant contribution to philosophy of mathematics in the Quine – Putnam " indispensability argument " for mathematical realism . This argument is considered by Stephen <unk> to be one of the most challenging arguments in favor of the acceptance of the existence of abstract mathematical entities , such as numbers and sets . The form of the argument is as follows . 
 One must have ontological commitments to all entities that are indispensable to the best scientific theories , and to those entities only ( commonly referred to as " all and only " ) . 
 Mathematical entities are indispensable to the best scientific theories . Therefore , 
 One must have ontological commitments to mathematical entities . 
 The justification for the first premise is the most controversial . Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non @-@ scientific entities , and hence to defend the " only " part of " all and only " . The assertion that " all " entities postulated in scientific theories , including numbers , should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism . Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion , but as a whole , there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well @-@ confirmed theories . This puts the <unk> who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non @-@ Euclidean geometry , but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics , for example , in a difficult position . 
 Putnam holds the view that mathematics , like physics and other empirical sciences , uses both strict logical proofs and " quasi @-@ empirical " methods . For example , Fermat 's last theorem states that for no integer <formula> are there positive integer values of x , y , and z such that <formula> . Before this was proven for all <formula> in 1995 by Andrew Wiles , it had been proven for many values of n . These proofs inspired further research in the area , and formed a quasi @-@ empirical consensus for the theorem . Even though such knowledge is more conjectural than a strictly proven theorem , it was still used in developing other mathematical ideas . 
 = = Mathematics and computer science = = 
 Putnam has contributed to scientific fields not directly related to his work in philosophy . As a mathematician , Putnam contributed to the resolution of Hilbert 's tenth problem in mathematics . This problem was settled by Yuri <unk> in 1970 , with a proof that relied heavily on previous research by Putnam , Julia Robinson and Martin Davis . 
 In computability theory , Putnam investigated the structure of the <unk> analytical hierarchy , its connection with the constructible hierarchy and its Turing degrees . He showed that there exist many levels of the constructible hierarchy which do not add any subsets of the integers and later , with his student George <unk> , that the first such " non @-@ index " is the ordinal <formula> of <unk> analysis ( this is the smallest <formula> such that <formula> is a model of full second @-@ order comprehension ) , and also , together with a separate paper with Richard Boyd ( another of Putnam 's students ) and Gustav Hensel , how the Davis – <unk> – <unk> <unk> hierarchy of arithmetical degrees can be naturally extended up to <formula> . 
 In computer science , Putnam is known for the Davis – Putnam algorithm for the Boolean satisfiability problem ( SAT ) , developed with Martin Davis in 1960 . The algorithm finds if there is a set of true or false values that satisfies a given Boolean expression so that the entire expression becomes true . In 1962 , they further refined the algorithm with the help of George <unk> and Donald W. Loveland . It became known as the <unk> algorithm . This algorithm is efficient and still forms the basis of most complete SAT solvers . 
 = = Epistemology = = 
 In the field of epistemology , Putnam is known for his " brain in a vat " thought experiment ( a modernized version of Descartes ' evil demon hypothesis ) . The argument is that one cannot coherently state that one is a disembodied " brain in a vat " placed there by some " mad scientist " . 
 This follows from the causal theory of reference . Words always refer to the kinds of things they were coined to refer to , thus the kinds of things their user , or the user 's ancestors , experienced . So , if some person , Mary , were a " brain in a vat " , whose every experience is received through wiring and other gadgetry created by the " mad scientist " , then Mary 's idea of a " brain " would not refer to a " real " brain , since she and her linguistic community have never seen such a thing . Rather , she saw something that looked like a brain , but was actually an image fed to her through the wiring . Similarly , her idea of a " vat " would not refer to a " real " vat . So , if , as a brain in a vat , she were to say " I 'm a brain in a vat " , she would actually be saying " I 'm a brain @-@ image in a vat @-@ image " , which is incoherent . On the other hand , if she is not a brain in a vat , then saying that she is a brain in a vat is still incoherent , but now because she actually means the opposite . This is a form of epistemological externalism : knowledge or justification depends on factors outside the mind and is not solely determined internally . 
 Putnam has clarified that his real target in this argument was never skepticism , but metaphysical realism . Since realism of this kind assumes the existence of a gap between how man conceives the world and the way the world really is , skeptical scenarios such as this one ( or Descartes ' Evil demon ) present a formidable challenge . Putnam , by arguing that such a scenario is impossible , attempts to show that this notion of a gap between man 's concept of the world and the way it is , is in itself absurd . Man cannot have a " God 's eye " view of reality . He is limited to his conceptual schemes . Metaphysical realism is therefore false , according to Putnam . 
 = = <unk> and ontology = = 
 In the late 1970s and the 1980s , stimulated by results from mathematical logic and by some ideas of Quine , Putnam abandoned his long @-@ standing defence of metaphysical realism — the view that the categories and structures of the external world are both causally and ontologically independent of the conceptualizations of the human mind . He adopted a rather different view , which he called " internal realism " . 
 Internal realism was the view that , although the world may be causally independent of the human mind , the structure of the world — its division into kinds , individuals and categories — is a function of the human mind , and hence the world is not ontologically independent . The general idea is influenced by Kant 's idea of the dependence of our knowledge of the world on the categories of thought . 
 The problem with metaphysical realism , according to Putnam , was that it fails to explain the possibility of reference and truth . According to the metaphysical realist , our concepts and categories refer because they match up in some mysterious manner with the pre @-@ structured categories , kinds and individuals that are inherent in the external world . But how is it possible that the world " carves up " into certain structures and categories , the mind carves up the world into its own categories and structures , and the two " carvings " perfectly coincide ? The answer must be that the world does not come pre @-@ structured but that structure must be imposed on it by the human mind and its conceptual schemes . In Reason , Truth , and History , Putnam identified truth with what he termed " idealized rational acceptability . " The theory , which owes something to C. S. Peirce , is that a belief is true if it would be accepted by anyone under ideal epistemic conditions . 
 Nelson Goodman had formulated a similar notion in Fact , Fiction and Forecast in 1956 . In that work , Goodman went as far as to suggest that there is " no one world , but many worlds , each created by the human mind . " Putnam rejected this form of social constructivism , but retained the idea that there can be many correct descriptions of reality . No one of these descriptions can be scientifically proven to be the " one , true " description of the world . This does not imply relativism , for Putnam , because not all descriptions are equally correct and the ones that are correct are not determined subjectively . 
 Putnam renounced internal realism in his reply to Simon Blackburn in the volume Reading Putnam . The reasons he gave up his " <unk> " are stated in the first three of his replies in " The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam " , an issue of the journal Philosophical Topics , where he gives a history of his use ( s ) of the term " internal realism " , and , at more length , in his The Threefold Cord : Mind , Body and World ( 1999 ) . 
 Although he abandoned internal realism , Putnam still resists the idea that any given thing or system of things can only be described in exactly one complete and correct way . He thus accepts " conceptual relativity " – the view that it may be a matter of choice or convention , e.g. , whether mereological sums exist , or whether space @-@ time points are individuals or mere limits . In other words , having abandoned internal realism Putnam came to accept metaphysical realism in simply the broad sense of rejecting all forms of verificationism and all talk of our ' making ' the world . 
 Under the influence of C. S. Peirce and William James , Putnam also became convinced that there is no fact – value dichotomy ; that is , normative ( e.g. , ethical and aesthetic ) judgments often have a factual basis , while scientific judgments have a normative element . 
 = = <unk> and Wittgenstein = = 
 At the end of the 1980s , Putnam became increasingly disillusioned with what he perceived as the " scientism " and the rejection of history that characterize modern analytic philosophy . He rejected internal realism because it assumed a " cognitive interface " model of the relation between the mind and the world . Putnam claimed that the very notion of truth would have to be abandoned by a consistent eliminative materialist . Under the increasing influence of James and the pragmatists , he adopted a direct realist view of this relation . For a time , under the influence of Ludwig Wittgenstein , he adopted a pluralist view of philosophy itself and came to view most philosophical problems as nothing more than conceptual or linguistic confusions created by philosophers by using ordinary language out of its original context . 
 Many of Putnam 's most recent works have addressed the concerns of ordinary people , particularly their concerns about social problems . For example , he has written about the nature of democracy , social justice and religion . He has discussed the ideas of the continental philosopher , Jürgen Habermas , and has written articles influenced by " continental " ideas . 
 = = Death = = 
 Putnam died of mesothelioma , a rare form of lung cancer , at his home in Arlington , Massachusetts during the early hours of March 13 , 2016 . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Putnam himself may be his own most formidable philosophical adversary . His frequent changes of mind have led him to attack his previous positions . However , many significant criticisms of his views have come from other philosophers and scientists . For example , multiple realizability has been criticized on the grounds that , if it were true , research and experimentation in the neurosciences would be impossible . According to Bechtel and <unk> , to be able to conduct such research in the neurosciences , universal consistencies must either exist or be assumed to exist in brain structures . It is the similarity ( or homology ) of brain structures that allows us to generalize across species . If multiple realizability were an empirical fact , results from experiments conducted on one species of animal ( or one organism ) would not be meaningful when generalized to explain the behavior of another species ( or organism of the same species ) . Other criticisms of metaphysical realism have been proposed by <unk> Kim , David Lewis , Robert Richardson and Patricia Churchland . 
 One of the main arguments against functionalism was formulated by Putnam himself : the Twin Earth thought experiment . However , there have been other criticisms . The Chinese room argument by John Searle ( 1980 ) is a direct attack on the claim that thought can be represented as a set of functions . The thought experiment is designed to show that it is possible to mimic intelligent action , without any interpretation or understanding , through the use of a purely functional system . In short , Searle describes a situation in which a person who speaks only English is locked in a room with Chinese symbols in baskets and a rule book in English for moving the symbols around . The person is instructed , by people outside the room , to follow the rule book for sending certain symbols out of the room when given certain symbols . Further , suppose that the people outside the room are Chinese speakers and are communicating with the person inside via the Chinese symbols . According to Searle , it would be absurd to claim that the English speaker inside " knows " Chinese based on these syntactic processes alone . This thought experiment attempts to show that systems that operate merely on syntactic processes cannot realize any semantics ( meaning ) or intentionality ( <unk> ) . Thus , Searle attacks the idea that thought can be equated with the following of a set of syntactic rules . Thus , functionalism is an inadequate theory of the mind . Several other arguments against functionalism have been advanced by Ned Block . 
 Putnam has consistently adhered to the idea of semantic holism , in spite of the many changes in his other positions . The problems with this position have been described by Michael <unk> , Jerry Fodor , Ernest Lepore , and others . In the first place , they suggest that , if semantic holism is true , it is impossible to understand how a speaker of a language can learn the meaning of an expression , for any expression of the language . Given the limits of our cognitive abilities , we will never be able to master the whole of the English ( or any other ) language , even based on the ( false ) assumption that languages are static and immutable entities . Thus , if one must understand all of a natural language to understand a single word or expression , language learning is simply impossible . Semantic holism also fails to explain how two speakers can mean the same thing when using the same linguistic expression , and therefore how any communication at all is possible between them . Given a sentence P , since Fred and Mary have each mastered different parts of the English language and P is related in different ways to the sentences in each part , the result is that P means one thing for Fred and something else for Mary . Moreover , if a sentence P derives its meaning from its relations with all of the sentences of a language , as soon as the vocabulary of an individual changes by the addition or elimination of a sentence , the totality of relations changes , and therefore also the meaning of P. As this is a common phenomenon , the result is that P has two different meanings in two different moments in the life of the same person . Consequently , if I accept the truth of a sentence and then reject it later on , the meaning of that which I rejected and that which I accepted are completely different and therefore I cannot change my opinions with regard to the same sentences . 
 The brain in a vat argument has also been subject to criticism . Crispin Wright argues that Putnam 's formulation of the brain @-@ in @-@ a @-@ vat scenario is too narrow to refute global skepticism . The possibility that one is a recently disembodied brain in a vat is not undermined by semantic externalism . If a person has lived her entire life outside the vat — speaking the English language and interacting normally with the outside world — prior to her " <unk> " by a mad scientist , when she wakes up inside the vat , her words and thoughts ( e.g. , " tree " and " grass " ) will still refer to the objects or events in the external world that they referred to before her <unk> . In another scenario , a brain in a vat may be hooked up to a supercomputer that randomly generates perceptual experiences . In this case , one 's words and thoughts would not refer to anything , and would therefore be devoid of content . Semantics would no longer exist and the argument would be meaningless . 
 In philosophy of mathematics , Stephen <unk> has argued that the Quine – Putnam indispensability thesis does not demonstrate that mathematical entities are truly indispensable . The argumentation is sophisticated , but the upshot is that one can achieve the same logical results by simply adding to any statement about an abstract object the assumption " so @-@ and @-@ so is assumed ( or hypothesized ) to exist " . For example , one can take the argument for indispensability described above and adjust it as follows : 
 1 * . One must have ontological commitments to all and only the [ abstract ] entities for which , under the assumption that they exist , their existence is indispensable to the best scientific theories . 
 2 * . Under the assumption that they exist , the existence of mathematical entities is indispensable to the best scientific theories . Therefore , 
 3 * . Under the assumption that mathematical entities exist , one must have ontological commitments to the existence of mathematical entities . 
 Finally , Putnam 's internal realism has been accused by Curtis Brown of being a disguised form of subjective idealism . If this is the case , it is subject to the traditional arguments against that position . In particular , it falls into the trap of solipsism . That is , if existence depends on experience , as subjective idealism maintains , and if one 's consciousness were to stop existing , then the rest of the universe would stop existing as well . 
 = = Major works and bibliography = = 
 There is a detailed bibliography of Hilary Putnam 's writings ( with 16 books and 198 articles ) compiled by Vincent C. Müller and published in 1993 . Online in <unk> . A later version of this is on Harvard 's Servers . 
 The " <unk> Hypothesis " and Explanatory Models in Linguistics , <unk> , Vol . 17 , No. 1 , March 1967 , pp. 12 – 22 . 
 Philosophy of Mathematics : Selected Readings . Edited with Paul <unk> . Englewood Cliffs , N.J. : Prentice @-@ Hall , 1964 . 2nd ed . , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1983 . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ X 
 Philosophy of Logic . New York : Harper and Row , 1971 . London : George Allen and Unwin , 1972 . ISBN 0 @-@ 04 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Mathematics , Matter and Method . Philosophical Papers , vol . 1 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1975 . 2nd. ed . , 1985 paperback : ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Mind , Language and Reality . Philosophical Papers , vol . 2 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1975 . 2003 paperback : ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Meaning and the Moral Sciences . London : Routledge and Kegan Paul , 1978 . 
 Reason , Truth , and History . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1981 . 2004 paperback : ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Realism and Reason . Philosophical Papers , vol . 3 . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1983 . 2002 paperback : ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Methodology , Epistemology , and Philosophy of Science : Essays in Honour of Wolfgang <unk> edited with Wilhelm K. Essler and Carl G. Hempel . Dordrecht : D. Reidel , 1983 . 
 Epistemology , Methodology , and Philosophy of Science : Essays in Honour of Carl G. <unk> edited with Wilhelm K. Essler and Wolfgang <unk> . Dordrecht : D. Reidel , 1985 . 
 The Many Faces of Realism . La Salle , Ill . : Open Court , 1987 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Representation and Reality . Cambridge , Mass . : MIT Press , 1988 . ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Realism with a Human <unk> edited by James F. Conant . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press , 1990 . <unk> Description . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Renewing Philosophy . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press , 1992 . <unk> Description . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Pursuits of Reason : Essays in Honor of Stanley <unk> edited with Ted Cohen and Paul <unk> . Lubbock : Texas Tech University Press , 1993 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 266 @-@ X 
 Words and <unk> edited by James F. Conant . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press , 1994 . <unk> Description . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Pragmatism : An Open Question . Oxford : Blackwell , 1995 . ISBN 0 @-@ 631 @-@ <unk> @-@ X 
 The Threefold Cord : Mind , Body , and World . New York : Columbia University Press , 1999 . ISBN 0 @-@ 231 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Enlightenment and Pragmatism . Assen : Koninklijke Van <unk> , 2001 . <unk> . 
 The Collapse of the Fact / Value Dichotomy and Other Essays . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press , 2002 . Description . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Ethics Without Ontology . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press , 2002 . <unk> Description . ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Jewish Philosophy as a Guide to Life : Rosenzweig , Buber , Levinas , Wittgenstein . Bloomington : Indiana University Press , 2008 . 
 Philosophy in an Age of Science , edited by Mario De Caro and David Macarthur . Cambridge , Mass . : Harvard University Press , 2012 . <unk> Description . 
 Naturalism , Realism , and <unk> , edited by Mario De Caro , Cam , Mass : Harvard University Press , 2016 , ISBN <unk> . 
 = = Works about Putnam = = 
 Y. Ben @-@ Menahem ( ed . ) , Hilary Putnam , Contemporary Philosophy in Focus , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , 2005 . 
 P. Clark @-@ B. Hale ( eds . ) , Reading Putnam , Blackwell , Cambridge ( Massachusetts ) <unk> 1995 . 
 C. S. Hill ( ed . ) , The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam , Fayetteville , Arkansas 1992 . 
 M. <unk> , <unk> und <unk> : Untersuchungen zu Richard Rorty und Hilary Putnam , ( Dissertation ) Hamburg 1987 . 
 Maximilian de <unk> , Hilary Putnam , McGill @-@ Queens University Press / Acumen , 2006 . 
 Randall E. Auxier , Anderson , & Hahn ( eds . ) , The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam , The Library of Living Philosophers , Open Court , Chicago , Illinois , 2015 . 
 Sanjit Chakraborty , Understanding Meaning and World : A <unk> on Semantic Externalism , Cambridge Scholars Publishing , London , 2016 . 
 = Desert = 
 A desert is a barren area of land where little precipitation occurs and consequently living conditions are hostile for plant and animal life . The lack of vegetation exposes the unprotected surface of the ground to the processes of <unk> . About one third of the land surface of the world is arid or semi @-@ arid . This includes much of the polar regions where little precipitation occurs and which are sometimes called polar deserts or " cold deserts " . Deserts can be classified by the amount of precipitation that falls , by the temperature that prevails , by the causes of desertification or by their geographical location . 
 Deserts are formed by weathering processes as large variations in temperature between day and night put strains on the rocks which consequently break in pieces . Although rain seldom occurs in deserts , there are occasional downpours that can result in flash floods . Rain falling on hot rocks can cause them to shatter and the resulting fragments and rubble strewn over the desert floor is further eroded by the wind . This picks up particles of sand and dust and wafts them aloft in sand or dust storms . Wind @-@ blown sand grains striking any solid object in their path can abrade the surface . Rocks are smoothed down , and the wind sorts sand into uniform deposits . The grains end up as level sheets of sand or are piled high in billowing sand dunes . Other deserts are flat , stony plains where all the fine material has been blown away and the surface consists of a mosaic of smooth stones . These areas are known as desert pavements and little further erosion takes place . Other desert features include rock outcrops , exposed bedrock and clays once deposited by flowing water . Temporary lakes may form and salt pans may be left when waters evaporate . There may be underground sources of water in the form of springs and seepages from aquifers . Where these are found , oases can occur . 
 Plants and animals living in the desert need special adaptations to survive in the harsh environment . Plants tend to be tough and wiry with small or no leaves , water @-@ resistant cuticles and often spines to deter herbivory . Some annual plants germinate , bloom and die in the course of a few weeks after rainfall while other long @-@ lived plants survive for years and have deep root systems able to tap underground moisture . Animals need to keep cool and find enough food and water to survive . Many are nocturnal and stay in the shade or underground during the heat of the day . They tend to be efficient at conserving water , extracting most of their needs from their food and concentrating their urine . Some animals remain in a state of dormancy for long periods , ready to become active again when the rare rains fall . They then reproduce rapidly while conditions are favorable before returning to dormancy . 
 People have struggled to live in deserts and the surrounding semi @-@ arid lands for millennia . Nomads have moved their flocks and herds to wherever grazing is available and oases have provided opportunities for a more settled way of life . The cultivation of semi @-@ arid regions encourages erosion of soil and is one of the causes of increased desertification . Desert farming is possible with the aid of irrigation and the Imperial Valley in California provides an example of how previously barren land can be made productive by the import of water from an outside source . Many trade routes have been forged across deserts , especially across the Sahara Desert , and traditionally were used by caravans of camels carrying salt , gold , ivory and other goods . Large numbers of slaves were also taken northwards across the Sahara . Some mineral extraction also takes place in deserts and the uninterrupted sunlight gives potential for the capture of large quantities of solar energy . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 English desert and its Romance cognates ( including Italian and Portuguese deserto , French désert and Spanish <unk> ) all come from the ecclesiastical Latin <unk> ( originally " an abandoned place " ) , a participle of <unk> , " to abandon " . The correlation between aridity and sparse population is complex and dynamic , varying by culture , era , and technologies ; thus the use of the word desert can cause confusion . In English before the 20th century , desert was often used in the sense of " unpopulated area " , without specific reference to aridity ; but today the word is most often used in its climate @-@ science sense ( an area of low precipitation ) . Phrases such as " desert island " and " Great American Desert " in previous centuries did not necessarily imply sand or aridity ; their focus was the sparse population . 
 = = Physical geography = = 
 A desert is a region of land that is very dry because it receives low amounts of precipitation ( usually in the form of rain but may be snow , mist or fog ) , often has little coverage by plants , and in which streams dry up unless they are supplied by water from outside the area . Deserts can also be described as areas where more water is lost by evapotranspiration than falls as precipitation . Deserts generally receive less than 250 mm ( 10 in ) of precipitation each year . <unk> are regions which receive between 250 and 500 mm ( 10 and 20 in ) and when clad in grass , these are known as steppes . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Deserts have been defined and classified in a number of ways , generally combining total precipitation , number of days on which this falls , temperature , and humidity , and sometimes additional factors . For example , Phoenix , Arizona , receives less than 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of precipitation per year , and is immediately recognized as being located in a desert because of its aridity @-@ adapted plants . The North Slope of Alaska 's Brooks Range also receives less than 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of precipitation per year and is often classified as a cold desert . Other regions of the world have cold deserts , including areas of the Himalayas and other high @-@ altitude areas in other parts of the world . Polar deserts cover much of the ice @-@ free areas of the Arctic and Antarctic . A non @-@ technical definition is that deserts are those parts of the Earth 's surface that have insufficient vegetation cover to support a human population . 
 Potential evapotranspiration supplements the measurement of precipitation in providing a scientific measurement @-@ based definition of a desert . The water budget of an area can be calculated using the formula P − PE ± S , wherein P is precipitation , PE is potential evapotranspiration rates and S is amount of surface storage of water . Evapotranspiration is the combination of water loss through atmospheric evaporation and through the life processes of plants . Potential evapotranspiration , then , is the amount of water that could evaporate in any given region . As an example , Tucson , Arizona receives about 300 mm ( 12 in ) of rain per year , however about 2 @,@ 500 mm ( 98 in ) of water could evaporate over the course of a year . In other words , about eight times more water could evaporate from the region than actually falls as rain . Rates of evapotranspiration in cold regions such as Alaska are much lower because of the lack of heat to aid in the evaporation process . 
 Deserts are sometimes classified as " hot " or " cold " , " semiarid " or " coastal " . The characteristics of hot deserts include high temperatures in summer ; greater evaporation than precipitation usually exacerbated by high temperatures , strong winds and lack of cloud cover ; considerable variation in the occurrence of precipitation , its intensity and distribution ; and low humidity . Winter temperatures vary considerably between different deserts and are often related to the location of the desert on the continental landmass and the latitude . Daily variations in temperature can be as great as 22 ° C ( 40 ° F ) or more , with heat loss by radiation at night being increased by the clear skies . 
 Cold deserts , sometimes known as temperate deserts , occur at higher latitudes than hot deserts , and the aridity is caused by the dryness of the air . Some cold deserts are far from the ocean and others are separated by mountain ranges from the sea and in both cases there is insufficient moisture in the air to cause much precipitation . The largest of these deserts are found in Central Asia . Others occur on the eastern side of the Rocky Mountains , the eastern side of the southern Andes and in southern Australia . Polar deserts are a particular class of cold desert . The air is very cold and carries little moisture so little precipitation occurs and what does fall , usually as snow , is carried along in the often strong wind and may form blizzards , drifts and dunes similar to those caused by dust and sand in other desert regions . In Antarctica , for example , the annual precipitation is about 50 mm ( 2 in ) on the central plateau and some ten times that amount on some major peninsulas . 
 Based on precipitation alone , <unk> deserts receive less than 25 mm ( 1 in ) of rainfall a year ; they have no annual seasonal cycle of precipitation and experience twelve @-@ month periods with no rainfall at all . Arid deserts receive between 25 and 200 mm ( 1 and 8 in ) in a year and semiarid deserts between 200 and 500 mm ( 8 and 20 in ) . However , such factors as the temperature , humidity , rate of evaporation and evapotranspiration , and the moisture storage capacity of the ground have a marked effect on the degree of aridity and the plant and animal life that can be sustained . Rain falling in the cold season may be more effective at promoting plant growth , and defining the boundaries of deserts and the semiarid regions that surround them on the grounds of precipitation alone is problematic . 
 Coastal deserts are mostly found on the western edges of continental land masses in regions where cold currents approach the land or cold water upwellings rise from the ocean depths . The cool winds crossing this water pick up little moisture and the coastal regions have low temperatures and very low rainfall , the main precipitation being in the form of fog and dew . The range of temperatures on a daily and annual scale is relatively low , being 11 ° C ( 20 ° F ) and 5 ° C ( 9 ° F ) respectively in the Atacama Desert . Deserts of this type are often long and narrow and bounded to the east by mountain ranges . They occur in south @-@ west Africa , Chile , southern California and Baja California . Other coastal deserts influenced by cold currents are found in Western Australia , the Arabian Peninsula and Horn of Africa , and the western fringes of the Sahara . 
 In 1961 , Peveril Meigs divided desert regions on Earth into three categories according to the amount of precipitation they received . In this now widely accepted system , extremely arid lands have at least twelve consecutive months without precipitation , arid lands have less than 250 mm ( 10 in ) of annual precipitation , and semiarid lands have a mean annual precipitation of between 250 and 500 mm ( 10 – 20 in ) . Both extremely arid and arid lands are considered to be deserts while semiarid lands are generally referred to as steppes when they are grasslands . 
 Deserts are also classified , according to their geographical location and dominant weather pattern , as trade wind , mid @-@ latitude , rain shadow , coastal , monsoon , or polar deserts . Trade wind deserts occur either side of the horse latitudes at 30 ° to 35 ° North and South . These belts are associated with the subtropical anticyclone and the large @-@ scale descent of dry air moving from high @-@ altitudes toward the poles . The Sahara Desert is of this type . Mid @-@ latitude deserts occur between 30 ° and 50 ° North and South . They are mostly in areas remote from the sea where most of the moisture has already precipitated from the prevailing winds . They include the <unk> and Sonoran Deserts . Monsoon deserts are similar . They occur in regions where large temperature differences occur between sea and land . Moist warm air rises over the land , deposits its water content and circulates back to sea . Further inland , areas receive very little precipitation . The Thar Desert near the India / Pakistan border is of this type . 
 In some parts of the world , deserts are created by a rain shadow effect . Orographic lift occurs as air masses rise to pass over high ground . In the process they cool and lose much of their moisture by precipitation on the windward slope of the mountain range . When they descend on the leeward side , they warm and their capacity to hold moisture increases so an area with relatively little precipitation occurs . The Taklamakan Desert is an example , lying in the rain shadow of the Himalayas and receiving less than 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) precipitation annually . Other areas are arid by virtue of being a very long way from the nearest available sources of moisture . 
 Montane deserts are arid places with a very high altitude ; the most prominent example is found north of the Himalayas , in the Kunlun Mountains and the Tibetan Plateau . Many locations within this category have elevations exceeding 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) and the thermal regime can be hemiboreal . These places owe their profound aridity ( the average annual precipitation is often less than 40 mm or 1 @.@ 5 in ) to being very far from the nearest available sources of moisture and are often in the lee of mountain ranges . Montane deserts are normally cold , or may be <unk> hot by day and very cold by night as is true of the northeastern slopes of Mount Kilimanjaro . 
 Polar deserts such as McMurdo Dry Valleys remain ice @-@ free because of the dry katabatic winds that flow downhill from the surrounding mountains . Former desert areas presently in non @-@ arid environments , such as the Sandhills in Nebraska , are known as <unk> . In the Köppen climate classification system , deserts are classed as BWh ( hot desert ) or <unk> ( temperate desert ) . In the Thornthwaite climate classification system , deserts would be classified as arid megathermal climates . 
 = = = Weathering processes = = = 
 Deserts usually have a large diurnal and seasonal temperature range , with high daytime temperatures falling sharply at night . The diurnal range may be as much as 20 to 30 ° C ( 36 to 54 ° F ) and the rock surface experiences even greater temperature differentials . During the day the sky is usually clear and most of the sun 's radiation reaches the ground , but as soon as the sun sets , the desert cools quickly by radiating heat into space . In hot deserts , the temperature during daytime can exceed 45 ° C ( 113 ° F ) in summer and plunge below freezing point at night during winter . 
 Such large temperature variations have a destructive effect on the exposed rocky surfaces . The repeated fluctuations put a strain on exposed rock and the flanks of mountains crack and shatter . Fragmented strata slide down into the valleys where they continue to break into pieces due to the relentless sun by day and chill by night . Successive strata are exposed to further weathering . The relief of the internal pressure that has built up in rocks that have been underground for aeons can cause them to shatter . <unk> also occurs when the outer surfaces of rocks split off in flat flakes . This is believed to be caused by the stresses put on the rock by repeated expansions and contractions which induces fracturing parallel to the original surface . Chemical weathering processes probably play a more important role in deserts than was previously thought . The necessary moisture may be present in the form of dew or mist . Ground water may be drawn to the surface by evaporation and the formation of salt crystals may dislodge rock particles as sand or disintegrate rocks by exfoliation . Shallow caves are sometimes formed at the base of cliffs by this means . 
 As the desert mountains decay , large areas of shattered rock and rubble occur . The process continues and the end products are either dust or sand . Dust is formed from solidified clay or volcanic deposits whereas sand results from the fragmentation of harder granites , limestone and sandstone . There is a certain critical size ( about 0 @.@ 5 mm ) below which further temperature @-@ induced weathering of rocks does not occur and this provides a minimum size for sand grains . 
 As the mountains are eroded , more and more sand is created . At high wind speeds , sand grains are picked up off the surface and blown along , a process known as saltation . The whirling airborne grains act as a sand blasting mechanism which grinds away solid objects in its path as the kinetic energy of the wind is transferred to the ground . The sand eventually ends up deposited in level areas known as sand @-@ fields or sand @-@ seas , or piled up in dunes . 
 = = = Dust storms and sandstorms = = = 
 Sand and dust storms are natural events that occur in arid regions where the land is not protected by a covering of vegetation . Dust storms usually start in desert margins rather than the deserts themselves where the finer materials have already been blown away . As a steady wind begins to blow , fine particles lying on the exposed ground begin to vibrate . At greater wind speeds , some particles are lifted into the air stream . When they land , they strike other particles which may be jerked into the air in their turn , starting a chain reaction . Once ejected , these particles move in one of three possible ways , depending on their size , shape and density ; suspension , saltation or creep . Suspension is only possible for particles less than 0 @.@ 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 004 in ) in diameter . In a dust storm , these fine particles are lifted up and wafted aloft to heights of up to 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) . They reduce visibility and can remain in the atmosphere for days on end , conveyed by the trade winds for distances of up to 6 @,@ 000 km ( 3 @,@ 700 mi ) . Denser clouds of dust can be formed in stronger winds , moving across the land with a billowing leading edge . The sunlight can be obliterated and it may become as dark as night at ground level . In a study of a dust storm in China in 2001 , it was estimated that 6 @.@ 5 million tons of dust were involved , covering an area of 134 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km2 ( 52 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . The mean particle size was 1 @.@ 44 μm . A much smaller scale , short @-@ lived phenomenon can occur in calm conditions when hot air near the ground rises quickly through a small pocket of cooler , low @-@ pressure air above forming a whirling column of particles , a dust devil . 
 <unk> occur with much less frequency than dust storms . They are often preceded by severe dust storms and occur when the wind velocity increases to a point where it can lift heavier particles . These grains of sand , up to about 0 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 020 in ) in diameter are jerked into the air but soon fall back to earth , ejecting other particles in the process . Their weight prevents them from being airborne for long and most only travel a distance of a few meters ( yards ) . The sand streams along above the surface of the ground like a fluid , often rising to heights of about 30 cm ( 12 in ) . In a really severe steady blow , 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) is about as high as the sand stream can rise as the largest sand grains do not become airborne at all . They are transported by creep , being rolled along the desert floor or performing short jumps . 
 During a sandstorm , the wind @-@ blown sand particles become electrically charged . Such electric fields , which range in size up to 80 kV / m , can produce sparks and cause interference with telecommunications equipment . They are also unpleasant for humans and can cause headaches and nausea . The electric fields are caused by collision between airborne particles and by the impacts of <unk> sand grains landing on the ground . The mechanism is little understood but the particles usually have a negative charge when their diameter is under 250 μm and a positive one when they are over 500 μm . 
 = = = Major deserts = = = 
 Deserts take up about one third of the Earth 's land surface . <unk> may be salt @-@ covered flats . Eolian processes are major factors in shaping desert landscapes . Polar deserts ( also seen as " cold deserts " ) have similar features , except the main form of precipitation is snow rather than rain . Antarctica is the world 's largest cold desert ( composed of about 98 % thick continental ice sheet and 2 % barren rock ) . Some of the barren rock is to be found in the so @-@ called Dry Valleys of Antarctica that almost never get snow , which can have ice @-@ encrusted saline lakes that suggest evaporation far greater than the rare snowfall due to the strong katabatic winds that even evaporate ice . 
 Deserts , both hot and cold , play a part in moderating the Earth 's temperature . This is because they reflect more of the incoming light and their albedo is higher than that of forests or the sea . 
 = = = Features = = = 
 Many people think of deserts as consisting of extensive areas of billowing sand dunes because that is the way they are often depicted on TV and in films , but deserts do not always look like this . Across the world , around 20 % of desert is sand , varying from only 2 % in North America to 30 % in Australia and over 45 % in Central Asia . Where sand does occur , it is usually in large quantities in the form of sand sheets or extensive areas of dunes . 
 A sand sheet is a near @-@ level , firm expanse of partially consolidated particles in a layer that varies from a few centimeters to a few meters thick . The structure of the sheet consists of thin horizontal layers of coarse silt and very fine to medium grain sand , separated by layers of coarse sand and pea @-@ gravel which are a single grain thick . These larger particles anchor the other particles in place and may also be packed together on the surface so as to form a miniature desert pavement . Small ripples form on the sand sheet when the wind exceeds 24 km / h ( 15 mph ) . They form perpendicular to the wind direction and gradually move across the surface as the wind continues to blow . The distance between their crests corresponds to the average length of jumps made by particles during saltation . The ripples are ephemeral and a change in wind direction causes them to reorganise . 
 Sand dunes are accumulations of windblown sand piled up in mounds or ridges . They form downwind of copious sources of dry , loose sand and occur when topographic and climatic conditions cause airborne particles to settle . As the wind blows , saltation and creep take place on the windward side of the dune and individual grains of sand move uphill . When they reach the crest , they cascade down the far side . The upwind slope typically has a gradient of 10 ° to 20 ° while the lee slope is around 32 ° , the angle at which loose dry sand will slip . As this wind @-@ induced movement of sand grains takes place , the dune moves slowly across the surface of the ground . Dunes are sometimes solitary , but they are more often grouped together in dune fields . When these are extensive , they are known as sand seas or ergs . 
 The shape of the dune depends on the characteristics of the prevailing wind . <unk> dunes are produced by strong winds blowing across a level surface , and are crescent @-@ shaped with the concave side away from the wind . When there are two directions from which winds regularly blow , a series of long , linear dunes known as <unk> dunes may form . These also occur parallel to a strong wind that blows in one general direction . Transverse dunes run at a right angle to the prevailing wind direction . Star dunes are formed by variable winds , and have several ridges and slip faces radiating from a central point . They tend to grow vertically ; they can reach a height of 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) , making them the tallest type of dune . Rounded mounds of sand without a slip face are the rare dome dunes , found on the upwind edges of sand seas . 
 A large part of the surface area of the world 's deserts consists of flat , stone @-@ covered plains dominated by wind erosion . In " eolian deflation " , the wind continually removes fine @-@ grained material , which becomes wind @-@ blown sand . This exposes coarser @-@ grained material , mainly pebbles with some larger stones or cobbles , leaving a desert pavement , an area of land overlaid by closely packed smooth stones forming a tessellated mosaic . Different theories exist as to how exactly the pavement is formed . It may be that after the sand and dust is blown away by the wind the stones jiggle themselves into place ; alternatively , stones previously below ground may in some way work themselves to the surface . Very little further erosion takes place after the formation of a pavement , and the ground becomes stable . Evaporation brings moisture to the surface by capillary action and calcium salts may be precipitated , binding particles together to form a desert conglomerate . In time , bacteria that live on the surface of the stones accumulate a film of minerals and clay particles , forming a shiny brown coating known as desert varnish . 
 Other non @-@ sandy deserts consist of exposed outcrops of bedrock , dry soils or <unk> , and a variety of landforms affected by flowing water , such as alluvial fans , sinks or playas , temporary or permanent lakes , and oases . A <unk> is a type of desert landscape consisting of a high rocky plateau where the sand has been removed by aeolian processes . Other landforms include plains largely covered by gravels and angular boulders , from which the finer particles have been stripped by the wind . These are called " reg " in the western Sahara , " <unk> " in the eastern Sahara , " <unk> plains " in Australia and " <unk> " in central Asia . The Tassili Plateau in Algeria is an impressive jumble of eroded sandstone outcrops , canyons , blocks , pinnacles , fissures , slabs and ravines . In some places the wind has carved holes or arches and in others it has created mushroom @-@ like pillars narrower at the base than the top . In the Colorado Plateau it is water that has been the eroding force . Here the Colorado River has cut its way over the millennia through the high desert floor creating a canyon that is over a mile ( 6 @,@ 000 feet or 1 @,@ 800 meters ) deep in places , exposing strata that are over two billion year old . 
 = = = Water = = = 
 One of the driest places on Earth is the Atacama Desert . It is virtually devoid of life because it is blocked from receiving precipitation by the Andes mountains to the east and the Chilean Coast Range to the west . The cold Humboldt Current and the anticyclone of the Pacific are essential to keep the dry climate of the Atacama . The average precipitation in the Chilean region of Antofagasta is just 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) per year . Some weather stations in the Atacama have never received rain . Evidence suggests that the Atacama may not have had any significant rainfall from 1570 to 1971 . It is so arid that mountains that reach as high as 6 @,@ 885 m ( 22 @,@ 589 ft ) are completely free of glaciers and , in the southern part from 25 ° S to 27 ° S , may have been glacier @-@ free throughout the Quaternary , though permafrost extends down to an altitude of 4 @,@ 400 m ( 14 @,@ 400 ft ) and is continuous above 5 @,@ 600 m ( 18 @,@ 400 ft ) . Nevertheless , there is some plant life in the Atacama , in the form of specialist plants that obtain moisture from dew and the fogs that blow in from the Pacific . 
 When rain falls in deserts , as it occasionally does , it is often with great violence . The desert surface is evidence of this with dry stream channels known as arroyos or wadis meandering across its surface . These can experience flash floods , becoming raging torrents with surprising rapidity after a storm that may be many kilometers away . Most deserts are in basins with no drainage to the sea but some are crossed by exotic rivers sourced in mountain ranges or other high rainfall areas beyond their borders . The River Nile , the Colorado River and the Yellow River do this , losing much of their water through evaporation as they pass through the desert and raising groundwater levels nearby . There may also be underground sources of water in deserts in the form of springs , aquifers , underground rivers or lakes . Where these lie close to the surface , wells can be dug and oases may form where plant and animal life can flourish . The Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System under the Sahara Desert is the largest known accumulation of fossil water . The Great Man @-@ Made River is a scheme launched by Libya 's Colonel <unk> to tap this aquifer and supply water to coastal cities . <unk> Oasis in Egypt is 150 km ( 93 mi ) long and is the largest oasis in the Libyan Desert . A lake occupied this depression in ancient times and thick deposits of sandy @-@ clay resulted . Wells are dug to extract water from the porous sandstone that lies underneath . <unk> may occur in the walls of canyons and pools may survive in deep shade near the dried up watercourse below . 
 Lakes may form in basins where there is sufficient precipitation or meltwater from glaciers above . They are usually shallow and saline , and wind blowing over their surface can cause stress , moving the water over nearby low @-@ lying areas . When the lakes dry up , they leave a crust or hardpan behind . This area of deposited clay , silt or sand is known as a playa . The deserts of North America have more than one hundred playas , many of them relics of Lake Bonneville which covered parts of Utah , Nevada and Idaho during the last ice age when the climate was colder and wetter . These include the Great Salt Lake , Utah Lake , Sevier Lake and many dry lake beds . The smooth flat surfaces of playas have been used for attempted vehicle speed records at Black Rock Desert and Bonneville Speedway and the United States Air Force uses Rogers Dry Lake in the Mojave Desert as runways for aircraft and the space shuttle . 
 = = Biogeography = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 Plants face severe challenges in arid environments . Problems they need to solve include how to obtain enough water , how to avoid being eaten and how to reproduce . Photosynthesis is the key to plant growth . It can only take place during the day as energy from the sun is required , but during the day , many deserts become very hot . Opening stomata to allow in the carbon dioxide necessary for the process causes evapotranspiration , and conservation of water is a top priority for desert vegetation . Some plants have resolved this problem by adopting crassulacean acid metabolism , allowing them to open their stomata during the night to allow CO2 to enter , and close them during the day , or by using C4 carbon fixation . 
 Many desert plants have reduced the size of their leaves or abandoned them altogether . Cacti are desert specialists and in most species the leaves have been dispensed with and the chlorophyll displaced into the trunks , the cellular structure of which has been modified to allow them to store water . When rain falls , the water is rapidly absorbed by the shallow roots and retained to allow them to survive until the next downpour , which may be months or years away . The giant saguaro cacti of the Sonoran Desert form " forests " , providing shade for other plants and nesting places for desert birds . Saguaro grow slowly but may live for up to two hundred years . The surface of the trunk is folded like a concertina , allowing it to expand , and a large specimen can hold eight tons of water after a good downpour . 
 Cacti are restricted to North America but other xerophytic plants have developed similar strategies by a process known as convergent evolution . They limit water loss by reducing the size and number of stomata , by having waxy coatings and hairy or tiny leaves . Some are deciduous , shedding their leaves in the driest season , and others curl their leaves up to reduce transpiration . Others store water in succulent leaves or stems or in fleshy tubers . Desert plants maximize water uptake by having shallow roots that spread widely , or by developing long taproots that reach down to deep rock strata for ground water . The saltbush in Australia has succulent leaves and secretes salt crystals , enabling it to live in saline areas . In common with cacti , many have developed spines to ward off browsing animals . 
 Some desert plants produce seed which lies dormant in the soil until sparked into growth by rainfall . When annuals , such plants grow with great rapidity and may flower and set seed within weeks , aiming to complete their development before the last vestige of water dries up . For perennial plants , reproduction is more likely to be successful if the seed germinates in a shaded position , but not so close to the parent plant as to be in competition with it . Some seed will not germinate until it has been blown about on the desert floor to <unk> the seed coat . The seed of the mesquite tree , which grows in deserts in the Americas , is hard and fails to sprout even when planted carefully . When it has passed through the gut of a pronghorn it germinates readily , and the little pile of moist dung provides an excellent start to life well away from the parent tree . The stems and leaves of some plants lower the surface velocity of sand @-@ carrying winds and protect the ground from erosion . Even small fungi and microscopic plant organisms found on the soil surface ( so @-@ called cryptobiotic soil ) can be a vital link in preventing erosion and providing support for other living organisms . Some plants , including the Plantago Lanceolata , have to reproduce via wind pollination due to living in the environment . Cold deserts often have high concentrations of salt in the soil . Grasses and low shrubs are the dominant vegetation here and the ground may be covered with lichens . Most shrubs have spiny leaves and shed them in the coldest part of the year . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Animals adapted to live in deserts are called <unk> . There is no evidence that body temperature of mammals and birds is adaptive to the different climates , either of great heat or cold . In fact , with a very few exceptions , their basal metabolic rate is determined by body size , irrespective of the climate in which they live . Many desert animals ( and plants ) show especially clear evolutionary adaptations for water conservation or heat tolerance and so are often studied in comparative physiology , <unk> , and evolutionary physiology . One well @-@ studied example is the specializations of mammalian kidneys shown by desert @-@ inhabiting species . Many examples of convergent evolution have been identified in desert organisms , including between cacti and Euphorbia , kangaroo rats and jerboas , Phrynosoma and Moloch lizards . 
 Deserts present a very challenging environment for animals . Not only do they require food and water but they also need to keep their body temperature at a tolerable level . In many ways birds are the most able to do this of the higher animals . They can move to areas of greater food availability as the desert blooms after local rainfall and can fly to faraway waterholes . In hot deserts , gliding birds can remove themselves from the over @-@ heated desert floor by using thermals to soar in the cooler air at great heights . In order to conserve energy , other desert birds run rather than fly . The cream @-@ colored courser flits gracefully across the ground on its long legs , stopping periodically to snatch up insects . Like other desert birds it is well @-@ camouflaged by its coloring and can merge into the landscape when stationary . The sandgrouse is an expert at this and nests on the open desert floor dozens of kilometers ( miles ) away from the waterhole it needs to visit daily . Some small diurnal birds are found in very restricted localities where their plumage matches the color of the underlying surface . The desert lark takes frequent dust baths which ensures that it matches its environment . 
 Water and carbon dioxide are metabolic end products of oxidation of fats , proteins , and carbohydrates . <unk> a gram of carbohydrate produces 0 @.@ 60 grams of water ; a gram of protein produces 0 @.@ 41 grams of water ; and a gram of fat produces 1 @.@ 07 grams of water , making it possible for <unk> to live with little or no access to drinking water . The kangaroo rat for example makes use of this water of metabolism and conserves water both by having a low basal metabolic rate and by remaining underground during the heat of the day , reducing loss of water through its skin and respiratory system when at rest . <unk> mammals obtain moisture from the plants they eat . Species such as the addax antelope , dik @-@ dik , Grant 's gazelle and oryx are so efficient at doing this that they apparently never need to drink . The camel is a superb example of a mammal adapted to desert life . It minimizes its water loss by producing concentrated urine and dry dung , and is able to lose 40 % of its body weight through water loss without dying of dehydration . Carnivores can obtain much of their water needs from the body fluids of their prey . Many other hot desert animals are nocturnal , seeking out shade during the day or dwelling underground in burrows . At depths of more than 50 cm ( 20 in ) , these remain at between 30 to 32 ° C ( 86 to 90 ° F ) regardless of the external temperature . <unk> , desert rats , kangaroo rats and other small rodents emerge from their burrows at night and so do the foxes , coyotes , jackals and snakes that prey on them . Kangaroos keep cool by increasing their respiration rate , panting , sweating and <unk> the skin of their forelegs with saliva . Mammals living in cold deserts have developed greater insulation through warmer body fur and insulating layers of fat beneath the skin . The arctic weasel has a metabolic rate that is two or three times as high as would be expected for an animal of its size . Birds have avoided the problem of losing heat through their feet by not attempting to maintain them at the same temperature as the rest of their bodies , a form of adaptive insulation . The emperor penguin has dense plumage , a downy under layer , an air insulation layer next the skin and various thermoregulatory strategies to maintain its body temperature in one of the harshest environments on Earth . 
 Being ectotherms , reptiles are unable to live in cold deserts but are well @-@ suited to hot ones . In the heat of the day in the Sahara , the temperature can rise to 50 ° C ( 122 ° F ) . Reptiles cannot survive at this temperature and lizards will be prostrated by heat at 45 ° C ( 113 ° F ) . They have few adaptations to desert life and are unable to cool themselves by sweating so they shelter during the heat of the day . In the first part of the night , as the ground radiates the heat absorbed during the day , they emerge and search for prey . Lizards and snakes are the most numerous in arid regions and certain snakes have developed a novel method of locomotion that enables them to move sidewards and navigate high sand @-@ dunes . These include the horned viper of Africa and the sidewinder of North America , evolutionarily distinct but with similar behavioural patterns because of convergent evolution . Many desert reptiles are ambush predators and often bury themselves in the sand , waiting for prey to come within range . 
 Amphibians might seem unlikely desert @-@ dwellers , because of their need to keep their skins moist and their dependence on water for reproductive purposes . In fact , the few species that are found in this habitat have made some remarkable adaptations . Most of them are fossorial , spending the hot dry months aestivating in deep burrows . While there they shed their skins a number of times and retain the remnants around them as a waterproof cocoon to retain moisture . In the Sonoran Desert , Couch 's spadefoot toad spends most of the year dormant in its burrow . Heavy rain is the trigger for emergence and the first male to find a suitable pool calls to attract others . Eggs are laid and the tadpoles grow rapidly as they must reach metamorphosis before the water evaporates . As the desert dries out , the adult toads rebury themselves . The juveniles stay on the surface for a while , feeding and growing , but soon dig themselves burrows . Few make it to adulthood . The water holding frog in Australia has a similar life cycle and may aestivate for as long as five years if no rain falls . The Desert rain frog of Namibia is nocturnal and survives because of the damp sea fogs that roll in from the Atlantic . 
 Invertebrates , particularly arthropods , have successfully made their homes in the desert . Flies , beetles , ants , termites , locusts , millipedes , scorpions and spiders have hard cuticles which are impervious to water and many of them lay their eggs underground and their young develop away from the temperature extremes at the surface . The Saharan silver ant ( Cataglyphis bombycina ) uses a heat shock protein in a novel way and forages in the open during brief forays in the heat of the day . The long @-@ legged darkling beetle in Namibia stands on its front legs and raises its carapace to catch the morning mist as condensate , funnelling the water into its mouth . Some arthropods make use of the ephemeral pools that form after rain and complete their life cycle in a matter of days . The desert shrimp does this , appearing " miraculously " in new @-@ formed puddles as the dormant eggs hatch . Others , such as brine shrimps , fairy shrimps and tadpole shrimps , are cryptobiotic and can lose up to 92 % of their bodyweight , rehydrating as soon as it rains and their temporary pools reappear . 
 = = Human relations = = 
 Humans have long made use of deserts as places to live , and more recently have started to exploit them for minerals and energy capture . Deserts play a significant role in human culture with an extensive literature . 
 = = = History = = = 
 People have been living in deserts for millennia . Many , such as the Bushmen in the Kalahari , the Aborigines in Australia and various tribes of North American Indians , were originally hunter @-@ gatherers . They developed skills in the manufacture and use of weapons , animal tracking , finding water , foraging for edible plants and using the things they found in their natural environment to supply their everyday needs . Their self @-@ sufficient skills and knowledge were passed down through the generations by word of mouth . Other cultures developed a nomadic way of life as herders of sheep , goats , cattle , camels , yaks , llamas or reindeer . They travelled over large areas with their herds , moving to new pastures as seasonal and erratic rainfall encouraged new plant growth . They took with them their tents made of cloth or skins draped over poles and their diet included milk , blood and sometimes meat . 
 The desert nomads were also traders . The Sahara is a very large expanse of land stretching from the Atlantic rim to Egypt . Trade routes were developed linking the Sahel in the south with the fertile Mediterranean region to the north and large numbers of camels were used to carry valuable goods across the desert interior . The Tuareg were traders and the goods transported traditionally included slaves , ivory and gold going northwards and salt going southwards . Berbers with knowledge of the region were employed to guide the caravans between the various oases and wells . Several million slaves may have been taken northwards across the Sahara between the 8th and 18th centuries . Traditional means of overland transport declined with the advent of motor vehicles , shipping and air freight , but caravans still travel along routes between <unk> and <unk> and between Timbuktu and <unk> carrying salt from the interior to desert @-@ edge communities . 
 Round the rims of deserts , where more precipitation occurred and conditions were more suitable , some groups took to cultivating crops . This may have happened when drought caused the death of herd animals , forcing herdsmen to turn to cultivation . With few inputs , they were at the mercy of the weather and may have lived at bare subsistence level . The land they cultivated reduced the area available to nomadic herders , causing disputes over land . The semi @-@ arid fringes of the desert have fragile soils which are at risk of erosion when exposed , as happened in the American Dust Bowl in the 1930s . The grasses that held the soil in place were ploughed under , and a series of dry years caused crop failures , while enormous dust storms blew the topsoil away . Half a million Americans were forced to leave their land in this catastrophe . 
 Similar damage is being done today to the semi @-@ arid areas that rim deserts and about twelve million hectares of land are being turned to desert each year . <unk> is caused by such factors as drought , climatic shifts , tillage for agriculture , overgrazing and deforestation . Vegetation plays a major role in determining the composition of the soil . In many environments , the rate of erosion and run off increases dramatically with reduced vegetation cover . Unprotected dry surfaces tend to be blown away by the wind or be washed away by flash floods , leaving infertile soil layers that bake in the sun and become unproductive hardpan . Although overgrazing has historically been considered to be a cause of desertification , there is some evidence that wild and domesticated animals actually improve fertility and vegetation cover , and that their removal encourages erosive processes . 
 = = = Natural resource extraction = = = 
 Deserts contain substantial mineral resources , sometimes over their entire surface , giving them their characteristic colors . For example , the red of many sand deserts comes from laterite minerals . Geological processes in a desert climate can concentrate minerals into valuable deposits . Leaching by ground water can extract ore minerals and <unk> them , according to the water table , in concentrated form . Similarly , evaporation tends to concentrate minerals in desert lakes , creating dry lake beds or playas rich in minerals . Evaporation can concentrate minerals as a variety of evaporite deposits , including gypsum , sodium nitrate , sodium chloride and borates . <unk> are found in the USA 's Great Basin Desert , historically exploited by the " 20 @-@ mule teams " pulling carts of borax from Death Valley to the nearest railway . A desert especially rich in mineral salts is the Atacama Desert , Chile , where sodium nitrate has been mined for explosives and fertilizer since around 1850 . Other desert minerals are copper from Chile , Peru , and Iran , and iron and uranium in Australia . Many other metals , salts and commercially valuable types of rock such as pumice are extracted from deserts around the world . 
 Oil and gas form on the bottom of shallow seas when micro @-@ organisms decompose under anoxic conditions and later become covered with sediment . Many deserts were at one time the sites of shallow seas and others have had underlying hydrocarbon deposits transported to them by the movement of tectonic plates . Some major oilfields such as <unk> are found under the sands of Saudi Arabia . Geologists believe that other oil deposits were formed by aeolian processes in ancient deserts as may be the case with some of the major American oil fields . 
 = = = Farming = = = 
 Traditional desert farming systems have long been established in North Africa , irrigation being the key to success in an area where water stress is a limiting factor to growth . Techniques that can be used include drip irrigation , the use of organic residues or animal manures as fertilisers and other traditional agricultural management practises . Once fertility has been built up , further crop production preserves the soil from destruction by wind and other forms of erosion . It has been found that plant growth @-@ promoting bacteria play a role in increasing the resistance of plants to stress conditions and these <unk> suspensions could be inoculated into the soil in the vicinity of the plants . A study of these microbes found that desert farming hampers desertification by establishing islands of fertility allowing farmers to achieve increased yields despite the adverse environmental conditions . A field trial in the Sonoran Desert which exposed the roots of different species of tree to <unk> and the nitrogen fixing bacterium <unk> <unk> with the aim of restoring degraded lands was only partially successful . 
 The Judean Desert was farmed in the 7th century BC during the Iron Age to supply food for desert forts . Native Americans in the south western United States became agriculturalists around 600 AD when seeds and technologies became available from Mexico . They used terracing techniques and grew gardens beside seeps , in moist areas at the foot of dunes , near streams providing flood irrigation and in areas irrigated by extensive specially built canals . The Hohokam tribe constructed over 500 miles ( 800 km ) of large canals and maintained them for centuries , an impressive feat of engineering . They grew maize , beans , squash and peppers . 
 A modern example of desert farming is the Imperial Valley in California , which has high temperatures and average rainfall of just 3 in ( 76 mm ) per year . The economy is heavily based on agriculture and the land is irrigated through a network of canals and pipelines sourced entirely from the Colorado River via the All @-@ American Canal . The soil is deep and fertile , being part of the river 's flood plains , and what would otherwise have been desert has been transformed into one of the most productive farming regions in California . Other water from the river is piped to urban communities but all this has been at the expense of the river , which below the extraction sites no longer has any above @-@ ground flow during most of the year . Another problem of growing crops in this way is the build @-@ up of salinity in the soil caused by evaporation of river water . The greening of the desert remains an aspiration and was at one time viewed as a future means for increasing food production for the world 's growing population . This prospect has proved false as it disregarded the environmental damage caused elsewhere by the diversion of water for desert project irrigation . 
 = = = Solar energy capture = = = 
 Deserts are increasingly seen as sources for solar energy , partly due to low amounts of cloud cover . Many successful solar power plants have been built in the Mojave Desert . These plants have a combined capacity of 354 megawatts ( MW ) making them the largest solar power installation in the world . Large swaths of this desert are covered in mirrors , including nine fields of solar collectors . The Mojave Solar Park is currently under construction and will produce <unk> when completed . 
 The potential for generating solar energy from the Sahara Desert is huge , the highest found on the globe . Professor David Faiman of Ben @-@ Gurion University has stated that the technology now exists to supply all of the world 's electricity needs from 10 % of the Sahara Desert . <unk> Industrial Initiative is a consortium seeking $ 560 billion to invest in North African solar and wind installations over the next forty years to supply electricity to Europe via cable lines running under the Mediterranean Sea . European interest in the Sahara Desert stems from its two aspects : the almost continual daytime sunshine and plenty of unused land . The Sahara receives more sunshine per acre than any part of Europe . The Sahara Desert also has the empty space totalling hundreds of square miles required to house fields of mirrors for solar plants . 
 The Negev Desert , Israel , and the surrounding area , including the Arava Valley , receive plenty of sunshine and are generally not arable . This has resulted in the construction of many solar plants . David Faiman has proposed that " giant " solar plants in the Negev could supply all of Israel 's needs for electricity . 
 = = = Warfare = = = 
 The Arabs were probably the first organized force to conduct successful battles in the desert . By knowing back routes and the locations of oases and by utilizing camels , Muslim Arab forces were able to successfully overcome both Roman and Persian forces in the period 600 to 700 AD during the expansion of the Islamic caliphate . 
 Many centuries later , both world wars saw fighting in the desert . In the First World War , the Ottoman Turks were engaged with the British regular army in a campaign that spanned the Arabian peninsula . The Turks were defeated by the British , who had the backing of irregular Arab forces that were seeking to revolt against the Turks in the Hejaz , made famous in T. E. Lawrence 's book Seven Pillars of Wisdom . 
 In the Second World War , the Western Desert Campaign began in Italian Libya . Warfare in the desert offered great scope for tacticians to use the large open spaces without the distractions of casualties among civilian populations . Tanks and armoured vehicles were able to travel large distances unimpeded and land mines were laid in large numbers . However the size and harshness of the terrain meant that all supplies needed to be brought in from great distances . The victors in a battle would advance and their supply chain would necessarily become longer , while the defeated army could retreat , regroup and resupply . For these reasons , the front line moved back and forth through hundreds of kilometers as each side lost and regained momentum . Its most easterly point was at El Alamein in Egypt , where the Allies decisively defeated the Axis forces in 1942 . 
 = = = In culture = = = 
 The desert is generally thought of as a barren and empty landscape . It has been portrayed by writers , film @-@ makers , philosophers , artists and critics as a place of extremes , a metaphor for anything from death , war or religion to the primitive past or the desolate future . 
 There is an extensive literature on the subject of deserts . An early historical account is that of Marco Polo ( c . 1254 – 1324 ) , who travelled through Central Asia to China , crossing a number of deserts in his twenty four year trek . Some accounts give vivid descriptions of desert conditions , though often accounts of journeys across deserts are interwoven with reflection , as is the case in Charles Montagu Doughty 's major work , Travels in Arabia <unk> ( 1888 ) . Antoine de Saint @-@ Exupéry described both his flying and the desert in Wind , Sand and Stars and Gertrude Bell travelled extensively in the Arabian desert in the early part of the 20th century , becoming an expert on the subject , writing books and advising the British government on dealing with the Arabs . Another woman explorer was Freya Stark who travelled alone in the Middle East , visiting Turkey , Arabia , Yemen , Syria , Persia and Afghanistan , writing over twenty books on her experiences . The German naturalist Uwe George spent several years living in deserts , recording his experiences and research in his book , In the Deserts of this Earth . 
 The American poet Robert Frost expressed his bleak thoughts in his poem , Desert Places , which ends with the stanza " They cannot scare me with their empty spaces / Between stars - on stars where no human race is . / I have it in me so much nearer home / To scare myself with my own desert places . " 
 = = Deserts on other planets = = 
 Mars is the only planet in the Solar System on which deserts have been identified . Despite its low surface atmospheric pressure ( only 1 / 100 of that of the Earth ) , the patterns of atmospheric circulation on Mars have formed a sea of circumpolar sand more than 5 million km ² ( 1 @.@ 9 million sq mi ) in area , much larger than deserts on Earth . The Martian deserts principally consist of dunes in the form of half @-@ moons in flat areas near the permanent polar ice caps in the north of the planet . The smaller dune fields occupy the bottom of many of the craters situated in the Martian polar regions . Examination of the surface of rocks by laser beamed from the Mars Exploration Rover have shown a surface film that resembles the desert varnish found on Earth although it might just be surface dust . The surface of Titan , a moon of Saturn , also has a desert @-@ like surface with dune seas . 
 = Portage Glacier Highway = 
 The Portage Glacier Highway , or Portage Glacier Road , is a highway located in the U.S. state of Alaska . The highway is made up of a series of roads , bridges , and tunnels that connect the Portage Glacier area of the Chugach National Forest and the city of Whittier to the Seward Highway . Most of the highway travels through mainly rural areas just north of the Kenai Peninsula , with the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel passing under Maynard Mountain , part of the Chugach Mountain Range . Parts of the route were first constructed in the early 1900s , and the entire highway was completed on June 7 , 2000 , as part of the Whittier Access Project . As of 2012 , the highway has not been extended or rerouted . The main portion of the highway traveling from the western terminus to the Begich , Boggs visitors center is designated as National Forest Highway 35 by the U.S. Forest Service . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The portion of the Portage Glacier Highway traveling from the Seward Highway to the Begich , Boggs Visitor Center is designated as part of Forest Highway 35 , a Federal Forest Highway ( FFH ) . Forest Highways are funded and administered by the US Forest Service and the Federal Highway Administration ; the system was created by the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 . FFH @-@ 35 is one of the 33 Forest Highways that are currently designated in Alaska . 
 = = = Chugach National Forest = = = 
 The Portage Glacier Highway begins at an at @-@ grade intersection with the Seward Highway , in the former town of Portage . At this point , the highway is a two @-@ lane , asphalt road . Almost immediately after the Seward Highway intersection , the road crosses over the Coastal Classic line of the Alaska Railroad . The highway continues in a southeasterly direction along the Portage Valley , with Portage Creek to the north and pine forests to the south . After about 1 @.@ 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 9 km ) , the roadway intersects a small gravel road that leads to the Moose Flats Day Use area , which has access to several scenic hiking trails . Peaks of the Chugach Mountains , along with several hanging glaciers can be seen from the road ; Portage Glacier itself is out of view . The highway passes through a low @-@ lying wetland before reentering forest and providing access to the Alder Pond Day Use area and the Portage Valley RV park . 
 Portage Glacier Highway continues southeastward , providing access to the Black Bear Campgrounds , maintained by the USFS . The roadway bends eastward , passing the USFS Williwaw Campgrounds , as well as several small gravel roads . The road continues for a short distance before passing the Begich , Boggs Visitor Center and associated buildings , comprising the headquarters of Portage Glacier unit of the Chugach National Forest . The highway continues onto the Portage Creek Bridge , which is 114 feet ( 35 m ) long . It allows the highway to cross over the small Portage Creek , which is fed by the Portage Glacier and Portage Lake . The bridge ends at the start of the Portage Lake Tunnel . The tunnel is 445 feet ( 136 m ) long and constructed of concrete . The route proceeds on to a 0 @.@ 5 mi ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) portion of road known as the " Rock Cut at Portage Lake " by the Alaska Department of Transportation & Public Facilities ( DOT & PF ) . This road passes along the coast of Portage Lake , and borders a large , man @-@ made cliff to the north ( hence the name " Rock Cut " ) . This portion of the route terminates at the Placer Creek Bridge . The bridge , which is just 83 feet ( 25 m ) long , spans over Placer Creek , the smaller of the two creeks fed by Portage Lake . The highway continues to the six @-@ lane Bear Valley Staging area , and the toll booth for the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel . The road continues into the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel . 
 = = = Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel = = = 
 The Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel ( often referred to simply as the Whittier Tunnel ) is a multi @-@ use highway and railroad tunnel that passes under Maynard Mountain . At 13 @,@ 300 ft ( 4 @,@ 100 m ) , it is the second @-@ longest highway tunnel and longest combined rail and highway tunnel in North America . The tunnel was upgraded to mixed use by the Kiewit Construction Company . 
 The tunnel is designed with a single highway lane . The floor of the tunnel is constructed of 1 @,@ 800 <unk> concrete panels ( each 7 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) by 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) ) with the railroad tracks sunken slightly below the road surface . The interior is exposed rock , and contains several " safe @-@ houses " , which are small buildings that are used in case of severe earthquakes , vehicle fires , or other emergencies . The tunnel also contains several pull @-@ outs , which are reserved for disabled vehicles . The tunnel uses a combination of portal fans and reversible jet engines to ensure proper air flow and air quality throughout the tunnel . There are two backup generators to ensure that the computerized traffic controls and safe @-@ house ventilation systems in the tunnel continue to function in the event of a power failure . Because eastbound traffic , westbound traffic , and the Alaska Railroad must share the tunnel , rail and road traffic are coordinated by two sophisticated computer @-@ based systems : the Tunnel Control System and the Train Signal System . These systems control the timing of vehicles entering the tunnel , spacing them for safety , and lower railroad gates when a train is approaching . The tunnel 's entrance portals are designed in an A @-@ shape , with a large , train @-@ sized " garage door " , which allows traffic in and out of the tunnel . The entrance portals are designed to withstand the force of an avalanche . The tunnel 's eastern terminus is in Whittier . The staging areas on either side of the tunnel can accommodate as many as 450 vehicles waiting to pass through . 
 Track circuits in the tunnel had problems because of wetness ; in 2015 these were replaced with axle counters . 
 = = = Whittier = = = 
 After exiting the tunnel , the highway enters the nine @-@ lane Whittier staging area , where it passes several of the tunnel 's automated control systems . Before traveling past the single @-@ runway Whittier Airport , the route intersects two small roads , one of which is the Portage Pass Trail access route . Running parallel to the Alaska Railroad line , the route continues between the Passage Canal and several mountains for approximately 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) . Passing by the Cliffside Marina , the route crosses over Whittier Creek before immediately turning off of Camp Road and onto Whittier Street . The road crosses over the Alaska Railroad , before bending southeastward and traveling past a large parking lot , the Whittier Parking and Camping headquarters . Traveling past several businesses making up central Whittier , the highway turns east and intersects Glacier Avenue , as well as a short pedestrian pathway . The roadway continues through central Whittier before reaching a four @-@ way intersection with Blackstone Road , Eastern Avenue , and Depot Road , after which the route transfers to the latter . The road continues along Passage Canal for a short distance , while traveling towards the Alaska Marine Highway ( <unk> ) pier . Depot Road splits away from the highway , which continues for a short distance along Dock Access Road before reaching its eastern terminus , the <unk> pier . 
 = = = Traffic = = = 
 The highway is maintained by the Alaska Department of Transportation & Public Facilities ( AkDOT & PF ) . Part of the job of the AkDOT & PF is to measure traffic along the highway . These counts are taken using a metric called annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) . This is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles that travel along a portion of the highway . The estimated AADT for the Portage Glacier Highway is 1 @,@ 030 vehicles . In addition to taking AADT , the AkDOT & PF also takes monthly and yearly counts for the highway . The road 's yearly traffic count for 2010 was 234 @,@ 738 vehicles . The roadway 's highest monthly traffic is in mid @-@ summer , when an average of nearly 50 @,@ 000 vehicles use the tunnel each month . The highway 's lowest monthly traffic is in late winter , when the average monthly traffic is only about 6 @,@ 000 . The monthly and yearly counts are taken at the entrance to the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel . The entire length of the highway is designated as an Intermodal Connector Route , part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = Scenic and recreational opportunities = = 
 The Portage Glacier Highway offers numerous scenic and recreational opportunities , mostly located along the section designated as FFH @-@ 35 . A short , 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) long boardwalk trail and the 4 @.@ 6 miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ) long Trail of Blue Ice are accessible through the Moose Flats Day @-@ Use area . A viewing area for the Explorer Glacier is located near milepost 2 , and a turnout for the Portage River is located near milepost 3 . Near milepost 4 is the Williwaw fish viewing observation deck , which allows travelers to view spanning salmon in July through September . The 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) long loop Williwaw Nature Trail is accessible through the Williwaw Campground . The trail provides views of the Middle Glacier . At the turnout for the Begich , Boggs Visitor Center is the Byron Glacier Trail as well as several others . The Portage Glacier can be seen on a short cruise on the M / V Ptarmigan ; The glacier is no longer visible from the road . Past milepost 6 is a turnout for the Byron Glacier and Portage Lake . 
 Many large hoofed animals such as moose , and caribou can be seen along the highway , as well as black and brown bear species . Bald Eagles can occasionally be seen from the highway . If using binoculars , mountain goats can be seen on the sides of the mountains . During spring and autumn , migrating species of ducks , geese , swans , and cranes can be seen throughout the region . Spawning salmon species of sockeye , chum , and coho can be seen in Portage Creek . Several unique species of wildflowers are found along several of the trails in the area . Whittier annually holds the Walk to Whittier , which is an event where pedestrians walk through the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel to Whittier , the only time pedestrians may use the tunnel . The event has been held since 2002 , except it was not held in 2010 . The walk traditionally takes place in June . 
 = = Tolls = = 
 A toll is charged for access through the Anton Anderson Tunnel . The fees are collected from vehicles traveling eastbound . The fee for a regular vehicle is $ 13 , as is the price for motorcycles . Vehicles pulling trailers must pay a higher toll , set at $ 20 . Small buses and regular RVs are charged $ 35 , while large buses must pay $ 125 . <unk> and unusually sized vehicles , those 10 to 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 4 m ) wide and 14 to 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) high must pay $ 300 per use . Vehicles that are exempt from paying tolls are those owned by the Alaska Railroad , the DOT & PF , or any emergency or law enforcement vehicle . Any vehicles owned or operated by any state government agency or school district must pay just $ 10 . 
 Seasonal passes are also available for normal @-@ sized cars , trucks and motorcycles , and are priced at over $ 500 . The average passenger vehicle toll cost per mile is $ 39 @.@ 42 , while the average per @-@ mile vehicle price for trucks is $ 39 @.@ 52 . The tunnel is operated on a strict time schedule , with vehicles being allowed in for 15 minutes from each a single direction before alternating to the other . The tunnel is open from 5 : 30 A.M. to 11 : 15 P.M. during summer months , and from 7 : 00 A.M. to 10 : 45 P.M. during winter months . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native trail = = = 
 The earliest evidence of the Portage Valley being used for transportation dates back to early A.D , when the Inuit people used the flat , low @-@ lying valley as a pass through the Chugach Mountains . The Dena 'ina people continued use of the valley as a passage between Cochrane Bay and the <unk> Arm . They used Portage Creek for fishing purposes , and established a series of trails along the creek . Russian fur traders and early settlers continued to use the valley , establishing a trail along the creek and the Portage and Burns glaciers . It was possible for boats to travel through the valley by using the Passage Canal and the creek up until 1913 . The trail was usable until 1939 , due to the continuous recession of the Portage Glacier . The final party to attempt to use the trail that year was forced to climb 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) up the Portage Shoulder to avoid the drop @-@ offs and crevasses that had formed along the trail . 
 = = = Railroad development = = = 
 In 1940 , the U.S. Government realized that it needed to reevaluate its territories , including Alaska . Alaska was declared a vulnerable attack target , as was the existing railroad connecting Anchorage and Seward . The U.S. Armed Forces began planning for new roads and railroads , and on October 15 , 1940 , General Simon Bolivar Buckner , Jr. announced those plans . The plan called for the existing railroad to be transferred to Whittier , and for the construction of a road to Seward ( the Seward Highway ) , a road to the Richardson Highway ( the Glenn Highway and the Tok Cut @-@ Off ) , and a road to the Portage Valley ( the Portage Glacier Highway ) . Less than a week after the announcement of the plan , surveying of the area around Whittier was taking place in order to make sure of the safety of building the railroad terminal . The project was strongly opposed by the city of Seward , but after the survey was complete , the project was definite . 
 In early 1941 , large groups of people from the Kenai Peninsula traveled to Washington , D.C. to protest the moving of the railroad . The protests were useless , and on April 3 , 1941 , U.S. Congress passed a bill providing the project with $ 5 @.@ 3 million ( equivalent to $ 85 @,@ 267 @,@ 600 respectively in 2016 ) . In late April , the U.S. Army 's 177th Engineering group began work on clearing and grading the former native trail . The U.S. Army hired the West Construction Company of Boston , <unk> to assist in the construction of the future railroad 's two tunnels . West Construction and the Army began working on the tunnel under Mount Maynard in late August 1941 . The first boring of the tunnel began on the east side of the mountain , and shortly afterwards , construction on the west side began . Winter hindered the construction of the tunnel until mid November , when a small " <unk> " building was constructed . The U.S. entered World War II on December 8 , 1941 , after the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor . This sparked the need for the completion of the tunnel earlier than expected . By the end of 1941 , workers had tunneled more than 170 feet ( 52 m ) into Maynard Mountain . 
 Work on the tunnel rapidly increased into the summer of 1942 . Large areas of the rock were blasted away with controlled explosions , using dynamite . The material removed from the tunnel was used as grading material for other parts of the railway . Supplies were received behind schedule , mainly due to the war . This hindered progress on the tunnel . In June 1942 , Japanese forces attacked and invaded the Alaskan islands of Attu and Kiska , again provoking the need to complete the tunnels sooner . The winter conditions of 1942 and 1943 slowed the progress of the tunnels . Work on the railroad continued until April 23 , 1943 , when the project was completed . Anton Anderson , the lead engineer for the tunnels and namesake for the tunnel to Whittier , was not present when the railroad was used for the first time , fearing the Whittier Tunnel was not ready . 
 = = = Early roads = = = 
 The U.S. army established a series of simple earthen roads while constructing the railroad spur . This was the first road to exist in the Portage Valley . Whittier began to grow after the completion of the railroad spur . The port boomed in the mid @-@ 1940s , with the population reaching over 1 @,@ 000 . The city , including roads , began to form . By 1953 , the earthen road in Portage Valley had generally been relocated near the location of the present highway . Also around that time , a road in Whittier in the location of the present highway existed as a graded , dirt road . The highway was probably paved sometime between 1965 and 1967 , and three small bridges along the route were constructed , all of which are still used today . 
 = = = Highway studies and proposals = = = 
 Between the late 1950s and the early 1960s , the U.S. Military pulled out of Whittier , allowing the town to grow as a commercial port . Whittier 's location made it a large tourist location , and after the military pullout , travel to Whittier grew massively . In addition to the state 's paving of the highway , the Alaska Railroad began offering shuttle services between Portage and Whittier in the mid @-@ 1960s . The Alaska Railroad would allow vehicles to drive onto flatcars , which would then be transported by train through the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel to Whittier . The number of people visiting Whittier grew progressively , bringing with it a larger number of requests for a more convenient and affordable way of transportation to Whittier . During the late 1970s , a proposal was put forward for a road to Whittier . In preparation for the highway , Anchorage businessman Pete <unk> purchased the Buckner Building , and planned to convert it into a resort . However , the highway proposal fell through . In 1981 , the AkDOT & PF began to study possible alternatives to the railroad , which would have cost anywhere between $ 10 million and $ 68 million . 
 In 1993 , the AkDOT & PF finally initiated the study for the alternative transportation system to Whittier . The project would be named the " Whittier Access Project " . The AkDOT & PF authorized HDR Alaska to conduct the study . The study presented five solutions : increasing the existing flatcar service , installing a high @-@ speed electric rail service , constructing a series of highways over the mountain range , building a highway and tunnels through the mountain range , and constructing a highway to the existing railroad tunnel and expanding the tunnel to withstand motor vehicles . After consulting with members of the Alaska Railroad , the general public , and highway and tunnel engineers , the AkDOT & PF decided to move forward with the last option , involving the expansion of the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel and the construction of a highway . In November 1995 , an environmental impact statement , created by HDR Alaska , was approved by the FHWA , allowing the project to move forward . 
 = = = Whittier Access Project = = = 
 In March 1996 , the state of Alaska announced its final plans for the construction of the Whittier Access Project . The project was predicted to cost around $ 50 million , and the project was planned to begin later that year . However , the project was met with much controversy , and by December 1996 , the project still had not begun . The cost of construction was reevaluated to be around $ 60 million , and the project was planned to begin in March 1997 . Construction of the Whittier Access Project finally began on May 6 , 1997 . Then @-@ governor of Alaska Tony Knowles began the construction when he detonated six pounds of explosives located on Begich Peak , although this was unrelated to the project itself . On May 22 , 1997 , construction of the project was halted . Carl S. Armbrister , the Director of the Office of Planning and Program Development for the FHWA 's 10th Region and head of the project was sued by several environmental agencies and tourism groups , headed by the Alaska Center for the Environment ( ACE ) . The ACE brought the suit against Armbrister on the grounds that the project violated section 4 ( f ) of the Department of Transportation Act of 1966 , which requires that all environmental impacts of a project be assessed and that a project " [ has ] no feasible and prudent alternative " . The ACE held that a new highway was not needed and improving the existing rail service was a prudent and feasible option . However , one day after construction was stopped , a judicial ruling was issued permitting work to continue . Construction continued for a week , until May 31 , but was then halted again due to the lawsuit . Work on the project was ruled off until at least mid @-@ July of that year . 
 James Keith Singleton , Jr . , the district judge overseeing the case , ruled in favor of Armbrister and the FHWA and stated that the agency was correct in its decision against improved rail service . The suit was compared to the landmark 1971 case Citizens to Preserve Overton Park , Inc. v. Volpe , where the supreme court ruled in favor of Memphis , Tennessee citizens attempting to protect Overton Park from a plan to route Interstate 40 through 26 acres ( 11 ha ) of its forest . However , unlike in that case , the Whittier Access project was found to be the only feasible solution for a link to Whittier . The ACE appealed the decision and the case went to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals . The court upheld Singleton 's decision , finding that the project only affected a very small amount of parkland and that the road was necessary to meet the requirements for a link to the city . These rulings were legally significant as they appeared to overturn the precedent established in the Overton Park case , which was interpreted as saying that " it must be shown that the implications of not building [ a ] highway pose an <unk> situation ' " . 
 Work on the project was finally approved following the Ninth Circuit 's decision . The lawsuit had put the project , which had been planned to be completed by the end of 1998 , far behind schedule . The first phase of construction consisted of building the Portage Creek Bridge and the construction of a new tunnel through Begich Peak . The contract for the phase had been awarded prior to the lawsuit , but work on the components was not completed until very late in 1998 . A temporary bridge was built over Portage Creek so that the tunnel could be constructed . The final part of the phase was replacing the temporary bridge over Portage Creek . The structure was designed so that it would appear to fit with the environment but could also withstand the regular seismic activity of the region and have a minimal impact on the surrounding fish and plant populations . <unk> Hill was selected to design the approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) of highway that would connect the existing road to the Anton Anderson Tunnel . Construction of the highway , done by Herndon and Thompson Inc . , was finished before tunnel work began . 
 The Kiewit Construction Company , based in Omaha , Nebraska , was awarded the contract for phase two , redesigning the Anton Anderson Tunnel . Kiewit began planning the tunnel design in June 1998 , and began work on the project sometime around September . The first part of the tunnel construction involved vertically and horizontally expanding the existing rock walls . Beginning from the western entrance , Kiewit drilled away several feet of the rock face from the top of the tunnel and installed a net to prevent any potential rockfalls . They then drilled sideways , clearing space for the nine vehicle turnaround areas . However , work on the tunnel was hindered by several different events . While crews were working on the tunnel , a drunken Whittier resident drove his or her truck into the tunnel and got it stuck on the rails . On October 23 , a thirteen @-@ car train derailed at the western entrance . Although no workers were injured , a substantial amount of the equipment was destroyed . In addition to the accidents , crews had to work in extreme weather . Kiewit claims that workers had to deal with " winds of more than 120 mph , minus 40 degree temperatures and snow up to 43 feet deep " and wind chills that would drop to around − 80 ° F ( − 62 ° C ) . An avalanche also at one point halted construction for four days . 
 Despite the conditions , the crews were forced to do much of the work during the winter , since the project had to adjust to the train schedule . Trains ran daily during the summer , so work was restricted to about nine @-@ hour shifts during the night . During winter months , trains were only operating during four days each week . When a train was scheduled to come through the tunnel , crews reported they had to " spent up to two hours breaking down equipment , getting it all outside and waiting for the train to pass before heading back into the mountain " . Following the expanding of the tunnel , one of the first steps the crews took was to demolish the existing entrance portals . Once they were destroyed , the existing rail was removed in sections . Pre @-@ cast panels were laid where the tracks had been , before the old rail was put back and welded to the panels . While that was being completed , some crews installed a series of anti @-@ icing insulation panels and drainage pipes to keep the tunnel clear during winter months . 
 Construction work was completed on schedule , in early 2000 . The town of Whittier began a number of improvements to help adjust for the road 's opening . Among these were more parking facilities and increasing public restrooms . The town government also approved of several long @-@ term changes to the city that would begin after the road was opened , including a second harbor , a bike trail , a new sidewalk system , and shopping center . The official opening ceremony was held on June 7 and was marked by protests from environmentalists . A group of three of them chained themselves together in the middle of the road in an attempt to block traffic , while another group of about twenty hung banners and waved signs . The ceremony itself was attended by around 300 people . Then @-@ governor Knowles performed a ribbon @-@ cutting and rode through the tunnel in a 1954 @-@ model Cadillac . 
 = = Major junctions = = 
 = = Related route = = 
 Forest Highway 35 ( FFH @-@ 35 ) is a Federal Forest Highway located entirely within Chugach National Forest . The highway is approximately 6 @.@ 6 miles ( 10 @.@ 6 km ) long , and is mostly designated along the Portage Glacier Highway . The road serves the Portage Glacier branch of the park . FFH @-@ 35 begins at an intersection with the Seward Highway ( AK @-@ 1 ) in Portage . The route follows the Portage Glacier Highway for approximately 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) , passing several park campgrounds and scenic turnouts . FFH 35 turns off the Portage Glacier Highway onto Portage Lake Loop Road , passing west of the Begich , Boggs Visitor Center Complex . The designation then shifts from Portage Lake Loop Road to Byron Glacier Road , which proceeds southward past low @-@ lying marshland along Portage Lake . It continues past a small turnout area and travels over a small creek before proceeding eastward to its eastern terminus , a building and parking lot that make up part of the visitor center . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is located within the Municipality of Anchorage , Alaska . 
 = Fez ( video game ) = 
 Fez ( stylized as <unk> ) is a 2012 indie puzzle platform game developed by Polytron Corporation and published by Polytron , Trapdoor , and Microsoft Studios . The player @-@ character Gomez receives a fez that reveals his two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) world to be one of four sides of a three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) world . The player rotates between these four 2D views to realign platforms and solve the game 's puzzles . The object of the game is to collect cubes and cube fragments to restore order to the universe . 
 The game was called an " underdog darling of the indie game scene " during its high @-@ profile and protracted five @-@ year development cycle . Fez designer and Polytron founder Phil Fish gained celebrity status for his outspoken public persona and his prominence in the 2012 documentary Indie Game : The Movie , which detailed Fez 's final stages of development and Polytron 's related legal issues . Fez met critical acclaim upon its April 2012 release for Xbox Live Arcade . The game was ported to other platforms following the expiration of a yearlong exclusivity agreement . 
 Reviewers commended the game 's emphasis on discovery and freedom , but criticized its technical issues , in @-@ game navigation , and endgame backtracking . They likened the game 's rotation mechanic to the 2D – 3D shifts of Echochrome , Super Paper Mario , and Crush . Fez won awards including the Seumas McNally Grand Prize and Eurogamer 's 2012 Game of the Year . It had sold one million copies by the end of 2013 , and it influenced games such as Monument Valley , Crossy Road , and Secrets of Rætikon . A planned sequel was canceled when Fish abruptly left the industry . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Fez is a two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) puzzle platform game set in a three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) world . The player @-@ character Gomez lives peacefully on a 2D plane until he receives a red fez and witnesses the breakup of a giant , golden <unk> that tears the fabric of spacetime and reveals a third dimension . After the game appears to glitch , reset , and reboot , the player can rotate between four 2D views of the 3D world , as four sides around a cube @-@ like space . This rotation mechanic reveals new paths through the levels by connecting otherwise inaccessible platforms , and is the basis of Fez 's puzzles . For example , floating platforms become a solid road , discontinuous ladders become whole , and platforms that move along a track stay on course . The object of the game is to collect cubes and cube fragments , which accrete to restore order to the universe . In search of these cubes , Gomez traverses the game environment by jumping between ledges . Other platforming elements change with the level themes , including crates that activate switches , bombs that reveal passages , and pistons that launch Gomez airborne . 
 The exploratory parts of the game feature a series of arcane codes and glyphs , treasure maps and chests , and secret rooms . Players are left without guidance to determine whether game elements are decipherable <unk> or simply false signals . These sorts of puzzles include hidden warp gates , enigmatic obelisks , invisible platforms , sequences of tetrominos , a ciphered alphabet , and QR codes . One of the game 's recurring themes is an ancient civilization that attempted to make sense of their dimensionality , as told through artifacts . 
 Fez has no enemies , bosses , or punishments for failure — the player @-@ character quickly respawns upon falling to his death . The game 's designer described Fez as a " ' stop and smell the flowers ' kind of game " . It prioritizes puzzle @-@ solving and patience over the platforming genre 's traditional interest in dexterity . Fez features a pixelated art style and a limited color palette reminiscent of the 8 @-@ bit era . Its homage includes Tetris tetrominos inscribed on the walls and in the sky , The Legend of Zelda treasure chest animations , Super Mario Bros. mushroom levels , travel by pipe , and floating platforms . The game 's settings include forests , factories , a coastal lighthouse , an urban city , and a library . Fez 's New Game Plus mode adds a first @-@ person perspective feature and lets the player revisit areas to collect " anti @-@ cubes " from harder puzzles . This second half of the game is more challenging and focuses on code cracking . 
 = = Development = = 
 Fez 's five @-@ year development cycle is known for its protracted length and amount of public exposure . Nathan Grayson of VG247 likened its rocky history to " an indie Duke Nukem Forever " , and Polygon reviewer Arthur Gies noted its standing reputation as an " underdog darling of the indie game scene " . Its designer , Phil Fish , became renowned in a way unusual for game developers due to his prominence in the 2012 Indie Game : The Movie . Apart from Fez , which was released to wide acclaim , Fish himself became known for his outspoken and acerbic public persona . 
 Fez began as a collaboration between Canadian indie developers Fish and Shawn McGrath . They worked on McGrath 's idea for a puzzle game in which a 3D space was viewed from four 2D angles . Though their partnership broke down due to creative differences , the entirety of Fez 's design , story , and art descends from this game mechanic . Fish continued to work on the project in his spare time and solicited for a programmer on DeviantArt , where he found Renaud Bédard . Fez was first announced in July 2007 on The Independent Gaming Source . It was nominated for two awards at the 2008 Game Developers Conference Independent Games Festival ( GDC IGF ) . When Fish 's employer did not permit him time off to attend the awards , he quit . He later recalled this moment as " when [ he ] became indie " . The game won " Excellence in Visual Art " , and its presence created a surge of public interest in Fez that rode a concurrent swell of interest in indie game development as a whole . Fish received a Canadian government loan to open Polytron Corporation as a startup company and began full @-@ time work on Fez . In July 2009 , Polytron announced that Fez would launch in early 2010 as an Xbox Live Arcade exclusive . Development continued with an experimental spirit until the company ran out of money . Fish borrowed from friends and family to keep the company open and considered canceling the project before the nearby Québécois developer @-@ publisher Trapdoor offered to help . Fish felt that the Trapdoor partnership rescued the game . 
 Fez won multiple awards in 2011 and was a " PAX 10 " selection at the 2011 Penny Arcade Expo . Fish is shown preparing for Fez 's booth at PAX East 2011 , an earlier show , in the 2012 documentary film Indie Game : The Movie . The film chronicles the game development stories of several indie developers . As a subplot , the film presents Fish amidst a legal dispute with a former business partner that jeopardizes Fez 's future . Game Informer called Fish the film 's " most memorable developer " , and Rock , Paper , Shotgun wrote that Fish is portrayed as theatrical in a way that exacerbates his already outspoken reputation . Eurogamer said that the part when Fish resolves to kill himself if he does not release his game is " the film 's most startling moment " . Near the end of Fez 's development , Fish told a Gamasutra reporter that he had received positive feedback from IGF Chairman Brandon Boyer and Braid designer Jonathan Blow , but that he felt " burnt out " . The final game included almost none of the original work from the first two years of development . After several delays , Fez was submitted for certification in February 2012 . 
 Fez was released on April 13 , 2012 , and it sold 200 @,@ 000 copies during its yearlong exclusivity to the Xbox Live Arcade platform . Fish rebuked Polytron 's co @-@ publisher , Microsoft Studios , for botching the game 's release by way of lackluster publicity . Several months later , Polytron entered a high @-@ profile dispute with Microsoft over the cost of patching Fez . Nearly a year after Fez 's launch , Fish announced a Windows PC port for release on May 1 , 2013 . OS X and Linux ports debuted on September 11 , 2013 , and PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , and PlayStation Vita ports by BlitWorks debuted on March 25 , 2014 . Ouya and iOS ports were also announced . Bédard stayed to port the Windows release before joining Toronto 's Capybara Games . He credited Polytron 's long development cycle to his own inexperience in game development ( compounded by the team 's small size and difficulty in setting reasonable milestones ) , the game 's scope , and Fish 's perfectionism . Fish had hoped that players would discuss Fez 's nuances online after its release . Players collaborated online for a week to solve the final " monolith " puzzle by using a <unk> attack known as brute force . Ars Technica described the apparent end to Fez 's harder puzzles as " anticlimactic " , but Fish told Eurogamer in March 2013 that hidden in @-@ game secrets remain to be found . 
 More than three years after its digital launch , Fez received a physical release designed by Fish and limited to a signed edition of 500 in December 2015 . The deluxe package included the soundtrack and a stylized red notebook with gold foil inlay . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Bédard wrote Fez in Microsoft Visual C # Express and XNA Game Studio Express . He coded the level editor and the game engine , <unk> , which converts 2D tiles ( " <unk> " ) into four @-@ sided 3D voxels ( " <unk> " ) . Fish made 2D pixel art in Photoshop for each side of the <unk> , which Bédard 's custom software compiled into 3D game assets . Fish would then design levels in the level editor by extruding surfaces , a process he found " overwhelming " but akin to playing with Lego blocks . In their workflow , Fish first proposed ideas that Bédard would implement . The two would then discuss and fine @-@ tune the addition — they worked well together . 
 The game came to adopt Metroidvania mechanics , with " secret passages , warp gates , and cheat codes " . Fish cited Myst as an inspiration and compared its open world , nonlinear narrative , and " obtuse <unk> " to Fez 's own alphabet , numeric system , and an " almost unfairly hard to get ... second set of collectibles " . He was also inspired by the Nintendo Entertainment System games of his youth ( particularly those of the Super Mario and The Legend of Zelda series ) , Hayao Miyazaki 's signature " open blue sky " , " feel @-@ good " atmosphere , and Fumito Ueda 's Ico . Fish sought to emulate Ico 's feeling of nostalgic and isolated loneliness , and Ueda 's development philosophy wherein all nonessential game elements are removed ( " design by subtraction " ) . Fish made a personal challenge of designing a game without relying on " established mechanics " . As such , Fez was always a peaceful game that never contained an antagonist . 
 = = Music = = 
 Rich Vreeland , also known as <unk> , composed the game 's chiptune @-@ esque electronic soundtrack . Despite his background in chiptune , Vreeland limited his use of that genre 's mannerisms in the score . He worked with soft synth pads and reverb to push the score closer to an 1980s synthesizer sound . He also reduced reliance on percussion and incorporated distortion techniques like <unk> and wow . Vreeland opted for slower passages with varying tempos that could " ebb , flow , and breathe with the player " . He left some portions of Fez without music . Vreeland worked on its soundtrack at night for about 14 months while scoring Shoot Many Robots , and Brandon McCartin of Aquaria contributed the game 's sound effects . 
 Vreeland 's first composition for the game ( " Adventure " ) became the soundtrack 's first track . He wrote it after meeting Bédard but before discussing the soundtrack with Fish , and based the composition on Fez audio created prior to his arrival . Vreeland wanted to use tape recorders for their distinctive sound , but potential audio synching issues with this method led him to employ digital recording . Portions of the soundtrack dynamically change between several dozen constituent elements and react to the game environment . For example , the " Puzzle " track 's elements change musical key based on the in @-@ game time of day . Certain tracks were intended to imitate real @-@ world sounds , such as those of bats , thunderstorms , taiko , and water falling from stalactites . Other tracks expanded from improvisations . Vreeland was also inspired by the Lord of the Rings Shire theme , 1980s horror media , the soundtrack of demoscene game Jasper 's Journeys , the Legend of Zelda dungeon music , the Mass Effect soundtrack , Tangerine Dream , and Steve Reich . " Continuum " is a synthesized rendition of Frédéric Chopin 's Prelude , Op. 28 , No. 4 . Instruments used in recording include the Sonic Charge <unk> , minimoog , " synthetic flute " , and <unk> . 
 The soundtrack was released in a digital format on April 20 , 2012 . Pre @-@ orders for the soundtrack topped the Bandcamp charts . Kirk Hamilton of Kotaku wrote that Fez 's sound effects evoked Jim Guthrie 's Superbrothers : Sword & Sworcery EP audio . Joshua <unk> of The Verge called the work " fantastic " and described it as a cross between a " 1980s Vangelis synth odyssey " and a submerged vinyl record from an arcade . Game Informer 's Matt Miller wrote that the soundtrack contributed to Fez 's " 80s nostalgia vibe " . Eurogamer described the music as " lush , spooky , and electrifying " , and Edge compared it to " Holst put through a Mega Drive " . Oli Welsh of Eurogamer wrote that the music matched the game 's themes of " hidden depth " . Welsh heard influences of 1960s English psychedelia ( Pink Floyd , Soft Machine ) , 1970s Krautrock ( Tangerine Dream and Kraftwerk ) , 1980s synth ( Jean Michel Jarre , Vangelis ) , and Erik Satie . He added that the soundtrack 's contribution to Fez was " incalculable " . Damian <unk> of Game Developer used Vreeland 's soundtrack to show that a <unk> aesthetic in sound and visuals could be both " futuristic and nostalgic " and provide the " right ' voice ' to support the game 's design intentions " . 
 Game Developer listed Vreeland in their 2012 Power 50 for his work on the soundtrack , which they described as " atmospheric , pensive , and maybe even a little bit melancholy " . In keeping with Fez 's theme of secrets , images visible only through spectrogram were embedded into the soundtrack audio . Vreeland released a remix album , FZ : Side F , a year later on April 20 , 2013 . It features tracks from other artists , including Jim Guthrie . Vreeland later released another remix album , FZ : Side Z , and all three albums were included in the August 2013 Game Music Bundle 5 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews upon Fez 's original release were " generally favorable " , according to review aggregator Metacritic . Later releases received " universal acclaim " . Each release was consistently among the top @-@ rated releases for each platform 's year . GameRankings ranks Fez within its top 100 highest @-@ rated Xbox 360 games , top 20 PC games , and top 20 PlayStation 4 games . While in development , Fez had won the 2012 GDC Independent Games Festival 's Seumas McNally Grand Prize , the 2011 Indiecade Best in Show and Best Story / World Design , the 2011 Fantastic Arcade Audience Choice Award , and the 2008 GDC Independent Games Festival 's Excellence in Visual Art . Eurogamer gave Fez their highest rating and named the " perfect , wordless sci @-@ fi parable " their 2012 Game of the Year . Digital Spy listed Fez eighth in its Best Games of 2012 , ahead of high @-@ budget games like Call of Duty : Black Ops 2 and Halo 4 . Fez was chosen as the 2012 game of the year by Diamond Trust of London developer Jason Rohrer and Halo 4 lead game designer Scott Warner . The Windows PC port was Metacritic 's tenth best @-@ reviewed video game of 2013 . 
 The New York Times called Fez Fish 's " tribute to 1980s gaming ... lovingly , almost excessively , devoted to the golden age of Nintendo " . Arthur Gies of Polygon described its aesthetics as " so retro it hurts " , citing its pixelated look , chiptune soundtrack , and ways of <unk> the player without explicit guidance . Gies felt that though " 8 @-@ bit nostalgia " was outmoded , Fez showed an understanding of its influences and was the " most authentic " of the style . Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com called the game 's minimalism " admirable " and likened its art style to that of Cave Story . Kotaku described Fez 's nostalgic manner as " the video game aesthetic " . Oli Welsh of Eurogamer lamented how " retro pixel art " became an indie game cliché during the game 's development , but felt that Fez transcended such stereotypes through its dedication to the wonderment of early Nintendo titles . " Fish clearly worships the Nintendo of his boyhood " , he wrote . Welsh likened Fez to a 1970s , peace @-@ loving , surrealist version of 2001 : A Space Odyssey as imagined by Shigeru Miyamoto , and foresaw its social status as " the darling of a certain indie clique " with " studied hipster cool " . Edge described the game as " a place built from gaming 's history " , whose playfulness makes it " an unexpected heir to Super Mario Bros. " with levels like well @-@ crafted toys , and IGN 's video review said the game " drags the 8 @-@ bit era into the future " . 
 Journalists likened Fez 's rotation mechanic to the 2D – 3D shifts of games like Echochrome , Super Paper Mario , and Crush . Early in development , Fish himself said that the idea is " nothing mind @-@ blowing " and that the game could have been made " at any point in the last 15 years " . Polygon 's Gies preferred how Echochrome used the perspective mechanic , and Tom McShea of GameSpot considered Fez 's mechanic a gimmick . Matt Miller of Game Informer thought that Fez realized the mechanic 's potential better than other perspective @-@ shifting games , and further commended Fez 's puzzle design and pacing up until the endgame . Miller also compared its story to that of the novella Flatland , whose protagonist similarly discovers the complexities of another dimension . 1UP.com 's Parish said that Fez 's rotation mechanic was deeper than that of Super Paper Mario and not as dependent on M. C. Escher themes as Echochrome . Edge felt that the mechanic was " far less self @-@ conscious " and " more harmonious " than in <unk> and Crush . The magazine wrote that Fez 's indoor puzzles were its best . Eurogamer 's Welsh compared the game 's " wraparound platforming " to the 1980s game <unk> and described the rotation mechanic as among the console generation 's " most unusual technical challenges " . 
 Reviewers commended the game 's emphasis on discovery and freedom , but found its reliance on backtracking , particularly in the endgame , tedious . Parish of 1UP.com wrote that open @-@ world action games like Metroid Prime all have these issues . Edge compared Fez 's esoteric tricks to an older age of game development that packed games with Easter eggs , secrets , and codes , citing titles such as Exile and Jet Set Willy . The magazine also came to appreciate the 3D map . IGN 's Mitch Dyer contrasted the game 's riddles to the Metal Gear Solid codec frequency puzzle . Jeffrey Matulef of Eurogamer related his experience to the feeling of first playing the 1994 Myst , and The New York Times called Fez " a Finnegans Wake of video games " for its codebreaking that " makes the player feel like John Nash as portrayed by Russell Crowe in A Beautiful Mind " . Game Informer recommended Fez for <unk> who seek challenges . Polygon 's Gies was uncertain as to whether the game 's technical frame rate issues were intentional , and described this dilemma as having a " certain genius " . Other reviewers noted its technical faults : Game Informer as minor , and 1UP.com as " easily the <unk> game I 've played on my 360 " . 
 Fez sold 20 @,@ 000 copies in its first day , 100 @,@ 000 in less than two months , 200 @,@ 000 within a year , and , after the Humble Bundle , one million by the end of 2013 . It was Xbox Live 's 13th best @-@ selling Arcade title of 2012 . Fez was cited as an inspiration for 2014 indie games Monument Valley , Crossy Road , and Secrets of Rætikon . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Fez 2 was announced as " one more thing " at end of the Horizon indie game press conference during the June 2013 Electronic Entertainment Expo . The project was cancelled a month later following a Twitter argument between Fish and a video game journalist . In an episode of Marcus Beer 's GameTrailers show Invisible Walls , the journalist criticized Fish 's response to questions about Microsoft 's Xbox One self @-@ publishing policy change . Fish replied on Twitter with condemnation for the industry 's negativity , and announced Fez 2 's cancellation and his exit from the industry in a final tweet . The news came as a surprise to the rest of his company , which has not commented on upcoming projects other than ports since the sequel 's cancellation . Polygon listed Fish in their top 50 newsmakers of 2013 for the social power of his " caustic use of Twitter " . 
 = Motte v Faulkner = 
 Motte v Faulkner ( decided 28 November 1735 ) was a copyright lawsuit between Benjamin Motte and George Faulkner over who had the legal rights to publish the works of Jonathan Swift in London . This trial was one of the first to test the Statute of Anne copyright law in regards to Irish publishing independence . Although neither held the copyright to all of Swift 's works , the suit became a legal struggle over Irish rights , which were eventually denied by the English courts . Faulkner , in 1735 , published the Works of Jonathan Swift in Dublin . However , a few of the works were under Motte 's copyright within the Kingdom of Great Britain , and when Faulkner sought to sell his book in London , Motte issued a formal complaint to Jonathan Swift and then proceeded to sue Faulkner . An injunction was issued in Motte 's favor , and the book was prohibited from being sold on British soil . The basis of the law protected the rights of the author , and not the publisher , of the works , and Swift was unwilling to support a lawsuit against Faulkner . With Swift 's reaction used as a basis , the lawsuit was later seen as a struggle between the rights of Irishmen to print material that were denied under English law . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Benjamin Motte = = = 
 Motte was a London publisher who took over Benjamin Tooke 's publishing business , which printed many of Swift 's earlier works . In 1726 , Swift sent Motte a copy of Gulliver 's Travels to be printed anonymously . Motte took great care to protect the identity of the author , and employed five publishing houses to speed production of the book and avoid unlicensed copying . In 1727 , Motte formed his first direct contract with Swift in order to publish Swift 's Miscellanies . As part of the contract , Motte paid Tooke for the original copyright to the work . 
 = = = George Faulkner = = = 
 Faulkner 's Dublin Journal , a newspaper established in 1725 , featured many articles written by Swift or inspired by writings of Swift . Between 1727 and 1730 , Faulkner published many works attributed to Swift , but many were actually written by others . After 1730 , only one of those works printed by Faulkner under Swift 's name turned out to be written by someone besides Swift , which suggests to some critics that Swift was working with Faulkner to ensure that only authentic works were printed under Swift 's name . He was the first to publish The Answer to the Craftsman , Swift 's final defense of the Irish economy from England 's policies . Faulkner was also the first to publish the collected Drapier 's Letters as Fraud Detected on 2 October 1725 . Faulkner also helped edit An Epistle upon an Epistle around December 1729 . 
 = = The case = = 
 On 14 August 1725 , Swift wrote to Charles Ford that his work , Gulliver 's Travels , was finished , however , he soon added a scene referring to the Drapier 's Letters . Swift wrote , in a letter to Pope , " a printer shall be found brave enough to venture his ears " . The printer Swift found was Benjamin Motte , and Swift did not control the publication in order to , as some critics say , preserve his anonymity . 
 Although Swift found Motte willing to print the work , he was not willing to print Swift 's additional scene . Swift 's lack of control over the publication lead to Swift complaining of " mangled and murdered Pages " . This was one of many reasons that Swift turned from Motte as his printer and sought a printer willing to produce his complete works without content removal . On 9 October 1733 , Swift wrote : " Now , you may please to remember how much I complained of Motts suffering some friend of his ( I suppose it was Mr Took a Clergy @-@ man now dead ) not onely to blot out some things that he thought might give offence , but to insert a good deal of trash contrary to the Author 's manner and Style , and Intention . " 
 Three editions of Gulliver 's Travels were produced in London during 1726 and a " corrected " edition of Motte 's works were printed by John Hyde in Dublin . Although Herbert Davis thought that the Hyde edition would not please Swift , some critics argue that Swift involved himself in helping Hyde make some corrections to the edition that was based on Motte 's London edition . The next year , Risk , Ewing , and Smith printed in Dublin a simple reprint of Motte 's original print with minor corrections . Motte then produced his " second edition " ( his fourth version ) of Gulliver 's Travels in 1727 with many corrections . Many of the corrections of Motte 's later editions were based on Swift 's corrections sent to the printer via letters . 
 The edition published by Faulkner includes over 500 corrections to the original text , surpassing any other editions . Faulkner 's version also contains over 50 passages that either not present in the original or expanded on from the original text . This has suggested to some critics that the Faulkner edition was a later rework of Gulliver 's Travels and not just a correction to printing related mistakes . The inclusion of these many additions was later seen by critics as part of Swift 's disapproval of Motte 's versions , but others see Motte 's version as being more true to the anti @-@ government spirit of Swift 's work , which confuses Swift 's motivation in allowing Faulkner to reprint the work . 
 Swift 's other works were previous collected in a four @-@ volume set edited by Alexander Pope called Miscellanies , but Swift wanted to have a " proper " edition of his works . Some critics speculate that Swift turned to having his work printed without public sponsorship because he was afraid of breaking his commitments to Pope and his publisher Motte . Regardless of what Swift may or may not be planning , he wrote to Motte in December 1732 and said : " I have cause to believe that some of our printers will collected all they think to be mine , and print them by subscription , which I will never encourage nor oppose . " 
 On 9 February 1733 , Faulkner advertised his future publication of Swift 's collected works in four volumes in the Dublin Journal . However , this edition led to controversy , since the London bookseller Benjamin Motte had publication rights , under English copyright law , to many of the works included in Faulkner 's edition . The English , in 1735 , attempted to pass a law that would allow a copyright holder to prohibit works that may violate their copyright , but this law failed to pass through Parliament . 
 = = The decision = = 
 Motte , without power to halt the introduction of Faulkner 's work on his own , asked Swift to intervene , but Swift passively refused . Even without the backing of Swift , Motte turned to the English legal system to halt the introduction of Faulkner 's edition . Motte issued a Bill of Complaint and sued under the Statute of Anne , claiming that Faulkner 's publishing of the 1735 Works infringed on his right to publish works like Gulliver 's Travels . The case was heard by the Court of Chancery , and they agreed with Motte in a ruling by Lord Talbot , the Lord Chancellor of Great Britain . In the 28 November 1735 , it was determined Motte could put forth an injunction to the whole of Swift 's works . Although works like the Drapier 's Letters were not under Motte 's copyright and some works were printed before 1709 , Faulkner 's complete work was legally brought to a halt from being published in England . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 It is uncertain if Swift allowed Faulkner to publish the works in order to allow an Irish publisher to compete against an English publisher or if Swift had no say in the matter and Faulkner published the works against Swift 's will . In a letter to Motte in May 1736 , Swift did not defend Faulkner 's legal right to publish the works but made sure to admonish the attitude and action of Motte as a publisher for prosecuting Faulkner instead of coming to an agreement that Faulkner would be allowed to reprint the copyrighted material . 
 However , some critics believe that Swift used the incident to " enlarge the affair into another example of English oppression of the Irish . " Swift wrote in a letter to Motte on 25 May 1736 : 
 the cruel oppressions of this kingdom by England are not to be borne . You send what books you please hither , and the booksellers here can send nothing to you that is written here . As this is absolute oppression , if I were a bookseller in this town , I would use all the safe means to reprint London books , and run them to any town in England , that I could , because whoever offends not the laws of God , or the country he lives in , commits no sin .... But I am so incensed against the <unk> from England , and have so little regard to the laws they make , that I do , as a clergyman , encourage the merchants both to export wool and woollen manufactures to any country in Europe , or anywhere else , and conceal it from the Custom @-@ house officers , as I would hide my purse from a highwayman , if he came to rob me on the road , although England hath made a law to the contrary ; and so I would encourage our booksellers here to sell your author 's books printed here , and send them to all the towns in England , if I could do it with safety and profit ; because I repeat , it is no offence against God , or the laws of the country I live in . 
 There is much debate in the academic community on which printer produced the " authoritative " edition of Swift 's works , especially Gulliver 's Travels . Harold Williams was one of the major proponents of the Faulkner edition being " correct " . However , some critics argue that the Faulkner edition was instead a " corrected " edition that added new revisions , and that neither text can truly be called authoritative . 
 = = Influence = = 
 In legal terms , the report of Motte v Faulkner of 28 November 1735 is no longer in existence , but was cited in a later legal decisions on copyright issues , such as Miller v Taylor of 1769 which read : " In the case of Motte vs Falkner , 28 November , 1735 an injunction was granted for printing Pope 's and Swift 's Miscellanies . Many of these pieces were published in 1701 , 1702 , 1708 ; and the counsel strongly pressed the objection , as to these pieces . Lord Talbot continued the injunction , as to the whole : and it was acquiesced under . Yet <unk> , the Irish bookseller , was a man of substance ; and the general point was of consequence to him : but he was not advised to litigate further . " 
 The case Pope v Curll [ 1741 ] refers to the Irish / English aspects of publishing that came up in Motte v Faulkner . Curll claimed his reprinting of a work from a Dublin edition originally made by George Faulkner would , under the Statute of Anne , be lawfully reprinted in England . Lord Hardwicke ruled on the matter , 17 June 1741 , that works first published in Ireland do not allow the publication of works in London if they invalidate the copyright . 
 = Battle of Onjong = 
 The Battle of Onjong ( Korean : <unk> 전투 ) , also known as the Battle of <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> Zhàn Dòu ) , was one of the first engagements between Chinese and United Nations forces during the Korean War . It took place around Onjong in present @-@ day North Korea from October 25 to October 29 , 1950 . As the main focus of the Chinese First Phase Campaign , the Chinese 40th Corps conducted a series of ambushes against the Republic of Korea II Corps , effectively destroying the right flank of the United States Eighth Army while stopping the UN advances north toward the Yalu River . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Korean War began in June 1950 with the Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) of the north attacking the Republic of Korea in the south . The invasion was almost successful in conquering all of the Republic of Korea until the United Nations ( UN ) intervened , sending ground forces into the country under the command of the United States . The UN forces initially experienced early defeats until the Battle of the Pusan Perimeter , where the UN forces reversed North Korea 's momentum . By October 1950 , the KPA was effectively destroyed by the UN forces after the landing at Inchon . Despite the strong objections from the People 's Republic of China on North Korea 's northern border , the US Eighth Army crossed the 38th parallel and advanced towards the Sino @-@ Korean border at the Yalu River . As part of the Thanksgiving Offensive to end the war , the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) II Corps , which was composed of the ROK 6th , 7th and 8th Infantry Division , was ordered to attack north towards the Yalu River through the village of Onjong on October 23 , 1950 . 
 In response to the UN advances , China 's Chairman , Mao Zedong , ordered the People 's Liberation Army 's North East Frontier Force to enter North Korea and engage UN forces under the name People 's Volunteer Army ( PVA ) . In order to stabilize the rapidly collapsing Korean front and to push back the advancing UN forces , Mao authorized the First Phase Campaign , a bridgehead @-@ building operation with the aim of destroying the ROK II Corps , the vanguard and the right flank of the US Eighth Army , advancing up the along the Taebaek Mountains in the middle of the peninsula . After the Chinese leadership finally settled the issue of armed intervention on October 18 , Mao ordered the PVA to enter Korea on October 19 under strict secrecy . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Locations and terrain = = = 
 Onjong is a crossroad village located at the lower Ch 'ongch 'on River Valley , 10 mi ( 16 km ) northeast of Unsan . At the east of Onjong stands the town of <unk> 'on , the staging area of the ROK II Corps for the Thanksgiving Offensive . To the north , Onjong is linked to the town of Kojang , which is located at 50 mi ( 80 km ) away from the Yalu River . Because of the hilly terrain at the Sino @-@ Korean Border , Onjong is one of the few access points into the Yalu River area . The terrain also limits troop movements while providing ideal grounds for ambushes . 
 = = = Forces and strategy = = = 
 On October 24 , the ROK 6th Infantry Division of the ROK II Corps advanced westward from <unk> 'on , and Onjong was captured on the same day . From Onjong , the ROK 7th Infantry Regiment of the ROK 6th Infantry Division turned north and advanced towards Kojang , while the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment of the ROK 6th Infantry Division planned to advance northwest from Onjong towards Pukchin . Because the UN Command expected no opposition from the destroyed KPA , the advances were not coordinated between the UN units . As a result , the ROK 7th Infantry Regiment managed to wander into Chinese territory without much opposition , completely oblivious to the new threats surrounding them . 
 While the Koreans were advancing towards the Yalu River , the Chinese were also trying to deploy their units for the upcoming First Phase Campaign . As the PVA Commander Peng Dehuai scrambled to set up his new command post at <unk> , the planned advance by the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment threatened to overrun his position . Without any KPA units nearby to hide the presence of the Chinese , Peng was forced to start the First Phase Campaign early by moving the PVA 40th Corps to intercept the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment near Onjong . On the night of October 24 , the 118th Division of the 40th Corps arrived at its designated blocking position . Meanwhile , the Chinese had set up numerous ambush positions on the ridges overlooking the Onjong @-@ Pukchin road . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Initial contacts = = = 
 On the morning of October 25 and with its 3rd Battalion on point , the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment started to advance northwest towards Pukchin . The Koreans soon came under fire 8 mi ( 13 km ) to the west of Onjong . The 3rd Battalion dismounted from their vehicles to disperse what they thought would be a small force of KPA , but the two Chinese regiments on the high ground immediately began pouring heavy fire onto the Korean left , front and right flanks . The 3rd Battalion broke instantly , abandoning most of its vehicles and artillery along the way . About 400 survivors managed to escape the trap and fall back into Onjong . 
 When the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment learned that the 3rd Battalion was under heavy attack , its 2nd Battalion was moved forward to support the 3rd Battalion while its 1st Battalion was sent back to Onjong . Although the 2nd Battalion was turned back after encountering strong resistances , the South Koreans managed to capture several Chinese prisoners who revealed that there were nearly 10 @,@ 000 Chinese soldiers waiting down the road . At the same time , the PVA High Command ordered the PVA 120th Division of the 40th Corps to join the battle while the rest of the 40th Corps was busy setting up roadblocks around Onjong . With all the roadblocks in place by midnight , the PVA 118th Division and one regiment from the PVA 120th Division attacked Onjong on October 26 at 0330 , and the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment was dispersed within 30 minutes . Although Colonel Ham Byung Sun , commander of the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment , managed to rally his troops 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) east of Onjong , the Chinese were still able to penetrate the new position within an hour . At this point not a single company of the regiment was left intact , and the ROK 2nd Infantry Regiment ceased to be an organized unit . Approximately 2 @,@ 700 men of the 3 @,@ 100 in the regiment eventually escaped to the Ch 'ongch 'on River . The 3rd Battalion 's Korean Military Advisory Group ( KMAG ) adviser , Lieutenant Glen C. Jones , was among those captured , and he eventually died in a North Korean prison camp . Captain Paul V. S. Liles of the KMAG also fell captive to the Chinese . 
 = = = Second ambush = = = 
 The loss of surprise due to the early start of the First Phase Campaign greatly disappointed Mao . Nevertheless , Mao still urged Peng to destroy the South Koreans by baiting them with trapped ROK units . At the same time , Major General Yu Jai Hung , commander of the ROK II Corps , sent the ROK 19th Infantry Regiment of the ROK 6th Infantry Division ( under Colonel Park Kwang Hyuk ) and the ROK 10th Infantry Regiment of the ROK 8th Infantry Division ( under Colonel Go Geun Hong ) to recapture Onjong and to salvage the lost equipment from the battle . The ROK 7th Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel Im Pu Taek , was also ordered to retreat south with the ROK 6th Infantry Division . Hoping to draw the rest of the ROK II Corps into the open , Peng ordered the PVA 118th Division to swing north and to trap the retreating ROK 7th Infantry Regiment , while the PVA 119th and the 120th Division of the 40th Corps would wait to ambush any rescue forces passing through Onjong . On October 27 , the PVA 118th Division isolated the ROK 7th Infantry Regiment by cutting the road between Kojang and Onjong , but the ROK 7th Infantry Regiment did not reach the roadblock due to the lack of fuel . Upon realizing that the ROK II Corps had not fallen for the deception , Peng ordered the 119th and the 120th Divisions to destroy the ROK 10th and 19th Infantry Regiment . On the night of October 28 , the ambush by the two Chinese divisions quickly decimated the advancing ROK regiments at the east of Onjong , and the Chinese roadblocks in the rear areas forced the South Korean soldiers to abandon all vehicles and artillery in order to escape . 
 The ROK 7th Infantry Regiment had now become the only surviving formation of the ROK 6th Infantry Division , but it too was ambushed by the PVA 118th Division on October 29 20 mi ( 32 km ) south of Kojang . The PVA 118th Division was ordered to wait for reinforcements from the 50th Corps , but the 118th Division attacked alone on the night of October 29 to prevent the Koreans from escaping . After a two @-@ hour battle , the ROK 7th Infantry Regiment was forced to disperse with its survivors scattered into the hills . About 875 officers and 3 @,@ 552 other soldiers managed to escape , while Major Harry Fleming of the KMAG was wounded in 15 places and was later captured by the Chinese . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the loss of the ROK 6th Infantry Division and the ROK 10th Infantry Regiment from the ROK 8th Infantry Division , the ROK II Corps was decimated , and effectively ceased to be an organized fighting force . This meant the right flank of the US Eighth Army was completely open to the Chinese forces , which were now advancing south to overwhelm the UN forces . Exploiting the situation , the Chinese launched another attack on the now exposed Eighth Army center , resulting in the loss of the ROK 15th Infantry Regiment and the US 8th Cavalry Regiment at the Battle of Unsan . With the Chinese forces pouring into the rear of the UN lines , the Eighth Army was forced to retreat to the Ch 'ongch 'on River . Only the stubborn defense of Kunu @-@ ri by the US 5th Regimental Combat Team and the ROK 7th Infantry Division on November 4 managed to stop the Chinese advance and prevented a disastrous defeat for the Eighth Army . By November 5 , logistics difficulties forced the Chinese to end the First Phase Campaign . 
 Although the Chinese were unable to exploit the breakthrough in the UN lines , the weakness of the ROK II Corps on the Eighth Army 's right flank was exposed to the Chinese commanders . During the planning of the Chinese Second Phase Campaign , Peng would again focus his attention towards the ROK II Corps at the Eighth Army 's right flank , resulting in a disastrous defeat for the UN forces at the Battle of the Ch 'ongch 'on River . To commemorate this battle as China 's official entry into the Korean War , October 25 is currently the War to Resist America and Aid Korea Memorial Day in China . 
 = S / O Satyamurthy = 
 S / O Satyamurthy ( read as Son of Satyamurthy ) is a 2015 Indian Telugu @-@ language drama film directed by Trivikram Srinivas and produced by S. Radha Krishna for <unk> & <unk> Creations . It features an ensemble cast of Allu Arjun , Upendra , Samantha Ruth Prabhu , Sneha , Adah Sharma , Nithya Menen , Rajendra Prasad , Brahmanandam and Ali . Prakash Raj makes a cameo appearance as Satyamurthy . 
 The film revolves around three characters ; the first follows his heart , the second uses his brain and the third uses his brawn . The first is Viraj Anand , the son of a billionaire named Satyamurthy , who gives his money to creditors after his father 's death . A creditor still owed money is <unk> Sambasiva Rao ( the second of the three ) , whose daughter Sameera falls in love with Anand . Sambasiva Rao informs Anand that he has to produce documentation of land sold by Satyamurthy to a landlord , Devaraj Naidu ( the third of the three ) to marry Sameera . The rest of the film focuses on the consequences faced by Anand and Sambasiva Rao 's change in viewpoint toward Satyamurthy . 
 In addition to directing the film , Srinivas wrote its screenplay . Initially planned as a multilingual film shot in Tamil , Malayalam and Telugu , the producers filmed in Telugu and dubbed it into Malayalam with the same title . Devi Sri Prasad composed the score and Prasad Murella was its cinematographer . Production began on 10 April 2014 at Ramanaidu Studios in Hyderabad . Principal photography began on 22 September 2014 in Hyderabad , lasting until mid @-@ March 2015 . Except for three songs filmed in Europe , the rest of the film was shot in and around Hyderabad . 
 The Telugu version was released worldwide on 1375 screens on 9 April 2015 to a lukewarm response , and the Malayalam version was released on 24 April 2015 . On a ₹ 400 – 500 @-@ million budget , S / O Satyamurthy earned a distributor share of ₹ 519 million and grossed ₹ 905 million . The film was an above average grosser based on the return on the distributors ' investment of ₹ 540 million . It is in seventh place on the all @-@ time list of highest @-@ grossing Telugu films at the global box office . With this film , Allu Arjun became the first Telugu actor with two consecutive films earning more than ₹ 500 million worldwide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Narrator Viraj Anand is the younger son of Satyamurthy , a billionaire businessman who dies in an accident . Although Anand has ₹ 3 billion worth of property and stock which is worthless , he owes an equal amount . <unk> Sambasiva Rao , one of Satyamurthy 's creditors , suggests that Anand file for bankruptcy to protect his wealth but Anand wants to preserve his father ’ s image . Anand 's older brother becomes mentally unstable and , at Sambasiva Rao 's advice , the father of Anand 's fiancée Pallavi cancels their upcoming wedding . Anand and his family move to a simpler home in Hyderabad , and he becomes the family 's sole breadwinner . He joins his friend 's event @-@ management company as a wedding planner , and his assistant Parandhamaiah goes with him . 
 Anand is assigned to plan a destination wedding at Ooty , which turns out to be Pallavi 's . There he meets Sameera ( also known as <unk> ) , a diabetic , with whom he eventually falls in love . While planning Pallavi 's marriage Anand faces many difficulties , including an attempt by Pallavi 's uncle and his son to stop the marriage because of her father 's mistreatment . Pallavi 's father and uncle reconcile , and Anand is paid more than the agreed amount in gratitude . Sameera turns out to be Sambasiva Rao 's daughter and objects to their marriage , saying that Satyamurthy cheated him when he sold an 8 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 740 m2 ) property illegally acquired by landlord Devaraj Naidu . The current market value of the land is half billion rupees . Sambasiva Rao tells Anand that he will agree to the marriage if Anand can deliver the land documents from Devaraj in four weeks . 
 Anand and Parandhamaiah set out for house number 6 in <unk> to exchange the original documents for fake ones . Instead they end up in house number 9 and reveal their intentions to Devaraj , who traps them without harm ; Devaraj cannot hurt anyone in front of his wife , Lakshmi , from whom he has hidden his true self for twenty years . Sambasiva Rao 's family is kidnapped and brought to Devaraj 's house ; the next day Anand saves Devaraj from the brother ( <unk> Naidu , Devaraj 's henchman since five years ) of his rival , Veerasamy Naidu . Impressed , Devaraj agrees to return the land documents if Anand becomes engaged to his sister Valli . However , Valli wants to marry Lakshmi 's brother and threatens to kill Anand if he does not break their engagement . 
 Valli teases Sameera , acting as if she is in love with Anand ( which makes Devaraj happy ) . Devaraj 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Koda Rambabu goes to <unk> , mistakenly believing that Parandhamaiah is Sameera 's lover and Valli 's potential lover . He wants to stop the marriage , and at Anand 's suggestion Rambabu and Sambasiva Rao ask Veerasamy to have his henchmen kill the bridegroom ; this would stop the marriage on the last day of the four @-@ week deadline imposed by Sambasiva Rao . Although Anand plans to help Valli elope with her cousin , Veerasamy 's henchmen mistake him for Anand and try to kill him . Devaraj and Anand save her cousin ; when Devaraj tries to kill Rambabu , Anand says that he was the mastermind behind the plan and wants the real land documents . 
 Nine minutes are left before Sambasiva Rao 's deadline ; as Anand and Devaraj duel , Anand 's mother enters . Devaraj and his family are shocked , remembering that Satyamurthy was fatally injured when he saved Valli from an accident planned by Veerasamy . Before he died , Satyamurthy told Valli that he made a mistake selling illegally @-@ acquired land to his friend and wants to rectify it with the landlord . Devaraj and Sambasiva Rao are full of remorse , and Devaraj returns the land documents to Anand in accordance with Satyamurthy 's last wish . Anand gives the papers to Sambasiva Rao , who apologises for his behaviour . Veerasamy dies in an accident , and Koda Rambabu is spared . 
 Anand and Sambasiva Rao are on their way home with their families when Pallavi 's father meets them with news that the market value of Anand 's stock is now worth hundred million rupees . An emotional Anand thanks his father at the spot where Satyamurthy saved Valli 's life . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Trivikram Srinivas planned to direct Allu Arjun in a film produced by S. Radha Krishna for <unk> & <unk> Creations ( who produced their 2012 collaboration Julai ) , since Srinivas had committed to another film with them . Allu Aravind was later rumoured to co @-@ produce of the film as Geetha Arts . The film 's pooja ceremony was held at Radha Krishna 's office in early December 2013 , and filming was expected to begin in February 2014 . Rumors that the film was shelved were denied by a film @-@ unit source , who said that Srinivas ' screenplay was nearly complete . Devi Sri Prasad was chosen to compose the score and Prawin Pudi was signed as the film editor , marking Pudi 's fifth collaboration with Srinivas . 
 The film was officially launched at Ramanaidu Studios in Hyderabad on 10 April 2014 . In June , the film 's title was rumoured to be <unk> . After considerable discussion , the producers reportedly tentatively planned to name the film <unk> ( also the title of a 1982 Telugu film starring Krishnam Raju and Sridevi ) . Agreements between the principals of both films were reportedly signed in early November 2014 . Radhakrishna denied the reports , saying that the film 's title would be announced in early December 2014 with its preview . Trivikram reportedly considered the title <unk> in mid @-@ January 2015 . Another title under consideration was <unk> , earlier used for a 1989 Hindi film starring Amitabh Bachchan and Jaya Prada . 
 The producers reportedly dropped the first two titles after poor feedback , and <unk> was expected to be chosen ; S / O Krishnamurthy was also considered . S / O Satyamurthy ( read as Son of Satyamurthy ) was confirmed as the film 's title on 6 March 2015 in a press release from the producers . The film was initially planned for simultaneous release in Telugu , Tamil and Malayalam . A dubbed Kannada version , along with Tamil and Malayalam , later was planned because of Upendra and Allu Arjun 's popularity in Karnataka . 
 Although the dubbed Malayalam version was also entitled S / O Satyamurthy , the dubbed Tamil and Kannada versions were scrapped for fiscal reasons and it was released in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka with English subtitles . Arjun began dubbing his role in early January , and post @-@ production was scheduled to resume in late February . The actor resumed dubbing on 7 March , after returning from Spain . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Allu Arjun was part of the project since its initial stages in early November 2013 . Samantha Ruth Prabhu was cast as one of the film 's heroines , her first collaboration with Arjun . S / O Satyamurthy has three female leads ; although Arjun initially denied this , Srinivas confirmed that the film has three heroines . Kriti Sanon was rumoured to be one of the three female leads , although she later denied it . Adah Sharma and Pranitha Subhash were cast as the other two female leads , after Regina Cassandra , Nayantara and Rashi Khanna were considered for Subhash 's role . Subhash was later replaced by Nithya Menen because of conceptual differences with Srinivas , although she later said that she never signed for the film and reports that she had walked out were rumours . 
 Rao Ramesh was cast in a crucial role . Although Arjun Sarja was reported to be the film 's antagonist in mid @-@ August 2014 , Sarja later confirmed that he was not part of the project due to other commitments . Sneha confirmed in mid @-@ September 2014 that she had an important role in the film . Upendra and Rajendra Prasad were said to play important roles in the film , and Upendra later confirmed his inclusion . Vennela Kishore and Surekha Vani were selected to play supporting roles . Kota Srinivasa Rao was cast at the end of November 2014 , and Mamilla Shailaja Priya was cast in a supporting role . 
 Supporting character actor M. S. Narayana died after most of his portions in the film was completed . Although Srinivas decided not to delete any of his scenes , he faced a dilemma : whether to use a double or make do with what they had . After evaluating many mimics , Srinivas and Arjun reportedly decided to use Siva Reddy to flesh out Narayana 's role . Sampath Raj was cast in early February 2015 . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 S / O Satyamurthy was considered an image makeover for Arjun . Although his character 's name ( Viraj Anand ) was intended for another role in the film , he requested Srinivas to use the name for the titular character 's son . Arjun learned flips , somersaults and other gymnastic skills to perform his stunts . He , his brother Allu Sirish and stylist Ashwin bought his costumes in Dubai , and he lost 10 kilograms ( 22 lb ) with a special diet and gym workouts . Sneha was rumoured to play Arjun 's sister @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Upendra was confirmed in a role paralleling Arjun 's in the film , and Sharma reportedly wore a traditional attire to suit her role . Sharma 's character was revealed to be unstable , while Arjun 's character was nuanced ; he was confirmed as an event manager in late October 2014 . Nithya Menen would reportedly play a negative role as Upendra 's sister in the film . About Arjun 's look , stylist Ashwin said it would reflect the current fashion trends in Milan , Paris and London ( incorporating pieces from the autumn @-@ winter 2014 and spring @-@ summer 2015 collections ) . 
 Ashwin said that they shopped in Dubai because Arjun wanted to select his costumes , and the European capitals at that time had only winter collections . Arjun would have several hairstyles in the film . Upendra 's role was reported to be a Tamil living in Madurai , and he was confirmed as the landlord at the end of January 2015 . He was not included in the film 's promotional activities since Srinivas did not want to reveal what he considered a crucial character . The way Kamal Haasan and Wasim Akram handled diabetes in real life inspired Srinivas to make Samantha 's character diabetic in the film . Samantha was comfortable in the role , since she too had been diagnosed with the disease two years earlier . 
 Prakash Raj had a limited role , since Srinivas wanted to tell the story of a father by not showing him but instead showing his son 's love and his influence on his life . The death of Sampath Raj was an accident because Srinivas did not believe in killing his antagonists directly , but to have them die as a result of their mistakes . Srinivas added that his death was planned so the film would have a good ending . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In early December 2013 it was announced that filming would begin the following February , after Arjun finished Race Gurram . At the end of March 2014 , shooting was postponed to the following month and it was later announced that filming would start during the third week of April . In June , filming was again postponed to the following month , when Arjun was scheduled to finish <unk> ; he completed the film on 30 July . 
 Principal photography began on 22 September at a Hyderabad @-@ based shopping mall . Samantha arrived at the set on 1 October 2014 , after completing <unk> , and Sharma joined the production unit five days later . A week @-@ long shooting schedule planned at Ooty for scenes with Arjun , Upendra , Samantha and Sneha was disrupted because of unrest in Tamil Nadu due to Jayalalithaa 's conviction , and the scenes were filmed near Shamshabad in Hyderabad . Art director Ravinder built a large outdoor set for the destination @-@ wedding scene , with flowers flown in from Bangkok . 
 A fight scene with Arjun was shot at Ramoji Film City under the supervision of Peter Hein . A residential set was built at a cost of ₹ 30 million by Ravinder in Kokapet , where scenes with Brahmanandam and Srinivasa Rao were filmed in late November 2014 . The Kokapet set , of a Tamil house in Madurai , required three truckloads of trees from a farmhouse in <unk> ( near Rajahmundry ) and materials from Delhi and Chennai . For the set , Srinivas and Ravinder travelled to a small city near Madurai and researched houses . By then , filming was nearly complete and the producers confirmed that the dialogue would be finished by the end of November and the songs shot the following month . 
 Filming was suspended because of a strike by Film Federation employees and the <unk> <unk> Cyclone Hudhud relief fundraiser at Visakhapatnam . The strike was called off , and shooting resumed on 6 December . When Upendra finished his first shooting schedule for the film , he returned to the set of <unk> 2 on 10 December . In addition to Arjun 's action sequences , Some more scenes were filmed at Ramoji Film City . Comedy sequences featuring Arjun and Samantha were shot at Hyderabad in late December . 
 Arjun spent the New Year with his wife and son in South Africa , and was scheduled to return to the set during the second week of January 2015 . The final shooting schedule began on 6 January in Hyderabad . Additional filming of action and romantic scenes began on 20 January . S / O Satyamurthy 's climactic scenes were filmed on the Kokapet house set in late January . 
 Shooting was scheduled to continue there until the first week of February , when the dialogue would be completed . A fight scene with Arjun and hundreds of other fighters was filmed in early February , and Upendra returned to the Hyderabad set for his scenes . A song , choreographed by Shekhar and featuring Arjun , Samantha and Menen , was filmed on the Kokapet house set in late February . The film unit then went to Spain to film three songs also featuring Arjun , Samantha and Menen , returning on 6 March . S / O Satyamurthy 's principal photography completed when the last song ( choreographed by Jani and featuring Arjun , Samantha and Sharma ) was filmed on 11 March 2015 in a specially erected set at Annapurna Studios . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Although S / O Satyamurthy was reportedly about a conflict between two families , according to Upendra it revolves around three characters : one who follows his heart , a second who uses his brain and a third who uses his brawn . The characters are a wedding planner ( Arjun ) , a wealthy businessman ( Prasad ) and a boss ( Upendra ) . Srinivas told the Indo @-@ Asian News Service that his film would highlight a father 's role in a person 's life , because more films dramatise relationships with mothers . S / O Satyamurthy has urban and rural settings similar to the director 's previous film , Attarintiki Daredi ( 2013 ) . 
 The film refers to situations in the Ramayana and the Mahabharata in the lives of Rama , Sita , Ravana , Yudhishthira and Karna and to the dowry system . Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu wrote in her review that the film " attempts to break away from staid portrayal of women and notions of machismo in Telugu cinema " . Upendra 's character wants his wife to be happy , and hides his dark side from her ; Samantha 's character is diabetic , and the wall full of post @-@ it notes in Rajendra Prasad 's house illustrate marriages where communication has broken down . Dundoo notes lines of dialogue which " scoff " at people who call a girl unlucky if her engagement is broken . 
 For the scenes between M. S. Narayana and Rao Ramesh , Srinivas was inspired by his mother 's maternal uncles in the village of <unk> in West Godavari district . In an interview , the director said that the screenplay was based on situations faced by people close to him and how they handled them . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Devi Sri Prasad composed the soundtrack album and background score for S / O Satyamurthy . Folk singer Raghu Dixit made his Telugu cinema debut as a playback singer , saying on 4 February 2015 that he had recorded a song for the film . The soundtrack was scheduled to be released on 14 March , with Pawan Kalyan and Mahesh Babu the expected guests of honour at the release party . In late February 2015 , Prasad wrote and recorded a song . Aditya Music acquired the soundtrack 's marketing rights , and the seven @-@ track list was released on 14 March 2015 . The soundtrack was released the following day at the Hotel Novotel in Hyderabad . The soundtrack 's success was celebrated on 6 April 2015 at at <unk> , Vijayawada . 
 = = Release = = 
 S / O Satyamurthy 's release date was originally scheduled for 5 February 2015 in late November 2014 , and was later postponed to 2 April ( after the 2015 Cricket World Cup ) due to post @-@ production delays . After the film 's review by the censors on 30 March 2015 , its release date was rescheduled for 9 April . 
 S / O Satyamurthy was one of the rare Telugu films to be released in Tamil Nadu with English subtitles . The film was confirmed for release on 100 screens across Karnataka , at the same time as Dheera Rana Vikrama . Its global screen count was 1375 , the largest Telugu film release of the year ; however , it did not break the record 1450 screens set by 2014 's Aagadu . S / O Satyamurthy 's dubbed Malayalam version was released on 24 April . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 S / O Satyamurthy 's overseas theatrical rights were sold to Classics Entertainment for an undisclosed sum in late October 2014 , and days later its Karnataka rights were also sold for an undisclosed price . Dil Raju acquired the Nizam regional rights for ₹ 140 million , one of the highest prices paid for Nizam rights to a film . Bhopal Reddy acquired the Karnataka regional distribution rights for ₹ 60 million . The film 's theatrical rights were sold for a total of ₹ 540 million . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Sai Gopal , who had assisted Srinivas since Swayamvaram ( 1999 ) , orchestrated S / O Satyamurthy 's promotion . Although the film was expected to preview in December 2014 , its preliminary preview was released on 6 March 2015 ( the night before Holi ) . The preview featured sixteen actors , including the leads ( whose faces were blurred ) , and the film 's logo was muted . In a press release , the producers announced that the film 's promotion would be in full swing at the soundtrack release party , with party passes awarded to those predicting the sixteen actors on the preview poster . 
 Its 45 @-@ second advance @-@ preview video was released on 7 March , receiving a good response on YouTube ( where it was viewed by more than 300 @,@ 000 people within 12 hours of its release ) . The film 's logo was disclosed the following day . Thirty @-@ one @-@ second 2D and 3D motion posters featuring Arjun , created by Prawin Pudi and designed by Siva Kiran of Working Title , were released on 9 March and two preview posters of Arjun were distributed the following day . 
 S / O Satyamurthy 's 27 @-@ second trailer was released on 11 March ; two posters featuring Arjun , Samantha and Menen in Spain were distributed the following day , and a poster of Arjun was released on 14 March . The theatrical trailer had more than one million views on one YouTube channel in three and a half days , a record . The trailer for a promotional song with Arjun and Prasad was released on 28 March , and the song itself was released on 1 April at 11 : 00 pm IST . Arjun promoted the film 's dubbed Malayalam version at the Lulu Mall in Cochin on 21 April . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 MAA TV acquired the film 's broadcast @-@ television rights for ₹ 95 million . S / O Satyamurthy had its global television premiere on 15 July 2015 at 6 p.m. IST . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 S / O Satyamurthy had a lukewarm reception from critics , with the International Business Times calling the film a " mass entertainer " and criticising its predictability and length . According to Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu , " We ’ ve seen enough films with characters placed in the villain ’ s den . Thankfully , the drama is lively and fun moments come through Ali and Brahmanandam . Allu Arjun shoulders the film with his remarkable performance and seems to be getting better with each film . The film ’ s biggest undoing is its length . A trimmer version would be far more engaging " . Pranitha Jonnalagedda of The Hans India wrote , " No denying that there are moments of crazy laughter , witty remarks and some thought provoking words , but Trivikram ’ s benchmark is set so high that the writing of this film doesn ’ t excite us enough . All said and done , if you are a lover of a Telugu cinema who enjoys watching the hero being the Good Samaritan and fancy a few tear @-@ jerking moments , this film is definitely for you ! " IndiaGlitz gave S / O Satyamurthy 3 @.@ 25 out of five stars , calling the film a " family entertainer sans memorable heroism " and adding that its second half " will work with a good many number of audience " . Madhavi Tata of Outlook India gave the film three out of five stars , writing that Trivikram 's screenplay " has too many sub @-@ plots , but the dialogues sparkle , especially when mouthed by veteran actors " . Tata called the film 's humour a " big draw " , with the best saved for Brahmanandam . Hemanth Kumar of The Times of India gave S / O Satyamurthy three out of five stars , writing that the film " works well as an idea , and leaves you with enough questions and thoughts to reflect upon your own life , but as a cinematic experience , it leaves a lot to be desired " . <unk> <unk> of Oneindia also gave the film three out of five stars , calling it a " perfect entertainer " despite being the " weakest work of Trivikram till date " : " Nevertheless it is shall be a great fun to watch Son Of Satyamurthy along with your family . Cut down the expectations and you will definitely love the movie " . Behindwoods gave it 2 @.@ 75 out of five stars : " Without a concrete villain , [ the film ] still manages to tell us the painful journey of the hero . Thanks to the powerful and meaningful dialogues in the voice @-@ over , [ the film ] becomes a charming drama " , calling it a " family drama that also entertains " and " another winner for the Trivikram @-@ Allu Arjun combo " . 
 Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle gave S / O Satyamurthy 2 @.@ 5 out of five stars : " Trivikram has continued the Attarintiki Daredi trend of rich @-@ kid @-@ giving @-@ up @-@ luxuries in this film too . But , the hallmark of the director is missing from this movie . The punch dialogues associated with his films are missing and the screenplay is so @-@ so " . Karthik Keramalu of CNN @-@ IBN also gave the film 2 @.@ 5 out of five stars , calling it an " inconsistent drama with over @-@ the @-@ top action and a grand message " and adding : " If only the screenplay had matched the quality of Allu Arjun 's style , which is impeccably taken care of , Trivikram would have won the S / O Satyamurthy lottery " . IANS gave S / O Satyamurthy two out of five stars : " While all the quintessential Trivikram trademark moments can be found in S / O Satyamurthy , what you miss is the magic he created in his career 's best film Athadu " , adding that the film is a " predictable and sloppy family drama with a few high and mostly low moments " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 S / O Satyamurthy grossed ₹ 205 million on its first day at the global box office , the third @-@ highest opening @-@ day gross in the history of Telugu cinema . The film also had the best opening @-@ day gross of Arjun 's film career , breaking records set by 2014 's Race Gurram ( his previous film ) , Temper and Gopala Gopala . Trade analyst Trinath told IANS that the film grossed ₹ 335 million in two days at the global box office , the biggest opening of the year to date . S / O Satyamurthy earned ₹ 269 @.@ 2 million in three days at the global box office . By the end of its first weekend , the film earned ₹ 303 @.@ 1 million and was the highest @-@ grossing Telugu film of the year to date . 
 Gross earnings for the film 's first weekend were ₹ 483 million . S / O Satyamurthy netted about ₹ 35 million and grossed ₹ 50 million on its fifth day at the global box office , bringing its five @-@ day global gross and net to ₹ 492 @.@ 4 million and ₹ 357 @.@ 4 million . By then , the film had recovered 60 percent of its cost and was third on the list of Telugu films with all @-@ time top first @-@ week worldwide openings , behind Attarintiki Daredi ( 2013 ) and Yevadu ( 2014 ) . S / O Satyamurthy 's earnings dropped sharply on its seventh day , and its seven @-@ day global earnings stood at ₹ 579 million gross and ₹ 369 @.@ 4 million net . 
 The film crossed the ₹ 40 @-@ crore ( 400 @-@ million ) mark on its eighth day , netting ₹ 432 @.@ 4 million and grossing more than ₹ 600 million in eight days ( recouping over 80 percent of its cost ) . In eleven days , it netted a total of ₹ 425 @.@ 5 million and grossed ₹ 668 @.@ 5 million at the global box office . With consistent weekday performance , the film 's fifteen @-@ day global total gross and net figures were ₹ 713 @.@ 5 million and ₹ 450 @.@ 5 million . 
 During its third week , S / O Satyamurthy lost a large number of screens to new releases <unk> , Kai Raja Kai , <unk> and Avengers : Age of Ultron . The film still performed decently , grossing ₹ 50 @.@ 5 million and netting ₹ 21 @.@ 7 million in three days for an eighteen @-@ day global total gross and net of ₹ 775 million and ₹ 469 @.@ 2 million ( surpassing the lifetime records of Naayak ( 2013 ) , Racha ( 2012 ) , Temper , Eega ( 2012 ) , Govindudu Andarivadele and Gopala Gopala ) . It was the tenth @-@ highest @-@ grossing Telugu film of all time at the global box office . At the end of three weeks , S / O Satyamurthy grossed over ₹ 800 million . Trade analyst Trinath told IANS that the film 's three @-@ week global net was over ₹ 500 million , the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing Telugu film of all time at the global box office . 
 S / O Satyamurthy grossed ₹ 905 million and netted a total of ₹ 519 million at the global box office during its full run ; of this , ₹ 507 @.@ 5 million was earned by the Telugu version . Arjun was the first Telugu actor with two consecutive films crossing the ₹ 500 @-@ million mark at the global box office . Bangalore Mirror called S / O Satyamurthy a blockbuster , grossing ₹ 920 million and netting over ₹ 600 million at the global box office during its run . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 The film grossed ₹ 118 @.@ 9 million at the Andhra Pradesh and Telangana box office , ₹ 43 @.@ 5 million in Karnataka and ₹ 6 million in the rest of India on its first day . Early trends suggested that S / O Satyamurthy would net ₹ 85 million in Andhra Pradesh , and the official tally was ₹ 93 @.@ 7 million ; it was the fourth @-@ highest opening @-@ day grossing Telugu film in the state , behind Attarintiki Daredi , Aagadu and Temper . The film earned more than ₹ 29 million at the Bangalore box office , with an 80 @-@ percent occupancy for two days ( the highest of Arjun 's films to date ) . S / O Satyamurthy earned ₹ 72 million in two days at the Karnataka box office . 
 It earned ₹ 51 @.@ 5 million and ₹ 40 million on its second and third days in Andhra Pradesh / Telangana , bringing its three @-@ day total to ₹ 184 @.@ 2 million . It earned approximately ₹ 25 million in Karnataka , Tamil Nadu , Maharashtra and elsewhere in North India in three days . By the end of its first weekend , S / O Satyamurthy netted ₹ 207 @.@ 1 million , ₹ 35 million and ₹ 10 million in Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka and the rest of India respectively . Its first @-@ weekend gross in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana was ₹ 315 million and ₹ 66 million , ₹ 12 million and ₹ 6 million in Karnataka , Tamil Nadu and the rest of India respectively . 
 S / O Satyamurthy performed well on its fifth day , earning ₹ 21 @.@ 6 million in Andhra Pradesh for a five @-@ day total of ₹ 228 @.@ 7 million . The film 's sixth @-@ day Andhra Pradesh earnings were ₹ 23 @.@ 8 million , bringing its six @-@ day total in the state to ₹ 252 @.@ 5 million . S / O Satyamurthy was the sixth @-@ highest first @-@ week earning Telugu film in Andhra Pradesh , at ₹ 262 @.@ 4 million . The film earned ₹ 39 million and ₹ 12 million in Karnataka and the rest of India in its first week . Its Karnataka gross was ₹ 47 @.@ 5 million , the highest ever for a Telugu film in the state . 
 It was the fourth Arjun film to net ₹ 10 million in the Nizam region , after Julai , <unk> ( 2013 ) and Race Gurram . In eighteen days , the film netted ₹ 337 @.@ 2 million , ₹ 54 @.@ 5 million , ₹ 6 @.@ 3 million and ₹ 7 @.@ 2 million in AP / Nizam , Karnataka , Tamil Nadu and the rest of India respectively . During its run S / O Satyamurthy netted ₹ 376 @.@ 5 million , ₹ 58 million , ₹ 6 @.@ 3 million and ₹ 7 @.@ 2 million in AP / Nizam , Karnataka , Tamil Nadu and the rest of India respectively , ₹ 140 @.@ 5 million in the Nizam region alone . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 S / O Satyamurthy grossed ₹ 37 @.@ 5 million on its first day at the overseas box office . According to Taran Adarsh , the film earned $ 347 @,@ 267 on its Wednesday premiere in the United States and was the second @-@ highest US premiere grosser ( behind Aagadu ) . It earned $ 136 @,@ 168 on Thursday , bringing its two @-@ day US box @-@ office total to $ 483 @,@ 435 ( about ₹ 30 @.@ 1 million ) . S / O Satyamurthy earned $ 233 @,@ 870 on Friday , bringing its three @-@ day US box @-@ office total to $ 720 @,@ 984 ( about ₹ 44 @.@ 9 million ) . 
 The film passed the million @-@ dollar mark on Sunday , the second Telugu film of 2015 to do so ( after Temper ) . Gross overseas receipts for the first weekend were ₹ 84 @.@ 6 million , with net earnings of ₹ 51 million . The film continued a good run on the international market despite a drop in collections in India , earning ₹ 56 million in eight days . 
 S / O Satyamurthy lost 60 percent of its screens after the release of OK <unk> , but ( according to Taran Adarsh ) earned $ 1 @,@ 235 @,@ 073 by 19 April 2015 . It broke the lifetime records of Temper , Gopala Gopala and Govindudu Andarivadele in 11 days , and was the ninth @-@ highest @-@ grossing Telugu film of all time at the US box office . The film earned ₹ 52 million in the US and ₹ 7 million at the remaining overseas box offices during its run . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A dialogue from the film , Maa Nanna <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> . Kani <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " According to my father , a wife is a voluntary duty and kids are the burden we love to bear . But for me , my father is an unforgettable memory " ) was spoofed by the producers of the film <unk> Matta in its promotion . Sakshi published a spoof of the film on 19 May 2015 in which Prakash Raj was replaced by Brahmanandam as the protagonist 's father , who tells his son not to follow ethics and values but to give importance only to money . 
 = Nicholas Mayall = 
 Nicholas Ulrich Mayall ( May 9 , 1906 – January 5 , 1993 ) was an American observational astronomer . After obtaining his doctorate from the University of California , Berkeley , Mayall worked at the Lick Observatory , where he remained from 1934 – 1960 , except for a brief period at MIT 's Radiation Laboratory during World War II . 
 During his time at Lick , Mayall contributed to astronomical knowledge of nebulae , supernovae , spiral galaxy internal motions , the redshifts of galaxies , and the origin , age , and size of the Universe . He played a significant role in the planning and construction of Lick 's 120 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) reflector , which represented a major improvement over its earlier 36 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) telescope . 
 From 1960 , Mayall spent 11 years as director of the Kitt Peak National Observatory until his retirement in 1971 . Under his leadership <unk> , and the Cerro Tololo Inter @-@ American Observatory , developed into two of the world 's top research observatories , equipped with premier telescopes . Mayall was responsible for the construction of the 4 @-@ meter ( 160 in ) Kitt Peak reflector , which was named after him . When Mayall died in 1993 , his ashes were spread high on an empty ridge of Kitt Peak . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mayall 's father , Edwin L. Mayall , Sr. , was an engineer for a manufacturing company in Illinois . His mother , Olive Ulrich Mayall , despite never attending college herself , set high educational standards for Mayall and his younger brother ( Edwin , Jr . , born 1907 ) . Sometime between his brother 's birth and 1913 , the family moved to California 's Modesto area , where Mayall entered first grade . Some time before 1917 , they moved again , to Stockton where they remained until 1924 and Mayall 's graduation from Stockton High School ( except for a brief return to Peoria , Illinois during 1918 – 1919 ) . During this period , presumably during his high school years , Mayall 's parents divorced . 
 During his senior year , in the fall of 1923 , Mayall was secretary of the school science club and set up a club visit to the Lick Observatory . His father permitted him to use his car , a Moline Knight , to transport the club members up the dirt and gravel winding mountain road leading to the observatory . This was Mayall 's first visit to the observatory where he would spend much of his career . After visiting , he read all the astronomy books available in the local libraries , although he did not at that time imagine making astronomy his profession . 
 = = Education = = 
 Mayall began college in the fall of 1924 at the University of California , Berkeley , studying for a degree in mining . He took up residence with his mother in an apartment on Durant Avenue , and worked at the UC Berkeley library to help support them both . Mayall generally did well at university , and was eventually elected to the Sigma Xi and Phi Beta Kappa honor societies . However , at mid @-@ term examinations of his second year , he achieved poor grades in mineralogy and chemistry laboratory . At a meeting with the dean to discuss his grades the latter became aware that Mayall was color blind , which prevented him from observing small color changes in bead and flame tests , and also kept him from seeing small color changes in precipitations and <unk> . Mayall 's adviser recommended that he change his major , as he would not be able to graduate as a mining engineer with such a handicap . 
 Mayall 's mother encouraged him to study whatever interested him the most , and to do it well , so he considered astronomy as an alternative to mining . After asking many professors in the astronomy department whether they enjoyed their work and whether they made a satisfactory wage , and being content with their answers , he transferred to the College of Letters and Science to major in astronomy . This did not set him back in his degree requirements because almost all of his first year studies had been in basic physical sciences and mathematics . Eventually Mayall discovered that he greatly enjoyed astronomy , and decided upon a course of graduate level study followed by a career as a research scientist . 
 After graduating in 1928 , Mayall decided to remain at Berkeley , as it had the best astronomy graduate program of the day . However , he took a hiatus from pursuing his advanced degree and went to work as a human computer at the Mount Wilson Observatory from 1929 – 1931 , where he assisted luminaries such as Edwin Hubble , Paul W. Merrill , and Milton L. Humason . This activity resulted in him co @-@ authoring papers on Pluto 's mass and orbit with Seth Barnes Nicholson and others , shortly after Pluto 's discovery 
 Mayall returned to Berkeley in 1931 to pursue graduate studies . His thesis topic , suggested by Hubble , was to count the number of galaxies per unit area on the sky as a function of position on direct plates taken with the Crossley reflector at Lick . This should have supplemented the counts Hubble himself was making using the 60 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and 100 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) telescopes at Mt . Wilson . Mayall successfully completed his thesis and was awarded his PhD degree in 1934 . Hubble complimented Mayall for his work , although significant results were never achieved ( nor by Hubble either ) due to the lack of accurate magnitude standards for the faint galaxies that were measured and by the ( then unrealized ) very strong tendency of galaxies to cluster . 
 While working on his thesis , Mayall had an idea of designing a small , fast <unk> spectrograph , optimized for nebulae and galaxies . He believed that if it were used in conjunction with the Crossley reflector it would make that facility competitive for at least some of the work that Humason and Hubble were doing with the larger Mt . Wilson telescopes . It was never expected to compete with the Mt . Wilson 100 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) instrument for stars or elliptical galaxies , which have condensed and relatively bright nuclei . The spectrograph was to be used instead to study extended , low @-@ surface @-@ brightness gaseous nebulae or irregular galaxies . Mayall 's thesis advisor , William Hammond Wright , and the then head of the Lick stellar spectroscopy program , Joseph Haines Moore , encouraged him to develop his spectrograph . The device was constructed by the Lick Observatory 's own workshop , and proved to be more efficient for extended , low @-@ surface @-@ brightness objects , particularly in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum , thus confirming the expectations of Mayall . With Wright 's strong encouragement , Mayall had used fused quartz to make ultraviolet transmitting optics , whereas the Mt . Wilson <unk> used heavy glass lenses and prisms , which absorb ultraviolet radiation . 
 = = Lick Observatory = = 
 While Mayall hoped to join the Mount Wilson team upon earning his doctorate , there were no openings during the Great Depression . Instead , he began his career at Lick , which was afforded by the number two janitor resigning and Mayall being given a one @-@ year position as observing assistant with janitorial duties limited to maintaining the <unk> and keeping instrument rooms clean . The following year , one of the senior astronomers joined the Berkeley department and his salary was split between Mayall and another young astronomer , Arthur Bambridge Wyse . 
 On June 30 , 1934 , Mayall married Kathleen ( Kay ) Boxall from Los Angeles , who he had met during his two years in Pasadena . They lived in a small apartment that was part of the little astronomy village on the Mount Hamilton summit , where all Lick astronomers resided at that time . 
 Using his newly built spectrograph , Mayall was the first to determine the radial velocities of many knots of gas in the Crab Nebula . Using these data and the previously published angular rate of expansion of the nebula , he was able to estimate its distance . Consequently , he became the first person to recognize and demonstrate that the Crab Nebula was the remnant of a supernova observed and recorded in 1054 ( SN 1054 ) , rather than a classical nova . Walter Baade was instrumental in stimulating and counseling Mayall after around 1939 , taking on the role previously filled by Hubble . 
 In 1941 , together with Arthur Wyse and Lawrence Aller , Mayall studied the rotation of nearby galaxies and found that there was much matter that was too faint to be observed , but which could be detected by way of its gravitational effect . He spent about three years until 1942 researching 50 Milky Way globular clusters , and found the Milky Way had about one half of the mass previously supposed . 
 While at the Lick Observatory , Mayall collaborated on a 20 @-@ year project with astronomers at Mount Palomar and Mount Wilson on the Big Bang theory of the beginning of the Universe . Together with Milton L. Humason and Allan R. Sandage , he wrote a 1956 paper concluding that the age of the Universe was six billion years ( three times the prior estimate , and about half the modern value ) , and its size three times larger than thought . 
 = = World War II = = 
 After the United States entered World War II , Mayall accepted a position at the MIT 's Radiation Laboratory in Cambridge , Massachusetts to work on radar development . He began his work early in 1942 in Cambridge , which was the only time during his adult life that he resided outside California or Arizona . However , the climate of Massachusetts was unlike that of California , which he and his family were accustomed to , and in the middle of 1943 he arranged a transfer to the Pasadena Mt . Wilson Observatory offices . Many wartime Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) projects related to optics , aerial gunnery , aerial photography , and bombing tactics were already in progress there . Unhappy with the management of his project and feeling his talents were not being well used , he transferred again in February 1944 to Caltech to work on the development of large rockets . There he became an expert on high @-@ speed photography , which was used to analyze rocket trajectories . In the spring of 1945 , he was transferred to a secret atomic bomb project that also required high @-@ speed photography . He visited Los Alamos twice , including once around the time of the Trinity test . By October 1 , 1945 , the war had ended and Mayall had returned to astronomical research at Lick . 
 = = 120 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) telescope = = 
 During World War II Mayall became an important influence on Lick Observatory 's future . Ever since 1931 , when he had returned to Lick and Berkley after serving two years as an assistant at Mount Wilson , he had felt strongly that Mount Hamilton required a larger telescope . The astronomers at Lick were proud of their ability to achieve important results with Lick 's small 36 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) Crossley reflector . Its diminutive size first became apparent in 1908 , when Mount Wilson 's 60 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) telescope saw first light . This was accentuated by the opening of the 72 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) Dominion Astrophysical Observatory in 1917 , and Mount Wilson 's even larger 100 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) Hooker telescope in 1919 . Mayall was adept at working with the small Crossley , but understood that it could never really stand up to a competing telescope that collected nine times the amount of light . This was only going to get worse when the 200 @-@ inch ( 5 @.@ 1 m ) Hale Telescope was completed at Palomar Observatory . Mayall and other young faculty at Lick thought that the older faculty such as Moore and Wright were too committed to the small telescopes and should have tried harder to obtain a larger reflector . 
 Unknown to Mayall , Lick observatory director William H. Wright and his predecessor , Robert G. Aitken , had both tried in secret to raise money for a larger reflector to replace the 36 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) Crossley Reflector . They tried both private sources as well as trying to get Robert Gordon Sproul , the University of California President , to provide for one in the budget . Despite multiple attempts , they continued to fail , primarily due to the Great Depression . However , in 1942 , Sproul asked Paul W. Merrill from Mt . Wilson to succeed Wright , but was turned down . Agitated by the refusal , Sproul changed his stance and told the regents that they had to find a way to raise money for a new telescope once the war ended . At about this time , Sproul promised or secretly appointed C. Donald Shane as director of Lick , to take over when the war ended . 
 The plan for a large telescope was leaked around September 1944 in the form of the University 's budget proposals . Wright and Joseph H. Moore , interim wartime Lick director , imagined an 85 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 2 m ) or 90 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) reflector based upon the funds proposed in the budget by Sproul . Mayall and Gerald E. Kron sent a letter to Sproul representing the younger Lick staff members , in which they requested a meeting to discuss the kind of telescope to be built . They met with Sproul in December 1944 in Sproul 's Los Angeles office . Mayall spoke of the key need for a telescope exceeding 90 inches ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) . At the Caltech optical shop in Pasadena he had seen the nearly completed 120 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) Pyrex glass disc that was initially planned to be used as a flat in the auto @-@ collimation test of the 200 @-@ inch ( 5 @.@ 1 m ) Palomar mirror and urged Sproul to have the Lick telescope use a mirror of that size . Much to their surprise , Sproul agreed . 
 Shane was appointed chairman of a committee formed by Sproul in the beginning of 1945 , to plan the new reflector . Other committee members included Mayall , Moore , Walter S. Adams and Ira S. Bowen . The committee functioned primarily through correspondence . Mayall 's first letter helped to convince Shane that 120 inches ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) was feasible instead of just 90 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) . Mayall helped to bridge the gap between the experienced team of telescope designers in Pasadena and Shane , who was more experienced as a university administrator and professor . Adams and the executive officer of the 200 @-@ inch ( 5 @.@ 1 m ) project , John August Anderson , shared their experience , drawings and plans with the Lick design committee . On March 6 , 1945 , with both Mayall and Shane present , the committee decided upon the basic parameters of what would become the 120 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) C. Donald Shane telescope . On March 7 , Mayall joined Shane , Wright and Moore ( not present at the March 6 meeting ) , at Mt . Hamilton to choose the location upon which to build the reflector . 
 = = Postwar Lick research = = 
 During the long period of building the 120 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) telescope , Mayall continued to use Lick 's 36 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) Crossley Reflector and focused his efforts on utilizing his <unk> spectrograph , which was optimized for extended , low @-@ surface @-@ brightness clusters , galaxies , and nebulae . In 1946 , he completed his pre @-@ war effort to get integrated spectra of globular clusters and published the work . His paper was key in demonstrating that the system of Milky Way globular clusters shares only slightly the galactic rotation found in the flattened disc of interstellar matter and young stars in our galaxy . In 1948 , Mayall serendipitously discovered a type II supernova while conducting other research . 
 Other research Mayall performed included the 20 year collaboration ( formulated in 1935 by Hubble ) with Milton Humason , to gather redshift values for all northern galaxies brighter than + 13 visual magnitude . Mayall handled the brighter galaxies on the Crossley , while Humason tackled the fainter ones using the Mount Wilson 100 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) . This work resulted in the 1956 paper he co @-@ authored with Humason and Allan Sandage , on the rate of expansion of the Universe . The paper listed over 800 redshift values ( 300 determined by Mayall ) for galaxies measured from 1935 to 1955 at Lick , Wilson and Palomar . 
 At Lick , he also studied galactic dynamics , such as the rotational motion of the Andromeda and Triangulum galaxies . He presented this work at a symposium on the structure of the Milky Way on June 23 , 1950 , at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor . This work demonstrated the inner solid @-@ body rotation and the outer Keplerian motion . In 1953 , together with O.J. Eggen , Mayall identified six likely globular clusters ( including Mayall II ) around the Andromeda galaxy in a Palomar 48 @-@ inch <unk> plate exposed in 1948 that was provided to them by Hubble . 
 Gerry Kron marveled at the sensitivity of Mayall 's eyes that could reach down to + 17 visual magnitude using the 36 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) telescope . Mayall 's eyesight later deteriorated to the point that he could no longer read . 
 The new 120 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) telescope became operational at the beginning of 1960 . Mayall immediately began using it , although he left Lick in September of that year . 
 = = Kitt Peak National Observatory = = 
 Mayall moved on from the University of California ( after more than 25 years progressing from student to astronomer ) , to become the second director of Kitt Peak National Observatory ( <unk> ) . With financial support from the National Science Foundation , several universities had formed a consortium — the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy ( AURA ) . Its purpose was to create and run a research observatory for American astronomers . The first director was Aden B. <unk> , who chose the site near Tucson at the 7 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) Kitt Peak , and oversaw the building of its first telescope , the 84 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) reflector which was completed in the spring of 1960 . 
 However , the AURA board decided that <unk> was not well suited for the job and chose Mayall to replace him on October 1 , 1960 , even though he had no previous administrative experience . Mayall had previously been appointed ( in 1958 ) as a consultant to AURA , due to his experience in planning the Lick 120 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) telescope . The board 's president was Shane , who was representing the University of California , and he helped convince Mayall to accept the offer . 
 As director , Mayall oversaw the building of the 4 @-@ meter ( 160 in ) Kitt peak reflector . It was still being built when he retired in 1971 , and was completed in 1973 , at which point it was named the Nicholas U. Mayall Telescope in his honor . Mayall was intimately involved in the expansion of the national observatory to the Southern hemisphere in what eventually became the Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory ( <unk> ) . The 4 @-@ metre ( 160 in ) Victor M. Blanco Telescope at <unk> ( identical to the Mayall Telescope at Kitt Peak ) saw first light in 1974 and was completed in 1976 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Mayall retired in 1971 , at the age of 65 , an event that was honored by a symposium held on his birthday , May 8 . During his retirement , he continued to play an active role in many organizations , including the overview committee for Fermilab . He died on January 5 , 1993 , of complications caused by diabetes ; his ashes were spread high on an empty ridge of Kitt Peak . Mayall was survived by his wife of 58 years , Kathleen Boxall , and their two children : Bruce Ian Mayall ( 1939 ) and Pamela Ann Mayall , their two grandchildren : Shane Nicholas Oakes ( 1977 ) and Bryce Oakes Mayall ( 1979 ) . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = Cited sources = = 
 = Norman conquest of England = 
 The Norman conquest of England was the 11th @-@ century invasion and occupation of England by an army of Norman , Breton , and French soldiers led by Duke William II of Normandy , later styled as William the Conqueror . 
 William 's claim to the English throne derived from his familial relationship with the childless Anglo @-@ Saxon King Edward the Confessor , who may have encouraged William 's hopes for the throne . Edward died in January 1066 and was succeeded by his brother @-@ in @-@ law Harold Godwinson . The Norwegian king Harald Hardrada invaded northern England in September 1066 and was victorious at the Battle of Fulford , but Harold defeated and killed him at the Battle of Stamford Bridge on 25 September 1066 . Within days , William landed in southern England . Harold marched south to confront him , leaving a significant portion of his army in the north . Harold 's army confronted William 's invaders on 14 October at the Battle of Hastings ; William 's force defeated Harold , who was killed in the engagement . 
 Although William 's main rivals were gone , he still faced rebellions over the following years and was not secure on his throne until after 1072 . The lands of the resisting English elite were confiscated ; some of the elite fled into exile . To control his new kingdom , William gave lands to his followers and built castles commanding military strongpoints throughout the land . Other effects of the conquest included the court and government , the introduction of Norman French as the language of the elites , and changes in the composition of the upper classes , as William enfeoffed lands to be held directly from the king . More gradual changes affected the agricultural classes and village life : the main change appears to have been the formal elimination of slavery , which may or may not have been linked to the invasion . There was little alteration in the structure of government , as the new Norman administrators took over many of the forms of Anglo @-@ Saxon government . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In 911 the French Carolingian ruler Charles the Simple allowed a group of Vikings under their leader Rollo to settle in Normandy as part of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Clair @-@ sur @-@ Epte . In exchange for the land , the Norsemen under Rollo were expected to provide protection along the coast against further Viking invaders . Their settlement proved successful , and the Vikings in the region became known as the " Northmen " from which " Normandy " and " Normans " are derived . The Normans quickly adopted the indigenous culture , renouncing paganism and converting to Christianity . They adopted the langue d <unk> of their new home and added features from their own Norse language , transforming it into the Norman language . They intermarried with the local population and used the territory granted them as a base to extend the frontiers of the duchy westward , annexing territory including the Bessin , the Cotentin Peninsula and Avranches . 
 In 1002 King Æthelred II of England married Emma , the sister of Richard II , Duke of Normandy . Their son Edward the Confessor , who spent many years in exile in Normandy , succeeded to the English throne in 1042 . This led to the establishment of a powerful Norman interest in English politics , as Edward drew heavily on his former hosts for support , bringing in Norman courtiers , soldiers , and clerics and appointing them to positions of power , particularly in the Church . Childless and embroiled in conflict with the formidable Godwin , Earl of Wessex , and his sons , Edward may also have encouraged Duke William of Normandy 's ambitions for the English throne . 
 When King Edward died at the beginning of 1066 , the lack of a clear heir led to a disputed succession in which several contenders laid claim to the throne of England . Edward 's immediate successor was the Earl of Wessex , Harold Godwinson , the richest and most powerful of the English aristocrats . Harold was elected king by the Witenagemot of England and crowned by the Archbishop of York , Ealdred , although Norman propaganda claimed the ceremony was performed by Stigand , the uncanonically elected Archbishop of Canterbury . Harold was immediately challenged by two powerful neighbouring rulers . Duke William claimed that he had been promised the throne by King Edward and that Harold had sworn agreement to this ; King Harald III of Norway , commonly known as Harald Hardrada , also contested the succession . His claim to the throne was based on an agreement between his predecessor Magnus I of Norway and the earlier English king , Harthacnut , whereby if either died without heir , the other would inherit both England and Norway . William and Harald at once set about assembling troops and ships to invade England . 
 = = Tostig 's raids and the Norwegian invasion = = 
 In early 1066 , Harold 's exiled brother Tostig Godwinson raided southeastern England with a fleet he had recruited in Flanders , later joined by other ships from Orkney . Threatened by Harold 's fleet , Tostig moved north and raided in East Anglia and Lincolnshire , but he was driven back to his ships by the brothers Edwin , Earl of Mercia , and Morcar , Earl of Northumbria . Deserted by most of his followers , he withdrew to Scotland , where he spent the summer recruiting fresh forces . King Harold spent the summer on the south coast with a large army and fleet waiting for William to invade , but the bulk of his forces were militia who needed to harvest their crops , so on 8 September Harold dismissed them . 
 King Harald Hardrada invaded northern England in early September , leading a fleet of more than 300 ships carrying perhaps 15 @,@ 000 men . Harald 's army was further augmented by the forces of Tostig , who threw his support behind the Norwegian king 's bid for the throne . Advancing on York , the Norwegians defeated a northern English army under Edwin and Morcar on 20 September at the Battle of Fulford . The two earls had rushed to engage the Norwegian forces before King Harold could arrive from the south . Although Harold Godwinson had married Edwin and Morcar 's sister Ealdgyth , the two earls may have distrusted Harold and feared that the king would replace Morcar with Tostig . The end result was that their forces were devastated and unable to participate in the rest of the campaigns of 1066 , although the two earls survived the battle . 
 Hardrada moved on to York , which surrendered to him . After taking hostages from the leading men of the city , on 24 September the Norwegians moved east to the tiny village of Stamford Bridge . King Harold probably learned of the Norwegian invasion in mid @-@ September and rushed north , gathering forces as he went . The royal forces probably took nine days to cover the distance from London to York , averaging almost 25 miles ( 40 kilometres ) per day . At dawn on 25 September Harold 's forces reached York , where he learned the location of the Norwegians . The English then marched on the invaders and took them by surprise , defeating them in the Battle of Stamford Bridge . Harald of Norway and Tostig were killed , and the Norwegians suffered such horrific losses that only 24 of the original 300 ships were required to carry away the survivors . The English victory was costly , as Harold 's army was left in a battered and weakened state . 
 = = Norman invasion = = 
 = = = Norman preparations and forces = = = 
 William assembled a large invasion fleet and an army gathered from Normandy and all over France , including large contingents from Brittany and Flanders . He mustered his forces at Saint @-@ Valery @-@ sur @-@ Somme and was ready to cross the Channel by about 12 August . The exact numbers and composition of William 's force are unknown . A contemporary document claims that William had 726 ships , but this may be an inflated figure . Figures given by contemporary writers are highly exaggerated , varying from 14 @,@ 000 to 150 @,@ 000 men . Modern historians have offered a range of estimates for the size of William 's forces : 7000 – 8000 men , 1000 – 2000 of them cavalry ; 10 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 men ; 10 @,@ 000 men , 3000 of them cavalry ; or 7500 men . The army would have consisted of a mix of cavalry , infantry , and archers or crossbowmen , with about equal numbers of cavalry and archers and the foot soldiers equal in number to the other two types combined . Although later lists of companions of William the Conqueror are extant , most are padded with extra names ; only about 35 individuals can be reliably claimed to have been with William at Hastings . 
 William of Poitiers states that William obtained Pope Alexander II 's consent for the invasion , signified by a papal banner , along with diplomatic support from other European rulers . Although Alexander did give papal approval to the conquest after it succeeded , no other source claims papal support before the invasion . William 's army assembled during the summer while an invasion fleet in Normandy was constructed . Although the army and fleet were ready by early August , adverse winds kept the ships in Normandy until late September . There were probably other reasons for William 's delay , including intelligence reports from England revealing that Harold 's forces were deployed along the coast . William would have preferred to delay the invasion until he could make an unopposed landing . 
 = = = Landing and Harold 's march south = = = 
 The Normans crossed to England a few days after Harold 's victory over the Norwegians at Stamford Bridge on 25 September , following the dispersal of Harold 's naval force . They landed at Pevensey in Sussex on 28 September and erected a wooden castle at Hastings , from which they raided the surrounding area . This ensured supplies for the army , and as Harold and his family held many of the lands in the area , it weakened William 's opponent and made him more likely to attack to put an end to the raiding . 
 Harold , after defeating his brother Tostig and Harald Hardrada in the north , left much of his force there , including Morcar and Edwin , and marched the rest of his army south to deal with the threatened Norman invasion . It is unclear when Harold learned of William 's landing , but it was probably while he was travelling south . Harold stopped in London for about a week before reaching Hastings , so it is likely that he took a second week to march south , averaging about 27 miles ( 43 kilometres ) per day , for the nearly 200 miles ( 320 kilometres ) to London . Although Harold attempted to surprise the Normans , William 's scouts reported the English arrival to the duke . The exact events preceding the battle remain obscure , with contradictory accounts in the sources , but all agree that William led his army from his castle and advanced towards the enemy . Harold had taken up a defensive position at the top of Senlac Hill ( present @-@ day Battle , East Sussex ) , about 6 miles ( 10 kilometres ) from William 's castle at Hastings . 
 Contemporary sources do not give reliable data on the size and composition of Harold 's army , although two Norman sources give figures of 1 @.@ 2 million or 400 @,@ 000 men . Recent historians have suggested figures of between 5000 and 13 @,@ 000 for Harold 's army at Hastings , but most agree on a range of between 7000 and 8000 English troops . These men would have comprised a mix of the fyrd ( militia mainly composed of foot soldiers ) and the housecarls , or nobleman 's personal troops , who usually also fought on foot . The main difference between the two types was in their armour ; the housecarls used better protecting armour than that of the fyrd . The English army does not appear to have had many archers , although some were present . Few individual Englishmen are known to have been at Hastings ; the most important were Harold 's brothers Gyrth and Leofwine . About 18 other named individuals can reasonably be assumed to have fought with Harold at Hastings , including two of his other relatives . 
 = = = Hastings = = = 
 The battle began at about 9 am on 14 October 1066 and lasted all day , but while a broad outline is known , the exact events are obscured by contradictory accounts in the sources . Although the numbers on each side were probably about equal , William had both cavalry and infantry , including many archers , while Harold had only foot soldiers and few archers . The English soldiers formed up as a shield wall along the ridge , and were at first so effective that William 's army was thrown back with heavy casualties . Some of William 's Breton troops panicked and fled , and some of the English troops appear to have pursued the fleeing Bretons . Norman cavalry then attacked and killed the pursuing troops . While the Bretons were fleeing , rumours swept the Norman forces that the duke had been killed , but William rallied his troops . Twice more the Normans made feigned withdrawals , tempting the English into pursuit , and allowing the Norman cavalry to attack them repeatedly . The available sources are more confused about events in the afternoon , but it appears that the decisive event was the death of Harold , about which differing stories are told . William of Jumieges claimed that Harold was killed by the duke . The Bayeux Tapestry has been claimed to show Harold 's death by an arrow to the eye , but this may be a later reworking of the tapestry to conform to 12th @-@ century stories that Harold had died from an arrow wound to the head . Other sources stated that no one knew how Harold died because the press of battle was so tight around the king that the soldiers could not see who struck the fatal blow . William of Poitiers gives no details at all about Harold 's death . 
 = = = Aftermath of Hastings = = = 
 The day after the battle , Harold 's body was identified , either by his armour or marks on his body . The bodies of the English dead , who included some of Harold 's brothers and his housecarls , were left on the battlefield , although some were removed by relatives later . Gytha , Harold 's mother , offered the victorious duke the weight of her son 's body in gold for its custody , but her offer was refused . William ordered that Harold 's body was to be thrown into the sea , but whether that took place is unclear . Another story relates that Harold was buried at the top of a cliff . Waltham Abbey , which had been founded by Harold , later claimed that his body had been buried there secretly . Later legends claimed that Harold did not die at Hastings , but escaped and became a hermit at Chester . 
 After his victory at Hastings , William expected to receive the submission of the surviving English leaders , but instead Edgar the Ætheling was proclaimed king by the Witenagemot , with the support of Earls Edwin and Morcar , Stigand , the Archbishop of Canterbury , and Ealdred , the Archbishop of York . William therefore advanced , marching around the coast of Kent to London . He defeated an English force that attacked him at Southwark , but being unable to storm London Bridge he sought to reach the capital by a more circuitous route . 
 William moved up the Thames valley to cross the river at Wallingford , Berkshire ; while there he received the submission of Stigand . He then travelled north @-@ east along the Chilterns , before advancing towards London from the north @-@ west , fighting further engagements against forces from the city . Having failed to muster an effective military response , Edgar 's leading supporters lost their nerve , and the English leaders surrendered to William at Berkhamsted , Hertfordshire . William was acclaimed King of England and crowned by Ealdred on 25 December 1066 , in Westminster Abbey . The new king attempted to conciliate the remaining English nobility by confirming Morcar , Edwin and Waltheof , the Earl of Northumbria , in their lands as well as giving some land to Edgar the Ætheling . William remained in England until March 1067 , when he returned to Normandy with English prisoners , including Stigand , Morcar , Edwin , Edgar the Ætheling , and Waltheof . 
 = = English resistance = = 
 = = = First rebellions = = = 
 Despite the submission of the English nobles , resistance continued for several years . William left control of England in the hands of his half @-@ brother Odo and one of his closest supporters , William fitzOsbern . In 1067 rebels in Kent launched an unsuccessful attack on Dover Castle in combination with Eustace II of Boulogne . The Shropshire landowner Eadric the Wild , in alliance with the Welsh rulers of Gwynedd and Powys , raised a revolt in western Mercia , fighting Norman forces based in Hereford . These events forced William to return to England at the end of 1067 . In 1068 William besieged rebels in Exeter , including Harold 's mother Gytha , and after suffering heavy losses managed to negotiate the town 's surrender . In May , William 's wife Matilda was crowned queen at Westminster , an important symbol of William 's growing international stature . Later in the year Edwin and Morcar raised a revolt in Mercia with Welsh assistance , while Gospatric , the newly appointed Earl of Northumbria , led a rising in Northumbria , which had not yet been occupied by the Normans . These rebellions rapidly collapsed as William moved against them , building castles and installing garrisons as he had already done in the south . Edwin and Morcar again submitted , while Gospatric fled to Scotland , as did Edgar the Ætheling and his family , who may have been involved in these revolts . Meanwhile , Harold 's sons , who had taken refuge in Ireland , raided Somerset , Devon and Cornwall from the sea . 
 = = = Revolts of 1069 = = = 
 Early in 1069 the newly installed Norman Earl of Northumbria , Robert de Comines , and several hundred soldiers accompanying him were massacred at Durham ; the Northumbrian rebellion was joined by Edgar , Gospatric , Siward Barn and other rebels who had taken refuge in Scotland . The castellan of York , Robert fitzRichard , was defeated and killed , and the rebels besieged the Norman castle at York . William hurried north with an army , defeated the rebels outside York and pursued them into the city , massacring the inhabitants and bringing the revolt to an end . He built a second castle at York , strengthened Norman forces in Northumbria and then returned south . A subsequent local uprising was crushed by the garrison of York . Harold 's sons launched a second raid from Ireland and were defeated in Devon by Norman forces under Count Brian , a son of Eudes , Count of <unk> . In August or September 1069 a large fleet sent by Sweyn II of Denmark arrived off the coast of England , sparking a new wave of rebellions across the country . After abortive raids in the south , the Danes joined forces with a new Northumbrian uprising , which was also joined by Edgar , Gospatric and the other exiles from Scotland as well as Waltheof . The combined Danish and English forces defeated the Norman garrison at York , seized the castles and took control of Northumbria , although a raid into Lincolnshire led by Edgar was defeated by the Norman garrison of Lincoln . 
 At the same time resistance flared up again in western Mercia , where the forces of Eadric the Wild , together with his Welsh allies and further rebel forces from Cheshire and Shropshire , attacked the castle at Shrewsbury . In the south @-@ west , rebels from Devon and Cornwall attacked the Norman garrison at Exeter , but were repulsed by the defenders and scattered by a Norman relief force under Count Brian . Other rebels from Dorset , Somerset and neighbouring areas besieged Montacute Castle but were defeated by a Norman army gathered from London , Winchester and Salisbury under Geoffrey of Coutances . Meanwhile , William attacked the Danes , who had moored for the winter south of the Humber in Lincolnshire , and drove them back to the north bank . Leaving Robert of Mortain in charge of Lincolnshire , he turned west and defeated the Mercian rebels in battle at Stafford . When the Danes attempted to return to Lincolnshire , the Norman forces there again drove them back across the Humber . William advanced into Northumbria , defeating an attempt to block his crossing of the swollen River Aire at Pontefract . The Danes fled at his approach , and he occupied York . He bought off the Danes , who agreed to leave England in the spring , and during the winter of 1069 – 70 his forces systematically devastated Northumbria in the Harrying of the North , subduing all resistance . As a symbol of his renewed authority over the north , William ceremonially wore his crown at York on Christmas Day 1069 . 
 In early 1070 , having secured the submission of Waltheof and Gospatric , and driven Edgar and his remaining supporters back to Scotland , William returned to Mercia , where he based himself at Chester and crushed all remaining resistance in the area before returning to the south . Papal legates arrived and at Easter re @-@ crowned William , which would have symbolically reasserted his right to the kingdom . William also oversaw a purge of prelates from the Church , most notably Stigand , who was deposed from Canterbury . The papal legates also imposed penances on William and those of his supporters who had taken part in Hastings and the subsequent campaigns . As well as Canterbury , the see of York had become vacant following the death of Ealdred in September 1069 . Both sees were filled by men loyal to William : Lanfranc , abbot of William 's foundation at Caen received Canterbury while Thomas of Bayeux , one of William 's chaplains , was installed at York . Some other bishoprics and abbeys also received new bishops and abbots and William confiscated some of the wealth of the English monasteries , which had served as repositories for the assets of the native nobles . 
 = = = Danish troubles = = = 
 In 1070 Sweyn II of Denmark arrived to take personal command of his fleet and renounced the earlier agreement to withdraw , sending troops into the Fens to join forces with English rebels led by Hereward the Wake , based on the Isle of Ely . Sweyn soon accepted a further payment of Danegeld from William , and returned home . After the departure of the Danes the Fenland rebels remained at large , protected by the marshes , and early in 1071 there was a final outbreak of rebel activity in the area . Edwin and Morcar again turned against William , and although Edwin was quickly betrayed and killed , Morcar reached Ely , where he and Hereward were joined by exiled rebels who had sailed from Scotland . William arrived with an army and a fleet to finish off this last pocket of resistance . After some costly failures the Normans managed to construct a pontoon to reach the Isle of Ely , defeated the rebels at the bridgehead and stormed the island , marking the effective end of English resistance . Morcar was imprisoned for the rest of his life ; Hereward was pardoned and had his lands returned to him . 
 = = = Last resistance = = = 
 William faced difficulties in his continental possessions in 1071 , but in 1072 he returned to England and marched north to confront King Malcolm III of Scotland . This campaign , which included a land army supported by a fleet , resulted in the Treaty of Abernethy in which Malcolm expelled Edgar the Ætheling from Scotland and agreed to some degree of subordination to William . The exact status of this subordination was unclear – the treaty merely stated that Malcolm became William 's man . Whether this meant only for Cumbria and Lothian or for the whole Scottish kingdom was left ambiguous . 
 In 1075 , during William 's absence , Ralph de Gael , the Earl of Norfolk , and Roger de Breteuil the Earl of Hereford , conspired to overthrow him in the Revolt of the Earls . The exact reason for the rebellion is unclear , but it was launched at the wedding of Ralph to a relative of Roger 's , held at Exning . Another earl , Waltheof , despite being one of William 's favourites , was also involved , and some Breton lords were ready to offer support . Ralph also requested Danish aid . William remained in Normandy while his men in England subdued the revolt . Roger was unable to leave his stronghold in Herefordshire because of efforts by Wulfstan , the Bishop of Worcester , and Æthelwig , the Abbot of Evesham . Ralph was bottled up in Norwich Castle by the combined efforts of Odo of Bayeux , Geoffrey of Coutances , Richard fitzGilbert , and William de Warenne . Norwich was besieged and surrendered , and Ralph went into exile . Meanwhile , the Danish king 's brother , Cnut , had finally arrived in England with a fleet of 200 ships , but he was too late as Norwich had already surrendered . The Danes then raided along the coast before returning home . William did not return to England until later in 1075 , to deal with the Danish threat and the aftermath of the rebellion , celebrating Christmas at Winchester . Roger and Waltheof were kept in prison , where Waltheof was executed in May 1076 . By that time William had returned to the continent , where Ralph was continuing the rebellion from Brittany . 
 = = Control of England = = 
 Once England had been conquered , the Normans faced many challenges in maintaining control . They were few in number compared to the native English population ; including those from other parts of France , historians estimate the number of Norman landholders at around 8000 . William 's followers expected and received lands and titles in return for their service in the invasion , but William claimed ultimate possession of the land in England over which his armies had given him de facto control , and asserted the right to dispose of it as he saw fit . Henceforth , all land was " held " directly from the king in feudal tenure in return for military service . A Norman lord typically had properties located in a piecemeal fashion throughout England and Normandy , and not in a single geographic block . 
 To find the lands to compensate his Norman followers , William initially confiscated the estates of all the English lords who had fought and died with Harold and redistributed part of their lands . These confiscations led to revolts , which resulted in more confiscations , a cycle that continued for five years after the Battle of Hastings . To put down and prevent further rebellions the Normans constructed castles and fortifications in unprecedented numbers , initially mostly on the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey pattern . Historian Robert Liddiard remarks that " to glance at the urban landscape of Norwich , Durham or Lincoln is to be forcibly reminded of the impact of the Norman invasion " . William and his barons also exercised tighter control over inheritance of property by widows and daughters , often forcing marriages to Normans . 
 A measure of William 's success in taking control is that , from 1072 until the Capetian conquest of Normandy in 1204 , William and his successors were largely absentee rulers . For example , after 1072 , William spent more than 75 per cent of his time in France rather than England . While he needed to be personally present in Normandy to defend the realm from foreign invasion and put down internal revolts , he set up royal administrative structures that enabled him to rule England from a distance . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 = = = Elite replacement = = = 
 A direct consequence of the invasion was the almost total elimination of the old English aristocracy and the loss of English control over the Catholic Church in England . William systematically dispossessed English landowners and conferred their property on his continental followers . The Domesday Book meticulously documents the impact of this colossal programme of expropriation , revealing that by 1086 only about 5 per cent of land in England south of the Tees was left in English hands . Even this tiny residue was further diminished in the decades that followed , the elimination of native landholding being most complete in southern parts of the country . 
 Natives were also removed from high governmental and ecclesiastical office . After 1075 all earldoms were held by Normans , and Englishmen were only occasionally appointed as sheriffs . Likewise in the Church , senior English office @-@ holders were either expelled from their positions or kept in place for their lifetimes and replaced by foreigners when they died . By 1096 no bishopric was held by any Englishman , and English abbots became uncommon , especially in the larger monasteries . 
 = = = English emigration = = = 
 Following the conquest , many Anglo @-@ Saxons , including groups of nobles , fled the country for Scotland , Ireland , or Scandinavia . Members of King Harold Godwinson 's family sought refuge in Ireland and used their bases in that country for unsuccessful invasions of England . The largest single exodus occurred in the 1070s , when a group of Anglo @-@ Saxons in a fleet of 235 ships sailed for the Byzantine Empire . The empire became a popular destination for many English nobles and soldiers , as the Byzantines were in need of mercenaries . The English became the predominant element in the elite Varangian Guard , until then a largely Scandinavian unit , from which the emperor 's bodyguard was drawn . Some of the English migrants were settled in Byzantine frontier regions on the Black Sea coast , and established towns with names such as New London and New York . 
 = = = Governmental systems = = = 
 Before the Normans arrived , Anglo @-@ Saxon governmental systems were more sophisticated than their counterparts in Normandy . All of England was divided into administrative units called shires , with subdivisions ; the royal court was the centre of government , and a justice system based on local and regional tribunals existed to secure the rights of free men . Shires were run by officials known as shire reeves or sheriffs . Most medieval governments were always on the move , holding court wherever the weather and food or other matters were best at the moment ; England had a permanent treasury at Winchester before William 's conquest . One major reason for the strength of the English monarchy was the wealth of the kingdom , built on the English system of taxation that included a land tax , or the geld . English coinage was also superior to most of the other currency in use in northwestern Europe , and the ability to mint coins was a royal monopoly . The English kings had also developed the system of issuing writs to their officials , in addition to the normal medieval practice of issuing charters . Writs were either instructions to an official or group of officials , or notifications of royal actions such as appointments to office or a grant of some sort . 
 This sophisticated medieval form of government was handed over to the Normans and was the foundation of further developments . They kept the framework of government but made changes in the personnel , although at first the new king attempted to keep some natives in office . By the end of William 's reign most of the officials of government and the royal household were Normans . The language of official documents also changed , from Old English to Latin . The forest laws were introduced , leading to the setting aside of large sections of England as royal forest . The Domesday survey was an administrative catalogue of the landholdings of the kingdom , and was unique to medieval Europe . It was divided into sections based on the shires , and listed all the landholdings of each tenant @-@ in @-@ chief of the king as well as who had held the land before the conquest . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 One of the most obvious effects of the conquest was the introduction of Anglo @-@ Norman , a northern dialect of Old French , as the language of the ruling classes in England , displacing Old English . French words entered the English language , and a further sign of the shift was the usage of names common in France instead of Anglo @-@ Saxon names . Male names such as William , Robert and Richard soon became common ; female names changed more slowly . The Norman invasion had little impact on placenames , which had changed significantly after earlier Scandinavian invasions . It is not known precisely how much English the Norman invaders learned , nor how much the knowledge of French spread among the lower classes , but the demands of trade and basic communication probably meant that at least some of the Normans and native English were bilingual . Nevertheless , William the Conqueror never developed a working knowledge of English and for centuries afterwards English was not well understood by the nobility . 
 = = = Immigration and intermarriage = = = 
 An estimated 8000 Normans and other <unk> settled in England as a result of the conquest , although exact figures cannot be established . Some of these new residents intermarried with the native English , but the extent of this practice in the years immediately after Hastings is unclear . Several marriages are attested between Norman men and English women during the years before 1100 , but such marriages were uncommon . Most Normans continued to contract marriages with other Normans or other continental families rather than with the English . Within a century of the invasion , intermarriage between the native English and the Norman immigrants had become common . By the early 1160s , Ailred of Rievaulx was writing that intermarriage was common in all levels of society . 
 = = = Society = = = 
 The impact of the conquest on the lower levels of English society is difficult to assess . The major change was the elimination of slavery in England , which had disappeared by the middle of the 12th century . There were about 28 @,@ 000 slaves listed in Domesday Book in 1086 , fewer than had been enumerated for 1066 . In some places , such as Essex , the decline in slaves was 20 per cent for the 20 years . The main reasons for the decline in slaveholding appear to have been the disapproval of the Church and the cost of supporting slaves , who unlike serfs , had to be maintained entirely by their owners . The practice of slavery was not outlawed , and the Leges Henrici Primi from the reign of King Henry I continue to mention slaveholding as legal . 
 Many of the free peasants of Anglo @-@ Saxon society appear to have lost status and become indistinguishable from the non @-@ free serfs . Whether this change was due entirely to the conquest is unclear , but the invasion and its after @-@ effects probably accelerated a process already under way . The spread of towns and increase in nucleated settlements in the countryside , rather than scattered farms , was probably accelerated by the coming of the Normans to England . The lifestyle of the peasantry probably did not greatly change in the decades after 1066 . Although earlier historians argued that women became less free and lost rights with the conquest , current scholarship has mostly rejected this view . Little is known about women other than those in the landholding class , so no conclusions can be drawn about peasant women 's status after 1066 . <unk> appear to have continued to influence political life mainly through their kinship relationships . Both before and after 1066 aristocratic women could own land , and some women continued to have the ability to dispose of their property as they wished . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Debate over the conquest started almost immediately . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , when discussing the death of William the Conqueror , denounced him and the conquest in verse , but the king 's obituary notice from William of Poitiers , a Frenchman , was laudatory and full of praise . Historians since then have argued over the facts of the matter and how to interpret them , with little agreement . The theory or myth of the " Norman Yoke " arose in the 17th century , the idea that Anglo @-@ Saxon society had been freer and more equal than the society that emerged after the conquest . This theory owes more to the period it was developed in than to historical facts , but it continues to be used in both political and popular thought to the present day . 
 In the 20th and 21st centuries historians have focused less on the rightness or wrongness of the conquest itself , instead concentrating on the effects of the invasion . Some , such as Richard Southern , have seen the conquest as a critical turning point in history . Southern stated that " no country in Europe , between the rise of the barbarian kingdoms and the 20th century , has undergone so radical a change in so short a time as England experienced after 1066 . " Other historians , such as H. G. Richardson and G. O. Sayles , believe that the transformation was less radical . In more general terms , one writer has called the conquest " the last echo of the national migrations that characterized the early Middle Ages " . The debate over the impact of the conquest depends on how change after 1066 is measured . If Anglo @-@ Saxon England was already evolving before the invasion , with the introduction of feudalism , castles or other changes in society , then the conquest , while important , did not represent radical reform . But the change was dramatic if measured by the elimination of the English nobility or the loss of Old English as a literary language . Nationalistic arguments have been made on both sides of the debate , with the Normans cast as either the persecutors of the English or the rescuers of the country from a decadent Anglo @-@ Saxon nobility . 
 = Ngoia Pollard Napaltjarri = 
 Ngoia Pollard Napaltjarri ( born c . 1948 ; also known as <unk> ) is a <unk> @-@ speaking Indigenous artist from Australia 's Western Desert region . Ngoia Pollard married Jack Tjampitjinpa , who became an artist working with the Papunya Tula company , and they had five children . 
 Having commenced painting in 1997 , Ngoia Pollard won a major regional art prize in 2004 . She went on to win the painting prize in the 2006 National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Awards . Her works are held in major private and public collections , including the National Gallery of Australia . 
 = = Life = = 
 Daughter of <unk> Nangala and Jim Tjungurrayi , Ngoia Pollard was born circa 1948 in Haasts Bluff , Northern Territory , west of Alice Springs . The ambiguity around the year of birth is in part because Indigenous Australians operate using a different conception of time , often estimating dates through comparisons with the occurrence of other events . 
 'Napaljarri ' ( in Warlpiri ) or ' Napaltjarri ' ( in Western Desert dialects ) is a skin name , one of sixteen used to denote the subsections or subgroups in the kinship system of central Australian Indigenous people . These names define kinship relationships that influence preferred marriage partners and may be associated with particular totems . Although they may be used as terms of address , they are not surnames in the sense used by Europeans . Thus ' Ngoia Pollard ' is the element of the artist 's name that is specifically hers . 
 Ngoia Pollard attended school at Papunya , and worked at the mission kitchen there . She married Jack Tjampitjinpa and they moved to Kintore , and then on to Mount Liebig ( now <unk> <unk> ) which at that time was unoccupied , about fifty kilometres west of Haasts Bluff . It was one of many outstations established by people from Papunya in the 1970s . Ngoia Pollard and Jack had five children . Jack died in 1988 ; as of 2008 Ngoia was still living at Mount Liebig . 
 = = Art = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Contemporary Indigenous art of the western desert began when Indigenous men at Papunya began painting in 1971 , assisted by teacher Geoffrey Bardon . Their work , which used acrylic paints to create designs representing body painting and ground sculptures , rapidly spread across Indigenous communities of central Australia , particularly following the commencement of a government @-@ sanctioned art program in central Australia in 1983 . By the 1980s and 1990s , such work was being exhibited internationally . The first artists , including all of the founders of the Papunya Tula artists ' company , had been men , and there was resistance amongst the Pintupi men of central Australia to women painting . 
 However , there was a desire among many women to participate , and in the 1990s large numbers of them began to create paintings . In the western desert communities such as Kintore , Yuendumu , Balgo , and on the outstations , people were beginning to create art works expressly for exhibition and sale . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Ngoia Pollard began her contemporary artistic career by assisting her husband , who painted with Papunya Tula artists for several years prior to his death . In 1997 , Ngoia Pollard began painting independently , and in 2004 won the first prize in a central Australian painting competition supported by the region 's major newspaper , the <unk> Advocate . In 2006 , Ngoia Pollard won the painting prize in the National Aboriginal & Torres Strait Islander Art Awards , with her work Swamps west of <unk> . Another of her works painted in the same year , and carrying the same title , was acquired by the Art Gallery of South Australia . 2006 was also marked by an artist 's residency in Copenhagen , shared with fellow Indigenous artist Lilly Kelly Napangardi , whom she had known since they attended school together in the 1960s . 
 Collections holding her works include the National Gallery of Australia . She has had solo exhibitions with private galleries in Sydney and Perth . 
 Western Desert artists such as Ngoia Pollard frequently paint particular ' dreamings ' , or stories , for which they have personal responsibility or rights . Many of Ngoia 's works relate to the region of <unk> , or Mount Liebig , in the country to the west of Haasts Bluff ; this is her father 's country : 
 ... infused with the spiritual power of the narrative of the <unk> . This snake lives in the swamps and lakes near <unk> ( <unk> ) , unoccupied ' dangerous territory ' north west of Mt . Liebig . The transcendental calm of her paintings , with their drifts of monochrome clouds of dots , belie the danger of the land and its creatures that they depict . 
 Her works are often characterised by the use of oval shapes representing swamps and lakes . Her palette is usually black and white , though red may be used to highlight oval forms . The dotted forms represent the ground cracking as water dries up . Other themes in her work include the sand hills of the desert country . 
 = = Collections = = 
 National Gallery of Australia 
 Corrigan Collection 
 = William of Wrotham = 
 William of Wrotham or William de Wrotham ( died c . 1217 ) was a medieval English royal administrator and clergyman . Although a late 13th @-@ century source says that William held a royal office under King Henry II of England ( reigned 1154 – 1189 ) , the first contemporary reference to William is in 1197 , when he became responsible among other things for the royal tin mines . He also held ecclesiastical office , eventually becoming Archdeacon of Taunton , and served King John of England as an administrator of ecclesiastical lands and a collector of taxes . 
 William 's main administrative work was naval . He was in charge of the royal fleet in the south of England in 1205 , and was one of those responsible for the development of Portsmouth as a naval dockyard . He continued to be involved in naval matters until 1214 or later , but by 1215 he had joined the First Barons ' War against John . After John 's death in 1216 , William returned to the royalist cause . He probably died in late 1217 . Known to a contemporary chronicler as one of John 's " evil advisers " , William is said by modern historians to have had a " special responsibility for ports , customs , and the navy " , and was " keeper of ports " , a forerunner of the office of First Lord of the Admiralty . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Little is known of William 's background or family , except that his father Godwin held land in Shipbourne , near Wrotham in Kent , perhaps as a vassal of the Archbishops of Canterbury . William 's brother Richard was named as William 's deputy in 1207 . 
 According to late 13th @-@ century documents , the Hundred Rolls , King Henry II gave William the office of steward of Exmoor , and lands at North Petherton , Somerset . William was the prebend of St Decumans in the cathedral chapter of Bath Cathedral by 9 May 1204 . He claimed to have held the office since 1194 during a later dispute with Savaric fitzGeldewin , the Bishop of Bath and another canon of the cathedral , Roger <unk> , who claimed the prebend . By 23 December 1205 , William had secured a papal judgement against Roger . 
 William may have owed his advancement in royal service to Geoffrey fitzPeter , a royal judge . In 1197 he granted William a manor at Sutton @-@ at @-@ Hone , Kent , which later was supposed to become a hospital , but instead eventually became a preceptory for the Knights Hospitaller . From 1197 William was responsible for the collection of revenues from Geoffrey 's lands at Lydford , Devon , and held the office of chief forester of Somerset ; it is unclear to whom he owed that position . 
 = = Royal service = = 
 In 1197 , Hubert Walter , who was Archbishop of Canterbury and Justiciar , appointed William to the administration of the royal stannaries , or tin mines , and in 1198 William was placed in charge of tin production , an office later known as the Lord Warden of the Stannaries . Under his control the mines became much more lucrative for the king , and accounted for a total of £ 1100 in William 's first year of administration . As part of his administrative work he became the first warden of Lydford Castle after it was constructed in the 1190s . In 1199 he was involved in a dispute over the stannaries with another official , Hugh Bardulf , temporarily losing control of them – along with his office as sheriff – in 1200 . The reason for the loss of these offices is uncertain . After restoration to office , he remained as Lord Warden of the Stannaries until 1215 . 
 In 1198 and 1199 , William was Sheriff of Devon and Sheriff of Cornwall , along with another royal servant , and served as a royal justice . In 1200 he was recorded as a receiver of the carucage , a tax on land , in the Pipe roll ; whether this meant that he was a local or a national collector of the tax is unclear . By 12 September 1204 , William was Archdeacon of Taunton in the Diocese of Bath , and he witnessed the election of Jocelin of Wells as the new bishop of the diocese . He was jointly placed in charge of the mints of London and Canterbury in 1205 , along with Reginald de Cornhill , with whom he also shared the collection of the tax of a fifteenth on merchants , a post the two had held since 1202 . In May 1205 William , along with de Cornhill , was given custody of one of three dies for the mint at Chichester ; in July the king gave William 's custody to Simon of Wells , the Bishop of Chichester . William was one of the officials in charge of the collection of a tax of a thirteenth in 1207 . 
 William was also placed in charge of vacant ecclesiastical offices , collecting their revenues for the king . He performed this office for the Diocese of Worcester around 1200 , the Diocese of Winchester in 1204 , for Glastonbury Abbey in 1205 , and for Whitby Abbey in 1206 and 1209 . From his actions it can be assumed that Wrotham was a member of the royal household , probably working in the wardrobe . 
 = = Naval administration = = 
 William 's main administrative work concerned the navy . In 1204 he , de Cornhill , and William of Furnell were placed in charge of granting wool export licences . William of Wrotham was also one of the officials charged with supervising the ships dispatched to the coasts in 1204 , after the loss of Normandy exposed England to invasion by the French . In 1205 he was again one of the keepers of the royal fleet along the south coast . William was in charge of the 17 ships based in Romney , Rye , Shoreham , Southampton , Winchelsea , and Exeter , while the rest of the fleet came under Cornhill 's control . In the same year , he was also in charge of naval spending for the attempted invasion of France , which in June alone totalled over 470 pounds . William surrendered custody of Taunton Castle to Peter de <unk> in July and was in charge of purchasing the royal wine in August . No further naval duties are recorded until November , when along with Cornhill he was responsible for assessing the ports . 
 In 1206 William was in charge of the naval forces in the Cinque Ports and commanded the fleet that invaded Poitou . Whether he accompanied the fleet or stayed in England after it sailed is unclear ; according to two historians – F. W. Brooks and R. W. Powell – it is more likely he stayed . From 1206 until 1215 he was effectively commander of King John 's navy , and helped to develop Portsmouth as a royal dockyard . In 1208 William was put in charge of ensuring that no ships sailed without royal permission . That year he also oversaw the naval preparations made by the Cinque Ports . The purpose of these preparations is unknown ; the Annals of Dunstable ascribe to John a desire to oppress the Cinque Ports . During May 1208 a royal order was issued that William 's deputies in all the seaports should seize any ships in the ports that were from foreign countries , excluding Denmark , Norway and other countries that did not oppose John 's diplomatic efforts . A gap in the governmental records does not allow a detailed view of William 's activities for the next years , until 1212 , when William is shown performing many of the same duties as earlier . He was in charge of repair of some ships and the construction of a large new ship , named the <unk> , owned by the king . William was also responsible for impressing privately owned merchant ships into royal service . These ships were used in the naval action of the Battle of Damme at <unk> in 1213 , when a fleet under William Longespee , the Earl of Salisbury , destroyed a substantial French naval force and sacked the town of Damme . 
 In late 1213 William was directing the efforts of the seaports of south @-@ western England and the Cinque Ports in naval affairs . He was also responsible for the setting up of a supply depot for the navy in June 1213 , for which he received supplies from the diocese of Chichester . In 1214 William had custody of some royal prisoners . The same year , the king ordered him to return a merchant ship if he had indeed seized it from its owner , Joscelin de Hampton . Also in 1214 , William co @-@ founded the hospital of Domus Dei in Portsmouth with Peter des Roches , the Bishop of Winchester . The foundation was confirmed by the king in October 1214 . 
 John rewarded William for his service with churches in Sheppey and East Malling , which were granted in 1207 , and the right to oversee the royal forests in Cornwall and Devon . Other grants included lands in Dartford and Sutton @-@ at @-@ Hone that had escheated to the crown , lands in Westminster and a prebend in the royal ecclesiastical foundation at Hastings . 
 = = Later years and legacy = = 
 During John 's reign , Pope Innocent III placed an interdict on England , forbidding public celebration of sacred rites in English churches . William supported John , and remained in England . The medieval chronicler Roger of Wendover named William as one of John 's " evil advisers " , or " most wicked counsellors " . Modern historians argue that Roger 's account of John 's reign , while containing some truth , was written to defame men who were prominent in the early years of King Henry III , John 's son who had succeeded his father in October 1216 . According to Nicholas Vincent , while Roger 's account of the exactions and crimes of the members of his list of evil advisers certainly had a strong basis of truth , it was also greatly exaggerated . W. L. Warren agrees and points out that many of the details of Roger 's accounts that can be checked with other records are wrong , making the other parts of his stories suspect . 
 In 1215 William joined the baronial rebellion against John , and lost his naval offices , the royal forester 's office for Somerset , and custody of Lydford Castle . In May 1216 the king offered William a safe conduct , which noted that William had fled overseas . The letters were witnessed by Peter des Roches . In mid @-@ 1217 , he rejoined the royalist cause , returning to the side of Henry III . This action regained him some of his lost lands . 
 William last appeared in documents on 25 July 1217 and was dead by 16 February 1218 , probably before 2 December 1217 , when someone else is mentioned as archdeacon . On 16 February 1218 , John Marshall became the guardian of Richard , William 's nephew and heir , who was the son of William 's brother Richard . 
 William has been described as having a " special responsibility for ports , customs , and the navy " by the historian Robert Bartlett . He is usually given the title of " keeper of ports " or " keeper of galleys " , which Ralph Turner equates with being First Lord of the Admiralty in later history . Sometimes this would be given as " custos <unk> maris " in Latin , or " keeper of the seaports " . At other times he was titled " keeper of the king 's ships " . Bartlett also called William " one of the king 's most important administrators " . Charles Young said that William 's service to King John was a " distinguished administrative career " , and J. E. A. Joliffe called William one of the " greatest of the king 's clerks " . 
 = Beaver Brook State Park = 
 Beaver Brook State Park is an undeveloped state park located in the Windham and Chaplin , Connecticut , United States . The park encompasses Bibbins Pond , also known as Beaver Brook Pond , and the acreage to its north , and the Beaver Brook runs through the park and exits in the south . The park is listed as an undeveloped walk @-@ in park with hunting as an activity , but it is better known for its trout fishing . Beaver Brook has abundant stocks of wild trout , but is restricted to catch and release only . The Air Line State Park Trail runs along the park 's northern boundary . 
 = = History = = 
 The state park was acquired using funds bequeathed by George Dudley Seymour to be used for the express purpose of purchasing public recreation areas for the people of the State of Connecticut . The donation of the park lands was announced in 1955 . Prior to the creation of the park , it was reported that the trout pools were developed for fishing before 1955 by H. Keeney Lathrop . According to Joseph Leary , " [ t ] he central feature of the park is Bibbins Pond , sometimes called Beaver Brook Pond . " The park encompasses Bibbins Pond , and the acreage to its north , but the park 's name may derive from a beaver pond that was once present . The Connecticut State Register and Manual notes a boundary increase from 165 acres in 1955 to 391 acres in the 1957 . The park achieved its present size of 401 acres by 1960 . In 2013 , the State of Connecticut opened a contract to improve and repair the Bibbins Pond Dam . Beaver Brook that runs both north and south of the pond and continues beyond the park limits . 
 = = Activities = = 
 The Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection notes that the Beaver Brook State Park is an undeveloped walk @-@ in park with hunting as an activity . The <unk> 's Guide to Connecticut states that the Beaver Brook is a class 1 Wild Trout Management Area and is described as having abundant wild trout with no seasonal restrictions , but is catch and release only . The book further notes that only an artificial fly or lure with a single , barb @-@ less free @-@ swinging hook can be used in this area . Only small , motor @-@ less vessels are permitted on the ponds from May 16 to October 31 . Beaver Brook State Park is connected to the Air Line State Park Trail , which runs through the park . The site also includes a <unk> which can be accessed via three different routes . In 1994 , a Connecticut state record for Brook Trout was caught in Beaver Brook by Sean Wozniak . As of 2014 , the Brook Trout record was last surpassed in 1998 by David Andes in Blackwells Brook in Brooklyn , Connecticut . 
 The park is accessible from the junction of Connecticut Route 203 and Connecticut Route 14 in Windham Center and by following Route 14 east for 0 @.@ 7 miles and turning left onto Back Road . Proceeding down Back Road for 2 @.@ 5 miles leads to the pond on the left , and there is no parking fee at the park . 
 = Tropical Storm Erin ( 2007 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Erin was the second largest tropical cyclone to make landfall in the United States in the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season . The fifth named storm of the season , it formed in the Gulf of Mexico on August 14 from a persistent area of convection . It attained tropical storm status the next day , and on August 16 Erin made landfall near Lamar , Texas , and persisted over land across Texas before moving northward into Oklahoma . Due to the brown ocean effect Erin intensified after landfall . The storm resulted in at least 16 fatalities and worsened an already @-@ severe flooding issue in Texas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 1 , an area of convection developed just south of Jamaica in association with a trough of low pressure . The system tracked west @-@ northwestward , and by August 10 consisted of a broad surface trough with minimal shower activity . Convection increased on August 11 , and by August 12 the interaction between a tropical wave and an upper @-@ level low in the area resulted in a large area of disorganized thunderstorms extending from the western Caribbean Sea into the central Bahamas . Upper @-@ level winds gradually became more beneficial for development , and on August 13 a broad low pressure area formed about 90 miles ( 145 km ) north @-@ northeast of Cancún , Quintana Roo . Late on August 14 , a Hurricane Hunters flight into the system reported a small circulation center , but at the time was not well @-@ defined enough to result in the initiation of tropical cyclone advisories . However , deep convection was maintained near the increasingly organizing center , and at 0300 UTC on August 15 the National Hurricane Center classified it as Tropical Depression Five about 425 miles ( 685 km ) southeast of Brownsville , Texas . 
 In the overnight hours after formation , the storm was disorganized with a ragged and ill @-@ defined center of circulation . Located to the south of a mid to upper @-@ level ridge over the southern United States , the system tracked to the west @-@ northwest through an environment conducive for further strengthening ; an upper @-@ level anticyclone developed over the central Gulf of Mexico , and sea surface temperatures along its track were warm . The cloud pattern became better organized , maintaining a large area of convection with curved rainbands and well @-@ established outflow . Based on reports from Hurricane Hunters , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Erin at 1530 UTC on August 15 about 250 miles ( 400 km ) east of Brownsville , Texas . As it continued northwestward , Erin remained disorganized and failed to strengthen beyond minimal tropical storm status . At 1200 UTC on August 16 the cyclone made landfall near Lamar , Texas as it weakened to tropical depression status . Three hours later , the National Hurricane Center ceased issuing advisories on Erin as warning responsibility was transferred to the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center . 
 Drifting northwestward through Texas , Tropical Depression Erin maintained an area of convection near the center , with its widespread but scattered rainbands dropping moderate to heavy precipitation . By August 17 , the winds decreased to 20 mph ( 30 km / h ) , with higher gusts . The system turned to the north @-@ northeast on August 18 , while heavy bands of thunderstorms continued to rotate around the center of Erin . Early on August 19 after entering Oklahoma , the remnants of Erin suddenly re @-@ intensified to maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) a short distance west of Oklahoma City . The Norman , Oklahoma National Weather Service remarked the intensification " [ resulted ] in what amounts to an inland tropical storm ; " at 0930 UTC the system presented an eye @-@ like feature and a spiral rainband , and produced wind gusts of over 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . However , a few hours later , the depression began weakening again , and late on August 19 Erin weakened significantly as the circulation dissipated over northeastern Oklahoma . Despite displaying tropical characteristics , the National Hurricane Center determined the system was not a tropical cyclone over Oklahoma , and classified it as a " low " . The low continued into southeastern Kansas before dissipating , feeding moisture northward toward a frontal system extending from the Midwestern United States through the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . Its remnant mid @-@ level circulation then moved eastward across Missouri , Kentucky , and Virginia before losing identity as it moved out into the Atlantic Ocean . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Immediately upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm watch from Freeport , Texas to the United States / Mexico border ; at the same time , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch southward to Rio San Fernando . Shortly before attaining tropical storm status , the watch in Texas was upgraded to a tropical storm warning . Late on August 15 , the warning was extended to San Luis Pass , while the watch in Mexico was discontinued . As Erin made landfall , the warning was canceled , and several flood watches and warnings were issued for counties across southeastern Texas . Upon moving into Oklahoma , flood and flash flood warnings were issued for several counties . 
 Governor Rick Perry activated the National Guard and mobilized emergency personnel to the region expected to be affected by the storm . Erin was expected to bring flooding to the region , which had already been declared a disaster area on August 7 , 2007 due to widespread flooding on the Nueces River basin ; this area remained flooded as of August 15 , 2007 . On August 15 , oil futures rose to $ 74 @.@ 01 ( USD ) , due to fears of Erin disrupting oil supplies produced on Texan coasts , combined with low oil inventories . As a result of the threat from the storm , Shell Oil Company evacuated 188 workers on oil platforms in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 By midday on August 15 , rainbands with gusty winds began affecting the Texas coastline . As it moved ashore , the storm produced heavy rainfall near and to the or northeast of its path , reaching 11 @.@ 02 inches ( 280 mm ) at a station in Lockwood . The storm caused several bayous in the Houston area to reach or exceed flood levels . Across southeastern Texas , the cyclone spawned several funnel clouds , and near IAH an EF0 tornado was reported . Wind gusts from Erin were minor across the state , peaking at 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) at Palacios with an unofficial report of 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) at Jamaica Beach . Upon moving ashore , the storm produced a minor storm surge peaking at 3 @.@ 22 feet ( 0 @.@ 98 m ) at Pleasure Pier , which caused minor beach erosion . 
 In Clear Lake City , heavy rainfall collapsed a portion of a grocery store roof , killing two workers . The precipitation caused moderate flooding across eastern portions of Harris County ; over 400 homes and 40 businesses were flooded . Flooding across the Greater Houston area briefly halted the METRORail and closed several state roads . One person drowned after driving into a retention pond . Several people required rescue assistance , and in Comal County a car accident caused three fatalities . The passage of the storm temporarily left about 20 @,@ 000 electrical customers without power , though most outages were quickly restored . In San Antonio , one body was recovered from a creek and another died after driving into a flooded road and was swept into a drainage ditch in which four others survived . In <unk> , two people were killed when they were swept away stalled over Sister Creek . In Taylor County , near Abilene , flooding killed one person and forced the evacuation of about 2 @,@ 000 people . Damage in Texas totaled over $ 45 million ( 2007 USD ) . 
 = = = Oklahoma = = = 
 After its unexpected redevelopment over Oklahoma , widespread damage was also reported there . Several communities in central Oklahoma were flooded due to the heavy rainfall . Watonga , Kingfisher and Geary were the hardest @-@ hit communities , where many houses and buildings were inundated . The weather forced the cancellation of the Hydro Fair as the carnival rides were not safe in heavy rain and high wind . Winds in Watonga gusted as high as 82 mph ( 131 km / h ) , which damaged numerous trees and power lines and heavily damaged mobile homes . The entire community lost power , as did about 15 @,@ 000 customers in total in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area . A section of Interstate 40 was also closed for a while . 
 One person drowned in a cellar in Fort Cobb , and another drowned in Kingfisher . Another storm @-@ related death took place in Seminole . Three others were found dead after a weather @-@ related automobile accident also near Carnegie . Another automobile accident fatality took place in Okmulgee County but it is unclear if the event was storm @-@ related . Damage amounted to over $ 2 million ( 2007 USD ) . 
 = = = Missouri = = = 
 Although its surface circulation had dissipated , its circulation aloft remained intact and led to a burst of rainfall early on August 20 . The 11 @.@ 94 inches / 303 @.@ 3 mm that fell at Miller became the wettest Missouri rainfall total associated with a tropical cyclone , or its remains , since at least 1972 . One person died in Sleeper when he drove into flood waters which had swept away a bridge he was attempting to navigate onto . Nine water rescues occurred along the I @-@ 44 corridor , mostly caused by Erin 's rainfall . Damage totaled about $ 19 @.@ 8 million ( 2007 USD ) in the state , primarily in Polk County . 
 = Beauty Revealed = 
 Beauty Revealed is an 1828 self @-@ portrait by Sarah Goodridge , painted in miniature with watercolors on a piece of ivory . Depicting the artist 's bared breasts surrounded by pale cloth , the 6 @.@ 7 @-@ by @-@ 8 @-@ centimetre ( 2 @.@ 6 by 3 @.@ 1 in ) painting – originally on a paper backing – is set in a modern case . Goodridge , aged forty when she completed the miniature , depicts breasts which appear imbued with a " balance , paleness , and buoyancy " by the harmony of light , color , and balance . The surrounding cloth draws the viewer to focus on them , leading to the body being " erased " . 
 Goodridge gifted the portrait to statesman Daniel Webster , who was a frequent subject and possibly a lover , following the death of his wife ; she may have intended to provoke him into marrying her . Although Webster married someone else , his family held onto the portrait until the 1980s , when it was auctioned at Christie 's and acquired by Gloria and Richard <unk> in 1981 . The couple gifted / sold their collection of miniatures , including Beauty Revealed , to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 2006 . 
 = = Description and context = = 
 Beauty Revealed is a self @-@ portrait by Sarah Goodridge , depicting her bared breasts , pink nipples , and a beauty mark . These are presented in a gradation of color , giving a three @-@ dimensional effect . Although Goodridge was aged forty when she painted this miniature , according to art critic Chris Packard her breasts seem younger , with a " balance , paleness , and buoyancy " which is imbued in part by the harmony of light , color , and balance . The breasts are framed by a swirl of pale cloth , which in parts reflects the light . 
 The 6 @.@ 7 @-@ by @-@ 8 @-@ centimetre ( 2 @.@ 6 by 3 @.@ 1 in ) painting is set in a case ; it had originally been installed on a paper backing which had the date " 1828 " on the reverse . The work is a watercolor painting on ivory , thin enough for light to shine through and thus allow the depicted breasts to " glow " . This medium was common for American miniatures , but in this case also served as a simile for the flesh presented upon it . 
 Beauty Revealed was completed during a period of popularity of portrait miniatures , a medium which had been introduced in the United States in the late 18th century . By the time Goodridge completed her self @-@ portrait , miniatures were increasing in complexity and <unk> . The <unk> Timeline of Art History describes Beauty Revealed as a play on the eye miniatures which were then popular as tokens of affection in England and France , but not common in the US . Such miniatures allowed portraits of loved ones to be carried by their suitors without revealing the sitters ' identities . 
 = = History = = 
 Goodridge was a prolific Boston @-@ based portrait miniature painter who had studied under Gilbert Stuart and Elkanah Tisdale . She had a long @-@ term association with Daniel Webster , a politician who began services as Senator from Massachusetts in 1827 . Webster sent her more than forty letters between 1827 and 1851 , and in time , his greetings to her became increasingly familiar ; his last letters were addressed to " My dear , good friend " , which was out of character . She , meanwhile , painted him more than a dozen times , and left her hometown of Boston to visit him in Washington , D.C. at least twice , once in 1828 after his first wife 's death and again in 1841 – 42 , when Webster was separated from his second wife . 
 Goodridge completed Beauty Revealed in 1828 , likely from looking at herself in a mirror . Several works have been cited as possible inspirations , including John Vanderlyn 's Ariadne Asleep on the Island of Naxos and Horatio Greenough 's sculpture Venus Victrix . Goodridge sent her portrait to Webster when he was a new widower , and , based on its miniature format , it was likely intended for his eyes alone . The American art critic John Updike suggests that the artist intended it to offer herself to Webster ; he writes that the bared breasts appear to say " We are yours for the taking , in all our ivory loveliness , with our tenderly stippled nipples " . Ultimately , however , Webster married another , wealthier woman . 
 After Webster 's death , Beauty Revealed continued to be handed down by his family , together with another self @-@ portrait Goodridge had sent him . The politician 's descendants held that Goodridge and Webster had been engaged . The painting was eventually auctioned through Christie 's , with a list price of $ 15 @,@ 000 , and passed through Alexander Gallery of New York later that year before being purchased by New York @-@ based collectors Gloria <unk> and her husband Richard . The couple included Beauty Revealed in the exhibition " Tokens of Affection : The Portrait Miniature in America " in 1991 , which toured to the Metropolitan Museum of Art ( Met ) in New York , the National Museum of American Art in Washington , D.C. , and the Art Institute of Chicago . 
 Beauty Revealed was one of more than three hundred portrait miniatures compiled by the couple , who gave it to the Met in 2006 , as part of a gift / purchase arrangement of their collection . Carrie <unk> Barratt and Lori <unk> of the Met describe Goodridge 's self @-@ portrait as the most compelling of the " strange and wonderful " miniatures by minor artists in the collection . Two years later , Beauty Revealed was included in a retrospective , " The Philippe de Montebello Years : Curators Celebrate Three Decades of Acquisitions " , which showcased works acquired under the tenure of retiring Met director Philippe de Montebello . Holland Cotter of The New York Times highlighted Goodridge 's self @-@ portrait , describing it as " remarkable " . In 2009 , authors Jane Kamensky and Jill Lepore drew inspiration from Beauty Revealed ( as well as other paintings , such as John Singleton Copley 's Boy with a Squirrel ) for their novel <unk> . As of 2014 , the Met 's website lists Beauty Revealed as not on display . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Art historian Dale Johnson described Beauty Revealed as " strikingly realistic " , demonstrative of Goodridge 's ability to portray nuanced lights and shadows . She found the stippling and hatching used in creating the painting to be delicate . Writing in Antiques in 2012 , Randall L. Holton and Charles A. Gilday said that the painting continued to present a self which evokes a " frisson of erotic possibility " . 
 Packard wrote that Beauty Revealed served as a sort of visual synecdoche , representing the entirety of Goodridge through her breasts . As opposed to the " burdened " 1845 self @-@ portrait and the non @-@ eroticized one of 1830 , he found Beauty Revealed to forefront Goodridge and her demand for attention . Arguing that the clothing surrounding her breasts served to indicate a performance ( similar to the curtains of vaudeville ) , Packard described the viewer 's eyes being focused on the breasts , while the rest of Goodridge 's body was erased and abstracted . This , he stated , challenged the assumptions and stereotypes regarding the demure , homebound 19th @-@ century woman . 
 = Hogettes = 
 The Hogettes were a group of 12 male Washington Redskins fans who wore women 's dresses , garden party hats , and pig snouts for two purposes : to cheer on their favorite NFL team and to raise money for charity . The group was founded in 1983 by Michael Torbert and became a regular fixture at Redskins games for nearly 30 years . When the group announced its retirement , effective with the end of the 2012 season , it had 12 active and 15 former members , including three who have been featured in an exhibit at the Pro Football Hall of Fame as part of the VISA Hall of Fans . 
