 The group retains a high profile largely because of their outrageous costumes , but also because of their frequent work for charitable organizations . The Hogettes have appeared in a national advertising campaign for VISA , and they provide support for many charities , including Children 's Miracle Network , Ronald McDonald House , and March of Dimes . They have raised over US $ 100 million for these and other charitable causes . Despite their philanthropic work , the Hogettes are disliked by some and have even been attacked by fans of opposing teams . 
 = = History = = 
 The origin of the Hogettes can be traced to October 1983 when Michael Torbert ( Mikey T. ) , founder of the group , went to a Halloween party at his grandmother 's retirement home wearing one of her old dresses as a costume . The costume was such a hit that he gathered a group of men who he " thought were tough enough to go out in public in a dress . " The group would go to children 's hospitals to cheer up sick children . On November 27 , 1983 , the group attended their first Washington Redskins football game in full drag , but with the addition of pig snout masks , in reference to The Hogs , the nickname of the Redskins offensive line players . 
 Led by Mikey T. , now known as " Boss Hogette " , the group became regular fixtures at Redskins home games , both at their old home of RFK Stadium and their new home of FedExField . The group made more than 100 appearances each year for charitable events , and Mikey T. and two other Hogettes were inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame as " ultimate " Redskins fans . There were a total of 27 members of the group from 1983 to 2012 , with twelve active members at conclusion . Though they have considerable notoriety , they receive no special treatment or official recognition from the Redskins . After the conclusion of the 2012 NFL season , the Hogettes announced they would be retiring their iconic outfits after 30 years of appearances . 
 = = = Origin of the name = = = 
 In the 1980s , the Washington Redskins ' Offensive Line coach , Joe <unk> , began to refer to his linemen as " Hogs " . The Hogs were credited for much of the Redskins success in the 1980s and early 1990s , including four Super Bowl appearances and three Super Bowl wins in a 10 @-@ season period from 1982 to 1991 . The group began wearing pig noses and named themselves " The Hogettes " in reference to the Hogs and to the Washington Redskins ' official cheerleaders , originally known as the " <unk> . " 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 The Hogettes organized and attended charitable events in the Washington , D.C. , area for over twenty years . In that time , they helped raise more than US $ 100 million for various charities , including Children 's Miracle Network , Ronald McDonald House , and March of Dimes . Upon reaching this landmark value , Howard " <unk> " Churchill remarked , " That 's a lot of money for a bunch of fat old <unk> in pig noses and dresses . " Among these events were golf tournaments , including the Hogettes ' annual charity golf tournament , walk @-@ a @-@ <unk> , truck rallies , galas , and other charity benefits . 
 While some of their charitable efforts went toward helping their local community , most of the money they raise goes toward helping children . " Hogette for a Game " was an annual fund raiser . In 1995 , Nick " <unk> " <unk> ' wife bought him this package . He subsequently became a substitute Hogette for several years before becoming an official member in 2002 . One female fan has , for several years , served as " Hogette for a Game " through winning annual auctions . In 2000 , she raised more than $ 11 @,@ 000 for children 's charities in order to attend one game with the Hogettes that season . 
 In an online interview with fans , Torbert stated " You ... have to have a sense of humor for many things from day to day . It is tough to be humorous when the [ Redskins ] lose , but it 's even tougher to face a sick child in a hospital room , and cheer them up with our humorous looks . That 's tough . " 
 = = National exposure = = 
 In addition to gaining national exposure through their outrageous costumes and continuous work with charitable organizations , the Hogettes were guests on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , and were featured in a VISA television commercial . Despite their generous philanthropy and positive attitude in the stands , not everyone appreciated the Hogettes . Longtime Washington Redskins owner Jack Kent Cooke and Daniel Snyder — the current owner — both failed to embrace the Hogettes . The group was called " incredibly obnoxious " and " annoying " , and were attacked in the infamous 700 Level at Veterans Stadium in Philadelphia by angry Philadelphia Eagles fans . 
 = = Members = = 
 In addition to the 12 final season members , there were 15 retired " official " Hogettes , as well as numerous temporary and substitute members , including winners of the " Hogette for a Game " auction . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 On January 11 , 2013 , founder Michael Tolbert announced that the Hogettes were retiring after 30 years , telling the Washington Post , " 30 seasons is enough of guys in pig snouts and dresses . " Tolbert further states , “ It ’ s a new era . It was great seeing <unk> and Alfred Morris break onto the scene , and it ’ s a perfect time to retire the old era and start the new . ” The Hogettes insist that they will continue to be fans of the Redskins and do charity work in the Washington area . 
 = Smile ( Lily Allen song ) = 
 " Smile " is the debut single by British recording artist Lily Allen from her debut studio album Alright , Still ( 2006 ) . It was written by Allen , <unk> <unk> and Darren Lewis , while sampling The Soul Brothers ' " Free Soul " . The song was released as the lead mainstream single of the album in July 2006 . After signing a contract deal with Regal Recordings and gaining popularity on the social network website Myspace with demo songs , Allen released a limited edition of " LDN " to promote her work and afterwards announced the release of " Smile " . 
 The song incorporates rocksteady music , as the lyrics tackle her dealing with the betrayal of her boyfriend , while enjoying his misery . Most contemporary critics complimented the song , noticing the confidence it hides and the carnival @-@ esque , yet melancholy , theme . On the other hand , some considered it was not one of the album 's best tracks and it makes the singer a " theoretical pop princess " . The single peaked inside the top 40 of the charts of some European countries and Australia , while staying on the summit of the UK Singles Chart for two consecutive weeks and ended the year as the country 's 11th most successful song . It is also charted on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , where it was certified gold . 
 For promotion , " Smile " was re @-@ recorded in Simlish and played on shows ; it also received its own answer song . The accompanying music video portrayed a revenge theme , with Allen hiring a posse to beat her ex @-@ boyfriend . It was directed by Sophie Muller and , afterwards , banned on MTV due to obscene language . The song was performed live many times , including on talk shows , her 2007 concert tour and also during her 2009 concert tour , though Allen claimed to be " sick " of it . In 2008 , it won a Pop Award at the London Broadcast Music Incorporated Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 After meeting George Lamb on a holiday in Ibiza , Allen made him her manager . Lamb later introduced the singer to production duo Future Cut , with whom she had written and produced demos , which were sent to various labels . In 2005 , Allen was signed to Regal Records , who gave her £ 25 @,@ 000 to produce an album . The singer considered it to be a " small development idea " , as they were also unable to provide much support for it due to their preoccupation with other releases . Taking advice from Lady Sovereign , the singer created an account on MySpace and began posting demo songs in November 2005 . By March 2006 , they attracted thousands of listeners , and 500 limited edition 7 " vinyl singles of one of the demos , a song titled " LDN " , were rush @-@ released and sold for as much as £ 40 . Allen also produced two mixtapes to promote her work . As she accumulated tens of thousands of MySpace friends , The Observer Music Monthly took interest . Few people outside of her label 's A & R department had heard of Allen , so the label was slow in responding to publications who wanted to report about her . Her label wasn 't pleased with the sound of the demos , so they assigned the singer to " more mainstream producers and top @-@ line writers " . After that , they finally approved some of her songs , being confident of their inclusion on the album . " Smile " was among the chosen ones , that Allen claimed she was happy with . It was the first song she had ever written , claiming : 
 When I set out to do this I knew I wanted to make songs that sounded a ) up to date and now and b ) really organic . Because you can 't get really good players without spending loads of money these days , the only other option is to sample . The first song I ever wrote was ' Smile ' . We just went through about seven or eight sample lyrics , found a beat , put it all in ... Then when it comes to writing lyrics I write ... like a rapper would , I suppose , with absolutely no melody involved whatsoever , I 'm just getting my flow sorted . Then I write the whole text of the song and then ad lib the melody into the microphone . It 's not terribly clever ! 
 " Smile " was released as a single , and the maxi single format for it contains two B @-@ Sides , " Absolutely Nothing " and " Cheryl Tweedy " , which Allen struggled to get on the album , but lost them in favour of " Take What You Take " . The latter is a satirical song about celebrity , finding the commercial promotion side of the celebrity machine uncomfortable , while mentioning Girls Aloud member Cheryl Tweedy , but argued she doesn 't " have anything against her " . 
 = = Music structure and lyrics = = 
 Musically , " Smile " is a bubbly , mid @-@ tempo tune with " a barroom piano lick " , subdued horns and a reggae beat , singing in a light falsetto , while the organ riff contains a sample of Jackie Mittoo playing keyboards on the 1960s rocksteady song " Free Soul " by The Soul Brothers , also written by Mittoo . He and Clement Dodd received credit on the song as co @-@ writers . It was described to have a " cod @-@ reggae groove that <unk> like a barbecue " , as a guitar and piano were used for the background music , following the notes Gm — F as its basic chord progression . It is set in the time signature of common time , having a metronome of 96 beats per minute , and is played in the key of F major . Lyrically , the song describes Allen 's satisfaction in her former lover 's suffering , being in a vengeful mood : " At worst / I feel bad for a while , / But then I just smile / I go ahead and smile , " thus creating a contrast between " the peppy melody and brassy lyrics " . The inspiration for the song came from a real life experience , when Allen broke up with her then boyfriend , Lester Lloyd , resulting in a drug overdose and hospitalization for her depression . The singer claimed " I started to get depressed and anyone who suffers from depression knows that it can soon get so bad that you can 't get out of bed . It was then that I checked into the Priory . That was really tough as I was an emotional mess . [ ... ] The lyrics are definitely bitter @-@ sweet " . Allen said she later regretted the direct approach of her lyrics : 
 I 'm now less inclined to do that , because everything that I do say gets repeated in a way that I haven 't said it , or taken out of context and spun in some negative way — and it makes me really sad . I 'm not , like , a negative person . I 'm actually quite positive , but this industry has really made me feel angry and negative recently . I 'm not enjoying it at the moment . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Smile " was met with mixed to positive reviews from music critics . According to Heather Phares of Allmusic , the song " has a silky verse melody that just barely conceals [ the singer 's ] spite " , while she keeps " her revenge sweet , the extra sting being given to it by the way she sounds like she 's singing about how ice cream or puppies or being in love makes her smile " . Blender reporter Jon Dolan claims that Allen " deploys a sugary melody as a Trojan horse for a smackdown on a douche @-@ bag ex @-@ boyfriend " , as Rob Webb from Drowned in Sound called " Smile " an " infectious slice of bouncing , carnival reggae that punches hard with its opening line : ' When you first left me / I was wanting more / But you were fucking that girl next door / What you do that for ? , ' " and went on to say that the theme of the song is melancholy , " set against breezy beats " , and while not being " an obvious <unk> contender on the surface , [ it ] is good but far from one of the LP 's choice cuts " . Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone gave a rather negative review , claiming the singer " doesn 't sound as if she 's trying too hard " , singing the song with a " breezy sha @-@ la @-@ la lilt that just made the song seem even nastier " . Later , he called Allen a " theoretical pop princess , who just entered the breakup @-@ song hall of fame " . Dom Passantino of Stylus suggested that " ' Smile ' gets burned off the lights by both Sean Paul and Abs when it comes to facsimiles of ' Uptown Top Ranking , ' but neither of them could bring the quality of lyricism the singer does , " while Slant Magazine reporter Sal Cinquemani was baffled as to why the song , which she " sings without a smirk of irony " , is a UK chart @-@ topper . 
 The reviewer from NME considered that the song <unk> along with sass , while still remaining charming , and said that though it doesn 't mark Allen out as excellent dating material , as a soundtrack to the summer , " it ’ s a dead <unk> ’ cert " . Adrien Begrand of PopMatters called " Smile " just as good as " LDN " , " its loose reggae arrangement augmented by the clever sample of Jackie Mittoo ’ s piano from the Soul Brothers ’ 60s rocksteady tune " Free Soul " , as Allen sings bitterly about her ex , with just a hint of vulnerability at first , before going to her friends for reassurance , and confronting the guy during the chorus with a mean @-@ spirited confidence that has us cheering inside " . While John Murphy of MusicOMH praised the song and its " gently lilting reggae rhythm " , Priya Elan from NME considered that the Althea & Donna groove of " Smile " is what made fans " fall for her in the first place " . The former argued that " even people who profess to hate pop music will secretly be tapping a foot to it and claiming it is just downright perfect pop for lolling around during the lazy warm , guaranteed to cheer the listeners up , no matter how down they 're feeling " . Other reviews came from The Guardian reporter Sophie Heawood , who didn 't consider the song as Allen 's greatest effort , but still thought she was far better than being called " the female Mike Skinner " . 
 In October 2011 , NME placed it at number 104 on its list " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Smile " was released to the iTunes Store in the United Kingdom in the spring of 2006 and spent its first week at number 1 on the iTunes chart , before entering the main UK Singles Chart at number thirteen , based on download sales alone . The next week , on the issue of 15 July 2006 , it rose to the summit of the chart , selling 39 @,@ 501 copies , knocking Shakira 's Hips Don 't Lie off the top spot and spending two consecutive weeks there . It later descended to number four , being replaced by McFly 's Please , Please . It was her very first single in her home country 's main charts , following a top 40 entry with the limited release of " LDN " the same year . It ended 2006 as UK 's 11th best selling single of the year . Allen was surprised at the success of it , stating : " Of course , I never thought the record would chart - I didn 't even think I 'd get a record contract " . She was named " one of the brightest hopes for domestic crossover rap " because of this single . The song shared similar success in Ireland , where it debuted on the issue of 6 July 2006 and peaked inside the top ten at six , holding on the chart for nine weeks . In mainland Europe , it broke the top 40 of most countries , but wasn 't as successful as in the singer 's home country . Notable successes were ten on the Dutch Top 40 , sixteen on the French Singles Chart and 21 on the Swiss Singles Chart . Across the ocean , " Smile " reached 14 on the ARIA Charts and in New Zealand peaked inside the top ten at six . 
 In North America , the song only managed to peak at 49 on the main Billboard chart in the U.S. on the issue of 24 February 2007 and spent 12 weeks on the chart . On the same week , it climbed to 29 on the Hot Digital Songs and , later in May , reached 35 on the Pop Songs and 20 on the Hot Adult Top 40 Tracks . Despite its low position , " Smile " managed to slowly sell over 500 @,@ 000 copies in paid digital download and was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America on 9 February 2009 ; it remained Allen 's highest @-@ charting single in the country until " 5 O 'Clock " which featured Allen , peaked at number 10 in 2011 . Nonetheless , " Smile " remains Allen 's highest @-@ charting song as a solo artist in the United States , as well as one of three entries ( after " Fuck You " and " The Fear " ) . It also peaked at 86 on the Canadian Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was released on 3 July 2006 . Having been directed by Sophie Muller , it contained a vengeance theme , similar to that of the song . It starts off with Allen sitting on the bed in her apartment , eating chocolate and <unk> . <unk> , there are shots of her and her ex @-@ boyfriend spending time together appear as a memory . He is played by Elliott Jordan . As the bridge comes up , the scene changes to the singer standing on the corner of a street , talking to a man and paying him money . The man leaves and goes to some gangsters , giving them instructions and each a share of money . As Allen 's former lover walks down the street talking on his mobile phone , one of the gangsters pushes him into an abandoned playground ; where they are joined by a second gangster , and the pair give Allen 's ex a beating . In this time , Allen , witnessing the scene , smiles . She then meets with her bruised ex @-@ boyfriend , and takes him to a coffee shop . There , he tried to explain to her how he was beaten by the muggers , not knowing that , meanwhile , they were breaking down his apartment door and destroying his furniture and possessions , including scratching his gramophone records . The ex @-@ boyfriend leaves the table for a while , enough time for Allen to put laxative pills in his coffee ; upon returning , he drinks it and leaves the shop . After , he goes to his apartment , only to find it trashed and destroyed . Scavenging through what 's left , he happily finds the record box , thinking they are intact , but he suddenly gets diarrhoea as a result of the laxatives , but is unable to use his toilet , as it is clogged with his clothes . He goes to Allen 's apartment with his records , seeking consolation , unaware that she is laughing behind his back . As the video finishes , the scene changes to Allen walking down the street , at night , smiling , singing the last chorus , while her ex @-@ boyfriend , actually a disc jockey , is in a nightclub , getting ready to put his music , but finds out that all his records have been scratched . 
 After the video was banned on MTV in the United Kingdom , Allen commented regarding this in an <unk> : 
 I got really offended when my single ' Smile ' got banned [ during after @-@ school hours ] from MTV in the U.K. because it had the word fuck in it . They said , ' We don 't want kids to grow up too quickly . ' But then you have Paris Hilton and the Pussycat Dolls taking their clothes off and gyrating up against womanizing , asshole men , and that 's acceptable . You 're thinking your kids are gonna grow up quicker because they heard the word fuck than from thinking they should be shoving their tits in people 's faces ? 
 DJ Ron Slomowicz of About.com criticised the music video , saying it was " mean @-@ spirited " , it would " alienate any sort of club fan base she might discover " , and that if a male " had his friends beating up his ex @-@ girlfriend , trashing her living space , drugging her and destroying her possessions , he would be branded as violent " and would be shunned , thus questioning the singer 's taste level . 
 = = Live performances and promotion = = 
 On the day the single was released , Allen appeared on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge with DJ Jo Whiley , performing an acoustic version of " Smile " , and a cover of The Kooks ' song , " Naïve " . At the Secret Garden Party , in September 2006 , Allen made a rendition of the song and afterwards stated : " The festival was well good , particularly as Lester , my ex , who I wrote ' Smile ' about , and subsequently sold his story to the papers , had a tent called ' the shit tent ' positioned directly opposite the main stage . So he and his new girlfriend had no option but to watch me perform to a couple of thousand people singing ' Smile ' back to me . Oh , it 's the little things eh ! " " Smile " was performed live as part of the setlist of Allen 's 2007 concert tour . During the 2007 South By Southwest music festival , Allen said " I 'm so sick of this song , but I 'll play it for you , Austin " before singing it . On 3 February 2007 , the singer was invited as a musical guest on Saturday Night Live and played this single and " LDN " . In 2009 , it was on the setlist of Allen 's 2009 concert tour , as part of the encore . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Covers = = = 
 " Smile " received its own answer song when rapper Example recorded a track called " Vile " in 2006 , from We Didn 't <unk> the Remix , with tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek lyrics written from the boyfriend 's perspective . While it also features elements from Keith Allen 's single " <unk> " , Example added " I think Lily has heard the track . I gave it to her producer to play to her . We just did it for a laugh . Hip @-@ hop artists take life too seriously . " Upon hearing the reply single , Chris Moyles , from BBC Radio 1 , recorded his own parody version of the song for The Chris Moyles Show . Allen herself re @-@ recorded the single in Simlish , the fictional language used in The Sims games , to help promotion . The Simlish version was used in the Sims expansion pack The Sims 2 : Seasons soundtrack , and Allen also had her own character in the game . She declared : " Recording ' Smile ' was a great experience for me . Sometimes revenge can be fun . But getting to sing it again [ in Simlish ] came very naturally and it was hilarious to practice ! The silly language and whimsy of The Sims games are a perfect fit for the song . I was laughing the entire time ! " Also , an animated music video was made for the Simlish version . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 " Smile " appears on another video game soundtrack , that of <unk> : Off the Rails , which is a theme park simulation . Among other citations , the song is present in the film He 's Just Not That Into You and featured on the 2007 Judd Apatow 's film Knocked Up and on the soundtrack . In 2009 , the season one episode " Mattress " of the Fox musical comedy / drama Glee , " Smile " was covered by the character Rachel , voiced by Lea Michele ; the version was made available as an iTunes single download and was later included on the second volume of the season one soundtracks . 
 In the first scene of the first episode of Big Bang Theory Penny is listening to Smile in her apartment when Leonard and Sheldon first meet her . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = = 2009 versions = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = New York State Route 33 = 
 New York State Route 33 ( NY 33 ) is an east – west state highway in western New York in the United States . The route extends for just under 70 miles ( 113 km ) from NY 5 in Buffalo in the west to NY 31 in Rochester in the east . It is , in fact , the only state highway that directly connects both cities , although it is rarely used today for that purpose . The westernmost 10 miles ( 16 km ) of NY 33 in Buffalo and the neighboring town of Cheektowaga have been upgraded into the Kensington Expressway . This section of NY 33 is one of several expressways leading out of downtown and serves as a main route to the Buffalo Niagara International Airport . 
 On the Rochester end , NY 33 primarily serves as a paralleling local route to Interstate 490 ( I @-@ 490 ) , of less importance to the area 's traffic patterns . Between the two cities , it is mostly a rural two @-@ lane highway . The largest location on this stretch is the Genesee County city of Batavia , where NY 33 reconnects to NY 5 and crosses NY 63 and NY 98 , two regionally important north – south highways . NY 33 overlaps with all three routes at one point or another as it traverses Batavia . A southerly alternate route , designated NY 33A , leaves NY 33 northeast of Batavia in Bergen and rejoins its parent in Rochester . 
 NY 33 was assigned in the mid @-@ 1920s , but only to the portion of its modern routing between Batavia and Rochester . It was extended on both ends — to Buffalo in the west and Marion in the east — as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; however , the eastern extension was eliminated in 1949 . In Buffalo , NY 33 was moved onto the Kensington Expressway in the mid @-@ 1960s , and its former surface routing along Genesee Street subsequently became the short @-@ lived New York State Route 33B . Smaller realignments in the years since have moved NY 33 's western terminus from the heart of downtown Buffalo to the northern fringe of the city 's center . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Most of NY 33 , including the entirety of the highway in Erie County , is state @-@ maintained ; however , two sections — from NY 5 to the eastern Batavia city line and all of NY 33 within the city of Rochester — are maintained by the cities of Batavia and Rochester , respectively . 
 = = = Kensington Expressway = = = 
 The Kensington Expressway was started in 1958 , and its construction radically changed the nature of the neighborhoods on the east @-@ side . The below grade construction was an attempt to minimize noise . 
 The highway begins as two one @-@ way streets , Goodell Street ( traveling west ) and East Tupper Street ( traveling east ) . Both intersect with NY 5 ( Ellicott Street ) in Buffalo , from where they serve as a one @-@ way couplet for three blocks before they merge to become the Kensington Expressway , a limited @-@ access highway . It initially travels through dense urban areas by way of a cut , in which both roadways are separated only by a Jersey barrier . The expressway runs past the Buffalo Museum of Science , located at Martin Luther King , Jr . Park , and through the middle of Humboldt Parkway in Buffalo , where the Scajaquada Expressway ( NY 198 ) leaves at the former exit for Main Street . The section of the expressway between the Scajaquada and Harlem Road ( NY 240 ) just outside the city limit is the busiest on all of NY 33 , handling in excess of 100 @,@ 000 vehicles per day in areas . 
 East of NY 198 , the road becomes more open as it passes through neighborhoods with a more suburban residential feel to them . Along this stretch , NY 33 connects to several streets , including Bailey Avenue ( U.S. Route 62 or US 62 ) and Harlem Road ( NY 240 ) . Past Harlem Road , the expressway makes a slight curve to the south as it prepares to meet a toll @-@ free section of the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) at a cloverleaf interchange . Beyond I @-@ 90 , the expressway veers to the south again , traversing an S @-@ curve before connecting to Union Road ( NY 277 ) by way of a partial interchange . After another 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) , NY 33 curves south under Genesee Street before joining it at a traffic light in front of the Buffalo Niagara International Airport . 
 = = = Buffalo Airport to Batavia = = = 
 Now returning to its pre @-@ Kensington route , NY 33 follows a six @-@ lane , divided Genesee Street past the airport on one side and numerous associated businesses such as hotels and fast food restaurants on the other . The large aerospace contractor Calspan has its headquarters here , and Westinghouse once operated a large industrial lathe plant on the airport side of the road ( it was torn down when the airport was rebuilt in the late 1990s ) . Beyond the airport , the divider ends , the travel lanes are reduced to four and , after a short curve and minimal descent , NY 33 intersects Transit Road ( NY 78 ) and enters the town of Lancaster . After this junction , the highway becomes a two @-@ lane route once again through the small hamlet of Bowmansville , where it crosses Ellicott Creek near some rapids . 
 For the next several miles , NY 33 runs parallel to the Thruway and very close to it , with both roads visible from the other . Much of this section of Lancaster has remained rural in character ; however , that began to change in the mid @-@ 1990s when Tops Friendly Markets , the regional supermarket chain headquartered in nearby Williamsville , chose a site near the <unk> Road intersection for a major distribution center . It necessitated the widening of the highway and construction of a traffic light and turn lanes at its entrance . 
 NY 33 becomes a two @-@ lane route once again as it heads out into Alden and eventually joins another state @-@ maintained street radiating out from the city , Walden Avenue , unsigned NY 952Q . NY 33 and the Genesee Street name take over Walden 's straight , slightly north @-@ trending course as it leaves Erie County for Genesee County . In the latter , it intersects with NY 77 in the center of the first community it encounters , the small village of Corfu . At the Batavia town line , it becomes Pearl Street , a name it keeps until it reaches NY 98 within the city of Batavia . 
 = = = Batavia to Bergen = = = 
 In the knot of highways that is the Genesee County seat , NY 33 crosses and briefly overlaps with not only NY 5 , the other east – west route in town , but both north – south routes , NY 63 and NY 98 . While concurrent with NY 98 on Oak Street Extension , NY 33 passes over Tonawanda Creek , which travels through Batavia on a roughly northwest – southeast alignment . The brief overlap with NY 98 ends at Main Street , which carries NY 5 and NY 63 through the western portion of the city . NY 33 turns east here , overlapping with NY 5 and NY 63 for five blocks along the four @-@ lane , mostly commercial Main Street . NY 63 leaves in downtown Batavia at Ellicott Street ; however , NY 5 and NY 33 continue to follow Main Street through much of the city 's eastern half . 
 At the eastern fringe of Batavia , NY 33 splits in a northeast direction from NY 5 , becoming Clinton Street , and , once outside the city limits , Clinton Street Road . In the town of Batavia , the highway passes through a residential area on its way to a junction with Batavia – Stafford Town Line Road , a county road providing access to Genesee Community College , located about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the north of NY 33 . The route continues on a northeastward course into the town of Stafford , where it crosses over the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Rochester Subdivision railroad line and the Thruway by way of overpasses less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) apart . Unlike in Buffalo , there is no connection between NY 33 and the Thruway at this point . 
 It remains close to the Interstate Highway for about 4 miles ( 6 km ) , intersecting NY 237 less than a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of the overpass taking that highway over the Thruway , but leaves it behind for good shortly thereafter as it turns even more to the north , taking it into the town of Bergen and the small village of the same name in the county 's northeast corner . Here , NY 33 crosses NY 19 , a long north – south route . Shortly afterward , NY 33A begins to the east while the main route turns to the north yet again and becomes Buffalo Road . Just east of this point , NY 33A connects to I @-@ 490 , which briefly runs along the Monroe County line through this area . From the west end of NY 33A to the county line , NY 33 and I @-@ 490 follow virtually identical northeasterly alignments . 
 = = = Monroe County = = = 
 Once across the county line , NY 33 crosses over the Rochester Subdivision rail line for a second time before returning to a more easterly orientation . It parallels the CSX main line and I @-@ 490 — both located a short distance to the south of NY 33 — into the village of Churchville , where the route has a brief concurrency with NY 36 . Farther east , NY 33 intersects NY 259 at North Chili and picks up another short concurrency with NY 386 as the suburbs begin at Gates . Here , NY 33 finally has a direct exit with I @-@ 490 . Also directly accessible from this junction is NY 531 , which begins about 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) to the north . At this point , I @-@ 490 trades positions with NY 33 as it continues to parallel the latter , but now to the north instead . 
 The route continues another 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) to Gates Center , meeting Howard Road ( formerly part of NY 47 and still state @-@ maintained as unsigned NY 940L ) and crossing over , but not connecting to I @-@ 390 . A crossing of the Erie Canal soon follows , bringing the route into the city of Rochester . Across the city line , NY 33 runs along the Rochester Subdivision rail line for about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , serving an industrial area built up along the north side of the railroad . It connects to Mount Read Boulevard by way of a signalized traffic circle before abruptly turning southward to pass under the tracks and meet up with West Avenue . 
 At West Avenue , NY 33 turns east into the densely populated western portion of the city , taking on the West Avenue name for 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) to a junction with Chili Avenue , which carries NY 33A into the city . Here , NY 33A completes its southern loop and NY 33 picks up its final designation as West Main Street . NY 33 travels east – northeast along Main Street to the junction of West Main and West Broad Streets adjacent to where I @-@ 490 passes over the former . NY 33 ends here , giving way to NY 31 , which enters from the north on Broad Street and continues to the east on Main Street . Nick <unk> Hots , a local restaurant , is located on the northwest corner of the junction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 NY 33 was assigned in the mid @-@ 1920s to the portion of its modern alignment east of NY 5 in Batavia . West of Batavia , what is now NY 33 was unnumbered and only partially state @-@ maintained . At the time , state maintenance of this segment began at the Buffalo city line and ended at current NY 77 in Corfu . The Corfu – Batavia segment was taken over by the state of New York in the late 1920s , and NY 33 was extended west over the now entirely state @-@ maintained Genesee Street to Main Street ( NY 5 ) in downtown Buffalo as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 At the same time , the route was extended east through Rochester to the Wayne County town of Marion 20 miles ( 32 km ) to the east . It was routed along West Main Street and East Avenue from NY 31 in Rochester to Penfield Road in Brighton , overlapping NY 15 ( now NY 96 ) from downtown Rochester to Brighton . NY 33 broke from NY 15 at Penfield Road and continued generally eastward on Penfield , Walworth – Penfield , and Walworth – Marion Roads through Brighton , Penfield and Walworth to Marion , where it ended at an intersection with NY 21 . The route was cut back to its current eastern terminus at the end of a brief over lap of NY 31 in downtown Rochester on January 1 , 1949 , at which time the portion of NY 33 's former routing east of NY 96 in Brighton was redesignated as NY 441 . 
 = = = Buffalo area = = = 
 Construction began c . 1961 on the Kensington Expressway , a limited @-@ access highway connecting downtown Buffalo to the Buffalo Niagara International Airport . The first section of the expressway was completed between 1962 and 1964 and extended from Michigan Avenue ( Harriet Tubman Way ) to Best Street . The remainder of the highway was completed c . 1965 , at which time NY 33 was realigned to follow the new expressway from Michigan Avenue to the airport . Its former routing on Genesee Street became NY 33B . There were once plans to extend the Kensington Expressway west to I @-@ 190 at exit 8 ; however , this extension was never built . 
 The western end of NY 33 has been located in downtown Buffalo since 1930 ; however , the exact location of its terminus has varied over time . In the mid @-@ 1970s , the northbound and southbound directions of NY 5 were split and rerouted to follow a series of streets through downtown Buffalo . Northbound NY 5 left the southbound direction at the north end of the Skyway and followed Church , South Division , Ellicott , and Chippewa Streets around downtown to Main Street , where both directions converged and continued north on Main Street . As a result , NY 33 was truncated eastward to the junction of Genesee and Ellicott Streets . At some point between 1979 and 1985 , a pair of ramps were constructed between the west end of the Kensington Expressway and Oak and Elm Streets , a pre @-@ existing one @-@ way couplet one block to the west of Michigan Avenue . NY 33 initially followed the new ramps to Genesee Street ; however , the route was altered in the latter half of the 1980s to connect to Ellicott Street ( by this point part of NY 5 north ) by way of Goodell and East Tupper Streets , another pre @-@ existing one @-@ way couplet . 
 = = Suffixed routes = = 
 NY 33 has one current alternate route and one former spur designation that has been reused multiple times . 
 NY 33A ( 17 @.@ 15 miles or 27 @.@ 60 kilometres ) is an alternate route in the Rochester area that was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 NY 33B is a designation that has been used for three different routes since the 1930s . 
 The original NY 33B was an alternate route of NY 33 through eastern Monroe and western Wayne counties . It was assigned c . 1931 and mostly renumbered to NY 31F when NY 33 was truncated to Rochester in 1949 . 
 The second NY 33B was assigned to Brooks Avenue and Genesee Park Boulevard between NY 33A and NY 383 in Gates and Rochester . It was assigned c . 1962 and removed c . 1965 . The Gates portion of its former routing is now part of NY 204 . 
 The third alignment was a spur in the Buffalo area that followed NY 33 's pre @-@ Kensington Expressway routing on Genesee Street . It was assigned c . 1965 and removed in the mid @-@ 1970s . The section of former NY 33B between current NY 33 and the Buffalo city line is now NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill = 
 " There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill " is the twelfth episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the fifty @-@ sixth episode overall . Directed by Tricia Brock , with a story by Jonathan Moskin and David Mulei and a teleplay by Moskin , Phil Klemmer , and John Enbom , the episode premiered on The CW on February 6 , 2007 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 In this episode , Veronica aids a conservative Christian student named Bonnie Capistrano ( <unk> <unk> ) in finding out who slipped her mifepristone , which caused a miscarriage . Meanwhile , Veronica becomes obsessed with Madison Sinclair ( Amanda Noret ) after becoming enraged that Madison and Logan ( Jason Dohring ) had sex while they were broken up . In addition , Veronica and Keith ( Enrico Colantoni ) discover new information about Dean O 'Dell 's death . 
 Series creator Rob Thomas had planned this case of the week for " There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill " since the beginning of the season as one of what he considered " college @-@ age crimes " . In addition , the subplot involving Logan and Veronica 's breakup triggered a discussion in the writers ' room about Veronica 's character traits . The episode received 2 @.@ 40 million viewers in its original broadcast and mixed reviews from television critics . Eric Goldman of IGN thought it was indicative of a general upward trend in the show 's quality , while Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club thought it was uneven . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Veronica has a dream that she woke up in the middle of the winter with Logan , but she is plagued with visions of Madison . When she wakes up , she goes to the Hearst library , where Tim Foyle ’ s ( James Jordan ) girlfriend , Bonnie , asks her to investigate who slipped her RU @-@ 486 , which caused a miscarriage . When Veronica presses Bonnie further , she reveals that Tim or Dick ( Ryan Hansen ) could be the father , although Tim has been very supportive . Veronica asks Logan point @-@ blank whether Logan had sex with Madison over the winter , and he says yes , leading to a major fight , with Veronica saying she ’ ll never forgive him . Veronica speaks to Bonnie ’ s roommate , Phyllis ( Toni Trucks ) , who reiterates that Tim is being very supportive . Veronica successfully breaks into Tim ’ s office to investigate before realizing she doesn ’ t have the password . After Keith comforts Veronica due to her breakup , she bugs Tim ’ s office . 
 In her spare time , Veronica trails Madison out of envy . After ascertaining Tim ’ s password , Veronica finds out that Tim is also investigating the Dean ’ s suicide and that he was browsing a site named “ Neptune Women ’ s Clinic ” . Veronica visits the ministry of Bonnie ’ s father , Ted ( Chris Ellis ) as well as the clinic , although neither really help in the case . She also questions Anthony , one of the witnesses of the Dean ’ s death ( he heard the gunshot ) . Returning home , Veronica is greeted by Keith , who has received a letter with images of Veronica exiting the clinic . For revenge , they visit the publisher of the photos , but it doesn ’ t go well . Nevertheless , she does see a picture of one of Dick ’ s paramours , although she was not as intimate with him as Veronica thought . In the middle of the night , Mindy O ’ Dell ( Jaime Ray Newman ) contact Keith , telling him to hurry . It turns out that Steve Botando ( Richard Grieco ) was trying to break in , and while he is there , Keith finds out that Cyrus was planning on sending the O ’ Dell son to a disciplinary school and that Mindy was at the scene of Dean O ’ Dell ’ s death . 
 Veronica starts to suspect one of the church officials , and a bookmark shows her that Bonnie ’ s roommate was behind the RU @-@ 486 . Bonnie begins to lash out at Phyllis , but her father holds her back and says that she should not be quick to anger . Veronica had previously hired Weevil to destroy Madison ’ s car , but right before it is about to be crushed , she calls it off . 
 = = Production = = 
 " There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill " features a story by Jonathan Moskin and David Mulei and a teleplay by Moskin , Phil Klemmer , and John Enbom , marking Moskin and Mulei 's second writing credits for the series , Klemmer 's thirteenth writing credit for the show , and Enbom 's fourteenth credit . It was directed by Tricia Brock , her only episode of Veronica Mars . The actor who played the witness to Dean O 'Dell 's death had previously appeared as an extra in " Spit & Eggs " during a party scene , nonverbally interacting with Piz ( Chris Lowell ) . Series creator Rob Thomas enjoyed the cameo so much that he cast the actor as the witness character in this episode . 
 The scene in which Veronica rebuffs Logan for sleeping with Madison over winter break was the subject of a continuing debate in the writers ' room about Veronica 's character . Specifically , Enbom and Klemmer , two writers for the episode thought that Veronica should be less mistrustful , paranoid and jealous , while executive producers Thomas and Diane Ruggiero advocated for these traits in Veronica . Thomas illustrated their creative differences by stating that he enjoyed the film Chasing Amy , while Enbom did not . 
 Thomas drew inspiration for his point of view about Veronica 's character from his own life , stating , " I 've sort of gotten past this , but I certainly lived in that space for a long time . " Thomas had had the idea for this mystery of the week since the beginning of the season ; in an interview , he stated that he would like to include several " college @-@ age crimes " such as " this idea of a college girl getting pregnant , and someone getting the idea they 're doing her a favor by slipping her RU @-@ 486 . " The promos for the episode made it seem as though Veronica was pregnant . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill " received 2 @.@ 40 million viewers , ranking 99th of 100 in the weekly rankings . This was a slight decrease from the previous episode , " Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves " , which garnered 2 @.@ 69 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill " received mixed reviews from television critics . Eric Goldman of IGN awarded the episode an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , indicating that it was " great . " He thought that it was indicative of an overall upward trend in the quality of Veronica Mars and praised the episode 's balance between the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week and the Dean O 'Dell story arc . " Like last week 's episode , ' There 's Got to Be a Morning After Pill ' benefited from integrating already established characters into a mystery of the week . " He was positive towards the mystery of the week in general , stating that it made him realize that it was possible to make good episodes with only a stand @-@ alone mystery . However , he was critical of the development of Veronica and Logan 's relationship , particularly Logan 's new character traits . " Let 's just hope they don 't get back together again next week , or anytime soon , because this horse has been beaten to death as it is . " Kelly West of Cinema Blend was positive towards the episode , calling it " jam @-@ packed with drama " . However , she stated that she would have enjoyed the episode more if Mac , Piz , Wallace , or Parker had made an appearance . Reviewer Alan Sepinwall enjoyed the pairing of Bonnie and her father , played by Chris Ellis . 
 Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club gave a mixed review , criticizing the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week and finding it indicative of a " wobbly " season . He thought that the case of the week was predictable , stating that it was clear that Bonnie 's best friend was the culprit when the character was introduced . He also called the mystery " one of the weakest that the show has ever done . " However , he thought that there were some interesting character development possibilities stemming from the episode . Television Without Pity gave the episode a " C + " . 
 = Hurricane Odile ( 1984 ) = 
 Hurricane Odile was the second of three tropical storms to make landfall in Mexico during the 1984 Pacific hurricane season . The fifteenth named storm and twelfth hurricane of the active season , it developed from a tropical disturbance about 185 miles ( 300 km ) south of Acapulco on September 17 . Curving towards the northwest , Odile became a Category 1 hurricane on September 19 . The tropical cyclone reached its peak intensity with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) two days later ; however , Hurricane Odile began to weaken as moved erratically it encountered less favorable conditions and was downgraded to a tropical storm shortly before making landfall northwest of Zihuatanejo . Over land , the storm rapidly weakened , and dissipated on September 23 . The storm caused significant rainfall accumulations of 24 @.@ 73 inches ( 628 @.@ 1 mm ) in Southern Mexico , resulting in severe damage to tourism resorts . Flooding from Odile resulted in the evacuation of 7 @,@ 000 people , 21 deaths , and the damage of about 900 homes . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical disturbance was first noted about 150 mi ( 240 km ) south of Acapulco on September 16 . After tracking over 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) waters , the disturbance began to strengthen , and became a depression at 1800 UTC on September 17 . The depression began to curve more towards the northwest beneath a narrow ridge located over southern Mexico and south of an upper @-@ level low over northern Mexico . About 24 hours after developing into a tropical cyclone , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Odile . By 0000 UTC September 20 , the EPHC reported that Odile had attained hurricane status while turning towards the east between the ridge and an upper @-@ level low . 
 Late on September 21 , Hurricane Odile reached its peak intensity of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) ( a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) as it approached Acapulco . Due to a combination of an upper level trough that moved southward over the Baja California Peninsula and the weakening of the ridge , the hurricane began to turn more northwestward . After maintaining peak intensity for 12 hours , Odile started to weaken , as the storm began to encounter cooler sea surface temperatures . The hurricane rapidly weakened to tropical storm status while approaching the coast of Mexico ; within a six @-@ hour period , the winds diminished from 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . By late on September 22 , Odile made landfall about 50 miles ( 80 km ) northwest of Zihuatanejo , with winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . Less than six hours later , at 0000 UTC on September 23 , Odile ceased to exist as a tropical cyclone . While its surface circulation rapidly weakened over the mountains of western Mexico , the remnants of Odile moved northwest , passing east of Manzanillo before weakening as it re @-@ curved towards Texas . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Heavy rainfall was recorded across Southern Mexico , with the maximum rainfall totals in Costa Azul and Acapulco , where it caused 24 @.@ 73 in ( 628 mm ) of rainfall . In all , Odile and a few other systems brought the heaviest rains to the region since 1978 . Acapulco Mayor Alfonso <unk> Alcaraz reported that flooding damaged roughly 900 homes , inundated 30 miles ( 50 km ) of highways , triggered an evacuation of 7 @,@ 000 people , and left 20 @,@ 000 families without water service . However , these reports were not confirmed because telephone circuits between Acapulco and Mexico City were down . 
 Commercial flights in Acapulco were suspended on September 21 , only to be resumed on September 23 , though the airline terminal remained flooded by more than 3 ft ( 910 mm ) of water . Cites such as Zihuatanejo along the coast were left without electricity since the hurricane had knocked down two high @-@ tension towers . A total of 44 riverbanks and 30 @,@ 000 residents were isolated due to flooding . Eighteen passengers and three crewman drowned on the Atoyac River . In addition , tourism resorts in Acapulco and Ixtapa @-@ <unk> suffered severe damage . Officials estimated that hotels were only 5 % full . 
 = Hubert Brooks = 
 Hubert Brooks MC ( December 29 , 1921 – February 1 , 1984 ) was a Canadian RCAF officer and ice hockey player who won a gold medal at the 1948 Winter Olympics in St. Moritz . He joined the RCAF in 1940 and served during World War II , being shot down during his second mission over Germany in 1942 . He was taken as a prisoner of war to Stalag VIII @-@ B , from where he tried several unsuccessful escape attempts prior to making it to occupied Poland and joining the Polish Underground State as a guerrilla . He rose through the ranks of the rebel force , undertaking raids and assassinations against the Nazi occupation until the end of the conflict . He was one of only five RCAF members to receive the Military Cross for his actions and his award carried the longest citation of them all . 
 Brooks returned to Canada by way of Russia in 1945 , and worked for the Missing Research and Enquiry Service for two years . He was then selected to join the Ottawa RCAF Flyers , who represented Canada at the 1948 Winter Olympics and captured the gold medal in the ice hockey tournament . After a series of exhibition games in Europe , he returned to Canada and entered military intelligence , serving at various posts until 1971 , at which point he retired to take up an administrative position at the University of Ottawa . He died in 1984 and one of the student dorms , the Brooks Residence , is named in his honour . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brooks was born on December 29 , 1921 in <unk> , Alberta . During the Great Depression his family moved out of the prairie provinces to Ottawa and Montreal , where he received an education in French and first learned to play ice hockey . In July 1940 , he applied to join the Royal Canadian Air Force and was accepted that August into the special reserve at the rank of Air Craftsman 2 . The " special reserve " was created at the onset of World War II as a section whose members could be terminated at any time , so that the force could easily return to its pre @-@ conflict size at the end of hostilities . 
 Brooks trained in Brandon , Manitoba through October prior to being sent to a Winnipeg equipment depot to serve as a guard . He then undertook several training phases across the country in Regina , Saskatchewan , London , Toronto , Malton , and Fingal , Ontario , and finally Rivers , Manitoba , prior to graduating in August 1941 as a Navigator - Bomb <unk> . Arriving in Britain at the end of September , he was sent to RAF Kinloss the following month and trained there until February 1942 , when he joined the 419 Tactical Fighter Training Squadron . On April 8 – 9 , during only his second mission , he was shot down during a bombing raid and landed near Oldenburg , Germany , where he was quickly taken as a prisoner of war and sent to Dulag Luft . 
 = = Activities in Germany and Poland = = 
 Brooks arrived in Stalag VIII @-@ B in April 1942 , and switched identities with a New Zealand army private , Frederick Cole , so that he would be available to be placed on work detail ( members of the air force were not permitted to be part of working parties ) . In June he was able to escape from a coal @-@ mining work camp with an Irish soldier , and fled to occupied Poland , but was soon captured in Kraków and returned to Stalag VIII @-@ B by the end of the month . He was sentenced to two weeks of solitary confinement , but retained his secret identity . 
 By September Brooks was back at a work camp , this time in <unk> in the Sudetenland . He escaped that month with five other men , this time making it to Lüneburg inside a coal train prior to his recapture . Sent to a prisoner of war camp near Wiener Neustadt , he once more tried to escape but failed , suffered a severe beating at the hands of the Germans , and was again sent back to Stalag VIII @-@ B for two weeks of solitary confinement . Working as a truck helper from a saw mill in <unk> , he slowly acquired maps of Europe and the surrounding region as well as contact information for the Polish Underground State . Having escaped twice already , he risked transfer to a special punishment camp if caught again but , nevertheless , he fled his detention once more , this time with a Scottish soldier by the name of John Duncan , in May 1943 . 
 The duo was eventually smuggled into occupied Poland where they contacted the Polish Underground in Częstochowa and joined the guerrilla movement Armia Krajowa . Posing as a Polish laborer working in a jam factory , he served on patrols , raided food convoys , and assassinated members of the Gestapo during a probationary period . After the camp was attacked in December , which not only killed several resistance members but also caused a split in the group , the reduced force continued its operations until February 1944 , when retaliation for a raid on a police garrison lowered their membership to a critical point . 
 By March , however , Brooks ' unit had grown to 110 men and he was promoted to Second Lieutenant and put in charge of a band of 40 soldiers , including Duncan . His guerrilla activities expanded to include larger raids , reprisal attacks , and the assassination of more important members of the Nazi regime . He would later earn the Polish Cross of Valor for helping lead over 100 of his men out of a German encirclement to safety without a single casualty . He made his way to the Russian front line in January 1945 , and was eventually transferred from Lviv to Odessa , Port Said , Cairo , and finally London , where he arrived in March 1945 . 
 Promoted to the rank of Warrant Officer during his tenure as a prisoner of war , Brooks was informed upon his arrival that his father had died in May of the previous year . He returned to Canada in June . He was awarded the Military Cross for his actions during the conflict , as well several other campaign and achievement medals such as the 1967 Canadian Centennial Medal and the silver Polish Cross of Merit with Swords . He was one of only five RCAF members to receive the Military Cross during World War II ( as it is primarily granted to soldiers serving in Army units ) and his citation was the longest . 
 = = MRES and 1948 Winter Olympics = = 
 Eventually promoted to Temporary Flying Officer , Brooks began working for the Missing Research and Enquiry Service ( MRES ) , which was an initiative to locate individuals from the Commonwealth of Nations who were missing or killed in action during World War II over hostile territory . He worked with the service for nearly two years , from November 1945 through July 1947 , as a Search Officer in Denmark , Norway , and as a Section Leader in the American Zone of Germany . Brooks and a colleague sailed a fishing smack around Cape <unk> in the Arctic Circle , the most northerly coastal point of the mainland of Europe , in the search for missing airmen . It was during his tenure with MRES that he met his wife <unk> . He also played ice hockey during his downtime in Scandinavia with the U.S. Army Allstars , and was selected to be a member of Canada 's national delegation to the 1948 Winter Olympics . This squad , known as the Ottawa RCAF Flyers , consisted entirely of members of the Royal Canadian Air Force . 
 The team 's first exhibition game , a 7 @-@ 0 defeat for the Flyers against the McGill Redmen , led to calls for the squad being scrapped and replaced with collegiate players . After a subsequent 6 @-@ 2 loss against the Army , several players from the Ottawa New Edinburghs were added to the lineup and , by the time that the team was set to depart for St. Moritz , ten of the original eighteen members had been replaced , although Brooks remained . 
 In the end the Canadians captured the gold medal at the Olympic tournament . Although Brooks remained a reserve player and did not see any time on the ice , he did receive a gold medal and was selected to be his nation 's flag bearer during the opening ceremonies . On February 9 , the day after the final , he was finally afforded the opportunity to marry his fiancee <unk> in a ceremony that included Barbara Ann Scott , a Canadian Olympic gold medalist in figure skating , as a bridesmaid . He then joined the rest of the squad on an exhibition series across Europe , winning thirty @-@ four and drawing five of forty @-@ four games prior to returning to Canada in April . Brooks , along with the rest of the Flyers , was inducted into the Canadian Olympic Hall of Fame in 2008 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following the Olympics , Brooks returned to the RCAF to work in the field of military intelligence . He was first posted in the Maritimes in 1954 , and stayed there for several years until heading to Paris , France to be a staff officer at Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe ( SHAPE ) . He then returned to Canada to work at an RCAF station in <unk> , Quebec from 1965 through 1967 , as the first fully bilingual RCAF officer . From there he served at the Canadian Armed Forces Headquarters in Ottawa from 1967 through 1971 , during which time he was sent to assess the severity of Quebec 's 1970 October Crisis . Following his 1971 retirement from the Armed Forces , he took up a position as an administrator at the University of Ottawa , eventually rising to the position of Housing Director . Brooks died on February 1 , 1984 of a heart attack while sitting at his desk . Four years later , the university named one of the student residences in his honour . 
 = Aaliyah ( album ) = 
 Aaliyah is the third and final studio album by American R & B singer Aaliyah . It was released on July 7 , 2001 , by Blackground Records and Virgin Records America . After raising her profile with hit soundtrack singles during the late 1990s , Aaliyah started to work on the album in 1998 , but rescheduled its recording around her developing film career . She resumed recording the record in 2000 at Sing Sing Studios in Australia , where she shot her role for the 2002 film Queen of the Damned during the day and recorded songs at night . Aaliyah worked primarily with Blackground 's in @-@ house crew of writers and producers , including Bud 'da , J. Dub , Rapture , and Eric Seats , as well as longtime collaborator Timbaland . 
 Aaliyah is an R & B and neo soul record with music drawing from funk , hip hop , alternative rock , and electronica , among other styles . The producers incorporated synthesizer melodies , fragmented beats , distorted guitar , and eccentrically manipulated vocals and song structures . Much of Aaliyah dealt with the complexities of romantic love and different stages in a relationship . Most of the songs were written by lyricist Static Major , who shared a close friendship and strong rapport with Aaliyah . She viewed the album as a reflection of herself as both a young adult and a matured vocalist . 
 Aaliyah received highly positive reviews from critics and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 , but sold <unk> afterwards . When Blackground and Virgin wanted a high charting single to increase the album 's sales , Aaliyah shot a music video for the song " Rock the Boat " in the Bahamas , but died in a plane crash on a return flight to the United States on August 25 , 2001 . After her death , sales of the album skyrocketed and propelled it to number one on the Billboard 200 . Aaliyah was released during a period of peak activity in contemporary R & B and , since its initial reception , has been cited by critics as one of the best R & B records of its time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Aaliyah released her second album One in a Million in 1996 , and graduated from high school the following year . She gained further exposure with radio hits from film soundtracks , including her 1998 single " Are You That Somebody ? " . After it became the biggest hit of her career at that point , Aaliyah wanted to keep a lower profile and avoid overexposure . A follow @-@ up record was planned for February 1999 , but she postponed its recording to develop an acting career , which led to a starring role in the 2000 film Romeo Must Die . The film heightened her profile significantly , while the soundtrack 's single " Try Again " became her first number @-@ one pop hit . Her label Blackground Records used the film and its soundtrack to set up a distribution deal with Virgin Records America , which would distribute Blackground 's subsequent releases globally , including her self @-@ titled third album . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Aaliyah began recording the album in 1998 . She recorded a few songs , including two with longtime collaborator Timbaland , before working on Romeo Must Die . In 1999 , while working on the record in New York City , Aaliyah called and asked Trent Reznor , one of her musical idols , to produce a song , but they could not coordinate their schedules . She intended to finish the album by the end of 2000 and resumed its recording while filming in Australia for Queen of the Damned ( 2002 ) , as she shot her part for the film during the day and recorded songs at night . She said in an interview for Billboard , " there were nights when I didn 't go into the studio — I was too tired . On the weekends , I always made it . " Jomo Hankerson , Blackground president and Aaliyah 's cousin , said that he had to " bribe the producers " , who did not want to " go halfway around the world ! " , but ultimately had " a beautiful time ... making hot music " . 
 Most of the album 's songs were recorded at either Sony Studios in New York City or Sing Sing Studios in Melbourne , including " Loose Rap " , which was done at both studios . Aaliyah recorded " More Than a Woman " at Manhattan Center Studios , " U Got Nerve " at Soundtracks Studios in New York City , " We Need a Resolution " at Westlake Studios , and " I Care 4 U " at Magic Mix Studios and Music Grinder Studios in Los Angeles . She had first recorded " I Care 4 U " , written by past collaborator Missy Elliott , in 1996 for One in a Million , but scrapped it after that album 's completion . Aaliyah worked with Blackground Records ' in @-@ house crew of musicians , songwriters , and producers , including novice producers Bud 'da , J. Dub , Rapture , and Eric Seats . Music manager Jimmy Henchman , a friend of Aaliyah 's manager Barry Hankerson , helped coordinate the record 's production and arranged for the producers and writers to work with Aaliyah . 
 Static from the R & B band Playa wrote most of the album 's lyrics . While his band was growing apart , he was invited by Blackground to be a lead writer for the album after writing " Are You That Somebody ? " and " Try Again " . Static was a part of Aaliyah 's close group of friends , which included Missy Elliott and Timbaland , and shared an infatuation with her . He found Aaliyah to be ideal for his songwriting style , while she believed that he could accurately portray her feelings . A subtly sexual lyricist , he wrote " Rock the Boat " for her in 1999 , but Blackground felt she was not ready for the song . Barry Hankerson said of his songwriting , " We always were protective over every lyric ... But he did things where you never felt offended . You just felt like you overheard someone thinking ... he was clever ... Aaliyah depended on him [ and ] he depended on her . " Elliott said that he was " a part of that bridge of Aaliyah growing up lyrically " . While she discussed the lyrics with Static , Aaliyah consulted Bud 'da about the sound and musical direction of the album . She was interested in learning about the UK garage scene at the time . 
 In March 2001 , Aaliyah finished recording the album after having filmed her part in Queen of the Damned for four months , which ultimately delayed the album 's release . In Australia , she also did a photo shoot for Aaliyah with photographers Jeff Dunas , Jonathan Mannion , David LaChapelle , and Albert Watson . Aaliyah handled five pythons at the shoot and developed an affinity for snakes , finding them " dangerous , but quite beautiful " and representative of her on the album . She revisited the snake theme in her music video for " We Need a Resolution " in April and told MTV , " They live in solitude , [ and ] there are times in my life [ when ] I just want to be by myself . There are times I can 't even figure myself out . I feel they are very complex creatures , [ but ] at the same time , they 're sexy , too . That 's why they represent Aaliyah pretty well . " She described the record as " a good reflection of [ myself ] and the person [ I am ] today " , saying in an interview for Jet magazine , " I am a young adult now , and I think this album shows my growth vocally . " Aaliyah was mastered by Bernie Grundman at his studio in Los Angeles . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 An R & B and neo soul album , Aaliyah featured midtempo funk songs , hip hop @-@ textured uptempo tracks , and slow jams that draw on older soul influences . Along with contemporary urban sounds , its music incorporated Middle @-@ Eastern influences , muted alternative rock , and , particularly on Timbaland 's songs for the album , Latin timbres . " Never No More " mixed both older soul and modern hip hop sounds with string arrangements by producer Bud 'da , while " Read Between the Lines " was a rhythmic digital samba with Latin percussion . Aaliyah 's production featured synthesizer melodies , vintage <unk> , distorted guitar , staccato arrangements , and layered , eccentrically manipulated vocals . John Mulvey of NME found its sound subtle and lacking " bombast and histrionics " , while the magazine 's Alex Needham likened its " otherworldly " , high frequency production to dub reggae and the dark , spacious dance music of Dr. Dre and Massive Attack . In Stephen Thomas Erlewine 's opinion , the album was distinct from the older soul leanings of Macy Gray and Jill Scott , as its music was unconventional yet modern , " turning out a pan @-@ cultural array of sounds , styles , and emotions " . 
 Aaliyah 's beats were produced to sound fragmented , exhibiting techno and electro textures . Tracks such as " Loose Rap " , " Extra Smooth " , and " What If " featured unconventional song structures experimenting with resolution . " I Can Be " and " What If " incorporated 2 @-@ step and rock elements , although the latter song drew particularly from Detroit techno and industrial rock . On the club @-@ influenced " More Than a Woman " , Aaliyah sang over harsh @-@ sounding synthesizer and guitar sounds , while " Loose Rap " featured underwater noises , low @-@ key electronica in the style of the Neptunes , and harmonically soft vocals declaring " it ain 't just rhythm and blues " . Ernest Hardy of Rolling Stone compared the album 's experimentation to the sounds on OutKast 's Stankonia ( 2000 ) , Sade 's Lovers Rock ( 2000 ) , and Missy Elliott 's Miss E ... So Addictive ( 2001 ) . According to Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani , " like Elliott 's genre @-@ bending So Addictive , Aaliyah provides a missing link between hip @-@ hop and electronica . " 
 The lyrics on Aaliyah explored the intricacies of romantic love and phases in a relationship such as heartache , frivolous infatuation , and issues near the end of a relationship . Subtle , lighthearted humor and witty sound effects such as comical vocal manipulation interspersed the themes of heartbreak and eroticism . According to Citysearch 's Justin Hartung , the record " transforms the confusion of young adulthood into exhilarating freedom " . Bob Waliszewski of Plugged In observed female empowerment @-@ themed songs that showed a " healthy self @-@ respect " by Aaliyah , who " doesn 't put up with unfaithful cads ( ' You Got Nerve ' ) , mind games ( ' I Refuse ' ) , self @-@ impressed hunks ( ' Extra Smooth ' ) , gossip and envy ( ' Loose Rap ' ) , or physical abuse ( ' Never No More ' ) " . The key @-@ shifting , drum and bass @-@ influenced " Extra Smooth " addressed an enthusiastic courtship and was inspired by a conversation between Aaliyah and Static about how men try to act suave , while " Loose Rap " was titled after the slang phrase of the same name and dismissed romantic admirers who use trite pick @-@ up lines . " Those Were the Days " dispassionately dismissed a male lover , while " What If " angrily threatened an unfaithful lover and by extension similar men . On " I Care 4 U " , the narrator tried to console a friend who is heartbroken , but found herself distressed by unrequited feelings she has for him . 
 Aaliyah sang with restrained soprano vocals throughout the album . Vibe magazine 's Hyun Kim argued that its songs drew focus to her singing more than her previous records , " bringing it to the forefront as opposed to hiding it behind the layered production " . " Rock the Boat " was sung with breathless vocals by Aaliyah , who instructed her lover on how to please her sexually and equated her erotic high to a drug high . Ballads such as " I Care 4 U " , " Never No More " , and " I Refuse " were sung more emotively , expressing melancholy qualities and hurt . On " I Can Be " , Aaliyah sang from the perspective of an adulterous man 's mistress who wanted to be his foremost girlfriend . Alex Macpherson from The Guardian wrote that " Aaliyah 's blank , numbed delivery " on the song " makes being the other woman seem like an emotionally masochistic form of self @-@ medication " . Biographer Christopher John Farley said she " emotionally detailed a song " unlike on her previous albums and that " her gentle voice now seemed like something elemental , a kindly wind blowing through the branches of a big tree . " According to Joshua Clover , Aaliyah pushed musical notes " into strange corners of syncopation 's shifty architecture " on the more " shape @-@ defying " tracks . He wrote that " she makes the sonics tell the story , creating meaning outside the lyrics , pleasure beyond the hooks . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 After Aaliyah was released in July 2001 , it debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 albums chart , selling 187 @,@ 000 copies in the week of August 4 . Although it was the highest sales week of Aaliyah 's career , the album initially sold slower than her previous record , One in a Million . Blackground and Virgin , which had invested heavily in Aaliyah 's commercial performance , wanted a single with a high chart placement to help increase sales . " We Need a Resolution " had been released as the lead single on April 13 , but underperformed on radio and only reached number fifty @-@ nine on the Billboard Hot 100 . In August , Aaliyah shot a music video for " More Than a Woman " in Los Angeles and then travelled to the Bahamas to shoot a video for " Rock the Boat " . But after its completion , she and several crew members who were returning to the United States died in a plane crash on August 25 . Blackground executives were uncertain when they would release the album 's next single and video . 
 The album 's sales skyrocketed after Aaliyah 's death . Before her death , its sales had been diminishing since the album 's release in July and stood at more than 447 @,@ 000 copies sold . News of her death was reported on the last day of Nielsen SoundScan 's sales tracking week , during which Aaliyah sold 62 @,@ 000 copies , a 41 @.@ 5 % increase from its past week 's sales . The following week , it sold 305 @,@ 500 copies and ascended from number 19 to number one on the Billboard 200 . It was the record 's highest sales week and marked the first time a recording artist climbed to number one posthumously since John Lennon in 1980 with his album Double Fantasy . It was also Aaliyah 's only album to top any of Billboard 's charts . The record sold more than one million copies by September 19 and 2 @.@ 06 million copies by February 25 , 2002 . In the US , Aaliyah spent 68 weeks on the Billboard 200 and , by December 2009 , had sold 2 @.@ 6 million copies . 
 Blackground , which had ended its joint deal with Virgin in November , wanted to send the video for " More Than a Woman " to domestic outlets , but it required both labels to work together . Blackground subsequently moved to Universal Records , and the video was first aired in Europe . In the United Kingdom , " More Than a Woman " was released as a single on January 7 , 2002 , and entered the singles chart at number one , while Aaliyah re @-@ entered the albums chart at number 65 ; it had originally entered the chart at number 25 on July 28 , 2001 . Two weeks after " More Than a Woman " reached number one , the album jumped 17 spots to number five on January 27 , 2002 . Aaliyah went on to spend 31 weeks on the British charts . It also reached number nine on the record charts in France , Germany , and the Netherlands , where it charted for 33 , 41 , and 46 weeks , respectively . 
 Aaliyah received highly positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 76 , based on 14 reviews . Michael Odell of The Guardian called it a flawless blend of pop and R & B that was " as much a brochure for the current state of R & B production facilities " as it was a showcase for Aaliyah 's singing . He found the music 's textures " scintillating " and believed its distinguishing characteristic to be " a playful and confident reworking of the [ R & B ] canon " . In the Chicago Tribune , Brad <unk> wrote that Aaliyah demonstrated Sade 's grace and Missy Elliott 's daring with fashionable neo soul that was " equal parts attitude and harmony , and all urban music perfection " , while Russell Baillie from The New Zealand Herald deemed the music innovative dance @-@ pop on what he called " a cohesive , detailed and disarmingly enticing album " . Simon Price , writing for The Independent , cited the record as " further evidence that black pop is the avant garde " . In a review for The A.V. Club , Nathan Rabin argued that the album established Aaliyah as a significant artist unobscured by her collaborators , while Hardy from Rolling Stone called it " a near @-@ flawless declaration of strength and independence " in which Aaliyah explored her " fantasies and strengths " . Writing for Spin , Clover viewed the record as her most profound work and said she had made " art " out of Timbaland and Static 's " formal finesse " by " investing sound schemes with urgency and emotional intricacy " . 
 In a less enthusiastic review , Connie Johnson from the Los Angeles Times found the production unadventurous and felt the lyrics lacked the depth and " personal revelation that gives music some immediacy " . Mulvey deemed Aaliyah " graceful " and " satisfying rather than extraordinary " in his review for NME , saying although it was redeemed by Static 's consistent songwriting , Timbaland should have contributed more songs . Like Mulvey , Q remarked that its music was decent rather than innovative , with some filler . In Entertainment Weekly , Craig Seymour wrote that there were a few songs that strayed from her musical strengths , but elsewhere she " skillfully portrays love as part woozy thrill , part pulse @-@ racing terror " . Robert Christgau gave the record a three @-@ star honorable mention , indicating " an enjoyable effort consumers attuned to its overriding aesthetic or individual vision may well treasure " . In his column for The Village Voice , he named " We Need a Resolution " and " U Got Nerve " as highlights and called Aaliyah " a slave to her beats , but a proud slave " . 
 Aaliyah was named the best album of 2001 by Slant Magazine and one of the ten best records of the year by The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution and Time magazine . NME ranked it at number 39 on their year @-@ end list . The album finished 73rd in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics published by The Village Voice . Christgau , who created and supervised the poll , said Aaliyah finally " developed material nobody can deny " on " a good album " . The record also finished 37th in the annual poll run by German music magazine Spex . For the album , Aaliyah was posthumously awarded an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Female Artist . At the 2002 American Music Awards , it won in the category of Favorite R & B / Soul Album . In 2002 , Aaliyah received a Grammy Award nomination for Best R & B Album . " Rock the Boat " was nominated for Best Female R & B Vocal Performance . " More Than a Woman " was nominated in the same category in 2003 . In 2005 , Aaliyah was ranked number 66 on GQ 's 2005 list of the " 100 Coolest Albums in the World " . Stylus Magazine ranked it 47 on their list of the " Top 50 Albums of 2000 – 2005 " ; the publication 's David Drake ranked it eighth on his own list . Vibe included it as one of their " 150 Essential Albums of the Vibe Era " in 2007 . A few years later , Aaliyah was named by Slant Magazine as the 72nd best record of the 2000s decade . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Along with Aaliyah 's burgeoning film career , the album was a part of her rising mainstream success in 2001 . In a retrospective review , Steve Huey from AllMusic called it her most consummate record and said it " completed the singer 's image overhaul into a sensual yet sensitive adult " . Erlewine , the website 's senior editor , called the album " a statement of maturity and a stunning artistic leap forward " , while BBC Music 's Daryl Easlea felt it made Aaliyah 's two previous accomplished albums " look like exercises in juvenilia " . According to PopMatters critic Quentin B. Huff , she had never used her singing to complement her music 's innovative production before with as much variety , conviction , and success as on Aaliyah , which he said was also known as " The Red Album " because of its red artwork . Huff believed the record showcased the growing rapport between Aaliyah and her collaborators , and disproved questions about how she would continue recording music while broadening her profile . In The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , Keith Harris wrote " Aaliyah had grown from studio puppet to a powerful R & B archetype — a more self @-@ aware Ronnie Spector for a time that requires more self @-@ awareness of its young adults . " 
 Before her death , Aaliyah had planned to embark on the largest concert tour of her career to support the album . Her recording sessions for Aaliyah produced many leftover tracks that were posthumously archived by Blackground and mostly left unreleased because of internal conflicts and legal complications between the label , Aaliyah 's family , and the producers . The compilation album I Care 4 U was released in 2002 and featured six previously unreleased songs from the sessions for Aaliyah . 
 Aaliyah 's re @-@ emergence with the album in mid @-@ 2001 had coincided with a period of peak activity in contemporary R & B , as well as the popularity of neo soul . According to Erlewine , Aaliyah was " one of the strongest urban soul records of its time " , while The Guardian cited it as the peak of R & B 's golden age at the " turn of the century " . Alexis Petridis , the newspaper 's lead critic , believed Aaliyah had recorded her most engaging music in a year when R & B and hip hop demonstrated the most creativity in popular music . The Guardian 's Rebecca Nicholson attributed Timbaland 's subsequent commercial success with singers such as Justin Timberlake and Nelly Furtado to his experience producing Aaliyah , writing that he " hasn 't come close to creating anything as sonically stunning since " . Although Jon Caramanica from Vibe believed it " redefines the category " , he said Aaliyah " may be the best soul album of the young <unk> " , calling its music " daring in construction , gorgeous from conception ... damn near post @-@ R & B " . Q journalist Eve Barlow credited the album for " creating a blueprint that can be heard across pop music today " with acts such as R & B singers Beyoncé and The Weeknd , and indie pop band The xx . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Anna of East Anglia = 
 Anna ( or Onna ; killed 653 or 654 ) was king of East Anglia from the early 640s until his death . He was a member of the Wuffingas family , the ruling dynasty of the East Angles . He was one of the three sons of Eni who ruled the kingdom of East Anglia , succeeding some time after Ecgric was killed in battle by Penda of Mercia . Anna was praised by Bede for his devotion to Christianity and was renowned for the saintliness of his family : his son Jurmin and all his daughters – Seaxburh , Æthelthryth , Æthelburh and possibly a fourth , Wihtburh – were canonised . 
 Little is known of Anna 's life or his reign , as few records have survived from this period . In 631 he may have been at Exning , close to the Devil 's Dyke . In 645 Cenwalh of Wessex was driven from his kingdom by Penda and , due to Anna 's influence , he was converted to Christianity while living as an exile at the East Anglian court . Upon his return from exile , Cenwalh re @-@ established Christianity in his own kingdom and the people of Wessex then remained firmly Christian . 
 Around 651 the land around Ely was absorbed into East Anglia , following the marriage of Anna 's daughter Æthelthryth . Anna richly endowed the monastery at Cnobheresburg . In 651 , in the aftermath of an attack by Penda on Cnobheresburg , Anna was forced to flee into exile , perhaps to the western kingdom of the Magonsæte . He returned to East Anglia in about 653 , but soon afterwards the kingdom was attacked again by Penda and at the Battle of Bulcamp the East Anglian army , led by Anna , was defeated by the Mercians , and Anna and his son Jurmin were both killed . Anna was succeeded by his brother , Æthelhere . Botolph 's monastery at Iken may have been built in commemoration of the king . After Anna 's reign , East Anglia seems to have been eclipsed by its more powerful neighbour , Mercia . 
 = = Early life and marriage = = 
 Anna was the son of Eni , a member of the ruling Wuffingas family , and nephew of Rædwald , king of the East Angles from 600 to 625 . East Anglia was an early and long @-@ lived Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom in which a duality of a northern and a southern part existed , corresponding with the modern English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . 
 Anna was married , according to Bede , who refers to the saint Sæthryth as " daughter of the wife of Anna , king of the East Angles " . In Abbott Folcard 's Life of St Botolph , written in the 11th century , Botolph is described as having been at one time the chaplain to the sisters of a king , Æthelmund , whose mother was named Sæwara . Folcard names two of Sæwara 's kinsmen as Æthelhere and Æthelwold . Since these are the names of two of Anna 's brothers , Steven Plunkett suggests that it is " tempting " to consider that Sæwara was married to Anna , and that Æthelmund might either be Anna 's full name , or the name of an otherwise unknown East Anglian sub @-@ king . The Liber Eliensis names Hereswith , the sister of Hild , abbess of Whitby , as Anna 's wife and the mother of Sæthryth , Seaxburh of Ely and Æthelthryth . However , the Liber Eliensis is regarded with caution by historians : Rosalind Love says that the mediaeval writers who interpreted Bede 's information about Hereswith made an " erroneous assumption " regarding her connection with Anna and his family . Historians now believe that Hereswith was Anna 's sister @-@ in @-@ law and that around the time that she married into the East Anglian royal family , Anna had already been king for a decade . 
 In 631 Anna was probably at the Suffolk village of Exning , an important settlement with royal connections , and , according to the Liber Eliensis , the birthplace of his daughter Æthelthryth . By tradition , Æthelthryth is said to have been baptised at Exning in a pool known as St <unk> 's Well . Exning was an important place strategically , as it stood just on the East Anglian side of the Devil 's Dyke , a major earthwork stretching between the Fen edge and the headwaters of the River Stour , built at an earlier date to defend the East Anglian region from attack . An early Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery discovered there suggests the existence of an important site nearby , possibly a royal estate or regio . 
 = = King of the East Angles = = 
 = = = Accession and rule = = = 
 During 632 or 633 Edwin of Northumbria , with his centre of Christian power north of the River Humber , was overthrown . Edwin was slain and Northumbria was ravaged by Cadwallon ap Cadfan , supported by the Mercian king , Penda . The Mercians then turned on the kingdom of the East Angles and their king , Ecgric . At an unknown date ( possibly in the early 640s ) , they routed the East Anglian army and Ecgric and his predecessor Sigeberht were both slain . D. P. Kirby has suggested that as Sigeberht was alive when the Irish monk Fursey left for Gaul and found Erchinoald , ( which happened after Erchinoald became Mayor of the <unk> palace in 641 ) , Sigeberht was probably killed around 640 or 641 . Penda 's victory marked the end of the line of kings of the East Angles who were directly descended from Rædwald . Some time after Penda 's victory , Anna became king of the East Angles , though the date of his accession is quite uncertain . The Liber Eliensis says that Anna died in the nineteenth year of his reign , and since he died in the mid @-@ 650s this would indicate a date around 635 . However , the Liber Eliensis is regarded by some historians as unreliable on this point , and Barbara Yorke suggests a possible date in the early 640s for Anna 's accession , noting that it could not have been after 645 as Anna is recorded as giving refuge to Cenwalh of Wessex in that year . It is probable that Anna became king with the assistance of the northern Angles . Throughout his reign he was the victim of Mercian aggression under Penda , but he also seems to have challenged the rise of Penda 's power . The British medievalist David Dumville has written that due to their rivalry for control over the Middle Anglian people , Mercia and East Anglia probably became hereditary enemies and Penda repeatedly attacked the East Angles from the mid @-@ 630s to 654 . 
 Anna arranged an important diplomatic marriage between his daughter Seaxburh and Eorcenberht of Kent , cementing an alliance between the two kingdoms . It was by means of marriages such as this that the kings of Kent could become well @-@ connected to other royal dynasties . Not all of Anna 's daughters were married into other royal families . During the 640s Anna 's daughter Æthelburg and his stepdaughter Sæthryth entered Faremoutiers Abbey in Gaul to live religious lives under abbess Fara . The first royal Anglo @-@ Saxons to become nuns , they made religious seclusion " an acceptable and desirable vocation for ex @-@ queens and royal princesses " , according to Barbara Yorke . 
 D. P. Kirby uses the presence of East Anglian princesses living under the veil in Gaul as evidence of the Frankish orientation of Anna 's kingdom at this time , continued since the reign of his predecessor Rædwald . The Wuffingas dynasty may have been connected with monastic foundations in the area around <unk> through Anna 's predecessor Sigeberht , who had spent several years as an exile in Gaul and had become a devout and learned Christian due to his experiences of monastic life . 
 In 641 Oswald of Northumbria was slain in battle by Penda ( probably at Oswestry in Shropshire ) . Due to his death , Northumbria was split into two . The northern part , Bernicia , accepted Oswald 's brother Oswiu as their new king , but the southern Deirans refused to accept him and were ruled instead by a king of the original Deiran house , Oswine . Soon afterwards Cenwalh of Wessex , the brother of Oswald 's widow and himself married to Penda 's sister , renounced his wife . In 645 , according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , Penda drove Cenwalh from his kingdom and into exile . During the following year , while a refugee at Anna 's court , he was converted to Christianity , returning in 648 to rule Wessex as a Christian king . Anna probably provided military support for Cenwalh 's return to his throne . 
 Anna 's hold on the western limits of his kingdom , which bordered on the Fen lands that surrounded the Isle of Ely , was strengthened by the marriage in 651 ( or slightly later ) of his daughter Æthelthryth to <unk> , a prince of the South Gyrwe , a people living in the fens who may have been settled in the area around Ely . Æthelthryth , accompanied by her minister <unk> , travelled from Ely to Northumbria when she married for the second time , to Ecgfrith . 
 = = = Exile = = = 
 During his reign Anna endowed the monastery at Cnobheresburg with rich buildings and objects . The monastery was built in about 633 by Fursey after he arrived in East Anglia . In time , weary of attacks on the kingdom , Fursey left East Anglia for good , leaving the monastery to his brother Foillan . When in 651 Penda attacked the monastery , Anna and his men arrived and held the Mercians back . This gave Foillan and his monks enough time to escape with their books and valuables , but Penda defeated Anna and drove him into exile , possibly to the kingdom of Merewalh of the Magonsætan , in western Shropshire . He returned to East Anglia in about 654 . 
 = = = Death , burial place and successors = = = 
 Soon after 653 , when Penda made his son Peada the ruler of the Middle Angles ( but still continued to rule his own country ) , the Mercian assault on East Anglia was repeated . The opposing armies of Penda and Anna met at Bulcamp , near Blythburgh in Suffolk . The East Anglians were defeated and many were slain , including King Anna and his son Jurmin . Anna 's death is mentioned in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle in the entry for 653 or 654 , " Her Anna <unk> <unk> <unk> ... " – ' Here Anna was killed ' – but no other details of the battle in which he died are given . 
 Blythburgh , a mile from Bulcamp and situated near the fordable headwaters of the Blyth estuary , was afterwards believed to be the location of the tombs of Anna and Jurmin . It is a candidate for a monastic site or a royal regio ( estate ) . According to Peter Warner , the Latin derivation of part of the nearby place @-@ name ' Bulcamp ' indicates its ancient origins , and mediaeval sources which claim continuous Christian worship at Blythburgh throughout the Anglo @-@ Saxon period provide circumstantial evidence of its connections with East Anglian royalty and Christianity . Part of an 8th @-@ century whalebone diptych or writing @-@ tablet , used for liturgical purposes , has been found near the site . 
 Saint Botolph began to build his monastery at <unk> , now conclusively identified as Iken , Suffolk , in the year that Anna was killed , possibly to commemorate the king . Anna was succeeded in turn by his two brothers Æthelhere and Æthelwold , who may have ruled jointly . It is possible that Æthelhere was set up as a puppet ruler by Penda or was his ally , as he was one of the 30 duces that accompanied Penda when he attacked Oswiu of Northumbria at an unidentified location called the Winwæd in 655 or 656 . Penda himself was killed at the Winwæd , after having steadily increased his power over a period of 13 years . Æthelhere ( who was also slain at the Battle of the Winwæd ) and Æthelwold were succeeded by the descendants of Anna 's youngest brother , Æthelric . 
 Bede praised Anna 's piety in his Ecclesiastical History of the English People , and modern historians have since regarded Anna as a devout king , but his reputation as a devoted Christian is mainly because he produced a son and four daughters who were all made into Anglo @-@ Saxon saints . Five hundred years after his death , his tomb at Blythburgh was ( according to the Liber Eliensis ) still " venerated by the pious devotion of faithful people " . 
 = = Descendants = = 
 Anna 's children were all canonised . The eldest , Seaxburh , was the wife of Eorcenberht of Kent . She ruled Kent from 664 until her son Ecgberht came of age . Æthelthryth , according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , founded the monastery at Ely in 673 . Another daughter , Æthelburh , spent her life at the nunnery of Faremoutiers . Anna 's son , Jurmin , was of warrior age in 653 when he was killed in battle . 
 By tradition , Anna is said to have had a fourth daughter , Wihtburh , an abbess at Dereham ( or possibly West Dereham ) , where there was a royal double monastery . She may never have existed : Bede fails to mention her and she first appears in a calendar in the late 10th century Bosworth Psalter . She may have been a character specifically created by the religious community at Ely , where her remains were supposed to have been taken after being stolen from Dereham and subsequently used as visual proof of the incorruptibility of a saint 's body , a substitute for her sister Æthelthryth , whose body had to remain unexamined in her tomb . Manuscript F of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , which dates from about 1100 , mentions Wihtburh 's death when it records that her body was found uncorrupted in 798 , 55 years after she died . The resulting date for her death of 743 is too far too late for her to have been a sister of Æthelthryth , who was born in 636 . 
 = Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes ( Japanese : マーヴル VS . カプコン <unk> オブ <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Māvuru bāsasu Kapukon : Kurasshu obu Sūpā Hīrōzu ) is a crossover fighting game developed and published by Capcom . It is the third installment in the Marvel vs. Capcom series , which features characters from Capcom 's video game franchises and comic book series published by Marvel Comics . The game debuted in Japanese arcades in January 1998 . It was ported to the Dreamcast and PlayStation , which were released from 1999 through 2000 . The game was re @-@ released in 2012 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 as part of the Marvel vs. Capcom Origins collection . 
 Players select a team of characters from the Marvel and Capcom universes to engage in combat and attempt to knock out their opponents . In contrast to the series ' previous entry , Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter , the game features characters from numerous Capcom video game franchises , rather than strictly Street Fighter characters . While the gameplay is largely identical to its predecessor , Clash of Super Heroes features two distinct changes : the removal of the traditional character assist system and the introduction of the " Variable Cross " attack . 
 The Dreamcast version of the game was praised for its visuals , gameplay , and translation of the original arcade experience . Due to the PlayStation 's limited RAM capacity , Capcom removed tag team battles in an attempt to preserve the game 's speed and graphical integrity . Consequently , the PlayStation port received mixed reviews . A sequel to Clash of Super Heroes , Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes , was released in 2000 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes is the third entry in the Marvel vs. Capcom series of 2D fighting games . The game utilizes similar tag team @-@ based game mechanics to its predecessor , Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter . Before starting each match , the player selects a team of two fighters to compete in one @-@ on @-@ one combat . The player is free to swap between their characters at any point during battle . While one character fights , their teammate resting off @-@ screen slowly regenerates their life gauge . The first team to exhaust their opponent 's vitality wins the match ; however , if the timer runs out before either team is knocked out , the player with the most remaining health is declared the winner . 
 Clash of Super Heroes features two significant gameplay changes from Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter . The game removes the " Variable Assist " feature used in the previous installment , which allows the player to summon their offscreen teammate to perform a special attack , in favor of the " Guest Character / Special Partner " system . While similar in function , guest characters are randomly allocated to each player at the beginning of a match . They are also limited to a few uses per round . Clash of Super Heroes introduces a new technique called the " Variable Cross " , also known as a " Duo Team Attack " . When executing a Variable Cross , the player can attack their opponent with both characters simultaneously for a limited time . In addition , the player is given unlimited use of the " Hyper Combo Gauge " , a colored meter towards the bottom of the screen which allows the player to perform several special techniques , allowing them to pull off multiple Hyper Combos , moves which deliver heavy damage to the opponent , in quick succession . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 The Dreamcast version of Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes includes five game modes : Arcade , Versus , Training , Survival , and Cross Fever . In Arcade Mode , the player must defeat several artificial intelligence @-@ controlled teams to reach the final boss character , Onslaught , a character from the X @-@ Men comic book series . Upon completion , the player views a cinematic ending unique to each playable fighter . In Versus Mode , two players can choose their characters , handicap level , and stages before competing against each other in battle locally . The player can practice moves and combos in Training Mode , where they can also adjust certain settings , such as AI difficulty , and the number of bars available in the Hyper Combo Gauge . In Survival Mode , the player fights through waves of enemies with a time limit ; in addition , the player 's life gauge is carried over through each round . Cross Fever Mode allows four players to simultaneously compete in a two @-@ on @-@ two match . In place of Cross Fever , the PlayStation version features an exclusive mode called Cross Over . Cross Over is the only mode in the PlayStation port that permits tag team gameplay , which was removed due to the console 's limited RAM capacity . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes features a roster of 15 playable fighters . Unlike Marvel Super Heroes vs. Street Fighter , which limited itself to characters from the Street Fighter series , Clash of Super Heroes uses characters from other Capcom video game franchises , such as Darkstalkers , Mega Man , and Strider . The game features 20 unplayable guest characters , drawn from the Marvel and Capcom universes , which are used for support during battle . Guest characters from Marvel Comics include Cyclops , Jubilee , and Thor , while the Capcom side includes Arthur from Ghosts ' n Goblins , the Unknown Soldier from Forgotten Worlds , and Saki <unk> from Quiz <unk> Dreams . The roster also contains six secret characters , which are accessed by inputting codes on the character select screen . Most of the secret characters are palette swaps of existing fighters with different moveset properties , such as Shadow Lady , a modified version of Chun @-@ Li ; the sole exception to this trend is Roll from the Mega Man series . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes was originally developed for the CP System II arcade system board . A direct Dreamcast port was revealed by the Computer Entertainment Software Association at the 1998 Tokyo Game Show . The Dreamcast version added the new game mode , Cross Fever , which permitted four @-@ player gameplay . The game later received a PlayStation port . However , the console 's RAM limitations required the developer to remove certain features , most notably the game 's tag team element ; thus , most game modes were restricted to two @-@ character battles , instead of four . This reduced the player 's secondary character to an assist role , similar to guest characters . To overcome the limitations , the PlayStation version had to implement a new gameplay mode called Cross Over . Cross Over Mode allows tag team play by forcing the players to fight with identical teams . For example , if Player 1 chooses Spider @-@ Man and Player 2 chooses Ryu , then Ryu and Spider @-@ Man would automatically be selected as Player 1 and Player 2 's secondary characters , respectively . The game also added an art gallery , where players could view game art and ending animations . Many frames of animation were also omitted as a result of insufficient RAM , particularly in larger character sprites . 
 Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes debuted in Japanese arcades on January 23 , 1998 . The game was released on the Dreamcast on March 25 , 1999 in Japan , and October 7 , 1999 in North America . A European version for the Dreamcast , published by Virgin Interactive , was released on June 23 , 2000 . The game was ported to the PlayStation on November 11 , 1999 in Japan , where it was renamed Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes EX Edition . North America received the PlayStation version later on January 27 , 2000 . 
 A high @-@ definition version of the game was released , alongside Marvel Super Heroes , as part of the Marvel vs. Capcom Origins collection . Built using the arcade ROM , the compilation sought to maintain the original 's gameplay experience , while adding new features such as online multiplayer , challenges , and replay saving . It was released through the PlayStation Network on September 25 , 2012 in North America and October 10 , 2012 in Europe . The Xbox Live Arcade version was released in both North America and Europe on September 26 , 2012 . Following the apparent expiration of Capcom 's licensing contracts with Marvel Comics in 2013 , Marvel vs. Capcom Origins was removed from online stores in December 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes was released to generally favorable reviews . Aggregating review site GameRankings gave the Dreamcast and PlayStation versions scores of 80 % and 75 % , respectively . 
 Upon its release on the Dreamcast , Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes received positive reviews for its animation quality and fast gameplay . Game Informer lauded the game for its " seamless animation , in @-@ your @-@ face effects , and lightning @-@ quick gameplay " . In addition , the magazine praised the Dreamcast version for being a " flawless " translation of the original arcade version . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot also praised the visuals and combat , stating that it was " everything you 'd expect from an over @-@ the @-@ top , ultra @-@ flashy fighter " . Game Revolution , on the other hand , felt that Clash of Super Heroes lacked depth . The site criticized the Dreamcast port for not adding any significantly new features from the arcade version . 
 The PlayStation port received more mixed reviews than its Dreamcast counterpart . Gerstmann heavily faulted the game for its removal of tag team battles . He claimed that while it had " the same moves as the original game ... the shell surrounding those moves [ was ] completely different " . Doug Perry of IGN labeled the PlayStation version as " an average game " , praising its gameplay and lasting appeal , while criticizing its selection of fighting styles and soundtrack . GamePro praised the developer for making the decision to remove features in order to keep the speed and graphical integrity of the game without overloading the system ; however , they still recommended the Dreamcast version over it . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel to Marvel vs. Capcom : Clash of Super Heroes was announced by Capcom on December 1 , 1999 . The game , titled Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes , was initially developed for the Sega NAOMI arcade board , marking Capcom 's first attempt at a fighting game outside of the CP System II and III hardware systems . It features several significant gameplay changes from Clash of Super Heroes , such as three @-@ on @-@ three tag team battles , a new character assist system , and a more simplified control scheme . Marvel vs. Capcom 2 also includes a roster of 56 playable fighters , drawing numerous character sprites from Capcom 's previous Marvel @-@ licensed fighting games . Following its release in Japanese arcades in 2000 , the game received ports to the Dreamcast , PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , Xbox , Xbox 360 , and iOS devices over the course of twelve years . 
 = Galaxy Supernova = 
 " Galaxy Supernova " is the eighth Japanese single by South Korean girl group Girls ' Generation . It was included on the group 's third Japanese studio album Love & Peace and was released as the second single from the album on September 18 , 2013 . The song was written by Frederik Tao Nordsø Schjoldan , Fridolin Nordsø Schjoldan , <unk> , and Martin Hoberg Hedegaard , whilst production was handled by Nozomu Tsuchiya . Musically , " Galaxy Supernova " is an electropop song . 
 The song received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who praised its music styles and compared the song to the group 's previous Japanese singles " Mr. Taxi " and " Paparazzi " . The song peaked at number three on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart and number four on the Japan Hot 100 . A music video for the track was released on September 5 , 2013 . To promote the song , Girls ' Generation performed live on music shows Secret Live and Live Monster in Japan . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Galaxy Supernova " was written by Frederik Tao Nordsø Schjoldan , Fridolin Nordsø Schjoldan , <unk> , and Martin Hoberg Hedegaard , whilst production was handled by Nozomu Tsuchiya . It is an electropop song that features " pulsing " synthesizers in its composition . It was released as the second single from Girls ' Generation 's third Japanese album Love & Peace on September 18 , 2013 . The album was subsequently released in December 2013 . 
 It was released as a CD single in Japan by Nayutawave Records , and includes the B @-@ side track " Do the <unk> " . Meanwhile , the digital single was released in several Asian countries including Japan , Hong Kong , Singapore and Taiwan by Universal Music Group . A limited CD + DVD edition of the single , which included a bonus music video for " Galaxy Supernova " , was released in Japan by Nayutawave Records . " Galaxy Supernova " was used in an advertisement campaign for Samantha Thavasa Jeans , the first jeans line from Japanese fashion company Samantha Thavasa , in conjunction with the group 's endorsement deal with the brand . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Galaxy Supernova " received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Jeff Benjamin from Billboard praised the song 's catchy " earworm hooks " and compared it to the group 's previous Japanese singles " Mr. Taxi " and " Paparazzi " for the same electropop production . Patrick St. Michael , writing for The Japan Times , picked " Galaxy Supernova " as one of the outstanding songs that " play to [ the group ] ' s strengths " on its parent album Love & Peace and labelled it a successor to " Mr. Taxi " . 
 " Galaxy Supernova " was a commercial success in Japan . The single took the number four spot on its first day of release on Oricon Daily Singles Chart . The following day , it rose to the number one spot on the Daily Chart , selling 14 @,@ 565 physical copies . It peaked at number three on the Oricon Weekly Singles Chart , and became the eighth best @-@ selling physical single of September in Japan , selling 62 @,@ 371 copies . 
 " Galaxy Supernova " debuted at number 39 on the Japan Hot 100 — a chart operated by Billboard magazine — on September 23 , 2013 . The following week , it rose to number four on the chart , which later became its peak . It dropped to number nine on the chart the following week . On the Japan Adult Contemporary Airplay chart , the single debuted at number 75 on September 23 , 2013 , and later peaked at number six on September 30 , 2013 . " Galaxy Supernova " also peaked at number 22 on the Hot Top Airplay , and number two on the Hot Singles Sales . The song 's music video was the sixth most @-@ viewed K @-@ pop music video on YouTube in 2013 . 
 = = Music video and promotion = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Galaxy Supernova " , directed by Toshiyuki Suzuki , was released on September 5 , 2013 . The video features the members wearing multicolored jeans and outfits , dancing in a " flashy virtual reality world " , as described by Benjamin . A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video was released on September 20 , 2013 , featuring scenes from the photo shoot for the Samantha Thavasa Jeans collection as well as the group practicing their choreography . 
 To promote the song in Japan , the group gave a Secret Live performance of " Galaxy Supernova " and " Gee " to 200 fans in Tokyo on the release day of the single and held a " Premium Talk " event on September 19 in Osaka . On November 4 , 2013 , the group held a live event in Tokyo for 500 people who bought the single . The group performed the song and the Japanese version of " Genie " on the Japanese television music show Live Monster on January 12 , 2014 . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the single 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Richard Riot = 
 The Richard Riot was a riot on March 17 , 1955 ( Saint Patrick 's Day ) in Montreal , Quebec , Canada . The riot was named after Maurice Richard , the star ice hockey player for the Montreal Canadiens of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Following a violent altercation on March 13 in which Richard hit a linesman , NHL president Clarence Campbell suspended him for the remainder of the 1954 – 55 NHL season , including the playoffs . Montreal fans protested that the suspension was too severe ; the team 's largely Francophone fan base claimed the length of the suspension was motivated by Richard 's French Canadian ethnicity . Outside of Montreal , however , the suspension was seen as justified and , if anything , too short . 
 On March 17 , Campbell appeared at the Montreal Forum for the Canadiens ' first game after Richard 's suspension . His presence provoked a riot at the Forum that spilled into the streets . The riot caused an estimated $ 100 @,@ 000 in property damage , thirty @-@ seven injuries , and 100 arrests . Tensions eased after Richard made a personal plea accepting his punishment and promising to return the following year to help the team win the Stanley Cup . The incident likely cost Richard the 1954 – 55 scoring title ( an honour Richard never achieved in his NHL career ) and played a role in the off @-@ season departure of longtime Canadiens head coach Dick Irvin . 
 = = Background = = 
 Maurice Richard was the star player for the Montreal Canadiens , and it was common for opponents to provoke him during games . Teams reportedly sent players onto the ice to purposefully annoy him by yelling ethnic slurs , hooking , slashing , and holding him as much as possible . Throughout his career , Richard was fined and suspended several times for retaliatory assaults on players and officials , including a $ 250 fine for slapping a linesman in the face less than three months before the March 13 , 1955 incident . Richard was considered the embodiment of French @-@ Canadians and was a hero during a time when they were seen as second @-@ class citizens . He was revered when he fought the " damn English " during games . In his book , The Rocket : A Cultural History of Maurice Richard , Benoît Melançon compares Richard to Major League Baseball 's Jackie Robinson by stating that both players represented the possibility for their minority groups to succeed in North America . 
 During the 1950s , Quebec 's industries and natural resources were controlled primarily by English Canadians or Americans . French @-@ speaking Quebecers were the lowest @-@ paid ethnic group in Quebec , which resulted in a sense that control rested with the Anglophone minority . Because of this and other factors , there had been growing discontent in the years before the riot . In early 1954 , Richard 's teammate , Bernie Geoffrion , was suspended in a move seen as anti @-@ Francophone . Following the suspension , Richard , who had a weekly column in the Samedi @-@ Dimanche newspaper , called President Campbell a " dictator " in print . The League in turn forced Richard to retract his statement and discontinue his column . In his 1976 biography of Richard , Jean @-@ Marie Pellerin wrote that his humiliation was shared by all Francophone Quebecers , who were sent running once more by the " English boot " . This was reflected in a Montreal newspaper 's editorial cartoon ( pictured ) , which portrayed Richard as an unruly schoolboy made to write lines by Campbell , shown as the teacher ; the cartoon had a deeper meaning as an example of the societal hierarchy that existed between English and French Canadians . 
 = = Incident = = 
 On March 13 , 1955 , an on @-@ ice episode sparked one of the worst incidents of hockey @-@ related violence in history . On that date in Boston , Richard was part of a violent confrontation in a game in between the Canadiens and their rival Boston Bruins . The Bruins ' Hal Laycoe , who had previously played defence for the Canadiens , high @-@ sticked Richard in the head during a Montreal power play . Richard required five stitches to close a cut that resulted from the high @-@ stick . Referee Frank <unk> signaled a delayed penalty , but allowed play to continue because the Canadiens had possession of the puck . When the play ended , Richard skated up to Laycoe , who had dropped his stick and gloves in anticipation of a fight , and struck him in the face and shoulders with his stick . The linesmen attempted to restrain Richard , who repeatedly broke away from them to continue his attack on Laycoe , eventually breaking a stick over his opponent 's body before linesman Cliff Thompson corralled him . Richard broke loose again and punched Thompson twice in the face , knocking him unconscious . Richard then left the ice with the Canadiens ' trainer . According to Montreal Herald writer Vince Lunny , Richard 's face resembled a " smashed tomato . " Richard was given a match penalty and an automatic $ 100 fine , and Laycoe a five @-@ minute major penalty plus a ten @-@ minute misconduct for the high stick . 
 Boston police attempted to arrest Richard in the dressing room after the game ended , but were turned back by Canadiens players who barred the door , preventing any arrest . Bruins management finally persuaded the officers to leave with a promise that the NHL would handle the issue . Richard was never arrested for the incident . He was instead sent to the hospital by team doctors after complaining of headaches and stomach pains . 
 The Laycoe incident was Richard 's second altercation with an official that season , after having slapped a linesman in the face in Toronto the previous December , for which he was fined $ 250 . Upon hearing the referee 's report , league president Clarence Campbell ordered all parties to appear at a March 16 hearing at his office in Montreal . 
 = = Hearing = = 
 The game 's on @-@ ice officials , Richard , Laycoe , Montreal assistant general manager Ken Reardon , Boston general manager Lynn Patrick , Montreal coach Dick Irvin , and NHL referee @-@ in @-@ chief Carl Voss attended the March 16 hearing . In his defence , Richard contended that he was dazed and thought Thompson was one of Boston 's players . He did not deny punching or attacking Laycoe . 
 After the hearing , Campbell issued a 1200 @-@ word statement to the press : 
 … I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the attack on Laycoe was not only deliberate but persisted in the face of all authority and that the referee acted with proper judgment in awarding a match penalty . I am also satisfied that Richard did not strike linesman Thompson as a result of a mistake or accident as suggested … Assistance can also be obtained from an incident that occurred less than three months ago in which the pattern of conduct of Richard was almost identical , including his constant resort to the recovery of his stick to pursue his opponent , as well as flouting the authority of and striking officials . On the previous occasion he was fortunate that teammates and officials were more effective in preventing him from doing injury to anyone and the penalty was more lenient in consequence . At the time he was warned there must be no further incident … The time for probation or leniency is past . Whether this type of conduct is the product of temperamental instability or willful defiance of the authority in the games does not matter . It is a type of conduct which cannot be tolerated by any player — star or otherwise . Richard will be suspended from all games both league and playoff for the balance of the current season . 
 The suspension — the longest that Campbell ever issued during his thirty @-@ one @-@ year tenure as league President — was considered by many in Montreal to be unjust and unduly severe . Within minutes of the judgment 's dispensation , the NHL head office ( then in Montreal ) was deluged with hundreds of calls from enraged fans , many of whom made death threats against Campbell . 
 The general feeling around the league was that the punishment could have been more severe . Detroit Red Wings general manager Jack Adams said that Campbell " could do no less " and " I thought he would be suspended until January 1 of next season . " Red Wings forward Ted Lindsay , whom the league had disciplined earlier the same season for an incident in Toronto in which he attacked a Maple Leafs fan who had been threatening teammate Gordie Howe , expressed the stronger opinion that Richard was lucky not to get a life suspension : " In baseball , football or almost anything else that much would be almost automatic . I say they should have suspended him for life . " Bruins president Walter A. Brown agreed with Adams , saying " That 's the least they could do " ; Bruins player Fleming <unk> said , " If they had thrown the book at Richard in 1947 when he cut Bill <unk> and Vic Lynn , it might have stopped him and made him an even greater hockey player because of it . " Interest was high in the hockey world ; the Detroit Free Press reported its switchboard was swamped with calls . 
 = = Riot = = 
 Public outrage from Montreal poured in about what residents felt was excessive punishment . Many Québécois regarded the suspension as the English minority further attempting to subjugate the French majority and an attempt to humiliate French Canadians by " excessively punishing their favorite player " . Campbell , who received death threats , stated that he would not back down and announced his intention to attend the Canadiens ' next home game against the Red Wings on March 17 , despite advice that he not do so . Hundreds of demonstrators gathered in the Montreal Forum lobby two hours before the game . Attempts to " crash the gate " by these fans without tickets were denied by police . They then began to gather at Cabot Square across from the Forum . The crowd of demonstrators grew to 6 @,@ 000 . Some carried signs that denounced Campbell , and others had signs reading , among other things , " Vive Richard " ( Long live Richard ) , " No Richard , no Cup " , and " Our national sport destroyed " . The crowd , originally described as " jovial " , turned " surly " after police intervened at the ticket gate . After the mood turned foul , some members of the crowd began smashing windows and throwing ice chunks at passing streetcars . 
 The game against Detroit was a battle for first place , but the suspension unsettled the Canadiens . Goaltender Jacques Plante later recalled that the game seemed secondary , and players and officials were " casting worried glances at the sullen crowd " . Likewise , Dick Irvin said later , " The people didn 't care if we got licked 100 – 1 that night . " 
 Midway through the first period , with Montreal already down 2 – 0 , Campbell arrived with three secretaries from his office ( one of whom he would later marry ) . The 15 @,@ 000 spectators immediately started booing Campbell . Some fans began pelting him and his group with eggs , vegetables , and various debris for six straight minutes . At the end of the first period , Detroit had taken a 4 – 1 lead , and the barrage began again . Despite police and ushers ' attempts to keep fans away from Campbell , one fan , pretending to be a friend of Campbell 's , managed to elude security . As he approached , the fan extended his hand as if to shake Campbell 's . When Campbell reached out to shake his hand , the fan slapped him . As Campbell reeled from the attack , the fan reached back and delivered a punch . Police dragged the attacker away while he attempted to kick the NHL president . Shortly after the fan attack , a tear gas bomb was set off inside the Forum , not far from Campbell 's seat . Montreal Fire Chief Armand Pare mandated that the game be suspended for " the protection of the fans " , and the Forum was evacuated . Following the evacuation , Campbell took refuge in the Forum clinic , where he met with Canadiens general manager Frank Selke . The two wrote a note to Adams declaring the Red Wings the winner of the game due to the Forum 's ordered closure . 
 The departing crowd joined the demonstrators , and a riot ensued outside the Forum . Rioters were heard chanting " À bas Campbell " ( Down with Campbell ) and " Vive Richard " while they smashed windows , attacked bystanders , ignited newsstands , and overturned cars . More than fifty stores within a fifteen @-@ block radius of the Forum were looted and vandalized . Twelve police officers and twenty @-@ five civilians were injured . The riot continued well into the night , eventually ending at three A.M. , and it left Montreal 's Saint Catherine Street in shambles . Police estimated between forty @-@ one and 100 individuals were arrested . Damage was estimated to be $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 899 @,@ 291 in 2016 dollars ) to the neighborhood and the Forum itself . One jewelry store alone estimated its losses at $ 7 @,@ 000 ( $ 62 @,@ 950 in 2016 dollars ) . 
 Adams blamed Montreal officials after the game : " If they hadn 't pampered Maurice Richard , built him up as a hero until he felt he was bigger than hockey itself , this wouldn 't have happened . " 
 The incident was national news in Canada . Reporters lined up to see both Campbell and Richard on March 18 . Richard was reluctant to make a statement , fearing it could start another riot , but he eventually gave the following statement , both in French and English , over television to a national audience : 
 Because I always try so hard to win and had my troubles in Boston , I was suspended . At playoff time it hurts not be in the game with the boys . However , I want to do what is good for the people of Montreal and the team . So that no further harm will be done , I would like to ask everyone to get behind the team and to help the boys win from the New York Rangers and Detroit . I will take my punishment and come back next year to help the club and the younger players to win the Cup . 
 Campbell was unapologetic . He said that he considered it his duty as president to attend the game . Montreal mayor Jean Drapeau was livid at Campbell for attending , and he laid the blame for the riot on Campbell . A Montreal city councilor wanted Campbell arrested for inciting the riot . Years later , Canadiens player Jean Béliveau stated that , although he disagreed with Campbell 's decision to attend the game , as well as feeling Campbell might have been using his appearance to make a statement , he concluded that Campbell may have felt that if he did not attend he could appear to be hiding . He also noted that Campbell 's absence might not have made much of a difference . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The suspension came when Richard was leading the NHL in scoring and the Canadiens were battling Detroit for first place . Richard 's suspension also cost him the 1954 – 55 scoring title , the closest he ever came to winning it . When Richard 's teammate Bernie Geoffrion surpassed Richard in scoring by one point on the last day of the regular season , the Canadiens ' fans booed him . 
 The points from the forfeiture provided Detroit with the margin it needed to win first place overall and be guaranteed home @-@ ice advantage throughout the Stanley Cup playoffs . That season , the Canadiens lost the Cup Finals to Detroit in seven games , with the home team winning all seven games of a final for the first time . Richard retired in 1960 after the Canadiens ' fifth consecutive Stanley Cup , a record that still stands . 
 The episode was a prelude to the off @-@ season departure of coach Dick Irvin . Selke felt Irvin had riled Richard , thereby contributing to his " periodic eruptions " . Selke offered Irvin a job for life with the Canadiens , as long as it was in a non @-@ coaching capacity . Irvin turned him down and moved on to coach the Chicago Black Hawks , where he had begun his coaching career in 1930 – 31 . He was replaced by former Canadiens player Toe Blake . Irvin coached only one more season before succumbing to bone cancer . 
 = = Historical interpretation = = 
 The Richard Riot has taken on a significance greater than a mere sports riot in the fifty years since it happened . The sight of French Quebecers rioting over the perceived slight to a Quebec cultural icon like Richard led many commentators to believe it was a significant factor in Quebec 's Quiet Revolution of the 1960s . Furthermore , the cause of the riot has been suggested not to be as a result of the severity of the suspension ; what mattered was that the anglophone president of an anglophone league had suspended a Quebec player . French Canadians saw themselves as inherently disadvantaged within Canada and North America as a whole . Richard was seen as a hero by French Canadians , and almost a sort of a " revenge " against the anglophone establishment . The riot was a clear sign of rising ethnic tensions in Quebec . In an article published four days after the riot , journalist André Laurendeau was the first to suggest the riot was a sign of growing nationalism in Quebec . Entitled " On a <unk> mon <unk> Richard " ( My brother Richard has been killed ) , Laurendeau suggested the riot " betrayed what lay behind the apparent indifference and long @-@ held passiveness of French Canadians " . 
 On the other hand , Benoît Melançon argues that the riot has become part of the " Rocket Richard myth " and has taken on an importance that , in retrospect , is far greater than it actually had when it happened . He asserts , " Had there been no Riot , it is doubtful there would ever have been a Maurice Richard myth . " The riot ended up taking on greater significance as time passed , but not for the reasons many nonacademic commentators believe . Richard was in danger of being forgotten in the years immediately after his retirement , so he promoted himself , and his nascent myth , excessively : 
 There were Maurice Richard skates and jackets , but there were also Rocket ashtrays , Rocket transistor radios , and Rocket Richard Condensed Tomato Soup . Moreover , these products changed throughout history . " The principal impact of the trade in Richard … has been the transformation of Maurice Richard into a product , then into a label , and ultimately into a myth . " 
 He concludes by suggesting that the riot is now something it was not : " The riot has become the key event in turning Richard from a mere hockey player to a symbol of political resistance ( even if Richard himself was publicly apolitical and , according to this book , definitely not for an independent Quebec ) … According to this popular narrative , for the first time the people of Quebec stood up for themselves ; especially English Canada delights in anachronistically announcing that this was the beginning of the 1960s Quiet Revolution . " Perhaps the best way to explain how the interpretation of the riot changed is by looking at the change in the public perceptions of its antagonist : " It was necessary to overlook some of [ Richard 's ] character traits and to rewrite several episodes of his career " in order to elevate him into a mythical figure . 
 = Ontario Highway 525 = 
 Secondary Highway 525 , commonly referred to as Highway 525 , is a provincially maintained secondary highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . It is a short , remote secondary highway that links Highway 596 to the Wabaseemoong First Nations reserve . It is the second @-@ westernmost secondary highway in the province , Highway 673 being the first . The route was commissioned by 1982 along what was formerly Highway 596 ; a former use of the route number existed between 1956 and 1973 in Gravenhurst . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 525 is a very remote highway in northwestern Ontario . There are no settlements along its 35 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 22 @.@ 1 mi ) length , and the closest human habitation is <unk> near its southern terminus and <unk> near its northern terminus . The route begins west of <unk> , branching off from Highway 596 , which travels south to Kenora . It travels north along a wide strip of land bounded by Sand Lake to the east , and by Swan Lake and <unk> Lake to the west , all part of the Winnipeg River watershed . Zig @-@ zagging in a generally northward direction , the highway passes through thick boreal forest . At approximately its midpoint , the route meets the Cygnet Lake road , which provides access to a remote camp . The highway continues north , curving west immediately before ending at the entrance to the Wabaseemoong ( Islington ) reserve . The road continues into the reserve to provide access to Caribou Falls and <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 The current Highway 525 is not the original usage of the number . In 1956 , the number was one of several dozen Secondary Highways designated by the Department of Highways to improve connections between King 's Highways . The highway followed the route of present @-@ day Muskoka District Road 18 north from Highway 11 to the Muskoka Centre . It was decommissioned between early 1972 and late 1973 , shortly after the establishment of the District Municipality of Muskoka . 
 The current Highway 525 was designated by 1982 . Prior to that , the road it followed was an extension of Highway 596 that was designated in the mid @-@ 1970s . The route was gravel surfaced when it was assumed , but has since been paved . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 525 . The entirety of the route is located within Kenora District . 
 = Minuscule 543 = 
 Minuscule 543 in the Gregory @-@ Aland numbering ( ε 257 in Soden 's numbering and labelled 556 by Scrivener ) is a Greek minuscule manuscript of the New Testament , on parchment . <unk> it has been assigned to the 12th century . 
 The manuscript contains text of the four Gospels with unusual grammar forms and numerous errors . <unk> it does not belong to any of the main text @-@ types , and is a member of the textual family Family 13 , known also as Ferrar Group . The lacunose manuscript is housed at the University of Michigan . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The codex contains the text of the four Gospels , on 184 thick parchment leaves ( size 28 cm by 23 cm ) , with several lacunae ( Matthew 12 : 11 @-@ 13 : 10 ; Mark 8 : 4 @-@ 28 ; Luke 15 : 20 @-@ 16 : 9 ; John 2 : 22 @-@ 4 : 6 ; 4 : 52 @-@ 5 : 43 ; 11 : 21 @-@ 47 ) . One leaf was misplaced in binding . The parchment is coarse and yellowed by age . 
 The text of the codex was written two columns per page , 27 @-@ 30 lines per page , 17 letters per line , in minute hand , in brown ink . The same scribe wrote all four Gospels . There are breathings and accents used in regular form , but in some sort of system . There is not found iota subscript , iota <unk> occurs very often ( especially in Mark ) . 
 The titles to the Gospels of Matthew and Mark run : <unk> εκ του κατά <unk> ( <unk> ) . The titles to the Luke and John are usual : <unk> κατά <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 The lists of the κεφαλαια ( chapters ) are placed before every Gospel , numbers of the κεφαλαια are given at the left margin , with their τιτλοι ( titles ) in red at the top of pages . There is a division according to the Ammonian Sections , with a references to the Eusebian Canons . It contains lectionary markings , Synaxarion , <unk> , subscriptions , <unk> , and <unk> . The list of κεφαλαια to Matthew is missing and Gospel of Matthew begins on the first of the codex . It has an additional non @-@ biblical material : The Limits of the Five Patriarchates ( as in codices 69 and 211 ) — one page of it lost . 
 = = = Nomina sacra and OT quotations = = = 
 The nomina sacra are contracted in the usual way , but there are a number of words which the scribe failed to abbreviate . In some of the cases where nomina sacra are uncontracted , they have the heavy bar signifying <unk> υιος is contracted only once ( John 4 : 47 ) . On the other hand , it gives unusual abbreviations : for <unk> ( crucify ) the manuscript has <unk> , for <unk> — <unk> , <unk> ( virgin ) is contracted to <unk> . 
 Quotations from the Old Testament are indicated in the left margin by a <unk> letter or sign . 
 = = = Errors = = = 
 Almost all the necessary corrections of misspellings have been made . Sometimes a stroke of the pen indicates an error , perhaps to be corrected later . Some corrections seem to be written by prima manu ( e.g. Matthew 4 : 10 ; 5 : 19 ) others plainly secondary manu ( Matthew 6 ; Luke 3 ; 10 : 35 ) . The apostrophe is used even when not required , especially in <unk> ' , and <unk> ' . 
 According <unk> Scrivener movable nu occurs 416 times especially with words ειπεν , εστιν . In Matthew 12 : 7 ; Luke 8 : 10 ; John 5 : 46 ; 7 : 7 ; 8 : 27 there is a hiatus for lack of it . The error of iotacism occurs 358 times : ει for ι ( 16 occurrences ) , ι for ει ( 35 ) , ο for ω ( 40 ) , ω for ο ( 33 ) , αι for ε ( 13 ) , ε for αι ( 31 ) , ει for η ( 23 ) , η for ει ( 19 ) , η for ι ( 11 ) , ι for η ( 7 ) , ε for η ( 11 ) , η for ε ( 2 ) , οι for ι ( 3 ) , ω for <unk> ( 20 ) , η for υ ( 3 ) , υ for η ( 5 ) , υ for οι ( 1 ) , υ for ει ( 1 ) , η for οι ( 1 ) , οι for η ( 1 ) , ι for υ ( 1 ) , οι for ει ( 2 ) . 
 There are many errors by <unk> ( Mark 2 : 18 ; 4 : 24 ; 12 : 26 ; 14 : 70 ; 15 : 14 ; Luke 12 : 22 @.@ 47 ; 13 : 28 @.@ 29 ; John 4 : 14 ) . 
 There are some unusual forms like : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . 
 = = Text = = 
 The Greek text of the codex is a representative of the Caesarean text @-@ type . It belongs to the textual family f13 , known also as Ferrar Family . Also the handwriting and the menology show that is a close member of the group . According to Kurt and Barbara Aland it agrees with the Byzantine standard text 151 times , and 72 times with the Byzantine when it has the same reading as the original text . It agrees 31 times with the original text against the Byzantine . It has 57 independent or distinctive readings . Alands placed it in Category III . According to the Claremont Profile Method it represents the textual family f13 in Luke 1 , Luke 10 , and Luke 20 , as a core member . 
 The Pericope Adulterae follows Luke 21 : 38 , like in other manuscripts of the Ferrar Family . 
 Textual variants 
 The words after the bracket are the readings of the codex ( before the bracket are readings of Textus Receptus ) . 
 Matthew 1 : 18 and 1 : 23 — εν <unk> ( pregnant , literary in womb ) ] <unk> ( <unk> ) 
 Matthew 5 : 48 — εν <unk> <unk> ( in heavens ) ] <unk> ( heavens ) 
 Matthew 6 : 24 — <unk> ( <unk> ) ] <unk> ( <unk> ) 
 Matthew 7 : 2 — απο ( from ) ] εκ ( from ) 
 Matthew 8 : 4 — <unk> ( Moses ) ] <unk> ( Moses ) 
 Matthew 8 : 8 — <unk> ( terrible ) ] <unk> ( terrible ) 
 Matthew 8 : 8 — <unk> ( worthy ) ] <unk> ( worthy ) 
 Matthew 8 : 26 — <unk> <unk> ( winds ) ] τω <unk> ( wind ) 
 Matthew 9 : 17 — <unk> ( ruined ) ] <unk> ( <unk> has <unk> ) 
 Matthew 9 : 17 — <unk> ] <unk> ( both ) 
 Matthew 11 : 5 — και <unk> <unk> και <unk> <unk> ( and the dead are raised up and the poor have the gospel preached to them ) ] και <unk> <unk> και <unk> <unk> ( and the poor have the gospel preached to them and the dead are raised up ) 
 Matthew 26 : 39 — ] <unk> δε <unk> <unk> απο του <unk> <unk> <unk> και <unk> εν <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> δε ο <unk> αυτου <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> την <unk> 
 Mark 1 : 9 — <unk> ( <unk> ) ] <unk> 
 Mark 1 : 10 — απο ] εκ 
 Mark 1 : 10 — εκ ( from ) ] εις ( to ) 
 Mark 2 : 4 — <unk> ] <unk> ( bed ) 
 = = History = = 
 J. Rendel Harris pointed out that the menology of the Ferrar group contains saints which appear to be peculiar to Calabria or Sicily . Abbe Martin had previously stated that certain palaeographical traits to be observed in these manuscripts were characteristic of Calabrian <unk> . 
 Of the history of the codex 543 nothing is known until the year 1864 , when it was in the possession of a dealer at Janina in <unk> . It was then purchased from him by a representative of Baroness Burdett @-@ Coutts ( 1814 – 1906 ) , a philanthropist , together with other Greek manuscripts ( among them codices 532 @-@ 546 ) . They were transported to England in 1870 @-@ 1871 . 
 The manuscript was presented by Burdett @-@ Coutts to Sir Roger <unk> 's School , and was housed at the Highgate ( Burdett @-@ Coutts III . 5 ) , in London . In 1922 it was acquired for the University of Michigan . It is currently housed at the University of Michigan ( Ms. 15 ) in Ann Arbor . 
 Scrivener observed a close textual affinity to the Ferrar group and announced in 1883 in the third edition of " Plain Introduction " ( p . 236 ) as <unk> to the same class . Scrivener collated its text and it was edited posthumously in 1893 . This collation was not wholly accurate and Jacob <unk> , from the University of Utah , gave a new and more accurate collation in 1932 . The collation was made against the Textus Receptus in Stephanus edition ( Editio Regia ) . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Golden Sun : The Lost Age = 
 Golden Sun : The Lost Age ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> no Taiyō : <unk> Toki ) , released under different names in some regions , is a 2002 role @-@ playing video game for the Game Boy Advance , developed by Camelot Software Planning and published by Nintendo . The Lost Age is the second installment of the Golden Sun series , being the " second part " to the earlier Golden Sun . Players can transfer their characters and items from Golden Sun to The Lost Age by means of a password system or Game Link Cable , and players are rewarded for fully completing both games . 
 Picking up the story during the events of the previous game , The Lost Age puts the player into the roles of a magic @-@ attuned " adept " named Felix and his allies as they seek to restore the power of alchemy to the world of Weyard . Along the way , the player uses <unk> to defeat enemies and discover new locations , help out local populations , and find elemental djinn which augment the characters ' powers . 
 Upon release , The Lost Age was generally praised , although many publications found that the game was not as good as Golden Sun . Nonetheless , IGN ranked the game as the eighth @-@ best Game Boy Advance title of 2003 and the 22nd @-@ best GBA game of all time . It has sold over 680 @,@ 000 units . The long @-@ awaited followup , Golden Sun : Dark Dawn , was released in November 2010 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Lost Age is similar to its predecessor in that it is a contemporary presentation of the traditional role @-@ playing video game formula . Players guide a cast of characters as they journey through a fantasy @-@ themed world , interact with other characters , battle monsters , acquire increasingly powerful magic spells and equipment , and take part in a building , predefined narrative . While many actions the player takes are compulsory and central to the story , The Lost Age allows the player to complete many objectives in the order of their choice , visiting previous locations to advance story elements and complete gameplay objectives is given a stronger emphasis than in the previous game . 
 Much of the time spent outside of battle takes place either in the game 's overworld or within dungeons , caves , and other locales with puzzles integrated into their layout . Unlike the original game , in which the overworld was explored on foot except for a brief , non @-@ navigable boat ride , a large portion of The Lost Age 's gameplay involves navigating a magical ship across a large sea , visiting continents and islands . To complete puzzles , players must either push pillars to construct negotiable paths between elevated areas , climb up and rappel down cliffs , or obtain a special item to progress through the story and game world . Many of these puzzles revolve heavily around the usage of the game ’ s resident form of magic spells , Psynergy , requiring the player to find items that grant the bearer new forms of Psynergy in order to accomplish tasks . 
 Whereas many role @-@ playing video games limit the usage of their forms of magic to battles as offensive and defensive measures , Psynergy spells are also heavily used in puzzles and exploration . Some types of Psynergy can only be used in combat ; conversely , some spells are only used in the game 's overworld and in non @-@ battle scenarios . Still other Psynergy can be used for both situations ; for example , the “ Frost ” spell can be used to damage enemies in battle , or to transform puddles of water into elongated pillars of ice as part of a puzzle . Psynergy comes in four elements : Venus ( rocks and plants ) , Mars ( fire and heat ) , Jupiter ( wind and electricity ) , and Mercury ( water and ice ) . The player gains more and more Psynergy spells as the game progresses , either through levelling up or acquiring and equipping , or using , special items , and with each " utility " Psynergy spell the party gains access to more locations and secrets hidden within the game world . Players will be required to return to previous locations in the game to finish off puzzles which they could not solve earlier because of the lack of specific Psynergy spells . 
 = = = Battle = = = 
 The Lost Age contains both random monster encounters and compulsory battles , which advance the story . When a battle begins , a separate screen is brought up where the enemy party is on the opposing side and the player ’ s party is on the battling side . While battle is conducted , the characters and background swirl around and change positions in a pseudo @-@ 3D effect . 
 Gameplay in relation to The Lost Age 's battle mode is similar to traditional role @-@ playing video games . In each battle , the player is required to defeat all the enemies using direct attacks with weapons , offensive Psynergy spells , and other means of causing damage , all while keeping their own party alive through items and supportive Psynergy that restore life and supplement defense . If all the player 's characters are downed by reducing their hit points to zero , it is considered “ Game Over ” , and the party is returned to the last village that the player visited and suffers a monetary penalty . The successful completion of a battle yields experience points , coins , and occasionally rare items . 
 In addition to the main game itself , there is also a competitive battling mode accessible from the menu screen , where players can enter their currently @-@ developed team from their saved game files into an arena where they can battle increasingly difficult CPU @-@ controlled enemies or other players head @-@ to @-@ head to see which of their team setups are stronger . In both cases there are no experience points or coins to be earned . 
 = = = Djinn system = = = 
 One of the most important features in Golden Sun : The Lost Age is the collection and manipulation of elemental creatures called Djinn ( singular : Djinni ) , and The Lost Age features a host of new Djinn . They can be found scattered in hiding throughout the game . There are eleven Djinn for each of the four elements ( not counting the ones that can only be found in the original Golden Sun ) that may be allocated to each character . Djinn form the basis of the game ’ s statistics enhancement system , and Set djinn dictate the character ’ s Psynergy capabilities . Attaching different Djinn to different characters modifies the characters ' classes , increasing maximum hit points , Psynergy points , and other statistics , and also alters the available Psynergy that the characters can perform . 
 Collected Djinn can be assigned to a character of the player 's choice and can be Set , on Standby , or in Recovery . When a Djinni is set , that Djinni exerts influence on its corresponding character ’ s class , statistics and Psynergy collection depending on both the character ’ s innate element and that of the Djinni . In combat , the player can choose to have a character use a set Djinni during that character 's turn . Each Djinni has its own special effect when invoked during combat . These effects include enhanced elemental attacks , buffing or <unk> , healing , and other effects . After using a Djinni , its status is changed to Standby . While on Standby , Djinn do not contribute to a character ’ s class , but can be used for Summon Sequences , where the player summons a powerful elemental spirit . This is the game ’ s most powerful method of attack , and also the riskiest , as it requires Djinn to be on standby and therefore not available to bolster the statistics of whichever character the Djinni is equipped to . Once a Djinni on Standby has been used for a Summon Sequence , it takes a number of turns recovering before it restores itself to Set position on a character , but a subsequent increase in the affinity of the element of the attack is bolstered on the character for the duration of the battle . There are a total of 29 Summon Sequences in The Lost Age ; 16 from the previous game can be used alongside 13 new sequences , each of which must be earned individually ; they are usually acquired by completing optional dungeons . 
 There is a total of 72 Djinn encompassing the four elements which can be arranged in almost any evenly distributed manner to the eventual eight characters , making for a large array of possible class setups for all eight playable characters , allowing a variety of combat options . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The Lost Age takes place on the same fantasy world as its predecessor , that of the world of " Weyard " , a massive earth @-@ like environment modeled on the old Flat Earth idea of the world . It is a flat , vaguely circular plane whose oceans perpetually spill off the edge of the world 's entire perimeter into what seems to be an endless abyss , although no one knows what is over it . However at the end of the game in the very north of Weyard is a huge black void . The plot progression of The Lost Age spans many continents , islands , and oceans around the two main continents where the previous game takes place . All matter on Weyard consists of any combination of the four base elements : Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and Mercury ; magically @-@ attuned Adepts can manipulate these elements . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 For much of the game , the player controls four characters : Felix is an eighteen @-@ year @-@ old Venus Adept from the village of Vale , who was an anti @-@ hero in Golden Sun but serves as the game 's new protagonist . He is generally not shown to speak , although he does say " ... " , " ! " and " Why ? " at points in the game . His younger sister , Jenna , a seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Mars Adept also from Vale , and a fourteen @-@ year @-@ old girl and Jupiter Adept named Sheba , as well as a sharp @-@ witted elderly scholar named Kraden , are all hostages that Felix was forced to take with his now @-@ deceased masters , the Mars Adept warriors Saturos and Menardi that served as the previous game 's antagonists . In this game the player takes the role of Felix as he strives to complete Saturos and Menardi 's original objective to restore Alchemy to the world of Weyard , and joining them early on is a Mercury Adept named Piers , a mysterious young man whose ship Felix 's party uses to explore the world throughout their journey . 
 Several groups of characters serve as Felix 's antagonists in The Lost Age . He is at odds with the heroes of the original Golden Sun , led by the young Venus Adept warrior Isaac , who pursue him across the World , Weyard under the belief that Alchemy would potentially destroy Weyard if unleashed . One of Saturos ' original companions , a powerful and enigmatic Mercury Adept named Alex , allies himself with a second pair of powerful and imposing Mars Adept warriors , Karst and Agatio . They keep the pressure on Felix to ensure he proceeds with his quest as he is supposed to . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The antagonists of the previous game , Saturos and Menardi , have been slain in battle by the game 's protagonists led by Isaac , but not before the pair succeeded in activating two of four great lighthouses situated across the world of Weyard , the Elemental Lighthouses . Saturos ' companion Felix takes the rest of Saturos ' group and sets out on a journey of his own to complete Saturos ' original objective to activate the remaining two Lighthouses , for lighting all four will achieve the restoration of the powerful force of Alchemy to Weyard . He is joined by his sister Jenna , a Jupiter Adept named Sheba who was previously kidnapped by Saturos , and the scholar Kraden . The group searches for a ship to cross to the western half of Weyard , and learns of a man named Piers who has been falsely accused of piracy and owns a ship they can use . Felix and his group clear his name , and Piers agrees to join them . During this , Isaac 's party continues to pursue them . The group also discovers that their former companion Alex has allied himself with Menardi 's younger sister Karst and her partner Agatio in order to keep Felix on track . 
 Eventually , Felix 's party is able to achieve entrance into Piers ' home , a legendary , secluded Atlantis @-@ like society named Lemuria far out in the ocean . When they convene with Lemuria 's ancient king , <unk> , they learn about Alchemy 's true nature ; it has always been the sustenance of Weyard 's very life force , and its absence over the past ages has caused the world 's continents to decrease in size and parts of the world to collapse into the abyss . Knowing that restoring Alchemy is what must be done to actually save the world , Felix crosses the sea in order to activate Jupiter Lighthouse . But when Isaac 's pursuing party enters the lighthouse , they are trapped and ambushed by Karst and Agatio . Felix rescues Isaac , but Karst and Agatio escape with the Mars Star formerly in Isaac 's possession . 
 Felix is finally able to explain to Isaac why Alchemy 's release is a necessary thing for everyone , and that Saturos and Menardi were aiming for this goal merely for the sake of the survival of their home colony of Prox to the far north , located near the Mars Lighthouse . He also reveals that his parents and Isaac 's father are alive and currently being held hostage in Prox in order to coerce Felix 's initial cooperation . Isaac and his company agree to aid Felix , and the group sets out north to activate the Mars Lighthouse . The group discovers that Karst and Agatio have been transformed into mindless dragons and are forced to defeat them - they return the Mars Star before succumbing to their wounds . When they reach the tower 's top , the Wise One , the entity responsible for originally tasking Isaac to prevent the breaking of Alchemy 's seal , confronts them . He warns them that mankind could very well destroy Weyard themselves if they had possession of such a power , and when Isaac insists on breaking the seal regardless the Wise One summons a giant , three @-@ headed dragon for the party to battle in the final struggle . 
 When the party of Adepts have slain the dragon , they discover that the Wise One had transformed Isaac 's father and Felix 's parents into the now @-@ dead beast . After a short period of mourning , they gather the resolve to finish their objective and activate Mars Lighthouse ; with all four towers across Weyard lit , the process that heralds the return of the force of Alchemy to Weyard ensues at the mountain sanctum Mt . Aleph . Alex is there , however ; he took advantage of everyone else 's quests so that he would gain immense power for himself from the light of the Golden Sun , a manifestation of Alchemy itself . However , he discovers that the Wise One had taken steps to prevent this and is left to die as the mountain collapses and sinks into the ground with him still on it . The Adepts , in the meantime , find that their parents have actually been revived by Alchemy 's return , just as the Wise One originally planned . They are able to recognize that the reason the Wise One appeared to play that cruel trick on them before was to test their resolve as Adepts , and therefore test their ability to handle a great new responsibility : to ensure that throughout the world the newly released force of Alchemy is not abused by Weyard 's populace like it was in the ancient past . The game ends as the Adepts and their parents return to their hometown of Vale to find that it has been destroyed by the energy let loose by the breaking of Alchemy 's seal , but that their families and the other townspeople have survived because the Wise One warned them of the impending danger in advance . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Lost Age was first revealed to Japan in early 2002 , with the magazine Famitsu being the first publication to review the game . The Lost Age was highly anticipated ; it topped IGN 's list of Game Boy Advance " Most Wanted " games for 2003 . The North American version of the game was playable at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2002 , and IGN noted that the opening of the game did away with the notoriously boring opening sequence of Golden Sun , introducing the characters in between the action . GameSpot previewed a localized copy of The Lost Age in February 2003 , and noted that the game built on its predecessor 's graphics engine , with " the environments in the game featuring rich detail with little touches — such as birds that fly off as you approach . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Lost Age generally received positive reviews , but critics were divided on whether or not the game was better than the original Golden Sun . On Metacritic , The Lost Age has an 86 % aggregate rating , compared to Golden Sun 's 91 % . Likewise , GameRankings gives The Lost Age an 87 % overall rating , slightly lower than Golden Sun 's 90 % . Conversely , The Lost Age was ranked 78 on IGN 's Readers Choice Top 100 games ever , higher than its predecessor . It was also rated the 69th best game made on a Nintendo System in Nintendo Power 's " Top 200 Games " list . 
 IGN gave the sequel high praise ; while most of the game mechanics remained unchanged , the addition of more complicated puzzles was welcomed . The Lost Age subsequently became IGN 's " Game of the Month " in April 2003 . Shane Bettenhausen of Electronic Gaming Monthly argued that though The Lost Age is " not going to win any originality contests ( this looks , sounds , and feels nearly identical to its predecessor ) , but when more of the same means more top @-@ notch roleplaying , I can 't complain " . Other publications singled out the graphics and audio as particularly strong features . 
 Some publications found fault with complaints which remained from the original , including the combat system . IGN and GamePro took issue with the lack of " smart " combat ; if an enemy is killed before other party members attack it , those members switch to defense instead of intelligently attacking the remaining enemies . Ethan Einhorn of GameNOW felt that the only elements that set the fighting system above " typical RPG fare " were the graphics . GameSpy felt that Camelot could have added more features , and criticized the long opening sequence which either alienated players of the previous game , or confused new players by swamping them with unfamiliar places and characters . 
 The Lost Age sold 96 @,@ 000 units in its first week in Japan , being the best @-@ selling game of the period . The game sold a total of 249 @,@ 000 copies in Japan and 437 @,@ 000 in North America by November 21 , 2004 . 
 = Sirkazhi = 
 Sirkazhi ( [ <unk> ] ) is a municipal town in Nagapattinam district in Tamil Nadu , India . It is located 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) from the coast of the Bay of Bengal , and 250 km ( 160 mi ) from the state capital Chennai . Sirkazhi was a part of Thanjavur district until 1991 and has later been part of Nagapattinam district . The town covers an area of 13 @.@ 21 km2 ( 5 @.@ 10 sq mi ) and in 2011 had a population of 34 @,@ 927 . It is administered by a second grade municipality. a Sirkazhi is part of the Cauvery delta region and agriculture is the major occupation . Roads are the main means of transportation ; the town has 51 @.@ 47 km ( 31 @.@ 98 mi ) of district roads , including a national highway . 
 The town is believed to be of significant antiquity and has been ruled by the Medieval Cholas , Later Cholas , Later Pandyas , the Vijayanagar Empire , the Marathas and the British . The Tamil trinity of Carnatic music ; Arunachala <unk> ( 1711 – 78 ) , Muthu <unk> ( 1525 – 1600 ) and <unk> Pillai ( 1712 – 87 ) , originated from Sirkazhi . The Saiva saint Tirugnanasambandar , foremost of the Saiva Nayanars , was born here in the seventh century . The history of the town is centred on the Sattainathar Temple , which is dedicated to Hindu god Shiva . 
 = = Etymology and origin = = 
 In ancient times , this town had twelve different names , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Shri Kali . According to Hindu legend , during one of the biggest <unk> that submerged the planet earth , Hindu god Shiva is said to have carried the 64 arts on a raft ( called <unk> in Tamil ) . The presiding deity in the temple , Shiva , is thus called " <unk> " ( the one who carried the raft ) and the region is called " <unk> " . The Hindu god Brahma is believed to have worshiped Shiva here , giving the name " <unk> " ( the one worshipped by Brahma ) and so the region is also referred as " <unk> " . Shiva is believed to have quelled the arrogance of Hindu god Vishnu , after showing his dominance over the three worlds and hence got the name " Sattainathar " here . The town is thus called " <unk> " , which in modern times , is a suburb within Sirkazhi . The town was known as " <unk> " during the early Chola period . Thirugnanasambandar , the seventh century Saiva <unk> , as an infant is believed to have been fed with the milk of wisdom by the divine mother Parvati on the banks of the temple tank . The child Sambandar started singing the anthology of Tevaram hymns from then on , commencing with " <unk> <unk> " . Sambandar refers the town as " <unk> " in his verses . It was called Shiyali during British rule , and after Independence , it was renamed " Sirkazhi " . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest mention of Sirkazhi is found in the history of the Chola king <unk> from the Sangam Age ( 3rd century BCE to 4th century CE ) , who is believed to have won a bloody battle here . During the 7th – 8th century , there were widespread disputes between the Hindu sects of Saivism and Vaishnavism . Tirugnanasambandar and Thirumangai Azhwar , belonging to Saivism and Vaishnavism , respectively , and both natives of Sirkazhi , had disputes over their religious compositions and theologies during the period . The Chola Kings ruled over the region for more than four centuries , from 850 to 1280 , and were temple patrons . There 41 inscriptions from the Chola kings in the temple that record various gifts like land , sheep , cow and oil to the temple . 
 The region fell under the control of Pandyas in 1532 and later became part of the Thanjavur Nayak kingdom . The region was conquered in 1674 by Ekoji I ( 1675 – 84 ) , the Maratha enemy of the Nawab of Bijapur and half @-@ brother of Shivaji ( 1674 – 80 ) . The town and the region became part of the British East India Company during the mid @-@ 18th century . Tanjore district was constituted in 1799 when the Thanjavur Maratha ruler Serfoji II ( 1798 – 1832 ) ceded most of his kingdom to the British East India Company in return for his restitution on the throne . After India 's independence , Sirkazhi continued to be a part of Thanjavur district until 1991 , when it became part of the newly created Nagapattinam district . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Sirkazhi is located at 11 @.@ 23 ° N 79 @.@ 73 ° E ﻿ / 11 @.@ 23 ; 79 @.@ 73 , on the eastern flank of the Kumbakonam @-@ Shiyali ridge , which runs along the Kollidam River . Sirkazhi has an average elevation of 5 @.@ 18 m ( 17 @.@ 0 ft ) above sea level and is located at 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) west of Bay of Bengal . It is located 95 km ( 59 mi ) north @-@ east of Thanjavur , 24 km ( 15 mi ) north of Mayiladuthurai and 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) south of Chidambaram . 
 The town experiences long summers and short winters , and receives an average yearly rainfall of 1 @,@ 250 mm ( 49 in ) , mainly from the north @-@ east monsoon between October and December . Its close proximity to the sea means that Sirkazhi receives more rainfall than neighbouring towns . Sirkazhi is part of the Cauvery delta region and has irrigation channels , called the Kollidam channels , which carry water from the rivers and provide a rich deposit of fertile silt before reaching the sea . The soil is black and contains fertile alluvial sediment . The area 's main crop is rice ; other crops grown in the area are coconut , tamarind and neem . The landscape mostly consists of plain lands with fields and small portions of scrub jungle . Antelope , spotted deer , wild hog , jackal and fox are present in the jungles and outlying areas of the town . Crow and ordinary game birds are found in large numbers in the town . 
 The 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake was an undersea , megathrust earthquake that occurred on 26 December 2004 , with an epicentre off the west coast of Sumatra , Indonesia , triggering a series of devastating tsunamis along coastal fringes of the Indian Ocean . Nagapattinam district was the most affected part of Tamil Nadu , accounting for 6 @,@ 064 off the 8 @,@ 009 casualties in the state . Sirkazhi remained mostly unaffected by the tsunami , but the groundwater quality deteriorated where aquifers were close to the water bodies . There was heavy salt water intrusion inland . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to 2011 census , Sirkali had a population of 34 @,@ 927 with a sex @-@ ratio of 1 @,@ 028 females for every 1 @,@ 000 males , much above the national average of 929 . A total of 3 @,@ 367 were under the age of six , constituting 1 @,@ 740 males and 1 @,@ 627 females . Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes accounted for 23 @.@ 21 % and <unk> % of the population respectively . The average literacy of the town was 81 @.@ 5 % , compared to the national average of 72 @.@ 99 % . The town had a total of : <unk> households . There were a total of 11 @,@ 476 workers , comprising 352 cultivators , 1 @,@ 398 main agricultural labourers , 150 in house hold industries , 7 @,@ 681 other workers , 1 @,@ 895 marginal workers , 88 marginal cultivators , 809 marginal agricultural labourers , 77 marginal workers in household industries and 921 other marginal workers . 
 As per the religious census of 2011 , Sirkazhi had 86 @.@ 91 % Hindus , 9 @.@ 46 % Muslims , 2 @.@ 16 % Christians , 0 @.@ 02 % Sikhs , 0 @.@ 46 % Buddhists , 0 @.@ 33 % Jains , 0 @.@ 63 % following other religions and 0 @.@ 04 % following no religion or did not indicate any religious preference . 
 In 1981 , there were 15 notified slums accommodating 4 @,@ 499 persons , constituting 17 @.@ 64 % of the population . In 2001 , there were still 15 slums accommodating 7 @,@ 533 persons , constituting 23 @.@ 37 % of the population . The slum area has remained static at 39 @.@ 45 acres ( 0 @.@ 1596 km2 ) . The town has a residential area of 2 @.@ 79 km2 ( 1 @.@ 08 sq mi ) ( 20 @.@ 96 % ) , commercial area of 0 @.@ 4 km2 ( 0 @.@ 15 sq mi ) ( 3 @.@ 04 % ) , industrial area of 0 @.@ 58 km2 ( 0 @.@ 22 sq mi ) ( 4 @.@ 39 % ) , public & semi public area of 1 @.@ 29 km2 ( 0 @.@ 50 sq mi ) ( 9 @.@ 66 % ) and undeveloped area of 8 @.@ 23 km2 ( 3 @.@ 18 sq mi ) ( 38 @.@ 05 % ) . 
 = = Economy and transport = = 
 The service sector provides most employment in the town . Limited agriculture is carried out ; the main crop is paddy rice . During the British Raj , Sirkazhi was known for mats made with a kind of <unk> . The headquarters of the taluka and panchayat union administration , and many government offices are located in the town . There are no major industries within the town , except for several rice mills . Sirkazhi has many Hindu temples , which draw in tourism activity . Sirkali Coop Urban Bank , founded on 23 April 1918 is the oldest bank in Sirkali . All major nationalised banks and private banks have branches in the town , and all have <unk> . 
 Sirkazhi municipality has 51 @.@ 5 km ( 32 @.@ 0 mi ) of roads : 18 @.@ 3 km ( 11 @.@ 4 mi ) of BT roads , 30 @.@ 4 km ( 18 @.@ 9 mi ) of cement roads , 2 @.@ 2 km ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) of water @-@ bound macadam surface and 0 @.@ 6 km ( 0 @.@ 37 mi ) of other roads . Bullock carts are the traditional mode of transport ; as late as the 1950s , landlords and rich farmers travelled mostly by bullock carts except on rare , long journeys , which they undertook by buses or motor vehicles . Buses are the main mode of public transport from Sirkazhi . The municipality operates a B @-@ Class bus stand with 36 bays that accommodate local and intercity buses . The buses are operated by Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation , connecting the town to Chidambaram , Mayiladuthurai , Karaikkal and other cities in Tamil Nadu . 
 Sirkazhi 's railway station is on the main line between Chennai and Trichy via Cuddalore and Chidambaram . Daily express trains connect major cities in Tamil Nadu like Chennai , Madurai and Trichy , and weekly express trains connect Tirupathi , Varanasi , Tiruchendur and Bhubaneswar . There are also daily passenger trains to Mayiladuthurai , Salem , Villupuram and Bangalore daily . The nearest airport is Tiruchirapalli Airport which is 160 km ( 99 mi ) from Sirkazhi . 
 = = Education and utility services = = 
 The first English school in the town was the Leipzig Evangelical Lutheran Mission School , which was opened by the Lutheran Mission in 1896 . The Lutheran mission was the earliest Protestant mission founded in Tanjore ( present @-@ day Thajavur ) by Rev. C.V. Schwartz in 1778 to promote Christian knowledge in the region . Of the 32 schools in Sirkazhi , there are nine municipal schools . There are three higher secondary schools , three middle schools , fourteen primary schools and three matriculation schools in the town . There are two arts and science colleges , BEST College of Arts and Science and Vivekananda College of Arts and Science . Srinivasa <unk> Polytechnic College ( locally called Puttur Polytechnic ) is located in Puttur , 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) from Sirkali . 
 Electricity supply to the town is regulated and distributed by the Sirkazhi Circle of Tamil Nadu Electricity Board ( TNEB ) . Water supply is provided by the Sirkazhi municipality from the Kollidam river ; it is distributed through five water tanks which supply 2 million ( two million ) litres a day . Push carts and tricycles are used to collect solid waste , which is deposited in marsh lands located outside the town . Sirkazhi municipality is implementing underground drainage and the current sewerage system is through septic tanks and public conveniences . Roadside drains carry away untreated sewage , which is released into the sea or accumulates in low @-@ lying areas . 
 Sirkazhi comes under the Sirkazhi Telecom Circle of the Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited ( BSNL ) , India 's state @-@ owned telephone and internet services provider . BSNL also provides a broadband internet service The town has a government hospital , 12 private hospitals , clinics and medical shops . 
 = = Municipal administration and politics = = 
 During the British Raj , Shiyali ( present @-@ day Sirkazhi ) was the headquarters of a separate administrative division , or taluka . In 1972 the town was declared a third grade municipality , and was upgraded to a second grade municipality in 1980 . The municipality has 24 wards , each of which has an elected councillor . The functions of the municipality are devolved into six departments : general administration / personnel , engineering , revenue , public health , town planning and IT , which are controlled by a Municipal Commissioner , who is the supreme executive head . Legislative powers are vested in a body of 24 members , one for each of the 24 wards . The legislative body is headed by an elected chairperson , who is assisted by a deputy . On the revenue administration side , Sirkazhi is a taluka headquarters having three revenue villages : <unk> , Sirkazhi and <unk> . 
 For the purposes of state government , Sirkazhi is part of the Sirkazhi assembly constituency , which elects a member to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly once every five years . The constituency is reserved for Scheduled Caste ( SC ) candidates . The assembly seat has been won by Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) in 1977 , 1989 , 1996 and 2006 elections and Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( ADMK ) in 1980 , 1984 , 1991 , 2001 and 2011 . As of 2011 , the MLA of the constituency is M. Sakthi from the ADMK . 
 In the national parliament , Sirkazhi is a part of the Mayiladuthurai ( Lok Sabha constituency ) , which has six assembly constituencies – Mayiladuthurai , Sirkazhi , Poompuhar , <unk> ( SC ) , Kumbakonam and Papanasam . The constituency was constituted during the third Lok Sabha ( lower house ) as <unk> until the 1980 elections , when it was renamed Mayiladuthurai . During the first elections in 1957 , Sirkazhi was part of Chidambaram constituency and was held by the Indian National Congress party . The current Member of Parliament from the constituency is R.K. Bharathi Mohan of the ADMK party . From 1962 , the Mayiladuthurai parliament seat was held by the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) twice between 1967 and 1971 , and from 1971 to 1977 , Tamil Maanila Congress for two terms between 1998 and 1999 and 1996 to 1998 , Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam twice during 2009 and 2014 , Indian National Congress for eight terms during 1962 – 67 , 1977 – 80 , 1980 – 84 , 1984 – 89 , 1989 – 91 , 1991 – 96 , 1999 – 2004 and 2004 – 09 
 Law and order in Sirkazhi is maintained by the Mayiladuthurai sub @-@ division of the Tamil Nadu Police , headed by a Deputy Superintendent of Police . There is a police station in the town . There are special units like prohibition enforcement , district crime , social justice and human rights , district crime records and special branch that operate at the district level police division , headed by a Superintendent of Police . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The <unk> temple , also called Sattainathar temple , is an ancient temple complex dedicated to Shiva , and has three Shiva shrines . The temple is mentioned in the Saiva canonical work , Tevaram , by Thirugnana <unk> , Tirunavukkarasar and Sundarar , the foremost Saivite saints of 7th – eighth century CE and is classified as Paadal Petra Sthalam . There is a separate shrine for Sambandar celebrating the miracle of Parvathi suckling the child Sambandar when he was crying for milk . Shiva is worshipped in three different forms ; the <unk> ( <unk> ) , Uma <unk> ( <unk> ) at the middle level , and <unk> ( <unk> ) at the upper level . The original temple was enlarged during the period of Kulothunga Chola I , Vikrama Chola , Kulothunga Chola II and Kulothunga Chola III ( as in Chidambaram – 11th through the 13th centuries ) . Every year in the Tamil month of Chithirai ( April – May ) , a 10 @-@ day festival is celebrated . 
 <unk> Vinnagaram temple , also called <unk> Koil , is dedicated to Vishnu in the form of Trivikrama . Sirkazhi is base to the outlying places like Poompuhar , and the temples <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Vinnagaram , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Annan Koil and <unk> are eleven Vishnu temples , called <unk> Divya Desams revered in Nalayira Divya Prabandham , located in the outskirts of Sirkazhi . The annual <unk> festival held during January attracts thousands of pilgrims . 
 Tamil Isai <unk> ( meaning Tamil trinity of Carnatic music ) namely , Arunachala <unk> ( 1711 – 1778 ) , Muthu <unk> ( 1525 – 1600 ) and <unk> Pillai ( 1712 – 1787 ) originated from Sirkazhi . Arunachala composed devotional songs , including Sirkazhi <unk> and Sirkazhi Kovai , eulogising the town . S. R. Ranganathan , considered to be the father of library science in India , is from Sirkazhi . 
 = NTA Film Network = 
 The NTA Film Network was an early American television network founded by Ely Landau in 1956 . The network was not a full @-@ time television network like CBS , NBC , or ABC . Rather , it operated on a part @-@ time basis , broadcasting films and several first @-@ run television programs from major Hollywood studios . Despite attracting over 100 affiliate stations and the financial support of Twentieth Century @-@ Fox ( which purchased a 50 % share of NTA in November 1956 ) the network proved unprofitable , and was discontinued by 1961 . The NTA Film Network 's flagship station , WNTA @-@ TV , is now WNET , one of the flagship stations of the Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Parent company National Telefilm Associates was founded by producers Ely Landau and Oliver A. Unger in 1954 when Landau 's film and television production company , Ely Landau , Inc . , was reorganized in partnership with Unger and screenwriter and producer Harold Goldman . NTA was the successor company to U.M. & M. TV Corporation , having purchased U.M. & M. in 1956 . 
 In October 1956 , NTA launched the NTA Film Network , a syndication service which distributed both films and television programs to independent television stations and stations affiliated with NBC , CBS , or ABC ( DuMont had recently gone out of the network business ) . The ad @-@ hoc network 's flagship station was WNTA @-@ TV , channel 13 in New York . The NTA Network was launched as a " fourth TV network " , and trade papers of the time referred to it as a new television network . 
 Unlike the Big Three television networks , the local stations in the NTA Film Network were not connected via coaxial cable or microwave relay . Instead , NTA Film Network programs were filmed and then mailed to each station in the network , a method used by television <unk> in the 1950s and 1960s . However , many local stations agreed to broadcast NTA Film Network programs in pattern ( simultaneously ) . Landau 's claim to network status was based on the simultaneous airing of the programs . 
 The NTA Film Network launched on October 15 , 1956 , with over 100 affiliate stations . In November 1956 , it was announced that 50 % of the network had been purchased by Twentieth Century @-@ Fox , which would also produce original content for the network . The film network grew to 128 stations . In September 1957 , the network purchased <unk> @-@ TV ( now Fox O & O <unk> @-@ TV ) in Minneapolis . 
 = = Affiliates = = 
 The following is a list of NTA Film Network affiliate stations in November 1956 . 
 Later affiliates included <unk> @-@ TV in Billings , Montana ( c . 1958 @-@ 1959 ) , <unk> @-@ TV in San Antonio ( c . 1958 – 1959 ) , <unk> @-@ TV in Indianapolis ( c . 1958 – 1959 ) , and <unk> in San Francisco ( c . 1959 – 1960 ) . The network purchased <unk> @-@ TV in Minneapolis , in September 1957 . 
 = = Programs = = 
 The NTA Film Network aired both films and television series . Among its 1956 – 1957 offerings were 52 Twentieth Century @-@ Fox films . Premiere Performance , a prime time block of Twentieth Century @-@ Fox films , aired from 1957 – 1959 . Other film blocks included TV Hour of Stars and The Big Night ( both 1958 – 1959 ) . 
 The network 's television programs included : 
 How to Marry a Millionaire , which aired from 1957 to 1959 , was based on the popular 1953 film of the same name . The series starred Barbara Eden , Merry Anders , Lori Nelson ( 1957 – 1958 ) , and Lisa Gaye ( 1958 – 1959 ) . The final episode aired in August 1959 . 
 Man Without a Gun , a western series starring Rex Reason and Mort Mills , aired from 1957 to 1959 . The series portrayed Reason as a newspaper editor who brought criminals to justice without the use of guns . 
 This is Alice , which aired from 1958 to 1959 , starred nine @-@ year @-@ old Patty Ann <unk> as Alice Holliday , a girl who lived in the fictional town of River Glen , Georgia . The series was directed and produced by Sidney <unk> for NTA and Desilu Productions . 
 The Play of the Week , which aired from 1959 to 1961 , was a series of 67 televised plays . The program was well received by critics , and received a Peabody Award . The series ended its run on May 1 , 1961 . 
 Other , lesser @-@ known NTA series included The Bill Corum Sports Show , Man 's Heritage , and The <unk> ( all c . 1957 ) , Official Detective ( 1957 – 1958 ) , Open End ( 1958 – 1961 ) , William Tell ( 1958 – 1959 ) , Assignment : Underwater ( 1959 – 1960 ) , Q. T. Hush ( 1960 – 1961 ) , Sheriff of Cochise / U.S. Marshall ( 1956 – 1958 ) , Alex in Wonderland ( 1959 ) , Newsbeat ( 1959 – 1961 ) Juke Box Jury ( 1958 – 1959 ) , The Best of Bishop Sheen ( 1958 – 1963 ) , Danger Is My Business ( 1958 ) , Divorce Court ( 1958 – 1961 ) , <unk> ( 1959 ) , Grand Jury ( 1959 ) , Mantovani ( 1959 ) , Henry Morgan and Company ( 1959 ) , George Jessel 's Show Business ( 1959 ) , The Mike Wallace Interview ( 1959 – 1961 ) , The Third Man ( 1960 – 1961 ) , The Oscar Levant Show ( 1960 ) , Confidential Portrait , Crime Reporter , and Probe ( 1962 ) . 
 In October 1956 , the NTA Film Network also announced provisional plans to telecast live sporting and special events ( using network relays ) by the 1959 – 1960 television season . 
 = = = Timeline of programs = = = 
 Below is a timeline showing the airdates of the NTA Film Network 's programs and later NTA offerings . The number of episodes that each series aired is given in parentheses . Some dates are tentative , as accurate records for filmed television series were not always kept . 
 = = = Schedule = = = 
 Friday 1958 – 1959 
 Note : This schedule was announced in May 1958 ; according to the announcement , 17 television stations would follow this schedule for the 1958 – 1959 television season ; other NTA Film Network affiliates aired the programs out of pattern . 
 = = End of network = = 
 In January 1959 , Ely Landau was succeeded by Charles C. Barry , who took over as president of network operations . Landau continued to chair National Telefilm Associates . Despite the 50 % ownership of Twentieth Century @-@ Fox , the film network never developed into a major commercial television network on a par with the " Big Three " television networks ; several modern TV historians regard the NTA Film Network as a syndication service rather than a major television network . 
 By 1961 , WNTA @-@ TV was losing money , and the network 's flagship station was sold to the Educational Broadcasting Corporation that November . WNTA @-@ TV became WNDT ( later WNET ) , flagship station of the National Educational Television network , a forerunner of PBS . NTA network operations did not continue without a flagship station , although parent company National Telefilm Associates continued syndication services ; four television series ( Probe , Tintin , The Fair Adventure , and A Day With Doodles ) were syndicated by NTA between 1962 and 1966 . 
 The Los Angeles NTA Film Network station , KTTV , went on to become a founding owned and operated station of the Fox television network , which is co @-@ owned with Twentieth Century @-@ Fox and a part of 21st Century Fox . 
 = We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again = 
 " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " is a song by Jeffrey Comanor from the album A Rumor in His Own Time , which debuted in September 1976 . Written by Comanor , the song describes a couple who spend a night together , one which the narrator wishes would " never end " . Both the song , which Epic Records released as a single , and album failed to chart . Discovered four months later by Arista Records President Clive Davis , " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " was covered by soft rock duo Deardorff & Joseph for their eponymous debut album , released on Arista . After Deardorff & Joseph disbanded , Marcia Day , who managed Maureen McGovern , became the manager of Deardorff , while Susan Joseph , who managed England Dan & John Ford Coley , became the manager of Joseph . Both McGovern and England Dan & John Ford Coley released covers of " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " in February 1978 ; while McGovern 's failed to chart , Dan & Coley 's spent six weeks at number one on the Billboard US Easy Listening chart , reached number two on the RPM Canada Adult Contemporary chart , and went to numbers nine and eleven on the magazines ' respective overall charts . 
 = = Original release = = 
 Lyricist and composer Jeffrey Comanor recorded " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " for the album A Rumor in His Own Time , which debuted in September 1976 . Produced by John Boylan and released on Epic Records , both the album and the single failed to chart . " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " describes a couple that spends a night together , one which the narrator wishes " would never end " . Comanor , who wrote the song , stated that his lyrical inspiration originated from a girl he dated who owned a wooden <unk> radio that continued to play music quietly when he attempted to turn it off . When Comanor 's next girlfriend , Molly , left the city where he lived , he remembered their last night together and how he " hated that night to end " : a combination of the two memories formed the introductory lyrics of the song . 
 = = Covers = = 
 After its release , Arista Records President Clive Davis found the song and wanted Melissa Manchester to record a cover ; instead , he gave it to Deardorff & Joseph , a group that previously opened for Seals and Crofts , and they recorded it for their eponymous debut album . Released as a single in January 1977 , the song peaked at number twenty @-@ two on the US Easy Listening chart for two weeks in April 1977 . 
 Nineteen months after its initial debut , England Dan & John Ford Coley covered the song for the album Some Things Don 't Come Easy . Produced by Kyle <unk> and engineered by <unk> and Marshall Morgan help from Tom Knox , Big Tree Records issued it as a single on February 17 , 1978 ; the song 's debut preceded its album 's . A Billboard magazine writer described England Dan & John Ford Coley 's cover of " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " as a soft ballad with a " catchy chorus " and " excellent vocal harmonizing " . In a review of Some Things Don 't Come Easy for AllMusic , Joe Viglione called it " far and away the best song on the album " and wrote that its " hook and instrumentation are so radio @-@ friendly that the 45 could be put on repeat and after the 30th spin not bore like many of the tracks [ on Some Things Don 't Come Easy ] " . Another Billboard writer listed " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " as a " hot cut " from the album , along with " You Can 't Dance " , " Calling for You Again " , and " Lovin ' Someone on a Rainy Night " . " Calling for You Again " , written by Coley and Bob Grundy , was the B @-@ side to the single . 
 In February , Maureen McGovern also recorded a cover that Epic Records released as a single . After Deardorff & Joseph separated , Marcia Day , who managed McGovern , became the manager of Danny Deardorff , while Susan Joseph , who managed Dan & Coley , became the manager of Marcus Joseph . According to Day , Susan told her that " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " would " absolutely not " be Dan & Coley 's next single , and that McGovern could release a cover ; Susan , however , states that she did not know of its plans for future release . On March 17 , 1978 , McGovern promoted her song on season four of the variety talk show Dinah ! , which aired on NBC . Described by Epic as the " title song " to McGovern 's newest album , the cover did not appear on her next album and the single failed to chart . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On March 25 , 1978 , in their " Top Album Pick " section , Billboard predicted that the first single from Some Things Don 't Come Easy would reach the top @-@ ten ; afterwards , it went to number nine on the magazine 's Hot 100 chart and spent six weeks at number one on their Easy Listening chart . Cashbox placed the song at number fourteen on their US Top 100 Singles chart for the week that ended on April 29 , 1978 . In Canada , " We 'll Never Have to Say Goodbye Again " peaked on the RPM Top Singles chart at number eleven , while on the Adult Contemporary Tracks chart , the song peaked at number two behind " Dust in the Wind " by the progressive rock band Kansas . 
 = = = Weekly singles charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = Military career of Keith Miller = 
 The military career of Keith Miller , an Australian Test cricketer and Australian rules footballer , lasted from August 1940 until June 1946 , when World War II interrupted his sporting career . Miller enlisted in the Militia , before switching to the Royal Australian Air Force , where he served from November 1941 until 1946 when he was discharged with the rank of flying officer . Miller trained as a fighter pilot , and in the last month of the European theatre of war , he flew combat missions over German installations . However , Miller was more notable for his efforts as a cricketer , representing the Royal Australian Air Force cricket team and after VE Day , the Australian Services in the Victory Tests of 1945 , followed by a tour of the Indian subcontinent and Australia before being demobilised . 
 While serving in the Militia , Miller continued playing football for St Kilda Saints and interstate cricket for Victoria when he was off duty . Miller struggled to conform to military norms and was soon fined for " using insulting language towards a superior officer " . In late 1941 , he left the Militia and was accepted into the Royal Australian Navy , but tore up his form because his friend was rejected , before enlisting in the RAAF . After his initial training in 1942 , he earned his wings and was deployed to the United Kingdom in early 1943 where he continued his training with the No. 169 Squadron RAF . Miller survived a few disciplinary incidents while training to eventually take part in combat operations in the closing stages of the European theatre of the war , and had several narrow escapes from death throughout his combat and training period . He received several campaign medals for his service . 
 Away from battle , from 1943 onwards , Miller was selected to represent the RAAF in a series of matches against the Royal Air Force and other English teams . The objective of the matches was to show that the British Commonwealth would not be cowed by German attacks , and the team was officially designated as a military unit . In 1945 , following the Nazi surrender , the RAAF team merged with members of the Australian Imperial Force team to become the Australian Services , involving army and air force personnel , and competed against England in the five Victory Tests . Following the end @-@ of @-@ war tour of England , the Services team toured the Indian subcontinent before returning to Australia and playing in the 1945 – 46 season against the Australian states before being demobilised . Miller was the vice @-@ captain of the team on the return leg of the tour to Australia . 
 Miller was Australia 's top @-@ scorer during the Victory Tests and came to the fore with his fast bowling . Miller was acclaimed for his free @-@ spirited and adventurous batting , which he attributed to the triviality of sport in comparison to war . This was particularly exhibited in his 185 from 165 minutes for Dominions against England . It was through his involvement in wartime cricket that Miller met many of his future international colleagues , such as England 's Denis Compton , Bill Edrich and Len Hutton . 
 = = In Australia = = 
 As was the case with many of his contemporaries , Miller 's sporting career was interrupted by World War II . On 20 August 1940 , towards the end of the football season , almost a year after war broke out , Miller joined the Militia ( army reserve ) , and was assigned to the 4th Reserve Motor Transport Company . In late September , with St Kilda already eliminated from the football season , Miller began his first army training camp at Caulfield Racecourse in Melbourne . This meant that he would be able to continue his sporting career when he was not in training . A non @-@ conformist , he had the first of his many clashes with authority on 4 November , when he was charged with " using insulting language to a superior officer " and fined 10 shillings . Miller 's knockabout persona soon saw him earn the nickname Dusty , referring to his tendency to be involved in a " dust @-@ up " , meaning a physical fight . 
 During the summer of 1940 – 41 , Miller was granted leave so that he could play interstate cricket . In a season shortened due to war , Miller played in three matches and scored 140 runs at 28 @.@ 00 . In the second match , which was against South Australia , Miller scored 63 , his only fifty of the summer , and bowled for the first time at first @-@ class level , conceding three runs from a solitary over . In the third match he took his maiden first @-@ class wicket , in a war fundraising match for Stan McCabe 's XI against Don Bradman 's XI , that of Ken Ridings , caught behind with wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon . His pace was noticed by Bradman . 
 The 1941 VFL season went ahead despite the loss of many players to military service . Miller alternated between playing in the backline and in attack depending on match conditions . When St Kilda were kicking downwind , Miller would play in attack , and when they kicked against the wind , he would return to a defensive position . In the forward line , he alternated with Sam Loxton , a future Invincibles teammate . He booted 28 goals in 16 games , including eight in one match against North Melbourne . Miller also gained a reputation among opponents for kicking them in the ankles . He again showed his disrespect for authority and reputation . In one match against Melbourne , for whom his boss and state cricket team @-@ mate Percy Beames played , Miller charged towards Beames with a raised elbow at the start of the match , forcing his boss to be taken from the field . Miller came second in St Kilda 's best and fairest for 1941 as his team again came second to last . 
 Miller 's season ended early after he was called back for army service and he was stationed in the northern suburb of Broadmeadows . However , he had disciplinary problems and disliked taking orders from his officers , whom he often felt were inferior to him . He left the Militia on 8 November 1941 . Miller and a friend then attempted to join the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) as stokers . When the navy would not take his friend , Miller tore up his paperwork in protest , left the recruiting office , and walked around the corner to the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) recruiting office . He was acutely aware of the risks , as many of his playing colleagues had been killed , injured or captured . The threat of combat increased when the Pacific Theatre of World War II opened on 7 December 1941 with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . The 1941 – 42 cricket season was cancelled and many cricket and football grounds were converted into army bases . 
 On 30 January 1942 he was called to active service by the RAAF . He was sent to No. 4 Initial Training School at Victor Harbor in South Australia , around 100 km south of Adelaide . Miller quickly showed his anti @-@ authoritarian streak in a training drill in which Miller 's instructor asked the recruits to disarm him . The recruits feared that their weekend leave would be cancelled if they succeeded in confiscating their sergeant 's rifle , but the sergeant assured that that this was not the case . Miller volunteered to combat the instructor , and succeeded by tripping him and removing his firearm . The sergeant angrily protested that Miller had tripped him and told Miller to repeat his feat . Miller again tripped the sergeant and disarmed him , this time contemptuously wiping his boot on his NCO 's shirt and soiling it . The irate instructor cancelled Miller 's leave and put him on guard duty , further threatening the other recruits with the same fate for protesting Miller 's treatment . However , the recruits protested the ruling with the camp adjutant , who overruled the sergeant , putting him on guard duty instead of Miller . 
 Soon after , on 19 February 1942 , the Japanese launched air raids on Australian soil , targeting the northern city of Darwin . Miller trained at flying schools at Cunderdin , Western Australia and Mallala , South Australia , just north of Adelaide and gained his wings in late 1942 . He played only one match during the football season , playing in a combined West Adelaide and Glenelg Football Club team while posted in South Australia . His team lost . On 17 December he returned to Melbourne and was promoted to the rank of flight sergeant . On 15 January 1943 , he embarked on the USS West Point at Port Melbourne , which was to take him to Europe in readiness for war combat . The journey included a stopover in February at a training camp in Boston in the United States . It was there that Miller met Peg Wagner , his future wife . They were engaged before Miller left for the United Kingdom . He arrived in Scotland on 18 March 1943 and was deployed to the southern English coastal town of Bournemouth . The once @-@ popular tourist resort had been turned into a military centre and was the target of frequent German air raids . 
 = = Britain = = 
 Miller continued his training at Bournemouth , spending his spare time pursuing his love of classical music and cricket . Miller had the first of many brushes with death in April , when he was invited to play weekend cricket for a RAAF team in London . While he was away for his first weekend match , the local Bournemouth pub where he ate lunch on Sunday was struck by a German air strike . Miller 's weekly <unk> were all killed . His selection for the RAAF cricket team had saved him . Miller quickly gained a reputation among the servicemen for his carefree batting and bowling . He often bowled without a proper run @-@ up but managed to trouble batsmen with pace and bounce regardless . The RAAF team was officially formed in preparation for the 1943 season and Miller was selected . The captain was flying officer Keith Carmody . Miller played his first match at Lord 's , the home of cricket , against Warner 's XI , a team that included former England captains Bob Wyatt and Gubby Allen and future Test players Alec and Eric Bedser and Trevor Bailey . Oblivious to authority , Miller pushed a person in the dressing room out of his way before the match started , unaware that it was Warner , the secretary of the Marylebone Cricket Club himself . Warner 's XI batted first , and Miller dismissed Wyatt and Allen in taking 2 / 20 from ten overs as the hosts made 201 . Miller came to the crease at the fall of the first wicket and hit consecutive fours off the bowling of Dick Pollard from the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . The RAAF were bowled out for 100 , with Miller top @-@ scoring with 45 . In the second innings , he made 21 not out with two sixes as time ran out and the match ended in a draw . In a match for the United Services against Sussex , Miller top @-@ scored with 134 not out in 120 minutes , striking 12 fours and three sixes . He then tore through Sussex with 7 / 36 , breaking through the defences of six players who were bowled or leg before wicket , as his team won by 225 runs . He also played one match for Sussex against the RAF , scoring 11 and taking 3 / 41 . 
 The RAAF played eight matches for the season , winning four and losing the rest . Miller 's top score was 141 in faster @-@ than @-@ even time against Public School Wanderers at Hove . He went on to play for Dominions , a composite team from the British Commonwealth , in a two @-@ day match against England in August , scoring 32 and two and bowling a total of eight overs for 46 runs without taking a wicket . England fielded a team of almost Test standard , with six capped Test players and four others who made their debut immediately after the resumption of international cricket following the war . The match marked the first meeting between Miller and his good friend , England batsman Denis Compton . In their first battle at the crease , Miller aimed a short ball that took off past Compton 's shoulder and went for four byes . By the end of his season , Miller 's bowling began to attract media attention . He ended the season in a match at Lord 's between the airmen : the RAAF against the RAF . Miller took 3 / 23 and scored 91 in the RAAF 's total of 8 / 164 . None of the matches during the 1943 season were accorded first @-@ class status . 
 By late 1943 , Miller has been based at RAF South Cerny in Gloucestershire . One night , he was pulled over by his commanding officer , whom he detested , for not wearing his uniform cap . An altercation resulted , and Miller posed as though he were about to punch his officer . The result was that Miller was charged with insubordination and sentenced to a three @-@ week disciplinary course with hard labour , from 18 October to 9 November . In mid @-@ November he was posted to Ouston near Newcastle upon Tyne where he was trained in the use of radar using Anson and Oxford aircraft . During his stay there , Miller was thrown on his back during a wrestling match , sustaining an injury that caused him recurring problems in later years , diminishing his ability to bowl . 
 In 1944 , Miller was again selected for the RAAF team . Near @-@ death experiences and the knowledge that he could be the next to die , changed Miller 's outlook to life . An RAAF teammate was killed on a mission soon after hitting a century . In a match against the British Civil Defence Services at Lord 's in July , Miller had reached 96 when an air raid siren signalled the arrival of a German flying bomb . It landed south of the ground and then Miller struck a four to register his ton before another flying bomb crashed close to the ground as he saluted the crowd . In a match against England , which boasted five capped and four future England Test players , Miller scored 85 in 100 minutes . While Miller was at the crease , the RAAF was on track to reach its target but his partners were dismissed around him and the RAAF fell 33 runs short after losing its last seven wickets for 51 runs . He took match figures of 6 / 28 against the West of England at Bristol , and top @-@ scored in the second innings of a low @-@ scoring match with 14 . Miller was also selected for the Dominions match against England , scoring 30 in a drawn encounter . The success of the season , especially Miller and Keith Carmody 's attractive batting , prompted Warner to begin planning for a " Test " series between the respective armed services of England and Australia . 
 After ten months of training , Miller was offered a commission as a pilot officer . His best friend missed out , so he arranged for Flight Lieutenant Keith Johnson an Australian cricket official , to pull some strings , ensuring his friend 's promotion . The pair were posted to 12 Advanced Flying Unit in Grantham , Lincolnshire in on 15 August 1944 , which was an Operations Training Unit for the purpose of familiarising officers with flying aircraft . However , on a trip back to Ouston to visit their colleagues , a night of drunken revelry led to property damage and injury to another airman . Miller and his friend were charged with eight offences and faced possible expulsion . Luckily for Miller , the Commanding Officer ( CO ) at his new posting at Cranfield , Buckinghamshire was his old CO at Ouston . Miller was given another three @-@ week disciplinary course , but his pleas convinced the CO to reduce the sentence to a fine for the property damage . Miller was allowed to resume his training in Beauforts , Beaufighters and Mosquitos . Again he had a near miss , when some instruments on his plane failed and he was forced to land his Beaufighter for repairs . After the repairs , another pilot used the plane and the problem recurred . The second pilot crash @-@ landed and was killed . Later , Miller was returning from a training mission over France and misjudged the runway , bouncing his plane on the tarmac . Trying to lift off again , only one engine responded and the unequal power supply caused the plane to swerve , missing the hangar by centimetres . He then escaped death by skipping a social appointment that he had agreed to attend . A V1 rocket hit the venue and killed many of the patrons inside . In October , he went AWOL to watch violinist Yehudi Menuhin perform in London and was dismissed , but the CO revoked his decision on the condition that Miller play for his cricket team . 
 = = Officer = = 
 At the end of his officer training , Miller was sent aboard a Royal Navy destroyer as part of an exchange programme between the forces . Miller and a friend reported to the harbour late after a night of socialising and were punished by having to wait for their turn on the second vessel . During a voyage to escort 30 merchant ships to Belgium , the vessel was involved in a battle with a German U @-@ boat , which was sunk . Upon his return to England , Miller was promoted to flying officer on 4 November 1944 . Miller was a nervy pilot , with his navigator saying that every landing was " a close shave " . 
 In March 1945 , Miller was deployed to the RAF station at Great Massingham in Norfolk , East Anglia . He was assigned to No. 169 Squadron RAF , flying Mosquito fighter @-@ bombers . Miller 's squadron took part in missions against Nazi Germany in April and May 1945 . They attacked V1 and V2 production sites on the island of Peenemünde in the North Sea with the objective of depleting the Germans ' offensive capability . On 19 April , Miller took part in an attack on a German installation at Flensburg in Germany . The Mosquitoes flew below 300 m in a four @-@ hour trip . In May , his squadron was deployed in Operation Fire Bash , to attack Westerland Airfield on the island of Sylt off the coast of Denmark . The Nazis had 5 @,@ 000 soldiers , 15 @,@ 000 sailors and 800 artillery pieces defending it . Over 300 British and American airmen had died in an attempt to capture it . Miller and his colleagues had tanks loaded with napalm , which were to be dropped on the Germans . One of Miller 's loads remained dangling from a wing , refusing to drop . He flew back to base with the explosives , and it fell off on landing at the air base . Luckily for Miller , it failed to detonate . However , five of the 24 planes that were involved in the raid were not so lucky , and were shot down . Miller avoided further European missions as bad weather forced the cancellation of additional raids over the next few days , by which time Germany had surrendered . His CO , Neville Reeves , organised for him to fly air force personnel over Germany to view the results of Allied bombing , called " Reeves ' Ruhr Tours " . On one flight , Reeves was leading a formation of aircraft when Miller broke away from the group and returned to base late . When asked why he had gone separately , Miller said that he wanted to fly over Bonn , the birthplace of Beethoven . He was not disciplined for the incident . 
 = = Victory Tests = = 
 The end of the war marked the start of the 1945 cricket season . Miller returned to Lord 's and top @-@ scored with 50 for the RAAF against a British Empire XI , as his team opened the season with a six @-@ wicket win . Warner had organised a series of matches between England and Australian servicemen , known as the Victory Tests , to celebrate the end of hostilities . However , Australian cricket administrators would not accredit the three @-@ day matches as official Test matches , arguing that there were not enough Test @-@ level players in the armed services . England were close to full strength , so the AIF and the RAAF teams merged to strengthen their quality . As a result , the Australian Services cricket team was formed under the leadership of Warrant Officer Lindsay Hassett to compete in the Victory Tests . Hassett was the only capped Test player , but six others had first @-@ class experience in Australia . The First Victory Test was at Lord 's and was expected to usher in a new post @-@ war era , which it hoped would be more aggressive and attractive . The last Anglo @-@ Australian Test series before the war had featured a large number of draws due to defensive play . England batted first and Miller came on as the fifth bowler . He bowled his Great Massingham pilot colleague Bill Edrich for 45 to end with 1 / 11 , precipitating an English collapse from 4 / 200 to 267 . In reply to England 's 267 , Miller came to the crease at 3 / 136 and joined Hassett . Miller gradually progressed , and once Australia had taken the lead , he cut loose . After spending 40 minutes in the 90s , he finished with 105 in 210 minutes , with a straight six . The Times opined that his innings was " as good a century as has been seen at Lord 's in many a long day " . Wisden said that he " was always getting runs with the soundness characteristic of most Australians " . Harry Altham declared that " a brilliant new star had joined the cluster of the Southern Cross " . Australia took a 188 @-@ run lead , and reached their second innings target with two balls to spare to win by six wickets despite Miller being run out for only one . He then took 2 / 2 and made a duck as the RAAF lost to the RAF by 16 runs in a one @-@ day match . 
 Miller went on to play a two @-@ day match for the RAAF against Lancashire , where his 52 was the only fifty in a low @-@ scoring game . He also took match figures of 2 / 28 . After scoring 30 in an innings victory over Learie Constantine 's XI , Miller represented the RAAF against the RAF at Lord 's where he top @-@ scored with 63 in 90 minutes . The Second Victory Test was played at Bramall Lane in Sheffield , where the grandstands were damaged by German air raids . Hassett sent the Englishmen into bat . Miller went wicketless . He was run out in the first innings for 17 . In the second innings , Miller bowled a fast and hostile spell , hitting Test world record holder Len Hutton in the arm before hitting Cyril Washbrook in the head , provoking an angry crowd reaction , comparing Miller to the Bodyline spearhead Harold Larwood . He later removed Washbrook and ended with 2 / 28 . His efforts led to calls for him to start taking his bowling seriously , instead of simply jogging in releasing the ball , especially from former South African representative Bob Crisp . Despite this , Miller fell for eight in the second innings and Australia fell 41 runs short of the target and series was squared . 
 During June , there was speculation that Miller 's squadron would be deployed to Burma to fight against Japan . In the meantime , the airmen continued to practice their flying , Miller earning Reeves ' ire by making unauthorised leisure flights . Later , he was ordered to fly tour flights over Germany . Not wanting to do so , Miller lodged bogus reports saying that the Mosquitoes were malfunctioning , causing unnecessary maintenance work . Thus , Reeves ordered Miller to take his plane instead , which caught fire in mid @-@ flight . With one functional engine and no navigator to assist him , Miller came back to the air base and <unk> . The fuselage and one of the wings was broken off and the plane became engulfed in flames . Miller escaped physical injury , but was shaken by the accident . Again Miller escaped disciplinary action , and was playing sport an hour later . 
 The next day , Miller headed to Lord 's to play for the RAAF against the South of England . Chasing 208 , Miller scored an unbeaten 78 in 95 minutes . The Australians were 3 / 184 , well placed to reach the target of 208 when rain washed out the match . He then scored 30 and took 1 / 14 as the RAAF defeated the Army . In the Third Victory Test at Lord 's , despite his efforts in the previous Victory Test , Miller was only Hassett 's sixth @-@ choice bowler , coming on when England were 2 / 100 . This time he measured out a run up . Miller struck John Dewes before uprooting his off stump . He then bowled Donald Carr for four and then removed Hutton 's off stump . He ended with 3 / 44 from 18 overs . Miller was bowled for seven in the first innings but was rewarded with the new ball in the second innings . He bowled Dewes for a duck with an outswinger , before bowling Edrich and Pollard to end with 3 / 42 . This left Australia a target of 225 in five hours . Miller came into bat at 3 / 104 and saw Australia to the target unbeaten on 71 . C B Fry opined that Miller 's innings was " superbly stroked and directed cover driving of the pace bowling formed the most telling and majestic feature " . 
 In a two @-@ day match against Yorkshire , Miller struck 111 including three sixes when none of the team @-@ mates passed 30 . His innings featured strokes from both the front and back foot . The next day , he scored 75 in 83 minutes against Durham and took 2 / 1 in another win for the RAAF . That was the first of four back @-@ to @-@ back one @-@ dayers for the RAAF ; Miller scored two , 23 and nine against Scottish Services , Greenock and Scotland . 
 In the Fourth Victory Test , again at Lord 's , Miller came in at 3 / 108 and after a slow start , scored another century , taking 170 minutes to reach the mark before being removed for 118 . He struck ten fours , all off which were driven . In the second innings , he came to the crease with four wickets down with Australia still in arrears . He scored an unbeaten 35 to ensure that Australia would not collapse further and lose the match . The public reception towards the Victory Tests resulted in an additional fifth match being added to the schedule . To warm up for that match , Miller took 3 / 95 against the North of England . 
 In the meantime Japan had surrendered , and No. 169 Squadron was disbanded . Miller had spent around 550 hours in the air with the RAF , to whom his RAAF unit had been seconded . For his active service he received the 1939 – 45 Star , France and Germany Star , Defence Medal , War Medal 1939 – 45 and the Australia Service Medal 1939 – 45 . 
 In the final Fifth Victory Test at Old Trafford , Australia batted first and had collapsed to 4 / 66 under overcast conditions on a green pitch when Miller came to the crease . Against a swinging and seaming ball , Miller struck 14 from the first over that he faced and went on to finish 77 not out in a display that featured strong cutting and driving as Australia could manage only 173 . He took one wicket with the ball but managed only four in the second innings as England won by four wickets to square the series 2 – 2 . Hassett wrote at the end of the series that " This is cricket as it should be ... These games have shown that international cricket can be played as between real friends — so let 's have no more talk of " war " in cricket " . Miller topped the batting averages for the series , with 443 runs at 63 @.@ 28 . His aggregate exceeded that of Hammond and Hutton , who made 369 and 380 respectively . Miller also took 10 wickets at 27 @.@ 70 . Of Miller 's batting , Hassett said that " as a strokeplayer he is second to none " . his exploits in military teams led some to compare him to Jack Gregory , who had broken into top @-@ flight cricket with his exploits with an AIF team immediately after the First World War . 
 The last big match of the season was a one @-@ off at Lord 's between England and Dominions , a combined team of players from the British Commonwealth . Miller managed 26 in the Dominions ' first innings of 307 , before coming to the crease at 2 / 60 in the second innings with England still leading by 80 runs . Miller settled in quickly , hitting his second ball through the covers for four and moved to 49 in 49 minutes . He brought up his half @-@ century by lifting Hollies straight back into the crowd . Three balls later , he hit another ball to the same point . At stumps , he was 61 not out with Dominions at 3 / 145 . The next morning , his partner Martin Donnelly was dismissed and replaced by Dominions captain Learie Constantine . Miller then began his attack , hitting the dual leg spin pairing of Hollies and Wright to all parts of the ground . At one point , all the fielders except for the wicketkeeper and the bowler were on the fence . 
 He registered his century in 115 minutes , <unk> another five balls over the boundary in the morning session . One of Miller 's sixes travelled over 170 m in the air to Block Q next to the pavilion . He then aimed a lofted shot over long on from the bowling of Hollies , directly at the pavilion . It was still rising when it narrowly went over the press box and clipped the top of the roof . Test spinner James Langridge was brought on and Miller deposited two drives over the fence in his first over . 
 In one 35 @-@ minute passage of play , he and Constantine added 91 runs , before he departed for 185 from 165 minutes . He had scored a total of 124 runs in 115 minutes of batting in the morning session . Miller had struck a total of 13 fours and seven sixes , prompting Warner to say that in his 60 years of involvement in first @-@ class cricket that he had " never seen such hitting " . 
 The Dominions went on to win by 45 runs in a match described by Wisden as " one of the finest ever seen " . Commenting of Miller ' innings , Robertson @-@ Glasgow said " From the moment he takes guard he plays each ball just that much below its supposed merits that scratches a bowler 's pride " . The former England player C. B. Fry said that Miller was " a batsman already great ... who is likely , later on , to challenge the feats of Australia 's champions of the past ... Miller has something of the dash and generous abandon that were part of Victor Trumper 's charm . " Miller had enjoyed his visit to the home of cricket . In eight innings at Lord 's for the season , he had scored 568 runs at 94 @.@ 68 with three centuries . Wisden concluded 
 Miller outshone even Hammond and for the latter part of his innings played faultless cricket . The shot experts said was longer than Trott 's landed high on the broadcasting box ... Miller 's other six <unk> bounced into seats in front of the Long Room , forcing elderly members to seek safety in the bar . 
 Miller 's carefree attitude on the playing field enchanted spectators and he was a favourite of the English public . Miller attributed this to the fact that sport was trivial in comparison to war . When asked many years later by Michael Parkinson , about pressure on the cricket field , Miller responded with the famous quote : " pressure is a Messerschmitt up your arse , playing cricket is not " . 
 The season ended with a few more matches against various English counties . Miller struck 81 not out in a low @-@ scoring win against Nottinghamshire . In a match against Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI , which comprised Test @-@ level England players , Miller struck 71 in just over an hour as the Australians finished at 506 and took an innings victory . Miller 's time in England ended on a losing note when he scored a duck and eight and took 2 / 10 and 2 / 17 as the Australian Services lost to Surrey by three wickets . In matches that were given first @-@ class status , Miller had score 725 runs at 72 @.@ 50 for the season , finishing second in the averages and the aggregates . The success of the Australian Services team prompted the Foreign Minister of Australia Doc Evatt to ask the team to stop in India and Ceylon on their return to Australia to play in a fundraising tour for the Red Cross . 
 = = Services tour of India = = 
 Miller , the vice @-@ captain of the team , almost missed the trip to India after turning up late for the voyage . The servicemen arrived in Bombay and took a two @-@ day train journey to Lahore to play North Zone . Miller scored 46 in a drawn match . The Australians headed to Delhi , but Miller missed the tour match due to food poisoning . He then led the Australians in a match against West Zone in Bombay with Hassett being rested . Miller top @-@ scored with 106 in a high @-@ scoring draw . In the first match against India at Bombay 's Brabourne Stadium , regarded as unofficial Tests , Miller took two wickets : <unk> Modi in the first innings and Abdul Hafeez Kardar in the second . The match ended in a high @-@ scoring draw with Miller unbeaten on 15 as Australia were 1 / 31 in pursuit of 112 for victory . At this point , with most of the team suffering from dysentery , some of the Australians became disenchanted with the long train journeys across the subcontinent , and tried to ask Hassett and manager Keith Johnson for air travel . When this was rejected , some of the RAAF personnel felt that Hassett should be removed , with Miller as one of the candidates to replace him . With Bradman likely to miss the upcoming tour of New Zealand , the Services captain would be one of the leading candidates to lead Australia . Miller refused to plot against Hassett and the dispute ended when Squadron Leader Stan Sismey arranged for a RAAF plane already in India to transport the team . On the first flight to Calcutta , the squad survived an electrical storm that caused the plane to drop altitude . 
 The team was scheduled to play East Zone , but the city was gripped in deadly riots as independence activists agitated against British rule . The match went ahead , but on the first day , thousands of protestors invaded the pitch , interrupting play for an hour . Elsewhere in the city , 23 people were killed . Miller scored only 17 and one , both times dismissed by Chandu Sarwate , and did not bowl . On the final day , Miller 's friend Compton , who was playing for East Zone while on deployment with the British Army in India , was nearing a century as his team closed in on victory . The rioters broke through the security presence and invaded the pitch again . The leader of the demonstrators ran up to Compton and said : " Mr Compton , you very good player , but you must stop " . In later years , Miller would quote this remark whenever Compton came to the crease in matches featuring both of them . Compton told the rioters to ask Hassett , saying that the Australian skipper controlled proceedings . Hassett smiled at the leader of the irate demonstrators and asked " You wouldn 't happen to have a cigarette , would you , old boy ? " The rioters calmed down and play resumed . Compton brought up his century with the winning runs . In 2005 , the ECB and Cricket Australia decided that the player adjudged the Player of the Series in the Ashes would be awarded the Compton @-@ Miller Medal , recognising their friendship and rivalry . 
 In the second match against India , the Australians were 2 / 250 in response to India 's 386 when Miller came in and hit Vinoo Mankad for four sixes from five balls , before falling to the said bowler for 82 . The match ended in a draw , with Miller not taking a wicket after aggravating an injury . Captaining the team , Miller took 3 / 19 and 1 / 8 in a match against South Zone in Madras , the Australians ' only win on Indian soil . However , he had a difficult time with the bat , falling twice to Ghulam Ahmed for a duck and eight . He failed with the bat in the third and final match against India , falling twice to Shute Banerjee for two and seven , but he took 2 / 60 in the first innings as India took the series 1 – 0 . Miller had a disappointing series in the international matches , with 107 runs at 26 @.@ 25 and four wickets at 40 @.@ 50 . Australia 's final match was in Colombo against an All Ceylon team . Miller scored 132 and took 2 / 37 as Australia won by an innings . Not wanting to wait a month for the next boat and a fortnight 's sea voyage , the Australians returned to Perth by hitching a ride on a B @-@ 24 Liberator . The pilot of the RAAF plane had already promised 14 friends a lift so that they would not be stuck in India for another six months , so the Australian team sat on the floor of the aircraft . They made it back to Australia despite suffering engine trouble and an overloaded plane . 
 = = Services matches in Australia = = 
 Upon returning to Australia , Hassett 's men were informed by the military and the Australian Board of Control that the Services were to play a further six first @-@ class matches against the state teams . Miller was tired but the fixtures were meant to revive cricket following the war and were also used as a lead @-@ up to the international tour to New Zealand in March 1946 . 
 Miler started his campaign for Test selection when the servicemen arrived in Perth and played their first match against Western Australia . Miller put in his best batting performance of the season with an 80 in a drawn match , before being rested in the match against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval , which again ended in a draw . Miller finally returned to his home town on 2 January 1946 and was reunited with family and friends before taking on Victoria . Miller top @-@ scored in both innings with 37 and 59 as the military men fell to an innings defeat , troubled by the off spin of Ian Johnson . Miller and the servicemen had another difficult time against New South Wales , as their opponents made 7 / 551 and Miller went wicketless . Miller faced his biggest challenge in Australian conditions in his quest for Test selection when he went out to bat . The Australian selectors had not been in England for the Victory Tests to witness his ability and Miller had not played to his potential on Australian soil . Local Australian opinion was that because the Services had played poorly in Australia , their achievements in England must have been against poor opposition . 
 He was pitted against Bill O 'Reilly , the leg spinner regarded as the best bowler in the world , and Ray Lindwall , an emerging bowler of express pace , the fastest in Australia . Miller accumulated slowly and was on 74 as Services limped to 9 / 171 . Services had no batsmen left with one man injured and retired hurt , so O 'Reilly allowed the twelfth man to bat , in order to give Miller a chance of making a century . Miller attacked and scored 31 of the last 33 runs , ending with an unbeaten 105 , with 11 fours in 172 minutes . He earned plaudits among cricket pundits on Australian soil . Former leading Test batsman Alan Kippax opined that " Australia has unearthed a new champion " , claiming that he was finer than Jack Gregory and saying that " few batsmen I have watched have had his ability to blend beauty and power " . O 'Reilly said that Miller 's century was " one of the best hundreds ever got against me " . Miller compiled 46 in the second innings before being bowled by O 'Reilly as the Servicemen fell to another innings defeat . Miller finished the season with 2 / 74 and 4 / 49 in a drawn match against Queensland and a pair of fifties in a drawn match against Tasmania . Miller ended the season with 463 runs at 57 @.@ 88 and six wickets at 31 @.@ 83 . 
 Miller was selected for Australia 's tour of New Zealand , and made his Test debut there . Upon returning to Australia , he was discharged from the RAAF on 26 June 1946 . 
 = Aldwych tube station = 
 Aldwych is a closed station on the London Underground , located in the City of Westminster in Central London . It was opened in 1907 with the name Strand , after the street on which it is located , and was the terminus of the short Piccadilly line branch from Holborn that was a relic of the merger of two railway schemes . The station building is close to the Strand 's junction with Surrey Street , near Aldwych . During its lifetime , the branch was the subject of a number of unrealised extension proposals that would have seen the tunnels through the station extended southwards , usually to Waterloo . 
 Served mostly by a shuttle train and suffering from low passenger numbers , the station and branch were considered for closure several times . Service was offered only during weekday peak hours from 1962 and finally discontinued altogether in 1994 , when the cost of replacing the lifts was considered too high for the income generated . 
 Disused parts of the station and the running tunnels were used during both world wars to shelter artworks from London 's public galleries and museums from bombing . The station has long been popular as a filming location and has appeared as itself and as other London Underground stations in a number of films . In recognition of its historical significance , the station is a Grade II listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The Great Northern and Strand Railway ( GN & SR ) first proposed a station in the Strand area in a private bill presented to Parliament in November 1898 . The station was to be the southern terminus of an underground railway line planned to run from Wood Green station ( now Alexandra Palace ) via Finsbury Park and King 's Cross and was originally to be located at the corner of Stanhope Street and Holles Street , north of the Strand . When the two streets were scheduled for demolition as part of the London County Council 's plans for the construction of Kingsway and Aldwych , the GN & SR moved the location to the junction of the two new roads . Royal Assent to the bill was given and the Great Northern and Strand Railway Act 1899 was enacted on 1 August . 
 In September 1901 , the GN & SR was taken over by the Brompton and Piccadilly Circus Railway ( B & PCR ) , which planned to build an underground line from South Kensington to Piccadilly Circus via Knightsbridge . Both were under the control of Charles Yerkes through his Metropolitan District Electric Traction Company and , in June 1902 , were transferred to Yerkes ' new holding company , the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) . Neither of the railways had carried out any construction , but the UERL obtained permission for new tunnels between Piccadilly Circus and Holborn to connect the two routes . The companies were formally merged as the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR ) following parliamentary approval in November 1902 . Prior to confirmation of the merger , the GN & SR had sought permission to extend its line southwards from the future junction of Kingsway and Aldwych , under Norfolk Street to a new interchange under the Metropolitan District Railway 's station at Temple . The extension was rejected following objections from the Duke of Norfolk under whose land the last part of the proposed tunnels would have run . 
 In 1903 , the GNP & BR sought permission for a branch from Piccadilly Circus to run under Leicester Square , Strand , and Fleet Street and into the City of London . The branch would have passed and interchanged with the already approved Strand station , allowing travel on the GNP & BR from Strand in three directions . The deliberations of a Royal Commission on traffic in London prevented parliamentary consideration of the proposal , which was withdrawn . 
 In 1905 , with the Royal Commission 's report about to be published , the GNP & BR returned to Parliament with two bills for consideration . The first bill revived the 1903 proposal for a branch from Piccadilly Circus to the City of London , passing and interchanging with Strand station . The second proposed an extension and relocation of Strand station to the junction of Strand and Surrey Street . From there the line was to continue as a single tunnel under the River Thames to Waterloo . The first bill was again delayed and withdrawn . Of the second , only the relocation of Strand station was permitted . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The linking of the GN & SR and B & PCR routes meant that the section of the GN & SR south of Holborn became a branch from the main route . The UERL began constructing the main route in July 1902 . Progress was rapid , so that it was largely complete by the Autumn of 1906 . Construction of the Holborn to Strand section was delayed while the London County Council constructed Kingsway and the tramway subway running beneath it and while the UERL decided how the junction between the main route and the branch would be arranged at Holborn . 
 Strand station was built on the site of the Royal Strand Theatre , which had closed on 13 May 1905 and been demolished . Construction of the station began on 21 October 1905 , to a design by the UERL 's architect Leslie Green in the UERL house style of a two @-@ storey steel @-@ framed building faced with red glazed terracotta blocks , with wide semi @-@ circular windows on the upper floor . The station building is L @-@ shaped , with two façades separated by the building on the corner of Strand and Surrey Street . The Strand façade is narrow with a single semi @-@ circular window above the entrance . The façade in Surrey Street is wider with a separate entrance and exit and a shop unit . In anticipation of a revival of the extension to Waterloo and the City route , the station was built with three circular lift shafts able to accommodate six trapezium @-@ shaped lifts . Only one of the shafts was fitted out , with two lifts . The other two shafts rose from the lower concourse to the basement of the station , but could have been extended upwards into the space of the shop unit when required . A fourth smaller @-@ diameter shaft accommodated an emergency spiral stair . 
 The platforms are 92 feet 6 inches ( 28 @.@ 19 m ) below street level and are 250 feet ( 76 m ) long ; shorter than the GNP & BR 's standard length of 350 feet ( 110 m ) . As with other UERL stations , the platform walls were tiled with distinctive patterns , in this case cream and dark green . Only parts of the platform walls were decorated because it was planned to operate the branch with short trains . Owing to the reduced lift provision , a second route between the platforms and lifts was never brought into use and was left in an unfinished condition without tiling . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 The GNP & BR 's main route opened on 15 December 1906 , but the Strand branch was not opened until 30 November 1907 . Initially , shuttle trains operated to Holborn from the eastern platform into the through platform at Holborn . At peak times , an additional train operated alternately in the branch 's western tunnel into the bay platform at Holborn . During the first year of operation , a train for theatregoers operated late on Monday to Saturday evenings from Strand through Holborn and northbound to Finsbury Park ; this was discontinued in October 1908 . 
 In March 1908 , the off @-@ peak shuttle service began to use the western platform at Strand and the through platform at Holborn , crossing between the two branch tunnels south of Holborn . Low usage led to the withdrawal of the second peak @-@ hour shuttle and the eastern tunnel was taken out of use in 1914 . On 9 May 1915 , three of the Underground stations in the area were renamed and Strand station became Aldwych . Sunday services ended in April 1917 and , in August of the same year , the eastern tunnel and platform at Aldwych and the bay platform at Holborn were formally closed . A German bombing campaign in September 1917 led to the disused platform being used as storage for around 300 paintings from the National Gallery from then until December 1918 . 
 In October 1922 , the ticket office was replaced by a facility in the lifts . Passenger numbers remained low : when the station was one of a number on the network considered for closure in 1929 , its annual usage was 1 @,@ 069 @,@ 650 and takings were £ 4 @,@ 500 . The branch was again considered for closure in 1933 , but remained open . 
 Wartime efficiency measures led to the branch being closed temporarily on 22 September 1940 , shortly after the start of The Blitz , and it was partly fitted out by the City of Westminster as an air @-@ raid shelter . The tunnels between Aldwych and Holborn were used to store items from the British Museum , including the Elgin Marbles . The branch reopened on 1 July 1946 , but patronage did not increase . In 1958 , the station was one of three that London Transport announced would be closed . Again it survived , but the service was reduced in June 1958 to run only during Monday to Friday peak hours and Saturday morning and early afternoons . The Saturday service was withdrawn in June 1962 . 
 After operating only during peak hours for more than 30 years , the closure announcement came on 4 January 1993 . The original 1907 lifts required replacement at a cost of £ 3 million . This was not justifiable as only 450 passengers used the station each day and it was losing London Regional Transport £ 150 @,@ 000 per year . The Secretary of State for Transport granted permission on 1 September 1994 to close the station and the branch closed on 30 September . Recognising the station 's historical significance as a mostly unaltered station from the early 20th century , the station was given Grade II listed building status in 2011 . 
 = = = Proposals for extension and new connections = = = 
 Although the Piccadilly Circus to City of London branch proposal of 1905 was never revisited after its withdrawal , the early plan to extend the branch south to Waterloo was revived a number of times during the station 's life . The extension was considered in 1919 and 1948 , but no progress towards constructing the link was made . 
 In the years after the Second World War , a series of preliminary plans for relieving congestion on the London Underground had considered various east @-@ west routes through the Aldwych area , although other priorities meant that these were never proceeded with . In March 1965 , a British Rail and London Transport joint planning committee published " A Railway Plan for London " which proposed a new tube railway , the Fleet line ( later renamed the Jubilee line ) , to join the Bakerloo line at Baker Street then run via Bond Street , Green Park , Charing Cross , Aldwych and into the City of London via Ludgate Circus , Cannon Street and Fenchurch Street before heading into south @-@ east London . An interchange was proposed at Aldwych and a second recommendation of the report was the revival of the link from Aldwych to Waterloo . London Transport had already sought parliamentary approval to construct tunnels from Aldwych to Waterloo in November 1964 , and in August 1965 , parliamentary powers were granted . Detailed planning took place , although public spending cuts led to postponement of the scheme in 1967 before tenders were invited . 
 Planning of the Fleet line continued and parliamentary approval was given in July 1969 for the first phase of the line , from Baker Street to Charing Cross . Tunnelling began on the £ 35 million route in February 1972 and the Jubilee line opened north from Charing Cross in May 1979 . The tunnels of the approved section continued east of Charing Cross under Strand almost as far as Aldwych station , but no work at Aldwych was undertaken and they were used only as sidings . Funding for the second phase of the work was delayed throughout the 1970s whilst the route beyond Charing Cross was reviewed to consider options for serving anticipated development in the London Docklands area . By 1979 , the cost was estimated as £ 325 million , a six @-@ fold increase from the £ 51 million estimated in 1970 . A further review of alternatives for the Jubilee line was carried out in 1980 , which led to a change of priorities and the postponement of any further effort on the line . When the extension was eventually constructed in the late 1990s it took a different route , south of the River Thames via Westminster , Waterloo and London Bridge to provide a rapid link to Canary Wharf , leaving the tunnels between Green Park and Aldwych redundant . 
 In July 2005 , Ove Arup & Partners produced a report , DLR Horizon 2020 Study , for the Docklands Light Railway ( DLR ) examining " pragmatic development schemes " to expand and improve the DLR network between 2012 and 2020 . One of the proposals was an extension of the DLR from Bank to Charing Cross via City Thameslink and Aldwych . The disused Jubilee line tunnels would be enlarged to accommodate the larger DLR trains and Aldwych station would form the basis for a new station on the line , although requiring considerable reconstruction to accommodate escalators . The estimated cost in 2005 was £ 232 million for the infrastructure works and the scheme was described as " strongly beneficial " as it was expected to attract passengers from the London Underground 's existing east @-@ west routes and from local buses and reduce overcrowding at Bank station . The business case assessment was that the proposal offered high value , although similar values were calculated for other extension proposals from Bank . Further detailed studies were proposed . 
 In 2015 , a scheme was proposed by the design firm Gensler to convert disused London Underground tunnels into subterranean rail trails , enabling the disused branches of the Piccadilly line and Jubilee line to be used as cycle paths . The scheme , which would involve re @-@ opening Aldwych station as an access point for cyclists , has not been officially approved . 
 = = Use in media = = 
 Because it was a self @-@ contained section of the London Underground which was closed outside weekday peak hours , Aldwych station and the branch line from Holborn were popular locations for filming scenes set on the Tube even before their closure . Since the branch 's closure in 1994 , its use in film productions has continued , with the station appearing as itself and , with appropriate signage , as other stations on the network . The track and infrastructure are maintained in operational condition , and a train of ex @-@ Northern line 1972 tube stock is permanently stabled on the branch . This train can be driven up and down the branch for filming . The physical connection with the Piccadilly line northbound tracks remains , but requires manual operation . 
 Films and television productions that have been shot at Aldwych include : 
 The Gentle Gunman ( 1952 ) 
 Battle of Britain ( 1969 ) 
 Death Line ( 1972 ) 
 Superman IV : The Quest for Peace ( 1986 ) 
 The Krays ( 1990 ) 
 Patriot Games ( 1994 ) 
 Creep ( 2004 ) 
 V for Vendetta ( 2006 ) 
 The Good Shepherd ( 2006 ) 
 Atonement ( 2007 ) 
 28 Weeks Later ( 2007 ) 
 The Edge of Love ( 2008 ) 
 Mr Selfridge ( 2013 ) 
 Sherlock ( 2014 ) 
 The pre @-@ war operation of the station features in a pivotal scene in Geoffrey Household 's novel Rogue Male , when the pursuit of the protagonist by an enemy agent sees them repeatedly using the shuttle service on the branch line . A chase through Aldwych station ends with the agent 's death by electrocution on the track . A much modified and expanded version of the station appears as a level in the video game Tomb Raider III . The music video for The Prodigy 's song " Firestarter " was filmed in the disused eastern tunnel and one of the unused lift shafts . The station was the subject of an episode of Most Haunted in 2002 . 
 = Cher = 
 Cher ( / <unk> / ; born Cherilyn Sarkisian ; May 20 , 1946 ) is an American singer and actress . Called the Goddess of Pop , she is described as embodying female autonomy in a male @-@ dominated industry . She is known for her distinctive contralto singing voice and for having worked in numerous areas of entertainment , as well as adopting a variety of styles and appearances during her five @-@ decade @-@ long career . 
 Cher gained popularity in 1965 as one @-@ half of the folk rock husband @-@ wife duo Sonny & Cher after their song " I Got You Babe " reached number one on the American and British charts . She began her solo career simultaneously , releasing in 1966 her first million @-@ seller song , " Bang Bang ( My Baby Shot Me Down ) " . She became a television personality in the 1970s with her shows The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour , watched by over 30 million viewers weekly during its three @-@ year run , and Cher . She emerged as a fashion trendsetter by wearing elaborate outfits on her television shows . While working on television , she established herself as a solo artist with the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart @-@ topping singles " Gypsys , Tramps & Thieves " , " Half @-@ Breed " , and " Dark Lady " . After her divorce from Sonny Bono in 1975 , Cher launched a comeback in 1979 with the disco @-@ oriented album Take Me Home and earned $ 300 @,@ 000 a week for her 1980 – 82 residency show in Las Vegas . 
 In 1982 , Cher made her Broadway debut in the play Come Back to the Five and Dime , Jimmy Dean , Jimmy Dean and starred in the film adaptation of the same title . She subsequently earned critical acclaim for her performances in films such as Silkwood ( 1983 ) , Mask ( 1985 ) , and Moonstruck ( 1987 ) , for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress . She then revived her musical career by recording the rock @-@ inflected albums Cher ( 1987 ) , Heart of Stone ( 1989 ) , and Love Hurts ( 1991 ) , all of which yielded several successful singles . She reached a new commercial peak in 1998 with the album Believe , whose title track became the biggest @-@ selling single of all time by a female artist in the UK ; it features the pioneering use of Auto @-@ Tune , also known as the " Cher effect " . Her 2002 – 05 Living Proof : The Farewell Tour became one of the highest @-@ grossing concert tours of all time , earning $ 250 million . In 2008 , she signed a $ 180 million deal to headline the Colosseum at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas for three years . After seven years of absence , she returned to film in the 2010 musical Burlesque . Cher 's first studio album in 12 years , Closer to the Truth ( 2013 ) , became her highest @-@ charting solo album in the U.S. to date at number three . 
 Cher has won a Grammy Award , an Emmy Award , an Academy Award , three Golden Globe Awards , a Cannes Film Festival Award , and a special CFDA Fashion Award , among several other honors . Throughout her career , she has sold 100 million records worldwide . She is the only artist to date to have a number @-@ one single on a Billboard chart in each decade from the 1960s to the 2010s . Outside of her music and acting , she is noted for her political views , philanthropic endeavors and social activism , including LGBT rights and HIV / AIDS prevention . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1946 – 61 : Early life = = = 
 Cher was born Cherilyn Sarkisian in El Centro , California , on May 20 , 1946 . Her father , John Sarkisian , was an Armenian @-@ American truck driver with drug and gambling problems , and her mother , Jackie Jean Crouch , was an occasional model and bit @-@ part actress who claimed Irish , English , German and Cherokee ancestry . Cher 's father was rarely home when she was an infant , and her parents divorced when Cher was ten months old . Her mother later married actor John Southall , by whom she had a daughter , Georganne Southall . 
 Now living in Los Angeles , Cher 's mother began acting while working as a waitress . She changed her name to Georgia Holt and played minor roles in films and on television . Holt also secured acting parts for her daughters as extras on television shows like The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet . Her mother 's relationship with Southall ended when Cher was nine years old , but she considers him her father and remembers him as a " good @-@ natured man who turned belligerent when he drank too much " . Holt remarried and divorced several more times , and she moved her family around the country ( including New York , Texas , and California ) . They often had little money , and Cher remembers using rubber bands to hold her shoes together . At one point , her mother left Cher at an orphanage for several weeks . Although they met every day , both found the experience traumatic . 
 When Cher was in fifth grade , she produced a performance of the musical Oklahoma ! for her teacher and class . She organized a group of girls , directing and choreographing their dance routines . Unable to convince boys to participate , she acted the male roles and sang their songs . By age nine , she had developed an unusually low voice . Fascinated by film stars , Cher 's role model was Audrey Hepburn , particularly due to her role in the 1961 film Breakfast at Tiffany 's . Cher began to take after the unconventional outfits and behavior of Hepburn 's character . She was disappointed by the absence of dark @-@ haired Hollywood actresses whom she could emulate then . She had wanted to be famous since childhood but felt unattractive and untalented , later commenting , " I couldn 't think of anything that I could do ... I didn 't think I 'd be a singer or dancer . I just thought , well , I 'll be famous . That was my goal . " 
 In 1961 , Holt married bank manager Gilbert LaPiere , who adopted Cher ( under the name Cheryl LaPiere ) and Georganne , and enrolled them at Montclair College Preparatory School , a private school in Encino , whose students were mostly from affluent families . The school 's upper @-@ class environment presented a challenge for Cher ; biographer Connie Berman wrote , " [ she ] stood out from the others in both her striking appearance and outgoing personality . " A former classmate commented , " I 'll never forget seeing Cher for the first time . She was so special ... She was like a movie star , right then and there ... She said she was going to be a movie star and we knew she would . " Despite not being an excellent student , Cher was intelligent and creative , according to Berman . She earned high grades , excelling in French and English classes . As an adult , she discovered that she had dyslexia . Cher achieved notoriety for her unconventional behavior : she performed songs for students during the lunch hours and surprised peers when she wore a midriff @-@ baring top . She later recalled , " I was never really in school . I was always thinking about when I was grown up and famous . " 
 = = = 1962 – 65 : Solo career breakthrough = = = 
 At age 16 , Cher dropped out of school , left her mother 's house , and moved with a friend into Los Angeles , where she took acting classes and worked to support herself . She danced in small clubs along Hollywood 's Sunset Strip , introducing herself to performers , managers , and agents . According to Berman , " [ Cher ] did not hesitate to approach anyone she thought could help her get a break , make a new contact , or get an audition . " Cher met performer Sonny Bono in November 1962 when he was working for record producer Phil Spector . Cher 's friend moved out , and Cher accepted Sonny 's offer to be his housekeeper . Sonny introduced Cher to Spector , who used her as a backup singer on many recordings , including the Ronettes ' " Be My Baby " and the Righteous Brothers ' " You 've Lost That Lovin ' Feelin ' " . Spector produced her first single , the commercially unsuccessful " Ringo , I Love You " , which Cher recorded under the name Bonnie Jo Mason . 
 Cher and Sonny became close friends , eventual lovers , and performed their own unofficial wedding ceremony in a hotel room in Tijuana , Mexico , on October 27 , 1964 . Although Sonny had wanted to launch Cher as a solo artist , she encouraged him to perform with her because she suffered from stage fright , and he began joining her onstage , singing the harmonies . Cher disguised her nervousness by looking at Sonny ; she later commented that she sang to the people through him . In late 1964 , they emerged as a duo called Caesar & Cleo , releasing the poorly received singles " Do You Wanna Dance ? " , " Love Is Strange " , and " Let the Good Times Roll " . 
 Cher signed with Liberty Records ' Imperial imprint in the end of 1964 , and Sonny became her producer . The single " Dream Baby " , released under the name " Cherilyn " , received airplay in Los Angeles . Encouraged by Imperial , Cher worked with Sonny on her second solo single on the label , a cover version of Bob Dylan 's " All I Really Want to Do " , which peaked at number 15 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 in 1965 . Meanwhile , the Byrds had released their own version of the same song . When competition on the singles charts started between Cher and the Byrds , the group 's record label began to promote the B @-@ side of the Byrds ' single . Roger McGuinn of the Byrds commented , " We loved the Cher version ... We didn 't want to hassle . So we just turned our record over . " Cher 's debut album , All I Really Want to Do ( 1965 ) , reached number 16 on the Billboard 200 ; it was later described by AllMusic 's Tim Sendra as " one of the stronger folk @-@ pop records of the era " . 
 = = = 1965 – 67 : Sonny and Cher 's rise to pop stardom = = = 
 In early 1965 , Caesar and Cleo began calling themselves Sonny & Cher . Following the recording of " I Got You Babe " , they traveled to England in July 1965 at the Rolling Stones ' advice ; Cher recalled , " [ they ] had told us ... that Americans just didn 't get us and that if we were going to make it big , we were going to have to go to England . " According to writer Cintra Wilson , " English newspaper photographers showed up when S & C were thrown out of the London Hilton [ because of their outfits ] the night they arrived — literally overnight , they were stars . London went gaga for the heretofore @-@ unseen S & C look , which was neither mod nor rocker . " 
 " I Got You Babe " reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and became , according to AllMusic 's Bruce Eder , " one of the biggest @-@ selling and most beloved pop / rock hits of the mid- ' 60s " ; Rolling Stone listed it among " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " in 2003 . As the song knocked the Beatles off the top of the British charts , English teenagers began to emulate Sonny and Cher 's fashion style , such as bell @-@ bottoms , striped pants , ruffled shirts , industrial zippers and fur vests . Upon their return to the U.S. , the duo made several appearances on the teen @-@ pop showcases Hullabaloo and Shindig ! and completed a tour of some of the largest arenas in the U.S. Their shows attracted Cher look @-@ alikes — " girls who were ironing their hair straight and dyeing it black , to go with their vests and bell @-@ bottoms " . Cher expanded her creative range by designing a clothing line . 
 Sonny and Cher 's first album , Look at Us ( 1965 ) , released for the Atco Records division of Atlantic Records , spent eight weeks at number two on the Billboard 200 , behind the Beatles ' Help ! . Their material became popular , and the duo successfully competed with the dominant British Invasion and Motown sounds of the era . Sonny and Cher charted ten Billboard top 40 singles between 1965 and 1972 , including five top @-@ ten singles : " I Got You Babe " , " Baby Don 't Go " , " The Beat Goes On " , " All I Ever Need Is You " , and " A Cowboy 's Work Is Never Done " . At one point , they had five songs in the top 50 at the same time , a feat equaled only by the Beatles and Elvis Presley . By the end of 1967 , they had sold 40 million records worldwide and had become , according to Time magazine 's Ginia Bellafante , rock 's " it " couple . 
 Cher 's following releases kept her solo career fully competitive with her work with Sonny . The Sonny Side of Chér ( 1966 ) features " Bang Bang ( My Baby Shot Me Down ) " , which reached number two in America and became her first million @-@ seller solo single . Chér , also released in 1966 , contains the Burt Bacharach and Hal David composition " Alfie " , which was added to the credits of the American version of the 1966 film of the same name and became the first stateside version of the popular song . With Love , Chér ( 1967 ) includes songs described by biographer Mark Bego as " little soap @-@ opera stories set to rock music " such as the U.S. top @-@ ten single " You Better Sit Down Kids " . 
 = = = 1967 – 70 : Backlash from the younger generation , first marriage = = = 
 By the end of the 1960s , Sonny and Cher 's music had ceased to chart . According to Berman , " the heavy , loud sound of groups like Jefferson Airplane and Cream made the folk @-@ rock music of Sonny and Cher seem too bland . " Cher later commented , " I loved the new sound of Led Zeppelin , Eric Clapton , the electric @-@ guitar oriented bands . Left to myself , I would have changed with the times because the music really turned me on . But Son [ ny ] didn 't like it — and that was that . " Their monogamous lifestyle during the period of the sexual revolution and the anti @-@ drug position they adopted at the height of the drug culture eventually made the duo lose their popular appeal among American youths . According to Bego , " in spite of their revolutionary unisex clothes , Sonny and Cher were quite ' square ' when it came to sex and drugs . " In an attempt to recapture their young audience , the duo produced and starred in the film Good Times ( 1967 ) , which was commercially unsuccessful . 
 Cher 's next album , Backstage ( 1968 ) , in which she runs in diverse musical directions , including Brazilian jazz and anti @-@ war protest settings , was not a commercial success . In 1969 , she was dropped from Imperial Records . Sonny and Cher had been dropped from Atco ; however , the label wanted to sign Cher for a solo album . <unk> Jackson Highway ( 1969 ) was recorded without the guidance of Sonny and incorporates experiments in soul music ; AllMusic 's Mark Deming proclaimed it " the finest album of her career " . Displeased with the <unk> Jackson Highway album , Sonny prevented Cher from releasing more recordings for Atco . 
 Meanwhile , Sonny repeatedly cheated on Cher , and by the end of the 1960s their relationship had begun to unravel . According to People magazine , " [ Sonny ] tried desperately to win her back , telling her he wanted to marry and start a family . " They officially married after she gave birth on March 4 , 1969 to Chastity Bono ( who years later became Chaz Bono ) . That year , the duo spent $ 500 @,@ 000 and mortgaged their home to make the film Chastity . Written and directed by Sonny , who did not appear in the movie , it tells the story of a young woman , played by Cher , searching for the meaning of life . The art film failed commercially , putting the couple $ 190 @,@ 000 in debt with back taxes . However , some critics noted that Cher showed signs of acting potential ; Cue magazine wrote , " Cher has a marvelous quality that often makes you forget the lines you are hearing . " 
 At the lowest point of their career , the duo put together a nightclub routine that relied on a more adult approach to sound and style . According to writer Cintra Wilson , " Their lounge act was so depressing , people started heckling them . Then Cher started heckling back . Sonny ... reprimanded her ; then she 'd heckle Sonny " . The heckling became a highlight of the act and attracted viewers . Television executives took note , and the couple began making guest appearances on prime @-@ time shows , in which they presented a " new , sophisticated , and mature " image . Cher adopted alluring , low @-@ cut gowns that became her signature outfits . 
 = = = 1971 – 74 : Television career breakthrough , first musical comeback = = = 
 CBS head of programming Fred Silverman offered Sonny and Cher their own television program after he noticed them as guest @-@ hosts on The Merv Griffin Show in 1971 . The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour premiered as a summer replacement series on August 1 , 1971 , and had six episodes . Because it was a ratings success , the couple returned that December with a full @-@ time show . 
 Watched by more than 30 million viewers weekly during its three @-@ year run , The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour was praised for the comedic timing , and deadpan Cher mocked Sonny about his looks and short stature . According to Berman , they " exuded an aura of warmth , playfulness , and caring that only enhanced their appeal . Viewers were further enchanted when a young Chastity also appeared on the show . They seemed like a perfect family . " Cher honed her acting skills in sketch comedy roles such as the brash housewife Laverne , the sardonic waitress Rosa , and historical vamps , including Cleopatra and Miss Sadie Thompson . The designer clothing Cher wore were part of the show 's attraction , and her style influenced the fashion trends of the 1970s . 
 In 1971 , Sonny and Cher signed with the Kapp Records division of MCA Records , and the latter singer released the single " Classified 1A " , in which she sings from the point of view of a soldier who bleeds to death in Vietnam . Written by Sonny , who felt that her first solo single on the label had to be poignant and topical , radio station programmers quickly rejected the song as uncommercial . Since Sonny 's first attempts at reviving their recording career as a duo had also been unsuccessful , Kapp Records recruited Snuff Garrett to work with them . He produced Cher 's first U.S. solo number @-@ one single , " Gypsys , Tramps & Thieves " , which " proved that ... Garrett knew more about Cher 's voice and her persona as a singer than Sonny did " , writes Bego . The song was featured on the 1971 album Chér ( eventually reissued under the title Gypsys , Tramps & Thieves ) , which was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Its second single , " The Way of Love " , reached number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and established Cher 's more confident image as a recording artist . 
 In 1972 , Cher released the all @-@ ballad set Foxy Lady , demonstrating the evolution of her vocal abilities , according to Bego . Following the release of the album , Garrett quit as producer after disagreeing with Sonny about the kind of material Cher should record . At Sonny 's insistence , in 1973 Cher released an album of standards called Bittersweet White Light , which was commercially unsuccessful . That year , lyricist Mary Dean brought Garrett " Half @-@ Breed " , a song about the daughter of a Cherokee mother and a white father , that she had written especially for Cher . Although Garrett did not have Cher as a client at the time , he was convinced that " it 's a smash for Cher and for nobody else " , so he held the song for months until he got Cher back . " Half @-@ Breed " was featured on the album of the same name and became Cher 's second U.S. solo number @-@ one single . Both the album and the single were certified gold by the RIAA . Cher 's third U.S. solo number @-@ one single was " Dark Lady " , in 1974 , from the namesake album . Later that year , she released a Greatest Hits album that , according to Billboard magazine , proved her to be " one of the most consistent hitmakers of the past five years " , as well as a " proven superstar who always sells records " . 
 Between 1971 and 1973 , Sonny and Cher 's recording career was revived with four albums released under Kapp Records and MCA Records : Sonny & Cher Live ( 1971 ) , All I Ever Need Is You ( 1972 ) , Mama Was a Rock and Roll Singer , Papa Used to Write All Her Songs ( 1973 ) , and Live in Las Vegas Vol . 2 ( 1973 ) . Cher later commented on this period : " I could do a whole album ... in three days ... We were on the road ... and we were doing the Sonny & Cher Show " . 
 = = = 1974 – 79 : Divorce from Sonny Bono , second marriage , decline of popularity = = = 
 Cher and Sonny had marital problems since late 1972 , but appearances were maintained until 1974 . " The public still thinks we are married , " Sonny wrote in his diary at the time , " [ and ] that 's the way it has to be . " In February 1974 , Sonny filed for a separation , citing " irreconcilable differences " . A week later , Cher countered with a divorce suit and charged Sonny with " involuntary servitude " , claiming that he withheld money from her and deprived her of her rightful share of their earnings . The couple battled in court over finances and the custody of Chastity , which was eventually granted to Cher . Their divorce was finalized on June 26 , 1975 . 
 In 1974 , Cher won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy for The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour . The same year , Sonny premiered a solo show on ABC , The Sonny Comedy Revue , which carried the creative team behind the Sonny and Cher show . It was canceled after 13 weeks . 
 During the divorce proceedings , Cher had a two @-@ year romantic relationship with record executive David Geffen , who freed her from her business arrangement with Sonny , under which she was required to work exclusively for Cher Enterprises , the company he ran . Geffen secured a $ 2 @.@ 5 million deal for Cher with Warner Bros. Records , and she began work on her first album under the label in 1975 . According to Bego , " it was their intention that [ this album ] was going to make millions of fans around the world take her seriously as a rock star , and not just a pop singer . " Despite Cher 's efforts to develop her musical range by listening to artists such as Stevie Wonder , Elton John , James Taylor , Carly Simon , Joni Mitchell , and Bob Dylan , the resulting album , Stars , was commercially and critically unsuccessful . Janet Maslin of The Village Voice wrote , " Cher is just no rock and roller ... Image , not music , is Cher Bono 's main ingredient for both records and TV . " The album has since become a cult classic and is generally considered among her best work . 
 On February 16 , 1975 , Cher returned to television with a solo show on CBS . Entitled Cher , it began as a highly rated special with guests Flip Wilson , Elton John , and Bette Midler . The show was produced by Geffen and centered on Cher 's songs , monologues , comedy performance , and her variation of clothing , which was the largest for a weekly TV show . Early critical reception was favorable ; Los Angeles Times exclaimed that " Sonny without Cher was a disaster . Cher without Sonny , on the other hand , could be the best thing that 's happened to weekly television this season . " Cher lasted for less than a year , replaced by a new show in which she professionally reunited with ex @-@ husband Sonny ; she said , " doing a show alone was more than I could handle . " 
 On June 30 , 1975 , four days after finalizing her divorce from Sonny , Cher married rock musician Gregg Allman , co @-@ founder of The Allman Brothers Band . She filed for divorce nine days later because of his heroin and liquor problems , but they reconciled within a month . They had one son , Elijah Blue , on July 10 , 1976 . Sonny and Cher 's TV reunion , The Sonny and Cher Show , debuted on CBS in February 1976 — the first show ever to star a divorced couple . Although the show was a ratings success on its premiere , Cher and Sonny 's insulting onscreen banter about their divorce , her reportedly extravagant lifestyle , and her troubled relationship with Allman caused a public backlash that eventually contributed to the show 's cancellation in August 1977 . 
 Cher 's next albums , I 'd Rather Believe in You ( 1976 ) and <unk> ( 1977 ) , the latter a return to her pop style at Warner 's producers insistence , were commercially unsuccessful . In 1977 , under the rubric " Allman and Woman " , she recorded alongside Allman the duet album Two the Hard Way , later regarded by History as " the worst of either artist 's respective career " . Their relationship ended following the release of the album , and their divorce was finalized in 1979 . Beginning in 1978 , she had a two @-@ year live @-@ in relationship with Kiss member Gene Simmons . That year , she legally changed her name from Cherilyn Sarkisian La <unk> Bono Allman to Cher , to eliminate the use of four surnames . She returned to prime time television with the specials Cher ... Special ( 1978 ) and Cher ... and Other Fantasies ( 1979 ) . 
 = = = 1979 – 82 : Second musical comeback , shift from disco music to rock = = = 
 A single mother with two children , Cher realized that she had to make a choice about the direction of her singing career . Deciding to temporarily abandon her desire to be a rock singer , she signed with Casablanca Records and launched a comeback with the single " Take Me Home " and the album of the same name , both of which capitalized on the disco craze . Both the album and the single became instant successes , remained bestsellers for more than half of 1979 , and were certified gold by the RIAA . Sales of the album may have been boosted by the image of a scantily clad Cher in a Viking outfit on its cover . Despite her initial lack of enthusiasm with disco music , she changed her mind after the success , commenting , " I never thought I would want to do disco ... [ but ] it 's terrific ! It 's great music to dance to . I think that danceable music is what everybody wants . " 
 Encouraged by the popularity of Take Me Home , Cher planned to return to rock music in her next album , Prisoner ( 1979 ) . The album 's cover features Cher draped in chains as a " prisoner of the press " , which caused controversy among feminist groups for her perceived portrayal of a sex slave . She included rock songs , which made the disco release seem unfocused and led to its commercial failure . Prisoner produced the single " Hell on Wheels " , featured on the soundtrack of the film Roller Boogie . The song exploits the late 1970s roller @-@ skating fad and contributed to its popularity . 
 In 1980 , alongside Italian record producer Giorgio Moroder , Cher wrote her last Casablanca disco recording , " Bad Love " , for the film Foxes . She formed the rock band Black Rose that year with her then @-@ lover , guitarist Les Dudek . Although Cher was the lead singer , she did not receive top billing because she wanted to create the impression that all band members were equal . Since she was easily recognized when she performed with the band , she developed a punk look by cutting her trademark long hair . Despite appearances on television , the band failed to earn concert dates . Their album Black Rose received unfavorable reviews ; Cher told Rolling Stone , " The critics panned us , and they didn 't attack the record . They attacked me . It was like , ' How dare Cher sing rock & roll ? ' " During the band 's active period , Cher was simultaneously doing a residency show in Las Vegas , earning $ 300 @,@ 000 a week . Its companion television special Cher ... A Celebration at Caesars aired on Lifetime in April 1983 . Black Rose disbanded in 1981 . That year , she released a duet with musician Meat Loaf called " Dead Ringer for Love " , which reached number five on the UK Singles Chart and was later described by AllMusic 's Donald A. Guarisco as " one of the more inspired rock duets of 1980s " . In 1982 , Columbia Records released the album I Paralyze , later deemed by Bego as Cher 's " strongest and most consistent solo album in years " despite its low sales . 
 = = = 1982 – 87 : Film career breakthrough , musical hiatus = = = 
 With decreasing album sales and a lack of commercially successful singles , Cher decided to further develop her acting career . While she had previously aspired to venture into film , she had only the critically and commercially unsuccessful movies Good Times and Chastity to her credit , and the Hollywood establishment did not take her seriously as an actress . She moved to New York in 1982 to take acting lessons with Lee Strasberg , founder of the Actors Studio , but never enrolled after her plans changed . She auditioned for and was signed by director Robert Altman for the Broadway stage production Come Back to the Five and Dime , Jimmy Dean , Jimmy Dean , playing a member of a James Dean fan club holding a 20 @-@ year reunion . That year , Altman cast her again in the film adaptation of the same title . Cher credits Altman for launching her acting career : " Without Bob [ Robert Altman ] I would have never had a film career . Everyone told him not to cast me ... I am convinced that Bob was the only one who was brave enough to do it . " 
 Director Mike Nichols , who had seen Cher onstage in Jimmy Dean , offered her the part of Dolly <unk> , a plant co @-@ worker and Meryl Streep 's lesbian roommate in the film Silkwood . When it premiered in 1983 , audiences questioned Cher 's ability as an actress . She recalls attending a film preview during which the audience laughed when they saw her name in the credits . For her performance , Cher won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture . 
 In 1985 , Cher formed the film production company Isis . Her next film , Mask ( 1985 ) , reached number two at the box office and was Cher 's first critical and commercial success as a leading actress . For her role as a drug addict biker with a teenage son who has a severe physical deformity , she won the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Actress . During the making of the film , however , she clashed with director Peter Bogdanovich . She attended the 58th Academy Awards in a tarantula @-@ like costume " to show her scorn for the ' system ' " , according to authors James Parish and Michael Pitts . The incident garnered her much publicity . 
 By 1987 , Cher was receiving attention for her controversial lifestyle , including her tattoos , plastic surgeries , exhibitionist fashion sense , and affairs with younger men . She had romantic relationships with actors Val Kilmer , Eric Stoltz , and Tom Cruise , hockey player Ron Duguay , film producer Josh Donen , Bon Jovi guitarist Richie Sambora , and Rob <unk> , an 18 @-@ years @-@ younger bagel baker whom she dated from 1986 to 1989 . 
 = = = 1987 – 92 : Film stardom , third musical comeback = = = 
 Cher starred in three films in 1987 . In Suspect , she played a public defender who is both helped and romanced by one of the jurors in the homicide case she is handling . Along with Susan Sarandon and Michelle Pfeiffer , she starred as one of three divorcees involved with a mysterious and wealthy visitor from hell who comes to a small New England town in the comedy horror The Witches of Eastwick . In Norman Jewison 's romantic comedy Moonstruck , she played an Italian widow in love with her fiancé 's younger brother . The two latter films ranked among the top ten highest @-@ grossing films of 1987 , at number ten and five , respectively . For her performance in Moonstruck , Cher won the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical . By 1988 , Cher had become one of the most acclaimed and bankable actresses of the decade , commanding $ 1 million per film . That year , she released the fragrance <unk> , which earned about $ 15 million in its first year sales . 
 In 1987 , Cher signed with Geffen Records and revived her musical career with what music critics Johnny Danza and Dean Ferguson describe as " her most impressive string of hits to date " , establishing her as a " serious rock and roller ... a crown that she 'd worked long and hard to capture " . Michael Bolton , Jon Bon Jovi , Desmond Child , and Richie Sambora produced her first Geffen album , Cher , which was certified platinum by the RIAA . It features the rock ballad " I Found Someone " , her first U.S. top @-@ ten single in more than eight years . 
 Cher 's 19th studio album Heart of Stone ( 1989 ) was certified triple platinum by the RIAA . The music video for its second single , " If I Could Turn Back Time " , caused controversy due to Cher 's performance on a Navy warship , straddling a cannon , and wearing a leather thong that revealed her tattooed buttocks . The song topped the Australian charts for seven weeks , reached number three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and became one of Cher 's most successful singles . Further songs from Heart of Stone to reach the U.S. top ten were " After All " , a duet with Peter <unk> , and " Just Like Jesse James " . At the 1989 People 's Choice Awards , Cher won the Favorite All @-@ Around Female Star Award . She embarked on the Heart of Stone Tour in 1990 . Most critics liked the tour 's nostalgic nature and admired Cher 's showmanship . Its parent television special Cher at the Mirage ( 1991 ) was filmed during a concert in Las Vegas . 
 In her first film in three years , Mermaids ( 1990 ) , Cher paid tribute to her own mother in this story about a woman who moves her two daughters from town to town at the end of a love affair . She conflicted with the film 's first two directors , Lasse Hallström and Frank Oz , who were replaced by Richard Benjamin . Believing Cher would be the star attraction , the producers allowed her creative control for the film . Mermaids was a moderate box office success and received mixed reviews . One of the two songs Cher recorded for the film 's soundtrack , " The Shoop Shoop Song ( It 's in His Kiss ) " , topped the UK Singles Chart for five weeks . 
 Cher 's final studio album for Geffen Records , Love Hurts ( 1991 ) , stayed at number one in the UK for six weeks and produced the UK top @-@ ten single " Love and Understanding " . The album was certified gold by the RIAA . In later years , Cher commented that her Geffen label " hit years " had been especially significant to her , " because I was getting to do songs that I really loved ... songs that really represented me , and they were popular ! " She released the exercise book Forever Fit in 1991 , followed by the 1992 fitness videos <unk> : A New Attitude and <unk> : Body Confidence . She embarked on the Love Hurts Tour during 1992 . That year , the UK @-@ only compilation album Greatest Hits : 1965 – 1992 peaked at number one in the country for seven weeks . It features three new songs : " Oh No Not My Baby " , " Whenever You 're Near " , and " Many Rivers to Cross " . 
 = = = 1992 – 97 : Health and professional struggles , directing debut = = = 
 Partially due to her experiences filming Mermaids , Cher turned down leading roles in such films as The War of the Roses and Thelma & Louise . According to Berman , " After the success of Moonstruck , she was so worried about her next career move that she was overly cautious . " In the early 1990s , she contracted the Epstein – Barr virus and developed chronic fatigue syndrome , which left her too exhausted to sustain her music and film careers . Because she needed to earn money and was not healthy enough to work on other projects , she starred in infomercials launching health , beauty , and diet products , which earned her close to $ 10 million in fees . The skits were parodied on Saturday Night Live and critics considered them a sellout , many suggesting her film career was over . She told Ladies ' Home Journal , " Suddenly I became the <unk> Queen and it didn 't occur to me that people would focus on that and strip me of all my other things . " 
 Cher made cameo appearances in the Robert Altman films The Player ( 1992 ) and <unk> @-@ à @-@ Porter ( 1994 ) . During 1994 , she started a mail @-@ order catalogue business , Sanctuary , selling Gothic @-@ themed products , and contributed a rock version of " I Got You Babe " to MTV 's animated series Beavis and Butt @-@ head . Alongside Chrissie Hynde , Neneh Cherry , and Eric Clapton , she topped the UK Singles Chart in 1995 with the charity single " Love Can Build a Bridge " . Later that year , she signed with Warner Music UK 's label WEA and released the album It 's a Man 's World ( 1995 ) , which came out of her idea of covering men 's songs from a woman 's point of view . In general , critics favored the album and its R & B influences , some saying her voice had improved . Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote that " From an artistic standpoint , this soulful collection of grown @-@ up pop songs … is the high point of her recording career . " It 's a Man 's World reached number 10 on the UK Albums Chart and spawned the UK top @-@ ten single " One by One " . Tracks were remixed for the American release of the album , abandoning its original rock sound in favor of a style more accessible to U.S. radio ; it reached number 64 on the Billboard 200 . 
 In 1996 , Cher played the wife of a businessman who hires a hitman to murder her in the Chazz Palminteri @-@ scripted dark comedy film Faithful . Although the film received negative reviews from critics , Cher was praised for her role ; The New York Times ' Janet Maslin wrote that she " does her game best to find comic potential in a victim 's role . " Cher refused to promote the film , claiming it was " horrible " . She made her directing debut with a segment in the abortion @-@ themed anthology If These Walls Could Talk ( 1996 ) , in which she also starred as a doctor murdered by an anti @-@ abortion fanatic . It drew the highest ratings for an original HBO movie to date , registering an 18 @.@ 7 rating with a 25 share in HBO homes and attracting 6 @.@ 9 million viewers . Her music played a large role in the American TV series The X @-@ Files episode " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " , which aired in November 1997 . Written for her , it tells the story of a scientist 's grotesque creature who adores Cher because of her role in Mask , in which her character cares for her disfigured son . 
 = = = 1998 – 2000 : Death of Sonny Bono , fourth musical comeback = = = 
 Following Sonny Bono 's death in a skiing accident in 1998 , Cher delivered a tearful eulogy at his funeral , calling him " the most unforgettable character " she had met . She paid tribute to him by hosting the CBS special Sonny & Me : Cher Remembers , which aired on May 20 , 1998 . That month , Sonny and Cher received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for Television . Later that year , Cher published the book The First Time , a collection of autobiographical essays of " first @-@ time " events in her life , which critics praised for revealing the singer to be down to earth and genuine . Although the manuscript was almost finished when Sonny died , she could not decide whether to include his death in the book ; she feared being criticized for capitalizing on the event . She later told Rolling Stone , " I couldn 't ignore it , could I ? I might have if I cared more about what people think than what I know is right for me . " 
 Cher 's 22nd studio album Believe ( 1998 ) marked a musical departure for her , as it comprises dance @-@ pop songs , many of which capture the " disco @-@ era essence " ; Cher said , " It 's not that I think this is a ' 70s album ... but there 's a thread , a consistency running through it that I love . ' " Believe was certified quadruple platinum by the RIAA and went on to be certified gold or platinum in 39 countries , selling 20 million copies worldwide . The album 's title track reached number one in more than 23 countries and sold over 10 million copies worldwide . It became the best @-@ selling recording of 1998 and 1999 , respectively , in the UK and the U.S. , and Cher 's most successful single to date . " Believe " topped the UK Singles Chart for seven weeks and became the biggest @-@ selling single of all time by a female artist in the UK , selling over 1 @.@ 7 million copies in the country as of November 2013 . It also topped the Billboard Hot 100 chart for four weeks , selling over 1 @.@ 8 million units in the U.S. as of December 1999 . The song earned Cher the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording . 
 In January 1999 , Cher performed " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " at the Super Bowl XXXIII . Two months later , she sang on the television special VH1 Divas Live 2 , which attracted 19 @.@ 4 million viewers . According to VH1 , it was the most popular , and most watched program in the television network 's history , as Cher 's presence was " a huge part of making it exactly that . " Capitalizing on the success of " Believe " , Cher 's former record company Geffen Records released the compilation album If I Could Turn Back Time : Cher 's Greatest Hits ( 1999 ) , which features the previously unreleased song " Don 't Come Cryin ' to Me " . It was certified gold by the RIAA . The Do You Believe ? tour ran from 1999 to 2000 and was sold out in every American city it was booked in , amassing a global audience of more than 1 @.@ 5 million . Its companion television special , Cher : Live in Concert – From the MGM Grand in Las Vegas ( 1999 ) , was the highest rated original HBO program in 1998 – 99 , registering a 9 @.@ 0 rating among adults 18 to 49 and a 13 @.@ 0 rating in the HBO universe of about 33 million homes . In November 1999 , Cher released the compilation album The Greatest Hits , which sold three million copies outside of the U.S. as of January 2000 . 
 Cher was named the number @-@ one dance artist of 1999 by Billboard . At the 1999 World Music Awards , she received the Legend Award for her " lifelong contribution to the music industry " . Her next film , Franco Zeffirelli 's Tea with Mussolini ( 1999 ) , got mixed reviews , but she earned critical acclaim for her performance as a rich , flamboyant American socialite whose visit to Italy is not welcome among the Englishwomen ; one reviewer from Film Comment wrote , " It is only after she appears that you realize how sorely she 's been missed from movie screens ! For Cher is a star . That is , she manages the movie star trick of being at once a character and at the same time never allowing you to forget : that 's Cher . " 
 <unk> ( 2000 ) was written mostly by Cher after she had attended a songwriters ' conference in 1994 ; it marked her first attempt at writing most of the tracks for an album . As the album was rejected by her record label for being uncommercial , she chose to sell it only on her website . In the song " Sisters of Mercy " , she calls the Catholic nuns who cared for her when she was a child " cruel , heartless and wicked " for keeping her in their orphanage long after her mother attempted to retrieve her ; church leaders quickly issued denouncements . 
 = = = 2001 – 13 : Touring success , Vegas residency , return to film = = = 
 Cher 's highly anticipated dance @-@ oriented follow @-@ up to Believe , Living Proof ( 2001 ) , entered the Billboard 200 at number nine and was certified gold by the RIAA . The album includes the UK top @-@ ten single " The Music 's No Good Without You " and " Song for the Lonely " , the latter song dedicated to " the courageous people of New York " following the September 11 attacks . In May 2002 , she performed during the benefit concert VH1 Divas Las Vegas . At the 2002 Billboard Music Awards , she won the Dance / Club Play Artist of the Year Award and was presented with the Artist Achievement Award by Steven Tyler for having " helped redefine popular music with massive success on the Billboard charts " . That year , her wealth was estimated at $ 600 million . 
 In June 2002 , Cher embarked on the Living Proof : The Farewell Tour , announced as the final live concert tour of her career , although she vowed to continue making records and films . The show highlighted her successes in music , television , and film , featuring video clips from the 1960s onwards and an elaborate backdrop and stage set @-@ up . Initially scheduled for 49 shows , the worldwide tour was extended several times . By October 2003 , it had become the most successful tour ever by a woman , grossing $ 145 million from 200 shows and playing to 2 @.@ 2 million fans . A collection of live tracks taken from the tour was released in 2003 as the album Live ! The Farewell Tour . The NBC special Cher – The Farewell Tour ( 2003 ) attracted 17 million viewers . It was the highest rated network @-@ TV concert special of 2003 and earned Cher the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety , Music , or Comedy Special . 
 After leaving Warner UK in 2002 , Cher signed a worldwide deal with the U.S. division of Warner Bros. Records in September 2003 . The Very Best of Cher ( 2003 ) , a greatest @-@ hits collection that surveys her entire career , peaked at number four on the Billboard 200 and was certified double platinum by the RIAA . She played herself in the Farrelly brothers comedy Stuck on You ( 2003 ) , mocking her public image as she appears in bed with a much younger boyfriend . Her 326 @-@ date Farewell Tour ended in 2005 as one of the highest @-@ grossing concert tours of all time , seen by over 3 @.@ 5 million fans and earning $ 250 million . In 2008 , she began a three @-@ year , 200 @-@ performance residency at the Colosseum at Caesars Palace , Las Vegas , for which she earned a reported $ 60 million per year . Titled Cher , the production featured state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art video and special effects , elaborate set designs , 14 dancers , four aerialists and more than 20 costume changes . 
 Cher returned to film in the 2010 musical Burlesque , playing a nightclub impresario whom a young Hollywood hopeful is looking to impress . One of the two songs she recorded for the film 's soundtrack , the power ballad " You Haven 't Seen the Last of Me " , reached number one on the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart in January 2011 , making Cher the only artist to date to have a number @-@ one single on a Billboard chart in each decade from the 1960s to the 2010s . In November 2010 , she received the honor of placing her handprints and footprints in cement in the courtyard in front of Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Hollywood . The next year , she lent her voice to Janet the Lioness in the comedy Zookeeper . Dear Mom , Love Cher , a documentary she produced about her mother Georgia Holt , aired on Lifetime in May 2013 . 
 = = = 2013 – present : Return to music and touring , Broadway project = = = 
 Closer to the Truth , Cher 's 25th studio album and the first since 2001 's Living Proof , entered the Billboard 200 at number three in October 2013 , marking her highest position on that chart to date . Michael Andor Brodeur from The Boston Globe commented that " Cher 's ' Goddess of Pop ' sash remains in little danger of undue snatching ; at 67 , she sounds more convincing than J @-@ Lo or Madonna reporting from ' the club ' " . Cher premiered the lead single " Woman 's World " on the season four finale of the talent show The Voice , her first live TV performance in over a decade . She later joined the show 's season five as judge Blake Shelton 's team adviser . 
 On June 30 , 2013 , Cher headlined the annual Dance on the Pier benefit , celebrating Gay Pride day . It became the event 's first sellout in five years . In November 2013 , she appeared as a guest performer and judge on the seventeenth season of ABC 's Dancing with the Stars , during its eighth week , which was dedicated to her . She embarked on the Dressed to Kill Tour in March 2014 , nearly a decade after announcing her " farewell tour " . She quipped about that fact during the shows , saying this would actually be her last farewell tour while crossing fingers . The tour 's first leg , which included 49 sold @-@ out shows in North America , grossed $ 54 @.@ 9 million . In November 2014 , she cancelled all remaining dates due to an infection that affected kidney function . 
 On May 7 , 2014 , Cher confirmed a collaboration with American hip hop group Wu @-@ Tang Clan on their album Once Upon a Time in Shaolin . Credited as Bonnie Jo Mason , she uses an alias of hers originated in 1964 . Only one copy of the album has been produced , and it was sold by online auction in November 2015 . After appearing as Marc Jacobs ' guest at the 2015 Met Gala , Cher posed for his brand 's fall / winter advertising campaign . The fashion designer stated , " This has been a dream of mine for a very , very long time . " 
 Cher first announced plans for a Broadway musical based on her life and music in June 2012 . At that time , she revealed that the show would feature three actresses playing herself during different stages of her life . She expressed interest in playing a fourth iteration of herself , as a wise figure who gives advice to her younger versions . By 2015 , she was still working on the project , enlisting writer Rick <unk> to help her develop the script . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Cher has employed various musical styles , including folk rock , pop rock , power ballads , disco , new wave music , rock music , punk rock , arena rock , and hip hop ; she said she has done this to " remain relevant and do work that strikes a chord " . Her music has mainly dealt with themes of heartbreak , independence , and self @-@ empowerment for women ; by doing so , she became " a brokenhearted symbol of a strong but decidedly single woman " , according to Out magazine 's Judy Wieder . Goldmine magazine 's Phill Marder credited Cher 's " nearly flawless " song selection as what made her a notorious rock singer ; while several of her early songs were penned by or sung with Sonny Bono , most of her solo successes , which outnumbered Sonny and Cher 's successes , were composed by independent songwriters , selected by Cher . <unk> ( 2000 ) , the singer 's first album mostly written by herself , presents a " 1970s singer @-@ songwriter feel " that proves " Cher adept in the role of storyteller " , according to AllMusic 's Jose F. Promis . 
 Robert Hilburn of Los Angeles Times writes , " There were a lot of great records by female singers in the early days of rock … None , however , reflected the authority and command that we associate with rock ' n ' roll today as much as [ Cher 's ] key early hits " . Some of Cher 's early songs discuss subjects rarely addressed in American popular music such as divorce , prostitution , unplanned and underaged pregnancy , and racism . According to AllMusic 's Joe Viglione , the 1972 single " The Way of Love " is " either about a woman expressing her love for another woman , or a woman saying au revoir to a gay male she loved " ( " What will you do / When he sets you free / Just the way that you / Said good @-@ bye to me " ) . Her ability to carry both male and female ranges allowed her to sing solo in androgynous and gender @-@ neutral @-@ themed songs . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Cher has a contralto singing voice , described by author Nicholas E. Tawa as " bold , deep , and with a spacious vibrato " . Ann Powers of The New York Times called it " a quintessential rock voice : impure , quirky , a fine vehicle for projecting personality . " AllMusic 's Bruce Eder wrote that the " tremendous intensity and passion " of Cher 's vocals coupled with her " ability to meld that projection with her acting skills " can provide " an incredibly powerful experience for the listener " , despite her having a limited vocal range . Paul Simpson , in his book The Rough Guide to Cult Pop ( 2003 ) , states that " Cher [ is ] the possessor of one of the <unk> , most distinctive voices in pop … which can work wonders with the right material directed by the right producer " . He further addresses the believability of her vocal performances : " she spits out the words … with such conviction you 'd think she was delivering an eternal truth about the human condition " . 
 Writing about Cher 's musical output during the 1960s , Robert Hilburn of Los Angeles Times stated that " Rock was subsequently blessed with the staggering blues exclamations of Janis Joplin in the late ' 60s and the raw poetic force of Patti Smith in the mid- ' 70s . Yet no one matched the pure , seductive wallop of Cher " . By contrast , her vocal performances during the 1970s were described by Eder as " dramatic , highly intense … [ and ] almost as much ' acted ' as sung " . First heard in the 1980 record Black Rose , Cher employed sharper , more aggressive vocals in her hard rock @-@ oriented albums , establishing her sexually confident image . For the 1995 album It 's a Man 's World , she restrained her vocals , singing in higher registers and without vibrato . The 1998 song " Believe " has an electronic vocal effect proposed by Cher , and was the first commercial recording to feature Auto @-@ Tune — an audio processor originally intended to disguise or correct off @-@ key inaccuracies in vocal music recordings — as a deliberate creative effect . After the success of the song , the technique became known as the " Cher effect " and has since been widely used in popular music . Cher continued to use Auto @-@ Tune on the albums Living Proof ( 2001 ) and Closer to the Truth ( 2013 ) . 
 = = = Films , music videos , and performances = = = 
 Author Yvonne Tasker , in her book Working Girls : Gender and Sexuality in Popular Cinema ( 2002 ) , notes that Cher 's film roles often mirrors her public image as a rebellious , sexually autonomous , and self @-@ made woman . In her films , she recurrently serves as a social intermediary to disenfranchised male characters , such as Eric Stoltz 's elephantiasis victim in Mask ( 1985 ) , Liam Neeson 's mute homeless veteran in Suspect ( 1987 ) , and Nicolas Cage 's socially isolated baker with a wooden hand in Moonstruck ( 1987 ) . Film critic Kathleen Rowe wrote of Moonstruck that the depiction of Cher 's character as " a ' woman on top ' [ is ] enhanced by the unruly star persona Cher brings to the part ' . Jeff Yarbrough of The Advocate noted that Cher was " one of the first superstars to ' play gay ' with compassion and without a hint of stereotyping " , as she portrays a lesbian in the 1983 film Silkwood . 
 Cher 's public image is also reflected in her music videos and live performances , in which she " repeatedly comments on her own construction , on her search for perfection and on the performance of the female body " , wrote Tasker . Unlike other music video and stage acts of that time who often featured female backers who would mimic the singer 's performance , Cher uses a male dancer dressed as her in the 1992 concert video Cher at the Mirage ; Author Diane Negra commented , " In authorizing her own quotation , Cher acknowledges herself as fictionalized production , and proffers to her audience a pleasurable plurality . " James Sullivan of San Francisco Chronicle wrote that " Cher is well aware that her chameleonic glitz set the stage for the current era of stadium @-@ size razzle @-@ dazzle . She 's comfortable enough to see such imitation as flattery , not theft . " 
 Cher was ranked 17th on VH1 's list of the " 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era " . The 1980 video for " Hell on Wheels " involves cinematic techniques and was one of the first music videos ever . Deemed " controversial " for her performance on a Navy warship , straddling a cannon , and wearing a leather thong that revealed her tattooed buttocks , the 1989 music video for " If I Could Turn Back Time " was the first ever to be banned by MTV . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Cher emerged as a fashion trendsetter in the 1960s , popularizing " hippie fashion with bell @-@ bottoms , bandanas , and Cherokee @-@ inspired tunics " . She began working as a model in 1967 for photographer Richard Avedon after then @-@ Vogue editor Diana Vreeland discovered her at a party for Jacqueline Kennedy that year . Avedon took the controversial photo of Cher in a beaded and feathered nude gown for the cover of Time magazine in 1975 . Through her 1970s television shows , she became a sex symbol with her inventive and revealing Bob Mackie @-@ designed outfits , and fought the network censors to bare her navel . Although Cher has been erroneously attributed to being the first woman to expose her navel on television , she was the most prominent to do so since the establishment of the American Code of Practices for Television Broadcasters in 1951 , which prompted network censors to ban navel exposure on U.S. television . People dubbed Cher the " pioneer of the belly beautiful " . In 1972 , after she was featured on the annual " Best Dressed Women " lists , Mackie stated : " There hasn 't been a girl like Cher since [ Marlene ] Dietrich and [ Greta ] Garbo . She 's a high @-@ fashion star who appeals to people of all ages . " 
 In May 1999 , after the Council of Fashion Designers of America recognized Cher with an award for her influence in fashion , Robin Givhan of Los Angeles Times called her a " fashion visionary " for " striking just the right note of contemporary wretched excess " . Givhan referenced Tom Ford , Anna Sui and Dolce & Gabbana as " [ i ] <unk> designers [ who ] have evoked her name as a source of inspiration and guidance . " She concluded that " Cher 's Native American showgirl sexpot persona now seems to epitomize the fashion industry 's rush to celebrate ethnicity , adornment and sex appeal . " Alexander Fury of The Independent lauded Cher as " the ultimate fashion icon " and traced her influence among female celebrities such as Beyoncé , Jennifer Lopez , and Kim Kardashian , stating that " [ t ] hey all graduated from the Cher school of never sharing the stage , with anyone , or anything … They 're trying to share the spotlight , to have Cher 's success . " 
 Cher has attracted media attention for her physical appearance — particularly her youthful looks and her tattoos . Journalists have often called her the " poster girl " of plastic surgery . Author Grant McCracken , in his book Transformations : Identity Construction in Contemporary Culture ( 2008 ) , draws a parallel between Cher 's plastic surgeries and the transformations in her career : " Her plastic surgery is not merely cosmetic . It is hyperbolic , extreme , over the top ... Cher has engaged in a transformational technology that is dramatic and irreversible . " Caroline <unk> , author of Up Against Foucault : Explorations of Some Tensions Between Foucault and Feminism ( 1993 ) , wrote that " Cher 's operations have gradually replaced a strong , decidedly ' ethnic ' look with a more symmetrical , delicate , ' conventional ' ... and ever @-@ youthful version of female beauty ... Her normalised image ... now acts as a standard against which other women will measure , judge , discipline and ' correct ' themselves . " 
 Cher has six tattoos . The Baltimore Sun called her the " Ms. Original Rose Tattoo " . She got her first tattoo in 1972 . According to Sonny Bono , " Calling her butterfly tattoos nothing was like ignoring a sandstorm in the Mojave . That was exactly the effect Cher wanted to create . She liked to do things for the shock they created . She still does . She 'll create some controversy and then tell her critics to stick it . " In the late 1990s , she began having laser treatments to remove her tattoos . The process was still underway in the 2000s . She stated , " When I got tattooed , only bad girls did it : me and Janis Joplin and biker chicks . Now it doesn 't mean anything . No one 's surprised . " In 1992 , Madame Tussauds wax museum honored Cher as one of the five " most beautiful women of history " by creating a life @-@ size statue . She was ranked 26th on VH1 's list of the " 100 Sexiest Artists " published in 2002 . 
 Cher 's presence on social media has drawn analysis from journalists . The New York Times writer Jenna Wortham commended Cher on her social media usage , saying " Most celebrities ' social @-@ media feeds feel painfully self @-@ aware and thirsty … In her own way , Cher is an outlier , perhaps the last unreconstructed high @-@ profile Twitter user to stand at her digital pulpit and yell ( somewhat ) incomprehensibly , and be rewarded for it . Online , authenticity and originality are often carefully curated myths . Cher thrives on a version of nakedness and honesty that is rarely celebrated in the public eye . " Monica Heisey of The Guardian called Cher 's Twitter profile " a jewel in the bizarro crown of the internet " , and stated , " While many celebrities use Twitter for carefully crafted self @-@ promotion , Cher just lets it all hang out . " 
 = = Other interests = = 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Cher 's primary philanthropic endeavors have included support of health research and patients ' quality of life , anti @-@ poverty initiatives , veterans rights , and vulnerable children . She is the namesake of the Cher Charitable Foundation , which supports international projects such as the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund , Operation Helmet , and the Children 's Craniofacial Association . 
 Beginning in 1990 , Cher served as a donor and as the National Chairperson and Honorary Spokesperson for the Children 's Craniofacial Association , whose mission is to " empower and give hope to facially disfigured children and their families " . The annual Cher 's Family Retreat is held each June to provide craniofacial patients , their siblings and parents an opportunity to interact with others who have endured similar experiences . She supports and promotes Get A @-@ Head Charitable Trust , which aims to improve the quality of life for people with head and neck diseases . 
 Cher is a donor , fundraiser , and international spokesperson for Keep a Child Alive , an organization that seeks to accelerate action to combat AIDS pandemic , including the provision of antiretroviral medicine to children and their families with HIV / AIDS . In 1996 , she hosted the American Foundation for AIDS Research ( amfAR ) Benefit alongside Elizabeth Taylor at the Cannes Film Festival . In 2015 , she received the amfAR Award of Inspiration for " her willingness and ability to use her fame for the greater good " and for being " one of the great champions in the fight against AIDS " . 
 Cher has been a vocal supporter of American soldiers and returning veterans . She has contributed resources to Operation Helmet , an organization that provides free helmet upgrade kits to troops in Iraq and Afghanistan . She has contributed to the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund , which serves military personnel who have been disabled in operations in Iraq and Afghanistan , and those severely injured in other operations . In 1993 , she participated in a humanitarian effort in Armenia , taking food and medical supplies to the war @-@ torn region . 
 Cher has engaged in the construction of houses with Habitat for Humanity and served as the Honorary National Chair of a Habitat 's elimination of poverty housing initiative " Raise the Roof " , an effort to engage artists in the organization 's work while on tour . In 2007 , she became the primary supporter of the Peace Village School ( PVS ) in Ukunda , Kenya , which " provides nutritious food , medical care , education and extracurricular activities for more than 300 orphans and vulnerable children , ages 2 to 13 years . " Her support enabled the school to acquire land and build permanent housing and school facilities , and in partnership with Malaria No More and other organizations , she piloted an effort to eliminate malaria mortality and morbidity for the children , their caregivers and the surrounding community . In 2016 , after the discovery of lead contamination in the drinking water of Flint , Michigan , Cher donated more than 180 @,@ 000 bottles of water to the city as part of a partnership with Icelandic Glacial . 
 Cher 's oldest child , Chaz Bono ( born Chastity Bono ) , first came out as a lesbian at age 17 , which reportedly caused her mother to feel " guilt , fear and pain " . However , Cher soon came to accept Chaz 's sexual orientation , and came to the conclusion that LGBT people " didn 't have the same rights as everyone else , [ and she ] thought that was unfair " . She was the keynote speaker for the 1997 national Parents , Families , & Friends of Lesbians and Gays ( PFLAG ) convention , and has since become one of the LGBT community 's most vocal advocates . In May 1998 , she received the GLAAD Vanguard Award for having " made a significant difference in promoting equal rights for lesbians and gay men " . On June 11 , 2009 , Chaz came out as a transgender individual , and his transition from female to male was legally finalized on May 6 , 2010 . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Cher has said that she is not a registered Democrat , but has attended many Democratic conventions and events . Over the years , she has become known for her political views , having been an outspoken critic of the conservative movement . In an interview with Vanity Fair , she was critical of a variety of political topics , including Republican politicians like Sarah Palin and Jan Brewer . She has commented that she did not understand why anyone would be a Republican because eight years under the administration of George W. Bush " almost killed [ her ] " . During the 2000 United States presidential election , ABC News wrote that she was determined to do " whatever possible to keep him [ Bush ] out of office " . She told the site , " If you 're black in this country , if you 're a woman in this country , if you are any minority in this country at all , what could possibly possess you to vote Republican ? ... You won 't have one fucking right left . " She added , " I don 't like Bush . I don 't trust him . I don 't like his record . He 's stupid . He 's lazy . " 
 On October 27 , 2003 , Cher anonymously called a C @-@ SPAN phone @-@ in program to recount a visit she made to maimed soldiers at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center and criticized the lack of media coverage and government attention given to injured servicemen . She remarked that she watches C @-@ SPAN every day . Although she identified herself as an unnamed entertainer , she was recognized by the C @-@ SPAN host , who subsequently questioned her about her 1992 support for independent presidential candidate Ross Perot . She said , " When I heard him talk right in the beginning , I thought that he would bring some sort of common @-@ sense business approach and also less partisanship , but then ... I was completely disappointed like everyone else when he just kind of cut and run and no one knew exactly why ... Maybe he couldn 't have withstood all the investigation that goes on now " . 
 On Memorial Day weekend in 2006 , Cher called into C @-@ SPAN 's Washington Journal endorsing Operation Helmet , a group that provides helmets to help soldiers avoid head injuries while in the war zone . On June 14 , 2006 , she made a guest appearance on C @-@ SPAN with Dr. Bob Meaders , the founder of Operation Helmet . That year , in an interview with Stars and Stripes , she explained her " against the war in Iraq but for the troops " position : " I don 't have to be for this war to support the troops because these men and women do what they think is right . They do what they 're told to do . They do it with a really good heart . They do the best they can . They don 't ask for anything . " 
 Cher supported Hillary Clinton in her 2008 presidential campaign . After Obama won the Democratic nomination , she supported his candidacy on radio and TV programs . However , in a 2010 interview with Vanity Fair , she commented that she " still thinks Hillary would have done a better job " , although she " accepts the fact that Barack Obama inherited insurmountable problems " . During the 2012 United States presidential election , Cher and comedian Kathy Griffin released a public service announcement titled " Don 't Let Mitt Turn Back Time on Women 's Rights " . In the PSA , the pair criticized Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney for his support of Richard <unk> , the U.S. Senate candidate who suggested that pregnancies resulting from rape were " part of God 's plan " . In September 2013 , Cher declined an invitation to perform at the 2014 Winter Olympics opening ceremony in Russia due to the country 's controversial anti @-@ gay legislation that overshadowed preparations for the event . In June 2015 , after Donald Trump announced his candidacy for president , she made a series of critical comments on Twitter , stating that " Donald Trump 's punishment is being Donald Trump " . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 According to Goldmine magazine 's Phill Marder , Cher " has been and remains today one of the Rock Era 's most dominant figures " . He described her as the leader of an effort in the 1960s to " advance feminine rebellion in the rock world [ and ] the prototype of the female rock star , setting the standard for appearance , from her early hippie days to her later outlandish outfits , and her attitude — the perfect female punk long before punk even was a rock term . " Cher 's unconventional outfits and dominant attitude over her partner Sonny Bono have influenced the presence of women in rock music , inspiring contemporary singers such as Marianne Faithfull and Nancy Sinatra . According to Jeff Miers from The Buffalo News , " Her music has changed with the times over the decades , rather than changing those times through groundbreaking work " ; however , he felt that subsequent female singers such as Cyndi Lauper , Christina Aguilera , Lady Gaga , and Madonna , whom he calls " her generation 's Cher " , were heavily inspired by Cher 's abilities to combine " showmanship with deep musicality … to make valid statements in a wide variety of trend @-@ driven idioms … to ease effortlessly between pop subgenres [ and ] to shock without alienating her fans " , as well as by her charismatic stage presence and the strong LGBT support among her fan base . Billboard 's Keith Caulfield wrote that " There 's divas , and then there 's Cher . " She is commonly referred to by the media as the " Goddess of Pop . " 
 Cher has repeatedly reinvented herself through various personas , for which Professor Richard Aquila from Ball State University called her " the ultimate pop chameleon " . The New York Times declared Cher as the " Queen of the Comeback " . According to author Lucy O 'Brien , " Cher adheres to the American Dream of reinvention of self : ' Getting old does not have to mean getting obsolete . ' " Author Craig Crawford , in his book The Politics of Life : 25 Rules for Survival in a Brutal and <unk> World ( 2007 ) , describes Cher as " a model of flexible career management " , and relates her career successes to a constant reshaping of her image according to the evolving trends of popular culture . He further explains that she billed " each dramatic turnaround of style as another example of rebellion — an image that allowed her to make calculated changes while appearing to be consistent . " Author Grant McCracken stated , " The term ' reinvention ' is now often used to talk about the careers of American celebrities . But in Cher 's case , it is particularly apt [ because she ] is inclined to lock on to each new fashion wave [ and ] is swept violently down the diffusion stream and out of fashion . Only substantial re @-@ creation permits her to return to stardom . " Her " integrity " and " perseverance " are highlighted in the Reaching Your Goals book series of illustrated inspirational stories for children , in which her life is detailed emphasizing the importance of self @-@ actualization : " For years , Cher worked hard to become a successful singer . Then she worked hard to become an actress . Even when she needed money , she turned down movie roles that weren 't right for her . Her goal has always been to be a good actress , not just a rich and famous one . " 
 Cher 's " ability to forge an immensely successful and lengthy career as a woman in a male @-@ dominated entertainment world " has drawn attention from feminist critics . According to author Diane Negra , Cher was presented in the beginning of her career as a product of male creativity ; Cher remembers , " It was a time when girl singers were patted on the head for being good and told not to think " . However , her image eventually changed due to her " refusal of dependence on a man and the determination not only to forge a career ( as an actor ) on her own terms but to refuse the conventional role assigned to women over forty years old in an industry that <unk> youth " , wrote author Yvonne Tasker . She was featured in the 16th @-@ anniversary edition of Ms. magazine as an " authentic feminist hero " and a 1980s role model for women : " Cher , the straightforward , tattooed , dyslexic single mother , the first Oscar winner to have entered into matrimony with a known heroin addict and to have admitted to being a fashion victim by choice , has finally landed in an era that 's not afraid to applaud real women . " Her 1988 Oscar win signaled an important change in Hollywood , according to Berman , as Cher appeared in a negligee outfit , danced onstage and was applauded for her daring . Stephanie Brush from The New York Times wrote that Cher " performs the function for women moviegoers that Jack Nicholson has always fulfilled for men . Free of the burden of ever having been America 's sweetheart , she is the one who represents us [ women ] in our revenge fantasies , telling all the <unk> ... exactly where they can go . You need to be more than beautiful to get away with this . You need to have been Cher for 40 years . " 
 The reverence the gay community holds for Cher has been attributed to the accomplishments in her career , her sense of style and her longevity . Alec Mapa of The Advocate elaborates : " While the rest of us were sleeping , Cher 's been out there for the last four decades living out every single one of our childhood fantasies ... Cher embodies an unapologetic freedom and fearlessness that some of us can only aspire to . " Rolling Stone 's Jancee Dunn wrote , " Cher is the coolest woman who ever stood in shoes . Why ? Because her motto is , ' I don 't give a shit what you think , I 'm going to wear this multicolored wig . ' There are folks all over America who would , in their heart of hearts , love to date people half their age , get multiple tattoos and wear feathered headdresses . Cher does it for us . " Alexander Fury of The Independent wrote that Cher " represents a seemingly immortal , omnipotent , uni @-@ <unk> level of fame . " Bego stated : " No one in the history of show business has had a career of the magnitude and scope of Cher 's . She has been a teenage pop star , a television hostess , a fashion magazine model , a rock star , a pop singer , a Broadway actress , an Academy Award @-@ winning movie star , a disco sensation , and the subject of a mountain of press coverage . " 
 = = Achievements and recognition = = 
 Throughout her career , Cher has sold 100 million records worldwide . She is the only artist to date to have a number @-@ one single on a Billboard chart in each decade from the 1960s to the 2010s . She has held U.S. Billboard Hot 100 number @-@ one singles over the longest period of time in history : 33 years , seven months and three weeks between " I Got You Babe " , which topped the chart for the first time in August 14 , 1965 , and " Believe " , whose last week at number one was April 3 , 1999 . With " Believe " , she became the oldest female artist to have a U.S. number @-@ one song in the rock era , at the age of 52 . Billboard ranked her at number 43 on their " Greatest Hot 100 Artists of All Time " list . In 2014 , the magazine listed her as the 23rd highest @-@ grossing touring act since 1990 , with total earned revenue of $ 351 @.@ 6 million and 4 @.@ 5 million attendance at her shows . 
 In 2003 , Cher appeared at number 41 on VH1 's list of " The 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons " , which recognizes " the folks that have significantly inspired and impacted American society " . She was ranked 31st on VH1 's list of " The 100 Greatest Women in Music " , based on the period 1992 – 2012 . Esquire magazine placed her at number 44 on their list of " The 75 Greatest Women of All Time " . In a 2001 poll , Biography magazine ranked her as their third favorite leading actress of all time , behind Audrey Hepburn and Katharine Hepburn . She was featured on the " 100 Greatest Movie Stars of our Time " list compiled by People . She is one of the few artists to win three of the four major American entertainment awards ( EGOT — Emmy , Grammy , Oscar , and Tony ) , and one of five actor @-@ singers to have had a U.S. number @-@ one single and won an acting Academy Award . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Tours and residency shows = = 
 Cher World Tour ( 1979 – 82 ) 
 Heart of Stone Tour ( 1990 ) 
 Love Hurts Tour ( 1992 ) 
 Do You Believe ? ( 1999 – 2000 ) 
 Living Proof : The Farewell Tour ( 2002 – 05 ) 
 Cher ( 2008 – 11 ) 
 Dressed to Kill Tour ( 2014 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Coal ball = 
 A coal ball is a type of concretion , varying in shape from an imperfect sphere to a flat @-@ lying , irregular slab . Coal balls were formed by the early permineralisation of peat by calcite in Carboniferous Period swamps and mires before the peat could become coal . As such , despite not actually being made of coal , the coal ball owes its name to its similar origins as well as its similar shape with actual coal . 
