 = = = Sports = = = 
 Most of the major sporting codes played in New Zealand have British origins . Rugby union is considered the national sport and attracts the most spectators . Golf , netball , tennis and cricket have the highest rates of adult participation , while netball , rugby union and football ( soccer ) is popular among young people . Around 54 percent of New Zealand adolescents participate in sports for their school . Victorious rugby tours to Australia and the United Kingdom in the late 1880s and the early 1900s played an early role in instilling a national identity . Horseracing was also a popular spectator sport and became part of the " Rugby , Racing and Beer " culture during the 1960s . Māori participation in European sports was particularly evident in rugby and the country 's team performs a haka , a traditional Māori challenge , before international matches . 
 New Zealand has competitive international teams in rugby union , netball , cricket , rugby league , and softball and has traditionally done well in triathlons , rowing , yachting and cycling . New Zealand participated at the Summer Olympics in 1908 and 1912 as a joint team with Australia , before first participating on its own in 1920 . The country has ranked highly on a medals @-@ to @-@ population ratio at recent Games . The All Blacks , the national men 's rugby union team , are the most successful in the history of international rugby and the reigning World Cup champions . New Zealand is known for its extreme sports , adventure tourism and strong mountaineering tradition , as seen in the success of notable New Zealander Sir Edmund Hillary . Other outdoor pursuits such as cycling , fishing , swimming , running , tramping , canoeing , hunting , <unk> and surfing are also popular . The Polynesian sport of waka ama racing has increased in popularity and is now an international sport involving teams from all over the Pacific . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 New Zealand 's cuisine has been described as Pacific Rim , drawing inspiration from Europe , Asia and Polynesia . For dishes that have a distinctly New Zealand style , there 's lamb , pork and <unk> ( venison ) , salmon , crayfish ( lobster ) , Bluff oysters , <unk> , paua ( abalone ) , mussels , scallops , <unk> and <unk> ( both are types of New Zealand shellfish ) , <unk> ( sweet potato ) , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , the national dessert . A <unk> is a traditional New Zealand Māori method of cooking food using heated rocks buried in a pit oven . New Zealand food 's distinctiveness is more in the way New Zealanders eat , generally preferring as relaxed and unaffected as possible , in keeping with the laidback Kiwi psyche . New Zealand 's climate is ideal for fine wine growing , wineries and vineyards . 
 = The Hustler ( film ) = 
 The Hustler is a 1961 American drama film directed by Robert Rossen from Walter Tevis 's 1959 novel of the same name , adapted for the screen by Rossen and Sidney Carroll . It tells the story of small @-@ time pool hustler " Fast Eddie " Felson and his desire to break into the " major league " of professional hustling and high @-@ stakes wagering by high @-@ rollers that follows it . He throws his raw talent and ambition up against the best player in the country ; seeking to best the legendary pool player " Minnesota Fats . " After initially losing to Fats and getting involved with unscrupulous manager Bert Gordon , Eddie returns to try again , but only after paying a terrible personal price . 
 The film was shot on location in New York City . It stars Paul Newman as " Fast " Eddie Felson , Jackie Gleason as Minnesota Fats , Piper Laurie as Sarah , and George C. Scott as Bert . 
 The Hustler was a major critical and popular success , gaining a reputation as a modern classic . Its exploration of winning , losing , and character garnered a number of major awards ; it is also credited with helping to spark a resurgence in the popularity of pool . Real @-@ life pool player Rudolf Wanderone , known at the time as " New York Fats " and " Chicago Fats " , claimed to be the real life inspiration for Gleason 's character , Minnesota Fats , and adopted the name as his own . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Small @-@ time pool hustler " Fast Eddie " Felson travels cross @-@ country with his partner Charlie to challenge the legendary player " Minnesota Fats " . Arriving at Fats ' home pool hall , Eddie declares he will win $ 10 @,@ 000 that night . Fats arrives and he and Eddie agree to play straight pool for $ 200 a game . After initially falling behind , Eddie surges back to being $ 1 @,@ 000 ahead and suggests raising the bet to $ 1 @,@ 000 a game ; Fats agrees . He sends out a runner , Preacher , to Johnny 's Bar , ostensibly for whiskey , but really to get professional gambler Bert Gordon to the hall . Eddie gets ahead $ 11 @,@ 000 and Charlie tries to convince him to quit , but Eddie insists the game will end only when Fats says it is over . Fats agrees to continue after Bert labels Eddie a " loser . " After 25 hours and an entire bottle of bourbon , Eddie is ahead over $ 18 @,@ 000 , but loses it all along with all but $ 200 of his original stake . At their hotel later , Eddie leaves half of the remaining stake with a sleeping Charlie and leaves . 
 Eddie stashes his belongings at the local bus terminal , where he meets Sarah Packard , an alcoholic who is supported by her father , attends college part @-@ time , and walks with a limp . He meets her again at a bar . They go back to her place but she refuses to let him in , saying he is " too hungry " . Eddie moves into a rooming house and starts hustling for small stakes . He finds Sarah again and this time she takes him in , but with reservations . Charlie finds Eddie at Sarah 's and tries to persuade him to go back out on the road . Eddie refuses and Charlie realizes he plans to challenge Fats again . Eddie realizes that Charlie held out his percentage and becomes enraged , believing that with that money he could have rebounded to beat Fats . Eddie dismisses Charlie as a scared old man and tells him to " go lie down and die " by himself . 
 At Johnny 's Bar , Eddie joins a poker game where Bert is playing , and loses $ 20 . Afterward , Bert tells Eddie that he has talent as a pool player but no character . He figures that Eddie will need at least $ 3 @,@ 000 to challenge Fats again . Bert calls him a " born loser " but nevertheless offers to stake him in return for 75 % of his winnings ; Eddie refuses . 
 Eddie humiliates a local pool shark , exposing himself as a hustler , and the other players punish him by breaking his thumbs . As he heals , Sarah cares for him and tells him she loves him , but he cannot say the words in return . When Eddie is ready to play , he agrees to Bert 's terms , deciding that a " 25 % slice of something big is better than a 100 % slice of nothing " . 
 Bert , Eddie , and Sarah travel to the Kentucky Derby , where Bert arranges a match for Eddie against a wealthy local socialite named Findley . The game turns out to be carom billiards , not pool . When Eddie loses badly , Bert refuses to keep staking him . Sarah pleads with Eddie to leave with her , saying that the world he is living in and its inhabitants are " perverted , twisted , and crippled " ; he refuses . Seeing Eddie 's anger , Bert agrees to let the match continue at $ 1 @,@ 000 a game . Eddie comes back to win $ 12 @,@ 000 . He collects his $ 3 @,@ 000 share and decides to walk back to the hotel . Bert arrives first and subjects Sarah to a humiliating sexual encounter . After , she scrawls " <unk> " , " <unk> " , and " <unk> " in lipstick on the bathroom mirror . Eddie arrives back at the hotel to learn that she has killed herself . 
 Eddie returns to challenge Fats again , putting up his entire $ 3 @,@ 000 stake on a single game . He wins game after game , beating Fats so badly that Fats is forced to quit . Bert demands a share of Eddie 's winnings and threatens that Eddie will be injured unless he pays . But Eddie says that if he is not killed he will kill Bert when he recovers ; invoking the memory of Sarah , he shames Bert into giving up his claim . Instead , Bert orders Eddie never to walk into a big @-@ time pool hall again . Eddie and Fats compliment each other as players , and Eddie walks out . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Cast notes 
 Pool champion Willie Mosconi has a cameo appearance as Willie , who holds the stakes for Eddie and Fats 's games . Mosconi 's hands also appear in many of the closeup shots . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Tevis novel had been optioned several times , including by Frank Sinatra , but attempts to adapt it for the screen were unsuccessful . Director Rossen 's daughter Carol Rossen speculates that previous adaptations focused too much on the pool aspects of the story and not enough on the human interaction . Rossen , who had hustled pool himself as a youth and who had made an abortive attempt to write a pool @-@ themed play called Corner Pocket , optioned the book and teamed with Sidney Carroll to produce the script . 
 According to Bobby Darin 's agent , Martin Baum , Paul Newman 's agent turned down the part of Fast Eddie . Newman was originally unavailable to play Fast Eddie regardless , being committed to star opposite Elizabeth Taylor in the film Two for the Seesaw . Rossen offered Darin the part after seeing him on The Mike Wallace Interview . When Taylor was forced to drop out of Seesaw because of shooting overruns on Cleopatra , Newman was freed up to take the role , which he accepted after reading just half of the script . No one associated with the production officially notified Darin or his representatives that he had been replaced ; they found out from a member of the public at a charity horse race . 
 Rossen filmed The Hustler over six weeks , entirely in New York City . Much of the action was filmed at two now @-@ defunct pool halls , McGirr 's and Ames Billiard Academy . Other shooting locations included a townhouse on East 82nd Street , which served as the Louisville home of Murray Hamilton 's character Findley , and the Manhattan Greyhound bus terminal . The film crew built a dining area that was so realistic that confused passengers sat there and waited to place their orders . Willie Mosconi served as technical advisor on the film and shot a number of the trick shots in place of the actors . All of Gleason 's shots were his own ; they were filmed in wide @-@ angle to emphasize having the actor and the shot in the same frames . Rossen , in pursuit of the style he termed " neo @-@ neo @-@ realistic " , hired actual street thugs , enrolled them in the Screen Actors Guild and used them as extras . Scenes that were included in the shooting script but did not make it into the final film include a scene at Ames pool hall establishing that Eddie is on his way to town ( originally slated to be the first scene of the film ) and a longer scene of Preacher talking to Bert at Johnny 's Bar which establishes Preacher is a junkie . 
 Early shooting put more focus on the pool playing , but during filming Rossen made the decision to place more emphasis on the love story between Newman and Laurie 's characters . Despite the change in emphasis , Rossen still used the various pool games to show the strengthening of Eddie 's character and the evolution of his relationship to Bert and Sarah , through the positioning of the characters in the frame . For example , when Eddie is playing Findley , Eddie is positioned below Bert in a two shot but above Findley while still below Bert in a three shot . When Sarah enters the room , she is below Eddie in two shot while in a three shot Eddie is still below Bert . When Eddie is kneeling over Sarah 's body , Bert again appears above him but Eddie attacks Bert , ending up on top of him . Eddie finally appears above Bert in two shot when Eddie returns to beat Fats . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The Hustler is fundamentally a story of what it means to be a human being , couched within the context of winning and losing . Describing the film , Robert Rossen said : " My protagonist , Fast Eddie , wants to become a great pool player , but the film is really about the obstacles he encounters in attempting to fulfill himself as a human being . He attains self @-@ awareness only after a terrible personal tragedy which he has caused — and then he wins his pool game . " Roger Ebert concurs with this assessment , citing The Hustler as " one of the few American movies in which the hero wins by surrendering , by accepting reality instead of his dreams . " 
 The film was also somewhat autobiographical for Rossen , relating to his dealings with the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . A screenwriter during the 1930s and ' 40s , he had been involved with the Communist Party in the 1930s and refused to name names at his first HUAC appearance . Ultimately he changed his mind and identified friends and colleagues as party members . Similarly , Felson sells his soul and betrays the one person who really knows and loves him in a Faustian pact to gain character . 
 Film and theatre historian Ethan Mordden has identified The Hustler as one of a handful of films from the early 1960s that re @-@ defined the relationship of films to their audiences . This new relationship , he writes , is " one of challenge rather than flattery , of doubt rather than certainty . " No film of the 1950s , Mordden asserts , " took such a brutal , clear look at the ego @-@ affirmation of the one @-@ on @-@ one contest , at the inhumanity of the winner or the castrated vulnerability of the loser . " Although some have suggested the resemblance of this film to classic film noir , Mordden rejects the comparison based on Rossen 's ultra @-@ realistic style , also noting that the film lacks noir 's " Treacherous Woman or its relish in discovering crime among the bourgeoisie , hungry bank clerks and lusty wives . " Mordden does note that while Fast Eddie " has a slight fifties ring " , the character " makes a decisive break with the extraordinarily feeling tough guys of the ' rebel ' era ... [ b ] ut he does end up seeking out his emotions " and telling Bert that he is a loser because he 's dead inside . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Hustler had its world premiere in Washington , D.C. on September 25 , 1961 . Prior to the premiere , Richard Burton hosted a midnight screening of the film for the casts of the season 's Broadway shows , which generated a great deal of positive word of mouth . Initially reluctant to publicize the film , 20th Century Fox responded by stepping up its promotional activities . 
 The film was well received by critics , although with the occasional caveat . Variety praised the performances of the entire main cast but felt that the " sordid aspects " of the story prevented the film from achieving the " goal of being pure entertainment . " Variety also felt the film was far too long . Stanley Kauffmann , writing for The New Republic , concurred in part with this assessment . Kauffmann strongly praised the principal cast , calling Newman " first @-@ rate " and writing that Scott 's was " his most credible performance to date . " Laurie , he writes , gives her part " movingly anguished touches " ( although he also mildly criticizes her for over @-@ reliance on Method acting ) . While he found that the script " strains hard to give an air of menace and criminality to the pool hall " and also declares it " full of pseudo @-@ meaning " , Kauffmann lauds Rossen 's " sure , economical " direction , especially in regard to Gleason who , he says , does not so much act as " [ pose ] for a number of pictures which are well arranged by Rossen . It is the best use of a manikin by a director since Kazan photographed Burl Ives as Big Daddy . " The New York Times , despite finding that the film " strays a bit " and that the romance between Newman and Laurie 's characters " seems a mite far @-@ fetched " , nonetheless found that The Hustler " speaks powerfully in a universal language that <unk> and reveals bitter truths . " 
 The Hustler received nine Academy Award nominations . The film won two , for Best Art Direction @-@ Set Decoration , Black @-@ and @-@ White ( Harry Horner and Gene Callahan ) and Best Cinematography , Black @-@ and @-@ White ( Eugen Schüfftan ) . The film was also nominated for Best Picture and Newman was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role . Gleason and Scott were both nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role ; Scott refused the nomination . Laurie was nominated for Best Actress in a Leading Role . Rossen received nominations for Best Director and , with Carroll , for Best Writing , Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium . 
 Newman was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor . Gleason and Scott were each nominated for Best Supporting Actor and Scott was also nominated as Best New Star of the Year . At the 1962 BAFTA Awards , The Hustler tied with the Soviet film Ballad of a Soldier for Best Film from Any Source . Newman won for Best Foreign Actor and Piper Laurie was nominated for Best Foreign Actress . Gleason was honored as Best Supporting Actor by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures and the film was named among the Board 's ten best films of 1961 . Rossen was named Best Director by the New York Film Critics Circle Awards and Rossen and Carroll shared the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written Drama . 
 American Film Institute Lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies - Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills - Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 Bert Gordon - Nominated Villain 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " Eddie , you 're a born loser . " - Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) - Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 - # 6 Sports Film 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the decades since its release , The Hustler has cemented its reputation as a classic . Roger Ebert , echoing earlier praise for the performances , direction , and cinematography and adding laurels for editor Dede Allen , cites the film as " one of those films where scenes have such psychic weight that they grow in our memories . " He further cites Fast Eddie Felson as one of " only a handful of movie characters so real that the audience refers to them as touchstones . " TV Guide calls the film a " dark stunner " offering " a grim world whose only bright spot is the top of the pool table , yet [ with ] characters [ who ] maintain a shabby nobility and grace . " The four leads are again lavishly praised for their performances and the film is summed up as " not to be missed . " 
 Paul Newman reprised his role as Fast Eddie Felson in the 1986 film The Color of Money , for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role . A number of observers and critics have suggested that this Oscar was in belated recognition for his performance in The Hustler . In 1997 , the Library of Congress selected The Hustler for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . " Carroll and Rossen 's screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America in 2006 as the 96th best motion picture screenplay of all time . In June 2008 , AFI released its " Ten top Ten " — the best ten films in ten " classic " American film genres — after polling over 1 @,@ 500 people from the creative community . The Hustler was acknowledged as the sixth best film in the sports genre . 
 The Hustler is credited with sparking a resurgence in the popularity of pool in the United States , which had been on the decline for decades . The film also brought recognition to Willie Mosconi , who , despite having won multiple world championships , was virtually unknown to the general public . Perhaps the greatest beneficiary of the film 's popularity was a real @-@ life pool hustler named Rudolf Wanderone . Mosconi claimed in an interview at the time of the film 's release that the character of Minnesota Fats was based on Wanderone , who at the time was known as " New York Fatty " . Wanderone immediately adopted the Minnesota Fats nickname and parlayed his association with the film into book and television deals and other ventures . Author Walter Tevis denied for the rest of his life that Wanderone had played any role in the creation of the character . Other players would claim , with greater or lesser degrees of credibility , to have served as models for Fast Eddie , including Ronnie Allen , Ed Taylor , Ed Parker , and Eddie <unk> . 
 = Brittany Pierce = 
 Brittany Susan Pierce is a fictional character from the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . The character is portrayed by actress Heather Morris , and first appeared in the show 's second episode , " Showmance " . Brittany was developed by Glee creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk , and Ian Brennan . In Glee , Brittany is a cheerleader , or " Cheerio " for the fictional William McKinley High School , and a member of the school 's glee club led by Will Schuester . Morris was originally hired to teach Beyoncé 's " Single Ladies " dance to the Glee cast . The show at the time was looking for a third cheerleader , and Morris landed the role . Morris was upgraded to a series regular in the series ' second season , in which Brittany is given a larger storyline , solos and dance routines to perform . 
 Morris plays Brittany as " literally insane " , but also entirely well @-@ meaning and goodhearted . She has said that Brittany " love [ s ] everybody , no matter who they are " ; she is frequently smiling and being nice to people . Brittany 's character traits include her finding recipes confusing , cheating off intellectually disabled classmates , thinking her cat , Lord <unk> , is reading her diary , and not knowing her right hand from her left . These facts are often presented in one @-@ liners delivered by Morris , many of which she has ad @-@ libbed . Brittany 's one @-@ liners are regularly celebrated in reviews of Glee . The character 's lack of intelligence and forthright manner of speaking means , as Morris puts it , that " Brittany is used by the series ' writers to say things no other character would " . The character has also received positive reviews related to her romantic storyline with her closeted best friend Santana ( Naya Rivera ) . While Brittany is bisexual , and is unashamed of that , Santana has trouble accepting her lesbianism . Brittany has continued to support Santana and urged her to be true to herself . 
 The character has been received favorably with television critics . Jarrett Wieselman of the New York Post has compared Morris as Brittany to Lynch as Sue , and has opined that she has " emerged as one of the funniest second bananas on TV right now " . Wieselman wrote that since her introduction , Brittany has been given " more and more to do [ and ] less and less to think " , and that the result has been " one of the most clueless characters that 's ever figured out how to dress herself in the morning . " Snarker called Brittany and Santana her " new favourite Glee pairing " , and commented : " While Heather Morris ( Brittany ) and Naya Rivera ( Santana ) have had minimal screen time , they ’ ve made it count . Heather in particular has brought the laughs as the Cheerio least likely to get a Mensa invitation . " Brittany has attracted comparison to Amanda Seyfried 's character from the 2004 hit teen comedy Mean Girls . Morris also receives acclaim for her dancing and her portrayal as Brittany . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 Brittany first appears in Glee during the show 's second episode , as a member of William McKinley High 's cheerleading team , the Cheerios . She joins the glee club , New Directions , with her friends and fellow cheerleaders Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) and Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) . Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) then enlists the three of them to help her destroy the club from the inside . When the club is due to compete at the sectionals round of show choir competition , Brittany unknowingly leaks their set list to Sue , who leaks the routines to competing glee clubs . New Directions put a new set list together at the last minute , and go on to win the competition regardless . Brittany also reveals that she and Santana have had sex , but are not dating . Following the club 's victory at sectionals , Sue renews her effort to bring them down , and enlists Brittany and Santana to break up co @-@ captains Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) and Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) . They invite Finn on a date with the both of them , but ignore him throughout the evening and ultimately request that he sit in the car and leave them to finish their meal alone . She mentions in the episode " Bad Reputation " that she has made out with almost everyone in the school – guys and girls alike , and the school janitor . She also briefly dates Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) in the episode " Laryngitis " as he wants to appear more masculine to impress his father and he is the only guy she has not made out with in the school . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 In the second season episode " Duets " , she asks Santana to be her partner for the duet competition while they are making out . Santana rejects her , so Brittany attempts to make her jealous by dating fellow glee club member Artie Abrams ( Kevin McHale ) . She sleeps with Artie , but Santana tells him that Brittany was just using him for his voice , so he breaks up with her , to Brittany 's dismay . Brittany 's relationship with Artie continues to develop ; in " Never Been Kissed " , he gets her to go out with him again . As of " Furt " , they are officially dating . In " Sexy " , following her performance of " Landslide " with Santana and Holly Holliday ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) , Santana admits her true feelings for Brittany . Although Santana fears being ostracized by the McKinley High student body for being in a same @-@ sex relationship , she confesses her romantic love to Brittany , feelings which are reciprocated . However , Brittany states that she loves Artie too , and would never do anything to hurt him , even if it means not being able to be with Santana . She says that if she and Artie ever break up , she would be Santana 's , proudly so . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 Brittany runs for senior class president in the third season , starting in " I Am Unicorn " , and wins the election in " I Kissed A Girl " , defeating Kurt in the balloting . She and Santana join the Troubletones , a rival all @-@ girls show choir at McKinley , and formally begin dating ; after Santana is outed by Finn , they are open about their relationship . The two rejoin New Directions after the Troubletones lose to them at Sectionals . Santana sends Brittany a singing valentine in " Heart " , and the two publicly kiss afterward . In " Saturday Night Glee @-@ ver " , concerned about Santana 's future plans , Brittany gets the idea to ask Sue to arrange for Santana to get a full scholarship to the top college cheerleading program in the country . After a year of being a do @-@ nothing class president , Brittany puts on a dinosaur @-@ themed senior prom . In the season finale , Brittany reveals that her grades are so bad she is not graduating , but will have to repeat her senior year . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 In the first episode of the fourth season , Brittany competes to become the lead singer of New Directions , but loses to Blaine ( Darren Criss ) . She then loses to him again when she runs to be a second @-@ term senior class president . Santana formally breaks up with Brittany because she feels that their long @-@ distance relationship is not working , though the two remain friends . She then becomes ' blonde buddies ' with Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , and then starts to date him . Santana comes back to try and break them up , however fails . Brittany visits MIT , where she is dubbed a mathematical genius . Returning to Lima , she becomes arrogant , refuses to perform at Regionals , leaves the Cheerios , and breaks up with Sam . After Will and Sue fail to get Brittany to change her attitude , Sam gets Santana to return to Lima to intervene . After talking with Santana , Brittany decides to perform at Regionals . Brittany reveals to the glee club she has been offered early admission to MIT and delivers an emotional goodbye , as she will be leaving after Regionals . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 Brittany returns to McKinley in " 100 " along with other New Directions alumni following the closure of the Glee club . Brittany states her unhappiness at being a math genius and kisses her ex @-@ girlfriend Santana . In " New Directions " , Brittany agrees to dropping out of MIT before going on a trip to Lesbos with Santana . Santana asks Brittany to go with her to New York after their trip , Brittany accepts . Brittany finally graduates in the episode , one year late . Brittany returns to New York in the last episode of the season " The Untitled Rachel Berry Project " but she finds out that Santana is out of town shooting another Yeast @-@ I @-@ Stat commercial . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 At the beginning of season six , Brittany returns with Santana and the rest of Glee club alumni to McKinley High School in " Homecoming " to help Rachel and Kurt recruit for New Directions . In " Jagged Little Tapestry " , while the alumni stick around for another week , Brittany is surprised by Santana 's marriage proposal and gladly accepts . Brittany and Santana then return in " What The World Needs Now " to deal with Santana 's disapproving grandmother Alma – with whom she hasn ’ t spoken since coming out as a lesbian . Brittany takes matters into her own hands and tries to invite Alma to the wedding , but Alma 's prejudice is too strong and she rejects their engagement , and Brittany tells her off for doing so . Later the New Directions serenade them in an attempt to be invited to their upcoming wedding . Brittany and Santana are wed in a double ceremony with Kurt and Blaine in the eighth episode " A Wedding " . Before the ceremony , Sue arrives with Alma , who she has helped to realize that although she may not believe females should marry each other , family is the most important thing , leading her and Santana to reconcile . Brittany and Santana return briefly in the last minutes of the series finale " Dreams Come True " for a last performance with the rest of the Glee Cast to take a bow . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 Brittany first appears as a guest character in the second episode of the first season of Glee . She was brought in as a member of William McKinley High 's cheerleading team , the Cheerios . Brittany is regularly played by actress Heather Morris . Morris grew up with a strong background in choreography . She was taking acting classes and actively pursuing an acting career when she was offered a spot on recording artist Beyoncé Knowles world tour as a dancer . Morris , however , turned down the job . Shortly thereafter , she was asked by Glee 's choreographer Zach Woodlee to teach the choreography for Beyoncé 's " Single Ladies " dance to the Glee actors . At the same time , the show was looking for a third cheerleader , they originally wanted to have the third be African American , but Morris ended up landing the role of Brittany Pierce . Initially a background character who hardly ever spoke , the role grew as writers discovered Morris had a gift for delivering one @-@ liners . In an interview with Brandon Voss of The Advocate.com , Morris said of her casting : 
 " About six months after I first moved to L.A. , I got a job doing Beyoncé 's tour . After I finished the tour , I started working with choreographer Zach Woodlee , who started hiring me to do things like Fired Up ! and Eli Stone . Prior to the Single Ladies tour I was supposed to move to New York to do West Side Story , but then I dropped dancing and started acting classes because I didn 't want to dance anymore and I really wanted to fulfill my lifelong dream of acting . Zach called me and was like , ' Are you in New York ? ' I was like , ' No , I 'm still here in L.A. and I ’ m acting . ' He was like , ' OK , I need you to come in and teach the " Single Ladies " dance to Chris Colfer and Jenna Ushkowitz for this TV show I 'm doing , Glee . Since you 're acting now , I know Ryan Murphy would love to consider you for a part . Look as cute as you can so he 'll love you even more . ” So I went in to teach the kids with a full @-@ on outfit . I was scheduled to read with Ryan Murphy twice , but he canceled both times . After that , Zach called me and said they might not hire me anyway because they wanted the third cheerleader to be black , so my hopes were shot . But then my agent called a week later and said , ' You 're now cast as Brittany in Glee . ' So it was nuts . " 
 Brittany 's role in the show was initially intended to be minor , but grew towards the end of the first season . She does not have any solo musical performances during season one , but Morris hoped she would have one in the second season . On April 27 , 2010 , Michael Ausiello of Entertainment Weekly reported that Morris would be upgraded to a series regular for season two . Speaking to E ! Online , Morris commented : " It 's so fun . I literally just stand there and doze off and then I 'm like , ' Oh yeah , I have to speak now ! ' " At the 2010 Television Critics Association Summer Press Tour , Murphy stated that Brittany would have " big storylines " in the new season , as viewers want to know more about her . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Some of Brittany 's most memorable lines are unscripted , and are instead devised by Murphy during filming , or improvised by Morris . Morris portrays Brittany as being " literally insane . " She is used by the series ' writers to say things no other character would , to the point that Morris considers some of her lines nonsensical . Brittany 's character traits include her finding recipes confusing , cheating off intellectually disabled classmates , thinking her cat is reading her diary , and not knowing her right hand from her left . She is friendly towards all the other characters , and Morris has explained that Brittany " love [ s ] everybody , no matter who they are " , so she is frequently smiling and being nice to people . Morris bases her portrayal of Brittany on the character Karen Smith from the film Mean Girls . She plays Brittany as being very innocent , rather than stupid . In the episode " A Night of Neglect " , Brittany participates in an academic decathlon as a seat warmer , but surprisingly ends up contributing to the win due to the fact that she is somewhat of an idiot savant on the topic of cat diseases . It is also revealed in " Britney / Brittany " that Brittany is also " Britney Spears " as her middle initial is " S " making her " Brittany S. Pierce . " 
 At the Paley Festival Glee panel in March 2010 , Murphy stated that Brittany and Santana would be seen to make out during the show 's first season . Morris and Rivera only became aware of this after reading a Paley Festival report online . When they asked Murphy about the development , he claimed to have made the statement " to get a kick " out of the " dirty guy " asking about them . Murphy told Morris and Rivera that Glee would not push relationships to appease the show 's fans , but would only pursue those which were " organic and natural . " While there are moments on the show which depict Brittany and Santana as being very close to one another , Morris attributes these to her close relationship with Rivera : " that is just Naya and I joking around with each other and being really close . It 's always her and I just messing around and they end up using it . " 
 Later in 2010 , when interviewed by After Ellen and discussing the large lesbian audience of Glee , Ryan Murphy confirmed that season two would contain at least one kiss between Brittany and Santana . In January 2011 , several months after Brittany and Santana are seen in bed together , Glee co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk further confirmed that " Brittana is on . Brittana was always on . " 
 = = Musical performances = = 
 Brittany performs in many of the series ' musical numbers , though she does not have a solo line until the second season . In that season 's second episode " Britney / Brittany " , Brittany performs " I 'm a Slave 4 U " as a solo and " Me Against the Music " as a duet with Santana . Songs by Morris as Brittany have been released as singles , available for digital download , and have also featured on the show 's soundtrack albums . Brittany sings lead for Kesha 's " Tik @-@ Tok " in the episode " Blame It on the Alcohol " . Candace Bulter of ScreenCrave praised the New Directions performance of the song and wrote , " Ke $ ha might be able to out @-@ drink the Glee members , but their cover of her song was phenomenal . " She went on to praise Brittany 's choreography and voice , calling it " mad " and " awesome " . Sandra Gonzalez of Entertainment Weekly praised all of the musical performances and covers of that episode . In the season finale , she sings solo lines in the glee club 's Nationals performance of the original song " Light Up the World " . In the third season , Brittany 's first major performance was in the third episode " Asian F " , where she sings lead on Beyoncé 's " Run the World ( Girls ) " , which garnered superlatives from many reviewers including Kevin Fallon of The Atlantic , who wrote , " Brittany 's performance of ' Run the World ( Girls ) ' was thrilling . It was the most adrenaline @-@ pumping musical number the series has produced : intricately choreographed , expertly shot and edited , perfectly woven into the story , and performed exquisitely by Heather Morris . " She also performs a duet with Santana on " I Wanna Dance With Somebody ( Who Loves Me ) " in the Whitney Houston tribute episode " Dance With Somebody " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jarrett Wieselman of the New York Post has compared Morris as Brittany to Lynch as Sue , and noted that she has " emerged as one of the funniest second bananas on TV right now " . Wieselman wrote that since her introduction , Brittany has been given " more and more to do [ and ] less and less to think " , and that the result has been " one of the most clueless characters that 's ever figured out how to dress herself in the morning . " E ! Online 's Megan Masters has also compared Brittany to Sue , and stated that Brittany 's one @-@ liners " easily rival " Sue 's . She deemed Brittany " <unk> brilliant " , and thanked the Glee producers for creating her : " Never before have we had the pleasure of enjoying such a ridiculously dumb — yet always loveable — character on television . " When a promotional clip for the episode " Sectionals " indicated that Brittany and Santana had slept together , Dorothy Snarker , when writing for lesbian entertainment website AfterEllen.com , praised the pairing and referred to it by the portmanteau " Brittana " . Snarker called the two her " new favourite Glee pairing " , and commented : " While Heather Morris ( Brittany ) and Naya Rivera ( Santana ) have had minimal screen time , they ’ ve made it count . Heather in particular has brought the laughs as the Cheerio least likely to get a Mensa invitation . Never mind Finn and Rachel – I ’ m on Team Brittana now . " 
 Morris ' performance in Britney / Brittany attracted critical praise ; Lisa de Moraes called " Britney / Brittany " a " great showcase " for the actress , and praised her " spectacular dance moves " and " deadpan flare " . In his otherwise negative review , Todd VanDerWerff deemed Morris " hysterical throughout " and the cast 's best dancer . He stated , " Murphy seems intent on running this character into the ground , but Morris isn 't going to have her stop being funny without a fight . " Jenna Mullins of E ! Online observed , " When Ryan Murphy said this episode was a celebration of Heather , he wasn 't kidding " , and commended her musical performances . Robert Canning of IGN was initially concerned that the episode would diminish Morris ' appeal by elevating her from a background role , but was ultimately pleased that it managed to retain her " fan favorite " secondary character status . While Poniewozik asked " have we gotten to the point as a society where it 's unremarkable that the most popular scripted TV show in the 18 to 49 demographic is also — almost without comment or controversy — the gayest show on broadcast TV ? " , Ann Oldenburg of USA Today questioned whether Glee had gone too far by its depiction of Brittany and Santana kissing and their reference to the sexual act called " <unk> " . Christie Keith , in writing for the lesbian and bisexual media website AfterEllen.com , suggested that " Duets " was the " queerest episode of any series that 's ever been on television " , and stated that she was moved to tears by the final scene of Brittany forlorn without Santana . AfterEllen.com also listed her in their Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters . 
 Robert Canning praised Morris for her performance in " A Very Glee Christmas " , and wrote : " The heart of " A Very Glee Christmas " was found in Artie Abrams attempt to keep Brittany 's belief in Santa Claus alive . Heather Morris perfectly played up Brittany 's innocence and joy surrounding everything Santa . Her interaction with the black mall Santa was a highlight . Watching Artie , and eventually the rest of the club , work to keep Brittany 's belief intact was truly in the spirit of Christmas and should have been made into a fuller part of the episode . Also shining in this storyline was Dot Jones as Coach Bieste . Her scene as Santa , and then her knowing expression as she watched Artie walk , were the best moments of the episode . " In January 2010 , Morris and her co @-@ stars won the " Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series . Later that year , Brittany and Santana were nominated for the " Favorite Fictional Lesbian Couple " award at the AfterEllen.com Visibility Awards . 
 = Fortress of Humaitá = 
 The Fortress of Humaitá ( 1854 – 68 ) , known metaphorically as the Gibraltar of South America , was a military installation near the mouth of the River Paraguay . A strategic site without equal in the region , it was " the key to Paraguay and the upper rivers " . It played a crucial role in the bloodiest conflict in the continent 's history : the Paraguayan War . 
 The site was a meander or sharp horseshoe bend in the river ; practically all vessels wishing to enter the Republic of Paraguay were forced to navigate it . The bend was commanded by a 6 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) line of artillery batteries , at the end of which was a chain boom which , when raised , closed the river to navigation . The fortress was protected from attack on its landward side by impassible swamp or extensive earthworks which , at their greatest extension , stretched for 8 lineal miles ( 13 km ) , had a garrison of 18 @,@ 000 men and deployed 120 cannon . At its zenith Humaitá was reputed to be impassable to enemy shipping . 
 The widespread perception which it created in its heyday – that Paraguay was practically immune to naval attack – may have induced its Marshal @-@ President Francisco Solano López to take unnecessary risks in foreign policy and , in particular , to seize government vessels and provinces of the much more populous Brazil and Argentina and to send armies to invade them and Uruguay . They united against him in the Treaty of the Triple Alliance . The war led to his country 's utter defeat and ruin and the casualties were immense . 
 A declared purpose of the Treaty of the Triple Alliance was the demolition of the Humaitá fortifications and that none others of that sort should be built again . However the fortress , though not by then invulnerable to the latest armour @-@ plated warships , was a serious obstacle to the Allies ’ plans to proceed upriver to the Paraguayan capital Asunción and to recapture the Brazilian territory of Mato Grosso : it delayed them for two and a half years . It was taken in the Siege of Humaitá ( 1868 ) , then razed pursuant to the Treaty . 
 For present @-@ day Paraguayans Humaitá is a symbol of national pride , standing for their country 's unyielding will to resist . 
 = = Motives for its construction = = 
 = = = Key to Paraguay = = = 
 Paraguay is a landlocked country and for much of its history it was difficult of access , except by sailing from the Atlantic up the River Paraná and hence the River Paraguay ( see map ) as the early Spanish explorers had done . There were other means of ingress , but they would have required an invading force to be resupplied through difficult and hostile country . So the command of the river was key to the security of Paraguay , who feared and distrusted its two much larger neighbours Brazil and Argentina . 
 = = = Anxiety about the Brazilian Empire = = = 
 In a long history of conflicts between the empires of Portugal and Spain in America , the Portuguese made numerous incursions – some of them permanent – into Spanish @-@ claimed territory . Slave raids by <unk> from what is now Brazil into the Jesuit Reductions of Paraguay carried off many Guaraní inhabitants , who feared and despised the Brazilians . The boundaries between the two empires were not resolved and the conflicts continued after independence , when Portuguese America became the Empire of Brazil . Brazil had no practical access to its own territory of Mato Grosso except by sailing from the Atlantic Ocean up the River Paraguay ( see map ) ; fear that Paraguay might interfere with the navigation was a source of conflict . Where Paraguay ended , and where the Mato Grosso began , was a matter of opinion . 
 = = = Anxiety about Buenos Aires = = = 
 The Spanish Viceroyalty of the River Plate occupied an enormous territory roughly coterminous with the modern @-@ day territories of Bolivia , central and northern Argentina , Paraguay and Uruguay . Although it did not exist for very long ( 1776 – 1810 ) the Spanish Viceroy had his seat in the city of Buenos Aires . Upon becoming independent from Spain the city claimed and thought itself rightly to be the capital of an identical territory it called the United Provinces of South America . Other provinces – especially Bolivia , Uruguay and Paraguay – begged to differ and the Viceroyalty broke up in acrimony and warfare . In particular , Buenos Aires did not recognise the independence of Paraguay and in 1811 sent an army under General Belgrano to try to ‘ recover ’ it . The Buenos Aires governor Juan Manuel Rosas during his dictatorship ( 1835 – 52 ) tried to bring Paraguay to heel by closing the River Paraná to commercial traffic ( see Battle of Vuelta de <unk> ) . Buenos Aires province fell out with the other provinces of the Argentine Confederation and declared itself the independent State of Buenos Aires ; it did not recognise Paraguay 's independence even after the others had . It was not until quite late in the nineteenth century ( 1859 ) that a re @-@ united Argentina formally recognised an independent Paraguay . Even so , the boundaries between Argentina and Paraguay were in dispute , notably the Chaco and Misiones territories . 
 = = = Defensive outlook of Paraguay = = = 
 Upon its independence in 1811 Paraguay tried to keep out of the anarchy of adjoining Hispanic America . Its formidable dictator José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia ( 1820 – 1840 ) imposed a strict policy of isolation . During his reign few were allowed to enter Paraguay , or to leave it . Professor Williams ' assessment : " In an attempt to coerce Paraguay economically and bring it to its knees , Buenos Aires only stiffened Paraguayan nationalism and produced a voluntary , xenophobic isolation of the breakaway province " . 
 After Francia 's death he was succeeded by Carlos Antonio López , ( called ‘ López I ’ by some authors , a convenient if inaccurate designation ) , the father of Francisco Solano López ( ‘ López II ’ ) . López I did open up Paraguay to foreign trade and technology , but the steamship made his country vulnerable to invasion and he understandably feared the machinations of his powerful neighbours . 
 During his presidency there were conflicts , not only with Brazil and Buenos Aires , but also the United States : the USS Water Witch affair of 1855 in which the fort of Itapirú fired upon an American warship , which led to a US naval expedition against Paraguay in 1858 . Although Carlos López was astute enough to know when to back down , he resolved to make Paraguay immune to foreign attack in future . 
 = = = Immediate cause of its construction ; initial works = = = 
 In 1777 , in colonial times , a modest guardia ( fortlet or lookout post ) was established at Humaitá , a place about 15 miles above the mouth of the River Paraguay . However , a more formidable version was built in stages on the orders of López I. He started the work hurriedly in 1854 during conflict with Brazil over boundaries and navigation , when Paraguay was threatened by a Brazilian flotilla ; fortunately for López , the Brazilians were delayed by the low state of the river . The Paraguayan author and diplomat Gregorio <unk> − who was in the Paraguayan army at the time − gives a slightly different account . López I , hearing the Brazilian squadron was on its way , immediately transferred 6 @,@ 000 troops from Paso de Patria to Humaitá ; working night and day , in 15 days they fortified that place , including furnaces for making red hot cannonballs . The Brazilian squadron desisted because of the strength of the fortifications ; the low state of the water is mentioned only incidentally . 
 To a design by the Hungarian colonel of engineers Wisner de Morgenstern , he hastily fortified the river 's left bank with a few batteries , which were continually but slowly augmented , and a trench was dug on the land side enclosing the rear of them . He felled the virgin forest , leaving only a few scattered trees , grubbed up the roots , and laid out the first batteries , to whose completion some two years were devoted . By January 1859 the installation appeared formidable . As described by an eye @-@ witness aboard USS Fulton , part of the Paraguay expedition sent by President Buchanan to demand reparations for wrongs alleged to have been done to the United States 
 Sixteen ominous apertures pointed their gloom , and whatever else they may contain , upon us ; and , like the eyes of the figure in the picture , seemed to follow the vessel 's motion ... These apertures are those of the casemate battery , constructed of brick , but very deep , and defended by the very formidable battery of sixteen eight inch guns . 
 Numerous other batteries were noticed . Fulton , having left the rest of her squadron behind , was allowed to proceed upriver . 
 The works , which were continually extended , were supervised by British engineers , of whom there were a considerable number on contract to the government of Paraguay . 
 = = Description of the finished fortress = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The fortress of Humaitá was situated on a level cliff about 30 feet ( 10 metres ) above the river , on a sharp horseshoe bend . The bend , called the ‘ ’ ’ Vuelta de Humaitá ’ ’ ’ was an ideal strategic pinch point . It was some 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) long ; the navigable channel narrowed to only 200 metres ( 660 ft ) broad ; the current was 2 @.@ 8 knots ( 5 @.@ 2 km / h ; 3 @.@ 2 mph ) and in places 3 knots ( 5 @.@ 6 km / h ; 3 @.@ 5 mph ) , difficult for the ships of the day to stem ; and ( a matter that was to horrify the Brazilian navy ) ideal for the release of ‘ torpedoes ' ( nineteenth century floating naval mines ) . 
 An unpleasant surprise for an invading flotilla was that , owing to the peculiar conformation of the river bed , there were " treacherous backwaters which often neutralize the action of the rudder , in direct proportion to the length of vessels " . 
 = = = = First impression = = = = 
 The explorer Captain Sir Richard Burton , who visited the scene during the war – when the Brazilians were still dismantling the fortifications – described it thus : 
 The sweep is more than usually concave , to the benefit of gunnery and the detriment of shipping . Nothing more dangerous than this great bend , where vessels were almost sure to get confused under fire , as happened at Port Hudson to the fleet commanded by Admiral D. G. Farragut . The level bank , twenty to thirty feet above the river , and dipping in places , is bounded by swamps up @-@ stream and down @-@ stream . Earthworks , consisting of trenches , curtains and redans , disposed at intervals where wanted , and suggesting the lines of Torres Vedras , rest both their extremities upon the river , whose shape here is that of the letter U , and extend in gibbous shape inland to the south . The outline measures nearly eight miles and a half , and encloses meadow land to the extent of 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square yards – a glorious battlefield . 
 = = = River batteries = = = 
 An invading force , if steaming around the bend upriver , would have to pass eight batteries , all capable of concentrating fire on the <unk> angle . Furthermore shipping was within range of the heavy guns well before arriving at the bend , and well after it . 
 = = = = Preliminary batteries = = = = 
 First it had to pass the Humaitá redoubt , armed with a single 8 inch ( 20 cm calibre ) gun . 
 It must then pass the Itapirú ( seven guns ) ; the <unk> [ heavy ] ( five guns ) , all partly revetted with brick ; the Octava or Madame Lynch ( three guns en barbette ) ; the Coimbra ( eight guns ) ; and the Tacuarí ( three guns ) . 
 = = = = The Batería Londres = = = = 
 Next , the invading flotilla must pass the Batería Londres ( so called because most of the técnicos in Paraguay were recruited by the Limehouse , London , firm of J. & A. Blyth ) . Its walls were 8 @.@ 2 metres ( 27 ft ) thick . It was supposed to be rendered bomb @-@ proof by layers of earth heaped upon brick arches , and there were embrasures for 16 guns . " Of these ports " said Burton " eight were walled up and converted into workshops , because the artillerymen were in hourly dread of their caving in and crumbling down . " 
 = = = = The Batería Cadenas = = = = 
 As a climax the invading force would come alongside the <unk> Cadenas ( Chain battery , for it protected the chain boom ) , backed by the Artillery Barracks . According to a survey by the Brazilian engineering corps this battery had 18 guns . 
 = = = The chain boom = = = 
 The boom across the river , intended to detain shipping under the guns , is variously described in the sources . Richard Burton and Commander Kennedy RN said it comprised 7 chains twisted together , of which ( wrote Burton ) the largest had a 1 @.@ 75 inch diameter link . It was made fast to a windlass supported by a house about 100 yards from the bank . Nearer the battery stood a still larger capstan . Other sources , notably George Thompson ( de facto chief engineer of Paraguayan army ) wrote that there were three chains side @-@ by @-@ side , of which the heaviest had 7 @.@ 5 inch links , sustained by barges and canoes . 
 The official staff report of Allied force that captured Humaitá , dated 29 July 1868 , by <unk> <unk> e <unk> , said that on both banks of the river there were seven chains which , after entering the water , were bound to three . The latter were partly sustained by large floating iron boxes . 
 = = = Approach = = = 
 Before even arriving at the Vuelta de Humaitá an invading squadron would first have to navigate the River Paraguay from its mouth , and run the gauntlet of such batteries as the Paraguayans were able to deploy on its left bank , particularly at Curuzú and Curupayty . Whether unarmoured warships could have done so without being sunk was never ascertained ; during the War the unarmoured wooden vessels of the Brazilian Navy did not attempt it . 
 Although heavily iron @-@ plated ships ought not be sunk by these river batteries , their very weight and size made them difficult , and at times impossible , to navigate in the shallow waters of the River Paraguay . As Commander Kennedy of the Royal Navy observed : 
 The river Paraguay presents no important obstacles to navigation , the principal point to observe being the [ seasonal ] rise of the water ; this varies sometimes as much as three fathoms ... The danger attendant on grounding in the Paraguay is ... [ that it ] has a sharp rocky bottom ... The entrance to the Paraguay at Tres Bocas is 500 yards wide , and at medium river there is a depth of twelve feet of water . The iron @-@ <unk> of the Brazilian fleet , many of which drew twelve and thirteen feet of water , were entirely dependent on these periodical rises , both for forward movements , and also for retreat , if it should have been necessary . Their guns and ammunition were not shipped until they arrived at Corrientes ; for the Paraná is equally shallow in various parts ... 
 It is difficult to conceive a more formidable obstacle to an advancing squadron than this small portion of the river between Tres Bocas and Humaitá . The water is shallow , and most uncertain in its depth ; the turnings in the channel are sharp and frequent , and every available point was bristling with guns of heavy calibre ... 
 = = = ' Torpedoes ' = = = 
 For an invading force of ironclads the most dangerous aspect of Humaitá was not the artillery batteries but the ' torpedoes ' that could be released in the confined , shallow and uncharted stream of the River Paraguay . 
 These torpedoes were improvised floating contact mines . The first was devised by " a Yankee , Mr. Krüger " . They consisted of a zinc cylinder containing a charge of gunpowder . The largest used a charge of 1 @,@ 500 lbs ( 680 kilos ) and the explosion shook the ground at the town of Corrientes , Argentina forty miles off . The fuses were designed and made by George Frederick Masterman , chief apothecary to the Paraguayan Army : they were glass capsules of sulphuric acid which , when broken by striking a heavy object , ignited a potassium chlorate / sugar mixture . 
 Although most of these devices failed to go off , except prematurely , one did sink the 1 @,@ 000 ton Brazilian ironclad Rio de Janeiro killing 155 men , and since they were released almost every night they had to be taken seriously . The Brazilian navy had patrol boats out rowing in three shifts , including nights , which tried to spot the floating torpedoes ; if they did , they attempted to hook their floats with grappling irons on long lines . Wrote Commander Kennedy RN , " It was a service of great danger " . 
 Deploying the torpedoes was not without its dangers either . After Kruger 's death – he was blown up by one of his torpedoes – the work was taken over by a Paraguayan called Ramos who had served an apprenticeship in England . He met the same fate , and the work was given to a Polish refugee named <unk> . <unk> used to take the torpedoes down the river in a canoe rowed by four boys . One day he was distracted and the boys absconded to the Allies with the torpedo : he was arrested , reduced to the ranks and sent to the front , where he was soon killed . An anonymous , if brave , Paraguayan diver tried to attach a torpedo to the Brazilian ironclad Brasil by hand : this was deduced when he was found entangled in her rudder @-@ chains , drowned . 
 The Paraguayans deliberately moored empty <unk> in the river to make the Brazilian navy suppose they marked the situations of torpedoes . It made them noticeably reluctant to navigate its waters . 
 = = = Landward defences : the Quadrilateral = = = 
 The Paraguayans had also taken precautions against Humaitá being seized from the landward side . Much of it was protected naturally by <unk> , marsh or swamp , and where not , an elaborate system of trenches was constructed , eventually extending over 13 km ( 8 mi ) with palisades and chevaux @-@ de @-@ <unk> at regular intervals , known as the Quadrilateral ( <unk> , <unk> or <unk> in various language sources ) . These trenches mounted batteries where appropriate . The trenches and natural barriers are shown in the map reproduced in this section of this Article , which was drawn to scale by Lt. Colonel George Thompson ( engineer ) of the Paraguayan army ; he personally made a detailed trigonometric survey of the ground . The map is corroborated by Burton 's detailed verbal description based on his own inspection on horseback and on figures supplied to him by Lt. Colonel <unk> of the Argentine Army . 
 Burton reported that the layout required a garrison of at least 10 @,@ 000 men ; at the time of the Siege of Humaitá the Allied Commander @-@ in @-@ chief estimated that it had 18 @,@ 000 and possibly 20 @,@ 000 men and 120 cannon not including the river batteries . 
 = = = = <unk> terrain = = = = 
 While the Paraguayans were familiar with the ground , maps of the territory were , for the Allies , non @-@ existent . The area lay in the province of <unk> , which is flat , low @-@ lying and obscured by swamp or <unk> . For example , when they established their main camp at Tuyutí in southern Paraguay the Allies did not realise they were placing it within earshot of the southeastern line of the Quadrilateral : the Sauce trench . In his 5 @-@ volume work on the Paraguayan war the Brazilian historian Tasso <unk> insists that a Brazilian high command letter of April 1867 
 does not leave the slightest doubt that the allies were completely ignorant not only of the topography of the terrain [ to the south of the fortress ] , but that all of it was protected by lines of [ Paraguayan ] entrenchments . 
 In order to gradually map the area the Allies were obliged to resort to <unk> ( improvised watch towers ) or ( a first in South American warfare ) captive observation balloons , but the Paraguayans obscured the terrain by lighting fires of damp grass . 
 = = = = Headquarters = = = = 
 López II established his headquarters at Paso Pucú , one of the corners of the Quadrilateral ( see map in this Section ) . Amongst orange groves stood the dwellings of López , his mistress Eliza Lynch , and military officers who enjoyed his confidence e.g. Generals Barrios , <unk> , and Bruges ; also Bishop Palacios , Lt Colonel George Thompson the chief engineer and Dr Stewart the surgeon @-@ general . The houses were simple ranchos with thatched roofs . A quadrangle of large traverses or earthworks protected from Allied artillery fire his house , that of Mrs Lynch , and those of his servants . These earthworks were made of sods and the largest was said to contain 422 @,@ 080 pieces . At the centre of the quadrangle was a mangrullo or watchtower . According to Burton the mangrullo 's ladders were surrounded by hides and matting , " an unusual precaution intended to conceal <unk> ankles " , for it was used by Mrs Lynch ; and indeed a contemporaneous drawing by the Brazilian engineering corps does show , unusually for Paraguay , a mangrullo with a covered ascent . 
 A large military hospital was established halfway between Humaitá and Paso Pucú and another one for field officers at Paso Pucú itself . At Paso Pucú there were two settlements for female camp @-@ followers ; they assisted in the hospitals and washed the soldiers ' clothes . They were allowed no rations , and lived on what beef the soldiers gave them . There was a cemetery , and a prisoner @-@ of war compound . 
 = = = = Newspapers = = = = 
 At headquarters were published the military newspapers <unk> ( mainly in Spanish ) and Cacique <unk> ( mainly in Guaraní ) . These featured crude but effective propaganda woodcuts , often of a racially offensive nature . Paper was in short supply but an ersatz version was improvised from <unk> ( wild pineapple ) . 
 = = = = Electrical telegraphy = = = = 
 In the final stages of the fortifications electrical telegraph lines were laid out from Humaitá and the points in the Quadrilateral to López 's headquarters at <unk> Pucú ; and he could instantly be informed — in Morse code — of an enemy attack on any point . The English military engineer George Thompson , a colonel in the Paraguayan army , recorded that the Guaraní became adept telegraphists . 
 = = = The Chaco side = = = 
 On the opposite bank of the River Paraguay begins the area known as the Gran Chaco , with a different , hot , semi @-@ arid climate . The opposite bank , now part of Argentina , but in dispute in those days , was inhabited by none except the fierce Toba Amerindians . In front of Humaitá the land was quite impracticable as far as Timbó which , when the river was high , was completely under water . ( Later , military roads were made through there at vast effort . ) 
 = = Strategic significance and perception = = 
 At least before the introduction of iron @-@ plated warships , Humaitá had the reputation of being impregnable , and it became famous as the " Sebastopol of South America " . During the war the European press compared it to the Richmond and Vicksburg of the American Civil War . It was also famed in Europe and the United States as the Gibraltar of South America . 
 Michael Mulhall , editor of the Buenos Ayres Standard , passed the site in 1863 and reported it to the world in these terms : 
 A succession of formidable batteries which frowned on us as we passed under their range … [ A ] ny vessel , unless iron @-@ plated , attempting to force a passage must be sunk by the raking and concentrated fire of this fortification , which is the key to Paraguay and the upper rivers . 
 When López I built Humaitá all warships were made of wood , and steamships were mostly paddle @-@ driven . Wooden paddle @-@ steamers , if intending to proceed into Paraguay , would have had to steam , against the current , past the succession of batteries – where the range was 200 metres ( 660 ft ) or less – and somehow cut through the boom of twisted chains , without being sunk : this appeared to be impossible . 
 A modern appreciation by Professor Whigham : 
 As a strategic site , Humaitá was without equal in the region , for enemy ships could not ascend the Paraguay [ river ] without passing under its guns . It was also exceptionally well protected on the south and east by marshes and lagoons . The few dry areas leading to it could be reinforced with troops in such a way as to frustrate any attack . 
 = = Weaknesses = = 
 In fact , Humaitá was not invulnerable , at any rate after a sufficient supply of river @-@ navigating ironclad warships became available in South America . Indeed Burton , having inspected the captured site , thought that its potency had been greatly exaggerated – to the point that it was a bluff . The commander of the Portuguese war vessel <unk> , also there at the time , wondered how Humaitá could have humbled a powerful navy for so long . 
 = = = Defective weaponry = = = 
 Although Paraguay could and did manufacture large artillery guns , there was nevertheless a shortage — partly because guns had to be taken to reinforce the landward artillery – and not all of the guns at Humaitá were of acceptable standard . When Burton inspected them ( August 1868 ) he noted that many had been thrown into deep water but the remainder were poor : 
 The guns barely deserve the name ; some of them were so honeycombed that they must have been used as street posts ... Not the worst of them were made at Asunción or <unk> , whose furnaces and air chimneys could melt four tons per diem . Some had been converted , but it was a mere patchwork . A few rifled 12 @-@ pounders had been cast at Asunción . There were sundry old tubes bearing the arms of Spain ; two hailed from Seville , the San Gabriel ( A.D. 1671 ) and the San Juan de Dios ( 1684 ) . 
 However , Burton may well have been underestimating the Paraguayan artillery at its zenith : according to both Thompson and Jourdan , some guns had already been evacuated to the Chaco side by the Paraguayans when abandoning the fortress . 
 = = = Defective fortifications = = = 
 According to Burton the system of fortification lacked the latest developments , mostly using the obsolete en barbette system which failed to protect the defending artillerymen . The consequence : 
 Thus the works were utterly unfit to resist the developed powers of rifled artillery , the concentrated discharge from shipping , and even the accurate and searching fire of the Spencer carbine . The Londres work , besides being in a state of decay , was an exposed mass of masonry which ought to have shared the fate of forts from Sumpter to Pulaski , and when granite fails bricks cannot hope to succeed . Had the guns been mounted in Monitor towers , or even protected by sand @-@ bags , the ironclads would have suffered much more than they did in running past them . 
 Other observers formed similar impressions . Thompson wrote that it should have been easy for the Brazilian flotilla firing grape and canister to " sweep the Paraguayans away from their guns " " . The British gunboat HMS Doterel , which had passed the site in 1865 ( long before it was damaged in the war ) likewise thought the artillerymen were far too exposed , and that even the casemated battery ( the Londres ) had poorly constructed embrasures , so wide open as to be " veritable cannonball receptacles " , very dangerous to the garrison . 
 = = = Obsolescence = = = 
 López I fortified Humaitá in the era of the wooden paddle @-@ steamer warship . Gloire , the first ironclad warship was not launched until 1859 and that was in France , intended for a blue @-@ water navy ; and no battles between European ironclads had actually happened . 
 However , the evolution of the navies in the American Civil War ( 1861 – 65 ) had fulfilled a demand for heavily armoured vessels that could navigate in river waters . The Battle of Hampton Roads , in which iron @-@ armoured Union and Confederate warships were unable to sink each other , dramatically demonstrated their resistance to heavy artillery . News of this naval engagement arrived in the River Plate on 14 May 1862 and was reported in the Buenos Aires Standard in these terms : 
 The two steel vessels commenced a cannonade a mile apart , without doing any damage on either side . In less than an hour and a half they were alongside , and then raged so terrible an encounter that both vessels were enveloped in smoke . Two balls from the Monitor entered her adversary 's cuirass ; as soon as the wind cleared away the smoke the Monitor was seen running round Merrimac , looking for a vulnerable point , the vessels being about 35 yards apart ... 
 The Merrimac drove her spur against the Monitor , which received the awful shock motionless and unhurt . Now they were so close that the guns fired into each others ' mouths : at length the Confederate got a wound which made her hail the others to tow her into Norfolk . After so terrible a conflict for several hours against heavy artillery , the Monitor showed only a few <unk> and scratches . The Merrimac 's spur scarcely marked her side . 
 The superiority so established of steel @-@ clad vessels has caused an immense sensation in America ... 
 The American sea @-@ fight caused great excitement in England , since it was feared that the new invention would rob that country of naval supremacy . Wooden men of war were declared , in the House of Commons , to be useless , and the Admiralty had stopped all the fortifications and arsenals , to devote all attention to the construction of a steel fleet 35 in number . 
 Apart from the more conventional ironclads , which the Brazilian navy could order from Britain or France , as noted the Americans had invented the monitor , an armoured , shallow draft , turreted vessel that presented little superstructure to enemy fire ; monitors could be and were built in Brazil . Thus by the time Lopez II fired the first shots against Brazil ( December 1864 ) the Humaitá defences were obsolescent to the latest naval weaponry that could be manufactured or purchased . Brazil was an enormous country and after the war broke out it could have ( and soon did have ) at least 10 ironclads . 
 That said , an ironclad naval force , by itself , was unlikely to pose a strategic threat to the Paraguayan nation . For assuming the latest ironclads could get past Humaitá – which they eventually did – it did not follow that unarmoured troopships could do so . Without the logistical support of an invading army , ironclads could not have operated far ahead of their lines of supply , except temporarily . 
 = = = Lack of tautness in the chain boom = = = 
 Even heavily armoured vessels might have been impeded by the chain boom , but it turned out to have an Achilles ' heel : it could not be drawn tight enough without intermediate floating supports – and these might be sunk by naval gunfire . 
 Burton 's description of the chain boom was : 
 The chain , which consisted of seven twisted together , passed diagonally through a kind of brick tunnel . On this side [ of the River Paraguay ] it was made fast to a windlass supported by a house about 100 yards from the bank . Nearer the battery stood a still larger capstan : the latter , however , wanted force to haul tight the chain . 
 This was so provided an enemy destroyed the chain 's intermediate floating supports ; for as explained by Thompson , the chains were 
 supported on a number of canoes , and on three pontoons . The [ Brazilian ] ironclads fired for three months at these pontoons and canoes , sinking all of them , when , of course , the chain went to the bottom , as the river there is about 700 yards wide , and the chain could not be drawn tight without intermediate supports . The chain was thus buried some two feet under the mud of the river , offering no obstacle whatever to the navigation . 
 = = = <unk> the garrison = = = 
 Because the marshlands were not ideal for the raising of cattle or the cultivation of manioc or maize , and because the Quadrilateral required a large garrison , food for Humaitá needed to be brought in from elsewhere . However , it was a very difficult position to supply . 
 Cut off by swamps , there was no easy overland communication with the nearest food @-@ producing regions . There was a coastal road , but it was poor , unfitted for oxcarts or cattle droves during the winter floods . During the War there was a shortage of steam vessels ; small river craft were difficult to land in winter . " Paraguay never resolved these transportation difficulties during the siege of Humaitá , and the army suffered the consequences " , observed Professor Cooney . 
 Even so , Humaitá withstood a siege of more than two years . 
 = = <unk> consequences = = 
 The Humaitá system was built to increase the security of Paraguay , but , as will now be described , its strength – real or perceived – may have had the opposite effect in the end . 
 = = = Provocation of Brazil = = = 
 For Brazil the fortifications posed a potential threat to her own security and caused her to make some preparations for war . As noted by Lt Colonel George Thompson of the Paraguayan army : 
 These batteries commanded the whole bend of the river , and Paraguay made all vessels anchor and ask permission before they could pass up the river . As this was the only practicable road which Brazil had to her province of Matto @-@ Grosso [ sic ] , she naturally disapproved of her stoppage of the river , and gradually accumulated large military stores in Matto @-@ Grosso , with the view , no doubt , of some day destroying Humaitá . 
 = = = Inducing overconfidence = = = 
 For Leslie Bethell , López II overestimated Paraguay 's military power , and this induced him to behave recklessly . According to Professor Bethell : 
 Solano López 's decision to declare war first on Brazil and then on Argentina , and to invade both their territories , proved a serious miscalculation , and one that was to have tragic consequences for the Paraguayan people . At the very least Solano López made an enormous gamble – and lost … Thus Solano López 's reckless actions brought about the very thing that most threatened the security , even the existence , of his country : a union of his two powerful neighbours … 
 For John Hoyt Williams , Humaitá was instrumental in generating this risk @-@ taking behaviour . According to Professor Williams : 
 The hundreds of heavy calibre guns mounted at Humaitá and elsewhere , the modern navy , railroad , telegraph , and munitions manufacturing establishments – all helped to bring about the horrendous War of the Triple Alliance and their own destruction by providing the hardware with which Francisco Solano López could become the Mariscal and self @-@ appointed arbiter of the Río de la Plata . 
 And : 
 Even El Mariscal would not have dared to do more than to defend his immediate borders had not his military materiel [ Williams expressly specifies Humaitá ] encouraged him to redefine those borders and play the wider and infinitely more dangerous role of fulcrum in the balance of power . 
 After the passage of Humaitá the Buenos Ayres Standard wrote : 
 None who have ever seen the place have questioned its strength . Old President López had such implicit faith in its impregnability that he believed if even a Xerxes attacked Paraguay he could not get past Humaitá . The same implicit confidence in its strength was inculcated in the minds of the Paraguayan people . Their watchword was ' Humaitá ' , and possibly to the exaggerated idea of its strength by the present López may be traced the grave political error which step by step led this unfortunate man from the cautious policy of his father to became the great champion of River Plate equilibrium . 
 = = = An alternative view = = = 
 A possible alternative view is that López was aware that developments in naval warfare were making Humaitá obsolescent , and therefore decided to take the offensive before Paraguay lost the balance of advantage altogether . Paraguay 's chief engineer the talented William Keld <unk> cannot have failed to become aware of the advantages of ironclad vessels and it is on record that in 1863 he obtained a British patent for an iron @-@ <unk> vessel . Indeed López himself only eight months after the Battle of Hampton roads was pressing the American ambassador in Asunción to procure a monitor for him ; and Paraguay placed orders for several ironclads to be built in European or Brazilian yards before the War . Further support for this view is afforded by López 's hesitation in seizing the Marques de Olinda . According to Thompson : 
 López was at Cerro Leon at the time [ when the Marques de Olinda arrived at Asunción ] , and hesitated for a whole day whether he should break the peace or not ... [ H ] e knew he could assemble every man in the country immediately and raise a large army ; he knew also that the Brazilians would be a long time recruiting to get a large force together , and he did not think they would wish to carry on a war for long . He said , ' If we don 't have a war now with Brazil , we shall have one at a less convenient time for ourselves . ' He therefore sent ... the ' Tacuarí ' ( the fastest steamer on the River Plate ) ... to bring her back to Asunción . 
 As against that , none of the sources cited in this Article establish why López declared war without waiting for his ironclads to be completed and delivered . According to Burton " it was the general opinion " that with a single ironclad at their disposal the Paraguayans " would have cleared the river " . He went further : 
 The war , indeed , was altogether premature : had the <unk> ships and <unk> ordered by the Marshal @-@ President begun the campaign , he might now have supplied the place of Mexico with a third great Latin empire . 
 Instead , at an early stage of the war Paraguay 's wooden vessels , only one of which had been built as a warship , were defeated by a Brazilian wooden flotilla at the Battle of the Riachuelo ; hence the River Paraguay was blockaded by the Brazilian navy ; and so the armoured ships he had ordered could neither be delivered nor paid for . The contracts were taken over by Brazil , who , eventually , used these <unk> ironclads to defeat Humaitá . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 On a traditional view , after the death of the cautious López I , his son paid not enough attention to his father 's dying words : to try to settle disputes with Brazil with the pen not the sword . He was induced by the then Uruguayan government to intervene in a conflict in the River Plate region , which he did on 13 November 1864 by firing across the bows of , then seizing , the Brazilian government ship the Marques de Olinda as she was proceeding upriver on her monthly voyage to the Mato Grosso ; he proceeded to seize the Mato Grosso itself . According to the American ambassador to Paraguay Charles A. Washburn , Lopez explained his seizure of the Brazilian ship by saying " with more candor than discretion " that only by a war could the attention and respect of the world be secured to Paraguay ; that although Paraguay was a small power in comparison with Brazil , she had " advantages of position " that gave her an equality of strength ; and that the Paraguayan troops would be already " fortified and <unk> " before the Brazilians could arrive in any considerable numbers . 
 Encouraged by the sluggish response of Brazil , infuriated by the mockery of the Buenos Aires press and impatient at Argentina 's refusal to permit him to invade a further Brazilian province through sovereign Argentine territory , on 13 April 1865 López fired upon and seized two small Argentine naval vessels moored in the port of Corrientes , then proceeded to take the Argentine province of that name , making Paraguayan paper currency compulsory on pain of death . The resulting War of the Triple Alliance was to destroy his country . 
 = = = The principal military objective of the Treaty of the Triple Alliance was Humaitá = = = 
 The Treaty of the Triple Alliance against Paraguay was signed 1 May 1865 and specifically stated that Humaitá must be destroyed and never rebuilt . Article 18 provided that the terms of the Treaty should be kept secret until its " principal objective " had been attained ; Consul Thomas Hutchinson thought this referred , not to the deposition of López , but to the demolition of Humaitá . Numerous political objectives are expressly mentioned in the Treaty , but no other military ones . 
 On the same day the Allied High Command agreed a strategic plan , the first point of which read : 
 The objective of the campaign operations − to which [ all ] military operations and [ invasion ] routes must be subordinated − should be the position of Humaitá . 
 And : - 
 The distance from Paso de Patria [ the invasion point ] to Humaitá is only seven leagues by land , and whatever be the difficulties of the terrain , the short distance , time and the ability to hit the enemy with the ironclads will compensate for it . 
 = = Effectiveness in practice = = 
 Despite Burton 's strictures the Fortress of Humaitá was a serious obstacle to the Allies ’ plans to proceed upriver . On it being announced in Buenos Aires that Paraguay had fired upon and seized the Argentine naval vessels , President Mitre told a furious crowd that : 
 In twenty @-@ four hours we shall be in the barracks , in a fortnight at Corrientes , and in three months at Asunción . 
 In fact , the Allies did not occupy the Paraguayan capital until 5 January 1869 , nearly four years after Mitre 's speech . The main reason was the Humaitá complex . 
 It may have been " only seven leagues by land " from Paso de Patria to Humaitá , but it was land that it necessary to traverse . After expelling the Paraguayans from Argentine soil the Allies landed in Paraguay and occupied Paso de Patria on 23 April 1866 . They did not capture Humaitá until 5 August 1868 . The Humaitá phase of the Paraguayan war is outside the scope of this Article . However , B.C. MacDermot thus summarised the difficulties : 
 [ T ] he terrain conferred a huge advantage on the defence . Below and around Humaitá was a conglomeration of lagoons , marshes and patches of jungle connected by narrow strips of terra firma which the attacking side had to squeeze through on a narrow front ... [ A ] t only two points was an advance inland possible : at Curupayty to the south and <unk> to the north of Humaitá . Behind the natural defences lay the earthworks of Humaitá , with its long outer perimeter touching on <unk> , and a smaller fort Timbó on the Chaco side of the river . To add to their difficulties the allies found that the ironclads were not as effective as their reputation had led them to hope . They could not move far ahead of their lines of supply . The Paraguayan artillery could not sink them but it could disable them enough to put them out of action . Below the waterline they were exposed to mines and torpedoes . They could be stopped by underwater obstructions and booms . Their ability to manoeuvre depended excessively on the level of the river , which between September and March could fall as much as fourteen feet , restricting the navigable channels and increasing the perils from obstructions or sandbanks . 
 These difficulties are almost sufficient to account for the failure of the allies to bring about the quick decision that their overwhelming superiority in numbers and armament entitled them to hope for , but they were also handicapped by divided leadership , national jealousies and as time went on a sinking morale . For the Paraguayans these were the years in which the National Epic , as it is to @-@ day called , was forged out of countless deeds of heroism performed under leaders whose names are known in every home . 
 An additional cause of delay , according to Professor Williams , was the long pause after the debacle of the Battle of Curupayty when the Allies overestimated the strength both of the opposing army and of Humaitá : they allowed López almost a year to rebuild his forces , devastated at the Battle of Tuyutí . 
 = = = Endgame = = = 
 On 19 February 1868 when the river was unusually high six Brazilian ironclad vessels were ordered to dash past Humaitá , which they did with no great difficulty because by then the chain boom was anyway lying in the river bed . The Paraguayans stopped resupplying Humaitá by river and it was starved out . The fortress was finally captured in the Siege of Humaitá , an operation that culminated on 5 August 1868 . It was razed pursuant to the Treaty of the Triple Alliance . It was the decisive year of the Paraguayan War . 
 = Chrono Cross = 
 Chrono Cross ( クロノ ・ <unk> ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) for the PlayStation video game console . It is the successor to Chrono Trigger , which was released in 1995 for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . Chrono Cross was developed primarily by scenarist and director Masato Kato and other designers from Chrono Trigger , including art director Yasuyuki Honne and composer Yasunori Mitsuda . Nobuteru Yūki designed the characters of the game . 
 The story of Chrono Cross focuses on a teenage boy named Serge and a theme of parallel worlds . Faced with an alternate reality in which he died as a child , Serge endeavors to discover the truth of the two worlds ' divergence . The flashy thief Kid and many other characters assist him in his travels around the tropical archipelago El Nido . Struggling to uncover his past and find the mysterious Frozen Flame , Serge is chiefly challenged by Lynx , a shadowy antagonist working to apprehend him . 
 Upon its release in Japan in 1999 and North America in 2000 , Chrono Cross received high ratings and critical acclaim , earning a perfect 10 @.@ 0 score from GameSpot . The game shipped 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , leading to a Greatest Hits re @-@ release and continued life in Japan as part of the Ultimate Hits series . Chrono Cross was released on July 6 , 2011 , on the Japanese PlayStation Network and on November 8 , 2011 , in North America . Square also released a " Millennium Edition " featuring a calendar , clock , and music sampler disc . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Chrono Cross features standard role @-@ playing video game gameplay with some differences . Players advance the game by controlling the protagonist Serge through the game 's world , primarily by foot and boat . Navigation between areas is conducted via an overworld map , much like Chrono Trigger 's , depicting the landscape from a scaled @-@ down overhead view . Around the island world are villages , outdoor areas , and dungeons , through which the player moves in three dimensions . Locations such as cities and forests are represented by more realistically scaled field maps , in which players can converse with locals to procure items and services , solve puzzles and challenges , or encounter enemies . Like Chrono Trigger , the game features no random encounters ; enemies are openly visible on field maps or lie in wait to ambush the party . Touching the monster switches perspectives to a battle screen , in which players can physically attack , use " Elements " , defend , or run away from the enemy . Battles are turn @-@ based , allowing the player infinite time to select an action from the available menu . For both the playable characters and the computer @-@ controlled enemies , each attack reduces their number of hit points ( a numerically based life bar ) , which can be restored through some Elements . When a playable character loses all hit points , he or she faints . If all the player 's characters fall in battle , the game ends and must be restored from a previously saved chapter — except for specific storyline @-@ related battles that allow the player to lose . Chrono Cross 's developers aimed to break new ground in the genre , and the game features several innovations . For example , players can run away from all conflicts , including boss fights and the final battle . 
 = = = Battle and Elements = = = 
 The Element system of Chrono Cross handles all magic , consumable items , and character @-@ specific abilities . Elements unleash magic effects upon the enemy or party and must be equipped for use , much like the materia of 1997 's Final Fantasy VII . Elements can be purchased from shops or found in treasure chests littered throughout areas . Once acquired , they are allocated to a grid whose size and shape are unique to each character . They are ranked according to eight tiers ; certain high level Elements can only be assigned on equivalent tiers in a character 's grid . As the game progresses , the grid expands , allowing more Elements to be equipped and higher tiers to be accessed . Elements are divided into six paired oppositional types , or " colors , " each with a natural effect . Red ( fire / magma ) opposes Blue ( water / ice ) , Green ( wind / flora ) opposes Yellow ( earth / lightning ) , and White ( light / cosmos ) opposes Black ( darkness / gravity ) . Each character and enemy has an innate color , enhancing the power of using same @-@ color Elements while also making them weak against elements of the opposite color . Chrono Cross also features a " field effect " , which keeps track of Element color used in the upper corner of the battle screen . If the field is purely one color , the power of Elements of that color will be enhanced , while Elements of the opposite color will be weakened . Characters also innately learn some special techniques ( " Techs " ) that are unique to each character but otherwise act like Elements . Like Chrono Trigger , characters can combine certain Techs to make more powerful Double or Triple Techs . <unk> Elements may be used to restore hit points or heal status ailments after battle . 
 Another innovative aspect of Chrono Cross is its stamina bar . At the beginning of a battle , each character has seven points of stamina . When a character attacks or uses an Element , stamina is decreased proportionally to the potency of the attack . Stamina slowly recovers when the character defends or when other characters perform actions in battle . Characters with stamina below one point must wait to take action . Use of an Element reduces the user 's stamina bar by seven stamina points ; this often means that the user 's stamina gauge falls into the negative and the character must wait longer than usual to recover . With each battle , players can enhance statistics such as strength and defense . However , no system of experience points exists ; after four or five upgrades , statistics remain static until players defeat a boss . This adds a star to a running count shown on the status screen , which allows for another few rounds of statistical increases . Players can equip characters with weapons , armor , helmets , and accessories for use in battle ; for example , the " Power Seal " upgrades attack power . Items and equipment may be purchased or found on field maps , often in treasure chests . Unlike Elements , weapons and armor cannot merely be purchased with money ; instead , the player must obtain base materials — such as copper , bronze , or bone — for a blacksmith to forge for a fee . The items can later be disassembled into their original components at no cost . 
 = = = Parallel dimensions = = = 
 The existence of two major parallel dimensions , like time periods in Chrono Trigger , plays a significant role in the game . Players must go back and forth between the worlds to recruit party members , obtain items , and advance the plot . Much of the population of either world have counterparts in the other ; some party members can even visit their other versions . The player must often search for items or places found exclusively in one world . Events in one dimension sometimes have an impact in another — for instance , cooling scorched ground on an island in one world allows vegetation to grow in the other world . This system assists the presentation of certain themes , including the questioning of the importance of one 's past decisions and humanity 's role in destroying the environment . Rounding out the notable facets of Chrono Cross 's gameplay are the New Game + option and multiple endings . As in Chrono Trigger , players who have completed the game may choose to start the game over using data from the previous session . Character levels , learned techniques , equipment , and items gathered copy over , while acquired money and some story @-@ related items are discarded . On a New Game + , players can access twelve endings . Scenes viewed depend on players ' progress in the game before the final battle , which can be fought at any time in a New Game + file . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Chrono Cross features a diverse cast of 45 party members . Each character is outfitted with an innate Element affinity and three unique special abilities that are learned over time . If taken to the world opposite their own , characters react to their counterparts ( if available ) . Many characters tie in to crucial plot events . Since it is impossible to obtain all 45 characters in one playthrough , players must replay the game to witness everything . Through use of the New Game + feature , players can ultimately obtain all characters on one save file . Several characters speak with unique accents , including French and Australian English . 
 Serge , the game 's protagonist , is a 17 @-@ year @-@ old boy with blue hair who lives in the fishing village of Arni . One day , he slips into an alternate world in which he drowned ten years before . Determined to find the truth behind the incident , he follows a predestined course that leads him to save the world . He is assisted by Kid , a feisty , skilled thief who seeks the mythical Frozen Flame . Portrayed as willful and tomboyish due to her rough , thieving past , she helps Serge sneak into Viper Manor . Kid was raised by Lucca as a child , and vows to find and defeat Lynx , an anthropomorphic panther who burned down Lucca 's orphanage . A sadistic and cruel agent of the supercomputer FATE , Lynx is bent on finding Serge and succeeds in taking his body . He travels with Harle , a mysterious , playful girl dressed like a harlequin . Sent by the Dragon God to shadow Lynx and one day steal the Frozen Flame from Chronopolis , she painfully fulfills her duty though smitten with Serge . To this end , she helps Lynx manipulate the Acacia Dragoons , the powerful militia governing the islands of El Nido . As the Dragoons maintain order , they contend with Fargo , a former Dragoon turned pirate captain who holds a grudge against their leader , General Viper . Their home base , Viper Manor , is also infiltrated by Serge , Kid , and one of three characters — Nikki , a musician , Pierre , a hero @-@ in @-@ training , or Guile , a mysterious magician . Though <unk> with Serge initially , the Acacia Dragoons — whose ranks include the fierce warriors Karsh , Zoah , Marcy , and Glenn — later assist him when the militaristic nation of Porre invades the archipelago . The invasion brings Norris and <unk> to the islands , a heartful commander of an elite force and a prototype cyborg soldier , respectively . As they too seek the Frozen Flame , the plot unfolds amidst several other characters . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Chrono Cross begins with Serge located in El Nido , a tropical archipelago inhabited by ancient natives , mainland colonists , and beings called Demi @-@ humans . Serge slips into an alternate dimension in which he drowned on the beach ten years prior , and meets the thief , " Kid " . As his adventure proceeds from here , Serge is able to recruit a multitude of allies to his cause . While assisting Kid in a heist Viper Manor to steal the Frozen Flame , he learns that that ten years before the present , the universe split into two dimensions — one in which Serge lived , and one in which he perished . Through Kid 's Astral Amulet charm , Serge travels between the dimensions . At Fort <unk> the use of a <unk> artifact called the Dragon Tear , Lynx switches bodies with Serge . Unaware of the switch , Kid confides in Lynx , who stabs her as the real Serge helplessly watches . Lynx boasts of his victory and banishes Serge to a strange realm called the Temporal Vortex . He takes Kid under his wing , brainwashing her to believe the real Serge ( in Lynx 's body ) is her enemy . Serge escapes with help from Harle , although his new body turns him into a stranger in his own world , with all the allies he had gained up to that point abandoning him due to his new appearance . Discovering that his new body prevents him from traveling across the dimensions , he sets out to regain his former body and learn more of the universal split that occurred ten years earlier , gaining a new band of allies along the way .. He travels to a forbidden lagoon known as the Dead Sea — a wasteland frozen in time , dotted with futuristic ruins . At the center , he locates a man named Miguel and presumably Home world 's Frozen Flame . Charged with guarding the Dead Sea by an entity named FATE , Miguel and three visions of Crono , Marle , and Lucca from Chrono Trigger explain that Serge 's existence dooms Home world 's future to destruction at the hands of Lavos . To prevent Serge from obtaining the Frozen Flame , FATE destroys the Dead Sea . 
 Able to return to Another world , Serge allies with the Acacia Dragoons against Porre and locates that dimension 's Dragon Tear , allowing him to return to his human form . He then enters the Sea of Eden , Another world 's physical equivalent of the Dead Sea , finding a temporal research facility from the distant future called Chronopolis . Lynx and Kid are inside ; Serge defeats Lynx and the supercomputer FATE , allowing the six Dragons of El Nido to steal the Frozen Flame and retire to Terra Tower , a massive structure raised from the sea floor . Kid falls into a coma , and Harle bids the party goodbye to fly with the Dragons . Serge regroups his party and tends to Kid , who remains comatose . Continuing his adventure , he obtains and cleanses the corrupted Masamune sword from Chrono Trigger . He then uses the Dragon relics and shards of the Dragon Tears to create the mythic Element Chrono Cross . The spiritual power of the Masamune later allows him to lift Kid from her coma . At Terra Tower , the prophet of time , revealed to be Belthasar from Chrono Trigger , visits him with visions of Crono , Marle , and Lucca . Serge learns that the time research facility Chronopolis created El Nido thousands of years ago after a catastrophic experimental failure drew it to the past . The introduction of a temporally foreign object in history caused the planet to pull in a counterbalance from a different dimension . This was Dinopolis , a city of <unk> — parallel universe descendants of Chrono Trigger 's Reptites . The institutions warred and Chronopolis subjugated the <unk> . Humans captured their chief creation — the Dragon God , an entity capable of controlling nature . 
 Chronopolis divided this entity into six pieces and created an Elements system . FATE then terraformed an archipelago , erased the memories of most Chronopolis 's staff , and sent them to inhabit and populate its new paradise . Thousands of years later , a panther demon attacked a three @-@ year @-@ old Serge . His father took him to find assistance at <unk> , but Serge 's boat blew off course due to a raging magnetic storm caused by Schala . Schala , the princess of the Kingdom of Zeal , had long ago accidentally fallen to a place known as the Darkness Beyond Time and began merging with Lavos , the chief antagonist of Chrono Trigger . Schala 's storm nullified Chronopolis 's defenses and allowed Serge to contact the Frozen Flame ; approaching it healed Serge but corrupted his father . A circuit in Chronopolis then designated Serge " Arbiter " , simultaneously preventing FATE from using the Frozen Flame by extension . The Dragons were aware of this situation , creating a seventh Dragon under the storm 's cover named Harle , who manipulated Lynx to steal the Frozen Flame for the Dragons . 
 After Serge returned home , FATE sent Lynx to kill Serge , hoping that it would release the Arbiter lock . Ten years after Serge drowned , the thief Kid — presumably on Belthasar 's orders — went back in time to save Serge and split the dimensions . FATE , locked out of the Frozen Flame again , knew that Serge would one day cross to Another world and prepared to apprehend him . Lynx switched bodies with Serge to dupe the biological check of Chronopolis on the Frozen Flame . Belthasar then reveals that these events were part of a plan he had orchestrated named Project Kid . Serge continues to the top of Terra Tower and defeats the Dragon God . Continuing to the beach where the split in dimensions had occurred , Serge finds apparitions of Crono , Marle , and Lucca once more . They reveal that Belthasar 's plan was to empower Serge to free Schala from melding with Lavos , lest they evolve into the " Time Devourer " , a creature capable of destroying spacetime . Lucca explains that Kid is Schala 's clone , sent to the modern age to take part in Project Kid . Serge uses a Time Egg — given to him by Belthasar — to enter the Darkness Beyond Time and vanquish the Time Devourer , separating Schala from Lavos and restores the dimensions to one . Thankful , Schala muses on evolution and the struggle of life and returns Serge to his home , noting that he will forget the entire adventure . She then seemingly records the experience in her diary , noting she will always be searching for Serge in this life and beyond , signing the entry as Schala " Kid " Zeal , implying that she and kid have merged and became whole again . A wedding photo of Kid and an obscured male sits on the diary 's desk . Scenes then depict a real @-@ life Kid searching for someone in a modern city , intending to make players entertain the possibility that their own Kid is searching for them . The ambiguous ending leaves the events of the characters ' lives following the game up to interpretation . 
 = = = Relation to Radical Dreamers = = = 
 Chrono Cross employs story arcs , characters , and themes from Radical Dreamers , a Satellaview side story to Chrono Trigger released in Japan . An illustrated text adventure , Radical Dreamers was created to wrap up an unresolved plot line of Chrono Trigger . Though it borrows from Radical Dreamers in its exposition , Chrono Cross is not a remake of Radical Dreamers , but a larger effort to fulfill that game 's purpose ; the plots of the games are irreconcilable . To resolve continuity issues and acknowledge Radical Dreamers , the developers of Chrono Cross suggested the game happened in a parallel dimension . A notable difference between the two games is that Magus — present in Radical Dreamers as Gil — is absent from Chrono Cross . Director Masato Kato originally planned for Magus to appear in disguise as Guile , but scrapped the idea due to plot difficulties . In the DS version of Chrono Trigger , Kato teases the possibility of an amnesiac Magus . 
 = = Development = = 
 Square began planning Chrono Cross immediately after the release of Xenogears in 1998 ( which itself was originally conceived as a sequel to the SNES game ) . Chrono Trigger 's scenario director Masato Kato had brainstormed ideas for a sequel as early as 1996 , following the release of Radical Dreamers . Square 's managers selected a team , appointed Hiromichi Tanaka producer , and asked Kato to direct and develop a new Chrono game in the spirit of Radical Dreamers . Kato thought Dreamers was released in a " half @-@ finished state " , and wanted to continue the story of the character Kid . Kato and Tanaka decided to produce an indirect sequel . They acknowledged that Square would soon re @-@ release Chrono Trigger as part of Final Fantasy Chronicles , which would give players a chance to catch up on the story of Trigger before playing Cross . Kato thought that using a different setting and cast for Chrono Cross would allow players unfamiliar with Chrono Trigger to play Cross without becoming confused . The Chrono Cross team decided against integrating heavy use of time travel into the game , as they thought it would be " rehashing and cranking up the volume of the last game " . Masato Kato cited the belief , " there 's no use in making something similar to before [ sic ] " , and noted , " we 're not so weak nor cheap as to try to make something exactly the same as Trigger ... Accordingly , Chrono Cross is not Chrono Trigger 2 . It doesn 't simply follow on from Trigger , but is another , different Chrono that interlaces with Trigger . " Kato and Tanaka further explained their intentions after the game 's release : 
 We didn 't want to directly extend Chrono Trigger into a sequel , but create a new Chrono with links to the original . Yes , the platform changed ; and yes , there were many parts that changed dramatically from the previous work . But in my view , the whole point in making Chrono Cross was to make a new Chrono with the best available skills and technologies of today . I never had any intentions of just taking the system from Trigger and moving it onto the PlayStation console . That 's why I believe that Cross is Cross , and NOT Trigger 2 . 
 When creating a series , one method is to carry over a basic system , improving upon it as the series progresses , but our stance has been to create a completely new and different world from the ground up , and to restructure the former style . Therefore , Chrono Cross is not a sequel to Chrono Trigger . Had it been , it would have been called Chrono Trigger 2 . Our main objective for Chrono Cross was to share a little bit of the Chrono Trigger worldview , while creating a completely different game as a means of providing new entertainment to the player . This is mainly due to the transition in platform generation from the SNES to the PS . The method I mentioned above , about improving upon a basic system , has inefficiencies , in that it 's impossible to maximize the console 's performance as the console continues to make improvements in leaps and bounds . Although essentially an RPG , at its core , it is a computer game , and I believe that games should be expressed with a close connection to the console 's performance . Therefore , in regards to game development , our goal has always been to " express the game utilizing the maximum performance of the console at that time . " I strongly believe that anything created in this way will continue to be innovative . 
 Full production began on Chrono Cross in mid @-@ 1998 . The Chrono Cross team reached 80 members at its peak , with additional personnel of 10 – 20 cut @-@ scene artists and 100 quality assurance testers . The team felt pressure to live up to the work of Chrono Trigger 's " Dream Team " development group , which included famous Japanese manga artist Akira Toriyama . Kato and Tanaka hired Nobuteru Yūki for character design and Yasuyuki Honne for art direction and concept art . The event team originally envisioned a short game , and planned a system by which players would befriend any person in a town for alliance in battle . Developers brainstormed traits and archetypes during the character @-@ creation process , originally planning 64 characters with unique endings that could vary in three different ways per character . Kato described the character creation process : " Take Pierre , for example : we started off by saying we wanted a wacko fake hero like Tata from Trigger . We also said things like ' we need at least one powerful mom ' , ' no way we 're gonna go without a twisted brat ' , and so on so forth . " 
 As production continued , the length of Cross increased , leading the event team to reduce the number of characters to 45 and scrap most of the alternate endings . Developers humorously named the character Pip " <unk> " in Japanese ( which means " packed " ) as a pun on their attempts to pack as much content into the game as possible . To avoid the burden of writing unique , accented dialogue for several characters , team member Kiyoshi Yoshii coded a system that produces accents by modifying basic text for certain characters . Art director Nobuteru Yuuki initially wanted the characters to appear in a more chibi format with diminutive proportions . The game world 's fusion of high technology and ethnic , tribal atmospheres proved challenging at first . He later recalled striving to harmonize the time period 's level of technology , especially as reflected in characters ' garb . 
 The Chrono Cross team devised an original battle system using a stamina bar and Elements . Kato planned the system around allowing players to avoid repetitive gameplay ( also known as " grinding " ) to gain combat experience . Hiromichi Tanaka likened the Elements system to card games , hoping players would feel a sense of complete control in battle . The team programmed each battle motion manually instead of performing motion capture . Developers strove to include tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor in the battle system 's techniques and animations to distance the game from the Final Fantasy franchise . Masato Kato planned for the game 's setting to feature a small archipelago , for fear that players would become confused traveling in large areas with respect to parallel worlds . He hoped El Nido would still impart a sense of grand scale , and the development team pushed hardware limitations in creating the game 's world . To create field maps , the team modeled locations in 3D , then chose the best angle for 2D rendering . The programmers of Chrono Cross did not use any existing Square programs or routines to code the game , instead writing new , proprietary systems . Other innovations included variable @-@ frame rate code for fast @-@ forward and slow @-@ motion gameplay ( awarded as a bonus for completing the game ) and a " CD @-@ read swap " system to allow quick data retrieval . 
 Masato Kato directed and wrote the main story , leaving sub @-@ plots and minor character events to other staff . The event team sometimes struggled to mesh their work on the plot due to the complexity of the parallel worlds concept . Masato Kato confirmed that Cross featured a central theme of parallel worlds , as well as the fate of Schala , which he was previously unable to expound upon in Chrono Trigger . Concerning the ending sequences showing Kid searching for someone in a modern city , he hoped to make players realize that alternate futures and possibilities may exist in their own lives , and that this realization would " not ... stop with the game " . He later added , " Paraphrasing one novelist 's favorite words , what 's important is not the message or theme , but how it is portrayed as a game . Even in Cross , it was intentionally made so that the most important question was left unanswered . " Kato described the finished story as " ole ' boy @-@ meets @-@ girl type of story " with sometimes @-@ shocking twists . Kato rode his motorcycle to relieve the stress of the game 's release schedule . He continued refining event data during the final stages of development while the rest of the team undertook debugging and quality control work . Square advertised the game by releasing a short demo of the first chapter with purchases of Legend of Mana . The North American version of Cross required three months of translation and two months of debugging before release . Richard Honeywood translated , working with Kato to rewrite certain dialogue for ease of comprehension in English . He also added instances of wordplay and alliteration to compensate for difficult Japanese jokes . To streamline translation for all 45 playable characters , Honeywood created his own version of the accent generator which needed to be more robust than the simple verbal tics of the Japanese cast . Although the trademark Chrono Cross was registered in the European Union , the game was not released in Europe . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Chrono Cross was scored by freelance video game music composer Yasunori Mitsuda , who previously worked on Chrono Trigger . Director Masato Kato personally commissioned Mitsuda 's involvement , citing a need for the " Chrono sound " . Kato envisioned a " Southeast Asian feel , mixed with the foreign tastes and the tones of countries such as Greece " ; Mitsuda centered his work around old world cultural influences , including Mediterranean , Fado , Celtic , and percussive African music . Mitsuda cited visual inspiration for songs : " All of my subjects are taken from scenery . I love artwork . " To complement the theme of parallel worlds , he gave Another and Home respectively dark and bright moods , and hoped players would feel the emotions of " ' burning soul , ' ' lonely world , ' and ' unforgettable memories ' " . Mitsuda and Kato planned music samples and sound effects with the philosophy of " a few sounds with a lot of content " . 
 Xenogears contributor Tomohiko Kira played guitar on the beginning and ending themes . Noriko Mitose , as selected by Masato Kato , sang the ending song — " Radical Dreamers – The Unstolen Jewel " . Ryo Yamazaki , a synthesizer programmer for Square Enix , helped Mitsuda transfer his ideas to the PlayStation 's sound capabilities ; Mitsuda was happy to accomplish even half of what he envisioned . Certain songs were ported from the score of Radical Dreamers , such as Gale , Frozen Flame , and Viper Mansion . Other entries in the soundtrack contain leitmotifs from Chrono Trigger and Radical Dreamers . The melody of Far Promise ~ Dream Shore features prominently in The Dream That Time Dreams and Voyage ~ Another World . Masato Kato faced internal opposition in hiring Noriko Mitose : 
 Personally , for me , the biggest pressure was coming from the ending theme song . From the start of the project , I had already planned to make the ending into a Japanese song , but the problem was now " who was going to sing the song ? " There was a lot of pressure from the people in the PR division to get someone big and famous to sing it , but I was totally against the idea . And as usual , I didn 't heed to the surrounding complaints , but this time , there was a pretty tough struggle . 
 Production required six months of work . After wrapping , Mitsuda and Kato played Chrono Cross to record their impressions and observe how the tracks intermingled with scenes ; the ending theme brought Kato to tears . Players who preordered the game received a sampler disc of five songs , and Square released a three @-@ CD official soundtrack in Japan after the game 's debut . The soundtrack won the Gold Prize for the PlayStation Awards of 2000 . In 2005 , Square Enix reissued the soundtrack due to popular demand . Earlier that year , Mitsuda announced a new arranged Chrono Cross album , scheduled for release in July 2005 . Mitsuda 's contract with Square gave him ownership and full rights to the soundtrack of Chrono Cross . It was delayed , and at a Play ! A Video Game Symphony concert in May 2006 , he revealed it would feature acoustic music and would be " out within the year " , later backtracking and alleging a 2007 release date . Mitsuda posted a streaming sample of a finished track on his personal website in January 2009 , and has stated the album will be released to coincide with the 10th anniversary of the Japanese debut of Cross . Music from Chrono Cross has been featured in the September 2009 Symphonic Fantasies concerts , part of the Symphonic Game Music Concert series conducted by Arnie Roth . The track " Dimension Break " was remixed by Mitsuda for inclusion on the charity album Play For Japan in 2011 . That same year , the Chrono Cross theme " Time 's Scar " was voted first place in Hardcore Gaming 101 's " Best Video Game Music of All Time " poll . " Time 's Scar " was also featured in 2012 by NPR in a program about classically arranged video game scores . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Chrono Cross shipped 850 @,@ 000 units in Japan and 650 @,@ 000 abroad . It was re @-@ released once in the United States as a Sony Greatest Hits title and again as part of the Japanese Ultimate Hits series . Chrono Cross was also released on the PlayStation Network in Japan on July 6 , 2011 , and in North America on November 8 , 2011 , but a PAL region release has not been announced . Critics praised the game 's complex plot , innovative battle system , varied characters , moving score , vibrant graphics , and success in breaking convention with its predecessor . Electronic Gaming Monthly gave Chrono Cross a Gold Award , scoring it 10 / 10 / 9 @.@ 5 in their three reviewer format ; the first review declared the game to be " a masterpiece , plain and simple " . GameSpot awarded the game a perfect 10 , one of only nine games in the 40 @,@ 000 games listed on Gamespot to have been given the score , and its Console Game of the Year Award for 2000 . IGN gave the game a score of 9 @.@ 7 , and Cross appeared 89th in its 2008 Top 100 games list . Famitsu rated the game 36 out of 40 from four reviewers . As of December 2010 , GameRankings rates Chrono Cross at 92 % . 
 Reviewers thought the game 's flaws were its vague ending , confusing plot elements , and narrative pacing problems . Fan reaction was largely positive , though certain fans complained that the game was a far departure from its predecessor , Chrono Trigger ; Chrono Cross broke convention by featuring more characters , fewer double and triple techs , fewer instances of time travel , and few appearances of Trigger characters and locations . Producer Hiromichi Tanaka and director Masato Kato were aware of the changes in development , specifically intending to provide an experience different from Chrono Trigger . Kato anticipated and rebuffed this discontent before the game 's release , wondering what the Chrono title meant to these fans and whether his messages ever " really got through to them " . He continued , " Cross is undoubtedly the highest quality Chrono that we can create right now . ( I won 't say the ' best ' Chrono , but ) If you can 't accept that , then I 'm sorry to say this but I guess your Chrono and my Chrono have taken totally different paths . But I would like to say , thank you for falling in love with Trigger so much . " Tanaka added , " Of course , the fans of the original are very important , but what innovation can come about when you 're bound to the past ? I believe that gameplay should evolve with the hardware . " 
 = = Sequel = = 
 There is no planned continuation of the Chrono series . In 2001 , Hironobu Sakaguchi revealed the company 's staff wanted to develop a new game and were discussing script ideas . Although Kato was interested in a new title , the project had not been greenlighted . Square then registered a trademark for Chrono Break worldwide , causing speculation concerning a new sequel . Nothing materialized , and the trademark was dropped in the United States on November 13 , 2003 , though it still stands in Japan and the European Union . Kato later returned to Square Enix as a freelancer to work on Children of Mana and Dawn of Mana . Mitsuda also expressed interest in scoring a new Chrono series game . In 2005 , Kato and Mitsuda teamed up to do a game called Deep Labyrinth , and again in 2008 for Sands of Destruction , both for the Nintendo DS . The February 2008 issue of Game Informer ranked the Chrono series eighth among the " Top Ten Sequels in Demand " , naming the games " steadfast legacies in the Square Enix catalogue " and asking " what 's the damn holdup ? ! " In Electronic Gaming Monthly 's June 2008 " Retro Issue " , writer Jeremy Parish cited Chrono as the franchise video game fans would be most thrilled to see a sequel to . In the May 1 , 2009 , issue of Famitsu , Chrono Trigger placed 14th out of 50 in a vote of most @-@ wanted sequels by the magazine 's readers . At E3 2009 , SE Senior Vice President Shinji Hashimoto remarked , " If people want a sequel , they should buy more ! " 
 = Hurricane Ginger = 
 Hurricane Ginger was the second longest @-@ lasting Atlantic hurricane on record . The eighth tropical cyclone and fifth hurricane of the 1971 Atlantic hurricane season , Ginger spent 27 @.@ 25 days as a tropical cyclone , lasting from September 6 to October 3 . Twenty of those days ( September 11 @-@ September 30 ) , Ginger was classified as a hurricane . The storm formed northeast of the Bahamas , and for the first nine days of its duration tracked generally eastward or northeastward while gradually strengthening to peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . On September 14 , Ginger slowed and turned to a general westward track , passing near Bermuda on September 23 . There , the hurricane produced gusty winds and high waves , but no damage . 
 While over the western Atlantic Ocean , Ginger became the last target of Project Stormfury , which sought to weaken hurricanes by depositing silver iodide into tropical cyclone rainbands . Ginger ultimately struck North Carolina on September 30 as a minimal hurricane , lashing the coastline with gusty winds that caused power outages across the region . Heavy rainfall flooded towns and left severe crop damage , with 3 million bushels of corn and 1 million bushels of soybean lost . Damage in the state was estimated at $ 10 million ( 1971 US dollars , $ 58 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) . Further north , moderate precipitation and winds spread through the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , although no significant damage was reported outside North Carolina . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Ginger originated in a cold @-@ core upper @-@ level low that persisted for several days in early September in the Western Atlantic Ocean . The upper @-@ level low was located within a large , persistent area of convection from the Gulf of Mexico through the central Atlantic , which resembled the Intertropical Convergence Zone but at a higher latitude . The convective feature was influenced by an anticyclone located over northern South America , which was opposite of the typical flow for September . The anticyclone also led to the formation of Hurricane Fern , Tropical Storm Heidi , and two tropical depressions . By September 5 , the low had descended to the surface as its thermal structure warmed , and the next day it developed into a tropical depression about 235 mi ( 375 km ) northeast of the Bahamas . 
 After forming , the depression moved slowly southeastward for about 24 hours before turning to the northeast , slowly organizing in the process . On September 10 , the depression turned eastward , and later that day intensified into Tropical Storm Ginger , the seventh named storm of the year in the Atlantic , about 325 mi ( 525 km ) south of Bermuda . The storm quickly intensified , and within 24 hours reached winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , making it a hurricane . It turned to the northeast , passing well to the east of Bermuda . Late on September 13 , Ginger attained its minimum barometric pressure of 959 mbar ( 28 @.@ 32 inHg ) , and early the next day reached peak maximum sustained winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . After reaching a position about halfway between Bermuda and the Azores , the hurricane 's eastward movement halted due to a building ridge to its north and east . It turned sharply southward before turning and beginning a westerly drift , during which Ginger weakened to minimal hurricane status . 
 For about six days , Ginger maintained minimal hurricane status . As it meandered over the central Atlantic Ocean , it maintained an unusually large eye , reaching 80 mi ( 130 km ) in diameter . On September 18 , Ginger turned to the south and slowly executed a tight counterclockwise loop within three days . By September 21 , the hurricane was tracking south of due west , and the next day suddenly intensified to winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Its westward track briefly posed a threat to Bermuda , although Ginger passed 115 mi ( 185 km ) south of the island on September 23 while slowly weakening . On September 24 , Ginger decelerated before beginning a turn to the southwest . By September 26 , Ginger briefly weakened to minimal hurricane strength , although re @-@ intensification resumed as the track turned to the west and northwest . Around that time , Ginger absorbed the smaller and weaker Tropical Storm Janice to its southeast . 
 For three days , beginning on September 26 , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration deployed planes into the hurricane as part of Project Stormfury , the fourth hurricane to be a part of the weather control experiment . The plane dropped silver iodide into the center of the hurricane , although there was no effect due to Ginger 's large eye and diffuse nature ; this was the last seeding done by the project . By September 28 , Ginger was moving northwestward toward North Carolina and was steadily intensifying . At around 06 : 00 UTC the next day , the hurricane reached a secondary peak intensity of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , which it maintained for about 18 hours . Afterward , Ginger slowly weakened , and late on September 30 it made landfall near Morehead City , North Carolina , with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . It quickly deteriorated over land , weakening first to a tropical storm and then to a tropical depression by late on October 1 . Ginger turned to the north , entered southern Virginia , and later turned to the east . On October 3 , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while crossing Hampton Roads into the Atlantic Ocean . The remnants of Ginger continued east @-@ southeastward until being absorbed by a cold front on October 5 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The threat of the hurricane in Bermuda prompted the British Royal Navy to evacuate a ship , and also resulted in two cruise ships leaving early . The United States military also evacuated some planes and secured the units that remained . Officials closed all of the island 's schools during Ginger 's passage . 
 Before Ginger struck North Carolina , the American Red Cross set up 28 emergency shelters in six counties , where about 5 @,@ 500 people stayed during the storm . The National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane watch from Wilmington , North Carolina , to Virginia Beach , Virginia , with gale warnings extending northward to Rehoboth Beach , Delaware . United States military officials evacuated planes and ships from the Norfolk , Virginia , region , in addition to flying planes down the coast to warn boaters of the approaching storm . Ferry services around the Outer Banks were canceled during the storm 's passage , while the Coast Guard ordered the evacuation of workers in three lighthouses . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As the hurricane passed south of Bermuda on September 23 , it produced heavy waves , as well as gale force winds for 17 hours . Naval Air Station Bermuda reported peak gusts of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . There was no reported damage , and the hurricane 's passage failed to alleviate persistent drought conditions . 
 While Ginger was still in the vicinity of Bermuda , it produced high swells and riptides along the East Coast of the United States , prompting the issuing of small craft warnings from Florida to North Carolina . Wave heights reached 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) in Sebastian , Florida , and one person was killed in St. Augustine from drowning . There were also initial reports of two missing people in Neptune Beach , Florida , but they were not listed as casualties in the year @-@ end hurricane summary . 
 As it moved ashore in North Carolina , Ginger produced a storm tide of around 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) along the Outer Banks and up to 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) in Pamlico Sound . The storm dropped heavy rainfall peaking at 15 @.@ 58 in ( 396 mm ) in Bodie Island along the Outer Banks , making Ginger among the wettest tropical cyclones in the state . Rainfall from the storm extended southwestward into South Carolina , where precipitation reached 4 @.@ 98 in ( 126 mm ) in Cheraw . In Atlantic Beach , North Carolina , wind gusts reached 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) , the highest associated with Ginger in the United States . The hurricane had a large wind field upon moving ashore , affecting a large portion of North Carolina ; one county official considered Ginger the largest storm in the region since 1936 . 
 Strong winds from Ginger damaged store fronts and windows , and also downed power lines and trees . Morehead City , where the hurricane moved ashore , lost power and had debris strewn across the streets . The nearby cities of New Bern , Beaufort , and Atlantic Beach also lost power , and one company had 6 @,@ 000 customers without power . Heavy rainfall caused the Neuse and Trent rivers to exceed their banks , resulting in flooding . Several oil tanks along the rivers broke open , creating dangerous boating conditions . Up to 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water from the Pungo River flooded most of the city of Belhaven , and similar flooding occurred in Washington , entering dozens of buildings and houses . Across the region , the combination of high winds , tides , and flooding closed several bridges and roads , including a portion of U.S. Highway 70 . The winds also destroyed several mobile homes , although coastal damage was less than expected . During Ginger 's passage , the Salvation Army and Red Cross provided more than 3 @,@ 000 people with food assistance . 
 Further inland , the combination of strong winds and rains left heavy crop damage , destroying 3 million bushels of corn and another million bushels of soybeans ; losses to the corn crop were mitigated due to about half of the crop having been harvested before the storm 's arrival . Heavy damage was also reported to the peanut crop as well as to various fruits and vegetables . In some locations , up to 15 % of the cotton crop was lost , particularly in the northeastern portion of the state . In 45 counties in the eastern portion of the state , farmers affected by the hurricane were eligible for loans from the Farmers Home Administration , following federal approval from United States President Richard Nixon . Governor Robert W. Scott requested federal disaster aid for 24 counties , which was denied . Damage in North Carolina was estimated at $ 10 million ( 1971 USD , $ 58 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) , of which about $ 1 million ( 1971 USD , $ 5 @.@ 84 million 2016 USD ) was from coastal flooding . One death occurred in Washington when a vehicle accident was possibly caused by a wind gust ; however , it was not conclusively linked to Ginger . 
 As the storm crossed into Virginia , it continued to produce heavy rainfall , including a total of 7 @.@ 61 in ( 193 mm ) in Norfolk . Near the border between Virginia and North Carolina , the storm produced tides of up to 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal . Gusty winds of over 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) downed a few trees , causing scattered power outages . Above @-@ normal tides and waves caused moderate to heavy beach erosion in Virginia Beach . Further north , Ginger produced above @-@ normal tides , light winds , and scattered rainfall along the Delmarva Peninsula and northward through New York . 
 = = Record longevity = = 
 Hurricane Ginger formed on September 6 and lasted until October 3 , for a total of 27 @.@ 25 days . Its duration surpassed that of Hurricane Inga in 1969 , which was the previous record @-@ holder , by three days . In 2003 , it was discovered that the 1899 San Ciriaco hurricane lasted as a tropical cyclone longer than Ginger , although its duration as a tropical cyclone was not continuous . This made Ginger the second longest @-@ lived of any Atlantic hurricane , but it remains the storm that lasted the most consecutive days as a tropical cyclone in the basin . 
 Ginger spent 20 days as a hurricane from September 11 to September 30 , one of the longest durations on record at that intensity . In addition , Ginger co @-@ existed with several other tropical cyclones , including on September 11 when there were four named storms at the same time , a rare occurrence ; the others were Hurricane Edith , Hurricane Fern , and Tropical Storm Heidi . 
 = Ontario Highway 90 = 
 King 's Highway 90 , commonly referred to as Highway 90 , was a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The route connected Barrie with the town of Angus and CFB Borden . The highway was designated in 1937 . During the early 1960s , the highway was realigned within Barrie in order to have it interchange with Highway 400 ; originally the route followed Tiffin Street . At the beginning of 1998 , the entire highway was transferred to the City of Barrie and Simcoe County ; it is now known as Simcoe County Road 90 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Today , the former routing of Highway 90 is known as Dunlop Street within Barrie and Simcoe County Road 90 outside of the city . The route begins at a split between Cambrai Road , which provides access to Camp Borden , and Simcoe County Road 10 , which continues south to Alliston and Tottenham . The four lane Simcoe County Road 90 progresses north through the centre of Angus . North of the Barrie Collingwood Railway overhead , it acts as the principal commercial strip for the town . North of Angus , the highway makes a broad 90 degree turn to the east and skims the southern edge of the <unk> Wetlands , an internationally significant bog . 
 East of the swamp , the road enters Essa , where it intersects the <unk> Road ( Simcoe County Road 40 ) . From there to Barrie , the highway passes through a largely rural area . It intersects former Highway 131 , now Simcoe County Road 27 , then enters Barrie at Miller Drive , curving northeast . East of Ferndale Drive , the route crosses Highway 400 at Exit 96 . Shortly thereafter , as it approaches the waterfront of Kempenfelt Bay , the route ends at High Street in downtown Barrie . 
 Simcoe County Road 90 is two lanes wide between McKinnon Road , north of Angus , and Ferndale Drive in Barrie , although a passing lane is provided for eastbound traffic between Angus and Essa . The road also widens to four lanes briefly at the junction with former Highway 131 west of Barrie , as well as within the city and within Angus . The land use surrounding the route is mixed , with pastures and forests composing the majority of the setting . Residences and small businesses are also scattered throughout the length of the route . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 90 was originally assumed by the Department of Highways ( DHO ) , the predecessor to today 's Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) , during the late 1930s . The primary purpose for the highway was to connect the CFB Borden military base at Angus with the main north – south routes of central Ontario . At that time , these were Highway 27 and Highway 11 . On October 6 , 1937 , the DHO designated the Barrie to Angus Road as King 's Highway 90 . The initially unimproved road was paved shortly after the outbreak of World War II ; a contract was awarded to Brennan Paving of Hamilton during the autumn of 1939 , and work completed by the end of the year . 
 Initially , Highway 90 followed Tiffin Street through Barrie , ending just short of the waterfront of Kempenfelt Bay at the intersection of Essa Street ( Highway 27 ) and Bradford Street ( Highway 11 / 27 ) . However , during the early 1960s the route was modified so as to provide an interchange with Highway 400 . A new interchange was constructed during the late 1950s at what was then known as Elizabeth Street in order to provide better access to downtown Barrie from the freeway . By 1960 , Highway 90 had been rerouted northwest along Ferndale Drive and northeast along Elizabeth Street . Though it still ended at Bradford Street , it intersected it 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) to the north . By 1961 , Elizabeth Street was renamed as Dunlop Street West . By 1964 , Dunlop Street was extended southwest of Ferndale Drive to merge with Tiffin Street at Miller Drive ( the present city limits ) . 
 The highway remained unchanged for over three decades , with the exception of a Connecting Link agreement established between the MTO and the City of Barrie . However , during the late 1990s , the MTO transferred many highways to lower levels of government as a cost @-@ cutting measure . Highway 90 was transferred to Simcoe County on January 1 , 1998 . The Connecting Link through Barrie was also discontinued . Simcoe County has since renamed its portion of the route as Simcoe County Road 10 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 90 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = = Current construction = = 
 The current construction to widen the highway to 5 lanes could last until 2020 . 
 = Bjarke Ingels = 
 Bjarke <unk> Ingels ( Danish pronunciation : [ ˈb ̥ <unk> ̊ ə ˈb ̥ <unk> ̊ <unk> <unk> ̩ s ] ; born 2 October 1974 ) is a Danish architect . He is the founder and creative partner of Bjarke Ingels Group ( BIG ) since 2005 . He is known for buildings that defy traditional architectural conventions and dimensions , ranging from representations of mountains to snowflakes . His designs incorporate sustainable development ideas and sociological concepts , along with sloped lines that are shaped to their surroundings . 
 In Denmark , he became known for designing two housing complexes in Ørestad : VM Houses and Mountain Dwellings . In 2006 he started his own architecture firm , Bjarke Ingels Group , which grew to a staff of 400 by 2015 . Some of their best known projects are the 8 House housing complex , a zero @-@ emission resort on Zira Island in Azerbaijan described as " one of the world 's largest eco @-@ developments " , the VIA ( West 57 ) apartments in Manhattan , the Google North Bayshore headquarters ( co @-@ designed with Thomas Heatherwick ) , the <unk> park ; and the Amager Bakke waste @-@ to @-@ energy plant . 
 Since 2009 , Ingels has won numerous architectural competitions . In October 2011 , the Wall Street Journal named him the Innovator of the Year for architecture . He moved to New York City in 2012 , where in addition to the VIA apartments , BIG won a design contest for improving Manhattan 's flood resistance after Hurricane Sandy , and are designing the new Two World Trade Center building . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Ingels was born in Copenhagen in 1974 to an engineer father and a dentist mother . Hoping to become a cartoonist , he began to study architecture in 1993 at the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts as he thought it would help him to improve his drawing skills . Only after he had been studying for a couple of years did he really take an interest in architecture . He continued his studies at the Escola <unk> Superior d <unk> in Barcelona , and returned to Copenhagen to receive his diploma in 1999 . As a third @-@ year student in Barcelona , he set up his first practice and won his first competition . 
 Alongside his architectural practice , Ingels has been a Visiting Professor at the Rice University School of Architecture , the Harvard Graduate School of Design , the Columbia University Graduate School of Architecture , Planning and Preservation , and mostly recently , the Yale School of Architecture . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1998 – 2005 = = = 
 From 1998 to 2001 , Ingels worked for Rem Koolhaas at the Office for Metropolitan Architecture in Rotterdam . In 2001 , he returned to Copenhagen to set up the architectural practice PLOT together with Belgian OMA colleague Julien de <unk> . The company received national and international attention for their inventive designs . They were awarded a Golden Lion at the Venice Biennale of Architecture in 2004 for a proposal for a new music house for Stavanger , Norway . 
 PLOT completed a 2 @,@ 500 m2 ( 27 @,@ 000 sq ft ) series of five open @-@ air swimming pools , Islands Brygge Harbour Bath , on the Copenhagen Harbour front with special facilities for children in 2003 . They also completed Maritime Youth House , a sailing club and a youth house at Sundby Harbour , Copenhagen . 
 The first major achievement for PLOT was the award @-@ winning VM Houses in Ørestad , Copenhagen , in 2005 . Inspired by Le Corbusier 's Unité d <unk> concept , they designed two residential blocks , in the shape of the letters V and M ( as seen from the sky ) ; the M House with 95 units , was completed in 2004 , and the V House , with 114 units , in 2005 . The design places strong emphasis on daylight , privacy and views . Rather than looking over the neighboring building , all of the apartments have diagonal views of the surrounding fields . Corridors are short and bright , rather like open bullet holes through the building . There are some 80 different types of apartment in the complex , adaptable to individual needs . The building garnered Ingels and <unk> the Forum AID Award for the best building in Scandinavia in 2006 . Ingels lived in the complex until 2008 when he moved into the adjacent Mountain Dwellings . 
 In 2005 , Ingels also completed the Helsingør Psychiatric Hospital in Helsingør , a hospital which is shaped like a snowflake . Each room of the hospital was specially designed to have a view , with two groups of rooms facing the lake , and one group facing the surrounding hills . 
 = = = 2006 – 2008 = = = 
 After PLOT was disbanded at the end of 2005 , in January 2006 Ingels made Bjarke Ingels Group ( BIG ) its own company . It grew to 400 employees by 2016 . 
 BIG began working on the 25 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 82 ft ) Mountain Dwellings on the VM houses site in the Ørestad district of Copenhagen , combining 10 @,@ 000 m2 ( 110 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of housing with 20 @,@ 000 m2 ( 220 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of parking and parking space , with a mountain theme throughout the building . The apartments scale the diagonally sloping roof of the parking garage , from street level to 11th floor , creating an artificial , south facing ' mountainside ' where each apartment has a terrace measuring around 93 m2 ( 1 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The parking garage contains spots for 480 cars . The space has up to 16 @-@ metre @-@ high ( 52 ft ) ceilings , and the underside of each level of apartments is covered in aluminium painted in a distinctive colour scheme of psychedelic hues which , as a tribute to Danish 1960s and ' 70s furniture designer Verner Panton , are all exact matches of the colours he used in his designs . The colours move , symbolically , from green for the earth over yellow , orange , dark orange , hot pink , purple to bright blue for the sky . The northern and western facades of the parking garage depict a 3 @,@ 000 m2 ( 32 @,@ 000 sq ft ) photorealistic mural of Himalayan peaks . The parking garage is protected from wind and rain by huge shiny aluminium plates , perforated to let in light and allow for natural ventilation . By controlling the size of the holes , the sheeting was transformed into the giant <unk> image of Mount Everest . Completed in October 2008 , it received the World Architecture Festival Housing Award ( 2008 ) , Forum AID Award ( 2009 ) and the <unk> Residential Development Award at Cannes ( 2009 ) . Dwell magazine has stated that the Mountain Dwellings " stand as a beacon for architectural possibility and stylish multifamily living in a dense , design @-@ savvy city . " 
 Their third housing project , 8 House , commissioned by Store <unk> Holding , <unk> A / S and Danish Oil Company A / S in 2006 and completed in October 2010 , was the largest private development ever undertaken in Denmark and in Scandinavia , combining retail with commercial row houses and apartments . It is also Ingels ' third housing development in Ørestad , following VM Houses and Mountain Dwellings . The sloping , bow @-@ shaped 10 @-@ storey building consists of 61 @,@ 000 m2 ( 660 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of three different types of residential housing and 10 @,@ 000 m2 ( 110 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of retail premises and offices , providing views over the fields and marches of <unk> <unk> to the south . The 476 @-@ unit apartment building forms a figure 8 around two courtyards . Noted for its green roof which won it the 2010 Scandinavian Green Roof Award , Ingels explained , " The parts of the green roof that remain were seen by the client as integral to the building as they are visible from the ground . These not only provide the environmental benefits that we all know come from green roofs , but also add to the visual drama and appeal of the sloping roofs and rooftop terrace in between . " The building also won the Best Residential Building at the 2011 World Architecture Festival , and the Huffington Post included 8 House as one of the " 10 Best Architecture Moments of 2001 – 2010 . " 
 In 2007 , Ingels exhibited at the Storefront for Art and Architecture in New York City and was commissioned to design the Danish Maritime Museum in Helsingør . The current museum is located on the UNESCO World Heritage Site of nearby Kronborg Castle . The concept of the building is ' invisible ' space , a subterranean museum which is still able to incorporate dramatic use of daylight . In launching the $ 40 million project , BIG had to reinforce an abandoned concrete dry dock on the site , 150 metres ( 490 ft ) long , 25 metres ( 82 ft ) wide and 9 metres ( 30 ft ) deep , building the museum on the periphery of the reinforced dry dock walls which will form the facade of the new museum . The dry dock will also host exhibitions and cultural events throughout the year . The museum 's interior is designed to simulate the ambiance of a ship 's deck , with a slightly downward slope . The 7 @,@ 600 m2 ( 82 @,@ 000 sq ft ) exhibition gallery is to house an extensive collection of paintings , model ships , and historical equipment and memorabilia from the Danish Navy . Ingels is collaborating with consulting engineer <unk> , <unk> for project management , and E. Pihl & <unk> and <unk> for construction and interior design . Some 11 different foundations are funding the project . Construction began on the museum in September 2010 and it is scheduled for completion by the summer of 2013 . In September 2012 , the Kronborg and Zig @-@ Zag Bridge components to the building were shipped in from China . 
 = = = 2009 – present : international scope = = = 
 Ingels designed a pavilion in the shape of a loop for the Danish World Expo 2010 pavilion in Shanghai . The open @-@ air 3 @,@ 000 m2 ( 32 @,@ 000 sq ft ) steel pavilion has a spiral bicycle path , accommodating up to 300 cyclists who experience Danish culture and ideas for sustainable urban development . In the centre , amid a pool of 1 million litres ( 264 @,@ 172 gallons ) of water , is the Copenhagen statue of The Little Mermaid , paying homage to Danish author Hans Christian Andersen . 
 In 2009 , Ingels designed the new National Library of Kazakhstan in Astana located to the south of the State Auditorium , said to resemble a " giant metallic doughnut " . BIG and MAD designed the <unk> Building in the <unk> district of Guiyang , China , an innovative leaning tower with six facades . Other projects included the city hall in Tallinn , Estonia , and the Faroe Islands Education Centre in <unk> , Faroe Islands . Accommodating some 1 @,@ 200 students and 300 teachers , the facility has a central open rotunda for meetings between staff and pupils . 
 In 2010 , Fast Company magazine included Ingels in its list of the 100 most creative people in business , mentioning his design of the Danish pavilion . BIG projects became increasingly international , including hotels in Norway , a museum overlooking Mexico City , and converting an oil industry wasteland into a zero @-@ emission resort on Zira Island off the coast of Baku , Azerbaijan . The 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m2 ( 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sq ft ) resort started construction in 2010 , and represented the seven mountains of Azerbaijan . It was cited as " one of the world 's largest eco @-@ developments . " The " mountains " were covered with solar panels and provide for residential and commercial space . According to BIG , " The mountains are conceived not only as metaphors , but engineered as entire ecosystems , a model for future sustainable urban development " . 
 In 2011 , BIG won a competition to design the roof of the <unk> industrial building , with 31 @,@ 000 m2 ( 330 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of ski slopes of varying skill levels . The roof is put forward as another example of " hedonistic sustainability " : designed from recycled synthetics , aiming to increase energy efficiency by up to 20 percent . In October 2011 , the Wall Street Journal named Ingels the Innovator of the Year for architecture , later saying he was " becoming one of the design world 's rising stars " in light of his portfolio . 
 In 2012 , Ingels moved to New York to supervise work on a pyramid @-@ like apartment building on West 57th Street , a collaboration with real estate developer Durst <unk> Residential . BIG opened a permanent New York office , and became committed to further work in New York . By mid @-@ 2012 that office had a staff of 50 , which they used to launch other projects in North America . In 2014 Ingels 's design for an integrated flood protection system , the <unk> , was a winner of the Rebuild By Design competition created by the Department of Housing and Urban Development in the wake of Hurricane Sandy . The <unk> will stretch Manhattan 's shoreline on the Lower East Side , with a landscaped flood barrier in East River Park , enhanced pedestrian bridges over the FDR drive , and permanent and deployable floodwalls north of East 14th Street . 
 BIG designed the Lego House that began construction in 2014 in Billund , Denmark . Ingels said of it , " We felt that if BIG had been created with the single purpose of building only one building , it would be to design the house for Lego . " Designed as a village of interlocking and overlapping buildings and spaces , the house is conceived with identical proportions to the toy bricks , and can be constructed one @-@ for @-@ one in miniature . They also designed the Danish Maritime Museum in Elsinore , Denmark , and a master plan for the new Smithsonian Institution south campus in Washington , D.C. This is part of a 20 @-@ year project that will begin in 2016 . 
 Ingels also designed two extensions for his former High School in <unk> , Denmark — a handball court , and a larger arts and sports extension . The handball court , in homage to the architect 's former math teacher , sports a roof with curvature that traces the trajectory of a thrown handball . 
 In 2015 Ingels began working on a new headquarters for Google in Mountain View , California with Thomas Heatherwick , the British designer . Bloomberg Businessweek hailed the design as " The most ambitious project unveiled by Google this year ... " in a feature article on the design and its architects . Later that year , BIG was chosen to take up the design of Two World Trade Center , one of the towers replacing the Twin Towers . The work had initially been entrusted to the British firm Foster and Partners . 
 = = Other engagements = = 
 In 2009 , Ingels became a co @-@ founder of the KiBiSi design group , together with Jens Martin <unk> and Lars Larsen . With interests in urban mobility , architectural illumination and personal electronics , KiBiSi designs bicycles , furniture , household objects and even aircraft , becoming one of Scandinavia 's most influential design groups . KiBiSi designed the furniture for Ingels ' Danish Pavilion at EXPO 2010 . 
 Ingels 's first book , Yes Is More : An <unk> on Architectural Evolution , catalogued 30 projects from his practice . It was in the form of a comic book , as he believed that 's the best way to tell stories about architecture . A sequel , Hot to Cold : An Odyssey of Architectural Adaptation , explored 60 case studies through a climatic lens , to examine where and how people live on the planet , working from the warmest regions to the coldest . The book was designed by Grammy Award winning designer Stefan Sagmeister , and accompanied by an exhibition of the same name at the National Building Museum in Washington D.C. The book featured well known projects such as VIA ( West 57th ) , Amager Bakke , 8 House , Gammel <unk> High School , <unk> , The Lego House and the Danish Maritime Museum , amongst others . 
 In 2009 , Ingels spoke at a TED event in Oxford , UK . He presented the case study “ <unk> sustainability ” in a workshop on managing <unk> the 3rd International Holcim Forum 2010 in Mexico City , and was a member of the Holcim Awards regional jury for Europe in 2011 . 
 In 2015 , a division of the Kohler Company , <unk> , released a new line of bath and kitchen products designed by Ingels . Named " taper " , the fixtures featured minimalist and mid @-@ century Danish design . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Ingels was cast in My Playground , a documentary film by Kaspar <unk> Schröder that explores parkour and <unk> , with much of the action taking place on and around BIG projects . 
 He was also part of the documentary film Genre de Vie , about bicycles , cities and personal awareness . It looks at desired space and our own impact to the process of it . The film documents urban life empowered by the simplicity of the bicycle . 
 = = Design philosophy = = 
 In 2009 , The Architectural Review said that Ingels and BIG " has abandoned 20th @-@ century Danish modernism to explore the more fertile world of bigness and baroque eccentricity ... BIG 's world is also an optimistic vision of the future where art , architecture , urbanism and nature magically find a new kind of balance . Yet while the rhetoric is loud , the underlying messages are serious ones about global warming , community life , post @-@ petroleum @-@ age architecture and the youth of the city . " The Netherlands Architecture Institute described him as " a member of a new generation of architects that combine shrewd analysis , playful experimentation , social responsibility and humour . " 
 In an interview in 2010 , Ingels provided a number of insights on his design philosophy . He defines architecture as " the art of translating all the immaterial structures of society – social , cultural , economical and political – into physical structures . " Architecture should " arise from the world " benefiting from the growing concern for our future triggered by discussion of climate change . In connection with his BIG practice , he explains : " Buildings should respond to the local environment and climate in a sort of conversation to make it habitable for human life " drawing , in particular , on the resources of the local climate which could provide " a way of massively enriching the vocabulary of architecture . " 
 Luke Butcher noted that Ingels taps into <unk> sensibility , adopting a <unk> attitude ; but he " seems to oscillate between modern positions and postmodern ones , a certain out @-@ of @-@ this @-@ <unk> and a definite down @-@ to @-@ <unk> , naivety and knowingness , idealism and the practical . " Sustainable development and renewable energy are important to Ingels , which he refers to as " hedonistic sustainability " . He has said that " It 's not about what we give up to be sustainable , it 's about what we get . And that is a very attractive and marketable concept . " He has also been outspoken against " suburban biopsy " in Holmen , Copenhagen , caused by wealthy older people ( the grey @-@ gold generation ) living in the suburbs and wanting to move into the town to visit the Royal Theatre and the opera . 
 In 2014 , Ingels released a video entitled ' Worldcraft ' as part of the Future of <unk> summit , which introduced his concept of creating architecture that focuses on turning " surreal dreams into inhabitable space " . Citing the power of alternate reality programs and video games , like Minecraft , Ingels ' ' <unk> ' is an extension of ' hedonistic sustainability ' and further develops ideas established in his first book , Yes Is More . In the video ( and essay by the same name in his second book , Hot to Cold : An Odyssey of Architectural Adaptation ) Ingels notes : " These fictional worlds empower people with the tools to transform their own environments . This is what architecture ought to be ... " " Architecture must become Worldcraft , the craft of making our world , where our knowledge and technology doesn 't limit us but rather enables us to turn surreal dreams into inhabitable space . To turn fiction into fact . " 
 = = Notable projects = = 
 For a full list of projects , see Bjarke Ingels Group # Completed projects 
 Two World Trade Center New York City , office building ( On hold , Larry Silverstein is in talks with News Corporation and 21st Century Fox to create a joint headquarters . ) 
 = = = Exhibitions = = = 
 2007 BIG City , Storefront for Art and Architecture , New York 
 2009 Yes is More , Danish Architecture Centre , Copenhagen 
 2010 Yes is More , <unk> , Bordeaux and <unk> , Stuttgart 
 2015 Hot to Cold : An Odyssey of Architectural Adaptation , National Building Museum 
 = = Awards = = 
 For a more detailed list of awards , see Bjarke Ingels Group # Awards 
 = Black American Sign Language = 
 Black American Sign Language ( BASL ) or Black Sign Variation ( <unk> ) is a dialect of American Sign Language ( ASL ) spoken most commonly by deaf African Americans in the United States . The divergence from ASL was influenced largely by the segregation of schools in the American South . Like other schools at the time , schools for the deaf were segregated based upon race , creating two language communities among deaf signers : White deaf signers at White schools and Black deaf signers at Black schools . Today , BASL is still used by signers in the South despite schools having been legally desegregated since 1954 . 
 Linguistically , BASL differs from other varieties of ASL in its phonology , syntax , and lexicon . BASL tends to have a larger signing space meaning that some signs are produced further away from the body than in other dialects . Signers of BASL also tend to prefer two @-@ handed variants of signs while signers of ASL tend to prefer one @-@ handed variants . Some signs are different in BASL as well , with some borrowings from African American English . 
 = = History = = 
 Like many educational institutions for hearing children during the 1800s and early 1900s , schools for deaf children were segregated based on race . The first school for the deaf in the United States , The American School for the Deaf ( ASD ) , was founded in 1817 but did not admit any Black students until 1952 . Of the schools for the deaf that began to be created , few admitted students of color . Seeing a lack of educational opportunities for the Black deaf , Platt Skinner founded the Skinner School for the Colored Deaf , Dumb , and Blind in 1856 in Niagara Falls , New York . Skinner described his school as " the first effort of its kind in the country ... We receive and instruct those and only those who are refused admission to all other institutions and are despised on account of their color . " The school moved to Trenton , New Jersey in 1860 . After its closure in 1866 , no Northern state created an institution for the Black deaf . Even after these states outlawed segregation by 1900 , integration was sparse as some institutions allowed Black students and others did not . 
 After the foundation and success of the American School for the Deaf , many other institutions for the deaf were founded throughout the country . Since schools , particularly in the South , were segregated , many Southern states created separate schools or departments for the Black deaf . The first school established for the Black deaf below the Mason – Dixon line opened in the District of Columbia in 1857 and remained segregated until 1958 . The last Southern state to create an institution for the Black deaf was Louisiana in 1938 . Black Deaf children thus became a language community isolated from the White Deaf with different means of language socialization , allowing for different dialects to develop . Because the education of White children was privileged over that of Black children , <unk> — the prominent pedagogical method of the time — was not as strictly applied to the Black deaf students . <unk> methods often forbade the use of sign language , so Black deaf students had more opportunities to use ASL than their White peers . Despite the decision in Brown v. Board of Education in 1954 which declared racial segregation in schools unconstitutional , integration was slow to come , and schools for the deaf were no exception : the last desegregated in 1978 , 24 years after the decision . 
 As schools began to integrate , students and teachers noticed differences in the way Black students and White students signed . Carolyn McCaskill , professor of ASL and Deaf Studies at Gallaudet University , recalls the challenge of understanding the dialect of ASL spoken by her White principal and teachers after her segregated school integrated : " When I began attending the school , I did not understand the teacher and she did not understand me because we used different signs . " Carl <unk> was the first to discuss differences between BASL and White ASL in his appendices of the 1965 version of the Dictionary of American Sign Language , and work has continued on BASL since then . 
 As deaf education and sign language research continued to evolve , so did the perception of ASL . With the publication of the Dictionary of American Sign Language , ASL began to be recognized as a legitimate language . The greater acceptance of ASL as a language led to standardization and the development of a prestige dialect which was based upon the signs used at Gallaudet University . Despite this standardization , there are still regional accents of ASL similar to spoken languages . Dialects that are different from the standard one , and especially those spoken by marginalized groups , are often stigmatized . As a non @-@ standard dialect , BASL is stigmatized by signers and seen as inferior to prestige dialects of ASL . This difference in prestige has led BASL speakers to code switch to a prestige dialect when speaking with different groups of people , despite BASL being mutually intelligible with other dialects of ASL . 
 = = Phonology = = 
 When asked , many signers in the South gave anecdotal accounts of differences between the signing of Black and White signers . These differences turned out to be aspects of the differing phonology of BASL . Among these accounts were claims that Black signers had a larger signing space and used more two @-@ handed signs . Investigation into these anecdotes has found correlations . 
 When compared , Black signers were more likely to produce signs outside of the typical signing space and to use two @-@ handed signs than were White signers . Adverbs are most likely to utilize a larger signing space . Less marked forms such as pronouns , determiners , plain verbs , and nouns tend to be less likely to be produced outside the typical signing space . The selection of two @-@ handed signs over one @-@ handed signs was found to have systematic constraints on their production . When the sign could be produced with one or two hands , Black signers often produced the variant that matched the handedness of the following sign ; if the following sign was two @-@ handed , they were more likely to produce a two @-@ handed variant , while if the following sign was one @-@ handed , they were more likely to produce the one @-@ handed variant . The use of innovative one @-@ handed forms though , even in environments which favored them , did not exceed 50 percent . 
 BASL signers further tend to favor lowered variants of side @-@ of @-@ forehead signs resulting in contact at the cheek . The sign KNOW is usually produced by placing the fingers of a flat hand on the temple , but when lowered the fingers make contact at the cheek . Early research showed that BASL signers used these lowered forms at a rate of 53 percent with grammatical category being the strongest constraint . Other conditioning environments for lowered signs depend on preceding location ; for instance , signs produced in front of the body lead to lowered sign variants while signs produced at the head cause signers to favor non @-@ lowered forms . 
 = = Syntax = = 
 Unlike ASL , BASL allows for the frequent use of syntactic repetition . In a study conducted by McCaskill , of 26 signers ( 13 Black and 13 White ) , there were 57 instances of repetition from Black signers compared to 19 from White signers , and of those 19 instances , 18 came from a single signer . The use of repetition by BASL signers is considered to be pragmatic rather than as a way to clarify meaning . 
 A study in 2004 by Melanie Metzger and Susan Mather found that Black male signers used constructed action , with or without constructed dialogue , more often than White signers , but never used constructed dialogue by itself . These results were not reproduced in a later study into constructed action and constructed dialogue by McCaskill , which found that Black signers not only used constructed dialogue , but did so more frequently than white signers . 
 = = Lexical variation = = 
 Lexical variation between BASL and other dialects of ASL was first noted in the Dictionary of American Sign Language . In a later study of 34 lexical signs , Black signers had 28 signs that White signers did not know . Older signers are more likely to use variant signs than younger signers , and most , having been developed in segregated schools for the Black Deaf , refer to everyday life . Younger signers of BASL are less likely to use these variants , but when asked about them are aware that older signers have and use these innovative signs . 
 = = = Borrowing from African American English = = = 
 A body of work has arisen looking at the similarities between Black American Sign Language and African American English ( AAE ) since both are language varieties marked by their use in African American communities . In 1998 John Lewis investigated the incorporation of aspects of AAE into BASL . He reported that , during narrative storytelling by a Black signer , there were " <unk> shifts " marked by shifts in posture and rhythmicity and by incorporating side @-@ to @-@ side head movement . He concluded that this " ' <unk> ' quality was related to the style of AAE . This finding was not reproduced by McCaskill , which she attributes to the nature of the speech acts : Lewis analyzed a narrative event while McCaskill utilized natural or elicited data . Lexical borrowing has been seen in BASL signers under age 35 which is likely due to the advances in mass media — younger signers would have more contact with AAE through movies , television , and the Internet . 
 When asked about distinctive features of their signing , Black Deaf signers tended to identify a number of idioms borrowed from AAE . Some were literal translations like I <unk> YOU or <unk> PLEASE which are signed the standard way but have meanings different from their literal interpretation . Other loan words modified existing signs like STOP <unk> which took the bent @-@ v handshape of TRIP and moved it up to the head to indicate a new meaning of " stop imagining things . " 
 = Good Girl Gone Bad = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad is the third studio album by Barbadian singer Rihanna . It was released on May 31 , 2007 , by Def Jam Recordings and SRP Records . Rihanna worked with various producers on the album , including Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , Terius " Dream " Nash , Neo da Matrix , Timbaland , Carl Sturken , Evan Rogers and StarGate . Inspired by Brandy Norwood 's fourth studio album Afrodisiac ( 2004 ) , Good Girl Gone Bad is a pop , dance @-@ pop and R & B album with 1980s music influences . Described as a turning point in Rihanna 's career , it represents a departure from the Caribbean sound of her previous releases , Music of the Sun ( 2005 ) and A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) . Apart from the sound , she also endorsed a new image for the release going from an innocent girl to an edgier and more sexual look . 
 Critics gave generally positive reviews of the album , praising its composition and Rihanna 's new musical direction , though some criticized the record 's lyrics and inconsistency . The album received seven Grammy Award nominations and one win in the Best Rap / Sung Collaboration category for " Umbrella " at the 2008 ceremony . The album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart and sold 162 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Certified quintuple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , it sold more than 2 @.@ 8 million copies in the United States . The album reached number one in Canada , Switzerland and the United Kingdom , and it has sold over 7 million copies worldwide . 
 Good Girl Gone Bad spawned five singles , including the international hits " Umbrella " and " Don 't Stop the Music " ; Rolling Stone placed the former at number 412 on the magazine 's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list . In support of the album , Rihanna embarked on her first worldwide concert tour , the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour . The album was reissued as Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded in June 2008 with three new songs , including the Billboard Hot 100 number @-@ one hits " Take a Bow " and " Disturbia " . It was followed by Rihanna 's first remix album , Good Girl Gone Bad : The Remixes , in January 2009 , which featured remixes from Moto Blanco , Tony Moran , the Soul Seekerz and the Wideboys . 
 = = Background and title = = 
 Rihanna 's second studio album , A Girl like Me , was released in April 2006 . It is a pop @-@ oriented record with dancehall and R & B influences . It had a mixed critical reception : some critics praised Rihanna 's new musical direction , while others criticized some of the album 's songs . Around its time of release , many critics felt that Rihanna 's style , sound , and musical material were too similar to those of American singer Beyoncé . The album sold over 587 @,@ 308 copies in the United Kingdom and more than 1 @,@ 330 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 In early 2007 , Rihanna began work on her third studio album . In an interview with MTV News , she announced that " the new music is going in a different direction . Not on purpose , but I just want to hear something fresh and mostly uptempo . I think that 's where I want to go on this one . You feel different every album , and [ at ] this stage I feel like I want to do a lot of uptempo [ songs ] . " The same year , Rihanna dismissed her innocent image for an edgier look with a new hairstyle , which was inspired by actress Charlize Theron 's bob cut in the 2005 science fiction thriller Æon Flux . 
 Rihanna explained that she wanted to keep the audience dancing and be soulful at the same time . She sought to make an album that people would listen to without skipping tracks . She cited Afrodisiac ( 2004 ) , the fourth studio album by American singer Brandy Norwood , as her main inspiration for the album . In May 2007 , Rihanna revealed that she called the album Good Girl Gone Bad because it represents her bolder and more independent image : " I 'm not the innocent Rihanna anymore . I 'm taking a lot more risks and chances . I felt when I cut my hair , it shows people I 'm not trying to look or be anybody else . The album is very edgy . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad was recorded in Westlake Recording Studios and Conway Studios in Los Angeles , Battery Studios and Roc the Mic Studios in New York City , Chicago Recording Company and Pressure Studios in Chicago , Phase One Audio Group in Toronto , Lethal Studios in Bridgetown , Barbados , Espionage Studios in Oslo and Parr Street Studios in Liverpool . Rihanna spent the week of the 2007 Grammy Awards working with American R & B singer @-@ songwriter Ne @-@ Yo , who gave her vocal lessons . They wrote and sang " Hate That I Love You " , which was co @-@ written and produced by Norwegian duo StarGate . Ne @-@ Yo told Vibe magazine , " The best way to express an emotion like love is through storytelling . It makes it more ' I can relate to this character in this song , because I 've been through something similar . ' You hear that kind of storytelling in the song that I wrote for Rihanna called ' Hate That I Love You ' . " 
 American producers Tricky Stewart and Dream had written the track " Umbrella " in 2007 with pop singer Britney Spears in mind . Her label rejected the song before she could hear it , stating they had enough songs for her to record ; at the time , Spears was working on her fifth studio album Blackout . The producers then reached out to Mary J. Blige , who did not have time to consider the song for her next album . Finally , L.A. Reid , then @-@ CEO of Def Jam Recordings , bought the record and forwarded it to Rihanna . Initially , Stewart was unsure whether Rihanna was the right artist for the song , but after they had recorded the " ella , ella " catch phrase for the track , he felt optimistic . Rapper Jay Z added rap vocals . Stewart also co @-@ wrote and produced " Breakin ' Dishes " with Nash . 
 " Rehab " , " Sell Me Candy " , and " Lemme Get That " were composed and produced by Timbaland for the album . He was on the FutureSex / LoveShow concert tour with Justin Timberlake to promote Timberlake 's 2006 album FutureSex / LoveSounds . After a show in Chicago , they joined Rihanna in the studio , where Timberlake experimented with beats and melodies . Weeks later , the three met in New York City , where Timberlake had conceptualized a song for Rihanna . Timbaland , who penned a song for Rihanna under the title " Rehab " , was producing a beat , over which Timberlake improvised his lyrics . Hannon Lane also co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced the song . Timberlake told Entertainment Weekly that he believed " Rehab " to be " the bridge for [ Rihanna ] to be accepted as an adult in the music industry " . Rihanna told Robert Copsey of Digital Spy that she enjoyed working with Timberlake , and learned much from the sessions . 
 = = Composition = = 
 A dance @-@ pop and pop / R & B album influenced by 1980s music , Good Girl Gone Bad is a departure from the Caribbean sound of Rihanna 's previous two records . Lyrically , the album is close to some teen pop records , " where sexual @-@ ism and consumerism supersede personal connection . " 
 The LP opens with the lead single " Umbrella " , an R & B song performed with drums and thundercloud synths . Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian compared the singer 's vocals to the voices of Ciara and Cassie . The second track , " Push Up On Me " , features echo electro claps and surging synths . " Don 't Stop the Music " is a dance @-@ pop and techno song that contains rhythmic devices used mainly in hip hop music . The song samples the line " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " from Michael Jackson 's 1983 single " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . The fourth song is " Breakin ' Dishes " ; Peter Robinson of The Observer called it a " wronged @-@ woman bonanza , packed with hooks , chants and flashes of lyrical brilliance . " " Shut Up and Drive " is a new wave and pop rock song , influenced by 1970s and 1980s musical styles , sampling New Order 's 1983 single " Blue Monday " . The collaboration with Ne @-@ Yo , " Hate That I Love You " , is a folky R & B song ; Nick Levine of Digital Spy compared it to Ne @-@ Yo 's singles " Sexy Love " and " Because of You " . 
 The seventh track on the album , " Say It " , samples the 1990s song " Flex " by Mad Cobra ; it consists of silky and warm groove and features island @-@ oriented music characteristics . " Sell Me Candy " features jumbled and noisy production with chaotic beats . The ninth song , " Lemme Get That " , has boom @-@ bap beats and is produced by Timbaland . " Rehab " is an old @-@ styled R & B track with a groove that is built around tambourine shakes , acoustic guitar swirls and a subtle backbeat . Doug Rule of Metro Weekly noted similarities among the structures of " Rehab " and Timberlake 's 2002 single " Cry Me a River " . " Question Existing " is an " eerie , smoky , destitute , emotional , and a sonic sidestep . " Tom Breihan of Pitchfork Media described the opening lyrics of the song as inspired by " puerile <unk> " . The album concludes with the title track " Good Girl Gone Bad " , which is played with an acoustic guitar and click tracks . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Released as the lead single from Good Girl Gone Bad , " Umbrella " was sent to contemporary hit , rhythmic and urban radio in the US on April 24 , 2007 . The song received acclaim from music critics , who praised its production , vocals and the collaboration between Rihanna and Jay Z. " Umbrella " reached number one in more than seventeen countries worldwide , including on the UK Singles Chart and the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . In the United Kingdom , the song topped the singles chart for ten consecutive weeks , while in the United States , it was at the top for seven consecutive weeks . As of June 2013 , " Umbrella " has sold 4 @,@ 236 @,@ 000 digital copies there , making it Rihanna 's fifth @-@ best selling single in the country . Director Chris Applebaum shot the accompanying music video , which features scenes of Rihanna nude and covered in silver paint . The video earned the singer nominations at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Direction , Video of the Year and Monster Single of the Year ; it won the latter two . 
 The second single from the album , " Shut Up and Drive " , was serviced to contemporary hit radio in the US on June 12 and rhythmic radio the following week . The song received mixed response from critics : some praised the composition , while others criticized the lyrics . It reached the top ten on more than twelve national charts , including number five on the UK Singles Chart and number 15 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . The music video for the song was shot by Anthony Mandler in Prague , the Czech Republic . The third single , " Hate That I Love You " , which features Ne @-@ Yo , was sent to contemporary hit , rhythmic and urban radio in the United States on August 21 . Critics gave the song positive reviews and praised the collaboration between the singers ; they compared it to the previous works written by Ne @-@ Yo , including the song " Irreplaceable " by Beyoncé . " Hate That I Love You " reached number seven on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 15 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " was digitally released as an EP via the iTunes Store on September 7 . The song received positive reviews from music critics , who praised its production and the interpolation of the " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " hook . " Don 't Stop the Music " won Best International Song at the 2008 NRJ Music Awards . The single peaked atop of the singles charts in eight countries , reaching number three on the Hot 100 and number four on the UK Singles Chart . It is the seventh @-@ best selling single by Rihanna in the United States , with 3 @,@ 521 @,@ 000 digital copies sold as of June 2013 . Mandler shot the music video in a nightclub in Prague , the Czech Republic . " Rehab " was released as the fifth and final single from Good Girl Gone Bad ; it was sent to contemporary hit radio in the United States on October 6 , 2008 . Critics were divided on the song 's production and composition , and some compared its structure to that of Timberlake 's 2007 single " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " . It reached number 16 on the UK Singles Chart and number 18 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Anthony Mandler directed the accompanying music video , which was shot in Vasquez Rocks Park , near Los Angeles . Timberlake also appears in the video . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad was first released by the Universal Music Group on CD in Portugal on May 31 , 2007 . It was released in the Netherlands and in Poland the following day . The album was launched in Finland and the United Kingdom on June 4 and in the United States the following day on CD and LP . Good Girl Gone Bad was released on CD in Germany on June 8 , on LP in Australia on June 12 and on CD in New Zealand on the same date . A deluxe edition of the album , featuring a bonus disc with dance remixes , was launched on June 27 in Japan . 
 In early 2008 , Rihanna unveiled a new song , " Take a Bow " , on the KIIS @-@ FM radio show On Air with Ryan Seacrest . MTV News reported that the track would serve as the lead single from Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded , a reissue of the original album to mark its first anniversary . Rihanna further announced that the expanded album would contain another two songs , " Disturbia " and the duet with American pop rock band Maroon 5 , titled " If I Never See Your Face Again " to supplement the original track listing . Among other achieved awards and nominations , " Disturbia " and " If I Never See Your Face Again " received nominations for Best Dance Recording and Pop Collaboration with Vocals respectively at the 2009 Grammy Awards . 
 Good Girl Gone Bad : The Remixes was released on January 27 , 2009 , and contains club remixes of tracks from the original album and the re @-@ issue . The songs were remixed by producers and disc jockeys such as Moto Blanco , Tony Moran , Soul Seekerz and Wideboys . Good Girl Gone Bad : The Remixes peaked at number 106 on the Billboard 200 and number four on the US Billboard Dance / Electronic Albums chart . As of July 2010 , it sold 49 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Rihanna performed " Umbrella " with " Shut Up and Drive " and " Breakin ' Dishes " at BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend on May 21 , 2007 . She performed " Umbrella " with Jay Z at the 2007 MTV Movie Awards at the Gibson Amphitheatre , Universal City , California , on June 3 . A reviewer of Rap @-@ Up wrote , " she looked hot and the production was on point " during the performance . She performed the song at the Tonight Show with Jay Leno on June 5 and on June 16 at The View . Rihanna performed " Shut Up and Drive " at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards at The Palms in Las Vegas , and was joined by American rock band Fall Out Boy . In early October 2007 , Rihanna was the guest star at the Late Show with David Letterman , where she gave a performance of " Shut Up and Drive " . On November 18 , Rihanna performed a medley consisting of " Umbrella " and " Hate That I Love You " at the 2007 American Music Awards at the Nokia Theater in Los Angeles , California . Ne @-@ Yo accompanied her for the performance of " Hate That I Love You " . 
 Rihanna performed " Don 't Stop the Music " at the 2008 NRJ Music Awards in Cannes , France , on January 26 , 2008 . She also performed the song at the 50th Grammy Awards on February 10 in a medley with " Umbrella " . For the performance , she was joined by American funk band , The Time . On April 28 , 2008 , Rihanna performed at the Pepsi Center with Kanye West , N.E.R.D and Lupe Fiasco . She sang " Rehab " , " Hate That I Love You " , " Don 't Stop the Music " and " Umbrella " . On June 20 , she was a guest on NBC 's Today Concert Series in Rockefeller Center , New York City . She performed " Don 't Stop the Music " , " Umbrella " and " Take a Bow " . She also performed " Rehab " live on November 23 , 2008 , at the 2008 American Music Awards , where she won the awards for Favorite Pop / Rock Female Artist and Favorite Soul / R & B Female Artist . At the awards ceremony , she performed wearing an eye patch , which she removed after she was lowered to the main stage . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 To further promote the album , Rihanna embarked on her first worldwide and second overall tour , the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) . She performed in Europe , North America , Oceania , Asia and Africa . During the concert shows she wore S & M @-@ inspired outfits and high boots . Mike Usinger of The Georgia Straight gave the show a mixed review ; he wrote that even though Rihanna 's vocals were improved , he felt she still struggled to keep the audience engaged . Jason MacNeil of Canadian Online Explorer gave a positive review of the concert after the show at Molson Amphitheatre , saying " the singer made a rather eye @-@ popping impression , opening with ' Pon de Replay ' and clad in a sexy , dominatrix @-@ like studded black leather ensemble . " During a show planned for February 13 in Malaysia , Malaysia 's conservative Islamic party recommended that Rihanna 's concert tour be banned from performing , citing her outfits . A video album , Good Girl Gone Bad Live , was filmed at the Manchester Arena show in Manchester , United Kingdom , on December 6 , 2007 . The Good Girl Gone Bad Live DVD was released on June 9 and 13 , 2008 , in the United Kingdom and Germany through Mercury Records and the Universal Music Group respectively . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad received generally favorable reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 based on 16 reviews . Uncut called it a " shiny , trans @-@ atlantic blend of Europop vim , R & B grit and Caribbean bounce . " Andy Kellman of AllMusic deemed it quintessential pop music and said each of its tracks was a potential hit . Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters praised the album , describing it as " more raw , perhaps edgier and more risqué " than Rihanna 's previous material . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times wrote that the album " sounds as if it were scientifically engineered to deliver hits " . Peter Robinson of The Observer commended her collaborators for " masking her own shortcomings " and commented that , " While Rihanna lacks her peers ' charisma , she 's a great vessel for exhilarating mainstream pop . " Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan found the album varied and satisfying . Neil Drumming of Entertainment Weekly felt that , although it " goes bad when Rihanna tries her hand at treacly ballads and glum sentiment " , at times Good Girl Gone Bad is a " thrilling throwback to more than a decade ago , when upstart producers haphazardly mashed R & B with hip @-@ hop to create chunky jeep anthems such as Mary J. Blige 's ' Real Love ' . " 
 In a mixed review , Rodney Dugue of The Village Voice felt that the album " never settles on a sound " and only cited its three Timbaland @-@ produced songs as highlights . Although he found the ballads to be improvements from Rihanna 's previous albums , Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani criticized the lyrics , particularly those written by Justin Timberlake , as an " Achilles ' high heel for Rihanna " . Alex Macpherson of The Guardian found Rihanna to be " ill @-@ suited " for its dance @-@ pop songs and stated , " The gimmicky samples and pounding beats bury her personality , and the summery reggae of her first two albums is sorely missed . " Robert Christgau of MSN Music cited " Umbrella " as a " choice cut " , indicating " a good song on an album that isn 't worth your time or money " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Good Girl Gone Bad debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 162 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It became Rihanna 's then @-@ best start album entry . The next week , it fell to number seven with 81 @,@ 000 copies sold . The re @-@ issue sold 63 @,@ 000 copies in the first week and helped Good Girl Gone Bad jump from number 124 to number seven on the US Billboard 200 in its 55th week . It was certified quintuple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) ; by November 2013 , both Good Girl Gone Bad and the reissue had sold 2 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 copies in the United States alone . To date , it is her best @-@ selling album in the former country . The album debuted atop of the Canadian Albums Chart and became Rihanna 's second number @-@ one album in the country . It was certified quintuple platinum by Music Canada , denoting shipments of more than 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Good Girl Gone Bad debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart . It became her first album to top the chart , and stayed on the chart for 177 weeks . In 2011 , the album peaked at number 16 on the UK R & B Albums Chart . It was certified sextuple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) and sold over 1 @,@ 850 @,@ 000 copies in the country . It ended at number 10 on the UK 2007 year @-@ end list and number six on the 2008 year @-@ end list . As of March 2015 , Good Girl Gone Bad is the 46th best @-@ selling album of the millennium in the United Kingdom . In Ireland , Good Girl Gone Bad debuted at number three on the Irish Singles Chart on June 7 , 2007 . After four weeks on the chart , it reached the top . The album peaked at number one on the Swiss Hitparade chart and stayed on the chart for 91 weeks . In Australia , it peaked at number two and was certified triple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 210 @,@ 000 copies . By November 2011 , Good Girl Gone Bad had sold over 11 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Impact = = 
 According to <unk> , Good Girl Gone Bad inspired Rihanna to transform her image from a " teen pop princess " persona into a " fully fledged superstar and sex symbol " . People magazine noted that Rihanna follows the likes of recording artists Janet Jackson and Christina Aguilera " when she sheds her innocent image for an edgier look and sound " . Jay @-@ Z also spoke about " Umbrella " and stated that the song represents an artistic grow for Rihanna , " If you listen to the lyrics to that song , you know the depth and how far she 's come . " Regarding the commercial impact of the album , Entertainment Weekly 's Margeaux Watson wrote , " For a pop star who was once dismissed as being incapable of yielding more than one hit song per album , Rihanna 's newfound staying power is nothing short of remarkable – and proof that there 's room for more than one diva in this game . " Jason Birchmeier of AllMusic concluded that it was Good Girl Gone Bad that made Rihanna a " full @-@ fledged international pop star with a regular presence atop the charts " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy described the album , as the closest thing to a Thriller that 2007 / 08 is likely to produce . 
 At the 2008 Grammy Awards ceremony , Good Girl Gone Bad received seven Grammy Awards nominations , including Record of the Year and Song of the Year for " Umbrella " , Best Dance Recording for " Don 't Stop the Music " , Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and Best R & B Song for " Hate That I Love You " . It won the accolade for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " Umbrella " . Additionally , magazine Rolling Stone placed " Umbrella " at number 412 on their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list . The album also won the International Album of the Year award at the 2008 Juno Awards . 
 Before its physical release , " Umbrella " achieved the biggest debut in the six @-@ year history of the iTunes Store in the United States , breaking a record previously held by the 2006 single " Hips Don 't Lie " . Following its digital release , the song debuted atop the Hot Digital Songs chart , with first @-@ week sales of more than 277 @,@ 000 units . The single became the highest digital debut in the United States since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking downloads in 2003 , surpassing Timberlake 's " SexyBack " 250 @,@ 000 sales record in 2006 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a denotes a vocal producer 
 ^ b denotes a co @-@ producer 
 ^ c denotes a remixer and additional producer 
 " Push Up on Me " samples " Running with the Night " , as written by Lionel Richie and Cynthia Weil , and performed by Richie . 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " samples " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " , as written and performed by Michael Jackson , which itself samples " Soul Makossa " , as performed by Manu Dibango . 
 " Shut Up and Drive " samples " Blue Monday " , as written and performed by New Order ( Stephen Morris , Peter Hook , Bernard Sumner and Gillian Gilbert ) . 
 " Say It " samples " Flex " , as written by Ewart Brown , Clifton Dillon , Sly Dunbar and Brian Thompson , and performed by Mad Cobra . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Good Girl Gone Bad adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Herrerasaurus = 
 Herrerasaurus was one of the earliest dinosaurs . Its name means " Herrera 's lizard " , after the rancher who discovered the first specimen . All known fossils of this carnivore have been discovered in rocks of Carnian age ( late Triassic according to the ICS , dated to 231 @.@ 4 million years ago ) in northwestern Argentina . The type species , Herrerasaurus ischigualastensis , was described by Osvaldo Reig in 1963 and is the only species assigned to the genus . Ischisaurus and Frenguellisaurus are synonyms . 
 For many years , the classification of Herrerasaurus was unclear because it was known from very fragmentary remains . It was hypothesized to be a basal theropod , a basal sauropodomorph , a basal saurischian , or not a dinosaur at all but another type of archosaur . However , with the discovery of an almost complete skeleton and skull in 1988 , Herrerasaurus has been classified as either an early theropod or an early saurischian in at least five recent reviews of theropod evolution , with many researchers treating it at least tentatively as the most primitive member of Theropoda . 
 It is a member of the Herrerasauridae , a family of similar genera that were among the earliest of the dinosaurian evolutionary radiation . 
 = = Description = = 
 Herrerasaurus was a lightly built bipedal carnivore with a long tail and a relatively small head . Adults had skulls up to 56 cm ( 22 in ) long and were up to 6 metres ( 20 ft ) in total length and 350 kg ( 770 lb ) in weight . Smaller specimens were half the size , with skulls only about 30 cm ( 12 in ) long . 
 Herrerasaurus was fully bipedal . It had strong hind limbs with short thighs and rather long feet , indicating that it was likely a swift runner . The foot had five toes , but only the middle three ( digits II , III , and IV ) bore weight . The outer toes ( I and V ) were small ; the first toe had a small claw . The tail , partially stiffened by overlapping vertebral projections , balanced the body and was also an adaptation for speed . The forelimbs of Herrerasaurus were less than half the length of its hind limbs . The upper arm and forearm were rather short , while the manus ( hand ) was elongated . The first two fingers and the thumb ended in curved , sharp claws for grasping prey . The fourth and fifth digits were small stubs without claws . 
 Herrerasaurus displays traits that are found in different groups of dinosaurs , and several traits found in non @-@ dinosaurian archosaurs . Although it shares most of the characteristics of dinosaurs , there are a few differences , particularly in the shape of its hip and leg bones . Its pelvis is like that of saurischian dinosaurs , but it has a bony acetabulum ( where the femur meets the pelvis ) that was only partially open . The ilium , the main hip bone , is supported by only two sacrals , a basal trait . However , the pubis points backwards , a derived trait as seen in dromaeosaurids and birds . Additionally , the end of the pubis has a booted shape , like those in <unk> ; and the vertebral centra has an hourglass shape as found in Allosaurus . 
 Herrerasaurus had a long , narrow skull that lacked nearly all the specializations that characterized later dinosaurs , and more closely resembled those of more primitive archosaurs such as <unk> . It had five pairs of fenestrae ( skull openings ) in its skull , two pairs of which were for the eyes and nostrils . Between the eyes and the nostrils were two antorbital fenestrae and a pair of tiny , 1 @-@ centimeter @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) slit @-@ like holes called <unk> fenestrae . 
 Herrerasaurus had a flexible joint in the lower jaw that could slide back and forth to deliver a grasping bite . This cranial specialization is unusual among dinosaurs but has evolved independently in some lizards . The rear of the lower jaw also had fenestrae . The jaws were equipped with large serrated teeth for biting and eating flesh , and the neck was slender and flexible . 
 According to Novas ( 1993 ) , Herrerasaurus can be distinguished based on the following features : the presence of a premaxilla @-@ maxilla fenestra , and the dorsal part of <unk> fenestra is less than a third as wide as the ventral part ; the presence of a ridge on the lateral surface of the jugal bone , and a deeply incised supratemporal fossa that extends across the medial postorbital process ; the <unk> ventral squamosal process has a lateral depression , and the <unk> bone overlaps the posterodorsal quadrate face ; the pterygoid process of the quadrate has an <unk> , trough @-@ shaped ventral margin , and the presence of a slender ribbed posterodorsal dentary process ; the surangular bone has a forked anterior process for articulation with the posterodorsal dentary process ; the humerus ' internal tuberosity is proximally projected and separated from the humeral head by a deep groove ( also present in <unk> ) ; possesses enlarged hands , which are 60 % of the size of the humerus + radius , and the humeral <unk> is ridge @-@ like with anterior and posterior depressions ; and the posterior border of the <unk> peduncle forms a right angle with the dorsal border of the shaft on the ischium 
 According to Sereno ( 1993 ) , Herrerasaurus can be distinguished based on the following features , all of which are unknown in other <unk> : a circular pit is present on the humeral <unk> , a feature also present in Saturnalia ; a saddle @-@ shaped ulnar condyle of the humerus , and the articular surface for the ulnare on the ulna is convex ; the articular surface of the ulnare is smaller than that of the ulna , a feature unknown in Staurikosaurus and Sanjuansaurus ; the centrale is placed distal to the <unk> ; a broad <unk> process of the premaxilla , and a broad supratemporal depression ( noted by Sereno and Novas , 1993 ) ; the basal tuber and the occipital condyle are subequal in width ( noted by Sereno and Novas , 1993 ) 
 = = History = = 
 Herrerasaurus was named by paleontologist Osvaldo Reig after Victorino Herrera , an Andean goatherd who first noticed its fossils in outcrops near the city of San Juan in 1959 . These rocks , which later yielded Eoraptor , are part of the Ischigualasto Formation and date from the late Ladinian to early Carnian stages of the Late Triassic period . Reig named a second dinosaur from these rocks in the same publication as Herrerasaurus ; this dinosaur , Ischisaurus cattoi , is now considered a junior synonym and a juvenile of Herrerasaurus . 
 Reig believed Herrerasaurus was an early example of a carnosaur , but this was the subject of much debate over the next 30 years , and the genus was variously classified during that time . In 1970 , Steel classified Herrerasaurus as a prosauropod . In 1972 , Peter Galton classified the genus as not diagnosable beyond Saurischia . Later , using cladistic analysis , some researchers put Herrerasaurus and Staurikosaurus at the base of the dinosaur tree before the separation between ornithischians and saurischians . Several researchers classified the remains as non @-@ dinosaurian . 
 Two other partial skeletons , with skull material , were named Frenguellisaurus ischigualastensis by Fernando Novas in 1986 , but this species too is now thought to be a synonym . Frenguellisaurus ischigualastensis was discovered in 1975 , and was described by Novas ( 1986 ) who considered it a primitive saurischian , and possibly a theropod . Novas ( 1992 ) and Sereno and Novas ( 1992 ) examined the Frenguellisaurus remains and found them referable to Herrerasaurus . Ischisaurus cattoi was discovered in 1960 and described by Reig in 1963 . Novas ( 1992 ) and Sereno and Novas ( 1992 ) reviewed its remains and found them to be referable to Herrerasaurus . 
 A complete Herrerasaurus skull was found in 1988 , by a team of paleontologists led by Paul Sereno . Based on the new fossils , authors such as Thomas Holtz and José Bonaparte classified Herrerasaurus at the base of the saurischian tree before the divergence between prosauropods and theropods . However , Sereno favored classifying Herrerasaurus ( and the Herrerasauridae ) as primitive theropods . These two classifications have become the most persistent , with Rauhut ( 2003 ) and Bittencourt and Kellner ( 2004 ) favoring the early theropod hypothesis , and Max Langer ( 2004 ) , Langer and Benton ( 2006 ) , and Randall <unk> and his coauthors ( 2007 ) favoring the basal saurischian hypothesis . If Herrerasaurus were indeed a theropod , it would indicate that theropods , sauropodomorphs , and ornithischians diverged even earlier than <unk> , before the middle Carnian , and that " all three lineages independently evolved several dinosaurian features , such as a more advanced ankle joint or an open acetabulum " . This view is further supported by <unk> records showing large <unk> ( three @-@ toed ) footprints that can be attributed only to a theropod dinosaur . These footprints date from the Ladinian ( Middle Triassic ) of the Los <unk> Formation in Argentina and predate Herrerasaurus by 3 to 5 million years . 
 The study of early dinosaurs such as Herrerasaurus and Eoraptor therefore has important implications for the concept of dinosaurs as a monophyletic group ( a group descended from a common ancestor ) . The monophyly of dinosaurs was explicitly proposed in the 1970s by Galton and Robert T. Bakker , who compiled a list of cranial and postcranial synapomorphies ( common anatomical traits derived from the common ancestor ) . Later authors proposed additional synapomorphies . An extensive study of Herrerasaurus by Sereno in 1992 suggested that of these proposed synapomorphies , only one cranial and seven postcranial features were actually derived from a common ancestor , and that the others were attributable to convergent evolution . Sereno 's analysis of Herrerasaurus also led him to propose several new dinosaurian synapomorphies . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Herrerasaurus was originally considered to be a genus within Carnosauria , which then included forms similar to Megalosaurus and Antrodemus ( the latter is equivalent to Allosaurus ) , even though Herrerasaurus lived many millions of years before them and retained multiple primitive features . This carnosaurian classification was amended upon by Rozhdestvensky and <unk> in 1964 , who classified Herrerasaurus within the family <unk> inside Carnosauria . The same year , Walker published a differing opinion that Herrerasaurus instead was allied with Plateosauridae , although it differed in possessing a pubic boot . Walker also proposed that Herrerasaurus may instead be close to <unk> ( now considered a pseudosuchian ) and the unnamed theropod from the <unk> Group of Texas ( now assigned to the rauisuchian Postosuchus ) . In 1985 , Charig noted that Herrerasaurus was of uncertain classification , showing similarities to both " prosauropods " and " <unk> " . Romer ( 1966 ) , simply noted that Herrerasaurus was a prosauropod possibly within Plateosauridae . In the description of Staurikosaurus , Colbert noted that there were many similarities between his taxon and Herrerasaurus , but classified them in separate families , with Herrerasaurus in <unk> . In 1970 , Bonaparte also proposed similarities between Herrerasaurus and Staurikosaurus , and while classifying them both clearly as in Saurischia , he stated that they appeared as though they could not be placed in a current family . This was further supported by Benedetto in 1973 , who named for the taxa the new family Herrerasauridae , which he classified as saurischians , possibly within Theropoda but not in Sauropodomorpha . However , in 1977 Galton proposed that Herrerasauridae only included Herrerasaurus , and found it to be <unk> incertae sedis . 
 Proposed in 1987 by Brinkman and Sues , Herrerasaurus has at times been considered basal to Ornithischia and Saurischia , although Brinkmann and Sues still considered it to be inside Dinosauria . They supported this on the basis that Herrerasaurus has a large pedal digit V , and has a well developed medial wall on the acetabulum . Brinkmann and Sues considered Staurikosaurus and Herrerasaurus to not form a true group called Herrerasauridae , and that instead they were successively more primitive forms . Also , they considered the characters used by Benedetto to be invalid , instead representing only the plesiomorphic state that was found in both taxa . This was disagreed with in 1992 by Novas , who stated many derived synapomorphies of Herrerasauridae , such as a distinct pubic boot , but still classified them as basal to Ornithischia and Saurischia . Novas defined the family as the least common ancestor of Herrerasaurus and Staurikosaurus and all its descendants . A differing definition of Herrerasaurus but not Passer domesticus first suggested by Sereno ( 1998 ) , and more closely follows the original inclusion proposed by Benedetto . Another group , <unk> was named by Galton in 1985 , and defined as Herrerasaurus but not <unk> or Plateosaurus by Langer ( 2004 ) , who used the node @-@ based definition for Herrerasauridae . 
 In a revision of basal Dinosauria , Padian and May ( 1993 ) discussed the definition of the clade , and redefined it as the latest common ancestor of Triceratops and birds . They also discussed what this definition would do to the most basal taxa , such as Herrerasauridae , and Eoraptor . Padian and May considered that since both Herrerasauridae and Eoraptor lack many diagnostic features of Saurischia or Ornithischia , that they could not be considered inside Dinosauria . 
 A later 1994 study by Novas instead classified Herrerasaurus within Dinosauria , and strongly supported its position within Saurischia , as well a provided synapomorphies shared with Theropoda . Novas found that the primitive features of lacking a brevis fossa and having only two sacral vertebrae were simply reversals found in the genus . In 1996 , Novas went further by supporting a theropod position for Herrerasaurus with a phylogenetic analysis , which placed it closer to <unk> than Eoraptor or Sauropodomorpha . Langer ( 2004 ) mentioned that this hypothesis was widely accepted , but that more later authors instead preferred to place Herrerasaurus as well as Eoraptor basal to Theropoda and Sauropodomorpha , a clade called Eusaurischia . Langer ( 2004 ) conducted a phylogenetic analysis , and found that it was much more likely that Herrerasaurus was a basal saurischian , than either a theropod or a non @-@ dinosaurian . Langer 's proposal was supported by multiple studies until the discovery of Tawa , when Nesbitt et al. conducted a more inclusive analysis , and the resulting cladogram placed Herrerasauridae basal to Eoraptor , but closer to Dilophosaurus than Sauropodomorpha . Unlike Nesbitt , Ezcurra ( 2010 ) conducted a phylogenetic analysis to place his new taxon <unk> , and found that Herrerasauridae was basal to Eusaurischia . 
 In 2010 , Alcocer and Martinez described a new taxon of <unk> , Sanjuansaurus . It could be distinguished from Herrerasaurus based on multiple features . In the phylogenetic analysis , Herrerasaurus , Sanjuansaurus and Staurikosaurus all were in a polytomy , and Herrerasauridae was the most primitive group of saurischian , outside Eusaurischia , Eoraptor and <unk> . In 2011 , Martinez et al. described <unk> , a basal theropod from the same formation as Herrerasaurus . In a phylogenetic analysis , Eoraptor was placed within Sauropodomorpha , Herrerasauridae was placed as the most basal theropods , and <unk> was placed as the next most basal . A more recent analysis , by Bittencourt et al . ( 2014 ) , placed Herrerasauridae in a polytomy with Theropoda and Sauropodomorpha , with Eoraptor also being in an unresolved position . This cladogram is shown below . 
 Other members of the clade may include Eoraptor from the same Ischigualasto Formation of Argentina as Herrerasaurus , <unk> from the Upper Petrified Forest ( Chinle Formation ) of Arizona , and possibly <unk> from the <unk> Formation of the <unk> Group in Texas , although the relationships of these animals are not fully understood , and not all paleontologists agree . Other possible basal theropods , <unk> from the Late Triassic Maleri Formation of India , and <unk> , known from very fragmentary remains from the Late Triassic of Brazil , might be related . Paul ( 1988 ) noted that it had been incorrectly suggested that Staurikosaurus pricei was a juvenile Herrerasaurus . This claim was refuted when pelvic bones from a juvenile Herrerasaurus were discovered , which upon examination did not resemble the pelvic bones of Staurikosaurus . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 The teeth of Herrerasaurus indicate that it was a carnivore ; its size indicates it would have preyed upon small and medium @-@ sized plant eaters . These might have included other dinosaurs , such as Pisanosaurus , as well as the more plentiful rhynchosaurs and synapsids . Herrerasaurus itself may have been preyed upon by giant <unk> like <unk> ; puncture wounds were found in one skull . 
 Coprolites ( fossilized dung ) containing small bones but no trace of plant fragments , discovered in the Ischigualasto Formation , have been assigned to Herrerasaurus based on fossil abundance . Mineralogical and chemical analysis of these coprolites indicates that if the referral to Herrerasaurus was correct , this carnivore could digest bone . 
 Comparisons between the scleral rings of Herrerasaurus and modern birds and reptiles suggest that it may have been cathemeral , active throughout the day at short intervals . 
 In a 2001 study conducted by Bruce Rothschild and other paleontologists , 12 hand bones and 20 foot bones referred to Herrerasaurus were examined for signs of stress fracture , but none were found . 
 <unk> 407 , a Herrerasaurus ischigualastensis , had a pit in a skull bone attributed by Paul Sereno and Novas to a bite . Two additional pits occurred on the <unk> . The areas around these pits are swollen and porous , suggesting the wounds were afflicted by a short @-@ lived non @-@ lethal infection . Because of the size and angles of the wound , it is likely that they were obtained in a fight with another Herrerasaurus . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 The holotype of Herrerasaurus ( PVL <unk> ) was discovered in the Cancha de <unk> Member of the Ischigualasto Formation in San Juan , Argentina . It was collected in 1961 by Victorino Herrera , in sediments that were deposited in the Carnian stage of the Triassic period , approximately 235 to 221 million years ago . Over the years , the Ischigualasto Formation produced other fossils ultimately referred to Herrerasaurus . In 1958 , A.S. Romer discovered specimen MCZ <unk> , originally referred to Staurikosaurus in Carnian sediments . Herrerasaurus specimens PVL 2045 and MLP ( 4 ) 61 , were collected in 1959 and 1960 , respectively , in sediments that were deposited in the Norian stage of the Triassic period , approximately 228 to 208 million years ago . In 1960 , Scaglia collected specimen MACN 18 @.@ 060 , originally the holotype of Ischisaurus cattoi , in sediments deposited in the Carnian stage . In 1961 , Scaglia collected Herrerasaurus specimen PVL <unk> , in the Carnian beds of this formation . In 1990 , the Cancha de <unk> Member produced more Herrerasaurus specimens , also from its Carnian beds . Specimen <unk> 53 , originally the holotype of Frenguellisaurus , was collected by <unk> & Oñate in 1975 in sediments that were deposited in the Carnian stage . 
 Although Herrerasaurus shared the body shape of the large carnivorous dinosaurs , it lived during a time when dinosaurs were small and insignificant . It was the time of non @-@ dinosaurian reptiles , not dinosaurs , and a major turning point in the Earth 's ecology . The vertebrate fauna of the Ischigualasto Formation and the slightly later Los Colorados Formation consisted mainly of a variety of <unk> archosaurs and synapsids . In the Ischigualasto Formation , dinosaurs constituted only about 6 % of the total number of fossils , but by the end of the Triassic Period , dinosaurs were becoming the dominant large land animals , and the other archosaurs and synapsids declined in variety and number . 
 Studies suggest that the paleoenvironment of the Ischigualasto Formation was a volcanically active floodplain covered by forests and subject to strong seasonal rainfalls . The climate was moist and warm , though subject to seasonal variations . Vegetation consisted of ferns ( <unk> ) , horsetails , and giant conifers ( <unk> ) . These plants formed lowland forests along the banks of rivers . Herrerasaurus remains appear to have been the most common among the carnivores of the Ischigualasto Formation . It lived in the jungles of Late Triassic South America alongside another early dinosaur , the one @-@ meter @-@ long Eoraptor , as well as <unk> , a giant land @-@ living rauisuchian ( a quadrupedal meat eater with a theropod @-@ like skull ) ; the broadly similar but smaller <unk> , an <unk> ; and the predatory therapsid <unk> . Herbivores were much more abundant than carnivores and were represented by rhynchosaurs such as <unk> ( a beaked reptile ) ; aetosaurs ( spiny armored reptiles ) ; and therapsids , including <unk> dicynodonts ( stocky , front @-@ heavy beaked quadrupedal animals ) such as <unk> and <unk> cynodonts ( somewhat similar in overall form to dicynodonts , but lacking beaks ) such as <unk> . These non @-@ dinosaurian herbivores were much more abundant than early ornithischian dinosaurs like Pisanosaurus . 
 = Fridtjof Nansen = 
 Fridtjof Nansen ( / <unk> <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ; 10 October 1861 – 13 May 1930 ) was a Norwegian explorer , scientist , diplomat , humanitarian and Nobel Peace Prize laureate . In his youth he was a champion skier and ice skater . He led the team that made the first crossing of the Greenland interior in 1888 , traversing the island on cross @-@ country skis . He won international fame after reaching a record northern latitude of 86 ° 14 ′ during his North Pole expedition of 1893 – 96 . Although he retired from exploration after his return to Norway , his techniques of polar travel and his innovations in equipment and clothing influenced a generation of subsequent Arctic and Antarctic expeditions . 
 Nansen studied zoology at the Royal Frederick University in Christiania ( renamed Oslo in 1925 ) , and later worked as a curator at the Bergen Museum where his research on the central nervous system of lower marine creatures earned him a doctorate and helped establish modern theories of neurology . After 1896 his main scientific interest switched to oceanography ; in the course of his research he made many scientific cruises , mainly in the North Atlantic , and contributed to the development of modern oceanographic equipment . As one of his country 's leading citizens , in 1905 Nansen spoke out for the ending of Norway 's union with Sweden , and was instrumental in persuading Prince Carl of Denmark to accept the throne of the newly independent Norway . Between 1906 and 1908 he served as the Norwegian representative in London , where he helped negotiate the Integrity Treaty that guaranteed Norway 's independent status . 
 In the final decade of his life , Nansen devoted himself primarily to the League of Nations , following his appointment in 1921 as the League 's High Commissioner for Refugees . In 1922 he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of the displaced victims of the First World War and related conflicts . Among the initiatives he introduced was the " Nansen passport " for stateless persons , a certificate recognised by more than 50 countries . He worked on behalf of refugees until his sudden death in 1930 , after which the League established the Nansen International Office for Refugees to ensure that his work continued . This office received the Nobel Peace Prize for 1938 . Nansen was honoured by many nations , and his name is commemorated in numerous geographical features , particularly in the polar regions . 
 = = Family background and childhood = = 
 The Nansen family originated in Denmark . Hans Nansen ( 1598 – 1667 ) , a trader , was an early explorer of the White Sea region of the Arctic Ocean . In later life he settled in Copenhagen , becoming the city 's <unk> in 1654 . Later generations of the family lived in Copenhagen until the mid @-@ 18th century , when Ancher Antoni Nansen moved to Norway ( then ruled by Denmark ) . His son , Hans <unk> Nansen ( 1764 – 1821 ) , was a magistrate first in the Trondheim district , later in Jæren . After Norway 's separation from Denmark in 1814 , he entered national political life as the representative for Stavanger in the first Storting , and became a strong advocate of union with Sweden . After suffering a paralytic stroke in 1821 Hans <unk> Nansen died , leaving a four @-@ year @-@ old son , Baldur Fridtjof Nansen , the explorer 's father . 
 Baldur was a lawyer without ambitions for public life , who became Reporter to the Supreme Court of Norway . He married twice , the second time to Adelaide Johanne Thekla Isidore <unk> Wedel @-@ Jarlsberg from Bærum , a niece of Herman Wedel @-@ Jarlsberg who had helped frame the Norwegian constitution of 1814 and was later the Swedish king 's Norwegian Viceroy . Baldur and Adelaide settled at Store Frøen , an estate at Aker , a few kilometres north of Norway 's capital city , Christiania ( since renamed Oslo ) . The couple had three children ; the first died in infancy , the second , born 10 October 1861 , was Fridtjof Nansen . 
 Store Frøen 's rural surroundings shaped the nature of Nansen 's childhood . In the short summers the main activities were swimming and fishing , while in the autumn the chief pastime was hunting for game in the forests . The long winter months were devoted mainly to skiing , which Nansen began to practice at the age of two , on improvised skis . At the age of 10 he defied his parents and attempted the ski jump at the nearby Huseby installation . This exploit had near @-@ disastrous consequences , as on landing the skis dug deep into the snow , pitching the boy forward : " I , head first , described a fine arc in the air ... [ W ] hen I came down again I bored into the snow up to my waist . The boys thought I had broken my neck , but as soon as they saw there was life in me ... a shout of mocking laughter went up . " Nansen 's enthusiasm for skiing was undiminished , though as he records , his efforts were overshadowed by those of the skiers from the mountainous region of Telemark , where a new style of skiing was being developed . " I saw this was the only way " , wrote Nansen later . 
 At school , Nansen worked adequately without showing any particular aptitude . Studies took second place to sports , or to expeditions into the forests where he would live " like Robinson Crusoe " for weeks at a time . Through such experiences Nansen developed a marked degree of self @-@ reliance . He became an accomplished skier and a highly proficient skater . Life was disrupted when , in the summer of 1877 , Adelaide Nansen died suddenly . Distressed , Baldur Nansen sold the Store Frøen property and moved with his two sons to Christiania . Nansen 's sporting prowess continued to develop ; at 18 he broke the world one @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) skating record , and in the following year won the national cross @-@ country skiing championship , a feat he would repeat on 11 subsequent occasions . 
 = = Student and adventurer = = 
 In 1880 Nansen passed his university entrance examination , the examen artium . He decided to study zoology , claiming later that he chose the subject because he thought it offered the chance of a life in the open air . He began his studies at the Royal Frederick University in Christiania ( renamed Oslo in 1925 ) early in 1881 . 
 Early in 1882 Nansen took " ... the first fatal step that led me astray from the quiet life of science . " Professor Robert Collett of the university 's zoology department proposed that Nansen take a sea voyage , to study Arctic zoology at first hand . Nansen was enthusiastic , and made arrangements through a recent acquaintance , Captain Axel <unk> , commander of the sealer Viking . The voyage began on 11 March 1882 and extended over the following five months . In the weeks before sealing started , Nansen was able to concentrate on scientific studies . From water samples he showed that , contrary to previous assumption , sea ice forms on the surface of the water rather than below . His readings also demonstrated that the Gulf Stream flows beneath a cold layer of surface water . Through the spring and early summer Viking roamed between Greenland and Spitsbergen in search of seal herds . Nansen became an expert marksman , and on one day proudly recorded that his team had shot 200 seal . In July , Viking became trapped in the ice close to an unexplored section of the Greenland coast ; Nansen longed to go ashore , but this was impossible . However , he began to develop the idea that the Greenland icecap might be explored , or even crossed . On 17 July the ship broke free from the ice , and early in August was back in Norwegian waters . 
 Nansen did not resume formal studies at the university . Instead , on Collett 's recommendation , he accepted a post as curator in the zoological department of the Bergen Museum . He was to spend the next six years of his life there — apart from a six @-@ month sabbatical tour of Europe — working and studying with leading figures such as Gerhard <unk> Hansen , the discoverer of the leprosy bacillus , and Daniel Cornelius <unk> , the museum 's director who had turned it from a backwater collection into a centre of scientific research and education . Nansen 's chosen area of study was the then relatively unexplored field of neuroanatomy , specifically the central nervous system of lower marine creatures . Before leaving for his sabbatical in February 1886 he published a paper summarising his research to date , in which he stated that " anastomoses or unions between the different ganglion cells " could not be demonstrated with certainty . This unorthodox view , confirmed by the simultaneous researches of the embryologist Wilhelm His and the psychiatrist August Forel . Nansen is considered the first Norwegian defender of the neuron theory , originally proposed by Santiago Ramon y Cajal . His subsequent paper , The Structure and Combination of Histological Elements of the Central Nervous System , published in 1887 , became his doctoral thesis . 
 = = Crossing of Greenland = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The idea of an expedition across the Greenland icecap grew in Nansen 's mind throughout his Bergen years . In 1887 , after the submission of his doctoral thesis , he finally began organising this project . Before then , the two most significant penetrations of the Greenland interior had been those of Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld in 1883 , and Robert Peary in 1886 . Both had set out from Disko Bay on the western coast , and had travelled about 160 kilometres ( 100 mi ) eastward before turning back . By contrast , Nansen proposed to travel from east to west , ending rather than beginning his trek at Disko Bay . A party setting out from the inhabited west coast would , he reasoned , have to make a return trip , as no ship could be certain of reaching the dangerous east coast and picking them up . By starting from the east — assuming that a landing could be made there — Nansen 's would be a one @-@ way journey towards a populated area . The party would have no line of retreat to a safe base ; the only way to go would be forward , a situation that fitted Nansen 's philosophy completely . 
 Nansen rejected the complex organisation and heavy manpower of other Arctic ventures , and instead planned his expedition for a small party of six . Supplies would be <unk> on specially designed lightweight sledges . Much of the equipment , including sleeping bags , clothing and cooking stoves , also needed to be designed from scratch . These plans received a generally poor reception in the press ; one critic had no doubt that " if [ the ] scheme be attempted in its present form ... the chances are ten to one that he will ... uselessly throw his own and perhaps others ' lives away " . The Norwegian parliament refused to provide financial support , believing that such a potentially risky undertaking should not be encouraged . The project was eventually launched with a donation from a Danish businessman , Augustin <unk> ; the rest came mainly from small contributions from Nansen 's countrymen , through a fundraising effort organised by students at the university . 
 Despite the adverse publicity , Nansen received numerous applications from would @-@ be adventurers . He wanted expert skiers , and attempted to recruit from the skiers of Telemark , but his approaches were rebuffed . Nordenskiöld had advised Nansen that Sami people , from Finland in the far north of Norway , were expert snow travellers , so Nansen recruited a pair , Samuel Balto and Ole Nielsen Ravna . The remaining places went to Otto Sverdrup , a former sea @-@ captain who had more recently worked as a forester ; Oluf Christian Dietrichson , an army officer , and Kristian Kristiansen , an acquaintance of Sverdrup 's . All had experience of outdoor life in extreme conditions , and were experienced skiers . Just before the party 's departure , Nansen attended a formal examination at the university , which had agreed to receive his doctoral thesis . In accordance with custom he was required to defend his work before appointed examiners acting as " devil 's advocates " . He left before knowing the outcome of this process . 
 = = = Expedition = = = 
 On 3 June 1888 Nansen 's party was picked up from the north @-@ western Icelandic port of <unk> by the sealer Jason . A week later the Greenland coast was sighted , but progress was hindered by thick pack ice . On 17 July , with the coast still 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) away , Nansen decided to launch the small boats ; they were within sight of the <unk> Fjord , which Nansen believed would offer a route up on to the icecap . 
 The expedition left Jason " in good spirits and with the highest hopes of a fortunate result " , according to Jason 's captain . There followed days of extreme frustration for the party as , prevented by weather and sea conditions from reaching the shore , they drifted southwards with the ice . Most of this time was spent camping on the ice itself — it was too dangerous to launch the boats . By 29 July they were 380 kilometres ( 240 mi ) south of the point where they had left the ship . On that day they finally reached land , but were too far south to begin the crossing . After a brief rest , Nansen ordered the team back into the boats and to begin rowing north . 
 During the next 12 days the party battled northward along the coast through the ice floes . On the first day they encountered a large Eskimo encampment near Cape Steen Bille , and there were further occasional contacts with the nomadic native population as the journey continued . On 11 August , when they had covered about 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) and had reached <unk> Bay , Nansen decided that although they were still far south of his intended starting place , they needed to begin the crossing before the season became too advanced for travel . After landing at <unk> , they spent the next four days preparing for their journey , and on the evening of 15 August they set out . They were heading north @-@ west , towards <unk> ( now <unk> ) on the west Greenland shores of Disko Bay , 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) away . 
 Over the next few days the party struggled to ascend the inland ice over a treacherous surface with many hidden crevasses . The weather was generally bad ; on one occasion all progress was halted for three days by violent storms and continuous rain . On 26 August Nansen concluded that there was now no chance of reaching <unk> by mid @-@ September , when the last ship was due to leave . He therefore ordered a change of course , almost due west towards Godthaab ( now Nuuk ) , a shorter journey by at least 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) . The rest of the party , according to Nansen , " hailed the change of plan with acclamation " . They continued climbing , until on 11 September they had reached a height of 8 @,@ 922 feet ( 2 @,@ 719 m ) above sea level , the summit of the icecap with temperatures dropping to − 50 ° F ( − 46 ° C ) at night . From then on the downward slope made travelling easier , although the terrain was difficult and the weather remained hostile . Progress was slow because of fresh snowfalls which made dragging the sledges as hard as pulling them through sand . By 26 September they had battled their way down to the edge of a fjord that ran westward towards Godthaab . From their tent , some local willows and parts of the sledges Sverdrup constructed a makeshift boat , and on 29 September Nansen and Sverdrup began the last stage of the journey , rowing down the fjord . Four days later , on 3 October 1888 , they reached Godthaab , where they were greeted by the town 's Danish representative . His first words were to inform Nansen that he had been awarded his doctorate , a matter that " could not have been more remote from my thoughts at that moment " . The crossing had been accomplished in 49 days , making 78 days in total since they had left the Jason ; throughout the journey the team had maintained careful meteorological , geographical and other records relating to the previously unexplored interior . The rest of the team arrived in Godthaab on 12 October . 
 Nansen soon learned that no ship was likely to call at Godthaab until the following spring , though they were able to send letters back to Norway via a boat leaving <unk> at the end of October . He and his party therefore spent the next seven months in Greenland , hunting , fishing and studying the life of the local inhabitants . On 15 April 1889 the Danish ship <unk> finally entered the harbour , and Nansen and his comrades prepared to depart . " It was not without sorrow that we left this place and these people , among whom we had enjoyed ourselves so well " , Nansen recorded . 
 = = Interlude and marriage = = 
 <unk> reached Copenhagen on 21 May 1889 . News of the crossing had preceded its arrival , and Nansen and his companions were feted as heroes . This welcome , however , was dwarfed by the reception in Christiania a week later , when crowds of between thirty and forty thousand — a third of the city 's population — thronged the streets as the party made its way to the first of a series of receptions . The interest and enthusiasm generated by the expedition 's achievement led directly to the formation that year of the Norwegian Geographical Society . 
 Nansen accepted the position of curator of the Royal Frederick University 's zoology collection , a post which carried a salary but involved no duties ; the university was satisfied by the association with the explorer 's name . Nansen 's main task in the following weeks was writing his account of the expedition , but he found time late in June to visit London , where he met the Prince of Wales ( the future King Edward VII ) , and addressed a meeting of the Royal Geographical Society ( RGS ) . 
 The RGS president , Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff , said that Nansen has claimed " the foremost place amongst northern travellers " , and later awarded him the Society 's prestigious Founder 's Medal . This was one of many honours Nansen received from institutions all over Europe . He was invited by a group of Australians to lead an expedition to Antarctica , but declined , believing that Norway 's interests would be better served by a North Pole conquest . 
 On 11 August 1889 Nansen announced his engagement to Eva Sars , the daughter of Michael Sars , a zoology professor who had died when Eva was 11 years old . The couple had met some years previously , at the skiing resort of Frognerseteren , where Nansen recalled seeing " two feet sticking out of the snow " . Eva was three years older than Nansen , and despite the evidence of this first meeting , was an accomplished skier . She was also a celebrated classical singer who had been coached in Berlin by Désirée Artôt , one @-@ time paramour of Tchaikovsky . The engagement surprised many , since Nansen had previously expressed himself forcefully against the institution of marriage ; Otto Sverdrup assumed he had read the message wrongly . The wedding took place on 6 September 1889 , less than a month after the engagement . 
 = = Fram expedition = = 
 = = = Theories and plans = = = 
 Nansen first began to consider the possibility of reaching the North Pole by using the natural drift of the polar ice when , in 1884 , he read the theories of Henrik Mohn , the distinguished Norwegian meteorologist . Artifacts found on the Greenland coast had been identified as coming from the lost US Arctic exploration vessel Jeannette , which had been crushed and sunk in June 1881 on the opposite side of the Arctic Ocean , off the Siberian coast . Mohn surmised that the location of the artefacts indicated the existence of an ocean current , flowing from east to west all the way across the polar sea , possibly over the pole itself . A strong enough ship might therefore enter the frozen Siberian sea , and drift to the Greenland coast via the pole . 
 This idea remained with Nansen during following years . After his triumphant return from Greenland he began to develop a detailed plan for a polar venture , which he made public in February 1890 at a meeting of the recently formed Norwegian Geographical Society . Previous expeditions , he argued , had approached the North Pole from the west , and had failed because they were working against the prevailing east @-@ west current . The secret of success was to work with this current . A workable plan , Nansen said , would require a small , strong and manoeuvrable ship capable of carrying fuel and provisions for twelve men for five years . The ship would sail to the approximate location of Jeannette 's sinking , and would enter the ice . It would then drift west with the current towards the pole and beyond it , eventually reaching the sea between Greenland and Spitsbergen . 
 Many experienced polar hands were dismissive of Nansen 's plans . The retired American explorer Adolphus Greely called the idea " an illogical scheme of self @-@ destruction " . Sir Allen Young , a veteran of the searches for Sir John Franklin 's lost expedition , and Sir Joseph Hooker , who had sailed south with James Clark Ross in 1839 – 43 , were equally dismissive . However , after an impassioned speech Nansen secured the support of the Norwegian parliament , which voted him a grant . The balance of funding was met by private donations and from a national appeal . 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 Nansen chose Colin Archer , Norway 's leading shipbuilder and naval architect , to design and build a suitable ship for the planned expedition . Using the toughest oak timbers available , and an intricate system of crossbeams and braces throughout its length , Archer built a vessel of extraordinary strength . Its rounded hull was designed so that it would slip upwards out of the grip of packing ice . Speed and sailing performance were secondary to the requirement of making the ship a safe and warm shelter during a predicted lengthy confinement . With an overall length of 128 feet ( 39 m ) and a beam of 36 feet ( 11 m ) , the length @-@ to @-@ beam ratio of just over three gave the ship its stubby appearance , justified by Archer thus : " A ship that is built with exclusive regard to its suitability for [ Nansen 's ] object must differ essentially from any known vessel . " The ship was launched by Eva Nansen at Archer 's yard at Larvik , on 6 October 1892 , and was named Fram , in English " Forward " . 
 From thousands of applicants , Nansen selected a party of twelve . Otto Sverdrup from the Greenland expedition was appointed captain of Fram and second @-@ in @-@ command of the expedition . Competition for places on the voyage was such that reserve Army lieutenant and dog @-@ driving expert Hjalmar Johansen signed on as ship 's stoker , the only position available . 
 = = = Into the ice = = = 
 Fram left Christiania on 24 June 1893 , cheered on by thousands of well @-@ wishers . After a slow journey around the coast , the final port of call was Vardø , in the far north @-@ east of Norway . Fram left Vardø on 21 July , following the North @-@ East Passage route pioneered by Nordenskiöld in 1878 – 79 , along the northern coast of Siberia . Progress was impeded by fog and ice conditions in the mainly uncharted seas . The crew also experienced the dead water phenomenon , where a ship 's forward progress is impeded by friction caused by a layer of fresh water lying on top of heavier salt water . Nevertheless , Cape Chelyuskin , the most northerly point of the Eurasian continental mass , was passed on 10 September . Ten days later , as Fram approached the area in which Jeannette had been crushed , heavy pack ice was sighted at around latitude 78 ° N. Nansen followed the line of the pack northwards to a position recorded as 78 ° 49 ′ N , 132 ° 53 ′ E , before ordering engines stopped and the rudder raised . From this point Fram 's drift began . 
 The first weeks in the ice were frustrating , as the drift moved unpredictably , sometimes north , sometimes south ; by 19 November Fram 's latitude was south of that at which she had entered the ice . Only after the turn of the year , in January 1894 , did the northerly direction become generally settled ; the 80 ° mark was finally passed on 22 March . Nansen calculated that , at this rate , it might take the ship five years to reach the pole . As the ship 's northerly progress continued at a rate rarely above a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) a day , Nansen began privately to consider a new plan — a dog sledge journey towards the pole . With this in mind he began to practice dog @-@ driving , making many experimental journeys over the ice . In November Nansen announced his plan : when the ship passed latitude 83 ° he and Hjalmar Johansen would leave the ship with the dogs and make for the pole while Fram , under Sverdrup , continued its drift until it emerged from the ice in the North Atlantic . After reaching the pole , Nansen and Johansen would make for the nearest known land , the recently discovered and <unk> mapped Franz Josef Land . They would then cross to Spitzbergen where they would find a ship to take them home . 
 The crew spent the rest of the 1894 – 95 winter preparing clothing and equipment for the forthcoming sledge journey . <unk> were built , to be carried on the sledges until needed for the crossing of open water . Preparations were interrupted early in January when violent tremors shook the ship . The crew disembarked , fearing that the vessel would be crushed , but Fram proved herself equal to the danger . On 8 January 1895 the ship 's position was 83 ° 34 ′ N , above Greely 's previous Farthest North record of 83 ° 24 . 
 = = = Dash for the pole = = = 
 On 14 March 1895 , after two false starts and with the ship 's position at 84 ° 4 ′ N , Nansen and Johansen began their journey . Nansen had allowed 50 days to cover the 356 nautical miles ( 660 km ; 410 mi ) to the pole , an average daily journey of seven nautical miles ( 13 km ; 8 @.@ 1 mi ) . After a week of travel a sextant observation indicated that they were averaging nine nautical miles a day , ( 17 km ; 10 mi ) , putting them ahead of schedule . However , uneven surfaces made skiing more difficult , and their speeds slowed . They also realised that they were marching against a southerly drift , and that distances travelled did not necessarily equate to northerly progression . On 3 April Nansen began to wonder whether the pole was , indeed , attainable . Unless their speed improved , their food would not last them to the pole and then on to Franz Josef Land . He confided in his diary : " I have become more and more convinced we ought to turn before time . " On 7 April , after making camp and observing that the way ahead was " a veritable chaos of <unk> stretching as far as the horizon " , Nansen decided to turn south . He recorded the latitude of the final northerly camp as 86 ° 13 @.@ 6 ′ N , almost three degrees beyond the previous Farthest North mark . 
 = = = Retreat = = = 
 At first Nansen and Johansen made good progress south , but on 13 April suffered a serious setback when both of their chronometers stopped . Without knowing the correct time , it was impossible for them to calculate their longitude and thus navigate their way accurately to Franz Josef Land . They restarted the watches on the basis of Nansen 's guess that they were at longitude 86 ° E , but from then on were uncertain of their true position . 
 Towards the end of April they observed the tracks of an Arctic fox , the first trace they had seen of a living creature other than their dogs since leaving Fram . Soon they began to see bear tracks , and by the end of May seals , gulls and whales were in evidence . On 31 May , by Nansen 's calculations , they were only 50 nautical miles ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) from Cape Fligely , the northernmost known point of Franz Josef Land . However , travel conditions worsened as the warmer weather caused the ice to break up . On 22 June the pair decided to rest on a stable ice floe while they repaired their equipment and gathered their strength for the next stage of their journey . They remained on the floe for a month . The day after leaving this camp Nansen recorded : " At last the marvel has come to pass — land , land , and after we had almost given up our belief in it ! " Whether this still @-@ distant land was Franz Josef Land or a new discovery they did not know — they had only a rough sketch map to guide them . On 6 August they reached the edge of the ice , where they shot the last of their dogs — they had been killing the weakest regularly since 24 April , to feed the others . They then lashed their two kayaks together , raised a sail and made for the land . 
 It was soon clear that this land was part of a group of islands . As they moved slowly southwards , Nansen tentatively identified a headland as Cape Felder , on the western edge of Franz Josef Land . Towards the end of August , as the weather grew colder and travel became increasingly difficult , Nansen decided to camp for the winter . In a sheltered cove , with stones and moss for building materials , the pair erected a hut which was to be their home for the next eight months . With ready supplies of bear , walrus and seal to keep their larder stocked , their principal enemy was not hunger but inactivity . After muted Christmas and New Year celebrations , in slowly improving weather they began to prepare to leave their refuge , but it was 19 May 1896 before they were able to resume their journey . 
 = = = Rescue and return = = = 
 On 17 June , during a stop for repairs after the kayaks had been attacked by a walrus , Nansen thought he heard sounds of a dog barking , and of voices . He went to investigate , and a few minutes later saw the figure of a man approaching . It was the British explorer Frederick Jackson , who was leading an expedition to Franz Josef Land and was camped at Cape Flora on the nearby Northbrook Island . The two were equally astonished by their encounter ; after some awkward hesitation Jackson asked : " You are Nansen , aren 't you ? " , and received the reply " Yes , I am Nansen . " Johansen was soon picked up , and the pair were taken to Cape Flora where , during the following weeks , they recuperated from their ordeal . Nansen later wrote that he could " still scarcely grasp " the sudden change of fortune ; had it not been for the walrus attack that caused the delay , the two parties might have been unaware of each other 's existence . 
 On 7 August Nansen and Johansen boarded Jackson 's supply ship Windward , and sailed for Vardø where they arrived on the 13th . They were greeted by Hans Mohn , the originator of the polar drift theory , who was in the town by chance . The world was quickly informed by telegram of Nansen 's safe return , but as yet there was no news of Fram . Taking the weekly mail steamer south , Nansen and Johansen reached Hammerfest on 18 August , where they learned that Fram had been sighted . She had emerged from the ice north and west of Spitsbergen , as Nansen had predicted , and was now on her way to Tromsø . She had not passed over the pole , nor exceeded Nansen 's northern mark . Without delay Nansen and Johansen sailed for Tromsø , where they were reunited with their comrades . 
 The homeward voyage to Christiania was a series of triumphant receptions at every port . On 9 September Fram was escorted into Christiania 's harbour and welcomed by the largest crowds the city had ever seen . The crew were received by King Oscar , and Nansen , reunited with family , remained at the palace for several days as a special guest . Tributes arrived from all over the world ; typical was that from the British mountaineer Edward Whymper , who wrote that Nansen had made " almost as great an advance as has been accomplished by all other voyages in the nineteenth century put together " . 
 = = National figure = = 
 = = = Scientist and polar oracle = = = 
 Nansen 's first task on his return was to write his account of the voyage . This he did remarkably quickly , producing 300 @,@ 000 words of Norwegian text by November 1896 ; the English translation , titled Farthest North , was ready in January 1897 . The book was an instant success , and secured Nansen 's long @-@ term financial future . Nansen included without comment the one significant adverse criticism of his conduct , that of Greely , who had written in Harper 's Weekly on Nansen 's decision to leave Fram and strike for the pole : " It passes comprehension how Nansen could have thus deviated from the most sacred duty devolving on the commander of a naval expedition . " 
 During the 20 years following his return from the Arctic , Nansen devoted most of his energies to scientific work . In 1897 he accepted a professorship in zoology at the Royal Frederick University , which gave him a base from which he could tackle the major task of editing the reports of the scientific results of the Fram expedition . This was a much more arduous task than writing the expedition narrative . The results were eventually published in six volumes , and according to a later polar scientist , Robert Rudmose @-@ Brown , " were to Arctic oceanography what the Challenger expedition results had been to the oceanography of other oceans . " 
 In 1900 Nansen became director of the Christiania @-@ based International Laboratory for North Sea Research , and helped found the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea . Through his connection with the latter body , in the summer of 1900 Nansen embarked on his first visit to Arctic waters since the Fram expedition , a cruise to Iceland and Jan Mayen Land on the oceanographic research vessel Michael Sars , named after Eva 's father . Shortly after his return he learned that his Farthest North record had been passed , by members of the Duke of the Abruzzi 's Italian expedition . They had reached 86 ° <unk> on 24 April 1900 , in an attempt to reach the North Pole from Franz Josef Land . Nansen received the news philosophically : " What is the value of having goals for their own sake ? They all vanish ... it is merely a question of time . " 
 Nansen was now considered an oracle by all would @-@ be explorers of the north and south polar regions . Abruzzi had consulted him , as had the Belgian Adrien de Gerlache , each of whom took expeditions to the Antarctic . Although Nansen refused to meet his own countryman and fellow @-@ explorer Carsten Borchgrevink ( whom he considered a fraud ) , he gave advice to Robert Falcon Scott on polar equipment and transport , prior to the 1901 – 04 Discovery Expedition . At one point Nansen seriously considered leading a South Pole expedition himself , and asked Colin Archer to design two ships . However , these plans remained on the drawing board . 
 By 1901 Nansen 's family had expanded considerably . A daughter , Liv , had been born just before Fram set out ; a son , Kåre was born in 1897 followed by a daughter , Irmelin , in 1900 and a second son Odd in 1901 . The family home , which Nansen had built in 1891 from the profits of his Greenland expedition book , was now too small . Nansen acquired a plot of land in the Lysaker district and built , substantially to his own design , a large and imposing house which combined some of the characteristics of an English manor house with features from the Italian renaissance . The house was ready for occupation by April 1902 ; Nansen called it Polhøgda ( in English " polar heights " ) , and it remained his home for the rest of his life . A fifth and final child , son Asmund , was born at Polhøgda in 1903 . 
 = = = Politician and diplomat = = = 
 The union between Norway and Sweden , imposed by the Great Powers in 1814 , had been under considerable strain through the 1890s , the chief issue in question being Norway 's rights to its own consular service . Nansen , although not by inclination a politician , had spoken out on the issue on several occasions in defence of Norway 's interests . It seemed , early in the 20th century that agreement between the two countries might be possible , but hopes were dashed when negotiations broke down in February 1905 . The Norwegian government fell , and was replaced by one led by Christian Michelsen , whose programme was one of separation from Sweden . 
 In February and March Nansen published a series of newspaper articles which placed him firmly in the separatist camp . The new prime minister wanted Nansen in the cabinet , but Nansen had no political ambitions . However , at Michelsen 's request he went to Berlin and then to London where , in a letter to The Times , he presented Norway 's legal case for a separate consular service to the English @-@ speaking world . On 17 May 1905 , Norway 's Constitution Day , Nansen addressed a large crowd in Christiania , saying : " Now have all ways of retreat been closed . Now remains only one path , the way forward , perhaps through difficulties and hardships , but forward for our country , to a free Norway " . He also wrote a book , Norway and the Union with Sweden , specifically to promote Norway 's case abroad . 
 On 23 May the Storting passed the Consulate Act establishing a separate consular service . King Oscar , refused his assent ; on 27 May the Norwegian cabinet resigned , but the king would not recognise this step . On 7 June the Storting unilaterally announced that the union with Sweden was dissolved . In a tense situation the Swedish government agreed to Norway 's request that the dissolution should be put to a referendum of the Norwegian people . This was held on 13 August 1905 and resulted in an overwhelming vote for separation , at which point King Oscar relinquished the crown of Norway while retaining the Swedish throne . A second referendum , held in November , determined that the new independent state should be a monarchy rather than a republic . In anticipation of this , Michelsen 's government had been considering the suitability of various princes as candidates for the Norwegian throne . Faced with King Oscar 's refusal to allow anyone from his own House of Bernadotte to accept the crown , the favoured choice was Prince Charles of Denmark . In July 1905 Michelsen sent Nansen to Copenhagen on a secret mission to persuade Charles to accept the Norwegian throne . Nansen was successful ; shortly after the second referendum Charles was proclaimed king , taking the name Haakon VII . He and his wife , the British princess Maud , were crowned in the Nidaros Cathedral in Trondheim on 22 June 1906 . 
 In April 1906 Nansen was appointed Norway 's first Minister in London . His main task was to work with representatives of the major European powers on an Integrity Treaty which would guarantee Norway 's position . Nansen was popular in England , and got on well with King Edward , though he found court functions and diplomatic duties disagreeable ; " frivolous and boring " was his description . However , he was able to pursue his geographical and scientific interests through contacts with the Royal Geographical Society and other learned bodies . The Treaty was signed on 2 November 1907 , and Nansen considered his task complete . Resisting the pleas of , among others , King Edward that he should remain in London , on 15 November Nansen resigned his post . A few weeks later , still in England as the king 's guest at Sandringham , Nansen received word that Eva was seriously ill with pneumonia . On 8 December he set out for home , but before he reached Polhøgda he learned , from a telegram , that Eva had died . 
 = = = <unk> and traveller = = = 
 After a period of mourning , Nansen returned to London . He had been persuaded by his government to rescind his resignation until after King Edward 's state visit to Norway in April 1908 . His formal retirement from the diplomatic service was dated 1 May 1908 , the same day on which his university professorship was changed from zoology to oceanography . This new designation reflected the general character of Nansen 's more recent scientific interests . In 1905 he had supplied the Swedish physicist Walfrid Ekman with the data which established the principle in oceanography known as the Ekman spiral . Based on Nansen 's observations of ocean currents recorded during the Fram expedition , Ekman concluded that the effect of wind on the sea 's surface produced currents which " formed something like a spiral staircase , down towards the depths " . In 1909 Nansen combined with Bjørn Helland @-@ Hansen to publish an academic paper , The Norwegian Sea : its Physical Oceanography , based on the Michael Sars voyage of 1900 . 
 Nansen had by now retired from polar exploration , the decisive step being his release of Fram to his fellow @-@ Norwegian Roald Amundsen , who was planning a North Pole expedition . When Amundsen made his controversial change of plan and set out for the South Pole , Nansen stood by him . Between 1910 and 1914 , Nansen participated in a several oceanographic voyages . In 1910 , aboard the Norwegian naval vessel Fridtjof , he carried out researches in the northern Atlantic , and in 1912 he took his own yacht , <unk> , to Bear Island and Spitsbergen . The main objective of the <unk> cruise was the investigation of salinity in the North Polar Basin . One of Nansen 's lasting contributions to oceanography was his work designing instruments and equipment ; the " Nansen bottle " for taking deep water samples remained in use into the 21st century , in a version updated by Shale <unk> . 
 At the request of the Royal Geographical Society , Nansen began work on a study of Arctic discoveries , which developed into a two @-@ volume history of the exploration of the northern regions up to the beginning of the 16th century . This was published in 1911 as Nord i <unk> ( " In Northern Mists " ) . That year he renewed an acquaintance with Kathleen Scott , wife of Robert Falcon Scott whose Terra Nova Expedition had sailed for Antarctica in 1910 . Biographer Roland Huntford has asserted that Nansen and Kathleen Scott enjoyed a brief love affair . Many women were attracted to Nansen , and he had a reputation as a womaniser . His personal life was troubled around this time ; in January 1913 he received news of the suicide of Hjalmar Johansen , who had returned in disgrace from Amundsen 's successful South Pole expedition . In March 1913 , Nansen 's youngest son Asmund died after a long illness . 
 In the summer of 1913 Nansen travelled to the Kara Sea , by the invitation of Jonas Lied , as part of a delegation investigating a possible trade route between Western Europe and the Siberian interior . The party then took a steamer up the Yenisei River to Krasnoyarsk , and travelled on the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway to Vladivostok before turning for home . Nansen published a report from the trip in Through Siberia . The life and culture of the Russian peoples aroused in Nansen an interest and sympathy he would carry through to his later life . Immediately before the First World War , Nansen joined Helland @-@ Hansen in an oceanographical cruise in eastern Atlantic waters . 
 = = = Statesman and humanitarian = = = 
 On the outbreak of war in 1914 Norway declared its neutrality , alongside Sweden and Denmark . Nansen was appointed president of the Norwegian Union of Defence , but had few official duties , and continued with his professional work as far as circumstances permitted . As the war progressed , the loss of Norway 's overseas trade led to acute shortages of food in the country , which became critical in April 1917 when the United States entered the war and placed extra restrictions on international trade . Nansen was dispatched to Washington by the Norwegian government ; after months of discussion he secured food and other supplies in return for the introduction of a rationing system . When his government hesitated over the deal , he signed the agreement on his own initiative . 
 Within a few months of the war 's end in November 1918 a draft agreement had been accepted by the Paris Peace Conference to create a League of Nations , as a means of resolving disputes between nations by peaceful means . The foundation of the League at this time was providential as far as Nansen was concerned , giving him a new outlet for his restless energy . 
 He became president of the Norwegian League of Nations Society , and although the Scandinavian nations with their traditions of neutrality initially held themselves aloof , his advocacy helped to ensure that Norway became a full member of the League in 1920 , and he became one of its three delegates to the League 's General Assembly . 
 In April 1920 , at the League 's request , Nansen began organising the repatriation of around half a million prisoners of war , stranded in various parts of the world . Of these , 300 @,@ 000 were in Russia which , gripped by revolution and civil war , had little interest in their fate . Nansen was able to report to the Assembly in November 1920 that around 200 @,@ 000 men had been returned to their homes . " Never in my life " , he said , " have I been brought into touch with so formidable an amount of suffering . " Nansen continued this work for a further two years until , in his final report to the Assembly in 1922 , he was able to state that 427 @,@ 886 prisoners had been repatriated to around 30 different countries . In paying tribute to his work , the responsible committee recorded that the story of his efforts " would contain tales of heroic endeavour worthy of those in the accounts of the crossing of Greenland and the great Arctic voyage . " 
 Even before this work was complete , Nansen was involved in a further humanitarian effort . On 1 September 1921 , prompted by the British delegate Philip Noel @-@ Baker , he accepted the post of the League 's High Commissioner for Refugees . His main brief was the resettlement of around two million Russian refugees displaced by the upheavals of the Russian Revolution . At the same time he tried to tackle the urgent problem of famine in Russia ; following a widespread failure of crops around 30 million people were threatened with starvation and death . Despite Nansen 's pleas on behalf of the starving , Russia 's revolutionary government was feared and distrusted internationally , and the League was reluctant to come to its peoples ' aid . Nansen had to rely largely on fundraising from private organisations , and his efforts met with limited success . Later he was to express himself bitterly on the matter : 
 There was in various transatlantic countries such an abundance of maize , that the farmers had to burn it as fuel in their railway engines . At the same time the ships in Europe were idle , for there were no cargoes . Simultaneously there were thousands , nay millions of unemployed . All this , while thirty million people in the Volga region — not far away and easily reached by our ships — were allowed to starve and die . 
 A major problem impeding Nansen 's work on behalf of refugees was that most of them lacked documentary proof of identity or nationality . Without legal status in their country of refuge , their lack of papers meant they were unable to go anywhere else . To overcome this , Nansen devised a document that became known as the " Nansen passport " , a form of identity for stateless persons that was in time recognised by more than 50 governments , and which allowed refugees to cross borders legally . Among the more distinguished holders of Nansen passports were the artist Marc Chagall , the composer Igor Stravinsky , and the dancer Anna Pavlova . Although the passport was created initially for refugees from Russia , it was extended to cover other groups . After the Greco @-@ Turkish wars of 1919 – 1922 Nansen travelled to Constantinople to negotiate the resettlement of hundreds of thousands of refugees , mainly ethnic Greeks who had fled from Turkey after the defeat of the Greek Army . The impoverished Greek state was unable to take them in , and so Nansen devised a scheme for a population exchange whereby half a million Turks in Greece were returned to Turkey , with full financial compensation , while further loans facilitated the absorption of the refugee Greeks into their homeland . Despite some controversy over the principle of a population exchange , the plan was implemented successfully over a period of several years . In November 1922 , while attending the Conference of Lausanne , Nansen learned that he had been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 1922 . The citation referred to " his work for the repatriation of the prisoners of war , his work for the Russian refugees , his work to bring succour to the millions of Russians afflicted by famine , and finally his present work for the refugees in Asia Minor and Thrace " . Nansen donated the prize money to international relief efforts . 
 From 1925 onwards he spent much time trying to help Armenian refugees , victims of Armenian Genocide at the hands of the Ottoman Empire during the First World War and further ill @-@ treatment thereafter . His goal was the establishment of a national home for these refugees , within the borders of Soviet Armenia . His main assistant in this endeavour was Vidkun Quisling , the future Nazi collaborator and head of a Norwegian puppet government during the Second World War . After visiting the region , Nansen presented the Assembly with a modest plan for the irrigation of 36 @,@ 000 hectares ( 360 km2 or 139 square miles ) on which 15 @,@ 000 refugees could be settled . The plan ultimately failed , because even with Nansen 's unremitting advocacy the money to finance the scheme was not forthcoming . Despite this failure , his reputation among the Armenian people remains high . Nansen wrote the book , Armenia and the Near East in 1923 which describes his sympathies to the plight of the Armenians in the wake of losing its independence to the Soviet Union . The book was translated in many languages including Norwegian , English , French , German , Russian and Armenian . After his visit to Armenia , Nansen wrote two additional books called " Gjennem Armenia " ( " Across Armenia " ) , published in 1927 and " Gjennem <unk> til Volga " ( " Through Caucasus to Volga " ) . 
 Within the League 's Assembly , Nansen spoke out on many issues besides those related to refugees . He believed that the Assembly gave the smaller countries such as Norway a " unique opportunity for speaking in the councils of the world . " He believed that the extent of the League 's success in reducing armaments would be the greatest test of its credibility . He was a signatory to the Slavery Convention of 25 September 1926 , which sought to outlaw the use of forced labour . He supported a settlement of the post @-@ war reparations issue , and championed Germany 's membership of the League , which was granted in September 1926 after intensive preparatory work by Nansen . 
 = = Later life = = 
 On 17 January 1919 Nansen married Sigrun Munthe , a long @-@ time friend with whom he had had a love affair in 1905 , while Eva was still alive . The marriage was resented by the Nansen children , and proved unhappy ; an acquaintance writing of them in the 1920s said Nansen appeared unbearably miserable and Sigrun steeped in hate . 
 Nansen 's League of Nations commitments through the 1920s meant that he was mostly absent from Norway , and was able to devote little time to scientific work . Nevertheless , he continued to publish occasional papers . He entertained the hope that he might travel to the North Pole by airship , but could not raise sufficient funding . In any event he was forestalled in this ambition by Amundsen , who flew over the pole in Umberto Nobile 's airship Norge in May 1926 . Two years later Nansen broadcast a memorial oration to Amundsen , who had disappeared in the Arctic while organising a rescue party for Nobile whose airship had crashed during a second polar voyage . Nansen said of Amundsen : " He found an unknown grave under the clear sky of the icy world , with the whirring of the wings of eternity through space . " 
 In 1926 Nansen was elected Rector of the University of St Andrews in Scotland , the first foreigner to hold this largely honorary position . He used the occasion of his inaugural address to review his life and philosophy , and to deliver a call to the youth of the next generation . He ended : 
 We all have a Land of Beyond to seek in our life — what more can we ask ? Our part is to find the trail that leads to it . A long trail , a hard trail , maybe ; but the call comes to us , and we have to go . Rooted deep in the nature of every one of us is the spirit of adventure , the call of the wild — vibrating under all our actions , making life deeper and higher and nobler . 
 Nansen largely avoided involvement in domestic Norwegian politics , but in 1924 he was persuaded by the long @-@ retired former Prime Minister Christian Michelsen to take part in a new anti @-@ communist political grouping , the Fatherland League . There were fears in Norway that should the Marxist @-@ oriented Labour Party gain power it would introduce a revolutionary programme . At the inaugural rally of the League in Oslo ( as Christiania had now been renamed ) , Nansen declared : " To talk of the right of revolution in a society with full civil liberty , universal suffrage , equal treatment for everyone ... [ is ] idiotic nonsense . " 
 Following continued turmoil between the centre @-@ right parties , there was even an independent petition in 1926 gaining some momentum that proposed for Nansen to head a centre @-@ right national unity government on a balanced budget program , an idea he did not reject . He was the headline speaker at the single largest Fatherland League rally with 15 @,@ 000 attendees in Tønsberg in 1928 . In 1929 he went on his final tour for the League on the ship Stella Polaris , holding speeches from Bergen to Hammerfest . 
 In between his various duties and responsibilities , Nansen had continued to take skiing holidays when he could . In February 1930 , aged 68 , he took a short break in the mountains with two old friends , who noted that Nansen was slower than usual and appeared to tire easily . On his return to Oslo he was laid up for several months , with influenza and later phlebitis , and was visited on his sickbed by <unk> , Haakon VII of Norway . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Nansen died of a heart attack , at home , on 13 May 1930 . He was given a non @-@ religious state funeral before cremation , after which his ashes were laid under a tree at Polhøgda . Nansen 's daughter Liv recorded that there were no speeches , just music : Schubert 's Death and the Maiden , which Eva used to sing . Among the many tributes paid to him subsequently was that of Lord Robert Cecil , a fellow League of Nations delegate , who spoke of the range of Nansen 's work , done with no regard for his own interests or health : " Every good cause had his support . He was a fearless peacemaker , a friend of justice , an advocate always for the weak and suffering . " 
 Nansen had been a pioneer and innovator in many fields . As a young man he embraced the revolution in skiing methods that transformed it from a means of winter travel to a universal sport , and quickly became one of Norway 's leading skiers . He was later able to apply this expertise to the problems of polar travel , in both his Greenland and his Fram expeditions . He invented the " Nansen sledge " with broad , ski @-@ like runners , the " Nansen cooker " to improve the heat efficiency of the standard spirit stoves then in use , and the layer principle in polar clothing , whereby the traditionally heavy , awkward garments were replaced by layers of lightweight material . In science , Nansen is recognised both as one of the founders of modern neurology , and as a significant contributor to early oceanographical science , in particular for his work in establishing the Central Oceanographic Laboratory in Christiania . 
 Through his work on behalf of the League of Nations , Nansen helped to establish the principle of international responsibility for refugees . Immediately after his death the League set up the Nansen International Office for Refugees , a semi @-@ autonomous body under the League 's authority , to continue his work . The Nansen Office faced great difficulties , in part arising from the large numbers of refugees from the European dictatorships during the 1930s . Nevertheless , it secured the agreement of 14 countries ( including a reluctant Great Britain ) to the Refugee Convention of 1933 . It also helped to repatriate 10 @,@ 000 Armenians to Yerevan in Soviet Armenia , and to find homes for a further 40 @,@ 000 in Syria and Lebanon . In 1938 , the year in which it was superseded by a wider @-@ ranging body , the Nansen Office was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . 
 In 1954 the League 's successor body , the United Nations , established the Nansen Medal , later named the Nansen Refugee Award , given annually by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to an individual , group or organisation " for outstanding work on behalf of the forcibly displaced " . A central street in Sofia Bulgaria is named after <unk> Nansen , and a memorial plate is mounted on a nearby building . 
 In his lifetime and thereafter , Nansen received honours and recognition from many countries . Nansen Ski Club , the oldest continually operated ski club in the United States , located in Berlin , New Hampshire , is named in his honour . Numerous geographical features are named after him : the Nansen Basin and the Nansen @-@ <unk> Ridge in the Arctic Ocean ; Mount Nansen in the Yukon region of Canada ; Mount Nansen , Mount Fridtjof Nansen and Nansen Island , all in Antarctica . Polhøgda is now home to the Fridtjof Nansen Institute , an independent foundation which engages in research on environmental , energy and resource management politics . In 1968 a film of Nansen 's life , Bare et liv – <unk> om Fridtjof Nansen was released , directed by Sergei <unk> , with Knut <unk> as Nansen . In 2004 the Royal Norwegian Navy launched the first of a series of five Fridtjof Nansen @-@ class frigates . The lead ship of the group is HNoMS Fridtjof Nansen ; two others are named after Roald Amundsen and Otto Sverdrup . In the ocean , Nansen is commemorated by <unk> , small mesopelagic fishes of family <unk> . In space , he is commemorated by asteroid 853 <unk> . In 1964 , the IAU adopted the name Nansen for an impact crater at the Lunar north pole , after the Norwegian explorer . 
 = = Works = = 
 Paa ski over Grønland . En <unk> af Den norske <unk> @-@ <unk> 1888 – 89 . Aschehoug , Kristiania 1890 . Tr. as The First Crossing of Greenland , 1892 . 
 <unk> . Aschehoug , Kristiania 1891 . Tr. as Eskimo Life , 1893 . 
 Fram over <unk> . Den norske <unk> 1893 – 1896 .. Aschehoug , Kristiania 1897 . Tr. as Farthest North , 1897 . 
 The Norwegian North Polar Expedition , 1893 – 1896 ; Scientific Results ( 6 volumes , 1901 ) . 
 Norge og <unk> med Sverige . Jacob Dybwads Forlag , Kristiania 1905 . Tr. as Norway and the Union With Sweden , 1905 . 
 Northern Waters : Captain Roald Amundsen 's Oceanographic Observations in the Arctic Seas in 1901 . J. <unk> , 1906 . 
 Nord i <unk> . <unk> av <unk> <unk> <unk> i <unk> <unk> . Jacob Dybwads Forlag , Kristiania 1911 . Tr. as In Northern Mists : Arctic Exploration in Early Times , 1911 . 
 Gjennem <unk> . Jacob Dybwads <unk> , Kristiania , 1914 . Tr. as Through Siberia the Land of the Future , 1914 . 
 <unk> @-@ liv . Jacob Dybwads Forlag , Kristiania , 1916 . 
 En <unk> til Spitsbergen . Jacob Dybwads Forlag , Kristiania , 1920 . 
 <unk> og <unk> . Jacob Dybwads Forlag , Kristiania , 1923 . 
 <unk> sel og <unk> . Min <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> . Jacob Dybwads Forlag , Kristiania , 1924 . 
 Gjennem Armenia . Jacob Dybwads Forlag , Oslo , 1927 . 
 Gjennem <unk> til Volga . Jacob Dybwads Forlag , Oslo , 1929 . Tr. as Through The Caucasus To The Volga , 1931 . 
 English translations 
 Armenia and the Near East . Publisher : J.C. & A.L. Fawcett , Inc . , New York , 1928 . ( excerpts ) . 
 = Planet of the Ood = 
 " Planet of the Ood " is the third episode of the fourth series of British science fiction television series Doctor Who . It was broadcast on BBC One on 19 April 2008 . It features the return of the Ood , who appeared in the second series episodes " The Impossible Planet " and " The Satan Pit " . 
 The episode takes place in the year <unk> on the Ood @-@ Sphere , the titular planet of the episode . The Doctor ( David Tennant ) and his companion Donna Noble ( Catherine Tate ) investigate Ood Operations , a company that is selling the Ood as a servant race , to discover the reason the Ood are happy to serve . When they find a group of unprocessed Ood , they become horrified at the alterations performed and resolve to free the Ood . The episode was well @-@ received for its central theme of slavery . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Doctor sets the TARDIS controls to random and materialises on a snowy alien planet . Outside , he and Donna find an injured Ood lying in the snow . Just before he dies , the Ood 's eyes turn red and it makes a lunge for the Doctor and startles him with his ferocity . The Doctor surmises that the Ood was being influenced by a being near them . They find a nearby industrial complex called Ood Operations , a company that has been harvesting and selling the Ood as servants . The Doctor discovers that they are on the Ood @-@ Sphere in the year <unk> , close to the Sense @-@ Sphere of the Sensorites . The " Red Eye " phenomenon begins affecting other Ood on the planet and several people are killed in the weeks before the Doctor arrived . The possessed Ood keep stating that " the circle must be broken " . Ood Operations consider the phenomenon to be a disease similar to foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease . The CEO of Ood Operations , <unk> Halpen , tells the Doctor the method of killing each time is identical : the victims are electrocuted by the Ood 's translation spheres . 
 Throughout the episode , Donna becomes sympathetic to the Ood and is horrified by their enslavement . The Doctor also takes an interest in the Ood , noting that no species could naturally evolve to be servants . He and Donna travel through the complex and find a batch of uncultivated Ood singing together . Instead of a translation sphere , they hold a " hindbrain " that gives them individuality . This hindbrain is being removed and replaced with the translation sphere by the humans to make them subservient , and the Doctor rebukes Halpen for <unk> the Ood . The Doctor and Donna are captured by Ood Operations ' security force . Shortly after , the Ood begin a mass revolution and the complex is evacuated . The Doctor follows Halpen to a locked warehouse that contains a large brain , which is revealed to be the Ood 's collective consciousness . The brain 's control of the Ood is limited by a circle of pylons emitting a forcefield . Halpen plans to kill the brain and by extension all of the Ood , but is stopped by the Doctor , Donna , and Dr. Ryder . Dr. Ryder reveals that he is secretly an activist for " Friends of the Ood " , and had slowly infiltrated the company to gain access to the pylons and lower their force field to cause the revolution . Halpen is outraged at his betrayal , so he throws Dr. Ryder into the brain , killing him . Halpen 's personal Ood servant , Ood Sigma , has been using Halpen 's hair loss medication to slowly convert Halpen into an Ood . Ood Sigma tells the Doctor and Donna that he will take care of Halpen . 
 The Doctor shuts down the pylons , freeing the Ood and allowing them all to sing in a telepathic collective . As the Doctor and Donna prepare to leave , Ood Sigma promises to include the " Doctor @-@ Donna " in the Ood 's song . He also tells the Doctor that his song will soon be ending . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The red eye phenomenon in the Ood is a symptom of them being possessed . In " The Impossible Planet " and " The Satan Pit " they were under the Beast 's control . In " Death is the Only Answer " , Albert Einstein is transformed into a red @-@ eyed Ood . In " The Doctor 's Wife " , an Ood named Nephew is possessed but displays bright green eyes instead of red . 
 The Ood @-@ Sphere is in the same solar system as the Sense @-@ Sphere , the location for the 1964 serial The Sensorites ; the Sensorites and Ood are visually and mentally similar . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Keith Temple and directed by Graeme Harper . Executive producer Russell T Davies had envisioned the Ood 's return because their previous appearance , the 2006 two @-@ part story " The Impossible Planet " and " The Satan Pit " , had been overshadowed by the appearance of the Devil . Davies subsequently provided Temple with a brief for the episode which included the term " ice planet " and the storyline of a business selling the Ood as a commodity . Temple 's drafts of the episode were described as " too dark " and " too old Doctor Who " ; Temple stated on the episode 's commentary that his early draft was " a six @-@ part [ serial ] in 45 minutes " . 
 Temple and Davies thought that the episode was not a " fun reappearance " of an old monster ; instead , they felt that there was " an actual story to tell " . Temple emphasised in his script that the Doctor overlooked the Ood under the shadow of the Devil , and the character had to see his shortcomings . Temple 's script also emphasised the Ood 's slavery ; both Temple and lead actor David Tennant commented that the existence of a species born to serve was complicated , the latter stating complications with Richard Dawkins ' " selfish gene " theory . Donna 's role in the episode was to further humanise the Doctor , and her opinion of the Ood changing from her initial disgust at their appearance to empathy for them was important to the episode and her character development . Susie Liggat cited the writing as part of Doctor Who 's importance — she thought the story about " liberating oppressed people " could be applied domestically or globally . 
 The episode 's antagonist , <unk> Halpen , is portrayed by Tim McInnerny . Davies considered his character — " a middle manager who 's out of his depth " — a perfect villain . Temple described him as " narcissistic " , " preening " and " ruthless ... without sentiment " . McInnerny said " It 's always nice to play a bastard ... I 'm glad Halpen 's a three @-@ dimensional bastard ! That makes him interesting ! " . Temple epitomised Halpen in a scene where he kills an operative for the activist group " Friends of the Ood " ; Davies and Tennant felt that his " disgusting " and " gothic ... Edgar Allan Poe " fate would be undeserved otherwise . 
 Filming for the episode took place in August 2007 . The opening and closing outdoor scenes were filmed in <unk> Quarry in the Brecon Beacons , the external scenes of the complex at <unk> Cement Works , and scenes in the " battery farm " were filmed in a hangar at RAF Saint Athan . CGI was used sparingly in production ; the snow was paper snow adhered by water , and the Ood heads contained complex animatronics . McInnerny wore a prosthetic mask with two layers for his transformation scene though the production team 's best boy provided motion capture for the computer @-@ generated profile of the appendages coming out of his mouth when this needed to be refilmed and McInnerny was unavailable . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Planet of the Ood " was the most watched programme in its timeslot , with 7 @.@ 5 million viewers . The episode was the second most @-@ watched programme of the day , beaten by Britain 's Got Talent , and was the twelfth most watched programme of the week . The episode 's Appreciation Index was 87 ( considered Excellent ) . 
 Scott Matthewman , writing for The Stage , gave a mixed review of the episode . He thought that " pretty much the only surprise in the way the humans who made up the Ood Corporation were presented came as PR girl Solana ( Ayesha Dharker ) escaped with the Doctor and Donna , only to betray their position by calling for the guards , " and " the revelation that Ryder ( Adrian Rawlins ) has been working to infiltrate the Corporation is thrown away ... as quickly as it is revealed . " However , he thought Donna was becoming " fast ... one of the strongest and most well @-@ rounded companions in the series ’ history " , and " there were some nice interpretations of the Ood ’ s natural development " . Caitlin Moran of The Times thought the episode was " really really good ... – one that will have you staring at your screen and asking , once again , ' How can something so good be happening so early on a Saturday night , in my own front room ? ' " . She enjoyed the scene where the Doctor and Donna talk about slaves in contemporary culture , saying that Tate " really , really isn ’ t that bad when she says [ " We don 't have slaves . " ] " . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy gave the episode five stars out of five . Rawson @-@ Jones opened his review by saying " Doctor Who can occasionally transcend the properties of a mere family television show to reach out and give viewers a poignant , beautiful epiphany and greater sense of the world they inhabit , " citing Donna 's reaction on seeing the uncultivated Ood as the moving part of the episode . He thought the episode as a whole " exemplifies just how powerful and emotive Doctor Who can be when writing , direction and performance are all harmonious and complete their own Ood @-@ like circle " , and was appreciative of the acting . The episode 's only flaw was when Donna said " Why do you say ' Miss ' ? Do I look single ? " , but was otherwise " an extremely impressive , contemplative examination of the abhorrent nature of humanity " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Planet of the Ood " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe = 
 Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe ( née Clemm ; August 15 , 1822 – January 30 , 1847 ) was the wife of American writer Edgar Allan Poe . The couple were first cousins and married when Virginia Clemm was 13 and Poe was 27 . Biographers disagree as to the nature of the couple 's relationship . Though their marriage was loving , some biographers suggest they viewed one another more like a brother and sister . In January 1842 she contracted tuberculosis , growing worse for five years until she died of the disease at the age of 24 in the family 's cottage , at that time outside New York City . 
 Along with other family members , Virginia Clemm and Edgar Allan Poe lived together off and on for several years before their marriage . The couple often moved to accommodate Poe 's employment , living intermittently in Baltimore , Philadelphia , and New York . A few years after their wedding , Poe was involved in a substantial scandal involving Frances Sargent Osgood and Elizabeth F. Ellet . Rumors about amorous improprieties on her husband 's part affected Virginia Poe so much that on her deathbed she claimed that Ellet had murdered her . After her death , her body was eventually placed under the same memorial marker as her husband 's in Westminster Hall and Burying Ground in Baltimore , Maryland . Only one image of Virginia Eliza Clemm Poe has been authenticated : a watercolor portrait painted several hours after her death . 
 The disease and eventual death of his wife had a substantial effect on Edgar Allan Poe , who became despondent and turned to alcohol to cope . Her struggles with illness and death are believed to have affected his poetry and prose , where dying young women appear as a frequent motif , as in " Annabel Lee " , " The Raven " , and " Ligeia " . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Virginia Eliza Clemm was born in 1822 and named after an older sister who had died as an infant only ten days earlier . Her father William Clemm , Jr. was a hardware merchant in Baltimore . He had married Maria Poe , Virginia 's mother , on July 12 , 1817 , after the death of his first wife , Maria 's first cousin Harriet . Clemm had five children from his previous marriage and went on to have three more with Maria . After his death in 1826 , he left very little to the family and relatives offered no financial support because they had opposed the marriage . Maria supported the family by sewing and taking in boarders , aided with an annual $ 240 pension granted to her mother Elizabeth Cairnes , who was paralyzed and bedridden . Elizabeth received this pension on behalf of her late husband , " General " David Poe , a former quartermaster in Maryland who had loaned money to the state . 
 Edgar Poe first met his cousin Virginia in August 1829 , four months after his discharge from the Army . She was seven at the time . In 1832 , the family – made up of Elizabeth , Maria , Virginia , and Virginia 's brother Henry – was able to use Elizabeth 's pension to rent a home at what was then 3 North Amity Street in Baltimore . Poe 's older brother William Henry Leonard Poe , who had been living with the family , had recently died on August 1 , 1831 . Poe joined the household in 1833 and was soon smitten by a neighbor named Mary Devereaux . The young Virginia served as a messenger between the two , at one point retrieving a lock of Devereaux 's hair to give to Poe . Elizabeth Cairnes Poe died on July 7 , 1835 , effectively ending the family 's income and making their financial situation even more difficult . Henry died around this time , sometime before 1836 , leaving Virginia as Maria Clemm 's only surviving child . 
 In August 1835 , Poe left the destitute family behind and moved to Richmond , Virginia to take a job at the Southern Literary Messenger . While Poe was away from Baltimore , another cousin , Neilson Poe , the husband of Virginia 's half @-@ sister Josephine Clemm , heard that Edgar was considering marrying Virginia . Neilson offered to take her in and have her educated in an attempt to prevent the girl 's marriage to Edgar at such a young age , though suggesting that the option could be reconsidered later . Edgar called Neilson , the owner of a newspaper in Baltimore , Maryland , his " bitterest enemy " and interpreted his cousin 's actions as an attempt at breaking his connection with Virginia . On August 29 , 1835 , Edgar wrote an emotional letter to Maria , declaring that he was " blinded with tears while writing " , and pleading that she allow Virginia to make her own decision . Encouraged by his employment at the Southern Literary Messenger , Poe offered to provide financially for Maria , Virginia and Henry if they moved to Richmond . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Marriage plans were confirmed and Poe returned to Baltimore to file for a marriage license on September 22 , 1835 . The couple might have been quietly married as well , though accounts are unclear . Their only public ceremony was in Richmond on May 16 , 1836 , when they were married by a Presbyterian minister named Rev. Amasa Converse . Poe was 27 and Virginia was 13 , though her age was listed as 21 . This marriage bond was filed in Richmond and included an affidavit from Thomas W. Cleland confirming the bride 's alleged age . The ceremony was held in the evening at the home of a Mrs. James <unk> , the owner of the boarding house in which Poe , Virginia , and Virginia 's mother Maria Clemm were staying . <unk> helped Maria Clemm bake the wedding cake and prepared a wedding meal . The couple then had a short honeymoon in Petersburg , Virginia . 
 Debate has raged regarding how unusual this pairing was based on the couple 's age and blood relationship . Noted Poe biographer Arthur Hobson Quinn argues it was not particularly unusual , nor was Poe 's nicknaming his wife " Sissy " or " Sis " . Another Poe biographer , Kenneth Silverman , contends that though their first @-@ cousin marriage was not unusual , her young age was . It has been suggested that Clemm and Poe had a relationship more like that between brother and sister than between husband and wife . Biographer Arthur Hobson Quinn disagreed with this view , citing a fervent love letter to argue that Poe " loved his little cousin not only with the affection of a brother , but also with the passionate devotion of a lover and prospective husband . " Some scholars , including Marie Bonaparte , have read many of Poe 's works as autobiographical and have concluded that Virginia died a virgin . It has been speculated that she and her husband never consummated their marriage , although no evidence is given . This interpretation often assumes that Virginia is represented by the title character in the poem " Annabel Lee " : a " maiden ... by the name of Annabel Lee " . Poe biographer Joseph Wood Krutch suggests that Poe did not need women " in the way that normal men need them " , but only as a source of inspiration and care , and that Poe was never interested in women sexually . Friends of Poe suggested that the couple did not share a bed for at least the first two years of their marriage but that , from the time she turned 16 , they had a " normal " married life until the onset of her illness . 
 Virginia and Poe were by all accounts a happy and devoted couple . Poe 's one @-@ time employer George Rex Graham wrote of their relationship : " His love for his wife was a sort of rapturous worship of the spirit of beauty . " Poe once wrote to a friend , " I see no one among the living as beautiful as my little wife . " She , in turn , by many contemporary accounts , nearly idolized her husband . She often sat close to him while he wrote , kept his pens in order , and folded and addressed his manuscripts . She showed her love for Poe in an acrostic poem she composed when she was 23 , dated February 14 , 1846 : 
 = = = Osgood / Ellet scandal = = = 
 The " tattling of many tongues " in Virginia 's Valentine poem was a reference to actual incidents . In 1845 , Poe had begun a flirtation with Frances Sargent Osgood , a married 34 @-@ year @-@ old poet . Virginia was aware of the friendship and might even have encouraged it . She often invited Osgood to visit them at home , believing that the older woman had a " restraining " effect on Poe , who had made a promise to " give up the use of stimulants " and was never drunk in Osgood 's presence . 
 At the same time , another poet , Elizabeth F. Ellet , became enamored of Poe and jealous of Osgood . Though , in a letter to Sarah Helen Whitman , Poe called her love for him " loathsome " and wrote that he " could do nothing but repel [ it ] with scorn " , he printed many of her poems to him in the Broadway Journal while he was its editor . Ellet was known for being meddlesome and vindictive and , while visiting the Poe household in late January 1846 , she saw one of Osgood 's personal letters to Poe . According to Ellet , Virginia pointed out " fearful paragraphs " in Osgood 's letter . Ellet contacted Osgood and suggested she should beware of her indiscretions and asked Poe to return her letters , motivated either by jealousy or by a desire to cause scandal . Osgood then sent Margaret Fuller and Anne Lynch Botta to ask Poe on her behalf to return the letters . Angered by their interference , Poe called them " Busy @-@ bodies " and said that Ellet had better " look after her own letters " , suggesting indiscretion on her part . He then gathered up these letters from Ellet and left them at her house . 
 Though these letters had already been returned to her , Ellet asked her brother " to demand of me the letters " . Her brother , Colonel William Lummis , did not believe that Poe had already returned them and threatened to kill him . In order to defend himself , Poe requested a pistol from Thomas Dunn English . English , Poe 's friend and a minor writer who was also a trained doctor and lawyer , likewise did not believe that Poe had already returned the letters and even questioned their existence . The easiest way out of the predicament , he said , " was a retraction of unfounded charges " . Angered at being called a liar , Poe pushed English into a fistfight . Poe later claimed he was triumphant in the fight , though English claimed otherwise , and Poe 's face was badly cut by one of English 's rings . In Poe 's version , he said , " I gave E. a flogging which he will remember to the day of his death . " Either way , the fight further sparked gossip over the Osgood affair . 
 Osgood 's husband stepped in and threatened to sue Ellet unless she formally apologized for her insinuations . She retracted her statements in a letter to Osgood saying , " The letter shown me by Mrs Poe must have been a forgery " created by Poe himself . She put all the blame on Poe , suggesting the incident was because Poe was " intemperate and subject to acts of lunacy " . Ellet spread the rumor of Poe 's insanity , which was taken up by other enemies of Poe and reported in newspapers . The St. Louis Reveille reported : " A rumor is in circulation in New York , to the effect that Mr. Edgar A. Poe , the poet and author , has been deranged , and his friends are about to place him under the charge of Dr. Brigham of the Insane Retreat at Utica . " The scandal eventually died down only when Osgood reunited with her husband . Virginia , however , had been very affected by the whole affair . She had received anonymous letters about her husband 's alleged indiscretions as early as July 1845 . It is presumed that Ellet was involved with these letters , and they so disturbed Virginia that she allegedly declared on her deathbed that " Mrs. E. had been her murderer . " 
 = = = Illness = = = 
 By this time , Virginia had developed consumption , first seen sometime in the middle of January 1842 . While singing and playing the piano , Virginia began to bleed from the mouth , though Poe said she merely " ruptured a blood @-@ vessel " . Her health declined and she became an invalid , which drove Poe into a deep depression , especially as she occasionally showed signs of improvement . In a letter to a friend , Poe described his resulting mental state : " Each time I felt all the agonies of her death — and at each accession of the disorder I loved her more dearly & clung to her life with more desperate pertinacity . But I am constitutionally sensitive — nervous in a very unusual degree . I became insane , with long intervals of horrible sanity . " 
 Virginia 's condition might have been what prompted the Poe family to move , in the hopes of finding a healthier environment for her . They moved several times within Philadelphia in the early 1840s and their last home in that city is now preserved as the Edgar Allan Poe National Historic Site in Spring Garden . In this home , Virginia was well enough to tend the flower garden and entertain visitors by playing the harp or the piano and singing . The family then moved to New York sometime in early April 1844 , traveling by train and steamboat . Virginia waited on board the ship while her husband secured space at a boarding house on Greenwich Street . By early 1846 , family friend Elizabeth Oakes Smith said that Virginia admitted , " I know I shall die soon ; I know I can 't get well ; but I want to be as happy as possible , and make Edgar happy . " She promised her husband that after her death she would be his guardian angel . 
 = = = Move to Fordham = = = 
 In May 1846 , the family ( Poe , Virginia , and her mother , Maria ) moved to a small cottage in Fordham , about fourteen miles outside the city , a home which is still standing today . In what is the only surviving letter from Poe to Virginia , dated June 12 , 1846 , he urged her to remain optimistic : " Keep up your heart in all hopelessness , and trust yet a little longer . " Of his recent loss of the Broadway Journal , the only magazine Poe ever owned , he said , " I should have lost my courage but for you — my darling little wife you are my greatest and only stimulus now to battle with this uncongenial , unsatisfactory and ungrateful life . " But by November of that year , Virginia 's condition was hopeless . Her symptoms included irregular appetite , flushed cheeks , unstable pulse , night sweats , high fever , sudden chills , shortness of breath , chest pains , coughing and spitting up blood . 
 Nathaniel Parker Willis , a friend of Poe 's and an influential editor , published an announcement on December 30 , 1846 , requesting help for the family , though his facts were not entirely correct : 
 Illness of Edgar A. Poe . — We regret to learn that this gentleman and his wife are both dangerously ill with the consumption , and that the hand of misfortune lies heavily on their temporal affairs . We are sorry to mention the fact that they are so far reduced as to be barely able to obtain the necessaries of life . That is , indeed , a hard lot , and we do hope that the friends and admirers of Mr. Poe will come promptly to his assistance in his bitterest hour of need . 
 Willis , who had not corresponded with Poe for two years and had since lost his own wife , was one of his greatest supporters in this period . He sent Poe and his wife an inspirational Christmas book , The Marriage Ring ; or How to Make a Home Happy . 
 The announcement was similar to one made for Poe 's mother , Eliza Poe , during her last stages of tuberculosis . Other newspapers picked up on the story : " Great God ! " , said one , " is it possible , that the literary people of the Union , will let poor Poe perish by starvation and lean faced beggary in New York ? For so we are led to believe , from frequent notices in the papers , stating that Poe and his wife are both down upon a bed of misery , death , and disease , with not a ducat in the world . " The Saturday Evening Post asserted that Virginia was in a hopeless condition and that Poe was bereft : " It is said that Edgar A. Poe is lying dangerously with brain fever , and that his wife is in the last stages of consumption — they are without money and without friends . " Even editor Hiram Fuller , whom Poe had previously sued for libel , attempted in the New York Mirror to garner support for Poe and his wife : " We , whom he has quarrelled with , will take the lead " , he wrote . 
 Virginia was described as having dark hair and violet eyes , with skin so pale it was called " pure white " , causing a " bad complexion that spoiled her looks " . One visitor to the Poe family noted that " the rose @-@ tint upon her cheek was too bright " , possibly a symptom of her illness . Another visitor in Fordham wrote , " Mrs. Poe looked very young ; she had large black eyes , and a pearly whiteness of complexion , which was a perfect pallor . Her pale face , her brilliant eyes , and her raven hair gave her an unearthly look . " That unearthly look was mentioned by others who suggested it made her look not quite human . William Gowans , who once lodged with the family , described Virginia as a woman of " matchless beauty and loveliness , her eye could match that of any <unk> , and her face defy the genius of a Canova to imitate " . She might have been a little plump . Many contemporary accounts as well as modern biographers remark on her childlike appearance even in the last years of her life . 
 While dying , Virginia asked her mother : " Darling ... will you console and take care of my poor Eddy — you will never never leave him ? " Her mother stayed with Poe until his own death in 1849 . As Virginia was dying , the family received many visitors , including an old friend named Mary Starr . At one point Virginia put Starr 's hand in Poe 's and asked her to " be a friend to Eddy , and don 't forsake him " . Virginia was tended to by 25 @-@ year @-@ old Marie Louise Shew . Shew , who served as a nurse , knew medical care from her father and her husband , both doctors . She provided Virginia with a comforter as her only other cover was Poe 's old military cloak , as well as bottles of wine , which the invalid drank " smiling , even when difficult to get it down " . Virginia also showed Poe a letter from Louisa Patterson , second wife of Poe 's foster @-@ father John Allan , which she had kept for years and which suggested that Patterson had purposely caused the break between Allan and Poe . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On January 29 , 1847 , Poe wrote to Marie Louise Shew : " My poor Virginia still lives , although failing fast and now suffering much pain . " Virginia died the following day , January 30 , after five years of illness . Shew helped in organizing her funeral , even purchasing the coffin . Death notices appeared in several newspapers . On February 1 , The New York Daily Tribune and the Herald carried the simple obituary : " On Saturday , the 30th <unk> . , of pulmonary consumption , in the 25th year of her age , <unk> ELIZA , wife of EDGAR A. POE . " The funeral was February 2 , 1847 . Attendees included Nathaniel Parker Willis , Ann S. Stephens , and publisher George Pope Morris . Poe refused to look at his dead wife 's face , saying he preferred to remember her living . Though now buried at Westminster Hall and Burying Ground , Virginia was originally buried in a vault owned by the Valentine family , from whom the <unk> rented their Fordham cottage . 
 Only one image of Virginia is known to exist , for which the painter had to take her corpse as model . A few hours after her death , Poe realized he had no image of Virginia and so commissioned a portrait in watercolor . She is shown wearing " beautiful linen " that Shew said she had dressed her in ; Shew might have been the portrait 's artist , though this is uncertain . The image depicts her with a slight double chin and with hazel eyes . The image was passed down to the family of Virginia 's half @-@ sister Josephine , wife of Neilson Poe . 
 In 1875 , the same year in which her husband 's body was reburied , the cemetery in which she lay was destroyed and her remains were almost forgotten . An early Poe biographer , William Gill , gathered the bones and stored them in a box he hid under his bed . Gill 's story was reported in the Boston Herald twenty @-@ seven years after the event : he says that he had visited the Fordham cemetery in 1883 at exactly the moment that the sexton Dennis Valentine held Virginia 's bones in his shovel , ready to throw them away as unclaimed . Poe himself had died in 1849 , and so Gill took Virginia 's remains and , after corresponding with Neilson Poe and John Prentiss Poe in Baltimore , arranged to bring the box down to be laid on Poe 's left side in a small bronze casket . Virginia 's remains were finally buried with her husband 's on January 19 , 1885 — the seventy @-@ sixth anniversary of her husband 's birth and nearly ten years after his current monument was erected . The same man who served as sexton during Poe 's original burial and his exhumations and <unk> was also present at the rites which brought his body to rest with Virginia and Virginia 's mother Maria Clemm . 
 = = Effect and influence on Poe = = 
 Virginia 's death had a significant effect on Poe . After her death , Poe was deeply saddened for several months . A friend said of him , " the loss of his wife was a sad blow to him . He did not seem to care , after she was gone , whether he lived an hour , a day , a week or a year ; she was his all . " A year after her death , he wrote to a friend that he had experienced the greatest evil a man can suffer when , he said , " a wife , whom I loved as no man ever loved before " , had fallen ill . While Virginia was still struggling to recover , Poe turned to alcohol after abstaining for quite some time . How often and how much he drank is a controversial issue , debated in Poe 's lifetime and also by modern biographers . Poe referred to his emotional response to his wife 's sickness as his own illness , and that he found the cure to it " in the death of my wife . This I can & do endure as becomes a man — it was the horrible never @-@ ending oscillation between hope & despair which I could not longer have endured without the total loss of reason " . 
 Poe regularly visited Virginia 's grave . As his friend Charles Chauncey Burr wrote , " Many times , after the death of his beloved wife , was he found at the dead hour of a winter night , sitting beside her tomb almost frozen in the snow " . Shortly after Virginia 's death , Poe courted several other women , including Nancy Richmond of Lowell , Massachusetts , Sarah Helen Whitman of Providence , Rhode Island , and childhood sweetheart Sarah Elmira Royster in Richmond . Even so , Frances Sargent Osgood , whom Poe also attempted to woo , believed " that [ Virginia ] was the only woman whom he ever loved " . 
 = Star Trek : Enterprise ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise commenced airing on UPN in the United States on September 18 , 2002 and concluded on May 21 , 2003 after 26 episodes . Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . The second season saw the series continue a concentration on stand @-@ alone episodes as seen in the debut season , but the decision was made to start an ongoing story @-@ arc to run into the third season with the second season finale episode " The Expanse " . The second season also saw the return of executive producer Rick Berman to writing duties after he had been working on the film Star Trek : Nemesis . 
 The season continued the Temporal Cold War story @-@ arc with the opening episode " Shockwave " ( part two ) , and the producers sought to include further appearances by the Andorians and the Vulcans . It also introduced the Romulans in their earliest appearance in the Star Trek timeline with the episode " Minefield " , and the Borg made an appearance in the series in " Regeneration " . Berman and Brannon Braga sought to bring Patrick Stewart in to direct an episode of Enterprise , and it was also suggested that either he or Whoopi Goldberg could appear on @-@ screen as their Star Trek : The Next Generation characters . Berman also said he was open to an appearance by William Shatner . 
 According to the Nielsen Ratings received for the episodes , the season stayed steady above four percent with the exception of two dips below that level . One of these dips included the episode " Horizon " , which with its 2 @.@ 2 percent rating , was the lowest viewed episode of the series at that point . The critical reception to the second season was mixed , with one reviewer stating that the series did not learn from the mistakes of the first season and another calling it childish for the lack of consequences being seen in the episodes . However , the introduction of the ongoing story @-@ line in the season finale was met with praise . The series was nominated for five Emmy Awards , four Saturn Awards and two Hugo Awards but did not win in any categories . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 The second season continues the Human exploration of interstellar space by the crew of Enterprise , and further mention is made of the Temporal Cold War . The early encounters and historic culture of familiar Star Trek franchise races , such as the Vulcans , Andorians , Klingons , Romulans , Tholians , Borg , and Tellarites , are also explored further . The season ends with a cliffhanger that sets up the Xindi story arc , set in the Delphic Expanse , of the third season . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 In the following table , episodes are listed by the order in which they aired . 
 = = Production = = 
 Production on the second season of Enterprise began on June 24 , 2002 , on a location shoot for the second episode of the season , " Carbon Creek " . Once production on that episode was complete , the crew moved onto the second part of " Shockwave " , which would be broadcast first . It was produced in that order as " Carbon Creek " only required Scott Bakula , Connor Trinneer and Jolene Blalock from the main cast to appear . The remaining cast returned on July 10 , for the first day of production for the second half of " Shockwave " . 
 Executive producer Rick Berman was looking forward to resuming writing with Brannon Braga on episodes of Enterprise as he had been previously busy with work on the film Star Trek : Nemesis . He was also in talks to bring Patrick Stewart in to direct an episode of the series , saying that the pair had discussed this and Stewart was interested but was busy at the time filming X2 in Canada . He added that once Stewart had a few weeks spare in his schedule , that they would see if he could be brought in to direct an episode . 
 Two other Star Trek alumni returned to Enterprise to direct . These were Roxann Dawson and LeVar Burton . Dawson had previously played B 'Elanna Torres on Star Trek : Voyager , and had directed the episodes " The Andorian Incident " and " Vox Sola " during the first season of Enterprise as well as two episodes of Voyager . She said that after a season of working together , the cast of Enterprise were finding their characters " beautifully " . Prior to the second season cast members Linda Park and Connor Trinneer undertook the same directing course that Dawson previously took during her time on Voyager . 
 Burton had played Geordi La Forge in Star Trek : The Next Generation , before moving into directing with the 100th episode of Voyager , " Timeless " . He had directed two episodes of Enterprise during the first season , and filmed a further two during the second season including " First Flight " . This episode was the 50th episode of the series and featured guest appearances from three members of the crew of the United States Navy aircraft carrier USS Enterprise ( CVN @-@ 65 ) . 
 There were several links in promotion between Star Trek : Nemesis and Enterprise , as season two saw Enterprise form half of a two @-@ hour block called " Out of This World Wednesdays on UPN " , with a new series of The Twilight Zone forming the second half . This promotion had a Nemesis competition tied into it , offering the chance for five winners to take a trip to Los Angeles to attend the premiere of the film . Another competition linked Nemesis back to Enterprise , with participating Loews Cinemas offering the chance to win a walk @-@ on role on the series . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Brannon Braga said that the production team sought to increase the tempo of season two compared to the first season . He said at a press junket held by the Television Critics Association in July 2002 that " We 're just starting . We want to capitalise more on the fact that [ Enterprise ] is a sequel . We want to have a season that maybe has more action in it than it had last season . " He predicted that possible storylines would include Jonathan Archer fulfilling more of his potential as Captain of the Enterprise , as well as further instalments in the Temporal Cold War story @-@ arc and further interactions between the crew and both the Andorians and the Vulcans . 
 Braga said that they wanted to avoid overloading the Temporal Cold War but instead they wanted to create an ongoing element to the series during season two . He expected that it would feature in the first episode of the season , " Shockwave " ( part two ) , but then there would be a break before it was featured again . He also revealed that the recurring character of Daniels wasn 't entirely human , and that this would be revealed during the second season while at a panel discussion at the Official Star Trek Convention in Las Vegas in August 2002 . Berman , said that the revelation of who was controlling the Suliban would not be shown during the second season , but he promised a " really good " season and was open to William Shatner appearing in the show . Scott Bakula also referred to a previous discussion with Berman where the producer suggested that Patrick Stewart or Whoopi Goldberg could appear on @-@ screen in the second season through the means of time travel from their time on Star Trek : The Next Generation . 
 Perhaps the biggest announcement made prior to the start of the season was the return of the Romulans to Star Trek . They had not previously been seen on Enterprise , and Braga was well aware that they would have to carefully consider the continuity as the crew of James T. Kirk 's Enterprise were the first to see a Romulan in the episode " Balance of Terror " . He said " The continuity is airtight . Believe me . We know . We know ... " . The species were due to make their first appearance in the Star Trek timeline in the episode " Minefield " , which was written by former The X @-@ Files writer John Shiban . At the same time that the Romulans were due to appear in Enterprise , work was underway on the Romulan @-@ centric film , Star Trek : Nemesis . The second season also saw an appearance by the Borg in the episode " Regeneration " , which was intended to follow up on the events in Star Trek : First Contact . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The season opened with Nielsen ratings of 4 @.@ 9 / 8 percent for " Shockwave " ( part two ) . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The ratings received for the season rose over the next few episodes to 5 @.@ 4 / 8 percent for " Dead Stop " - the most watched episode of the season . " Vanishing Point " was the first episode of the season to drop below a 4 percent rating , but not the last as " Judgment " , " The Breach " and " Horizon " also received ratings below the season average . The ratings received by " Horizon " of 2 @.@ 2 percent were a series low at that point . But the ratings increased following that trio of episodes , and the season ended with " The Expanse " receiving ratings of 4 @.@ 4 / 7 percent . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 At the time of the broadcast of the final episode of the season , Scott D. Pierce for the Deseret News described Enterprise as not " an awful show , it 's just , well , boring . " He called the new story arc introduced in " The Expanse " a " promising idea " . But also added , " it 's pretty hard to get your hopes up too high for Enterprise . " 
 Randy Miller III , in his review of the Blu @-@ ray release of the second season for DVD Talk , said that the memory of this season was worse than it actually was . He criticised the studio 's instance at stand @-@ alone episodes but said that there was a marked improvement about halfway through the season , calling the finale " game @-@ changing " . He added that at the time of the DVD release , he did not feel so positively towards the season and agreed with Holly Ordway 's opinion at the time . Ordway had said that the second season sought to be more realistic , but that it feels childish as no one gets hurt or killed - even in the episode " Marauders " which saw a group of colonists defend themselves from renegade Klingons . She called the finale a " giant reset button " on the series , adding that it seemed that the show was about to become a sequel to Voyager but squandering the premise it had been given . 
 Michael Simpson , while writing for SciFiNow , suggested that the second season of Enterprise " suggests a fatal failure to recognise what went wrong " with the first season . He said that the inclusion of the Borg in the episode " Regeneration " lacked fresh ideas as a similar idea had previously appeared in season one with the Ferengi making first contact but not being named in " Acquisition " . He was frustrated with the season due to the " unfulfilled potential " , and praised episodes such as " Carbon Creek " , " Singularity " and " <unk> " . James Hunt at the website Den of Geek placed three second season episodes in his top ten list of Enterprise . In ninth place , " First Flight " was chosen as it demonstrated that Jonathan Archer was " the most Kirk @-@ esque Captain since the original " . " Regeneration " was placed in third position , while " Carbon Creek " was the runner @-@ up for the best episode because it was an early episode in which the series found its feet . 
