 Landis has commented on the practicalities of generating oxygen and creating building materials for a future Moon base in New Scientist , and on the possibilities of using readily available metallic iron to manufacture steel on Mars . 
 He is the recipient of numerous professional honors , including the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Aerospace Power Systems Award , the NASA Space Flight Awareness award and the Rotary National Award for Space Achievement Stellar Award in 2016 . 
 = = = Photovoltaic Power Systems = = = 
 Much of Landis ' technical work has been in the field of developing solar cells and arrays , both for terrestrial use and for spacecraft . 
 = = = Mars = = = 
 Landis has worked on a number of projects related to developing technology of human and robotic exploration of Mars and scientific analysis of the Martian surface , including studies of the performance of photovoltaic cells in the Mars environment , the effect of Martian dust on performance , and technologies for dust removal from the arrays . He was a member of the Rover team on the Mars Pathfinder mission , and named the Mars rock , " Yogi " . He is a member of the science team on the 2003 Mars Exploration Rovers mission , where his work includes observations of Martian dust devils , atmospheric science measurements , and observation of frost on the equator of Mars . He was also a member of the Mars <unk> Propellant Precursor experiment team for the Mars Surveyor 2001 Lander mission , an experiment package to demonstrate manufacture of oxygen from the Martian atmosphere . ( which was cancelled after the failure of the Mars Polar Lander ) . 
 He has also done work on analyzing concepts for future robotic and human mission to Mars . These include the Mars Geyser Hopper spacecraft , a Discovery @-@ class mission concept that would investigate the springtime carbon dioxide Martian geysers found in regions around the south pole of Mars , the Human Exploration using Real @-@ time Robotic Operations ( " <unk> " ) concept for <unk> Mars exploration , and concepts for use of In @-@ situ resource utilization for a Mars Sample Return mission . In a 1993 paper , he suggested the use of a phased program of Mars exploration , with a series of incremental achievements leading up to human landings on Mars . 
 = = = NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts = = = 
 Landis was a fellow of the NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts ( " NIAC " ) , where he worked on a project investigating the use of <unk> and particle @-@ beam pushed sails for propulsion for interstellar flight . In 2002 Landis addressed the annual convention of the American Association for the Advancement of Science on the possibilities and challenges of interstellar travel in what was described as the " first serious discussion of how mankind will one day set sail to the nearest star " . Dr. Landis said , " This is the first meeting to really consider interstellar travel by humans . It is historic . We 're going to the stars . There really isn 't a choice in the long term . " He went on to describe a star ship with a diamond sail , a few nanometres thick , powered by solar energy , which could achieve " 10 per cent of the speed of light " . 
 He was selected again as a NASA Innovative Advanced Concepts fellow in 2012 , with an investigation of a <unk> rover for Venus exploration , and in 2015 was the science lead on a NIAC study to design a mission to Neptune 's moon Triton . 
 = = = Academic positions = = = 
 In 2005 – 2006 , he was named the Ronald E. McNair Visiting Professor of Astronautics at MIT , and won the AIAA Abe M. <unk> Educator Award in 2007 . Landis has also been a faculty member of the International Space University ; in 1998 he was on the faculty of the Department of Mining , Manufacturing , and Robotics in the Space Studies Program , and in 1999 he was on the faculty of the 12th Space Studies Program at the <unk> University of Technology in Nakhon Ratchasima , <unk> and co @-@ chair of the student project " Out of the Cradle . " He was also a guest lecturer at the ISU 13th Space Studies Program in Valparaíso , Chile , and the 2015 Space Studies Program in Athens , Ohio . 
 As a writer , he was an instructor at the Clarion Writers Workshop at Michigan State University in 2001 . He was a guest instructor at the Launch Pad workshop for 2012 . 
 = = Writing = = 
 = = = Science fiction = = = 
 = = = = History = = = = 
 Landis first science fiction story , Elemental , appeared in Analog in December 1984 , and received a nomination for a Hugo award as well as earning him a nomination for the John W. Campbell award for Best New Writer . In the field of science fiction , Landis has published over 70 works of short fiction , and two books . He won the 1989 Nebula Award for best short story for " Ripples in the Dirac Sea " ( Asimov 's Science Fiction , October 1988 ) , the 1992 Hugo Award for " A Walk in the Sun " ( Asimov 's Science Fiction , October 1991 ) , and the 2003 Hugo for his short story " Falling Onto Mars " ( Analog Science Fiction and Fact , July / Aug 2002 ) . 
 His first novel , Mars Crossing , was published by Tor Books in 2000 , winning a Locus Award . A short story collection , Impact Parameter ( and Other Quantum Realities ) , was published by Golden Gryphon Press in 2001 and named as noteworthy by trade magazine Publishers Weekly . He has also won the Analog Analytical Laboratory Award for the novelette The Man in the Mirror ( 2009 ) . His 2010 novella The Sultan of the Clouds won the Sturgeon award for best short science fiction story , and was nominated for both the Nebula and Hugo awards . 
 He attended the Clarion Workshop in 1985 , with other emerging SF writers such as Kristine Kathryn Rusch , Martha <unk> , William <unk> , Resa Nelson , Mary <unk> and Robert J. Howe . 
 = = = = Novels = = = = 
 Mars Crossing ( 2000 ) 
 = = = = Collections = = = = 
 Impact Parameter ( and Other Quantum Realities ) ( 16 shorts ) 
 A Walk in the Sun 
 Impact Parameter 
 Elemental 
 <unk> 
 Across the Darkness 
 Ouroboros 
 Into the Blue Abyss 
 Snow 
 <unk> 's War 
 Approaching <unk> 
 What We Do Here at NASA 
 Dark Lady 
 Outsider 's Chance 
 Beneath the Stars of Winter 
 The Singular Habits of Wasps 
 Winter Fire 
 A Walk in the Sun ( Great Science Fiction Stories ) 2004 
 = = = = Short Stories = = = = 
 Ripples in the Dirac Sea 
 A Walk in the Sun 
 Falling Onto Mars 
 The Man in the Mirror 2009 
 The Sultan of the Clouds 2010 
 A Hotel in Antarctica 2014 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Landis has also published a number of poems , much of it involving science fiction or science themes . He won the <unk> Award twice , for his poems " Christmas , after we all get time machines " in 2000 ( which also won the 2000 Asimov 's Reader 's Award for best poem ) , and for " Search " in 2009 , and the Dwarf Stars Award in 2010 , for the poem " Fireflies " . He has won the Asimov 's Reader 's award for best poem three times , most recently in 2014 , for his poem " Rivers " . In 2009 , he won 2nd place in the Hessler Street Fair poetry contest for his poem " Five Pounds of Sunlight , " and 1st place in 2010 for " Human Potential . " 
 His poetry collection Iron Angels was published in 2009 . 
 = = = Major awards = = = 
 1989 Nebula Award for best short story for " Ripples in the Dirac Sea " 
 1992 Hugo Award for best short story " A Walk in the Sun " 
 2001 Locus Award for best first novel for Mars Crossing 
 2003 Hugo Award for best short story " Falling Onto Mars " 
 2011 Theodore Sturgeon Award for best short science fiction for " The Sultan of the Clouds " 
 2014 Robert A. Heinlein Award " bestowed for outstanding published works in science fiction and technical writings that inspire the human exploration of space . " 
 = = = Other writing = = = 
 Landis has also written non @-@ fiction and popular science articles , encyclopedia articles and columns for a large range of publications , including Analog Science Fiction and Fact , Space Sciences , Asimov 's Science Fiction , Spaceflight , and Science Fiction Age . His article " The Demon Under Hawaii " won the Analog Analytical Laboratory Award for best science article in 1993 . 
 = = Works = = 
 Landis , Geoffrey A. ( 1991 ) . Myths , legends , and true history . Author 's Choice Monthly 26 . Eugene , OR : <unk> Publications . OCLC <unk> . 
 Landis , Geoffrey A. ( November 2001 ) . Mars Crossing . Tor Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Landis , Geoffrey A. ( December 2001 ) . Impact Parameter ( and Other Quantum Realities ) . Urbana , IL : Golden Gryphon Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 06 @-@ 1 . 
 Landis , Geoffrey A. ( 2009 ) . Iron Angels . Van Zeno Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 @-@ 8 . 
 Geoffrey A. Landis . Laser @-@ powered Interstellar Probe on the Geoffrey A. Landis : <unk> papers available on the web 
 = Sitti Nurbaya = 
 Sitti Nurbaya : Kasih Tak <unk> ( Sitti Nurbaya : <unk> Love , often abbreviated Sitti Nurbaya or Siti Nurbaya ; original spelling Sitti <unk> ) is an Indonesian novel by Marah Rusli . It was published by Balai Pustaka , the state @-@ owned publisher and literary bureau of the Dutch East Indies , in 1922 . The author was influenced by the cultures of the west Sumatran Minangkabau and the Dutch colonials , who had controlled Indonesia in various forms since the 17th century . Another influence may have been a negative experience within the author 's family ; after he had chosen a Sundanese woman to be his wife , Rusli 's family brought him back to Padang and forced him to marry a Minangkabau woman chosen for him . 
 Sitti Nurbaya tells the story of two teenage lovers , Samsulbahri and Sitti Nurbaya , who wish to be together but are separated after Samsulbahri is forced to go to Batavia . Not long afterwards , Nurbaya unhappily offers herself to marry the abusive and rich Datuk Meringgih as a way for her father to escape debt ; she is later killed by Meringgih . It ends with Samsulbahri , then a member of the Dutch colonial army , killing Datuk Meringgih during an uprising and then dying from his wounds . 
 Written in formal Malay and including traditional Minangkabau storytelling techniques such as pantuns , Sitti Nurbaya touches on the themes of colonialism , forced marriage , and modernity . Well @-@ received upon publication , Sitti Nurbaya continues to be taught in Indonesian high schools . It has been compared to Romeo and Juliet and the Butterfly Lovers . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Sitti Nurbaya was written by Marah Rusli , a Dutch @-@ educated Minangkabau from a noble background with a degree in veterinary science . His Dutch education led him to become Europeanized . He abandoned some Minangkabau traditions , but not his view of the subordinate role of women in society . According to Bakri Siregar , an Indonesian socialist literary critic , Rusli 's Europeanisation affected how he described Dutch culture in Sitti Nurbaya , as well a scene where the two protagonists kiss . A. Teeuw , a Dutch critic of Indonesian literature and lecturer at the University of Indonesia , notes that the use of pantuns ( a Malay poetic form ) shows that Rusli was heavily influenced by Minangkabau oral literary tradition , while the extended dialogues show influence from the tradition of <unk> ( in @-@ depth discussions by a community to reach an agreement ) . 
 Indonesian critic Zuber Usman credits another , more personal , experience as influencing Rusli in writing Sitti Nurbaya and his positive view of European culture and modernity . After expressing interest in choosing a Sundanese woman to become his wife , which " caused an uproar among his family " , Rusli was told by his parents to return to his hometown and marry a Minangkabau woman chosen by them ; this caused conflict between Rusli and his family . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Padang in the early 20th century Dutch East Indies , Samsulbahri and Sitti Nurbaya – children of rich noblemen Sutan Mahmud <unk> and Baginda Sulaiman – are teenage neighbours , classmates , and childhood friends . They begin to fall in love , but they are only able to admit it after Samsu tells Nurbaya that he will be going to Batavia ( Jakarta ) to study . After spending the afternoon at a nearby hillside , Samsu and Nurbaya kiss on her front porch . When they are caught by Nurbaya 's father and the neighbours , Samsu is chased out of Padang and goes to Batavia . 
 Meanwhile , Datuk Meringgih , jealous of Sulaiman 's wealth and worried about the business competition , plans to bankrupt him . Meringgih 's men destroy Sulaiman 's holdings , driving him to bankruptcy and forcing him to borrow money from Meringgih . When Meringgih tries to collect , Nurbaya offers to become his wife if he will forgive her father 's debt ; Datuk Meringgih accepts . 
 Writing to Samsu , Nurbaya tells him that they can never be together . However , after surviving Meringgih 's increasingly violent outbursts , she runs away to Batavia to be with Samsu . They fall in love again . Upon receiving a letter regarding her father 's death , Nurbaya hurries back to Padang , where she dies after unwittingly eating a cake poisoned by Meringgih 's men on his orders . Receiving news of her death by letter , Samsu seemingly commits suicide . 
 Ten years later , Meringgih leads an uprising against the Dutch colonial government to protest a recent tax increase . During the uprising , Samsu ( now a soldier for the Dutch ) meets Meringgih and kills him , but is mortally wounded himself . After meeting with his father and asking for forgiveness , he dies and is buried next to Nurbaya . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Sitti Nurbaya 
 Sitti Nurbaya ( sometimes spelled Siti Nurbaya ; abbreviated Nurbaya ) is the title character and one of the main protagonists . Indonesian short @-@ story writer and literary critic Muhammad Balfas describes her as a character who is capable of making her own decisions , indicated by her decision to marry Datuk Meringgih when he threatens her father , willingness to take control with Samsulbahri , and dismissal of Datuk Meringgih after the death of her father . She is also independent enough to move to Batavia to look for Samsulbahri on her own . Her actions are seen as being heavily against adat — the strong Indonesian cultural norms — and this eventually leads to her being poisoned . Her beauty , to the point that she is called " the flower of Padang " , is seen as a physical manifestation of her moral and kind nature . 
 Samsulbahri 
 Samsulbahri ( sometimes spelled <unk> ; abbreviated Samsu ) is the primary male protagonist . He is described as having skin the colour of <unk> , with eyes as black as ink ; however , from afar he can be confused with a Dutchman . These physical attributes have been described by Keith Foulcher , a lecturer of Indonesian language and literature at the University of Sydney , as indicating Samsu 's mimicry and collaborationist nature . His good looks are also seen as a physical manifestation of his moral and kind nature . 
 Datuk Meringgih 
 Datuk Meringgih is the primary antagonist of the story . He is a trader who originated from a poor family , and became rich as a result of shady business dealings . Indonesian writer and literary critic M. Balfas described Meringgih 's main motivations as greed and jealousy , being unable to " tolerate that there should be anyone wealthier than he " . Balfas writes that Datuk Meringgih is a character that is " drawn in black and white , but strong enough to create serious conflicts around him . " He later becomes the " champion of anti @-@ colonist resistance " , fuelled only by his own greed ; Foulcher argues that it is unlikely that Datuk Meringgih 's actions were an attempt by Rusli to insert anti @-@ Dutch commentary . 
 = = Style = = 
 According to Bakri Siregar , the diction in Sitti Nurbaya does not reflect Marah Rusli 's personal style , but a " Balai Pustaka style " of formal Malay , as required by the state @-@ owned publisher . As a result , Rusli 's orally @-@ influenced story telling technique , often wandering from the plot to describe something " at the whim of the author " , comes across as " lacking " . 
 Sitti Nurbaya includes pantuns ( Malay poetic forms ) and " clichéd descriptions " , although not as many as contemporary Minangkabau works . The pantuns are used by Nurbaya and Samsul in expressing their feelings for each other , such as the pantun 
 Its main messages are presented through debates between characters with a moral dichotomy , to show alternatives to the author 's position and " thereby present a reasoned case for [ its ] validation " . However , the " correct " ( author 's ) point of view is indicated by the social and moral standing of the character presenting the argument . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Sitti Nurbaya is generally seen as having an anti @-@ forced marriage theme or illustrating the conflict between Eastern and Western values . It has also been described as " a monument to the struggle of forward @-@ thinking youth " against Minangkabau adat . 
 However , Balfas writes that it is unjust to consider Sitti Nurbaya as only another forced marriage story , as the marriage of Nurbaya and Samsu would have been accepted by society . He instead writes that Sitti Nurbaya contrasts Western and traditional views of marriage , criticising the traditionally accepted dowry and polygamy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rusli 's family was not pleased with the novel ; his father condemned him in a letter , as a result of which Rusli never returned to Padang . His later novel , Anak dan <unk> ( 1958 ) was even more critical of older generation 's inflexibility . 
 Until at least 1930 , Sitti Nurbaya was one of Balai Pustaka 's most popular works , often being borrowed from lending libraries . After Indonesia 's independence , Sitti Nurbaya was taught as a classic of Indonesian literature ; this has led to it being " read more often in brief synopsis than as an original text by generation after generation of Indonesian high school students " . As of 2008 , it has seen 44 printings . 
 Sitti Nurbaya is generally considered one of the most important works of Indonesian literature , with its love story being compared to William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet and the Chinese legend of the Butterfly Lovers . Some Western critics , including Dutch critic A. Teeuw and writer A. H. Johns , consider it to be the first true Indonesian novel , as opposed to Azab dan Sengsara , which was less developed in its theme of forced marriage and the negative aspects of adat . 
 Teeuw wrote that the moral messages and sentimentality in Sitti Nurbaya are overdone , similar to Azab dan Sengsara . However , he considers the plot of Sitti Nurbaya more interesting for a reader from a Western background than the older novel . 
 Siregar wrote that Rusli " in many things acts as a <unk> " , or puppet master , occasionally removing the characters in order to speak directly to the reader , making the message too one @-@ sided . He considered the plot to be forced in places , as if the author were preventing the story from flowing naturally . He considered Rusli a mouthpiece of the Dutch colonial government , who had controlled Indonesia since the early 17th century , for making Samsul , " the most sympathetic character " , a member of the Dutch forces and Datuk Meringgih , " the most antipathetic character " , the leader of Indonesian revolutionary forces , as well as for Rusli 's antipathy to Islam in the novel . 
 Sitti Nurbaya inspired numerous authors , including Nur Sutan Iskandar , who stated that he wrote Apa <unk> Karena Aku Perempuan ( What Am I to Do Because I Am a Girl , 1924 ) as a direct result of reading it ; Iskandar later wrote Cinta yang Membawa <unk> ( Love that Brings Death , 1926 ) , which deals with the same themes . The Sitti Nurbaya storyline has often been reused , to the point that Balfas has referred to similar plots as following " the ' Sitti Nurbaya ' formula " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Sitti Nurbaya has been translated into numerous languages , including Malaysian in 1963 . It has been adapted into a <unk> ( soap opera ) twice . The first , in 1991 , was directed by <unk> <unk> , and starred Novia <unk> in the leading role , Gusti Randa as Samsulbahri , and HIM <unk> as Datuk Meringgih . The second , starting in December 2004 , was produced by MD Entertainment and broadcast on Trans TV . Directed by <unk> <unk> and starring Nia <unk> as the title character , Ser <unk> Reza as Samsulbahri , and Anwar <unk> as Datuk Meringgih , the series introduced a new character as a competitor for Samsul 's affections . 
 In 2009 , Sitti Nurbaya was one of eight classics of Indonesian literature chosen by <unk> Ismail to be reprinted in a special Indonesian Cultural Heritage Series edition ; Sitti Nurbaya featured a West Sumatran @-@ style woven cloth cover . Actress Happy Salma was chosen as its celebrity icon . 
 = Battle of The Cedars = 
 The Battle of The Cedars ( French : Les <unk> ) was a series of military confrontations early in the American Revolutionary War during the Continental Army 's invasion of Quebec that had begun in September 1775 . The skirmishes , which involved limited combat , occurred in May 1776 at and around The Cedars , 45 km ( 28 mi ) west of Montreal , Quebec . Continental Army units were opposed by a small number of British troops leading a larger force of Indians ( primarily Iroquois ) , and militia . 
 Brigadier General Benedict Arnold , commanding the American military garrison at Montreal , had placed a detachment of his troops at The Cedars in April 1776 , after receiving rumors of British and Indian military preparations to the west of Montreal . The garrison surrendered on May 19 after a confrontation with a combined force of British and Indian troops led by Captain George Forster . American reinforcements on their way to The Cedars were also captured after a brief skirmish on May 20 . All of the captives were eventually released after negotiations between Forster and Arnold , who was bringing a sizable force into the area . The terms of the agreement required the Americans to release an equal number of British prisoners . However , the deal was repudiated by Congress , and no British prisoners were freed . 
 Colonel Timothy Bedel and Lieutenant Isaac Butterfield , leaders of the American force at The Cedars , were court @-@ martialed and cashiered from the Continental Army for their roles in the affair . After distinguishing himself as a volunteer , Bedel was given a new commission in 1777 . News of the affair included greatly inflated reports of casualties , and often included graphic but false accounts of atrocities committed by the Iroquois , who made up the majority of the British forces . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Cedars is located on the north shore of the Saint Lawrence River , about 45 kilometres ( 28 mi ) from the center of modern Montreal , to the southwest of the western tip of the island of Montreal , from which it is separated by the Ottawa River . The nearby rapids in the Saint Lawrence required portage , making The Cedars a strategic landing point for anyone navigating the river to or from Montreal . Crossing of the Ottawa River was made between Fort Anne and Quinze @-@ Chênes , now Vaudreuil . 
 = = = Montreal = = = 
 In September 1775 , early in the American Revolutionary War , a Continental Army under the direction first of Major General Philip Schuyler , and later of Brigadier General Richard Montgomery , invaded the British Province of Quebec . The city of Montreal was taken without a fight on November 13 , following the Siege of Fort St. Jean . Montgomery left a garrison of troops under the command of Major General David Wooster in control of Montreal before leading the rest of the army to Quebec City . The occupation of Montreal was poorly managed , and relations between the Americans and the population , including those supportive of the Americans , deteriorated for a variety of reasons . One major factor that contributed to the poor relations was the American interdiction of trade with the Indian populations on the upper St. Lawrence and the Great Lakes , since the trade goods might be used to support British garrisons in those areas . The fur trade was economically important to the city , and its absence affected both supporters and opponents of the American cause . 
 Following the American losses at the battle of Quebec at the end of 1775 , Wooster eventually led reinforcements to Quebec . He arrived early in April 1776 , and the military administration of Montreal passed temporarily to Colonel Moses Hazen before going to Brigadier General Benedict Arnold , who had been in command at Quebec . The American forces occupying the city numbered about 500 , with additional forces at posts outside the city . Wooster had reported to General Schuyler as early as March 5 of rumored scheming between British troops and Indians to the west of the city . In response to these alarming reports , as well as the unauthorized departures of two fur traders and Claude de Lorimier , a British Indian agent from Montreal , Hazen had sent 400 troops commanded by Colonel Timothy Bedel of Bedel 's Regiment to occupy a strategic position at The Cedars in early April . Lieutenant Isaac Butterfield led an advance force that arrived at The Cedars on April 26 and began construction of a wooden stockade fort , fortifying it with two 4 @-@ pound cannons . Bedel and the rest of the detachment arrived on May 6 . 
 = = = British call to arms = = = 
 The Indian agent Lorimier traveled west to Oswegatchie , where a company of the 8th Regiment of Foot under the command of George Forster had occupied Fort de La Présentation . Lorimier proposed recruiting a force of Indians to launch an attack on Continental forces at Montreal from the west . When Forster agreed , Lorimier went to Saint Regis , where he recruited 100 Mohawk men from Akwesasne . Word of these activities led the American rebels to fortify The Cedars . 
 At Fort Niagara in early May the Loyalist captain , John Butler , held a conference with several hundred tribesmen , primarily from the Six Nations of the Iroquois , in which his goal was to break pledges of neutrality some of them had made in 1775 . Butler , an experienced Indian agent , plied the natives with liquor and tales of combat ; he convinced more than 50 Seneca , Cayuga , and Onondaga warriors to join the British cause , as well as some warriors from further west . Historians are uncertain whether any of these recruits participated in the action at The Cedars , but it appears unlikely . Stanley ( 1973 ) is of the opinion that Indian participation was limited to those recruited by Lorimier , who went as far as Gananoque to recruit . Lanctot ( 1967 ) and Smith do not identify any specific tribes participating in the action . 
 James Stanley Goddard , one of the fur traders who left with Lorimier , traveled further west in an ultimately unsuccessful effort to raise an Indian force to oppose the Americans occupying Quebec . He reached Fort Michilimackinac in June , where the British commander , Captain Arent DePeyster , sent him recruiting among the Menominee and Winnebago tribes near Green Bay . DePeyster also sent out Joseph <unk> , a local Indian interpreter , to recruit from tribes closer to the fort . None of the Indians recruited by these men reached Montreal until well after the Americans had left the city . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Once forces began assembling at Oswegatchie , Lorimier made arrangements with a sympathetic priest near The Cedars for the provisioning of supplies for the troops . With the assistance of some men of the 8th Foot , he strategically hid several shallow @-@ draft boats , known as bateaux , near a point where the Saint Lawrence River could be crossed . 
 Forster left Oswegatchie on May 12 with about 40 regular troops , 10 British and French @-@ speaking Canadien militia , and 160 Iroquois . On May 14 , they picked up 44 more Iroquois at Saint Francis , and camped at the western end of Saint Francis Lake on May 16 . On May 17 , Forster received scouting reports about the troop strength at The Cedars . The Indians were concerned about the number of troops , but news that the Americans were in retreat from the city of Quebec emboldened them to act . 
 On May 15 , Bedel left The Cedars , leaving Butterfield in charge of the fort . Bedel later claimed that the reason for his departure was to meet with the friendly Caughnawaga Indians . In his court martial , the judges concluded this claim was suspect . He returned to Montreal and reported that a force of 150 British troops of the 8th Foot and about 500 Iroquois commanded by Forster was approaching . On this news , Colonel John Paterson sent Major Henry Sherburne with 140 men from his regiment toward The Cedars . Arnold , who was meeting with the retreating Continental Army command at Sorel , returned to Montreal when the news reached him and set about organizing a larger relief force . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = The Cedars = = = 
 Forster 's force landed near the American @-@ occupied fort on May 18 , and sent in a demand for surrender . Butterfield countered with a request to withdraw under arms , which Forster refused . The parties exchanged fire . During the course of the exchange , Forster received word that Sherburne had crossed the Ottawa River from the island of Montreal to Quinze @-@ Chênes , but , believing The Cedars to have fallen already , had retreated back across the river . This news caused the besiegers to redouble their efforts the next day . Additional help arrived for the British in the form of about 40 Canadiens under Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> de Montigny ; Forster sent them to harass Sherburne . Word then came to Forster that Sherburne had resumed his advance ; Butterfield , unaware of this , surrendered the fort . The terms of capitulation included a guarantee of the personal safety of the captured men . The Iroquois plundered the fort 's stores , and denied some of the captives small pouches of sometimes valuable personal items . 
 = = = Quinze @-@ Chênes = = = 
 Sherburne reached Fort Anne , across the Ottawa River from Quinze @-@ Chênes , on May 17 . A scout he sent across the river the next day was captured by Lorimier . The scout was allowed to notify Sherburne of his capture ; in his message he included a claim that 500 Indians had surrounded the fort at The Cedars . Consequently , Sherburne decided to delay crossing the river , and sent word back to Montreal requesting further assistance . 
 Sherburne decided to advance on May 20 . Some of his men were apparently suffering from the aftereffects of smallpox , so these were left behind . Sherburne landed about 100 of his men at Quinze @-@ Chênes , about 16 kilometres ( 10 mi ) from The Cedars . When word of this crossing reached Forster , he ordered Lorimier to take 100 Indians and stop Sherburne . Lorimier was at first only able to raise 40 warriors , but was joined on the way by another 40 . Sherburne , not realizing that Butterfield had already surrendered , marched his troops right at Lorimier 's advancing force . They fought for about 40 minutes before Sherburne , believing he was being attacked by a much larger force , surrendered . The Iroquois claimed these captives as war spoils , since they were not part of the fort 's garrison , and prepared to kill some of them in retaliation for their own losses . Only the intervention of Forster , who paid a ransom , prevented this ; it did not prevent the Iroquois from stripping the prisoners of all but their clothes . 
 = = = Arnold 's relief = = = 
 Following his successes , Forster moved his forces , including all of the prisoners , down to Quinze @-@ Chênes , where more Loyalist militia had assembled . Leaving some of the prisoners there , he advanced on May 23 to Fort Senneville , a fortified works located on the southwest tip of Montreal island that was owned by Montigny . In the meantime , Arnold gathered most of the few remaining forces in Montreal , and sent requests to the outposts around the city for additional troops . By May 24 , he was entrenched at Lachine , south of the city , and his force had reached 450 men . Forster began to advance on Lachine , but decided to retreat back to Quinze @-@ Chênes when his scouts notified him of Arnold 's position . He also received intelligence from Montreal that Arnold 's force was going to be massively reinforced — the reported number of reinforcements was 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 men , more than Arnold had available in the area . 
 Once his scouts reported Forster 's retreat , Arnold gave chase . He reached Fort Senneville ( which he burned ) on May 26 , just as Forster 's men were landing on the far shore at Quinze @-@ Chênes . Arnold decided to send a group of <unk> , who were friendly to the Americans , with a demand that Forster release his prisoners and a threat that he would destroy area Indian villages if any of the prisoners were harmed . Forster countered that he would permit his Indians to kill the prisoners if Arnold attacked . Arnold attempted to cross the Ottawa River with a number of his men in bateaux , but Forster used the four @-@ pounders captured at The Cedars to drive them back . 
 Arnold called a war council so the Americans could consider their options . He wanted to mount a surprise attack the next morning ; Hazen , who had acquired significant experience fighting Indians in the French and Indian War , argued against the idea . The disagreement between the two men was severe enough that it nearly provoked Arnold to file charges of insubordination against Hazen . The council decided not to act , voting Arnold 's proposed attack down . Early in the morning of May 27 , a boat crossed the river carrying Sherburne and Forster 's deputy , Lieutenant Parke . Forster , whose forces were somewhat reduced as some of the Indians had returned to their homes , had negotiated a prisoner exchange with Sherburne and Butterfield . After further negotiations , both Arnold and Forster agreed to terms . The American prisoners were returned to Arnold at Fort Anne on May 30 , after being delayed for two days by high winds on the river . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Americans never held up their side of the prisoner exchange . Formally repudiating the agreement over the protests of George Washington , Congress accused Forster of mistreating American prisoners by turning them over to the Indians . In a breach of etiquette , the letter containing the repudiation was delivered to Lieutenant General John Burgoyne , instead of the British commander @-@ in @-@ chief and governor of the province , Guy Carleton . The Congressional action may have been tainted by overly lurid accounts of the action — Charles Carroll , part of a Congressional delegation that was in Montreal at the time , reported that " a hundred or more [ American troops ] were barbarously murdered by savages . " Arnold 's report of the incident included otherwise unsubstantiated allegations that two prisoners were killed by Forster 's Indians . Some histories of the action ( for example , the 1882 history by Jones ) include accounts of significant atrocities committed by the Indians , but little supporting evidence has been found . The Congressional repudiation complicated an attempted prisoner exchange in 1781 involving Burgoyne and Henry Laurens , a congressman from South Carolina whom the British were holding in the Tower of London ; Laurens was eventually freed in exchange for a promise to help negotiate Lord Cornwallis 's release . 
 Arnold initially blamed Bedel for the defeat . He removed both Bedel and Butterfield from command and sent them to Sorel for court @-@ martial . Due to the army 's retreat , the two men were not tried until August 1 , 1776 at Fort Ticonderoga . Both were convicted and cashiered from the army . Bedel continued to volunteer his services , and following Burgoyne 's surrender at Saratoga in October 1777 , he was given a new commission by Congress . 
 The site of some of the skirmishes was designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 1928 . 
 = Bert Trautmann = 
 Bernhard Carl " Bert " Trautmann , OBE ( 22 October 1923 – 19 July 2013 ) was a German professional footballer who played for Manchester City from 1949 to 1964 . 
 Brought up during times of inter @-@ war strife in Germany , Trautmann joined the Luftwaffe early in the Second World War , serving as a paratrooper . He fought on the Eastern Front for three years , earning five medals , including an Iron Cross . Later in the war , he was transferred to the Western Front , where he was captured by the British as the war drew to a close . One of only 90 of his original 1 @,@ 000 @-@ man regiment to survive the war , he was transferred to a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp in Ashton @-@ in @-@ Makerfield , Lancashire . Trautmann refused an offer of repatriation , and following his release in 1948 , settled in Lancashire , combining farm work with playing goalkeeper for a local football team , St Helens Town . 
 Performances for St Helens gained Trautmann a reputation as an outstanding goalkeeper , resulting in interest from Football League clubs . In October 1949 , he signed for Manchester City , a club playing in the country 's highest level of football , the First Division . The club 's decision to sign a former Axis paratrooper sparked protests and 20 @,@ 000 people attended a demonstration . Over time , he gained acceptance through his performances in the City goal , playing in all but five of the club 's next 250 matches . 
 Named FWA Footballer of the Year for 1956 , Trautmann entered football folklore with his performance in the 1956 FA ( Football Association ) Cup Final . With 17 minutes of the match remaining , Trautmann suffered a serious injury while diving at the feet of Birmingham City 's Peter Murphy . Despite his injury , he continued to play , making crucial saves to preserve his team 's 3 – 1 lead . His neck was noticeably crooked as he collected his winner 's medal ; three days later an X @-@ ray revealed it to be broken . 
 Trautmann played for Manchester City until 1964 , making 545 appearances . After his playing career , he moved into management , first with lower @-@ division sides in England and Germany , and later as part of a German Football Association development scheme that took him to several countries , including Burma , Tanzania and Pakistan . In 2004 , he was appointed an honorary Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) for promoting Anglo @-@ German understanding through football . Trautmann died at home in Valencia , Spain , on 19 July 2013 , aged 89 . 
 = = Early life in Germany = = 
 Trautmann was born on 22 October 1923 in <unk> , a middle class area in west Bremen , living with his father who worked in a fertiliser factory by the docks , and his mother Frieda , a housewife . He had a brother , Karl @-@ Heinz , three years his junior , with whom he enjoyed a close relationship . The bleak economic climate of the early 1930s forced the <unk> to sell their house and move to an apartment block in the working class area of <unk> , where Bernhard lived until 1941 . 
 The young Bernhard had a keen interest in sport , playing football , handball and <unk> ( a form of dodgeball ) . To this end , he joined the YMCA and football club Blau und Weiss . He took to playing for the football club with enthusiasm , but the YMCA activities did not interest him to the same extent . 
 In August 1933 , he joined a new organisation , the Jungvolk , a precursor to the Hitler Youth . The following year , he won several local junior athletics events and was awarded a certificate for athletic excellence signed by Paul von Hindenburg , the President of Germany . At the onset of the Second World War , Trautmann was working as an apprentice motor mechanic . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Trautmann joined the Luftwaffe as a radio operator in 1941 . During training , he showed little aptitude for radio work , and transferred to Spandau to become a Fallschirmjäger ( paratrooper ) . He served first in Occupied Poland , though being stationed far behind the front line resulted in boredom for his regiment , which resorted to sports and practical jokes to pass the time . One such practical joke involving a car backfired on Trautmann , resulting in a staff sergeant burning his arms . Trautmann was court @-@ martialled , and received a three @-@ month prison sentence . At the start of his confinement , Trautmann came down with acute appendicitis , and spent the remainder of his sentence in a military hospital . 
 In October 1941 , he rejoined the 35th Infantry Division at Dnepropetrovsk , Ukraine , where the German advance had halted . Over @-@ winter hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks on Soviet Army supply routes were the unit 's main focus and in spring , Trautmann was promoted to Unteroffizier ( corporal ) . Gains were made in 1942 , but the Soviet counter @-@ offensive hit Trautmann 's unit hard , and by the time it was withdrawn from the Eastern Front , only 300 of the original 1 @,@ 000 men remained . Trautmann won five medals for his actions on the Eastern Front , including an Iron Cross First Class . 
 Promoted to Feldwebel ( sergeant ) , Trautmann was part of a unit formed from the remnants of several others which had been decimated in the east , and moved to France in anticipation of the Allied invasion of Normandy . In 1944 , he was one of the few survivors of the Allied bombing of <unk> , and with no unit left decided to head home to Bremen . By this point , German soldiers without valid leave papers were being shot as deserters , so Trautmann sought to avoid troops from either side . However , a few days later , he was captured in a barn by two American soldiers . Deciding that Trautmann had no useful intelligence to give them , the soldiers marched him out of the barn with his hands raised . Fearing he was about to be executed , Trautmann fled . After evading his captors , he jumped over a fence , only to land at the feet of a British soldier , who greeted him with the words " Hello Fritz , fancy a cup of tea ? " Earlier in the war , he had been captured by the Russians and later the French Resistance , but escaped both times . With the war drawing to a close , Trautmann did not attempt a third escape . 
 He was imprisoned near Ostend , Belgium , then transferred to a transit camp in Essex , where he was interrogated . As a volunteer soldier who had been subject to indoctrination from a young age , he was classified a category " C " prisoner by the authorities , meaning he was regarded as a Nazi . Trautmann , one of only 90 of his original regiment to survive the war , was then transferred to a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp at Marbury Hall , near Northwich , Cheshire , and interned with other category " C " prisoners . He was soon downgraded to non @-@ Nazi " B " status , after which he was taken to Fort Crosby in Hightown near Liverpool where he stayed for a short while working on local farms and mixing with the locals , from here he was sent to PoW Camp 50 ( now <unk> High School ) in Ashton @-@ in @-@ Makerfield in Lancashire between St Helens and Wigan , where he stayed until 1948 . 
 Football matches were regularly held at the camp , in which Trautmann played outfield . However , in a match against amateur team Haydock Park , Trautmann was injured while playing centre @-@ half . He swapped positions with goalkeeper Günther <unk> , and from that day forward played as a goalkeeper . During this time he became known as " Bert " , as the English had trouble pronouncing " Bernd " , the abbreviated version of his name . 
 = = Early football career = = 
 With closure of the PoW camp imminent , Trautmann declined an offer of repatriation and stayed in England , working on a farm in Milnthorpe then subsequently working on bomb disposal in Huyton . 
 In August , 1948 he started playing amateur football for the non @-@ league Liverpool County Combination club St Helens Town , through which he met the club secretary 's daughter , Margaret Friar , whom he later married . Over the course of the 1948 – 49 season , Trautmann 's goalkeeping reputation steadily grew and a series of large crowds were attributed to his performances , including a record 9 @,@ 000 attendance in the final of a local cup competition , the Mahon Cup . The success of that season elevated the club into Division Two of the Lancashire Combination League for the start of 1949 – 50 . 
 = = Joins Manchester City = = 
 Performances for St Helens gained Trautmann a reputation as an able goalkeeper , resulting in interest from Football League clubs . As the following season commenced , a number of League clubs showed interest in signing him . The first to offer him a contract was Manchester City , a club playing in the highest level of football in the country , the First Division . On 7 October 1949 Trautmann signed for the club as an amateur and turned professional shortly after . Trautmann became the first sportsman in Britain to wear Adidas , thanks to his friendship with Adolf <unk> . 
 = = = Supporter discontent = = = 
 Some Manchester City fans were unhappy about signing a former member of the Luftwaffe . Season ticket holders threatened a boycott , and various groups in Manchester and around the country bombarded the club with protest letters . In addition to this difficulty , Trautmann was replacing the recently retired Frank Swift , one of the greatest keepers in the club 's history . Though privately expressing doubts about the signing , the club captain , Eric Westwood , a Normandy veteran , made a public display of welcoming Trautmann by announcing , " There 's no war in this dressing room " . Trautmann made his first team debut on 19 November against Bolton Wanderers , and after a competent display in his first home match , protests shrank as fans discovered his talent . He continued to receive abuse from crowds at away matches , which affected his concentration in some early games ; in December 1949 , he conceded seven goals at Derby County . 
 City 's match against Fulham in January 1950 was Trautmann 's first visit to London . The match received widespread media attention , as most of the British press were based there ; several leading sportswriters watched Trautmann in action for the first time . The damage caused to the city by the Luftwaffe meant former paratrooper Trautmann was a target of hatred for the crowd , who yelled " Kraut " and " Nazi " . City were struggling in the league , and widely expected to suffer a heavy defeat but a string of saves from Trautmann meant the final score was a narrow 1 – 0 loss . At the final whistle , Trautmann received a standing ovation , and was applauded off the pitch by both sets of players . The Manchester City team struggled throughout the season , and was relegated to the Second Division . 
 = = = Early Manchester City career = = = 
 Manchester City returned to the top flight at its first attempt , and in the following years Trautmann established himself as one of the best keepers in the league , playing in all but five of his club 's next 250 league matches . By 1952 , his fame had spread to his home country , leading Schalke 04 to offer Manchester City £ 1 @,@ 000 for his services . The offer was refused ; the club responded that they thought Trautmann to be worth twenty times more . 
 In the mid @-@ 1950s , the Manchester City manager Les McDowall introduced a new tactical system using a deep @-@ lying centre @-@ forward , which became known as the Revie Plan after Don Revie who played centre @-@ forward . The system depended on maintaining possession of the ball wherever possible , which required Trautmann to make use of his throwing ability . For goalkeepers of Trautmann 's era , it was usual to kick the ball as far as possible downfield after making a save . By contrast , Trautmann , influenced by the Hungarian goalkeeper Gyula <unk> , sought to start attacks by throwing the ball to a wing @-@ half , typically Ken Barnes or John McTavish . The wing @-@ half then passed to Revie to develop the attack . 
 = = 1955 FA Cup Final = = 
 Using the Revie Plan , Manchester City reached the 1955 FA Cup Final , in which Trautmann became the first German to play in an FA Cup final . City faced Newcastle United , winners of the cup in 1951 and 1952 . Nerves affected the City players , and they went behind to a Jackie Milburn goal after only 45 seconds . Further problems were caused by the loss of Jimmy Meadows to injury after 18 minutes , leaving City with 10 men , a disadvantage that meant Trautmann 's ability to start attacks from throws was limited . Though City equalised in the first half , they struggled in the second , and after 57 minutes Trautmann was outwitted by Bobby Mitchell , who scored Newcastle 's second goal . The match finished as a comfortable 3 – 1 win for Newcastle , and Trautmann gained a runners @-@ up medal . 
 = = 1956 FA Cup Final = = 
 Manchester City had a strong season in 1955 – 56 , finishing fourth in the league and reached the FA Cup final against Birmingham City . Trautmann , one of the team 's most prominent performers , won the FWA Footballer of the Year Award shortly before the match , the first goalkeeper to win the award . Two days later , Trautmann stepped out onto the Wembley pitch for the match that would gain him worldwide acclaim . 
 During the previous final , nerves had contributed to the opposition scoring an early goal , but the City team was more settled on this occasion . Under the influence of Don Revie who was outstanding on the day , City scored an early goal , a left @-@ footed strike by Joe Hayes . Birmingham equalised on 14 minutes . The match remained level until midway through the second half , when Jack Dyson and Bobby Johnstone scored two goals in as many minutes to give Manchester City a 3 – 1 lead . Birmingham attacked strongly in the next ten minutes . In the 75th minute , Trautmann , diving at an incoming ball , was knocked out in a collision with Birmingham 's Peter Murphy in which he was hit in the neck by Murphy 's right knee . No substitutes were permitted in those days , so Trautmann , dazed and unsteady on his feet , carried on . For the remaining 15 minutes he defended his net , making a crucial interception to deny Murphy once more . Manchester City held on for the victory , and Trautmann was the hero because of his spectacular saves in the last minutes of the match . Trautmann admitted later that he had spent the last part of the match " in a kind of fog " . 
 His neck continued to cause him pain , and Prince Philip commented on its crooked state as he gave Trautmann his winner 's medal . Trautmann attended that evening 's post @-@ match banquet despite being unable to move his head , and went to bed expecting the injury to heal with rest . As the pain did not recede , the following day he went to St George 's Hospital , where he was told he merely had a <unk> in his neck which would go away . Three days later , he got a second opinion from a doctor at Manchester Royal Infirmary . An X @-@ ray revealed he had dislocated five vertebrae , the second of which was cracked in two . The third vertebra had wedged against the second , preventing further damage which could have cost Trautmann his life . 
 = = = Recovery from injury = = = 
 Trautmann 's convalescence took several months , resulting in him missing a large part of the 1956 – 57 season . Jack Savage deputised during his absence . At the start of December , Trautmann played two reserve matches , but lacked confidence . He was restored to the first team on 15 December for a match against Wolverhampton Wanderers , but conceded three goals . He struggled to regain his form in the remainder of the season , leading to calls from some fans and media for him to retire . Others criticised the club , believing that Trautmann had been forced to play while still not fully recovered from injury . 
 The 1957 – 58 season was an unusual one for Manchester City , which became the first and thus far only English team to both score and concede 100 goals in a season . Trautmann played in 34 matches , and though he did not play in the 9 – 2 defeat to West Bromwich Albion , an 8 – 4 defeat to Leicester City was a record for the most goals conceded by Trautmann in a match in his career , and in the entire season he kept only two clean sheets . 
 = = Testimonial = = 
 Trautmann appeared in 545 matches for City during the 15 @-@ year period between 1949 and 1964 . 
 On 15 April 1964 , he ended his career with a testimonial in front of a crowd officially numbered at 47 @,@ 000 , though the true figure was estimated to be closer to 60 @,@ 000 . Trautmann captained a combined Manchester City and Manchester United XI that included Bobby Charlton and Denis Law , against an International XI that included Tom Finney , Stanley Matthews , Ronnie Clayton and Jimmy Armfield . 
 = = International football = = 
 Though recognised as one of the leading goalkeepers of his era , he never played for his native country . Trautmann met with the German national coach , Sepp Herberger , in 1953 , who explained that travel and political implications prevented him from selecting a player who was not readily available , and that he could only consider including Trautmann if he were playing in a German league . Consequently , Trautmann 's international isolation prevented him from playing in the 1954 World Cup , in which his countrymen were victorious . Trautmann 's only experience of international football came in 1960 , when the Football League decided to include non @-@ English players in the Football League representative team for the first time . Trautmann captained the League against the Irish League , and also played against the Italian League . 
 = = Later career = = 
 After leaving City , Trautmann played briefly for Wellington Town , who offered him £ 50 per match . Age had diminished his abilities , but his debut at Hereford showed he still had the ability to draw crowds . However , he was sent off at Tonbridge for violent conduct in his second match , and never played again . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Trautmann excelled at shot @-@ stopping , particularly penalties , saving 60 % of those he faced over the course of his career . The Manchester United manager Matt Busby mentioned Trautmann 's anticipation in his pre @-@ match team talks : " Don 't stop to think where you 're going to hit it with Trautmann . Hit it first and think afterwards . If you look up and work it out he will read your thoughts and stop it . " Similar sentiments were expressed by the Manchester City forward Neil Young , who recalled that " the only way to beat him with a shot in training was to mis @-@ hit it " . As a former handball player , Trautmann was adept at throwing the ball long distances , an attribute he used to start attacking moves , particularly after witnessing the Hungarian goalkeeper Gyula <unk> use such tactics to good effect in Hungary 's 6 – 3 victory over England in 1953 . 
 Trautmann found it difficult to accept criticism , and allowed only close friends to suggest changes to his game . He occasionally dwelt on mistakes to the detriment of his concentration , a tendency his friend Stan Wilson called " picking at daisies " . A short temper also caused occasional problems ; he was sent off on more than one occasion . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 After a couple of months pondering his future career plans , he received a telephone call from the Stockport County chairman , Victor Bernard , who offered him the position of general manager . Stockport was a struggling lower league club with a small budget , and Trautmann 's appointment was an attempt to improve its image . Many people in the local area supported one of the two Manchester clubs , so to stimulate interest Trautmann and Bernard decided to move matches to Friday evenings , when neither Manchester club would be playing . This improved revenue , but the team continued to struggle . Trautmann resigned in 1966 following a disagreement with Bernard . From 1967 to 1968 , he was the manager of the German team Preußen Münster , taking them to a 13th @-@ place finish in the Regionalliga West , following which he had a short spell at Opel Rüsselsheim . 
 The German Football Association then sent him as a development worker to countries without national football structures . His first posting was in Myanmar ( Burma ) , where he spent two years as the national coach , qualifying for the Olympics in 1972 , and winning the President 's Cup , a tournament contested by south @-@ east Asian countries , later that year . His work subsequently took him to managing Tanzania , Liberia , Pakistan and North Yemen , until 1988 , when he retired and settled in Spain . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Over the course of his career , Trautmann received many plaudits from leading football figures . The Russian goalkeeper Lev Yashin , himself considered one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time , believed that Trautmann and himself were the " only ... two world @-@ class goalkeepers " . 
 Trautmann 's idiosyncratic style of play also had an influence on budding young goalkeepers at the height of his career . The former Arsenal goalkeeper Bob Wilson names Trautmann as his boyhood hero , and Gordon Banks cited him as an influence on his playing style . 
 Media outlets have since recognised Trautmann 's reputation , with Trautmann placed unofficially as the 19th greatest goalkeeper of all @-@ time by the Daily Mail . ESPN consider Trautmann as one of the greatest FA Cup goalkeepers , with Trautmann representing Manchester City in two consecutive FA Cup finals in 1955 and 1956 while his lunge at Peter Murphy 's feet to grasp the ball in the 1956 FA Cup Final is rated as the greatest FA Cup save – a save that broke Trautmann 's neck . 
 In November 1995 , Trautmann returned to Maine Road to open the rebuilt Kippax Stand . However , the stand was gone within a decade : in May 2003 the club moved to the City of Manchester Stadium , Maine Road was closed and its stadium demolished the following year . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In 1997 Trautmann received the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany . He was appointed an honorary OBE in 2004 for his work in Anglo @-@ German relations , and received the award at the British Embassy in Berlin . The following night , at a concert given by the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra , he met the Queen . " Ah , Herr Trautmann . I remember you , " she said . " Have you still got that pain in your neck ? " 
 In 2005 , he was inducted into the National Football Museum 's Hall of Fame . He continued to follow Manchester City and visited Manchester to watch them play , as recently as April 2010 . Trautmann said during his visit , " I watch all City 's games on TV , they 're still my club " , and added , " I love England too and still shout for them – even if they 're playing Germany ! " In 1999 , he had also appeared in the BBC Timewatch programme episode " The Germans We Kept " , recounting the experiences of German prisoners of war who decided to remain in the UK . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Trautmann married a St Helens woman , Margaret Friar , in 1950 , but they divorced in the 1960s . ( <unk> Clay Trautmann 's Journey p . 259 ) The couple had three children , John , Mark and Stephen . John , his firstborn son , was killed in a car accident a few months after the FA Cup Final in 1956 , aged five . According to Trautmann , his wife 's struggle to come to terms with the loss ultimately resulted in the breakup of their marriage . He also had a daughter from a previous relationship from whom he was estranged for many years . He married Ursula von der <unk> , a German national , while living in Burma in the 1970s , but divorced in 1982 . From 1990 , Trautmann lived with his third wife <unk> in a small bungalow on the Spanish coast near Valencia . He since helped found the Trautmann Foundation , which continues his legacy by fostering courage and sportsmanship . 
 Trautmann 's autobiography Steppes to Wembley was published in 1956 . 
 = = Death = = 
 Trautmann died at home in Spain on 19 July 2013 at the age of 89 . He had suffered two heart attacks earlier in the year . The president of the German Football Association , Wolfgang <unk> , said that Trautmann was " an amazing sportsman and a true gentleman ... a legend " . Bob Wilson , a former Arsenal goalkeeper , tweeted , " Amazing man who helped bring our warring countries closer together " . Joe Corrigan , a former Manchester City goalkeeper , said Trautmann was " a fantastic man and was one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time " . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Manchester City 
 FA Cup : 1956 
 Individual 
 FWA Footballer of the Year : 1956 
 Member of the English Football Hall of Fame 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Sources : Rowlands , Trautmann : The Biography , p . 252 ; James , Manchester City : The Complete Record , pp. 367 – 395 . 
 = Hurricane Debby ( 2000 ) = 
 Hurricane Debby caused minor damage in the Greater and Lesser Antilles in August 2000 . The seventh tropical cyclone , fourth named storm , and second hurricane of the annual season , Debby developed from a tropical wave east of the Lesser Antilles on August 19 . Favorable conditions allowed the depression to become Tropical Storm Debby early on August 20 , and further strengthening into a hurricane occurred 24 hours later . Sustained winds peaked at 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) on August 21 . Debby made three landfalls on August 22 , in Barbuda , Saint Barthélemy , and Virgin Gorda , before re @-@ entering the Atlantic north of Puerto Rico . As Debby moved parallel to the north coast of Hispaniola late on August 23 , it weakened back to a tropical storm . The storm tracked westward and weakened further , instead of approaching Florida and strengthening into a major hurricane . While south of eastern Cuba on August 24 , Debby was downgraded to a tropical depression , six hours before completely dissipating . 
 Light rainfall and gusty winds caused minor damage in Barbuda , Saint Martin , and Trinidad and Tobago . In the United States Virgin Islands , brief blackouts and damage reaching $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 2000 USD ) was reported . Effects were most severe in Puerto Rico , where isolated locations experienced more than 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of rainfall . The heavy precipitation resulted in mudslides and flooding , which in turn damaged roads , bridges , and houses . At least 406 homes on the island were flooded , five of which suffered moderate to severe damage . Additionally , there were many car accidents in San Juan due to slick roads . One indirectly fatality was reported after a man fell off his roof while attempting to remove a satellite dish . Damage on the island of Puerto Rico reached $ 501 @,@ 000 . In Dominican Republic , the Civil Defense Force reported that severe flooding in the northern portions of that country caused the evacuation of more than 700 people . Overall , the storm caused roughly $ 35 @,@ 000 in damage across the island . Impact was lesser in Haiti , where squalls tore tin roofs off of numerous shanty homes and subsequently flooded a few . Additionally , rainfall in Cuba brought relief to an 8 month long drought impacting the region . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A strong tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on August 16 . By the following day , an area of low pressure was noted near 10 ° N 30 ° W. However , Dvorak classifications were not be initiated due to insignificant convective banding . At 0000 UTC on August 18 , the National Hurricane Center 's Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch ( TAFB ) indicated a low @-@ level circulation , though the system was still considered " too weak to classify " . The TAFB released an initial classification later that day at 1145 UTC . Convective banding had increased , though the system as a whole was poorly organized . It then began to gradually organize while moving westward at approximately 17 mph ( 27 km / h ) . By late on August 19 , convection had consolidated around a well @-@ defined center of circulation . As a result , it is estimated that Tropical Depression Seven developed at 1800 UTC , while located about 1 @,@ 035 miles ( 1 @,@ 665 km ) east of the Windward Islands . In the initial advisory by the National Hurricane Center , the agency noted a large area of convection , weak vertical wind shear , warm sea surface temperatures ( SSTs ) , all of which produced a favorable environment for intensification . 
 The depression strengthened and became Tropical Storm Debby at 0000 UTC on August 20 . Operationally , it was not upgraded to a tropical storm until 15 hours later . After classification , the center of circulation was difficult to locate due to the re @-@ organization of convection . Although the circulation remained relatively disorganized , the central dense overcast ( CDO ) associated with Debby was large , symmetrical , and had cold cloud tops . By 0600 UTC on August 21 , Debby had strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane . Despite reconnaissance aircraft flight reports of sustained winds ranging from 92 to 101 mph ( 148 to 163 km / h ) , Debby was not upgraded to a hurricane . Six hours later , the storm reached its maximum sustained wind speed of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Additionally , Debby attained its minimum barometric pressure of 991 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) early on August 22 . It was operationally not upgraded to a hurricane until 0900 UTC on August 22 , due to a poorly defined circulation . Hurricane @-@ force winds were very concentrated , extending only 25 miles ( 40 km ) from the storm 's center of circulation . 
 At 0600 UTC on August 22 , Debby made landfall in Barbuda with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . A few hours later , the storm also struck Saint Barthélemy at the same intensity . It made a third landfall in Virgin Gorda with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , at 1500 UTC on August 22 . In an advisory issued later that day , the National Hurricane Center noted that although the agency anticipated further strengthening , it would not be " significant " in the short @-@ term , due to Debby 's rapid movement west @-@ northwestward and potential land interaction with Hispaniola . Late on August 22 , the storm passed about 35 miles ( 56 km ) north of Puerto Rico . Early on August 23 , computer models varied extensively with the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory ( GDFL ) model , regarded by the National Hurricane Center as an " extreme outlier " , depicting a 926 mbar ( 27 @.@ 3 inHg ) low pressure area over the Florida Keys on August 26 . Due to increasing southwesterly wind shear , Debby began to weaken and was downgraded to a tropical storm at 1200 UTC on August 23 , while situated north of Dominican Republic . 
 Beginning late on August 23 , it was predicted that Debby would re @-@ strengthen , as SSTs were between 84 and 86 ° F ( 29 and 30 ° C ) and the storm was anticipated to resume the original west @-@ northwest movement , reducing land interaction . However , Debby curved westward and continued to become increasingly disorganized , with the low @-@ level circulation being displaced well west of the main , deep convective area . Early on August 24 , the storm entered the Windward Passage and began passing south of Cuba . The National Hurricane Center continued to predict re @-@ intensification , but noted the potential for degeneration into a tropical wave during the next few days in its advisory at 0900 UTC on August 24 , due to persistent wind shear . Three hours later , Debby was downgraded to a tropical depression . The storm degenerated into a tropical wave at 1800 UTC on August 24 , while located south of Cuba . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Several storm warnings were issued for the Greater and Lesser Antilles to warn residents of the approaching storm . In Philipsburg , Sint Maarten , several shops in the downtown area were boarded up to prepare for Debby 's approach . Elsewhere along the range of the cyclone 's predicted path , homes and businesses were boarded up , and families buried emergency supplies in the ground . Ten United States Navy ships and two submarines off the Coast of Vieques Island temporarily abandoned training exercises and moved over 300 miles ( 480 km ) to the south of Puerto Rico , out of the storm predicted path . On Antigua , electricity was shutoff to prevent storm damage to the island 's infrastructure . When the hurricane moved into the coastal waters of the U.S. Virgin Islands , the <unk> oil refinery in St. Croix was shut down , and as a result gas prices rose . 
 Around 7 @,@ 000 people in Cuba were evacuated to avoid the oncoming hurricane . Several shelters were opened by the Montserrat Red Cross on Montserrat , but few people sought refuge in them . Over 40 shelters were ready for use in Nassau , Bahamas , even though Debby never affected the island . A total of 889 people in the northern coastal plains were evacuated and placed in shelters out of Debby path . Three shelters were opened for the coming of Debby in Saint Thomas , and another two in Saint John . The total number of people in all five shelters only reached 64 . An additional 17 people took refuge in an unknown number of shelters on St. Croix . 
 In addition , many tropical cyclone warnings and watches were posted in the Greater and Lesser Antilles . At 2100 UTC on August 20 , a hurricane watch was issued for Sint Maarten , Saba , and Sint Eustatius , while there was a tropical storm watch for Antigua , Barbuda , and Anguilla . Early on August 21 , the hurricane watch was expanded to include the United States Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico . Additionally , the tropical storm watch was extended out to the British Virgin Islands , Guadeloupe , Montserrat , Saint Barthélemy , Saint Kitts and Nevis , and Saint Martin . A hurricane warning was issued for Guadeloupe , Puerto Rico , and the Virgin Islands late on August 21 . In Dominica , both a tropical storm warning and a hurricane watch were reported , while a tropical storm watch was put into effect in Dominican Republic . At 0300 UTC on August 22 , a hurricane watch was issued for Haiti north of Port @-@ au @-@ Prince as was a tropical storm warning in Dominican Republic from Palenque to Cabrera . An hour later , a tropical storm watch was put into effect for the southeastern Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands . By 0900 UTC on August 22 , Dominican Republic 's entire north coast was under a hurricane warning . Additionally , the tropical storm watch for the southeastern Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands was upgraded to a hurricane watch . 
 The hurricane warning for Antigua , Barbuda , Guadeloupe , Montserrat , and St. Kitts and Nevis was discontinued at 1200 UTC on August 22 , as was the tropical storm warning for Dominica . Three hours later , a hurricane warning was issued for the southeastern Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands , and another hurricane watch was posted for the central Bahamas . Additionally , the hurricane warning for Saba , Sint Eustatius , Sint Maarten , was discontinued . At 2100 UTC on August 22 , a hurricane watch was issued in Cuba for the provinces of Holguín and Las Tunas , while a tropical storm warning was issued for Haiti north of Port @-@ au @-@ Prince . The hurricane warning for the United States Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico was lowered to a tropical storm warning , before being canceled early on August 23 . Additionally , all watches and warning east of the United States Virgin Islands were discontinued . On August 23 , a hurricane warning was issued for the central Bahamas and Cuba in the provinces of Guantanamo , Holguín , and Las Tunas . A hurricane watch was put into effect for the northwestern Bahamas and Cuba in Camagüey and Ciego de Ávila on the north coast and Santiago de Cuba and Granma on the south coast . By 1500 UTC on August 25 , all of the remaining tropical cyclone watches and warnings were cancelled . 
 Although the hurricane was still situated far from Florida , a state of emergency was declared for the Florida Keys . Non @-@ residents in Monroe County were forced to leave , causing a significant reduction in the tourism for the year 2000 . For a period of time , forecasters predicted Debby to approach the Florida Keys as a Category 2 hurricane , while the GDFL predicted a much more intense Debby near the Florida Keys as a Category 4 hurricane with a minimum central pressure of 926 mbar ( 27 @.@ 3 inHg ) . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Because of the relatively weak and disorganized nature of the storm , impact throughout its path was widespread , but not particularly severe . Puerto Rico bore the brunt of the storm , followed by the United States Virgin Islands , then the Dominican Republic . Debby was attributed to about $ 735 @,@ 000 in damage and 1 indirect fatality , which occurred in Puerto Rico when a man fell off a roof while attempting to remove a satellite dish . 
 = = = Lesser Antilles = = = 
 Throughout the Leeward Islands , gusty winds damaged fruit trees and downed power lines . Wind gusts estimated to have reached 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) lashed Anguilla . Some trees were destroyed , and electrical poles and power lines were downed . In Antigua , downed utility poles and trees were spotted . Precipitation totals in Antigua peaked at 0 @.@ 91 inches ( 23 mm ) . Rainfall on the island of Barbuda reached 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . Debby caused moderate roof damage to several structures and destroyed a few sheds and fruit trees . Sint Maarten reported little rainfall as the storm almost uneventfully passed over the island , causing mostly minor flooding and vegetation damage . Losses reached $ 750 @,@ 000 , though it was entirely from cruise ship cancellations and closed businesses . With damage nearly nonexistent , the Sint Maarten Tourism Bureau remarked that Debby " was the weakest hurricane St. Maarten experienced in several years . " 
 On Saint Barthélemy , wind gusts as strong as 87 mph ( 140 km / h ) at Gustavia were reported . Wind damage was minor , limited to some downed trees and power poles . Rainfall totals were very light , ranging from 0 @.@ 59 to 0 @.@ 98 inches ( 15 to 25 mm ) . Tides on the island reached about 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) above normal . Similar wave heights were reported on Saint Martin , while precipitation was slightly higher , ranging from 0 @.@ 78 to 1 @.@ 37 inches ( 20 to 35 mm ) . Impact was minimal on Guadeloupe . Wave heights reached approximately 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . Rainfall was also light on Guadeloupe , with 1 @.@ 45 inches ( 37 mm ) in Le Moule , 1 @.@ 22 inches ( 31 mm ) in Sainte @-@ Rose , 1 @.@ 07 inches ( 27 mm ) in La Désirade , 0 @.@ 66 inches ( 17 mm ) in Sainte @-@ Anne , and 0 @.@ 66 inches ( 17 mm ) in Pointe @-@ à @-@ Pitre . Feeder bands from Debby affected countries as far south as Trinidad and Tobago , where heavy rainfall resulted in flooding in the Barrackpore region . 
 = = = United States territories = = = 
 In the United States Virgin Islands , losses reached approximately $ 200 @,@ 000 . On Saint Thomas , 1 @.@ 93 inches ( 49 mm ) of rain was recorded . At the Cyril E. King Airport , sustained winds reached 33 mph ( 53 km / h ) , while gusts up to 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) were reported . Elsewhere on Saint Thomas , one sailboat was washed ashore on <unk> Beach . Sustained winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) and gusts of 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) on Saint Croix caused brief power outages . Additionally , 0 @.@ 46 inches ( 11 @.@ 7 mm ) of rain fell in St. Croix . Minor landscape damage occurred on Saint John . 
 Debby also dropped up to 12 inches ( 30 @.@ 5 mm ) of rainfall across Puerto Rico in less than 48 hours , causing mudslides and damage to bridges and roads ; however , most of the island territory only received 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 62 mm ) of precipitation . The maximum rainfall on the island was 12 @.@ 63 inches ( 32 mm ) in Río Piedras , Puerto Rico . Additionally , 12 @.@ 16 inches ( 31 mm ) of precipitation was recorded near Cayey , though there were unofficial reports of 17 inches ( 43 mm ) in the interior mountains of the region . The hurricane dropped around 5 inches ( 127 mm ) of rain in San Juan , producing slick roads that resulted in several minor car accidents . There were 406 homes affected from the flooding , 5 of which were moderately to severely damaged . Losses in Puerto Rico reached $ 501 @,@ 000 , primarily in the Caguas municipality . The storm was also indirectly responsible for the death of a 78 @-@ year @-@ old man who fell while trying to remove a satellite dish from the roof of his home . 
 = = = Dominican Republic = = = 
 On the northern coast of the Dominican Republic , waves and rainfall caused light to moderate damage . Storm surge damaged about 20 homes and dozens of families were evacuated from Cabrera , Nagua , Río San Juan , and Samaná . In Nagua , several districts were left without drinking water and electricity after gusts blew down power cables and large trees . At San José de Matanzas , several coconut trees were uprooted from the ground . Also , two houses were slightly damaged from wind gusts . In the nearby town of La Vega , bridges over the Piedra River and <unk> River collapsed due to the heavy rainfall and flooding . In southern Puerto Plata , flooding in Aguas Negras , Playa Oeste and <unk> districts forced dozens of families to leave their houses . In Monte Cristi , heavy rainfall caused flooding in various low @-@ lying districts , with over 200 people affected in the coastal portion of the province . Another town , Salcedo , lost approximately 23 sq mi ( 60 km2 ) of bananas , with the damage estimated to have reached approximately $ 35 @,@ 000 ( RD $ 500 @,@ 000 DOP ) . The country 's Civil Defense Force stated that over 700 people on the northern coast were forced out of their homes after severe flooding . A wedding was also delayed at the <unk> beach resort after flooding left the alter area suitable only for ducks . 
 = = = Greater Antilles = = = 
 Residents living in shanties in northern Haiti fled their homes during the storm . In Port @-@ de @-@ Paix , strong winds tore off many tin roofs and flooded some homes . A small coastal village , <unk> , experienced high winds that sunk at least five boats . Storm surge also swept away one home , but without any reports of injury or death . In Cuba , the remnants of Debby brought rainfall to the eastern portion of the country , particularly Guantánamo Province , with 24 ‑ hour precipitation totals of 3 @.@ 22 inches ( 82 mm ) in San Antonio del Sur , 2 @.@ 55 inches ( 65 mm ) in Maisí , and 2 @.@ 28 inches ( 58 mm ) and 2 @.@ 16 inches ( 55 mm ) at separate locations in Guantánamo . Due to a severe eight @-@ month drought in Guantanamo Province , the accumulated rainfall was largely beneficial . However , as a precaution against potential flooding , more than 32 @,@ 000 people and thousands of cattle residing in low @-@ lying areas were evacuated to higher ground . A few locations reported gusty winds . At Maisí , sustained winds between 29 and 31 mph ( 47 and 50 km / h ) were reported , along with gusts up to 42 mph ( 68 km / h ) . Additionally , tides caused coastal flooding in Baracoa . 
 = Grey @-@ necked rockfowl = 
 The grey @-@ necked rockfowl ( Picathartes oreas ) is a medium @-@ sized bird in the family Picathartidae with a long neck and tail . Also known as the grey @-@ necked picathartes , this passerine is mainly found in rocky areas of close @-@ canopied rainforest from south @-@ west Nigeria through Cameroon , Equatorial Guinea , and south @-@ west Gabon . It additionally lives on the island of Bioko . Its distribution is patchy , with populations often isolated from each other . The rockfowl typically chooses to live near streams and inselbergs in its forested habitat . It has no recognized subspecies , though some believe that it forms a superspecies with the white @-@ necked rockfowl . The grey @-@ necked rockfowl has grey upperparts , a light grey breast , and lemon @-@ coloured underparts . Its unusually long tail is used for balance , and its thighs are muscular . The head is nearly featherless , with the exposed skin being powder blue on the forehead and upper mandible and carmine on the hindcrown . The bird ’ s cheeks and eyes are covered in a large , circular black patch that , though narrow , connects and divides the carmine and powder blue skin at the peak of the crown . Though the bird is usually silent , some calls are known . 
 This rockfowl feeds primarily on insects , though some plant matter , such as fruit and flower buds , is eaten . One feeding strategy involves following Dorylus army ant swarms , feeding on insects flushed by the ants . Rockfowl move through the forest mainly through a series of hops and bounds , or short flights in low vegetation . It travels either alone or in small groups . This species rarely flies for long distances . The grey @-@ necked rockfowl is monogamous and pairs nest either alone or in the vicinity of other pairs , sometimes in colonies of two to five nests , though one colony of forty nests has been recorded . These nests are constructed out of mud and are formed into a deep cup that is built on rock surfaces , typically in caves or on cliffs . Two eggs are laid twice a year . Though the birds breed in colonies , infanticide exists in this species , with rockfowl attempting to kill the young of other pairs . Nestlings mature in about a month . 
 This species is classified as vulnerable as its dwindling and fragmented populations are threatened by habitat destruction . A conservation plan has been drawn up for this species , and research into its current distribution is ongoing . Some of the indigenous peoples of Cameroon either respect this species or , in some cases , fear it . Today , this rockfowl is considered one of Africa ’ s most desirable birds by birders and is a symbol of ecotourism across its range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 This species was first described by Anton Reichenow in 1899 from a bird collected at the base of Mount Cameroon near Limbe , Cameroon . He published his description in <unk> <unk> and described it as Picathartes oreas . The generic name was first used by René @-@ Primevère Lesson in 1828 after he split the grey @-@ necked rockfowl 's close relative the white @-@ necked rockfowl from the crow genus Corvus and placed it in its own genus , Picathartes , as the white @-@ necked rockfowl did not share characteristics common to members of Corvus such as a feathered head . This generic name comes from a combination of the Latin genera pica for " magpie " and <unk> for " vulture " . The species name is derived from the Ancient Greek word oreas , meaning " mountain " . Since its initial description , the picathartes have been placed in more than five different families , including those of crows ( Corvidae ) , starlings ( Sturnidae ) , Old World flycatchers ( Muscicapidae ) , babblers ( <unk> ) and Old World warblers ( Sylviidae ) . Today the grey @-@ necked rockfowl and the white @-@ necked rockfowl are believed to comprise a unique family , Picathartidae . Additionally , it has been suggested , though not generally accepted , that the two rockfowl represent the remnants of an ancient bird order . Recent DNA analysis has shown that Picathartidae and its closest relatives , southern Africa 's <unk> and south @-@ east Asia 's rail @-@ babbler , form a clade . The analysis suggests that the rockfowl split from the common ancestor of their clade 44 million years ago . It is believed that the ancestor of this clade originated in Australia and spread to Africa . Though the grey @-@ necked rockfowl has no subspecies , it may form a superspecies with the white @-@ necked rockfowl , with plumage and facial pattern being the main differences between the two species . 
 This species has numerous common names , including the grey @-@ necked rockfowl , grey @-@ necked picathartes , bare @-@ headed rockfowl , red @-@ headed rockfowl , blue @-@ headed picathartes , and grey @-@ necked bald crow . Rockfowl is a reference to the species ' habit of building mud nests on rock surfaces and caves . Picathartes refers to the species ' scientific name . Bald crow is a reference to its featherless head and somewhat crow @-@ like appearance , especially in its beak . 
 = = Description = = 
 This rockfowl measures approximately 33 to 38 centimetres ( 13 to 15 in ) in length , with its notably long tail contributing about 14 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) . This species does not show sexual dimorphism . The adult 's head is largely featherless , and the skin on the forehead and forecrown as well as the upper mandible of the beak behind the bird 's nostril is a powder blue . The lower mandible and rest of the upper mandible are black . This beak is unusually large and crow @-@ like at 30 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) in length and is also decurved . There are some small , bristle @-@ like feathers located on the crown that can be erected . Behind the crown , the species ' bare skin on the hindcrown and nape is carmine in coloration and has a few more bristle @-@ like feathers . The area between these patches of skin , as well as the lores , cheeks , and ear region , are featherless with black skin . Its eyes are dark brown . The grey @-@ necked rockfowl 's mantle , back , rump , and uppertail coverts are all grey . The feathers on the rump are long , dense , and silky . Additionally , the tail is grey . The rockfowl 's chin , throat , sides of the neck , and upper breast are all a pale grey . This bird is buffy lemon in colour on its lower breast , belly , flanks , thighs , and undertail coverts , though the flanks can sometimes appear to be greyish . The wing is grey , though the wing 's remiges are black , forming a line between the lemon underparts and grey upperparts . Its legs and feet are silver @-@ grey and muscular . The adult rockfowl weighs 200 to 250 grams ( 7 @.@ 1 to 8 @.@ 8 oz ) . 
 The nestling is born nearly featherless except for tiny primary quills and a fine down along its spine , humerus , forearm , and femur . Its skin is dark pink but displays variable black patches on its upperside . The gape is yellow . As the nestling develops , its plumage begins to resemble that of the adult , though it has white flecks on its wing coverts and the featherless skin on the head is black or dark brown , not powder blue , on the forecrown and dark reddish brown , not carmine , on the hindcrown . After fledging , the immature closely resembles the adult except for the bare patch on the back of the head being golden yellow instead of carmine and the tail being only a third as long as that of an adult . 
 The grey @-@ necked rockfowl is a relatively silent species . It has been known to give a quiet , one to two second long , hissing " wheet " call several times at intervals of about four seconds . To give this call , the rockfowl opens its beak and inflates its throat . When bringing food to their nests , the adults give one or two " peep " s . After reaching the nest , the adult repeatedly makes a low " ga @-@ a @-@ a " sound that has been described as being between a snore and a sigh . It also makes a hissing noise that has been described as a " <unk> " . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The grey @-@ necked rockfowl is found in West Africa from southeast Nigeria to southwest Gabon . In Nigeria , it is only found in the nation 's southeastern corner near the coast and the Cameroon border . The species is widespread in southwestern Cameroon , and this country is considered to be the species ' stronghold . It is found throughout Equatorial Guinea and into southwestern Gabon . Additionally , the species resides in the southwestern forests of the island of Bioko in the Gulf of Guinea . There is only one record of this species from the Republic of the Congo , though it is suspected that the rockfowl may have an undiscovered population in this country . The grey @-@ necked rockfowl 's total range covers approximately 314 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 121 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . 
 The grey @-@ necked rockfowl prefers rugged terrain in these forests covered in large boulders , caves , and gorges . Additionally , it often found near inselbergs and a source of water , either a river or a forest pool . The understory of its forests has sparse undergrowth or open spaces but is covered in mosses , ferns , lianas , and epiphytes . In southwestern Bioko it is found in low forests that receive nearly 10 metres ( 33 ft ) of rain a year . Bioko 's habitat also has dense undergrowth and vertical gorges near a caldera . The rockfowl 's habitat is normally found between 450 and 2 @,@ 100 metres ( 1 @,@ 480 and 6 @,@ 890 ft ) above sea level , though it is lower in elevation on Bioko . This species is non @-@ migratory , and at one site in Cameroon the birds remained within 300 metres ( 980 ft ) of their nesting site throughout the year . It is capable of living near human activity , and one breeding site in Cameroon was located within 30 metres ( 98 ft ) of a maize plot . This and other recent observations suggest that the rockfowl has greater tolerance for degraded habitat than previously thought . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 This rockfowl usually lives either alone or in pairs , although small flocks of three to ten birds are not uncommon . It normally moves through its habitat in a series of runs and long , springing hops on the ground and in low branches . It uses its tail for balance while hopping and running . When in a flock , rockfowl hop almost in unison . In the unusual occurrences when the species does fly , it is fast and is capable of navigating through the trees and rocks well . When it is standing still , the rockfowl has its tail down and its head looking up . Typically , it silently evades any unusual movements in their forest . However , if these birds know that they have been sighted , they can become quite inquisitive and occasionally approach observers . This is not a shy species once it knows that it has been seen , and often studies things of interest , including humans , from an open location . When this species is suspicious , it raises the small crown on its head and the ruff on its neck while uttering a muffled groan . It is most active in the early morning and late evening , and from 10 : 30 am to 7 : 00 pm remains perched with little activity either in liana @-@ tangled areas or in caves away from the nests . To scratch its head , the species lifts its foot over its head . It bathes in small pools . While its lifespan in the wild is unknown , it has lived up to 25 years in captivity . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 This species forages in the early morning or late afternoon either alone or in small groups in leaf litter and on dead tree trunks . It is also known to leap upwards to grab prey on overhanging foliage . It looks for its prey either by standing still and scanning the surrounding area or by tossing the leaf litter away with its beak . It also frequently follows columns of Dorylus ants , feeding on the insects flushed by the ants . It also is known to hunt in streams for crabs and fish . It crushes snails with its beak and , if its prey struggles , smashes it against the ground . While an uncommon occurrence , male rockfowl have been observed giving food to a female . 
 The grey @-@ necked rockfowl feeds on a diverse range of invertebrates and small vertebrates , though plant matter does constitute a major part of its diet . It is known to eat beetles , including weevils , rove beetles , and click beetles from the genus <unk> , butterflies , ants from the genera Dorylus and Pachycondyla , grasshoppers , cockroaches from the family <unk> , earwigs , caterpillars , ant @-@ lions , silverfish , and earthworms . Small lizards , frogs , snails , and slugs are also eaten , as are crabs from the genus Potamon , fruits , flower buds , mosses , and leaves . Fish have also been identified as a prey item in Nigeria . At at least one nesting site , it relies heavily on the arthropods feeding on the bat guano near the cave for sustenance , while this behaviour has been reported to a lesser extent at other sites . It is known to regurgitate what it has eaten in pellet form . Overall , between 52 and 60 percent of the bird 's diet is believed to be composed of animals . Rove beetle larvae and ants were the most frequently eaten prey in a study in Nigeria . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The grey @-@ necked rockfowl breeds either alone or in small colonies averaging two to five nests in size , though nearly fifty nests are present at one site . It is monogamous and therefore does not breed with rockfowl other than its mate . It is believed to breed cooperatively in Equatorial Guinea , as four different birds were observed feeding one nest . The rockfowl 's courtship displays are unknown . The timing of the egg laying in a colony is not synchronized , leading to various stages of development of nestlings within the colony . It has been suggested that this is to promote cooperative breeding . The laying dates also vary by region , typically coinciding with a few weeks before the onset of the wet season ; in areas where the wet season is bimodal , two different breeding seasons occur . However , in mountainous regions such as Mount Cameroon , it breeds during the dry season to avoid the frequent mists of the wet season . Birds in Nigeria lay their eggs between August and November , birds in Gabon lay between November and April , birds in western Cameroon lay between March and November with peaks of June , July , and October , and birds in southern Cameroon have two breeding seasons , a main one from October to December and a secondary one lasting from April to May . In Equatorial Guinea , nesting occurs in mid @-@ February . 
 This rockfowl builds its nest onto the sides of rocks , normally in caves , where nests are built both by the entrance and deep within , or on nearly vertical cliff faces , which can be either bare or have some vegetation , though never woody branches , near the nest . Nests need to be built under an overhang to protect it from water , and the rock surface normally slopes forward slightly . The nests are almost always found near water , which can be in the form of either streams or forest pools . These streams , particularly those located at the base of a nesting cliff , help keep predators away from the nests . Nests on rock surfaces are normally built 1 @.@ 2 to 5 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 9 to 17 @.@ 1 ft ) above the ground . In addition to the rock face nests , there is a record of a nest being constructed on the buttress root of a <unk> tree above a small stream . Two nests were even built onto a concrete bridge in Gabon 's Lopé National Park . The male and female rockfowl work equally on the nest 's construction , and it can take two to three months to build one , though in some extreme cases it takes more than a year . The nest itself is a half @-@ cup constructed of dry mud with grass fibres and dead leaves mixed in , often with the plant matter sticking out of the nest 's walls . It is either built onto the rock surface or , in some cases , is built more like a retaining wall across the opening of a small rock fissure . Nests are built at least away 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) from each other , and in some cases up to 5 metres ( 16 ft ) . The nest is normally 30 to 40 centimetres ( 12 to 16 in ) thick , though the nest is uneven in its construction and one nest was 140 centimetres ( 55 in ) thick . It is about 290 centimetres ( 110 in ) wide and 400 centimetres ( 160 in ) long and weighs about 3 kilograms ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . However , nest sizes do have a large degree of variability . After the mud dries , it becomes a very hard structure . The inside of the nest is lined with rootlets and thin strips of grass . 
 One to three eggs , normally two , are laid , with the second egg being laid between 24 and 48 hours after the first . The eggs are variable in coloration and can be a light yellow @-@ brown with dark brown blotches , creamy white with dark brown or grey blotches , or pale grey with brown mottling . The eggs weigh about 15 @.@ 2 grams ( 0 @.@ 54 oz ) and have an average size of 40 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 59 in ) by 27 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 08 in ) . The rockfowl begins to incubate after both eggs are laid . The time the rockfowl spends incubating varies greatly , though it is mostly for less than five minutes at a time with nearly two hours between sessions . Both the male and female rockfowl incubate . When the incubating bird 's mate comes , it gives a brief call that causes the incubating bird to leave the nest . In the two days prior to hatching , the adult rockfowl prods at the eggs , sometimes with food in its beak . Incubation lasts for 21 to 24 days . When the infants hatch , they hatch about a day apart . The adult rockfowl quickly remove the eggshell fragments from the nest . The newborn weighs only 12 grams ( 0 @.@ 42 oz ) after hatching , but it quickly gains weight . The eyes open and the tail begins to grow on the fifth day . During the first couple of days , food is brought to the nestlings three to six times an hour , peaking in the evening . Begging nestlings expose their beak and gape to their parent , though they do not make a sound . The second @-@ hatched nestling often fails to gain weight and dies , and there is evidence suggesting that the adults cannibalize the remains . For the first ten days after hatching , one adult rockfowl stays and guards the nestlings while the other collects food ; despite this , nests have been destroyed by chimpanzees and drills . The chicks leave the nest after 24 days . Infanticide has been recorded in this species , with rockfowl killing other rockfowl 's young . In one case , a second pair of rockfowl moved onto a nest after killing the first pair 's nestlings . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 In Cameroon , the grey @-@ necked rockfowl is respected by the indigenous peoples and , in some cases , even feared . It is known by many names to the indigenous peoples of Nigeria , with most of the translating to " bird of the rocks " or " fowl of the stream " . Hunters sheltering in the rockfowl 's nesting caves have been known to kill and eat adult rockfowl , though it is generally thought to be too small to eat and is left for children to hunt . In the 1950s and 1960s , western zoos desired this species , leading to a large demand to collect the rockfowl for display . British conservationist and author Gerald Durrell made this species a target on two of his trips to Cameroon , which he describes in The <unk> Beagles and A Zoo in My Luggage . The trade of this species is non @-@ existent today , and , as the zoo population did not sustain itself despite sporadic breeding , the last captive rockfowl died at the Frankfurt Zoo in 2009 . The grey @-@ necked rockfowl has been depicted on numerous postage stamps from Cameroon and Nigeria , as well as stamps from Benin and Togo , where it does not live . It is considered one of the most difficult species of bird to see in the wild . The grey @-@ necked rockfowl is a symbol for both conservation and ecotourism efforts in its range . This species is considered one of the five most desirable birds in Africa by ornithologists . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The grey @-@ necked rockfowl is considered to be vulnerable due to habitat destruction , its isolated populations , collection of adults , predation , and a low breeding success rate . Its habitat is being destroyed to create large agricultural fields and cocoa plantations , as well as for logging and slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture . Due to the highly specialized requirements for its habitat , its population is very fragmented , and the species is believed to be naturally rare . Competition for its nesting sites is a result of these strict requirements and can lead to infanticide . Its estimated population is between 2 @,@ 500 and 10 @,@ 000 individuals , though it is believed that the population is at the lower end of the estimate . However , due to the inaccessibility of some parts of its range , it is also possible that this species is more common than believed . The population of some of these colonies is reaching the minimum levels needed for long @-@ term viability . It also falls victim to spring traps set for mammals by hunters . However , a more serious threat to its numbers was the widespread collection of rockfowl for display in zoos in the 1950s and 1960s . There is a risk that it will be negatively affected by ecotourism due to disturbances in its daily routine if proper viewing procedures are not followed . 
 Cameroon is the only nation with a national law protecting this species . This law prohibits killing the rockfowl , though it can be captured with a proper permit . International trading of the grey @-@ necked rockfowl is governed under CITES Appendix I , meaning that legal trading of this species is only authorized in extraordinary circumstances . In 2006 BirdLife International drafted an international action plan to provide strategies for protecting this species . This plan focused on surveying the remaining habitat , raising awareness amongst the local populace , and limiting the continued destruction of its habitat . 
 This rockfowl is protected in some of the areas in which it lives by national parks . Additionally , there seems to be little habitat destruction in Gabon and on Bioko as the locations in these places in which the rockfowl lives is believed to be too inaccessible for future human development . Recent surveys have also discovered new populations of the grey @-@ necked rockfowl . 
 = God Hates Us All = 
 God Hates Us All is the ninth studio album by American thrash metal band Slayer . Released on September 11 , 2001 , the album received positive critical reviews and entered the Billboard 200 at number 28 . It was recorded in three months at The Warehouse Studio in Canada , and includes the Grammy Award @-@ nominated " Disciple " . The album is the band 's last to feature drummer Paul Bostaph until their 2015 Repentless . Guitarist Kerry King wrote the majority of the lyrics , taking a different approach from earlier recordings by exploring topics such as religion , murder , revenge and self @-@ control . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Slayer began writing lyrics for a new album prior to their appearance at the 1999 Ozzfest . However , every three to four months the band was distracted by commitments to Ozzfest , and worldwide " Tattoo the Earth " tour with Slipknot . Guitarist Jeff Hanneman later admitted " that was the last break . Then we got our shit together . " The band 's longtime producer , Rick Rubin , was too busy to work with Slayer , and felt " burned out " — unable to create intense music . Araya and King had similar feelings about Rubin , and King remarked he " wanted to work with someone into the heavy @-@ music scene , and Rubin 's not anymore . I wanted somebody who knows what 's hot , knows what 's selling , knows the new techniques , and will keep me on my toes . " Rubin recommended two producers , although the first producer was not going to work out personality @-@ wise according to Hanneman . The band gave second candidate , Matt Hyde , a trial on the song " Bloodline " , which appeared in the movie Dracula 2000 . The band was pleased with Hyde 's work on " Bloodline " and hired him to produce the entire album . " Bloodline " was also briefly used in the 2009 film Law Abiding Citizen . The song " Here Comes the Pain " had originally been recorded almost two years prior to the release of God Hates Us All , appearing on the compilation album WCW Mayhem : The Music in 1999 , and then used as the opening theme for WCW Thunder from February 16 , 2000 to the final episode on March 21 , 2001 . 
 God Hates Us All was to be recorded in a Hollywood studio ; however , the band relocated to Vancouver , British Columbia due to the availability of cheaper studio time . Hyde recommended a studio to the band — The Warehouse Studio ( owned by Bryan Adams ) as he had previously worked there . The studio was altered to make it " feel like home " for Slayer ; as opposed to the setting for , in King 's words , the " lightweight Canadian pop singer " . This consisted of adding incense burners , candles , dimmed lights and pornography on the walls . Two banner flags of two middle fingers were also hung up . Vocalist Tom Araya says " that was basically the attitude of Slayer in the studio . We had a red devil head on one of the speakers . We had a skull on another . That 's the kind of shit we put up . Spooky stuff that makes you feel at home . " 
 Hyde used the digital audio workstation Pro Tools during the engineering , production , and audio mixing stages of the album . Slayer members wanted to keep the use of computer effects to a minimum , only to include a small amount of delay and distortion . As with previous recordings , the drum tracks were recorded first . Drummer Paul Bostaph follows a simple rule suggested by Rubin when in the studio : " The perfect take is the one that felt like it was going to fall apart but never did . " Seven @-@ string guitars were used on the tracks " <unk> " and " Here Comes the Pain , " the first time Slayer had done so . King was at the B.C. Rich guitar company ( manufacturer of his signature model , the <unk> ) and decided to borrow a seven string guitar . After writing one song , King ordered a seven string as he thought " there 's no point having one tuning for just one song , " so he wrote another , going on to comment " you don 't have to be good to make up a seven @-@ string riff . " The album features two songs on seven string guitars , four songs with guitars tuned to Drop @-@ B and all other songs in C # Standard . 
 = = Lyrical themes = = 
 God Hates Us All explores such themes as religion , murder , revenge , and self @-@ control . King wrote a majority of the lyrics , which he based on " street " subjects which everyone could relate to , rather than " Satan this , " " Satan that , " and " the usual Dungeons & Dragons shit " from the band 's previous records . King told Guitar World : 
 I definitely wanted to put more realism in it , more depth . God Hates Us All isn 't an anti @-@ Christian line as much as it 's an idea I think a lot of people can relate to on a daily basis . One day you 're living your life , and then you 're hit by a car or your dog dies , so you feel like , " God really hates me today . " 
 The song " Threshold " is about reaching one 's limit with a person in a situation where one is about to break — and are about to blow up as they get " under your skin " , while " Cast Down " features a fallen Angel who falls into drugs . " God Send Death " and " <unk> " take up the idea of killing people for pleasure . Both songs were written by Hanneman . Having read several books on serial killers , Hanneman came to the conclusion he could only kill someone if they really " pissed him off " , and decided he was unable to kill someone he did not know just for power . He later admitted he was trying to get into that person 's mind ; " why do they get off on it ? Without being angry , just killing for the sake of killing and getting off on it . I just wanted to get into that mindset . " 
 While other members went to local pubs , Araya spent his free hours reading factual books regarding serial killers , including Gordon Burn 's Happy Like Murderers : The Story of Fred and Rosemary West . Araya was seeking inspiration , and aimed to sound convincing while singing the lyrics , avoiding himself to sound like a gimmick . Araya sang the lyrics more " over @-@ the @-@ top " than done on previous albums , as King 's writing style is more " aggro . " This resulted in Kerrang ! reviewer Jason Arnopp describing the album 's lyrics as " so packed with foul and abusive language that it sounds as if D @-@ 12 and the Sopranos family were going head @-@ to @-@ head in a celebrity <unk> . " 
 = = Cover art and album title = = 
 God Hates Us All was originally intended to be named Soundtrack to the Apocalypse . However , Araya suggested that the title would be better used for a box set , which the band released in 2003 . The phrase God Hates Us All originates from the song " Disciple " , during which the line is repeated over the chorus . The lyrics are in reference to God 's allowance of acts such as suicide and terrorism , while seemingly doing nothing to prevent them ( see problem of evil ) . A member of the heavy metal band Pantera suggested using " God Hates Us All " for a shirt design after King played the song to the band . King agreed , although he thought the phrase would have more impact as the album title . 
 The original album cover depicts a Bible spiked with nails placed in a pentagram star shape , covered in blood with the word " Slayer " burnt across it . The liner notes intersperse the lyrics between passages from the biblical book of Job , partly crossed out with a black marker . The idea was suggested by the band 's record company , although King wanted more time to develop a better cover . King 's concept for the cover was to show nails in the shape of a pentagram , and have them miss keywords in Bible verses so it appeared as if it had been created by a sociopath who knew where every word appears . He later complained that the outcome was typical of " a record company with absolutely no idea what the fuck they were going to do " , and said that the cover " looked like a seventh grader defaced the Bible . " A slip insert was placed in front of the covers in major retail outlets . 
 = = Reception = = 
 God Hates Us All was set for release on July 10 ; however , concerns regarding audio mixing , the album cover , and the band 's label — American Recordings — changing distributor , caused the release date to be delayed until September 11 , 2001 . The release drew a connection to the September 11 attacks , which was the second time Slayer caused controversy towards one of their releases — the video for " Seasons in the Abyss " was filmed in Egypt and released prior to the Gulf War . In its week of release , God Hates Us All debuted at number 28 on the Billboard 200 , and sold 51 @,@ 000 copies . It entered the Canadian Albums Chart at number 9 , and debuted at number 18 on the top Internet album chart . As of August 16 , 2006 the album has sold 304 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 God Hates us All received generally positive reviews from music critics . On Metacritic , the album has a score of 80 out of 100 based on 12 reviews . Kerrang ! ' s Jason Arnopp described the album as " easily Slayer 's most convincing collection since Seasons in the Abyss , " awarding the album five out of five . Rolling Stone 's Rob Kemp wrote the record was " Slayer 's most brutal record since 1986 's immortal ( or undead ) Reign in Blood , " describing the music as " galloping double @-@ bass @-@ drum salvos " which " switch on a dime to furious double @-@ time pummeling , as ominous power chords and jagged shred solos slice and dice with Formula One precision . " Kemp awarded the album three and a half out of five . AllMusic reviewer Jason Birchmeier commented that " nearly 20 years into their evolution , Slayer have abandoned the <unk> and accessibility of their late- ' 80s / early- ' 90s work and returned to perfect the raw approach of their early years . A near flawless album , " and that Araya 's performance possibly makes " the most exhausting Slayer album yet . " 
 Not all critics were impressed with the album . Blabbermouth.net reviewer Borivoj Krgin dismissively labeled the album as " another failure on the band 's part to take the initiative and reinvent themselves . " Krgin described King as " the weaker and less inventive of the two main songwriters " ( King and Hanneman ) , feeling the album followed " a familiar direction that almost always sounds tired and forced " as a result of King being the album 's main songwriter . Krgin also singled out Araya for criticism , and called the vocalist a " hollow shell of his former self , boasting a singing style that is monotonous , devoid of creativity and at times virtually unlistenable . " Krgin awarded the record 6 out of 10 , and ended the review by observing that " Slayer 's rapidly diminishing record sales ( Diabolus In Musica has shifted less than 300 @,@ 000 copies in the US compared to 600 – 700 @,@ 000 + ) as a sign that the band is in dire need of a new lease on life . " The Washington Post gave it a mixed review , stating , " Of course , what Slayer says isn 't supposed to be nearly as important as how it says it : The riffs are all overdriven and suffocating , and that 's a conscious decision . In its simplest form , a song like " Exile " could pass for Motorhead pushed through the blades of a lawn mower , but that 's selling Slayer short ; guitarist Kerry King actively fights the groove that naturally comes from playing heavy rock @-@ and @-@ roll . " 
 The song " Disciple " received a Grammy Award nomination for " Best Metal Performance " at the 44th Grammy Awards , the band 's first nomination . The members cared neither about the nomination nor the award ceremony , and although they did not expect to win , thought it was " cool " to be nominated . The ceremony took place on February 27 , 2002 , with Tool winning the award for their song " Schism " . 
 = = Bostaph 's departure = = 
 Prior to Christmas 2001 , Bostaph sustained a chronic elbow injury which hindered his ability to drum , resulting in his decision to leave the band . His third @-@ to @-@ last performance with Slayer was recorded on War at the Warfield . To date , Bostaph has not viewed the footage ; he has likened the experience to " breaking up with a girlfriend , " and wants to move on with his life . Bostaph does not regret his time spent with the band , and described the period as a high point in his career . Bostaph eventually rejoined Slayer in 2013 , once again replacing Dave Lombardo . 
 Without a drummer the band were unable to finish their God Hates Us All tour . King contacted original drummer Dave Lombardo almost ten years after his departure , and asked him if he would be willing to play for the remainder of the tour . Lombardo accepted the offer , and played for the remaining 21 shows ; however , he did not take on a permanent position with the band . 
 Following the tour , the band continued their search for a permanent drummer , and sought solicitation via demo tape and snail mail . Interested fans sent video recordings of renditions of the songs " Disciple , " " God Send Death , " " Stain of Mind , " " Angel of Death " , " Postmortem / Raining Blood , " " South of Heaven , " " War Ensemble , " and " Seasons in the Abyss " ; complete with résumés . The band listened to hundreds of demo tapes , and created a " good pile " and " <unk> pile , " though the " <unk> " was much larger . Those whose performances the band were pleased with were offered an audition in Dallas , San Francisco or Peoria , Illinois ; many applicants , however , were unable to attend due to flight costs . The band auditioned roughly two to three drummers a day , and their top choice was one of Lombardo 's recommendations . However , the band ultimately returned to Lombardo after deciding that they could not find a drummer who suited the job ; Lombardo re @-@ joined Slayer and attended music festivals worldwide to promote God Hates Us All and record drums on the 2006 album Christ Illusion . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Limited edition = = = 
 The European LP does not contain track 12 
 = = = Bonus DVD materials = = = 
 " Darkness of Christ " ( DVD Intro video ) 
 " Bloodline " ( Video ) 
 " Raining Blood " ( Live Video ) ( 2001 @-@ 12 @-@ 07 San Francisco , CA ) 
 " Interview / B @-@ Roll Footage 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Liberty Head double eagle = 
 The Liberty Head double eagle or Coronet double eagle is an American twenty @-@ dollar gold piece struck as a pattern coin in 1849 , and for commerce from 1850 to 1907 . It was designed by Mint of the United States Chief Engraver James B. Longacre . 
 The largest denomination of United States coin authorized by the Mint Act of 1792 was the eagle , or ten @-@ dollar piece . The large amount of bullion being brought east after the discovery of gold in California in the 1840s caused Congress to consider new denominations of gold coinage . The gold dollar and double eagle were the result . After considerable infighting at the Philadelphia Mint , Chief Engraver James B. Longacre designed the double eagle , and it began to be issued for commerce in 1850 . Only one 1849 double eagle is known to survive ; it rests in the National Numismatic Collection at the Smithsonian . 
 The coin was immediately successful ; merchants and banks used it in trade . It was struck until replaced by the Saint @-@ Gaudens double eagle in 1907 , and many were melted when President Franklin D. Roosevelt recalled gold coins from the public in 1933 . Millions of double eagles were sent overseas in international transactions throughout its run to be melted or placed in bank vaults . Many of the latter have now been repatriated to feed the demand from collectors and those who desire to hold gold . 
 = = Inception = = 
 Under the Mint Act of 1792 , the largest @-@ denomination coin was the gold eagle , or ten @-@ dollar piece . Also struck were a half eagle ( $ 5 ) and quarter eagle ( $ 2 @.@ 50 ) . Bullion flowed out of the United States for economic reasons for much of the late 18th and early 19th centuries . The eagle 's size made it convenient for use in international transactions , and , faced with the likelihood that most being struck were exported , the Director of the Mint Elias Boudinot ended its production in 1804 . In 1838 , coinage resumed after Congress revised the weight and fineness of American gold coins . The new eagle was struck to a design by Christian Gobrecht , who was one of the Mint 's engravers . 
 In 1836 , the Public Ledger , a Philadelphia newspaper , proposed the issuance of both a gold dollar and a twenty @-@ dollar piece ; they wrote of the latter , " Twenty [ silver dollars ] are an encumbrance in a pocket ... if we are to have larger coins , let them be of gold . Along with the eagle , which has the size of the half dollar , we would recommend the double eagle , which [ would be ] of the size of our silver dollar , [ and ] would contain the value of twenty . " Others perceived a need for a large U.S. gold coin to be used in international transactions — American merchants sometimes used high @-@ denomination Latin American gold coins for that purpose . 
 No proposal for a gold twenty @-@ dollar piece was considered until after the California Gold Rush , beginning in 1848 , greatly increased the amount of the metal available in the United States . The increase in the supply of gold caused silver coins to be worth more than their face value , and they were heavily exported , generating new support for a gold dollar to take their place in commerce . The massive quantity of gold made a larger denomination desirable as well , to more efficiently convert gold to coins . In January 1849 , North Carolina Congressman James Iver McKay amended his previously introduced legislation for a gold dollar to provide for a double eagle as well . He wrote to Mint Director Robert M. Patterson , who responded , " there can be no other objection to the Double eagle except that it is not needed . It will be a handsome coin , between the half dollar and dollar in size . " 
 Concerned about likely Whig opposition to the coinage bill , McKay got his fellow Democrat , New Hampshire Senator Charles Atherton , to introduce the bill in the Senate on February 1 , 1849 — Atherton was chairman of the Senate Finance Committee . McKay introduced a version of the bill into the House on February 20 ; debate began the same day . The dollar was attacked on ground it would be too small ; the double eagle on the claim that it would be heavily abraded in circulation , and would become lightweight . McKay did not respond substantively , but stated that if no one wanted these denominations , they would be unasked @-@ for at the Mint , and would not be coined . Pennsylvania Representative Joseph Ingersoll , a Whig , spoke against the bill , noting that Patterson opposed the new denominations . Ingersoll stated that a twenty @-@ dollar piece would be " doubled into a ponderous and unparalleled size " . Nevertheless , the bill providing for the issuance of the gold dollar and double eagle passed both houses by large margins , and was signed into law by President James K. Polk on March 3 , 1849 . According to numismatist David Lange , " the double eagle was a banker 's coin intended to simplify transfers of large sums between financial institutions and between nations " . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 The act authorizing the gold dollar and double eagle precipitated conflict at the Philadelphia Mint . There the officers , including Chief Coiner Franklin Peale , were mostly the friends and relations of Director Patterson . The outsider in their midst was Chief Engraver James B. Longacre , successor to Gobrecht ( who had died in 1844 ) . A former copper @-@ plate engraver , Longacre had been appointed through the political influence of South Carolina Senator John C. Calhoun . Patterson despised Calhoun , and Longacre became a loner at the mint . Most of Peale 's formal duties were performed by his predecessor , Adam Eckfeldt , who continued to do the work of chief coiner despite his retirement . Peale spent the resulting free time running a private medal business taking commissions from the public and using the government 's facilities , including its Contamin portrait lathe . This machine , used in Peale 's medal work , was needed to reduce models of new designs to coin @-@ sized reductions from which working dies could be made . So long as no new coin designs were needed , dies could be reproduced mechanically , without using the Contamin device . Although it belonged to his department , Longacre did not use the Contamin lathe much until Congress ordered that the two new coins be struck . 
 When Longacre began work on the two new coins in early 1849 , he had no assistants . He completed work on the gold dollar first , anxious to show that he could create a coin design . In May , he requested that Patterson hire another engraver to assist him . The director declined , willing only to have engraving work contracted out . This was unsatisfactory to Longacre , who was responsible under the law for the proper execution of coinage dies , and who could not supervise outside work . 
 As Longacre worked on the double eagle design , according to numismatist Walter Breen , " Peale , with Patterson 's tacit approval , began harassment . " Longacre prepared a large model of the new coin in wax , and was instructed to give it to Peale for use in preparing a metal galvano , which could be used in the lathe . The operation failed , and Longacre 's model was destroyed . Longacre had , however , made a cast of his model in plaster , and was able to use it in the machine . The resulting steel die had to be hardened in Peale 's department ; as Longacre put it , " it unluckily split in the process " . According to numismatic historian Don Taxay , " Peale 's adoption of a process not normally used at the Mint , together with its catastrophic failures , seems more than coincidental " . 
 Longacre set forth on a third attempt to create a die . He was hampered not only by the continued opposition of Peale , but by poor lighting and the noxious fumes that penetrated his office at the Philadelphia Mint . A friend , New York engraver Charles Cushing Wright , arranged for Peter F. Cross to assist Longacre with making hubs and dies . Cross made the first obverse die in November and December 1849 at Longacre 's direction , and the chief engraver made the reverse . On December 22 , 1849 , Patterson wrote to Treasury Secretary William M. Meredith that the dies were completed . He enclosed a double eagle , asking Meredith , if he approved of the piece , to send word as quickly as possible to allow the coinage of 1849 double eagles in quantity . Before any reply could be received , Peale objected on December 24 , complaining that the relief of the head of Liberty was so high that pieces struck using the Philadelphia Mint 's steam @-@ powered machinery could not fully bring out the design — the coin sent to Meredith had been coined on a medal press , by hand . In addition , Peale alleged that the head was in such high relief that the coins would not stack . Patterson sent Peale 's letter to Meredith on December 25 , noting that this meant there would be a lengthy delay . 
 Longacre completed the lower @-@ relief dies about January 12 , 1850 . Peale did not test them for two weeks ; when he did , he rejected them , stating that Liberty 's head opposed the eagle on the reverse , making it difficult for the full design to be brought forth . He stated that Longacre would have to move the position of the head . Longacre , outraged , appealed to Director Patterson , who took no action , but early the next month came to see Longacre in his office . He told the engraver that the Taylor administration ( which had taken office in March 1849 ) had decided on Longacre 's removal , and urged him to send in his resignation as quickly as possible . Longacre did not resign , but went to Washington to see Secretary Meredith . He found that Patterson had lied to Meredith about a number of matters . For example , when Longacre took a new double eagle from his pocket , Meredith expressed surprise , believing that the dies from which it had been made had been broken . Longacre kept his job . 
 According to numismatic author Q. David Bowers , Longacre 's last set of dies were completed in February 1850 , and were accepted . Breen , however , stated that the first production coins appeared about January 26 , 1850 . Only one 1849 double eagle is known to be extant ; it forms part of the Smithsonian Institution 's National Numismatic Collection . The specimen sent to Meredith is unlocated , and is said to have been owned in the 1950s by coin dealer William K. Nagy , whose former business partner John W. Haseltine supposedly acquired it from the Meredith estate . Nagy allegedly stated that he had sold the coin to a private collector . One 1849 piece , in gilt brass , was later struck for Philadelphia druggist and numismatist Robert Coulton Davis , who had close ties to the Mint . Its location is also unknown . 
 = = Design = = 
 The obverse depicts a head of Liberty in the Greco @-@ Roman style , facing left , with her hair pulled back — according to numismatists Jeff Garrett and Ron Guth , " attractively " — in a bun . Some of her hair descends the back of her neck . She wears a coronet , inscribed " Liberty " , and is surrounded by thirteen stars , representative of the original states , and the year of issue . The reverse features a heraldic eagle , holding a double ribbon , on which " E Pluribus Unum " is inscribed . The double ribbon is an allusion by Longacre to the denomination of the piece he was designing . The design is a variant on the Great Seal of the United States ; the eagle protects a shield , which represents the nation , and holds an olive branch and arrows . Above the bird , Longacre again placed thirteen stars , arranged as a halo , together with an arc of rays . 
 Longacre 's initials , JBL , appear on the truncation of the head . The gold dollar and twenty @-@ dollar piece were the first American federal coins on which the designer 's initials appear — on the gold dollar , only the " L " is used . Longacre 's designs for the double eagle and the Type I gold dollar ( 1849 – 1854 ) are similar . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule disliked the double eagle and other Longacre coins showing Liberty , calling them routine . He did find that the reverse " has some commendable points of heraldic imagery " and likened that side of the coin to " the frontispiece for a patriotic brochure " . The Daily Alta California in May 1850 reprinted a piece from an unnamed Eastern newspaper , which said of the new piece , " we cannot say that we admire it ... [ the eagle on the reverse is ] imperfectly formed , and marred by some adjacent <unk> intended for radiance we suppose , by which the whole thing is rendered confused " . The Journal of Commerce , a New York periodical , suggested that the piece be replaced with one showing George Washington on one side and on the other " a handsome eagle standing out as if it were not ashamed of itself " . The Boston Evening Transcript suggested that Mint authorities should be " stopping the issuance of this very shabby coin . The manager of the mint would seem to be utterly destitute of taste to allow such a specimen to go forth . " Bowers , writing in 2004 , stated that despite the negative contemporary reaction , the design of the double eagle is now very popular among collectors . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Type I ( 1850 – 1866 ) = = = 
 The double eagle soon became the most popular gold coin in terms of the number of pieces struck . During the denomination 's life , from 1850 to 1933 , far more gold was struck into double eagles than into all other denominations combined . Of all gold coins struck from the start of gold coinage for circulation in 1795 to the end in 1933 , just under half of the coins struck were double eagles , but 78 % of the gold used was struck into twenty @-@ dollar pieces . According to Bowers , the double eagle " represented the most efficient way to coin a given quantity of gold bullion into coin form " . 
 Regular production of the double eagle began with the striking of just over a million at Philadelphia in 1850 , and 141 @,@ 000 at the New Orleans Mint that year . Double eagles were struck at New Orleans every year from 1850 to 1861 , generally in small quantities . In the early years of the Liberty Head double eagle , when no mint was in the Far West , some California gold was presented there for coining into double eagles . Once the San Francisco Mint opened in 1854 , New Orleans mintages were light as for the most part only local gold was deposited , and there was not much of it . The Philadelphia Mint continued to receive much of the California gold . After Louisiana seceded from the Union in 1861 , some of the double eagles from New Orleans that year , though bearing the standard designs , were struck under the authority of the State of Louisiana , and later , the Confederacy . That mint then closed , reopening in 1879 . The branch mints at Charlotte and Dahlonega , which also closed with the Civil War , had limited coinage facilities , and struck no denomination higher than a half eagle . 
 A shortage of gold coins occurred in California and the Far West in the early 1850s ; federal authorities refused to accept gold dust for payment of customs duties and private minters soon stepped into the breach . California Senator William Gwin proposed legislation to establish assay offices in California and for the issuance of high @-@ denomination gold coins , as large as $ 10 @,@ 000 . Although most of his proposals were defeated , an assay office was established at San Francisco . Nevertheless , two money panics <unk> California , and in 1852 , Congress established the San Francisco Mint . The first double eagle was coined there on April 3 , 1854 ; struck in proof condition , that piece is now part of the National Numismatic Collection . Just over half of the double eagles struck between 1850 and 1933 were minted at San Francisco . 
 Many of the high @-@ grade San Francisco Type I double eagles known today were taken from shipwrecks , where they had rested for over a century . These ships included the SS Brother Jonathan , the SS Central America , and the SS Yankee Blade . Thousands of almost @-@ pristine 1857 double eagles struck at San Francisco ( 1857 @-@ S ) went down with the Central America when it sank off the East Coast of the United States that September , as did some 435 people , including Captain William Herndon . The cargo was salvaged beginning in the 1980s ; once litigation over its ownership was settled , the pieces were marketed to the public . The Brother Jonathan , a luxurious paddle steamer en route from San Francisco north to Portland , sank in July 1865 ; few survived the wreck . The thousands of double eagles and other coins on board were salvaged beginning in 1996 , and once litigation concluded , many mint state double eagles came on the market . 
 The word " LIBERTY " on double eagles between 1850 and 1858 was originally spelled " <unk> " by Longacre , who converted the second L into an I ; this is visible under magnification . In 1860 , Assistant Engraver Anthony C. Paquet completed a revision of the reverse , with taller , narrower letters . After production had begun in early 1861 at Philadelphia and San Francisco , it was noticed that the design lacked a rim high enough to protect the design from abrasion , and the Mint went back to the old reverse . Only a handful of the Philadelphia specimens were not melted , but by the time word reached San Francisco to stop production , the western mint had issued 20 @,@ 000 pieces . A Philadelphia specimen sold at auction for $ 1 @,@ 610 @,@ 000 in August 2006 , setting a record for the Liberty Head double eagle series . In February 2013 , an 1866 @-@ S double eagle with no motto was discovered in the Saddle Ridge Hoard in the Gold Country on the western slope of the Sierra Nevada in California . Only a very small number of proof coins in the Liberty Head double eagle series were struck for sale to the public , beginning in 1858 , at Philadelphia ; Breen noted , " few collectors could afford them even then " . 
 = = = Type II ( 1866 – 1876 ) = = = 
 With the nation in the midst of an internal war , in November 1861 , Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase received a proposal that American coinage bear an expression of faith in God . After various wordings were considered , " In God We Trust " was placed on the new two @-@ cent piece in 1864 . The Act of March 3 , 1865 that authorized the copper @-@ nickel three @-@ cent piece also required that the motto appear on all coins large enough to bear it . Pursuant to this mandate , Longacre began re @-@ engraving the various denominations of U.S. coinage . In 1866 , he added " In God We Trust " to all coins that did not already have it , excepting the pieces smaller in diameter than the nickel , a coin which began to be struck that year . The San Francisco Mint used up leftover double eagle reverse dies from 1865 before switching over during 1866 . 
 Longacre made the required addition to the double eagle by slightly enlarging the circle of stars on the reverse , and placing the motto within it . He took the opportunity to make other changes to the double eagle . The shield on the reverse was given rococo sides ; previously they had been straight . A ninth leaf was added to the olive branch , and the shape of the leaves was changed . The finials of the scroll were made smaller though more elaborate — on the left @-@ hand scroll , the finials impinge less on the letters " <unk> " in " Pluribus " than before . The eagle 's wings and tail feathers were also slightly elongated . 
 In 1870 , the Carson City Mint opened in Nevada at the urging of silver mining interests , so that ore could be refined and converted to coin locally . In addition to silver , it struck gold half eagles , eagles , and double eagles . The 1870 @-@ CC double eagle , like other coins from that mint 's first year of operations , is a great rarity — only 3 @,@ 789 were struck . One sold for $ 414 @,@ 000 at auction in March 2009 . Carson City double eagles circulated for the most part only locally , since they were only struck in response to the deposit of gold bullion and the request of the depositor that it be coined into twenty @-@ dollar pieces . Heavy production of the coin occurred in San Francisco and satisfied the needs of Californians and those in the export trade . As gold did not circulate in the East , most Philadelphia pieces of this era were either sent west , or exported and melted . 
 In November 1872 , Chief Engraver William Barber , Longacre 's successor , submitted a set of <unk> to show how the following year 's date would appear on the coinage . They were approved , but on January 18 , 1873 , Chief Coiner A. Loudon Snowden filed a written complaint , stating that the " 3 " in the date too closely resembled an " 8 " . Barber was ordered to redo his work ; this decision affected most denominations of U.S. coins . The differences between the " Closed 3 " and " Open 3 " on the double eagle are small . One difference is that on the Closed 3 , the two knobs on the " 3 " are equal in size ; on the Open 3 the upper one is somewhat smaller . All Carson City and most San Francisco issues from that year are Closed 3 . 
 = = = Type III ( 1877 – 1907 ) = = = 
 In 1876 , William Barber altered the double eagle 's reverse , emboldening " In God We Trust " . The two varieties are known as the " Heavy Motto " and " Light Motto " types . He made more extensive changes for the following year 's production . He truncated Liberty 's neck at a sharper angle to allow more space for the date , which was punched into the dies by hand . In Longacre 's original version , the tip of Liberty 's coronet is very close to the seventh star clockwise from the date ; beginning in 1877 , it points between the sixth and seventh stars . A more noticeable change was made to the reverse , where the denomination , formerly " Twenty D. " , was spelled out as " Twenty Dollars " . The phrase " E Pluribus Unum " , on the ribbon that the eagle bears , was enlarged . The new dies initially created difficulties at the Mint and Barber made minor adjustments to the design over the first few months of production . 
 Many double eagles were struck at San Francisco between 1877 and 1883 . Beginning in 1881 , mintage of double eagles at Philadelphia was sharply curtailed . For the seven years 1881 – 1887 , only 4 @,@ 521 were made at that mint for circulation , none being struck in 1882 , 1883 , and 1887 . They were struck yearly in proof at Philadelphia : the 1883 ( mintage 92 ) , 1884 ( 71 ) and 1887 ( 121 ) are great rarities . The mintage of 2 @,@ 325 at New Orleans in 1879 , the only postwar strikings there , is unexplained — Breen suggested that the local mint superintendent might have anticipated a demand for the denomination . Double eagles were unpopular in commerce in the South , as were eagles . Millions of double eagles were sent to Europe as payment in international transactions beginning in the 1880s , often in cloth bags containing 250 coins , for a total of $ 5 @,@ 000 per bag . 
 In 1900 , William Barber 's successor as chief engraver , his son Charles E. Barber , slightly adjusted the design ; other modifications to U.S. coins about that time suggest that he most likely did it as part of a plan to re @-@ engrave all denominations . The most significant change made by Charles Barber was smoothing the back of the eagle 's neck . In 1904 , the Mint set records for production of double eagles : 6 @,@ 256 @,@ 699 at Philadelphia and 5 @,@ 134 @,@ 175 at San Francisco — highs for the series for those mints . The only higher production of double eagles , after the Liberty Head series ended , was the figure of 8 @,@ 816 @,@ 000 from Philadelphia in 1928 . 
 The 1891 discovery of gold at Cripple Creek , Colorado , in 1891 led to a gold rush there . The greater availability of gold in Colorado was one reason the Denver Mint was authorized in 1904 — it opened in 1906 . About a dozen proofs were struck for presentation to dignitaries when production of double eagles was inaugurated at Denver on April 4 , 1906 . 
 = = = Replacement = = = 
 In 1904 , President Theodore Roosevelt complained to his Secretary of the Treasury , Leslie M. Shaw , about the designs on American coinage , and enquired if a sculptor such as the President 's friend , Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens , could be hired to provide beautiful , up @-@ to @-@ date designs . 
 The following year , the Mint hired Saint @-@ Gaudens to create new designs for the four gold pieces then being struck , as well as the cent . Other commissions delayed him , and as he became more ill with the cancer that would kill him , his work slowed . Chief Engraver Barber repeatedly objected to the design Saint @-@ Gaudens finally submitted , which shows Liberty striding across a rocky outcrop , on the grounds that its relief was too high . After Saint @-@ Gaudens 's death on August 3 , 1907 , Barber produced his own , low @-@ relief version of Saint @-@ Gaudens 's coin . Its striking began in late 1907 , and it entered commerce that December — thereby putting an end to the Liberty Head double eagle series . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 Large quantities of double eagles were melted in the 1930s by the government after they were called in under President Franklin D. Roosevelt . Although many of the double eagles exported in bulk in the late 19th and early 20th centuries were melted — records show that most sent to the United Kingdom were recoined into sovereigns — millions remained in banks . Large quantities of double eagles were found in the vaults of European banks beginning in the 1940s , and were placed on the numismatic market . Many common and low @-@ grade Liberty Head double eagles have been sold as investments , valued based on their bullion content . Type I double eagles have been recovered from shipwrecks , bringing many high @-@ grade early specimens onto the market , with the romance of " treasure coins " increasing the public demand . 
 In the 19th century , double eagles were little collected . Numismatists did not yet consider mintmarked coins to be distinct from those without . Even proof coins — with mintages in the dozens or low hundreds — sold on the secondary market at a slight increase from face value , and probably many were spent in hard times . In 1909 , early numismatic writer Edgar H. Adams published a catalog of American gold issues . No Liberty Head double eagle was considered by Adams to be worth more than the value inscribed on it . 
 As it became clear in the 1940s that the withdrawal of gold coins in 1933 had left several late @-@ date Saint @-@ Gaudens double eagles unexpectedly rare , collector interest grew in the denomination . The massive importation of double eagles held overseas once Americans were allowed to own gold again in 1974 added to the supply , but according to numismatic writer and coin dealer Bowers , " today they are of such wide popularity , fascination , and interest that the record prices achieved [ at an important sale in 1949 ] seem like incredible bargains ! " 
 There are many ways to collect Liberty Head double eagles . Some , wishing only a few pieces , may choose one each of the three major types , or seek pieces from the five mints that struck them . Carson City double eagles are highly popular . As the 1870 @-@ CC is almost unobtainable , collectors may limit themselves to Carson City Type III pieces ( 1877 – 1893 ) . Collectors seeking one double eagle per year of mintage will find it expensive to fill the 1886 entry , a year in which double eagles were only struck at Philadelphia , and just 1 @,@ 000 business strikes and 106 proof pieces were issued . The 2015 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins lists the 1886 in Very Fine condition ( VF @-@ 20 ) at $ 22 @,@ 500 . 
 = 1979 Gillette Cup Final = 
 The 1979 Gillette Cup Final was a cricket match between Somerset County Cricket Club and Northamptonshire County Cricket Club played on 8 September 1979 at Lord 's in London . It was the seventeenth final of the Gillette Cup , which had been the first English domestic knock @-@ out competition between first @-@ class sides . Northamptonshire had won the competition in 1976 ; Somerset were playing their second consecutive final , having lost to Sussex in 1978 . 
 After winning the toss , Northamptonshire captain Jim Watts opted to bowl first . Somerset scored 269 runs off their full allocation of 60 overs , during which West Indian batsman Viv Richards top @-@ scored for the county , totalling 117 runs . In their response , Northamptonshire lost early wickets , but a partnership of 113 between Geoff Cook and Allan Lamb kept them in the game . Six wickets from Joel Garner helped Somerset bowl their opponents out for 224 with 3 @.@ 3 overs remaining , earning the county the first trophy in their 104 @-@ year history . 
 = = Background = = 
 Northamptonshire 's only previous Gillette Cup Final appearance had come three summers earlier when they beat Lancashire by four wickets to win the 1976 Gillette Cup , which was the club 's only silverware since becoming a first @-@ class county in 1905 . Somerset had appeared in two previous finals , losing in 1967 to Kent , and in 1978 to Sussex . In addition to losing the Gillette Cup final in 1978 , Somerset had narrowly missed out in the John Player League , and according to Vic Marks , there was " a deep determination to atone for the acute disappointments of the 1978 season . " 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 Northamptonshire entered the competition in the second round , in which they were drawn against Surrey County Cricket Club . They won the match by six wickets , aided by a century from Geoff Cook which earned him the man of the match award . In the quarter @-@ finals , they beat Leicestershire by eight wickets , with particularly economical bowling from Sarfraz Nawaz and Richard Williams helping to limit their opponents to 180 , a total which Northamptonshire reached with 4 @.@ 2 overs to spare . Northamptonshire batted first during their semi @-@ final against Sussex , a match which they won by 37 runs . Allan Lamb and Peter Willey shared a partnership of 157 for the fourth wicket , and Willey 's economical bowling was then instrumental in restricting Sussex to 218 , for which he was named man of the match . 
 Like their opponents in the final , Somerset joined the tournament in the second round , facing Derbyshire . Bowling first , Somerset limited their opponents to 224 ; Joel Garner was their most economical bowler . In reply , Somerset captain and opening batsman Brian Rose remained not out on 88 when his side reached their winning target with 3 @.@ 5 overs remaining , having lost two wickets . Kent travelled to Taunton for the quarter @-@ final , in which Somerset chose to bat first after winning the toss . Only Graham Burgess reached a half @-@ century for Somerset against a bowling attack which included five Test players . In Kent 's reply , Garner claimed five wickets and Ian Botham three as Somerset bowled their opponents out for 60 runs . Against Middlesex in the semi @-@ final , Somerset 's bowlers were once again led by Garner , who picked up four wickets as the London @-@ based club were dismissed for 185 . Somerset won with 9 @.@ 4 overs remaining for the loss of three wickets and Peter Denning remained unbeaten on 90 . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The sun was shining on the morning of the final , and Somerset 's captain Brian Rose was glad when Northamptonshire won the toss . The conditions favoured batting first , but had Somerset won the toss they would most likely have chosen to bat second , given their success in chasing throughout the season . Northamptonshire captain Jim Watts opted to field , giving Somerset the benefit of batting first . Somerset 's opening batsmen began quickly , taking the score to 34 before Peter Denning was caught by the wicket @-@ keeper George Sharp off the bowling of Sarfraz Nawaz . His wicket in the seventh over brought in Viv Richards . Before going out to bat , Richards focussed his mind on the fact that " it wasn 't a day for daring , carefree sixes . It was a day for maturity " . Rose played a patient innings for his 41 runs , before being bowled by Watts , leaving Somerset 95 / 2 . At the other end , Richards was playing what David Foot described as " a controlled gem " . He remained at the wicket until the final over , scoring 117 runs in a <unk> innings . His boundaries were scored predominantly from straight drives and leg hits , powerfully struck . Ian Botham played aggressively when he came in at number five , scoring 27 runs off 17 deliveries , and Joel Garner played similarly when he batted towards the end of the innings , adding 24 runs to the total . Somerset batted through their full allocation of overs , finishing on 269 / 8 . Of the Northamptonshire bowlers , Watts was the most economical , conceding 34 runs off his 12 overs . Tim Lamb conceded the most , allowing 70 runs to be scored from his 12 . The wickets were shared by the bowlers ; Watts , Lamb and Griffiths took two each , while Sarfraz Nawaz and Peter Willey claimed one apiece . Towards the end of the innings , Watts broke a bone in his right hand when catching a throw from the outfield , which prevented him from participating further in the match . 
 The Northamptonshire reply was made more difficult when Garner trapped Wayne Larkins leg before wicket and induced Richard Williams to hit his own wicket during his opening bowling spell . Opening batsman Geoff Cook was then joined at the crease by Allan Lamb , and the pair fought back , adding 113 runs in 13 overs before Cook was run out by Roebuck . In his history of Somerset cricket , Roebuck describes this run out as vital , though he does not give himself credit , stating that " Geoff Cook ran himself out " . Marks identified the point at which Lamb was stumped by Derek Taylor as the point at which " victory was almost assured . " Jim Yardley and George Sharp added 20 and 22 runs respectively , but with their captain , Watts , unable to bat through injury , and Somerset 's West Indian fast bowler Garner in good form , Northamptonshire were bowled out for 224 . Garner added four more wickets to the two he had taken during his first spell , to finish with career @-@ best figures of six wickets for 29 runs . Garner , Botham and Keith Jennings all bowled very economically , each restricting their opponents to less than 30 runs from their bowling . Somerset won the match by 45 runs , winning the Gillette Cup , the first trophy they had won during their 104 @-@ year history . 
 = = = Scorecard = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Somerset were awarded £ 5 @,@ 500 for winning the competition , while Northamptonshire collected £ 2 @,@ 500 . The day after their success in the Gillette Cup Final , Somerset travelled to Nottingham , where they beat Nottinghamshire to clinch the 1979 John Player League . The Somerset captain , Brian Rose was one of two Somerset players to be named as a Wisden Cricketer of the Year in 1980 , primarily for his captaincy of Somerset during the 1979 season . Also one of the five players was Joel Garner , of whom Wisden said " His part in Somerset 's double success during 1979 admits no arguments as to his potent and continuing ability to swing matches . " Northamptonshire were eliminated in the first round of the 1980 Gillette Cup , but won the 1980 Benson & Hedges Cup , defeating Essex in the final . 
 = Smalls Paradise = 
 Smalls Paradise ( often called Small 's Paradise and Smalls ' Paradise , and not to be confused with Smalls Jazz Club ) , was a nightclub in Harlem , New York City . Located in the basement of <unk> Seventh Avenue , it opened in 1925 and was owned by Ed Smalls . At the time of the Harlem Renaissance , Smalls Paradise was the only one of the well @-@ known Harlem night clubs to be owned by an African @-@ American and integrated . Other major Harlem night clubs admitted white patrons only , unless the person was an African @-@ American celebrity . 
 The entertainment at Smalls Paradise was not limited to the stage ; waiters danced the Charleston or roller @-@ skated as they delivered orders to customers . Waiters were also known to vocalize during the club 's floor shows . Unlike most of the Harlem clubs which closed between 3 @-@ 4am , Smalls was open all night , offering a breakfast dance which featured a full floor show beginning at 6am . 
 After 30 years as the owner of the night club , Ed Smalls sold the club to Tommy Smalls ( no relation ) in 1955 . It was later owned by Wilt Chamberlain , and renamed Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise . Many well known musicians , both white and African @-@ American , - appeared at the club over the years , and often came to Smalls after their evening engagements to jam with the Smalls Paradise band . The club was responsible for promoting popular dances such as the Charleston , the Madison and the Twist . Smalls Paradise was the longest @-@ operating club in Harlem before it closed in 1986 . The building has been the site of Thurgood Marshall Academy since 2004 . 
 = = Early history = = 
 Entrepreneur Ed Smalls owned a small venue in Harlem , the Sugar Cane Club , from 1917 to 1925 , which catered primarily to local residents . When Smalls opened Smalls Paradise in the basement of an office building at <unk> Seventh Avenue , he envisioned a night club which would not exclude his neighbors , but would also be attractive to New Yorkers who lived in the city 's downtown area . Smalls arranged a lavish gala for the club 's opening on October 26 , 1925 , which was attended by almost 1 @,@ 500 people . Though Prohibition was in effect , patrons were able to bring their own liquor or purchase bootlegged liquor from the club 's waiters . 
 Opening Day music was provided by Charlie Johnson and his musicians , who remained as the " house band " for ten years . The members of Johnson 's band included <unk> Smith , Benny Carter , Jimmy Harrison , Sidney De Paris and Sidney Bechet . While performing at Smalls Paradise in 1925 , Sam Wooding and his orchestra were heard by a Russian <unk> ; <unk> promptly hired Wooding and his musicians for a European tour with the Chocolate Kiddies revue . The revue opened in Berlin in 1925 , with Wooding and his band performing in the revue for a year . Wooding and his orchestra left the revue to perform in Europe and South America until 1927 . 
 Banjo player Elmer Snowden , whose band played at the Smalls Paradise Sunday matinees , would often jam with the Johnson band after he had finished his nightly performance at the Hot Feet Club . Other musicians also made it a habit to drop in at Smalls Paradise after their engagements were over for the evening . Glenn Miller , Tommy Dorsey and Buddy Rich often came to Smalls Paradise to jam with the house band for the joy of it . 
 Like the other large and successful night clubs in Harlem , the Cotton Club and Connie 's Inn , Smalls regularly showcased revues which featured the club 's permanent staff of entertainers . Ed Smalls commissioned original music for the stage productions of the night club . Smalls Paradise was the only major Harlem night spot which was owned by an African @-@ American , and was racially integrated . The other clubs admitted white patrons only unless the person was an African @-@ American celebrity . Smalls previously had some success in attracting a racially mixed clientele at his Sugar Cane Club with the quality entertainment and waiters who danced while balancing trays of drinks and sang during floor shows . Beginning with the opening of Smalls Paradise , Smalls had his waiters dance the Charleston while serving guests ; patrons were also served drinks by waiters on roller skates . 
 Smalls Paradise had no cover charge and stayed open longer than most of the others , including the Cotton Club . At Smalls Paradise , patrons could also reserve a seat at the club by paying a yearly fee . Many regular visitors of Harlem 's night clubs also found the food better at Smalls Paradise than at either The Cotton Club or Connie 's Inn . While most of the night spots shut their doors between 3 and 4 am , Smalls Paradise began breakfast dances at 6 am with a floor show of up to 30 dancers and a full jazz band . 
 Smalls Paradise celebrated its fourth anniversary in 1929 and by 1930 , it began an arrangement with WMCA Radio to have twice weekly broadcasts from the club . During Ed Small 's ownership of the club , he organized many gala charity events which were held at Smalls Paradise with the proceeds donated to help the needy of the Harlem community . One memorable gala in 1931 featured Bill " Bojangles " Robinson . Entertainers from both the Cotton Club and Connie 's Inn made appearances at the event with the permission of the clubs ' management . Ed Smalls was doing well enough at the time of the club 's tenth year in business to greatly expand the Smalls Paradise floor space by moving the club 's bar upstairs . Smalls continued to expand the club on street level , opening his Orchid Room in 1942 . 
 In the early 1930s , a female singer with Charlie Johnson 's band arranged an audition with the band for a young hopeful at Smalls Paradise . When the girl was asked what key she sang in , she replied that she did not know , and the audition was unsuccessful . This was Billie Holiday 's first try as a professional singer . Jazz musician Fats Waller was a frequent visitor to Smalls Paradise . With a new Victor recording contract in 1934 , Waller was in need of sidemen to record with . Playing in the house band at Smalls Paradise were Harry Dial and Herman Autrey ; both were recruited by Waller at Smalls Paradise and recorded with him as Fats Waller and His Rhythm . 
 A young Malcolm X , who enjoyed the atmosphere at Smalls Paradise , worked there as a waiter between 1942 and 1943 . Civil rights activist Doctor W. E. B. Du Bois celebrated his 83rd birthday at Smalls Paradise on February 23 , 1951 . The banquet , sponsored by Albert Einstein , Mary McLeod Bethune , Paul Robeson and others , was originally to be held at New York 's Essex House . This was during the era of McCarthyism ; a pro @-@ McCarthy group circulated a newsletter labeling Du Bois , Einstein and others connected with the dinner as being pro @-@ Communist . When the Essex House canceled the banquet , it was held at Smalls Paradise . 
 = = New ownership = = 
 = = = Tommy Smalls = = = 
 Founder and long @-@ time owner Ed Smalls sold the club to popular disc jockey Tommy Smalls in late 1955 . Smalls , known as " Dr. Jive " , was an early enthusiast of rock ' n ' roll . Like his contemporary , Alan Freed , Smalls also organized rock ' n ' roll shows held at New York area theaters . He held a grand opening gala at the club on December 13 , 1955 , which was attended by many prominent people in the music industry . A special guest was baseball star Willie Mays . He began broadcasting his <unk> radio program from the club shortly after his ownership . 
 = = = Wilt Chamberlain = = = 
 By the late 1950s , Smalls Paradise was in trouble as it had lost substantial business . Basketball star Wilt Chamberlain , who had always wanted to own a night club ; was able to purchase Smalls Paradise with a business partner in 1961 . After purchasing the club , Chamberlain spent up to 18 hours a day at Smalls Paradise , as a celebrity host and learning the night club business . He renamed the venue Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise and changed the club 's style of music from jazz to rhythm and blues for economic reasons . One of the first performers at Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise was Ray Charles . Chamberlain also began booking African @-@ American comedians ; Redd Foxx played at Big Wilt 's in December 1961 . Smalls Paradise had been a place for African @-@ American baseball players to gather during the time it was owned by Tommy Smalls . Under Chamberlain 's ownership , it now became a place where African American basketball players would meet . 
 A number of white jazz musicians regularly performed at the club alongside blacks . Jazz guitarist Pat Martino recalls that he began playing at the club as a teenager ( in the late 1950s ) , and would often play until 4am in the morning . After the clubs closed he would then join guitarists such as Wes Montgomery and Grant Green for breakfast . 
 = = Dances renew popularity = = 
 Smalls Paradise played a role in popularizing the Madison in 1960 , but the night club 's burst of popularity in the early 1960s came from the later dance craze , the Twist . Since Tuesday nights were exceptionally slow at Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise , the club looked for a way to bring in more business . Someone came up with the idea to hold Twist dance contests on Tuesday evenings and the club 's weekly contest started in December 1961 . A hostess for the Paris night club , the Blue Note , visited Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise shortly after the contest began ; she was there to learn the Twist and take the dance back to the Paris club , 
 By the beginning of 1962 , BBC @-@ TV came with a crew to film the twisting at the night spot for broadcast in the UK and journalists from many foreign newspapers visited to take photos and file news stories . Delegates from the United Nations had also found their way to the night club for the Tuesday night contest . Those participating in the contest were patrons of Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise . The only dance professionals doing the twist at the club were Mama Lou Parks and the <unk> , who were there to provide lessons to novices . The Tuesday night twist contest brought patrons in limousines from downtown just as the entertainment at Smalls Paradise had done years before . As King Curtis played , Chamberlain was greeting royalty , as well as various show business and political figures . Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise saw over 250 @,@ 000 guests in the year since its weekly Twist contest began . The club was continually at capacity on Tuesday evenings until it closed at 4 am . Many people had to be turned away each week because they did not have the necessary reservations . 
 When author James Baldwin 's 1962 novel Another Country appeared in print , his publisher held a twist party for him at Baldwin 's favorite night club , Smalls Paradise . The guest list included many of Baldwin 's friends as well as literary figures . Despite the fact that many in @-@ town celebrities were also invited , some of those who were not on the guest list crashed the party . 
 = = After the Twist = = 
 In 1968 , a group of Tuskegee University students arrived in New York hoping to make a musical impression . They auditioned at Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise but were turned down by one of the owners who believed the music genre funk was on the way out . A few days later , the group received a call from Big Wilt 's , asking if they would be able to fill in for a last @-@ minute performance cancellation at the club . Even though this was to be a one @-@ night performance , the Commodores agreed to play at Big Wilt 's . The engagement was extended substantially , with the group winning praise from the club 's talent manager , along with an invitation to play at Big Wilt 's anytime . 
 Singer Millie Jackson , a guest at Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise , began heckling a female vocalist onstage . When the vocalist challenged Jackson by asking her to do better . Jackson accepted the dare by singing Don 't Play It No More . This was Jackson 's first public appearance as a singer ; she was hired for an engagement within two weeks of stepping onto the stage at Smalls . 
 By the early 1970s , it was necessary to revamp Big Wilt 's Smalls Paradise once more . Some of the club 's patrons were using the night spot for illicit activities , such as drug dealing . The night club was cleared of those engaging in undesirable activities . Changes in the entertainment policy brought in acts like Jerry Butler and The Dells and the <unk> Room was built for those who preferred to dance to a disco beat . 
 = = Last dance = = 
 By 1983 , the club was known as the New Smalls Paradise . This version of Smalls Paradise offered everything from music and dancing to craft shows and political speeches . By 1986 , the club , which was the longest @-@ operating night club in Harlem , had fallen vacant . Before its closure it had undergone a transition from a jazz to a disco club . Just prior to the club 's demise , the New York Swing Dance Society brought the Lindy Hop back to the dance floor at Smalls . 
 The structure was purchased by the Abyssinian Development Corporation . The nonprofit corporation , affiliated with the Abyssinian Baptist Church , planned to completely renovate the building and add three floors to it . Further plans for the building were to lease the structure for 50 years to the New York Board of Education to house its Thurgood Marshall Academy and to lease space for an International House of Pancakes restaurant . The school opened in 2004 ; all traces of Smalls Paradise were wiped out with the renovation . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Photographer and writer Carl Van Vechten was a frequent patron of Harlem 's night clubs for some years . Van Vechten had been a guest at Ed Smalls ' Sugar Cane Club as well as at Smalls Paradise . Van Vechten 's 1926 novel , Nigger Heaven , was based on some of his observations of Harlem 's night life ; he referred to Smalls Paradise as The Black Venus in the novel . After the book was published , Smalls ' employees were offended enough by Van Vechten 's portrayal of Harlem to bar Van Vechten from the night club permanently . 
 In 1932 , Elmer Snowden with his Smalls Paradise band and some of the club 's entertainers , were hired by Warner Brothers to star in a film short called Smash Your Baggage . The entire group was credited as " Smalls Paradise Entertainers " and not by individual names . The film 's plot involved a group of Pullman porters who decided to hold a benefit for one of their own . The ten @-@ minute film was shot at the Atlantic Avenue station of the Long Island Rail Road and it is the only recording of these musicians playing together ; this group produced no records together . 
 Smalls Paradise was the subject of a 1945 film , It Happened in Harlem , produced by All American News . The plot revolves around Ed Smalls ' singer drawing record crowds at Smalls Paradise until the singer receives his draft notice . Smalls begins auditions to try to replace his star vocalist . A little @-@ known young man with a following tries to audition for Smalls , but is turned away . One of the young man 's ardent fans then persuades Smalls to give him an audition . Actor George Wiltshire plays the role of Ed Smalls . 
 = = Albums recorded at Smalls Paradise = = 
 Groovin ' at Smalls ' Paradise Jimmy Smith 1957 
 Cool Blues Jimmy Smith 1958 
 Live At Small 's Paradise Babs Gonzales 1953 
 Live at Small 's Paradise King Curtis 1966 
 = Hydnum repandum = 
 Hydnum repandum , commonly known as the sweet tooth , wood hedgehog or hedgehog mushroom , is an edible mushroom with no poisonous lookalikes . A basidiomycete fungus of the family Hydnaceae , it is the type species of the genus Hydnum . The fungus produces fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) that are characterized by their spore @-@ bearing structures — in the form of spines rather than gills — which hang down from the underside of the cap . The cap is dry , colored yellow to light orange to brown , and often develops an irregular shape , especially when it has grown closely crowded with adjacent fruit bodies . The mushroom tissue is white with a pleasant odor and a spicy or bitter taste . All parts of the mushroom stain orange with age or when bruised . 
 A mycorrhizal fungus , Hydnum repandum is broadly distributed in Asia , Australia , North America and Europe where it fruits singly or in close groups in coniferous or deciduous woodland . This is a choice edible species , although mature specimens can develop a bitter taste . Mushrooms are collected and sold in local markets of Europe , Mexico , and Canada . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 First officially described by Carl Linnaeus in his 1753 Species Plantarum , Hydnum repandum was sanctioned by Elias Fries in 1821 . The species has been shuffled to several genera : <unk> by Jean @-@ Jacques Paulet in 1812 ; <unk> by Samuel Frederick Gray in 1821 ; <unk> by Petter Karsten in 1881 Sarcodon by Lucien Quélet in 1886 . After a 1977 nomenclatural proposal by mycologist Ronald H. Petersen was accepted , Hydnum repandum became the official type species of the genus Hydnum . Previously , supporting arguments for making H. repandum the type were made by Marinus Anton Donk ( 1958 ) and Petersen ( 1973 ) , while Zdeněk Pouzar ( 1958 ) and Kenneth Harrison ( 1971 ) thought that H. imbricatum should be the type . 
 Several forms and varieties of H. repandum have been described . Forms albidum and rufescens , found in Russia , were published by T.L. <unk> in 1961 ; the latter taxon is synonymous with H. rufescens . Form <unk> , published from Slovenia by <unk> <unk> , Bogdan <unk> and <unk> <unk> in 1988 , is illegitimate as per article 36 @.@ 1 of the International Code of Nomenclature for algae , fungi , and plants , as it was not given a sufficiently comprehensive description . Jean @-@ Baptiste Barla described H. repandum var. rufescens in 1859 . Carleton Rea described the white fruit bodied version as a variety — H. repandum var. album — in 1922 . 
 Molecular studies have shown that the current species concept for H. repandum may need revision as there is a poor overlap between morphological and molecular species concepts . Phylogenetic analysis of European specimens , based on internal transcribed spacer and 5.8S DNA sequences , indicates that H. repandum specimens form two distinct clades , whose only consistent morphological distinction is cap size . These genetic differences may indicate the presence of undescribed cryptic species , and that the taxon may currently be undergoing intensive speciation . 
 The specific epithet repandum means " bent back " , referring to the wavy cap margin . The varietal epithet album means " white as an egg " . Hydnum repandum has been given several vernacular names : " sweet tooth " , " yellow tooth fungus " , " wood urchin " , " spreading hedgehog " , " hedgehog mushroom " , or " pig 's trotter " . The variety alba is known as " white wood " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The <unk> , <unk> or tan @-@ colored pileus ( cap ) is up to 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) wide , although specimens measuring 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) have been documented . It is generally somewhat irregular in shape ( it may be convex or concave at maturity ) , with a wavy margin that is rolled inward when young . Caps grow in a distorted shape when fruit bodies are closely clustered . The cap surface is generally dry and smooth , although mature specimens may show cracking . Viewed from above , the caps of mature specimens resemble somewhat those of chanterelles . The flesh is thick , white , firm , brittle , and bruises yellow to orange @-@ brown . The underside is densely covered with small , slender whitish spines measuring 2 – 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) long . These spines sometimes run down at least one side of the stipe . The stipe , typically 3 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long and 1 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick , is either white or the same color as the cap , and is sometimes off @-@ center . It is easy to overlook the mushrooms when they are situated amongst gilled mushrooms and boletes , because the cap and stipe are fairly nondescript and the mushrooms must be turned over to reveal their spines . The pure white variety of this species , H. repandum var. album , is smaller than the main variety , with a cap measuring 2 – 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) wide and a stipe that is 1 – 3 in ( 2 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 6 cm ) long . 
 The spore print is pale cream . Spores are smooth , thin @-@ walled and hyaline ( translucent ) , roughly spherical to broadly egg @-@ shaped , and measure 5 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 µm . They usually contain a single , large refractive oil droplet . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and measure 30 – 45 by 6 – 10 µm . The cap cuticle is a trichodermium ( where the outermost hyphae emerge roughly parallel , like hairs , perpendicular to the cap surface ) of narrow , club @-@ shaped cells that are 2 @.@ 5 – 4 µm wide . Underneath this tissue is the <unk> layer of interwoven hyphae measuring 10 – 20 µm in diameter . The spine tissue is made of narrow ( 2 – 5 µm diameter ) , thin @-@ walled hyphae with clamp connections . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 North American lookalikes include the white hedgehog ( Hydnum albidum ) and the giant hedgehog ( Hydnum <unk> ) . H. albidum has a white to pale yellowish grey fruit body that bruises yellow to orange . H. <unk> is large and paler than H. repandum . Hydnum <unk> is smaller , with caps measuring 3 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , and thinner stipes that are 0 @.@ 5 – 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) wide . Its caps are <unk> ( with a navel @-@ like cavity ) , sometimes with a hole in the center of the cap , unlike the flattened or slightly depressed caps of H. repandum . Microscopically , H. <unk> has spores that are larger and more elliptical than those of H. repandum , measuring 7 @.@ 5 – 9 by 6 – 7 @.@ 5 µm . A European lookalike , Hydnum rufescens , is also smaller than H. repandum , and has a deeper apricot to orange color . Hydnum <unk> , described as a new species from Germany in 2004 , differs from H. repandum by the shape and length of its spores , which are ellipsoid and measure 9 – 11 by 6 – 7 @.@ 5 µm . Compared to H. repandum , it has smaller fruit bodies , with cap diameters ranging from 3 to 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) wide . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 <unk> repandum is a mycorrhizal fungus . The fruit bodies grow singly , scattered , or in groups on the ground or in leaf litter in both coniferous and deciduous forests . They can also grow in fairy rings . Fruiting occurs from summer to autumn . The species is widely distributed in the northern temperate zone , and is one of the most common of the tooth fungi . It has been recorded from Australia , Europe , northern Asia , and North America . In Europe , it has been listed as a vulnerable species in the Red Data Lists of the Netherlands , Belgium , and Germany ; Sweden lists it as being of Least Concern . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 The hedgehog mushroom is considered to be a good edible , having a sweet , nutty taste and a crunchy texture . Some consider it the culinary equivalent of the chanterelle . Author Michael Kuo gives it an edibility rating of " great " and notes that there are no poisonous lookalikes , and that they are unlikely to be infested with maggots . <unk> brushing the cap and stipe of specimens immediately after harvest will help prevent soil from getting lodged between the teeth . Hydnum repandum mushrooms can be cooked by pickling , simmering in milk or stock , and sautéeing , which creates a " tender , meaty texture and a mild flavor . " The mushroom tissue absorbs liquids well and assumes the flavors of added ingredients . The firm texture of the cooked mushroom makes it suitable for freezing . Its natural flavor is reportedly similar to the peppery taste of watercress , or oysters . Older specimens may have a bitter taste , but boiling can remove the bitterness . Specimens found under conifers can taste " unpleasantly strong " . The form <unk> , locally common in Slovakia , is reportedly inedible because its fruit body has a bitter taste at all developmental stages . 
 Hydnum repandum is frequently sold with chanterelles in Italy , and in France , it is one of the officially recognized edible species sold in markets . In Europe , it is usually sold under its French name Pied @-@ de @-@ Mouton ( mutton 's foot ) . It is also collected and sold in local markets of Mexico , Spain and British Columbia , Canada . H. repandum mushrooms are also used as a food source by the red squirrel ( Sciurus vulgaris ) . 
 As a widespread edible species , Hydnum repandum has been the subject of several scientific studies determining its nutritional and chemical composition . H. repandum fruit bodies contain 10 @.@ 7 % moisture and 9 @.@ 2 % ash . The organic acid composition includes malic acid ( 0 @.@ 31 grams per 100 g of mushroom , dry weight ) and citric acid ( 0 @.@ 65 % ) . One study assessed the proportion of essential amino acids ( value expressed as a percentage of the total amino acids ) : valine , 3 @.@ 9 % ; leucine , 14 @.@ 5 % ; isoleucine , 3 @.@ 2 % ; threonine , 4 @.@ 4 % ; methionine , 1 % ; lysine , 4 @.@ 2 % ; phenylalanine , 3 @.@ 4 % ; tryptophan , 1 @.@ 4 % . Lipid content is 4 @.@ 7 % ( expressed as a percent of dry matter ) . Major fatty acids include palmitate ( 15 @.@ 7 % ) , stearate ( 0 @.@ 9 % ) , <unk> ( 26 @.@ 4 % ) , <unk> ( 47 @.@ 5 % ) , and <unk> ( 20 @.@ 3 % ) . The <unk> content has been recorded as 628 milligrams of ergosterol and 85 mg of <unk> ( both values per 100 grams of dry matter ) . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 Both H. repandum and the variety album contain the <unk> compound <unk> ( 2R , 3R , <unk> , <unk> ) <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @,@ 3 : 8 @,@ 9 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @,@ 10 @-@ diol ) , which was shown to have potent cytotoxic activity against various tumor cells in laboratory culture . At the molecular level , <unk> is an alkylating agent . It inserts crosslinks between strands of DNA , making it difficult for the genetic material to be expressed or replicated . 
 The volatile chemicals responsible for the fruity aroma of the mushroom are known . The 12 compounds include eight @-@ carbon derivatives such as 1 @-@ octen @-@ 3 @-@ ol , ( E ) -2 @-@ <unk> , and ( E ) <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 European studies conducted after the 1986 Chernobyl disaster have shown that the fruit bodies have a high rate of accumulation of the radioactive isotope cesium . 
 = = = Cited literature = = = 
 Dugan FM . ( 2011 ) . " Conspectus of World <unk> " . St. Paul , Minnesota : American <unk> Society . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 395 @-@ 5 . 
 = Hanlon Expressway = 
 The Hanlon Expressway or Hanlon Parkway is a high @-@ capacity at @-@ grade suburban limited @-@ access road connecting Highway 401 with the city of Guelph in the Canadian province of Ontario . The 17 km ( 11 mi ) route travels in a generally north @-@ south direction in the city 's west end . It is signed as Highway 6 for its entire length ; from Wellington Street to Woodlawn Road it is concurrent with Highway 7 . The speed limit alternates between 70 and 80 km / h ( 45 and 50 mph ) . 
 Though the road was originally designed to be a freeway , budget limitations precluded the construction of overpasses ; apart from the interchanges with Highway 401 , Laird Road , and Wellington Street West ( Highway 7 and former Highway 24 ) , all junctions are at @-@ grade intersections . There are also two railway crossings near the northern terminus , though both are for spur lines . The Hanlon is graded and landscaped similarly to a freeway , with broad flat shoulders and an open median . 
 It was initially built between 1972 and 1975 , after years of planning and engineering . The first interchange , at Wellington Street , was opened 25 years later in 2001 . In late 2013 , a second interchange was completed at Laird Road . The Government of Ontario has announced plans to build a new Highway 7 freeway bypass joining the current northern terminus of the Hanlon Expressway to the Conestoga Parkway in Kitchener ; in @-@ line with this work , the Hanlon Expressway will be upgraded to 400 @-@ series standards . Long @-@ term plans call for a potential extension south of Highway 401 to meet Highway 6 south of <unk> . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Hanlon Expressway begins at a trumpet interchange with Highway 401 and cuts through several farms northward before curving slightly westward to follow along the west side of the right @-@ of @-@ way of Hanlon Road . It enters Guelph at Maltby Road , skirting the outskirts of urban development . At the Laird Road interchange , opened in late 2013 , the expressway encounters the Hanlon Creek Business Park . As it progresses into residential subdivisions , the Hanlon Expressway encounters an at @-@ grade intersection , with Downey Road travelling to the west and Kortright Road West to the east . Continuing north , the route crosses to the east side of the Hanlon Road right @-@ of @-@ way as it intersects Stone Road West to the west of the Stone Road Mall . Before crossing the Speed River , the expressway meets College Avenue West , an at @-@ grade intersection at the southwest corner of Centennial Park Arena . 
 The Hanlon Expressway crosses the Speed River as it swerves to the west and meets Wellington Street , the only other interchange along the route . To the east , Wellington Road is Highway 7 , which follows the Hanlon Expressway north from the interchange ; to the west it was formerly Highway 24 . North of the Wellington Road the expressway was built slightly west of what is now Silvercreek Parkway . It passes beneath the a line of the Goderich – Exeter Railway , a sideline of the Canadian Pacific Railway , before encountering three at @-@ grade intersections : Paisley Road , Willow Road and <unk> Avenue West . This section also features two at @-@ grade rail crossings . Shortly thereafter , it ends at Woodlawn Road West ; Highway 6 travels east from this point while Highway 7 travels west . 
 The road , like with nearby Hanlon Creek , is named after Felix Hanlon , one of the men who cut the first tree in Guelph along with John Galt . He was one of the original settlers in the area , and his family eventually deeded their land to the city . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the construction of the Hanlon Expressway , Hanlon Road existed as far north as College Avenue . Edinburgh Road was the westernmost crossing of the Speed River . On the opposite side of the valley , Silvercreek Road continued , as it does today , along the same right @-@ of @-@ way as Hanlon Road . With the rapid suburban expansion of Guelph in the 1950s and 1960s , a revised transportation plan was conceived to handle the increasing traffic load . The Guelph Area Transportation Study was completed in 1967 , and recommended a new controlled @-@ access highway to allow through @-@ traffic on Highway 6 to bypass the city . Route planning , engineering and design began on October 2 , 1967 and was subsequently completed in 1969 . Construction began between Waterloo Avenue and Stone Road in 1970 ; 
 this section opened on June 28 , 1972 . The next section , from Stone Road to Clair Road , opened in October 1973 . Work on the northern section from Waterloo Avenue to Woodlawn Road began in August 1974 . That section , as well as the final section south to Highway 401 were opened on November 7 , 1975 . 
 Initially , the Hanlon featured no interchanges . Despite this , this Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) has planned to upgrade the route to a freeway since at least 1994 , when an environmental assessment ( EA ) for the expressway north of the Speed River was completed . Construction of the Wellington Avenue interchange began in October 1998 ; it opened in July 2001 , connecting Wellington Street west of the expressway with the Silvercreek Parkway into downtown Guelph . The interchange cost C $ 13 @.@ 2 million and opened a year later than expected due to a design flaw that resulted in several months of delay and a lawsuit against the MTO resulting in a budget overrun of C $ 3 @.@ 2 million . No further work has been done north of the Speed River , and the 1994 EA now requires updating . On April 30 , 2012 , construction began on the Laird Road interchange . It partially opened on the week of November 11 , 2013 , and was fully opened on November 29 , 2013 , in a public ceremony attended by local officials as well as Guelph MPP Liz Sandals . 
 = = Future = = 
 As initially envisioned , the Hanlon Expressway will be upgraded to a controlled @-@ access highway by removing all existing at @-@ grade intersections and improving the highway to 400 @-@ series standards . Planning for this work initially began in the early 1990s with the EA for the section north of the Speed River , which resulted in the construction of the Wellington Street interchange . The EA for the section south of the Speed River began in early 2007 . The Laird Road interchange and associated closing of the Clair Road intersection were the first projects completed as part of this work . 
 Future projects will result in numerous changes . A full interchange will be constructed between Wellington County Road 34 and Maltby Road ; the intersection with the former will become an overpass while the latter will be closed , with Maltby Road terminating at a cul @-@ de @-@ sac on both sides of the expressway . Further north , a partial @-@ access diamond interchange will be built at Downey Road / Kortright Road West , with ramps from the northbound lanes and to the southbound lanes and the crossroad run beneath the expressway . The lack of ramps on the north side is due to the proximity of Stone Road to the north , where a full interchange will be constructed . A service road will be constructed along the west side of the expressway connecting Downey Road and Stone Road to provide better access to the YMCA , which previous controversial plans had neglected . At College Road , an underpass will be built . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Hanlon Expressway , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in Wellington County . 
 = Bounded weak echo region = 
 The bounded weak echo region , also known as a BWER or a vault , is a radar signature within a thunderstorm characterized by a local minimum in radar reflectivity at low levels which extends upward into , and is surrounded by , higher reflectivities aloft . This feature is associated with a strong updraft and is almost always found in the inflow region of a thunderstorm . It cannot be seen visually . The BWER has been noted on radar imagery of severe thunderstorms since 1973 and has a lightning detection system equivalent known as a lightning hole . 
 = = Description and attributes = = 
 The BWER is a nearly vertical channel of weak radar echo , surrounded on the sides and top by significantly stronger echoes . The BWER , sometimes called a vault , is related to the strong updraft in a severe convective storm that carries newly formed atmospheric particulates , called <unk> , to high levels before they can grow to radar @-@ detectable sizes . <unk> are typically found at mid @-@ levels of convective storms , 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) to 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) above the ground , and are a few kilometers in horizontal diameter . Identifying the location of the updraft region is important because it is linked to locations where severe weather normally occurs . The presence of a BWER has been part of a method to diagnose thunderstorm strength as part of the Lemon technique since 1977 . The updraft strength within the BWER supports the growth of large hailstones just above the vault , which can be displaced slightly into the direction of motion of the parent supercell storm . 
 = = = Detection = = = 
 The bounded weak echo region ( BWER ) is a region of low radar reflectivity bounded above by an area of higher radar reflectivity which shows evidence of a strong updraft within mesocyclones . Radar analysts have recognized this phenomenon since at least 1973 , using different elevation scans . Methods of objectively corroborating that a BWER is associated with a mesocyclone is done by using a weather radar with Doppler effect to obtain the precipitations velocities . This have been available operationally in United States since 1997 with the NEXRAD network . When using the lightning detection system , lightning holes ( uncovered in 2004 ) correspond to where a BWER would be seen on radar . 
 A cross @-@ section of the three @-@ dimensional reflectivity of a thunderstorm shows the vault better . Algorithms were developed by the J.S. Marshall Radar Observatory of McGill University in Canada to locate the overhang region in a thunderstorm by the late 1980s . Its radar uses 24 angles , giving it good vertical resolution . In United States , fewer scanning angles are made within the WSR @-@ 88D radar which makes it more difficult to detect the overhang . Once the overhang is located , it is possible to make a cross @-@ section to view if it is related with a BWER . However , since 1997 algorithms have been developed by the National Weather Service to determine regions of reflectivity gradient in three dimensions and the presence of BWER in convection . 
 The development of a pronounced BWER can lead to tropical cyclone @-@ like radar signatures over land when located with a low angle plan position indicator ( PPI ) . When using the lightning detection system , lightning holes ( uncovered in 2004 ) correspond to where a BWER would be seen on radar . 
 = Venture Science Fiction = 
 Venture Science Fiction was an American digest @-@ size science fiction magazine , first published from 1957 to 1958 , and revived for a brief run in 1969 and 1970 . Ten issues were published of the 1950s version , with another six in the second run . It was founded in both instances as a companion to The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction ; Robert P. Mills edited the 1950s version , and Edward L. Ferman was editor during the second run . A British edition appeared for 28 issues between 1963 and 1965 ; it reprinted material from The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction as well as from the US edition of Venture . There was also an Australian edition , which was identical to the British version but dated two months later . 
 The original version was only moderately successful , although it is remembered for the first publication of Sturgeon 's Law . The publisher , Joseph Ferman ( father of Edward Ferman ) , declared that he wanted well @-@ told stories of action and adventure ; the resulting fiction contained more sex and violence than was usual for the science fiction ( sf ) genre in the late 1950s , and sf historian Mike Ashley has suggested that the magazine was ahead of its time . It succumbed to poor sales within less than two years . The second US version was no more successful , with less attractive cover art and little in the way of notable fiction , though it did publish Vonda McIntyre 's first story . By the end of 1970 , Venture had ceased publication permanently . 
 = = First US run = = 
 In late 1949 , publisher Lawrence E. Spivak launched The Magazine of Fantasy , one of many new titles in a crowded field of genre magazines . The title was changed to The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction ( usually abbreviated to F & SF ) with the second issue , and the new magazine rapidly became successful and influential within the science fiction field . The editors were Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas , and the managing editor was Robert P. Mills . In 1954 , Joseph Ferman , a partner of Spivak 's , bought the magazine from him . Ferman subsequently decided to launch a companion magazine , and gave it to Mills to edit . 
 The new magazine was titled Venture Science Fiction , and the first issue was dated January 1957 . Mills was managing editor of F & SF throughout Venture 's first run ; he became editor of F & SF shortly after Venture ceased publishing in July 1958 . The editorial philosophy was laid out by Ferman in the inaugural issue : " strong stories of action and adventure ... There will be two prime requisites for Venture stories : In the first place , each must be a well @-@ told story , with a beginning , middle and end ; in the second place , each must be a strong story — a story with pace , power and excitement . " Ferman hoped to take advantage of a gap in the science fiction magazine market opened up by the demise of Planet Stories , one of the last sf pulps , which had ceased publication in late 1955 . Planet Stories had focused on adventure stories , as opposed to the realistic style becoming more popular in science fiction in the 1950s , and Ferman hoped to combine the virtues of the melodramatic pulp fiction style with the literary values that were key to F & SF 's success . Venture 's bias towards action @-@ oriented adventure led to stories with relatively more sex and violence than those in competing magazines , and sf historian Mike Ashley has commented that it was perhaps five or ten years ahead of its time . One story , " The Girl Had Guts " , by Theodore Sturgeon , involved an alien virus that caused its victims to vomit up their intestines ; Ashley records a reviewer saying that the story made him physically ill . 
 Ed Emshwiller supplied eight of the ten covers ; he had sold several covers to F & SF by this time , so his work reinforced the sense of connection between the two magazines . Emshwiller also contributed interior illustrations in the first issue , but the main interior artist was John Giunta , with John <unk> contributing some of his earliest work to several of the later issues . 
 Some well @-@ known writers appeared during this incarnation of Venture , including Isaac Asimov , Clifford Simak , Marion Zimmer Bradley , Robert Silverberg , and Damon Knight . Not all the fiction was adventure oriented . For example , Sturgeon 's story " The Comedian 's Children " tells of a telethon host and his relationship with his sponsors , and Leigh Brackett 's " All the Colors of the Rainbow " deals with racism after aliens have contacted humanity . These and other examples can be regarded as stories of character with strong themes , in keeping with Ferman 's stated goals in his inaugural editorial . Venture was also the place that " Sturgeon 's Law " first saw print . This adage is now usually seen in the form " 90 % of everything is crap " . It was formulated by Sturgeon in about 1951 , and a version of it appeared in the March 1958 issue of Venture , under the name " Sturgeon 's Revelation " . 
 An editorial , " <unk> , " appeared in each issue of the first series ; after Ferman used the first one as a platform for editorial policy , it was usually written by Mills , who occasionally turned the column over to letters from SF figures . The very last editorial , in July 1958 , featured a eulogy of C.M. Kornbluth by Frederik Pohl , and one of Henry Kuttner by Sturgeon . Kornbluth and Kuttner had died within two months of each other earlier that year . 
 Sturgeon began a book review column , " On Hand . . . <unk> " , in the July 1957 issue that continued for the rest of the magazine 's run . This was Sturgeon 's first review column ; more than a decade later he wrote a similar column for Galaxy Science Fiction . The January 1958 issue saw the first in a series of four science articles by Asimov that also continued until Venture folded . The series was transferred to F & SF , beginning with the November 1958 issue , and eventually ran to 399 consecutive articles ; it is not often remembered that it began in F & SF 's short @-@ lived companion magazine . 
 Venture kept to a steady bimonthly schedule for ten issues , but its circulation never reached a sustainable level , and it was canceled in mid @-@ 1958 . The large number of competing magazines probably hurt sales , though since many of the competitors lasted for only one or two issues , Venture can be thought of as at least a partial success . An anthology drawn from the magazine 's <unk> , No Limits , was published in 1964 by Ballantine Books , attributed to Joseph Ferman as editor . 
 = = British and Australian editions = = 
 In December 1959 , a British edition of F & SF appeared from Atlas Publishing and Distributing Limited , a London @-@ based publisher . Atlas had published a British edition of Analog ( formerly Astounding Science Fiction ) since 1939 . In 1963 the abolition of import restrictions meant that Analog could be directly imported , and since there was no longer a need for a British edition , Atlas decided to start a new sf magazine to replace it . The new Venture Science Fiction drew many of its stories from the US version , but it also reprinted from the late 1950s F & SF , since there had been no British edition of that magazine until the end of 1959 . Within a year Atlas decided to abandon their edition of F & SF as well ; the last issue appeared in June 1964 . 
 The British version of Venture began in September 1963 , and ran for 28 numbered issues , through December 1965 ; the editor was Ronald R. <unk> . The stories selected from F & SF for the UK edition of Venture did not overlap with material already reprinted in the UK edition of F & SF . The first five issues had pictorial covers , but thereafter the cover simply listed the names of the contributing authors . This unattractive presentation , and the lack of much in the way of interior artwork , probably hurt sales . Atlas 's stated reason for ending the magazine was that it was " due to the expiration of available material " , but there were in fact many stories available to reprint . It is more likely that the real reason was that the US edition of F & SF was by then easily available in the UK , and that circulation was falling . 
 Atlas also published an Australian edition , which was identical to the British edition except that it was dated two months later ; the issues ran from November 1963 to February 1966 . 
 = = Second US run = = 
 A little over ten years after the first US edition ceased , a new version appeared , again as a companion to F & SF . This time the magazine was quarterly . The debut issue was dated May 1969 , and it was edited by Edward L. Ferman — son of Joseph Ferman — who was also the editor of F & SF . There was no statement of editorial intent for this version , but the policy was straightforward : a novel was presented in each issue . Although these were substantially cut , they still took up most of the magazine , with the result that the other stories tended to be very short . As in the first incarnation , the contents were of fairly good quality , with contributions from well @-@ known writers . However , the magazine was no more successful than before , and lasted for only six quarterly issues ; the last issue was August 1970 . 
 The condensed novels that appeared in this version of Venture included Hour of the Horde , by Gordon R. Dickson ; Plague Ship , by Harry Harrison ; Star Treasure , by Keith <unk> ; and <unk> , by Dean R. Koontz . The short fiction included little of note , though " The Snows Are <unk> , the Snows Are Gone " , an early story by James Tiptree , Jr . , appeared in 1969 , and " Breaking Point " , by Vonda McIntyre , was published in February 1970 . " Breaking Point " was McIntyre 's first published fiction , but , perhaps because it was published as by " V. N. McIntyre " , it has been missed by several bibliographers . There was also a Reginald <unk> <unk> story in each issue : these were a series of very short stories , based on bad puns , that had begun in F & SF the previous year . 
 Ron Goulart contributed a book review column to each issue of the second incarnation , and there was an occasional film review . This version of Venture did not credit the artists , but most of the covers were signed by Bert Tanner , who was listed on the masthead as the art director . Tanner 's cover art was much less distinguished than Emshwiller 's work for the first run of the magazine , and it is likely that this had a negative effect on sales : Tanner 's work has been likened to " pencil sketches overlaid by a single color " . Tanner also contributed much , but not all , of the interior art ; other artists who can by identified by their signatures include Emshwiller , Derek Carter , and <unk> Stewart , who illustrated Tiptree 's story in the November 1969 issue . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 For the first incarnation , Venture was priced at 35 cents throughout , and maintained a 128 @-@ page count along with a regular bimonthly schedule , starting with January 1957 and ending with the July 1958 issue . The first volume had six numbers , and the second had four . The British edition was numbered consecutively from 1 to 28 without any volume numbers , and was priced at 2 / 6 ( ₤ 0 @.@ 12 1 ⁄ 2 ) until the July 1964 issue , after which the price was 3 / - ( ₤ 0 @.@ 15 ) . The second US version began in May 1969 with volume 3 number 1 , and maintained a regular quarterly schedule until the last issue in August 1970 . Each issue was priced at 60 cents , and like its predecessor had a page count of 128 . 
 After the first US edition ceased publication , F & SF added the line " including Venture Science Fiction " to the masthead , in order to ensure that the publisher retained the rights to the title . The line reappeared in February 1971 , several months after the failure of the second US edition , and was finally dropped in February 1990 . 
 = Southern Adventist University = 
 Southern Adventist University is a Seventh @-@ day Adventist college in Collegedale , Tennessee , owned and operated by the Southern Union Conference of Seventh @-@ day Adventists . U.S. News & World Report categorizes it as a Southern Regional College , and the magazine has consistently ranked it as one of the top @-@ tier schools in that category . Southern Adventist University occupies a 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ) campus in a rural setting in the Tennessee River Valley . 
 It was founded in 1892 in Graysville , Tennessee , as Graysville Academy and was the first Adventist school in the southern U.S. Due to the need for additional space for expansion the school relocated in 1916 and was renamed Southern Junior College . In 1944 Southern began awarding baccalaureate degrees and was renamed Southern Missionary College . In 1996 the institution started conferring master 's degrees and adopted its current name . 
 Southern offers associate , baccalaureate , master 's , and doctoral degrees . It is accredited by multiple organizations including the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools . Its Institute of Archaeology offers an undergraduate degree in biblical archaeology ; Southern is one of only two schools which offer the degree . It is known for its emphasis on Adventist beliefs and conservative religious and social practices , and is considered the most conservative of the Seventh @-@ day Adventist schools in North America . The college operates a radio station ( WSMC @-@ FM ) , a health food store and a wellness center . Enrollment was 3 @,@ 053 students in 2010 , its highest level to date . 
 = = History = = 
 Southern 's roots stem from the establishment of Graysville Academy in Graysville , Tennessee , in 1892 , in a part of the South much affected by the American Civil War . The area saw the battle of Chickamauga and the Chattanooga campaign , and was the staging ground for Sherman 's Atlanta campaign . The Academy was privately funded at first , with no financial support from the Adventist church . In 1897 it was renamed the Southern Industrial School and then Southern Training School in 1901 . The school moved to the community of Thatcher 's Switch in 1916 , renaming it Collegedale . In 1943 , Kenneth A. Wright became president of the school . During Wright 's administration , Southern Junior College became accredited as a four @-@ year college . A new name , Southern Missionary College , was adopted in 1944 , and Southern granted its first baccalaureate degrees two years later . When the school became a university in 1996 , the trustees voted on a new name : Southern Adventist University . 
 = = = Graysville Academy , 1892 @-@ 1897 = = = 
 The Graysville Seventh @-@ day Adventist Church was organized on September 8 , 1888 , and by the fall of 1890 , the members had dedicated a church building . R.M. Kilgore , former president of the Illinois Conference had been asked to supervise the church 's work in the Southern United States . He had just moved to Graysville and was present for the church dedication . As the superintendent for the church 's work in the South , Kilgore repeatedly advocated the establishment of a school . 
 Kilgore invited George W. Colcord ( 1843 – 1902 ) , to come to Graysville and establish a school . Colcord was the founder of Milton Academy , which is the forerunner of Walla Walla University . The General Conference Education Secretary , W. W. Prescott , along with Kilgore and Colcord worked together to establish the school at Graysville . Colcord and his wife Ada began the school . The first term began in February , 1892 , with 23 students . The second term began in September of that year . By January 1893 Colcord reported that 62 students were in attendance . By 1893 there were three full @-@ time teachers and three part @-@ time teachers . Prescott considered the positive attitude of the school 's faculty , students and supporters to be indicators of the school 's future success and good reason to start other such schools in the South . 
 During 1892 , Colcord operated the school privately . Then , at the session of the Seventh @-@ day Adventist General Conference held at Battle Creek , Michigan , February 17 to March 6 , 1893 , the church officially took over the school . This first school in the South inspired the session to recommend that other schools also be established . 
 In the Fall of 1894 , Graysville Academy faced a crisis . Fourteen of the members of the Graysville Church were indicted for having violated the Tennessee Sunday law . This included Colcord , his nephew , Prof. I. C. Colcord , and M. C. <unk> , manager of the boys ' dormitory . 
 The church members found guilty refused to pay the fines , choosing to go to prison instead . The imprisonment of the school 's leaders resulted in its immediate closing for the rest of the year . The students , some of whom were ready to graduate , returned to their homes . 
 = = = Southern Industrial School , 1897 @-@ 1901 = = = 
 In November 1897 , the district conference voted to change the school 's name to Southern Industrial School . The name change reflected a change in the school 's emphasis . Industries were established including a wagon and blacksmith shop , a broom shop , a <unk> and a school farm . The farm grew peaches , pears and many types of berries and vegetables . 
 = = = Southern Training School , 1901 @-@ 1916 = = = 
 The Southern Union Conference was organized in April 1901 . Kilgore , the superintendent of the Southern District , known as District 2 , was elected the first president of the Southern Union Conference . The headquarters was in Graysville . The General Conference arranged for the Southern Union to take over the operation of the Southern Industrial School . The property was transferred to the Southern Union . They renamed the school the Southern Training School . It offered 14 grades of instruction . 
 = = = Southern Junior College , 1916 @-@ 1945 = = = 
 = = = = Relocation = = = = 
 Eventually the Graysville school outgrew its 7 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) site . Church leaders looked for a larger plot of land . They believed " that the only education worth while in these strenuous days is that practical kind which teaches the student to actually do with his hand the things he learns about in books . " To provide for this practical concern , they found a larger property . Plans were made to relocate the college program to a 285 @-@ acre ( 115 ha ) farm at Thatcher 's Switch east of Chattanooga . The move from Graysville to Thatcher 's Switch involved moving most of the school 's equipment , livestock , and implements to the new site fifty miles away . The school moved and opened in its new location by October , 1916 . The community was soon renamed Collegedale and the school as Southern Junior College . The term training school had become associated with reform schools while at the same time the junior college designation had become a popular one . 
 Graysville Academy continued on at the original site as a church and conference @-@ sponsored secondary boarding academy until 1938 . 
 = = = = Pioneer years = = = = 
 In 1916 , the school 's property holdings totaled $ 32 @,@ 000 . Two years later , due mainly to the construction of additional buildings on campus , the school 's holdings increased to $ 113 @,@ 000 . Many students earned their tuition by helping to construct these buildings . Southern was financially supported by two union conferences of the Church 's North American administration . The school organized construction bees . Interested church members came from across the South to help in these bees . 
 At first , the school taught only students in grades 1 @-@ 12 with a total enrollment of 59 students . In 1918 , three students were taking post @-@ high school level classes . The total student enrollment at this time was 175 . 
 Southern Junior College served two union conferences of Seventh @-@ day Adventists , the Southern and the Southeastern . Later these two would be reorganized into one , the Southern Union Conference . In 1920 , Lynn H. Wood , the president of the college , presented a major report to meetings for both union conferences . He reviewed the events of the first four years at the Ooltewah location . 
 According to Wood , enrollment grew quickly because of a tuition work program . Students of limited means realized they could get an education and improve themselves . This put a strain on housing . But the desire for an education motivated the students to cope with those early inadequate facilities , " Students have been willing to live in shacks and tents , to put up with all kinds of inconvenience , in order that they might receive the character development that the school had for them . " Wood referred to these first few years as the " pioneer years . " He wrote that the positive spiritual attitude of the students made these years the most enjoyable that one could wish for . 
 The college built the girls ' dormitory first . The girls moved in before it was finished , even before there was any heating , doors or chairs . They used " curtains for doors , sat upon their trunks for chairs — any way to get along . " 
 = = = = Faith community support = = = = 
 The building of the boys ' dormitory began in the summer of 1918 . The students helped build it , and , in doing so , many earned their way through school . Shortly after the beginning of the school year in 1918 , a " Workers ' Bee " took place . Church workers from all across the South and from church headquarters in Washington , D.C. came to the college to build the boys ' dormitory . For two and a half weeks they worked and associated with the students . They succeeded in putting up most of the framework . 
 Other help from the Adventist faith community included a $ 6 @,@ 000 donation by the Southern Publishing Association for a water supply system and another " Working Bee " to build a large dairy barn , a blacksmith shop , and a corn crib . People interested in the college 's success bought surrounding properties and donated them to the institution , more than doubling the school 's area to close to 600 acres ( 2 @.@ 4 km2 ) . This allowed the school to protect itself from families moving so close that they hindered their young people attending from learning some independence , President Wood wrote . He encouraged families to send their young people to the school , and if the cost was too high for some of them , he advised that church leaders make sure they got the help they needed for their young people to attend and live in the dormitory . 
 = = = Southern Missionary College , 1944 @-@ 1982 = = = 
 In 1944 , the Seventh Day Adventist General Conference Spring Council voted for Southern to become a four @-@ year college . The enrollment that first year was the highest ever to date , 436 students . The theology , teaching and pre @-@ nursing departments had the highest enrollments . Industries that helped students earn their tuition included a wood shop , a broom factory , a printing press , and a farm . The name Southern Missionary College was chosen at a combined meeting of the members of the college board , the union educational board , and the college faculty . 
 = = = Southern College of Seventh @-@ day Adventists , 1982 @-@ 1996 = = = 
 On July 1 , 1982 , the word " Missionary " was dropped from the school 's name . The reported reasons for the change were that the general population reacted negatively to the term ; foreign countries resisted accepting church workers who were from a " missionary " college ; the name incorrectly identified the school as only a Bible college , rather than a fully accredited , four @-@ year liberal arts institution ; and , graduates found the name " missionary " made it more difficult for them to get a job . Southern was the last Adventist college in North America to retain " missionary " in its title . The others changed their names many years earlier . 
 In their official announcement of the name change , the Board of Trustees of Southern Missionary College explained that a shorter name would help popularize it . They also stated that , " The word ' Southern ' has been associated with the College since its beginning — Southern Industrial School , Southern Training School , Southern Junior College , Southern Missionary College , and now Southern College . " 
 = = = Early 1980s controversy = = = 
 Southern College found itself drawn into a wider church controversies involving Desmond Ford who was dismissed from ministry in the Adventist church in 1980 , and Walter Rae , and Ronald Numbers 's book , The <unk> of Health . It began after a visit to the campus by a leading Bible scholar and theologian of the Seventh @-@ day Adventist Church , Edward Heppenstall , on his understanding of the church 's " investigative judgment " teaching , and who was also mentor to Desmond Ford . Then grew when a teacher from the theology department made a comment that seemed to disagree with statements made by church pioneer Ellen G. White . The incident along with other concerns led to accusations that faculty at the school did not believe in White as a prophet and led to calls for their dismissal . Southern President Frank Knittel and Board of Trustees member Tom Zwemer resigned , and Jerry <unk> , a professor of Old Testament Studies at Southern , also left the school . His credentials as a minister of the church were not renewed . 
 = = = Southern Adventist University , 1996 @-@ present = = = 
 In May 1996 , the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools granted approval for Southern to become an accredited Level III institution , allowing the school to confer master 's degrees . By September of that year , the college 's constituency approved the name change to Southern Adventist University . In 1996 , attendance was 1600 . Since 1996 , Southern has continued to grow and build , reaching a peak enrollment of 3 @,@ 053 in 2010 ( compared with 2 @,@ 079 in 1980 ) . 
 = = Academics = = 
 The student @-@ faculty ratio at Southern Adventist University is 16 : 1 and its most selected majors are biological and biomedical sciences ; business , management , marketing , and related support services ; education ; and health professions and related clinical sciences . Southern offers 81 undergraduate degrees , with sixty majors , thirty @-@ eight minors and two one @-@ year certificate programs . It also offers master 's degrees in business , computer science , education , psychology , nursing , religion and social work . The university is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools and the Accrediting Association of Seventh @-@ day Adventist Schools , Colleges , and Universities . In 2009 , the Princeton Review , an education services company , selected Southern as one of 141 institutions it listed in its " Best in the Southeast " section . 
 = = = School of Nursing = = = 
 The nursing program was instituted in 1934 . Upon completion of the program students were able to transfer to Florida Sanitarium and Hospital , where they could earn a diploma in nursing . In 1963 , Southern 's President Rees announced that the school 's nursing program had received its Bachelor of Science National League of Nursing accreditation . In 2002 , the master 's program also received official accreditation . Southern 's School of Nursing has existed on the Collegedale campus since 1956 . 
 In 2003 , the School announced an accelerated program allowing registered nurses with an associate 's degree to receive a Master of Science in Nursing . At this date approximately half of Southern 's nursing graduate program were non @-@ Adventist . 
 In December 2010 , the college temporarily suspended a home health nursing program after two of its nursing students were accosted at gunpoint in Chattanooga . The school is considering a safer , more controlled environment for the program . 
 In 2011 , the university opened Florida Hospital Hall , a new building with twice the space of the former nursing building , to accommodate an expanding student base . 
 = = = Institute of Archaeology = = = 
 The Institute of Archaeology is part of the School of Religion . It coordinates the archaeological programs at Southern through an undergraduate degree , an archeological museum , the William G. Dever Research Library and its archaeological excavations and publications . Southern is one of two schools in the U.S. where students can pursue an undergraduate degree in biblical archaeology . The Lynn H. Wood Archaeological Museum has a collection of nearly 600 artifacts , many of which were unearthed in Israel between 1967 and 1975 . 
 The current Institute Director , Professor of Near Eastern Studies and Archaeology Michael Hasel , studied for his doctorate under William G. Dever at the University of Arizona . In 2000 , Dever gave his artifact collection in loan to Hasel and Southern . This made the development of Southern 's program possible . The artifacts , valued at $ 250 @,@ 000 , date from 3200 BC to 450 AD . The collection has an almost complete set of the many strains of pottery from this period which students can study . In 2008 , Dever placed his personal library at Southern , along with 15 @,@ 000 photographic slides of archaeological excavations . 
 = = = School of Visual Art and Design = = = 
 Wayne and Maria Hazen founded the School of Visual Art and Design in 1998 . The film department produced Angel in Chains in 2003 , a film " based on a true story about acceptance and forgiveness . " In 2007 , Southern released Secret of the Cave , a feature film which was awarded a Crystal Heart Award at the Heartland Film Festival in Indiana . The family @-@ oriented feature was filmed in Ireland and was the first feature @-@ length film produced at the university . The school offers degrees in graphic design , animation , film production and fine art . 
 = = = McKee Library = = = 
 The McKee Library is located on the campus and opened in 1970 . Its collection of books and media comprises approximately 165 @,@ 000 volumes on the shelves , 25 @,@ 000 electronic books , subscriptions to more than 880 print and electronic periodicals and access to more than 19 @,@ 000 electronic journals . The library is defined by the Thomas Memorial Collection , a major Civil War collection with more than 3 @,@ 600 volumes concerning Lincoln and the Civil War , and authentic photos and newspapers . The Collection has two original copies of the only Lincoln biography ever read and approved by him , the Life of Abraham Lincoln by J. L. Scripps , and a section of his original marble sarcophagus . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 Southern is known for its religious and social conservatism , and some say is the most conservative of denominationally owned Adventist colleges in North America . In 2001 , Adventist noted theologian and scholar Raymond Cottrell , a " progressive Adventist " , wrote that Southern operated " an agency of Southern Bible belt obscurantism . " 
 In explaining why he placed his collection of artifacts and his personal library at Southern Adventist University , archaeologist William Dever said , " The major support for archaeology work in Israel and Jordan comes from conservative and evangelical circles where the Bible is still taken seriously and no one is more serious and committed about archaeological study in the Middle East than Adventists . " 
 = = Student life = = 
 The Princeton Review describes Southern as a " religiously loving environment . " Most forms of jewelry are not allowed on campus , including engagement rings , and students may be fined for not complying with this policy . Southern is a dry campus , as the Adventist Church opposes the use of alcohol . The university observes the Sabbath from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday and students are expected to refrain from secular activities during these hours . 
 Although Southern does not have fraternities or sororities , there are 40 clubs on campus , one of which is a chapter of the Adventist Forum , publisher of Spectrum Magazine . The Southern Accent is a weekly student @-@ run newspaper that has been the voice of Southern students since 1926 and gives information on events and outings and " hot issues that are being talked about on campus " . There are 21 student @-@ led ministries on campus and in the community and a Student Missions program . 
 Southern has more than 10 miles ( 16 km ) of hiking / mountain biking trails used by students and local community members alike . 
 There is a campus @-@ wide internet network with all classrooms accessing the wireless network and a computer lab in each building with access to printing . Wireless printing is also accessible in the dormitories . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Southern 's dormitories are single gender although students can opt out of the dormitories during summer sessions or with permission from a dean . <unk> and married students can receive exemptions from this policy . The men 's dormitory is <unk> Hall and the women 's dormitory is Thatcher Hall . An accidental fire in Thatcher Hall in April 2005 killed one student and injured two others . The dormitories have also been used to shelter storm victims who needed short @-@ term housing , such as after tornadoes in early 2011 . 
 = = = WSMC @-@ FM radio station = = = 
 Southern owns and operates FM radio station WSMC which is almost completely staffed by students and the only classical music station in the Chattanooga area . In 2003 , following technical problems that caused the station to keep dropping off the air , WSMC upgraded equipment to improve its reliability . It has been in operation since 1961 and is located on campus . 
 = = McKee Foods = = 
 McKee Foods has its headquarters beside the campus and has been an important part of school history as one of the companies which have provided jobs within walking distance for students to fund their education . It was founded by a Southern alumnus and is the headquarters for Little Debbie , <unk> and Sunbelt products . McKee Foods is one of the largest employers in Hamilton County . 
 = = People = = 
 = = = Principals , presidents = = = 
 = = = Notable alumni = = = 
 Jim Davis , state senator 
 Clifford Goldstein , author and editor 
 Dwight Nelson , pastor 
 Cherie Priest , novelist and blogger 
 Mathew Staver , founder and Chairman of Liberty Counsel 
 Lisa Robertson , actress and QVC host 
 = Chrono Resurrection = 
 Chrono Resurrection , also known as Chrono Trigger : Resurrection , is an unreleased fangame developed by North American team Resurrection Games under Nathan Lazur 's direction . It is based on the critically acclaimed Super NES role @-@ playing game Chrono Trigger by the Japanese company Square . The project was initially called CT64 and was meant to be a complete remake of the original game for the Nintendo 64 , with both 2D and 3D playing modes . 
 After a first interruption in development , the project was redefined as a short interactive demo for Windows @-@ based personal computers . New team members , including professional artists and designers , were recruited for the demo , which would feature ten scenes from Chrono Trigger and most of its playable characters . In 2004 , the project was publicly closed after Square Enix issued a cease @-@ and @-@ desist letter to Resurrection Games for trademark and copyright infringement . Despite its closure , the project has received critical and popular praises . 
 = = Nintendo 64 version = = 
 Nathan Lazur initially planned to create a Chrono Trigger remake for the Nintendo 64 , called CT64 , using GNU @-@ based homebrew tools . Lazur 's motivation for the project came in 1999 when playing Chrono Trigger and Super Mario 64 . The remake , developed by a team of four people , was Lazur 's first attempt at creating a complete title . The game was intended to have two playing modes and the same battle system as the original . 
 The first mode would feature 2D and pre @-@ rendered graphics enhanced with 3D spell and battle effects . Some of the effects created by Lazur would rely on software programming rather than the Nintendo 64 hardware , as the latter would not be capable of rendering them directly . The second mode would be a full 3D mode played in either regular or high display resolution , and would feature different level of detail textures depending on camera distances , to maximize clarity and performance . Both modes would be in a top @-@ down perspective , although more cinematic camera angles , similar to those from The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time , were also considered for the 3D mode . 
 A gallery feature was also planned and would allow players to unlock bonus material depending on their progression in the game . Fan artwork and music would be unlockable through this feature , as well as minigames , including a card game similar to Triple Triad from Final Fantasy VIII . The remake was expected to be released on the Internet for free and played on console emulators , since there would be no cartridge version due to financial constraints . Only a semi @-@ working 3D test was actually completed , and the project was discontinued in mid @-@ 2000 due to a number of factors , including the accidental loss of Lazur 's data and his desire to improve his programming skills . 
 = = Second version = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The second version of the project , tentatively called Chrono Trigger : Brink of Time then Chrono Resurrection , started development in April 2003 . Lazur has given several reasons to explain his willingness to restart the project , including his experience coding for the Dreamcast Visual Memory Unit , programming for game developer DC Studios , and playing Chrono Cross , the official sequel to Chrono Trigger for PlayStation . Unlike CT64 , the second version would be a short demo developed in a cross @-@ platform engine with a single 3D playing mode . The Windows version was planned for a free Internet release , while Nintendo GameCube and Xbox ports would be reserved for official developers with access to development kits of either of the two consoles . 
 The new development team was mostly recruited on the game developers website Gamasutra and worked in a small studio in Lazur 's apartment , in Montreal , Quebec , Canada . The team included up to nine members , most of which had about two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years of experiences in the industry . Lazur has admitted that he began to seriously focus on the quality of the demo only after art director Luis Martins joined the project . Other professional designers in the team included Moise Breton , a 3D artist who had worked on character models for the commercially successful movie The Matrix Reloaded , and Michel <unk> , an animator who had worked for game company <unk> . Difficulties were encountered in the game engine development as Lazur was the unique programmer and worked from scratch . 
 The score for the demo was composed by Mathew Valente , who had been with the project since its Nintendo 64 version . The score was to consist in arrangements of the official Chrono Trigger soundtrack written by Yasunori Mitsuda , Nobuo Uematsu and Noriko Matsueda . Valente 's goal was to retain the feeling of the original music while enhancing it for a modern platform . Most of the arrangements were created in the Impulse Tracker format , then converted to MIDI and enhanced with a number of tools . 
 = = = Content = = = 
 The team tried to capture the feel of the original game with updated graphics and sounds in the demo . It was to feature ten short interactive scenes from Chrono Trigger . Despite receiving requests from fans , the development team did not intend to create a complete remake of the original game since they would not have the necessary resources , and because they thought the result would not have been on par with Square Enix @-@ developed titles . The story of the game was altered slightly to allow for the ten scenes to better flow from one to the other . 
 The demo was meant to be played using a " default party " of characters , with other party members unlockable for additional replay value . Due to time constraints , the development team expected that two of the seven characters of the original game , Robo and Ayla , would have 50 % chances of not being featured . While the team tried to capture the feel of the original game with updated graphics and sounds , the artists and animators faced difficulty in reproducing the characters due to the differences of style between the sprites , artwork and PlayStation version anime sequences . They noted , however , that they overcame the issues and managed to add a bit of their own art style into the game . 
 = = Closure and aftermath = = 
 Chrono Resurrection was originally set for a Christmas 2004 release . However , Square Enix issued a cease @-@ and @-@ desist letter to Resurrection Games before the release for trademark and copyright infringement . Faced with a threat of legal action , the project was publicly closed on September 6 , 2004 . According to the development team , the website of the project had received significant hits from Square Enix Japanese IP addresses for a period of three months before the letter issuing . They assumed these visits were mostly from employees rather than top executives , and hoped the company would see the demo as how the team sees it , a tribute to Chrono Trigger rather than a replacement . 
 Gaming websites 1UP.com and GameSpot called the project 's second version " ambitious " and praised its graphics , noting that the art style is mostly faithful to that of the original game 's character designer Akira Toriyama . Website Nintendo World Report praised the game 's graphics and music , and called the quality of the artwork " professional " . 1UP.com judged the project 's closure " unfortunate " but deduced that Square Enix could not leave the possibility of a " competing " Chrono Trigger remake open . GameSpot also expressed their disappointment in Square Enix 's decision to shut down the " furthest along " of Chrono Trigger fan remakes , pointing at the fact that with no news of another official sequel , fans of the Chrono series " have been left in the cold " . Website GamePro Australia called the project " possibly the greatest fan remake to get crushed under the huge shoe of a big @-@ time developer " . 
 Several Internet petitions were created by fans to pressure Square Enix into green @-@ lighting Chrono Resurrection ; none have had any effect , however . Nathan Lazur , though disappointed , holds no ill will towards Square Enix for protecting its intellectual property , and he has stated that he " felt honoured to even be recognized " by the company . He added that to avoid legal issues , developers of fangames should present their polished demos directly to the original publishers so that the products can be handled in a " more traditional business procedure " . Before the closure of Chrono Resurrection , Lazur had stated that his team had no plans to remake other games after the project 's completion and would have liked to develop an original concept based in feudal Japan . 
 = Halo ( megastructure ) = 
 Halo rings are eponymous fictional megastructures and superweapons in the Halo science fiction franchise . They are referred to as " Installations " by their AI monitors , and are collectively referred to as " the Array " by the installations ' creators , the Forerunners . The series ' alien antagonists , the Covenant , refer to the structures as the " Sacred Rings " , believing them to form part of a greater religious prophecy known as " The Great Journey " . According to Halo 's fiction , the Forerunners built the rings to contain and study the Flood , an infectious alien parasite . The rings act together as a weapon of last resort ; when fired , the rings kill any sentient life capable of falling prey to the Flood , starving the parasite of its food . The installations are at the crux of the plot progression for the Halo series . 
 The Halos are massive ringworlds , which feature their own wildlife and weather . The constructs resemble Iain M. Banks ' Orbital concept in shape and design . The structure that Halo : Combat Evolved takes place on was initially to be a hollowed @-@ out planet , but was changed to its ring design later in development ; a staff member provided " Halo " as the name for both the ring and the video game after names such as Red Shift were suggested . 
 = = Overview = = 
 = = = Design and development = = = 
 The term " megastructure " refers to artificial structures where one of three dimensions is 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) or larger . The first use of a ring @-@ shaped megastructure in fiction was Larry Niven 's novel Ringworld ( 1970 ) . Niven described his design as an intermediate step between Dyson spheres and planets - a ring with a radius of more than 93 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 miles ( 150 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) and a width of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 km ) ; these are dimensions far exceeding the ringworlds found in the Halo series , which feature radii of 5 @,@ 000 miles ( 8 @,@ 000 km ) The Halos are closer in proportion to the Bishop Ring ( habitat ) , an actual proposed space habitat first explained by Forrest Bishop , though the proportions of the Halos do not exactly match up with Bishop 's idea . As seen in the games , Halo installations feature a metallic exterior , with the interior of the ring filled with an atmosphere , water , plant life , and animal life . What appear to be docking ports and windows dot the exterior surface , suggesting that a fraction of the ring structure itself is hollow and used for maintenance , living , and power generation . 
 Before the title for game developer Bungie 's next project was announced and development of the game that would become Halo was in its early stages , the megastructure that Halo : Combat Evolved took place on was a massive , hollowed @-@ out planet called " <unk> " . The planet became a Dyson Sphere , and then a Dyson Ring . Some Bungie staffers felt the change to a ringworld was " ripping off Larry Niven " , according to Bungie artist Paul Russel . Bungie employee Frank O 'Connor wrote in a post on Bungie.net that " the specific accusation that we swiped the idea of a ring @-@ shaped planet wholesale is not accurate , " explaining that Bungie used a ringworld because " it 's cool and therefore the type of thing a Forerunner civilization would build . " 
 At the time , the game was known as Blam ! , but Bungie had always expected to replace the working title with something better ( Blam ! was only used after studio co @-@ founder Jason Jones could not bring himself to tell his mother their next project was dubbed Monkey Nuts . ) Titles such as The Crystal Palace , Hard Vacuum , Star Maker , Star Shield , and The Santa Machine were suggested . Russel suggested calling it Project : Halo because of the ring . Despite concerns that the title seemed too religious or lacked action , the name stuck . In turn , " Halo " became the ring 's name as well . 
 Combat Evolved 's Halo was intended to be populated with large animal life , collectively known as Fauna . The Fauna included " pseudo @-@ dinosaurs " and mammals , as well as a Chocobo @-@ like creature — the " Blind Wolf " — that players could ride . The animals were removed for technical and conceptual reasons ; there were difficulties in getting herd and behavior action to work , and under pressure to complete the game 's more central aspects , the animals were dropped . Bungie also felt that the desolate ring heightened the sense of Halo 's mystery , and made the appearance of the parasitic Flood more terrifying and unexpected . 
 = = = Scientific analysis = = = 
 Physicist Kevin Grazier posited in a 2006 essay the composition and problems associated with a Halo installation . The complete Halos seen in Halo : Combat Evolved and Halo 2 orbit gas giants similar to Jupiter , though much larger ; the bodies exhibit characteristics of both a jovian planet and a small star . In each system , there are five points where a body of negligible mass would remain stationary to the two much larger bodies in the system , the gas giant and its moon . These areas , known as Lagrange points , are classified by stability ; while bodies at 60 ° angles to the gas giant would remain in the same location relative to the other objects in the system , the other three Lagrange points are meta @-@ stable , having the tendency to be unstable in one direction . As the Halos are located at point L1 , the installations must actively correct its orbit . The apparent gravity of the Halo installations is close to Earth normal . A Halo would have to spin with a <unk> speed of 7 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) per second to match Earth 's gravity , translating to 19 @.@ 25 rotations in a day . 
 Aside from its unstable position , Halos would have to contend with thousands of meteor and <unk> impacts which would destabilize or destroy the ring ; there is no evidence in the games that the installations project an energy shield to prevent this occurrence . Because of the magnetic environment around the gas giant , a Halo would be exposed to high levels of radiation . Earth is protected from such radiation by charged particles created by the planet 's magnetic field . Grazier posits that huge conductive cables could run the circumference of a Halo ; when an electric current was run through these cables , a protective magnetic environment could be created to sustain life . 
 In the games , spectroscopic analysis of the ring 's composition proved " inconclusive " , implying that the Halos are constructed of an unknown material ( <unk> ) . Were a Halo to be constructed using conventional materials a light steel alloy would be most feasible . Assuming that the ring structure is 50 % empty space , a 5000 km ring composed of steel alloy at an average density of 7 @.@ 7 grams ( 0 @.@ 27 oz ) per 1 cubic centimeter ( 0 @.@ 061 cu in ) would result in a total mass of <unk> kg . The amount of material required to build such a ring would be akin to the total material available in the asteroid belt . 
 = = Installations = = 
 = = = Installation 03 = = = 
 Installation 03 , also referred to as Gamma Halo , appears in Halo 4 . It is monitored by 049 Abject Testament and is located in the <unk> system , orbiting a damaged planet . Whilst no gameplay takes place on the installation , an extremely dense asteroid field surrounding the installation is the site of the UNSC scientific research base Ivanoff . It is here that UNSC scientists are conducting experiments on the Forerunner artifact called the Composer , which has the ability to convert biological forms , specifically humans , into AIs . Once the game 's antagonist , the Didact , activates the device , the UNSC base is left uninhabited . In Halo : Escalation , a series of comics which follows many events after Halo 4 , establishes that 049 Abject Testament has long disappeared from the ring , leading a monitor to arrive at the Installation , just to be ambushed by a still living Didact , using the Installation to use the Composer . 
 = = = Installation 04 = = = 
 Installation 04 , also referred to as Alpha Halo , appears in Halo : Combat Evolved . The majority of gameplay takes place in areas on this installation , and its exploration drives the story . The ring was managed by an artificial intelligence known as 343 Guilty Spark , and is located in the <unk> system , dominated by a gas giant known as Threshold . Halo orbits Threshold 's only satellite , an extremely large moon known as Basis . A group of humans aboard the ship Pillar of Autumn crash @-@ land on the ring after being pursued by the alien Covenant . The ring holds religious significance to the aliens , while the humans believe it is a weapon that could turn the tide of the war against the Covenant in their favor . In reality , the ring is home to a virulent parasite called the Flood , which is accidentally released by the Covenant and threaten to infest the galaxy . The human soldier Master Chief eventually detonates the Pillar of Autumn 's reactors in order to destabilize the ring and cause it to break up , preventing the spread of the Flood and the activation of the Halo network , which would kill all sentient life as a fail @-@ safe to starve the Flood . The Ark was alerted to its destruction and proceeded to create Installation 04B , which , too , was destroyed by Master Chief . During the game 's events , Guilty Spark alludes to a previous firing of the network , which Bungie 's director of cinematics Joseph Staten said occurred around 100 @,@ 000 years previous to the events of the game in the year 2552 . 
 = = = Installation 05 = = = 
 During the events of Halo 2 , the Covenant and humans discover a second ringworld , Installation 05 , or Delta Halo . It was monitored by <unk> Penitent Tangent , who completely ignored Flood warnings and was captured by their leader , the Gravemind . The Covenant leadership wants to activate the installation , believing it is the key to their salvation . At the same time , the Flood , led by an intelligence known as the Gravemind , lay siege to the Covenant 's city @-@ ship , High Charity . After 343 Guilty Spark informs Halo 's true purpose to the Arbiter , a Covenant holy warrior , of the danger that the Halos truly represent , a group of humans and Covenant Elites prevent the firing of the ring . The unexpected shutdown activates a fail @-@ safe protocol , priming the remaining Halo installations for remote activation from a location known as The Ark . In Halo 4 , it is revealed that the UNSC has created an oversight base on the Installation ( or around it ) , as they did with Installation 03 . 
 = = = The Ark = = = 
 The Ark , also referred to as Installation 00 , is located outside the Milky Way galaxy and serves as the construction and control station for the Halo weapon system . It does not share the ringworld geometry of the other installations . During Halo 3 , the Covenant discover a portal on Earth that leads to the Ark and are pursued by the humans and a breakaway faction of Covenant opposed to activating the rings . Gravemind , having hijacked High Charity , crash @-@ lands on the installation . The remote firing of the rings is halted by Master Chief and the Arbiter . In order to end the threat of the Flood , Master Chief decides to activate Installation 04B under construction in The Ark , the replacement for the Halo that he destroyed in Halo : Combat Evolved . Unknown to everyone but 343 Guilty Spark , a premature firing would destroy the installation ; the monitor attempted to defend ' his ' ring but was destroyed by Master Chief , who proceeded to fire the weapon . The firing tears apart the incomplete Halo and severely damages The Ark as Master Chief , Cortana , and the Arbiter try to escape through the Portal , which closes as they enter , leaving Master Chief and Cortana drifting in space while the Arbiter returns to Earth successfully , forming the setting of Halo 4 . 
 According to Greg Bear 's Forerunner Trilogy , a " Greater Ark " served as the location for the construction of larger 30 @,@ 000 km rings . 
 = It Girl ( Jason Derulo song ) = 
 " It Girl " is a song by American recording artist Jason Derulo , released as the second single from his second studio album , Future History on August 9 , 2011 . The song was written by Derulo , E. Kidd Bogart , Lindy Robbins and Emanuel " Eman " Kiriakou , who also handled the song 's production . Musically , " It Girl " is a mid @-@ tempo pop and R & B love song , that features a whistling intro and an acoustic guitar melody . Lyrically , it revolves around Derulo singing the praises of the perfect girl he found after searching all over . The lyrics reference the title in the opening chorus phrase , " You could be my it girl " . 
 The song received positive reviews from music critics , who praised its catchy production and radio @-@ friendly lyrics . They also added that it has the potential to overshadow the commercial success of Derulo 's debut single , " Whatcha Say " ( 2009 ) . " It Girl " attained worldwide success , reaching the top @-@ ten on the singles charts in Australia , Denmark , Ireland , New Zealand and the United Kingdom , and the top @-@ twenty in Hungary , Japan , the Netherlands and Norway . The song peaked at number 17 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , number six on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and at number 10 on the US Pop Songs chart . 
 The accompanying music video of " It Girl " was directed by Colin Tilley and filmed at a mansion in Malibu , California . It portrays a fictional relationship between Derulo and his love interest played by actress Tika Sumpter . To promote the song , Derulo performed the song live on televised shows , including America 's Got Talent , The Wendy Williams Show , The Ellen DeGeneres Show and The X Factor Australia . The official remix of the song premiered online in February 2012 , and features Derulo 's former girlfriend Jordin Sparks . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 " It Girl " was written by Jason Derulo , E. Kidd Bogart , Lindy Robbins and Emanuel " Eman " Kiriakou , who also produced the track . The engineering process was handled by Jens <unk> . It was mixed by Serban Ghenea at Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia . The song 's keyboards , whistle , guitars , bass , percussion and drum programming were provided by Eman , with additional keyboards and drum programming by <unk> and Andrew Goldstein . On July 29 , 2011 , the audio of " It Girl " was uploaded to Derulo 's official YouTube account . When speaking of the song , Derulo told The Daily Telegraph , " I wanted to put myself in a position as if I 'd found my It Girl , to make myself feel like if I found that one true love . I 've basically described what it would be like if I found her . " Derulo further elaborated about the concept of the song in another interview with Matt Elias of MTV News : 
 An ' It Girl ' to me is someone who is selfless , someone who 's always thinking about others before she thinks about herself . You know , my mom is a very charitable woman , so I 'd want someone who is in line with that kind of thought process . I also like a girl who 's polite . I feel like that 's a lost art , and just saying ' please ' and ' thank you ' goes a very long way with me . That 's just so lost these days . So , ladies , it 's OK to say ' thank <unk> 
 Derulo explained that he did not believe in the possibility of " It Girl " to be the next single from Future History . However , his peers believed that it was very distinct from the lead single , " Don 't Wanna Go Home " and that response motivated him to pick it as the second single . He believed that showing the difference in the new album was important in picking the single . He did not want to put another dance song so that his fans do not assume that the entire album consisted of uptempo songs . He concluded that " growing up has definitely taken place . My music has always been a representation of who I am and I guess I speak differently , my demeanour is different . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " It Girl " is a mid @-@ tempo pop and R & B love song , built on a finger @-@ clicking beat . The song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 95 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of E major with Derulo 's vocal range spanning from the note of E4 to the note of B5 . According to Rap @-@ Up , the song 's lyrics find Derulo as the male protagonist singing praises of " a lovely lady " , comparing her to his " greatest hit " . " It Girl " opens with a whistling intro and an acoustic guitar melody . In the first verse , he chants about how he searched all over and finally found the girl of his dreams . He also affirms that the girl means much more than a Grammy Award to him . Its hook , which forms part of the chorus , contains the lyrics : " You could be my it girl / Baby , you 're the shit girl / Lovin ; you could be a crime / Crazy how we fit , girl / This is it , girl / Gimme 25 to life / I just wanna rock all night long and put you in the middle of my spotlight / You could be my it girl / You 're my biggest hit , girl / Let me play it loud . " Scott Shelter from Pop Crush noted that the song uses the " oh @-@ oh @-@ oh @-@ oh " vocal chants after the chorus . 
 = = Release = = 
 " It Girl " was added to the B @-@ playlist of urban radio station BBC Radio 1Xtra in the United Kingdom on August 5 , 2011 . The song was released as a digital download on iTunes Stores worldwide from May 6 , 2011 . " It Girl " impacted contemporary hit radio in the United States on August 16 , 2011 , and mainstream radio in the UK on August 24 , 2011 . A digital extended play with four remixes of the song , was released in Denmark , Ireland , Switzerland and the United Kingdom on September 16 , 2011 . " It Girl " was made available as a CD single in Germany on November 25 , 2011 . On February 29 , 2012 , the official remix of " It Girl " premiered online , which features Derulo 's former girlfriend Jordin Sparks . The remix has a slower tempo than the original and features a new verse by Sparks . Cristin Maher of PopCrush noted that both singers " harmonize together on the chorus , with their voices matching up beautifully " . The remix was accompanied by a video that displays behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of Derulo and Sparks spending time together . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " It Girl " garnered mixed reviews from music critics . Describing it as " a catchy pop song with major hit potential " , Scott Shetler of Pop Crush awarded " It Girl " four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , writing that " even though Derulo 's debut produced hits like ' Whatcha Say ' and ' In My Head ' , ' It Girl ' could be his best single to date . " Shetler concluded that " every element of the song works , from the sweet whistling intro to the acoustic guitar melody to the ' oh @-@ oh @-@ oh @-@ oh ' vocal chants after the chorus . " Similarly , Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV , who viewed " It Girl " as Derulo 's " valiant attempt to trump his monstrous [ ... ] hit ' Whatcha Say ' , gave the song a positive review , writing that it is catchy and it is " perfectly crafted for radio success " . Jess Holton of The Music Network noted that the song " delivers with catchy whistling and tender lyrics " and that it " will appeal to the lady fans of Derulo who like to see the romantic side of the crooner " . Robbie Daw of Idolator wrote that the song " comes dangerously close to being just another bland , cookie cutter R & B @-@ pop experience , but lucky for him , that whistle gimmick in the chorus makes it a somewhat enjoyable three minutes . " 
 Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly awarded the song a B- rating and wrote that " perhaps [ Derulo ] should have pitched woo with something hotter than a flat midtempo beat , some acoustic flourishes , and a whistle garnish . " Shahryar Rizvi of Dallas Observer gave the song a mixed review , criticizing its lyrics : " [ ... ] if you read between the lines in ' It Girl ' , it becomes clear that Derulo has some really weird taste in women . " Lewis Corner of Digital Spy gave the song a negative review , " with the charts now welcoming the return of the organic singer @-@ songwriter " , Derulo may not have equipped enough himself with " his own gut @-@ wrenching ballad . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the issue dated August 27 , 2011 , " It Girl " debuted at number 39 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and fell to number 68 the following week . After descending the Hot 100 for three consecutive weeks , " It Girl " moved from number 61 to number 38 in its fifth week . It peaked at number 17 on the issue dated October 29 , 2011 . On the US Pop Songs chart , " It Girl " debuted at number 34 on the issue dated September 10 , 2011 . The song peaked at number 10 on the issue dated November 10 , 2011 , becoming Derulo 's fourth top @-@ ten single on the chart . " It Girl " peaked at number six on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , giving Derulo his second top @-@ ten single on the chart . The song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting sales of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 <unk> the Canadian Hot 100 it debuted at number 73 and peaked at 37 . 
 In Australia , " It Girl " debuted at number 16 on the ARIA Singles Chart on August 22 , 2011 , becoming the highest debuting single of that week . The following week , the song peaked at number three , and at number one on the ARIA Urban Singles Chart . " It Girl " was certified six times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 420 @,@ 000 copies . The song debuted and peaked at number three on the New Zealand Singles Chart , becoming Derulo 's highest debut in that country to date . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting sales of 7 @,@ 500 copies . On the Danish Singles Chart , " It Girl " peaked at number nine , giving Derulo his second top @-@ ten single in that country . In Ireland , " It Girl " debuted and peaked at number three for the week ending September 22 , 2011 . " It Girl " debuted and peaked at number four in the United Kingdom for the week ending October 1 , 2011 , giving Derulo his fifth top @-@ five single in that country . It peaked at number two on the UK R & B Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " It Girl " was directed by Colin Tilley and shot at a mansion in Malibu , sitting on a cliff overlooking the Pacific Ocean . On July 19 , 2011 , several stills from the video were released online , and showed Derulo at the oceanside mansion dressed in a white suit . Gossip Girl actress , Tika Sumpter , also appeared in the photos , and plays Derulo 's " It Girl " in the video . Derulo told MTV News that he wanted the video to look like an open book . He said , 
 I wanted it to be almost like a photo album , so every single scene is kind of like a picture that you 're kind of looking into our relationship . So it is a 1920s vibe , it 's black and white , very high fashion — you know , you 'll see me very dapper in 1920s , Frank Sinatra @-@ ish . So you 'll see the cars from that era , you 'll definitely feel the vibe of the house having that 1920s vibe as well . So it 's very different and very intimate , and it 's not a lot of dancing — it 's more personal . 
 A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage from the video shoot showed Derulo wearing different outfits , including a dark pinstripe suit with a pair of sunglasses , a rose @-@ colored button @-@ down shirt and white pants . The footage also showed Derulo and Sumpter shooting a scene in a silver corvette , as well as a kissing scene between the two . A 37 @-@ second preview of the video was released on August 12 , 2011 . The completed video premiered online on August 15 . 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 The beginning of the video is shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , and shows Derulo sitting on the hood of a corvette outside a Malibu mansion dressed in 1920s attire . In another scene , Derulo is seen dancing at an area of the mansion which is surrounded by trees . The video then shows intercut scenes in full color of Derulo at the beach , on the mansion 's balcony , and in the bedroom with his love interest ( played by Tika Sumpter ) . More scenes in full color , show Derulo on the balcony interacting with her , and also shows him singing to her in the bedroom using a microphone . During another scene , Derulo is seen dressed in all white . The video ends with a kissing scene between the two which then fades away . 
 Melinda Newman of HitFix praised the concept of the video , writing : " [ ... ] when [ Derulo is not ] busy showing off his dance moves , he is living the high life with his lady in their palatial estate . He sings to her , she wraps her legs around him , they pose in some awesome topiary gardens . It is not the most thrilling of videos , and he may want to think twice about <unk> in a <unk> someone did it before him and <unk> but it is a nice change of pace from some of his more hectic , <unk> clips . " Cameron Matthews of AOL Music commented that the video gives " a kaleidoscopic view " between Derulo 's beachfront paradise , an assortment of " edgy suits " and " a little bit of pillow talk with his new ' It Girl ' . " According to Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV , " the romance factor in Jason 's full @-@ length ' It Girl ' video is very , very high . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On August 4 , 2011 , Derulo performed a medley of " It Girl " and " Don 't Wanna Go Home " on America 's Got Talent . Robbie Daw of Idolator compared his performance to Michael Jackson , writing " we 're used to the 21 @-@ year @-@ old [ copying ] MJ 's legendary moves , especially on AGT . But why not stage some original shuffling of your own at some point , Jason ? " . He later sang the song on The Wendy Williams Show on September 30 , 2011 . During an Australian promotional tour for Future History , Derulo performed " It Girl " at the Westfield shopping mall in Parramatta , New South Wales , as part of a set list which included " In My Head " and " Don 't Wanna Go Home " . On October 18 , 2011 , he performed " It Girl " on The X Factor Australia . Derulo later performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on October 25 , 2011 . 
 On November 6 , 2011 , Derulo performed " It Girl " at the Belfast City Hall in Northern Ireland , to coincide with the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards . The song was part of a set list which also included " Whatcha Say " , " In My Head " , " Don 't Wanna Go Home " and " Breathing " . Holly Thomas of the Daily Mail praised his set , writing that " Jason Derulo gave a steamy performance " . On December 3 , 2011 , he performed " It Girl " at radio station KDWB @-@ FM 's annual Jingle Ball , which took place at the Target Center in Minneapolis , Minnesota . The song was part of a set list which included " Whatcha Say " , " In My Head " , " Ridin ' Solo " , " Don 't Wanna Go Home " and " Fight for You " . According to Jon Bream of Star Tribune Derulo " turned it out with sweet vocals and smooth dancing " . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes for Future History . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Naroda Patiya massacre = 
