 = = = Additional references = = = 
 = Government of Singapore = 
 The Government of Singapore is defined by the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore to mean the Executive branch of government , which is made up of the President and the Cabinet of Singapore . Although the President acts in his personal discretion in the exercise of certain functions as a check on the Cabinet and Parliament of Singapore , his role is largely ceremonial . It is the Cabinet , composed of the Prime Minister and other Ministers appointed on his advice by the President , that generally directs and controls the Government . The Cabinet is formed by the political party that gains a simple majority in each general election . 
 A statutory board is an autonomous agency of the Government that is established by an Act of Parliament and overseen by a government ministry . Unlike ministries and government departments that are subdivisions of ministries , statutory boards are not staffed by civil servants and have greater independence and flexibility in their operations . 
 There are five Community Development Councils ( CDCs ) appointed by the board of management of the People 's Association ( PA ) for districts in Singapore . Where there are not less than 150 @,@ 000 residents in a district , the PA 's board of management may designate the Chairman of a CDC to be the Mayor for the district that the CDC is appointed for . As it is the practice for MPs to be appointed as Chairmen of CDCs , these MPs have also been designated as Mayors . 
 From the founding of modern Singapore in 1819 until 1826 , Singapore was headed by two Residents in succession . Following Singapore 's amalgamation into the Straits Settlements in 1826 , it was governed by a Governor together with a Legislative Council . An Executive Council of the Straits Settlements was introduced in 1877 to advise the Governor but wielded no executive power . In 1955 , a Council of Ministers was created , appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of the Leader of the House . Constitutional talks between Legislative Assembly representatives and the Colonial Office were held from 1956 to 1958 , and Singapore gained full internal self @-@ government in 1959 . The Governor was replaced by the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Negara , who had power to appoint to the post of Prime Minister the person most likely to command the authority of the Assembly , and other Ministers of the Cabinet on the Prime Minister 's advice . In the 1959 general elections , the People 's Action Party ( PAP ) swept to power with 43 out of the 51 seats in the Assembly , and Lee Kuan Yew became the first Prime Minister of Singapore . The executive branch of the Singapore Government remained unchanged following Singapore 's merger with Malaysia in 1963 , and subsequent independence in 1965 . The PAP has been returned to power in every general election and has thus formed the Cabinet since 1959 . The Government is generally perceived to be competent in managing the country 's economy and largely free from political corruption . On the other hand , it has been criticized for using unfair election tactics and violating freedom of speech . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 The term Government of Singapore can have a number of different meanings . At its widest , it can refer collectively to the three traditional branches of government – the Executive branch , Legislative branch ( the President and Parliament of Singapore ) and Judicial branch ( the Supreme Court and Subordinate Courts of Singapore ) . The term is also used colloquially to mean the Executive and Legislature together , as these are the branches of government responsible for day @-@ to @-@ day governance of the nation and lawmaking . At its narrowest , the term is used to refer to the Members of Parliament ( MPs ) belonging to a particular political party ( or coalition of parties ) holding a majority of seats in Parliament sufficient to enable the party ( or coalition ) to form the Cabinet of Singapore – this is the sense intended when it is said that a political party " forms the Government " . 
 The Constitution of the Republic of Singapore uses the word Government to mean the Executive branch , made up of the President and the Cabinet . This article describes the Government of Singapore in this technical sense , as well as selected aspects of the Executive branch of the Government . 
 = = History = = 
 On 30 January 1819 Sir Stamford Raffles , an Englishman who was the Governor of Bencoolen ( now Bengkulu , Indonesia ) , entered into a preliminary agreement with the Temenggung of Johor , Abdul Rahman Sri Maharajah , for the British East India Company to establish a " factory " or trading post on the island of Singapore . This was confirmed by another agreement signed by Raffles , the Temenggung and Sultan Hussein Shah on 6 February . In June 1823 Singapore ceased to be a dependency of Bencoolen and was placed under the control of the Presidency City of Calcutta ( Kolkata ) in the Bengal Presidency . On 24 June 1824 , Singapore and Malacca were formally transferred to the East India Company , with the result that they came under the control of Fort William . Full cession of Singapore to the Company by the Sultan and Temenggung was effected by a treaty of 19 November 1824 , which was ratified by Calcutta on 4 March 1825 . Between 1819 and 1826 , Singapore was headed by two Residents of Singapore in succession , <unk> William Farquhar and Dr. John Crawfurd . 
 In 1826 , Malacca , Penang and Singapore were amalgamated into the Straits Settlements , which were made a Crown colony with effect from 1 April 1867 . The Colony was governed by a Governor together with a Legislative Council . An Executive Council was introduced in 1877 by letters patent issued by the Crown , Composed of " such persons and constituted in such manner as may be directed " by royal instructions , it existed to advise the Governor and wielded no executive power . The Governor was required to consult the Executive Council on all affairs of importance unless they were too urgent to be laid before it , or if reference to it would prejudice the public service . In such urgent cases , the Governor had to inform the Council of the measures he had taken . 
 Following the Second World War , the Straits Settlements were disbanded and Singapore became a Crown colony in its own right . The reconstituted Executive Council consisted of six officials and four nominated " <unk> " . In February 1954 , the Rendel Constitutional Commission under the chairmanship of Sir George William Rendel , which had been appointed to comprehensively review the constitution of the Colony of Singapore , rendered its report . Among other things , it recommended that a Council of Ministers be created , composed of three ex officio Official Members and six Elected Members of the Legislative Assembly of Singapore appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of the Leader of the House , who would be the leader of the largest political party or coalition of parties having majority support in the legislature . The recommendation was implemented in 1955 . In the general election held that year , the Labour Front took a majority of the seats in the Assembly , and David Saul Marshall became the first Chief Minister of Singapore . Major problems with the Rendel Constitution were that the Chief Minister and Ministers ' powers were ill defined , and that the Official Members retained control of the finance , administration , and internal security and law portfolios . This led to confrontation between Marshall , who saw himself as a Prime Minister governing the country , and the Governor , Sir John Fearns Nicoll , who felt that important decisions and policies should remain with himself and the Official Members . 
 In 1956 , members of the Legislative Assembly held constitutional talks with the Colonial Office in London . The talks broke down as Marshall did not agree to the British Government 's proposal for the casting vote on a proposed Defence Council to be held by the British High Commissioner to Singapore , who would only exercise it in an emergency . Marshall resigned as Chief Minister in June 1956 , and was replaced by Lim Yew Hock . The following year , Lim led another delegation to the UK for further talks on self @-@ government . This time , agreement was reached on the composition of an Internal Security Council . Other constitutional arrangements were swiftly settled in 1958 , and on 1 August the Parliament of the United Kingdom passed the State of Singapore Act 1958 , granting the colony full internal self @-@ government . Under Singapore 's new constitution which came into force on 3 June 1959 , the Governor was replaced by the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Negara ( Head of State ) , who had power to appoint as Prime Minister the person most likely to command the authority of the Legislative Assembly , and other Ministers of the Cabinet on the Prime Minister 's advice . The Constitution also created the post of the British High Commissioner , who was entitled to receive the agenda of each Cabinet meeting and to see all Cabinet papers . In the 1959 general elections , the People 's Action Party ( PAP ) swept to power with 43 out of the 51 seats in the Assembly , and Lee Kuan Yew became the first Prime Minister of Singapore . Nine other Ministers were appointed to the Cabinet . 
 The British High Commissioner 's role became that of an ambassador following Singapore 's independence from Britain and merger with Malaysia in 1963 . Apart from that , the executive branch of the Singapore Government remained largely unchanged , although now it governed a state within a larger federation . However , with effect from 9 August 1965 , Singapore left the Federation of Malaysia and became a fully independent republic . On separation from Malaysia , the Singapore Government retained the executive authority it held , and took on additional executive authority over Singapore that the Parliament of Malaysia relinquished . The Yang di @-@ Pertuan Agong , the Supreme Head of State of Malaysia , also ceased to be the Supreme Head of Singapore and relinquished his sovereignty , jurisdiction , power and authority , executive or otherwise in respect of Singapore , which was revested in the Yang di @-@ Pertuan Negara of Singapore . The Republic of Singapore Independence Act 1965 then vested the executive authority of Singapore in the newly created post of President , and made it exercisable by him or by the Cabinet or by any Minister authorized by the Cabinet . 
 The PAP has been repeatedly returned to power by voters and has thus formed the Cabinet since Singapore 's 1959 general election . The Government is generally perceived to be competent in managing the country 's economy , and largely free from political corruption . Transparency International 's 2010 Corruption Perceptions Index , which compares countries according to the degree to which corruption is perceived to exist among public officials and politicians , ranked Singapore in joint first place with Denmark and New Zealand out of 178 countries . In addition , Singapore was second only to New Zealand in the Asia @-@ Pacific region . On the other hand , the Government has been criticized for using unfair election tactics , such as discouraging voting for opposition parties in the 2006 general election by stating that wards that elect opposition candidates will receive state @-@ subsidized improvements to public housing only after all PAP @-@ held wards have been attended to . It has also been accused of violating freedom of speech through Ministers bringing defamation suits against opposition politicians , and by restricting the circulation of foreign newspapers deemed to have engaged in domestic politics . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Constitution defines the Government of Singapore as the President and the Cabinet of Singapore . The executive authority of Singapore is vested in the President and is exercisable by him or by the Cabinet of Singapore or any Minister authorized by the Cabinet . However , the President normally plays a nominal and largely ceremonial role in the executive branch of government . Although the President acts in his personal discretion in the exercise of certain functions as a check on the Cabinet and Parliament of Singapore , he is otherwise required to act in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet or of a Minister acting under the general authority of the Cabinet . It is the Cabinet that has the general direction and control of the Government . As Singapore follows the Westminster system of government , the legislative agenda of Parliament is determined by the Cabinet . At the start of each new Parliamentary session , the President gives an address prepared by the Cabinet that outlines what the Cabinet intends to achieve in the session . 
 Each parliament lasts for a maximum of five years from the date of its first sitting , and once a parliament has been dissolved a general election must be held within three months . Following a general election , the President appoints as Prime Minister an MP who , in his judgment , is likely to command the confidence of the majority of the MPs . In practice , the Prime Minister is usually the leader of the political party holding the majority of the seats in Parliament . The President also appoints other Ministers from among the MPs , acting in accordance with the Prime Minister 's advice . 
 = = = Ministries and responsibilities of Ministers = = = 
 The Prime Minister may , by giving written directions , charge any Minister with responsibility for any department or subject . In practice , this is done by issuing notifications that are published in the Government Gazette . For instance , the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( Responsibility of Senior Minister and Co @-@ ordinating Minister for National Security , Prime Minister 's Office ) Notification 2009 states : 
 It is hereby notified for general information that , pursuant to Article 30 ( 1 ) of the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore , the Prime Minister has directed that Mr S. Jayakumar shall , with effect from 1st April 2009 , be charged with the responsibility for the following matters : 
 ( a ) national security issues involving or affecting more than one Ministry ; 
 ( b ) Chairmanship of the Security Policy Review Committee ; 
 ( c ) foreign policy issues involving or affecting more than one Ministry ; and 
 ( d ) foreign policy issues which involve legal negotiation or international adjudication , 
 and that he shall be designated as Senior Minister and Co @-@ ordinating Minister for National Security . 
 Ministers may be designated by the Prime Minister to be in charge of particular ministries , or as Ministers in the Prime Minister 's Office . Such Ministers were formerly known as Ministers without portfolio . The Prime Minister may retain any department or subject in his charge . Some Ministers are appointed as Second Ministers for portfolios other than their own to assist the primary Minister in his or her duties . For instance , with effect from 1 April 2009 during the 11th Parliament , Lim <unk> Hua , who was a Minister in the Prime Minister 's Office , also held the posts of Second Minister for Finance and Second Minister for Transport . 
 On 31 July 2012 , the Prime Minister announced that , as of 1 November 2012 , the Ministry of Community Development , Youth and Sports ( <unk> ) and the Ministry of Information , Communications and the Arts ( MICA ) would be reorganized into three ministries : the Ministry of Communications and Information ( MCI ) ; the Ministry of Culture , Community and Youth ( <unk> ) ; and the Ministry of Social and Family Development ( MSF ) . Thus , the ministries of the Government as of that date are the following : 
 Prime Minister 's Office ( PMO ) 
 Ministry of Communications and Information ( MCI ) 
 Ministry of Culture , Community and Youth ( <unk> ) 
 Ministry of Defence ( MINDEF ) 
 Ministry of Education ( MOE ) 
 Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources ( <unk> ) 
 Ministry of Finance ( <unk> ) 
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( MFA ) 
 Ministry of Health ( MOH ) 
 Ministry of Home Affairs ( MHA ) 
 Ministry of Law ( <unk> ) 
 Ministry of Manpower ( MOM ) 
 Ministry of National Development ( MND ) 
 Ministry of Social and Family Development ( MSF ) 
 Ministry of Trade and Industry ( MTI ) 
 Ministry of Transport ( MOT ) 
 A ministry is usually composed of a headquarters and a number of departments , boards or other subordinate entities , and statutory boards . For instance , as of May 2007 the Ministry of Law had three departments ( the Chief Information Officer 's Office , <unk> and Public Trustee 's Office and Legal Aid Bureau ) , three boards and tribunals ( the Appeals Board for Land Acquisitions , Copyright Tribunal and Land Surveyors Board ) , and two statutory boards ( the Intellectual Property Office of Singapore and Singapore Land Authority ) . 
 The names in bold are the surnames of Chinese persons , and the personal names of Indian and Malay persons ( except for Vivian Balakrishnan and Tharman Shanmugaratnam , where they indicate surnames as well ) . 
 Sources : Transcript of Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong 's Statement at the Press Conference on the new Cabinet Line @-@ Up on 28 September 2015 , Prime Minister 's Office , 29 September 2015 , archived from the original on 29 September 2015 ; Rachel Chang ( 29 September 2015 ) , " PM names Cabinet aimed at leadership succession : Coordinating ministers will help tackle complex matters , mentor younger ministers " , The Straits Times , p . A1 ; Laura Elizabeth <unk> ( 29 September 2015 ) , " Five new faces to become office @-@ holders " , Today , archived from the original on 29 September 2015 . 
 = = Other aspects of the Government = = 
 = = = Ministers of State and Parliamentary Secretaries = = = 
 As in the United Kingdom and in a number of Commonwealth countries , Members of Parliament ( MPs ) may be appointed as Ministers of State to aid Ministers in the performance of their functions . In addition , the Constitution provides that the President , acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister , may appoint Parliamentary Secretaries from among the MPs to assist Ministers in the discharge of their duties and functions . Such office holders are not regarded as members of the Cabinet . 
 Where in any written law a Minister is empowered to exercise any power or perform any duty , he may , in the absence of any provision of law to the contrary , with the approval of the President and by notification in the Government Gazette , depute any person by name or the person for the time being discharging the duties of an office designated by him to exercise that power or perform that duty on behalf of the Minister subject to such conditions , exceptions and qualifications as the President may determine . For instance , under the Delegation of Powers ( Ministry of Law ) ( Consolidation ) Notification , the Senior Minister of State for Law is deputed to exercise certain powers of the Minister for Law under the Copyright Act , Criminal Procedure Code , Land Acquisition Act , Land Surveyors Act , and <unk> Act ; while the Parliamentary Secretary for Home Affairs is deputed the powers of the Minister for Home Affairs under regulation 157 of the Prisons Regulations pursuant to the Delegation of Powers ( Ministry of Home Affairs ) ( Consolidation ) Notification . 
 Template : Fourth Lee Hsien Loong Cabinet / Current Ministers of State and Parliamentary Secretaries 
 = = = Statutory boards = = = 
 A statutory board is an autonomous agency of the Government that is established by an Act of Parliament and overseen by a government ministry . The Act sets out the purposes , powers and rights of the agency . Unlike ministries and government departments that are subdivisions of ministries , statutory boards may not be staffed by civil servants and have greater independence and flexibility in their operations . They are managed by boards of directors whose members usually include businessmen , professionals , senior civil servants and officials of trade unions . The Agency for Science , Technology and Research ( A * STAR ) , the Central Provident Fund Board ( CPF ) , the Housing and Development Board ( HDB ) , the Intellectual Property Office of Singapore ( <unk> ) , the Land Transport Authority ( LTA ) , the Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore ( MPA ) , the National Heritage Board ( <unk> ) , and the Urban Redevelopment Authority ( URA ) are all statutory boards . 
 The National Heritage Board is an example of a typical statutory board . It was established on 1 August 1993 with the enactment of the National Heritage Board Act . Section 3 of the Act states : " There shall be established a body to be known as the National Heritage Board which shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession and shall , by that name , be capable of — ( a ) suing and being sued ; ( b ) acquiring , owning , holding , developing and disposing of property , both movable and immovable ; and ( c ) doing and suffering all such acts or things as bodies corporate may lawfully do or suffer . " The functions of the Board are : 
 to explore and present the heritage and nationhood of the people of Singapore in the context of their ancestral cultures , their links with South @-@ East Asia , Asia and the world through the collection , preservation , interpretation and display of objects and records ; 
 to promote public awareness , appreciation and understanding of the arts , culture and heritage , both by means of the Board ’ s collections and by such other means as it considers appropriate ; 
 to promote the establishment and development of organizations concerned with the national heritage of Singapore ; 
 to provide a permanent repository of records of national or historical significance and to facilitate access thereto ; 
 to conduct records management programmes for the Government ; 
 to record , preserve and disseminate the history of Singapore through oral history methodology or other means ; and 
 to advise the Government in respect of matters relating to the national heritage of Singapore . 
 The Board is empowered to " do all things necessary or convenient to be done for or in connection with the performance of its functions " . Without prejudice to the generality of that provision , the Board also has power to , for example , develop and manage museums , archives , oral history centres and other facilities related to its functions ; to advise and facilitate the preservation of historic sites ; and to establish liaison with other museums , archives , oral history centres , universities and other institutions to secure maximum collaboration of all activities relevant to its functions . 
 The Board consists of a Chairman , a Deputy Chairman , and not less than 10 nor more than 25 other members as the Minister for Information , Communications and the Arts may from time to time determine . The members of the Board are appointed by the Minister , and hold office for such term as the Minister may determine unless they resign during their term of office or their appointment is revoked by the Minister . The Minister is not required to provide any reason for revoking the appointment of a board member . The Minister may , in consultation with the Board or otherwise , give the Board directions as he thinks fit that are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act concerning the exercise and performance by the Board of its functions , and the Board is required to give effect to such directions . 
 With the approval of the Minister , the Board is required to appoint a chief executive officer who is responsible to the Board for the proper administration and management of the Board 's affairs in accordance with the policy laid down by the Board . The Board is entitled to appoint employees and officers on such terms as to remuneration or otherwise as it may determine , and to engage other persons and pay for their services as it considers necessary for carrying out its functions and duties . 
 = = = Community Development Councils and Mayors of districts = = = 
 The People 's Association ( PA ) is a statutory board , the objects of which include the organisation and the promotion of group participation in social , cultural , educational and athletic activities for the people of Singapore in order that they may realize that they belong to a multiracial community , the interests of which transcend sectional loyalties ; and the establishment of institutions for the purpose of leadership training in order to instill in leaders a sense of national identity and a spirit of dedicated service to a multiracial community . 
 There are five Community Development Councils ( CDCs ) appointed by the board of management of the PA for districts in Singapore , namely , the Central Singapore CDC , North East CDC , North West CDC , South East CDC and South West CDC . The functions of a CDC include fostering community bonding and strengthening social cohesion amongst the people of Singapore ; and advising the PA on matters affecting the well @-@ being of residents in districts , the provision and use of public facilities and services within districts , and the use of public funds allocated to districts for community activities . 
 Each CDC consists of a Chairman and between 12 and 80 other members . Where the number of residents in a district is not less than 150 @,@ 000 , the PA 's board of management is empowered to designate the Chairman of a CDC to be the Mayor for the district that the CDC is appointed for . As it is the practice for MPs to be appointed as Chairmen of CDCs , these MPs have also been designated as Mayors . As of 1 October 2015 , the Mayors are : 
 The names in bold are the surnames of Chinese persons , and the personal names of Indian and Malay persons . 
 Even if Mayors are required to vacate their seats in Parliament because Parliament has been dissolved or otherwise , they continue to hold office until their terms of office expire or they are directed to vacate their office by the PA 's board of management . 
 = Aries ( album ) = 
 Aries is the ninth studio album by Mexican recording artist Luis Miguel . It was released by WEA Latina on 22 June 1993 . After attaining success in 1991 with his previous album , Romance , Miguel decided to record an album of original recordings rather than a follow @-@ up to Romance . Aries , which is similar to his earlier work prior to Romance , features pop ballads and dance numbers with R & B influences . The record was produced by Miguel , who was assisted by Kiko Cibrian , Rudy Pérez , David Foster , and Juan Luis Guerra . 
 Three singles were released to promote the album . Its first two singles , " Ayer " and " Hasta Que Me Olvides " , topped the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart while " Suave " peaked at number nine on the chart . " Hasta el Fin " and " Tu y Yo " both peaked at number four on the Hot Latin Songs chart , and " <unk> en Ti " received airplay in Mexico . To further promote the record , Miguel launched the 1993 Aries Tour to some Latin American countries and the United States . 
 Aries peaked at number one on the US Billboard Latin Pop Albums , where it stayed for 19 weeks . Internationally , the album was certified triple platinum in Mexico , where it sold over one million copies . It was also certified diamond in Argentina . Aries has sold over two million copies worldwide as of 2000 . Upon its release , the album received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews from music critics ; they were divided on the dance tunes and ballads , although Miguel 's vocals and the album 's arrangements garnered positive reactions . Miguel received several accolades , including a Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 1991 Miguel released his eighth studio album , Romance , a collection of classic boleros , the oldest of which originated in the 1940s . The album , which was produced by Armando Manzanero and arranged by Bebu Silvetti , was a success in Latin America and sold over seven million copies worldwide . It revived interest in the bolero genre and was the first record by a Spanish @-@ speaking artist to be certified gold in Brazil , Taiwan , and the United States . In spite of Romance 's success , Miguel did not want to release an immediate follow @-@ up to the album . When asked why he chose not to record more boleros , he replied " I wanted to try my music , just forgetting a little bit about those boleros that everyone knows " . He began working with the composers for the album a year before recording in a studio in 1992 ; in Miguel 's words , he wanted to " discuss the works , the themes , and melodies ; ... The creation of an album has to part of me or else I would not be able to interpret it , or in it " . 
 On 24 August 1992 , Mexican newspaper El Siglo de Torreón reported that Miguel had begun collaborating with David Foster and Juan Carlos Calderón for their compositions , along with English @-@ speaking composers , and selecting cover versions for the album . He also received assistance from Cuban composer Rudy Pérez and Dominican singer @-@ songwriter Juan Luis Guerra with the songwriting . Recording began on 4 July 1992 . Miguel had difficulty finding a suitable producer for the record ; he initially worked with American audio engineer Bruce Swedien , but decided to re @-@ record the whole album after disagreements with Swedien 's direction . Unable to find a producer , he decided to co @-@ produce the album with his long @-@ time associate Kiko Cibrian . Recording the album took almost a year and was affected by several complications , including its high budget of over US $ 1 @.@ 5 million , his father 's death , and an appendectomy . Miguel announced the name of the album would be Aries during a presentation at the 1993 Festival Acapulco . About the naming of the album he said , " This album expresses my personal self . I had a lot to do . I produced everything and wanted to have a lot of fun , take what I like , and what better than the zodiacal sign representing what one is . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Aries is composed of ten tracks , six of which are " romance @-@ themed " ballads . The rest of the album consists of four dance numbers which San Antonio Express @-@ News editor Ramiro Burr describes as " pop groove " and R & B influences , and compared them to Miguel 's earlier recordings before Romance . Miguel said the mixture of ballads and uptempo music was done to " keep a steady musical line " because he did not want his music to be unrecognizable . The dance tunes " Suave " , " Dame Tu Amor " , and " Que <unk> de Mujer " are " upbeat , brass @-@ heavy , <unk> numbers " while " Luz Verde " incorporates Latin hip hop and R & B. " Suave " features a saxophone solo with American musician Kirk <unk> and " Que <unk> de Mujer " is a Spanish @-@ language adaptation of " Attitude Dance " by American band Tower of Power . The band members assisted with the horn section in the song , which was led by one of its lead members Emilio Castillo . Miguel said he included the band 's song on the album because of his fondness for R & B in the 1970s , citing the group as one of his musical influences . 
 " Ayer " is a Spanish @-@ language cover of David Foster 's instrumental " All That My Heart Can Hold " with additional lyrics by Rudy Pérez . Burr characterized the song as a " lush ballad sung by Miguel in his stylistic romantic swagger that simultaneously conveys pride and pain " . Similarly , John Lannert wrote for the Sun @-@ Sentinel that the track was comparable to Romance 's " sparse lyrical muse and smooth musical backdrop " . Lannert also called Juan Luis Guerra 's composition " Hasta Que Me Olvides " an " emotion @-@ drenched love ode " and referred " Me <unk> Estar Solo " and " Hasta El Fin " as " desperate confessionals about being out of love " . Achy Obejas of the Chicago Tribune labeled the ballads " Hasta El Fin " and " Tu y Yo " as " luxuriantly slow narratives of love lost " . 
 = = Singles and promotion = = 
 " Ayer " was released as the lead single from Aries on 17 May 1993 . It reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States the week of 17 July 1993 , and stayed there for three weeks . The three music videos for " Ayer " were directed by Benny Corral , Rubén Galindo , and Gustavo Garzón respectively . The music videos were filmed in a mansion in Mexico City . " Ayer " ended 1993 as the sixth @-@ best @-@ performing Latin song of the year in the United States . The album 's second single , " Hasta Que Me Olvides " , was released in August 1993 and reached number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart the week of October 23 , and remained there for three weeks . The album 's third single , " Suave " , was released in September 1993 and peaked at number nine on the Hot Latin Songs chart ; its music video was directed by Kiko Guerrero and features Miguel dancing with several women on a beach . In the United States , " Hasta el Fin " and " Tu y Yo " both peaked at number four on the Hot Latin Songs chart . " <unk> en Ti " received airplay in Mexico . 
 To promote the album , Miguel began his Aries Tour on May 22 at the 1993 Acapulco Festival in Mexico . After his performances in Mexico , he toured several countries in Latin America beginning with Argentina and later performed in the United States . His set list consisted mainly of pop songs and ballads from Aries and his earlier career , as well as boleros from Romance , which he performed during the second half of the concerts . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Aries was released internationally on 22 June 1993 . However , pirated cassettes of the album were being sold for $ 1 in Mexico ten days before Aries was officially released . WEA Latina prepared 500 @,@ 000 copies to be distributed on release date , but after finding legitimate copies of the compact disc were already being sold on the pirate market , they recounted the copies stored in their warehouse and found only 300 @,@ 000 units . WEA Latina responded to the piracy by having a Mexican radio station play the whole album a few days before its release . In Mexico , the album was certified triple platinum and has sold over one million copies in the country . In the United States , it debuted and peaked at the number two on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart ; it was held off the number one position by Gloria Estefan 's album Mi Tierra . Aries remained at this position until it was replaced by the Gipsy Kings 's album Love and Liberté 20 weeks later . 
 Aries peaked at number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart and stayed at the top for 19 weeks . Aries ended 1993 as the second best @-@ selling Latin pop album in the United States after Romance . In Argentina , the album peaked at number two on the album chart and was certified diamond by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers for sales of 500 @,@ 000 copies . Elsewhere in South America , the album peaked at number one on the Chilean albums chart and was certified platinum in Colombia . Aries has sold over two million copies worldwide as of 2000 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , Aries received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reactions from music critics . AllMusic editor Jose F. Promis gave the album 2 @.@ 5 stars out of five who found the ballads to be " sometimes a little too syrupy " . He complimented some of the dance tunes such as " Suave " and " Dame Tu Amor " , but said " Luz Verde " was a " somewhat dated attempt at early- ' 90s Latin hip @-@ hop R & B " . An editor for Billboard magazine wrote a favorable review of Aries , stating that Miguel " trades in nostalgic boleros for a stylish , up @-@ to @-@ date package " and called " Ayer " a " perfect transition track from Romance " . Chicago Tribune editor Achy Obejas gave the record 2 @.@ 5 stars out of four , calling it " a kind of middle ground between Romance and its lush ballads , and the bouncy pop of 20 Años , its immediate antecedent " . She praised Miguel 's vocals as " wonderfully nuanced and dramatic " , and said the ballads mostly " work " , but that " the uptempo tunes fall flat most of the time " . Enrique Lopetegui of the Los Angeles Times gave the album three stars out of four ; he lauded Miguel 's inclusion of " healthy elements of jazz and funk into his polished sound " and said he " returns to familiar territory accompanied by his usual superb arrangements and musicianship " . 
 At the 36th Annual Grammy Awards in 1994 , Miguel won the Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album for Aries . At the 6th Lo Nuestro Awards in the same year , the album won the award for Pop Album of the Year and Miguel was named Pop Male Artist of the Year . He also received two nominations in the category of Pop Song of the Year for " Hasta Que Me Olvides " and " Ayer " ; the latter track was also nominated Video of the Year . At the inaugural Billboard Latin Music Awards in 1994 , Miguel received two awards including Pop Album of the Year and Pop Male Artist of the Year . Miguel was awarded Best Male Singer , Best Male Show for the tour , and Best Disc for the album at the 1994 Eres awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from AllMusic : 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Treehouse of Horror ( series ) = 
 The Simpsons Treehouse of Horror episodes , also known as The Simpsons Halloween specials , is a series of Halloween specials in the animated series The Simpsons , each consisting of three separate , self @-@ contained segments . These segments usually involve the Simpson family in some horror , science fiction , or supernatural setting . They take place outside the show 's normal continuity and completely abandon any pretense of being realistic . The first , entitled " Treehouse of Horror " , aired on October 25 , 1990 , as part of the second season and was inspired by EC Comics horror tales . The episodes are known for being far more violent and much darker than an average Simpsons episode . As of 2015 , there are 26 Treehouse of Horror episodes , with one airing every year . 
 Episodes contain several trademarks , including the alien characters Kang and Kodos , " scary names " in the credits , a special version of the opening sequence , and parodies of horror , science fiction and fantasy films . The show 's staff regard the Treehouse of Horror as being particularly difficult to produce , as the scripts often go through many rewrites , and the animators typically have to design new characters and backgrounds . 
 Many of the episodes are popular among fans and critics of the show and have inspired a whole offshoot of Simpsons merchandise , including action figures , playsets , video games , books , DVDs , comic books and a special version of Monopoly . Several of the episodes have won awards for animation and sound editing . In 1996 and 2013 , " Treehouse of Horror VI " and " Treehouse of Horror XXIII " were nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) " category . 
 = = Segments = = 
 Treehouse of Horror episodes typically consist of four parts : an opening and Halloween @-@ themed version of the credits , followed by three segments . These segments usually have a horror , science fiction or fantasy theme and quite often are parodies of films , novels , plays , television shows , Twilight Zone episodes , or old issues of EC Comics . Although they are sometimes connected by " wraparounds " , the three segments rarely have any kind of continuing connection within the episode . The exception is " Treehouse of Horror V " , in which Groundskeeper Willie is killed by an axe in a similar fashion in all three segments . The episodes are considered to be non @-@ canon and always take place outside the normal continuity of the show . 
 From " Treehouse of Horror " to " Treehouse of Horror XIII " , all three segments were written by different writers . In some cases there was a fourth writer who wrote the opening and wraparound segments . For the original " Treehouse of Horror " , there were three different directors for the episode . Starting with season 15 's " Treehouse of Horror XIV " , however , only one writer has been credited with writing each Treehouse of Horror episode . 
 On occasion , the episodes will be used to showcase special animation , such as the " Treehouse of Horror VI " segment " Homer3 " , in which a computer @-@ animated Homer is shown in a non @-@ animated setting . At the time ( 1995 ) , it was groundbreaking , as it was unusual for a television show to use such animation . The segment was executive producer Bill Oakley 's idea and included live action directed by David Mirkin . " Treehouse of Horror XX " included the segment " There 's No Business Like Moe Business " , which was the first to be musically @-@ themed . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 = = = Opening sequence = = = 
 Every Treehouse of Horror episode opens with a special introductory segment . The first , second and fifth Treehouse of Horror episodes open with Marge standing on a stage and warning parents about the content of the episode , advising them to put their children to bed . The warning in the first episode was put in as a sincere effort to warn young viewers , as the producers felt it was somewhat scary . The entire segment was a parody of the opening of the 1931 film Frankenstein . Marge 's warnings quickly became a burden to write . After " Treehouse of Horror V " , they were permanently dropped and the writers did not make any attempts at reviving them . 
 Other Treehouse of Horror episodes have opened with parodies ; for example , " Treehouse of Horror III " had Homer introduce the episode in a manner similar to Alfred Hitchcock in Alfred Hitchcock Presents , " Treehouse of Horror IV " had Bart introduce the episode and segments in a manner similar to Night Gallery , and " Treehouse of Horror V " featured a parody of The Outer Limits . The sixth and seventh episodes featured short clips with no lines because the episodes had run long and longer segments were cut . Following " Treehouse of Horror VII " , the opening has been upwards of a minute long and sometimes featured an introduction by a character , such as Mr. Burns in " Treehouse of Horror XVII " or included over @-@ the @-@ top violence , such as " Treehouse of Horror VIII " ( which showed a Fox Network censor being brutally murdered ) and " Treehouse of Horror XIV " ( which showed the Simpson family killing each other ) . 
 In the opening segment of the first five episodes , the camera zooms through a cemetery where tombstones with humorous epitaphs can be seen . These messages include the names of canceled shows from the previous season , deceased celebrities such as Walt Disney and Jim Morrison and a tombstone with an inscription that read " TV violence " that was riddled with bullets as the camera panned on it . They were last used in " Treehouse of Horror V " , which included a solitary tombstone with the words " Amusing Tombstones " to signal this . The tombstone gags were easy for the writers in the first episode , but like Marge 's warnings , they eventually got more difficult to write , so they were abandoned . Another reason they were dropped was that the tombstones would list television shows that had been canceled the previous season ; after a few years , several of the shows that were canceled were produced by former Simpsons writers . 
 While the early Treehouse of Horror episodes featured a Halloween themed opening sequence , the later ones only included the title and the " created by " and " developed by " credits . Every episode between " Treehouse of Horror II " and " Treehouse of Horror X " featured a couch gag with a Halloween theme , including the Simpson family dressed as skeletons , zombies and characters from previous Halloween episodes . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The first four Treehouse of Horror episodes had brief wraparounds that occurred before each segment and loosely tied together all three stories . " Treehouse of Horror " was the only one that actually included a treehouse as a setting . In that episode , Bart and Lisa sat in it telling stories to each other . " Treehouse of Horror II " presented all of the segments as being nightmares of Lisa , Bart and Homer ; " Treehouse of Horror III " had Lisa , Bart and Grampa telling stories at a Halloween party ; and " Treehouse of Horror IV " is presented by Bart in a parody of Rod Serling 's Night Gallery . After a few years , the amount of broadcast time for an episode was shortened , allowing less time to tell a proper story . There were no wraparounds for " Treehouse of Horror V " because they had been cut to make more time for the segments . Following that , the writers permanently dropped them . 
 = = = Kang and Kodos = = = 
 Two characters that are virtually exclusive to the Treehouse of Horror series are Kang and Kodos , a pair of large green space aliens who were introduced in the " Hungry are the Damned " segment of " Treehouse of Horror " . Kang and Kodos have since appeared in every Treehouse of Horror episode , sometimes as important parts of a story , but often just for brief cameos . In some episodes , they only appear in the opening segment , but often they will make a cameo appearance in the middle of a different story . For example , a story about zombies attacking the town briefly cuts to them in their space ship , watching the events and laughing maniacally at the Earthlings ' suffering . The action then switches back to the actual story . The unofficial rule is that they must be in every episode , although quite often they will be forgotten and are added at the last moment , resulting in only a brief appearance . Their scene in " Treehouse of Horror VIII " nearly did not make the final cut of the episode , but David X. Cohen managed to persuade the producers to leave the scene in . 
 = = = Scary names = = = 
 Beginning with " Treehouse of Horror II " , the producers decided to give the cast and crew of the show " scary names " in the opening and closing credits . Although the names quickly became more silly than scary , there have been a wide variety of special credits , from simple names like " Bat Groening " to complex ones like " David ² + S. ² = Cohen ² " . Sam Simon , who left the show during the fourth season but still receives " developed by " and " executive producer " credits , has ever since been listed in Treehouse of Horror episodes as " Sam ' Sayonara ' Simon " . Since his death in 2015 he has been credited simply by his real name . 
 The idea for " scary names " came from executive producer Al Jean , who was inspired by EC Comics because some of the issues also used " scary " alternate names . The " scary names " became such a burden to write that they were cut for " Treehouse of Horror XII " and " Treehouse of Horror XIII " , but after hearing complaints from the fans , Jean decided to bring them back . Matt Groening 's rule for the " scary names " is that they cannot be longer than a person 's real name , but this is rarely followed by anyone else . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 References to films , novels , plays , television shows and other media are commonly featured , and many segments have been parodies of a specific work in the horror , science fiction or fantasy genre . Many segments are spoofs of episodes of The Twilight Zone and entire segments will be based on a single episode . Some of the Twilight Zone episodes parodied include " A Kind of a Stopwatch " , " To Serve Man " , " A Small Talent for War " , " Living Doll " , " Nightmare at 20 @,@ 000 Feet " , " Little Girl Lost " , and " The Little People " . The " Bart 's Nightmare " segment of " Treehouse of Horror II " parodies the episode " It 's a Good Life " and is even presented in a format similar to an episode of The Twilight Zone . The Halloween episodes also regularly parody horror and thriller films such as The Exorcist , The Amityville Horror , King Kong , Night of the Living Dead , The Shining , A Nightmare on Elm Street , The Fly , Psycho , Paranormal Activity , and Dead Calm . Robert Englund , who portrays Freddy Krueger in the Nightmare on <unk> franchise , had a cameo appearance in " Treehouse of Horror IX " as the character . Science fiction films have also occasionally been used as inspiration for segments , and in later episodes many of the segments were based more on science fiction than horror . Science fiction works parodied include The Omega Man , the novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four , E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial and Orson Welles 's The War of the Worlds radio broadcast . In " Treehouse of Horror " , Edgar Allan Poe 's poem " The Raven " is read by James Earl Jones while the parts are acted by various characters . Recent parodies have included films and television specials in more varied genres , including Mr. & Mrs. Smith , It 's the Great Pumpkin , Charlie Brown , Transformers , Sweeney Todd , the Twilight film series , and Jumanji . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first Treehouse of Horror episode aired in 1990 as part of the second season , and its on @-@ screen title was " The Simpsons Halloween Special . " It was inspired by EC Comics Horror tales . Although every episode is entitled " Treehouse of Horror " , the first one was the only episode that actually used the treehouse motif . During production of the first episode , Matt Groening was nervous about " The Raven " segment , and felt it would be " the worst , most pretentious thing [ they had ] ever done . " 
 The Treehouse of Horror episodes are difficult for both the writers and the animators . The episodes were originally written at the beginning of the production run , but in later seasons they were written at the end and aired at the beginning of the next season as holdovers , giving the animators more time to work . Part of the difficulty for the animators is that the episodes always involve many complex backgrounds , new characters , and new designs . They are difficult for the writers because they must produce three stories , an opening and , in the early episodes , a wraparound . They would have to try to fit all of this into a 20 – 22 minute episode . The episodes often go through many last minute changes , with rewrites requiring new lines to be recorded . " Treehouse of Horror III " in particular underwent somewhere between 80 and 100 line changes in the six @-@ week period between the arrival of the animation from Korea and the airing of the episode . By the fourth season , executive producers Al Jean and Mike Reiss were less enamored of Treehouse of Horror episodes and considered dropping them , but the other writers insisted that they be kept . 
 Part of the attraction for the writers is that they are able to break the rules and include violence that would not make a regular episode . In some cases , the writers will have an idea that is too violent and far @-@ fetched or too short for a normal episode , but can be used as a segment in the seasonal special . Several of the writers , former executive producer David Mirkin among them , believe that the episodes should be scary and not just funny . " Treehouse of Horror V " has been described by Mirkin as being one of " the most intense , disturbing Halloween show ever " as it was filled with violence and gore in response to new censorship rules . Earlier " Treehouse of Horror " episodes began with Marge issuing a disclaimer that " if you have sensitive children , maybe you should tuck them into bed early tonight instead of writing us angry letters tomorrow . " However , these episodes seem mild compared to the carnage that followed in later episodes , according to Jean , who calls it " a societal thing " . He points out that his 10 @-@ year @-@ old daughter loves films like Coraline , and that , " [ in ] the age of scary stories [ ... ] appropriateness has gotten lower . " 
 Although gruesome for the most part , some segments , such as " Citizen Kang " in " Treehouse of Horror VII " , satirize political issues . The opening segment of " Treehouse of Horror XIX " featured Homer attempting to vote for Barack Obama but a rigged electronic voting machine instead registers a vote for John McCain . Rather than taking sides in the election , Al Jean says it is " mostly a comment on what many people to believe to be the irregularities in our voting system . [ sic ] " In " Treehouse of Horror XVII " , a segment called " The Day the Earth Looked Stupid " ends with Kang and Kodos taking over Springfield as part of a mission called " Operation : Enduring occupation " . The script originally called for Kodos and Kang to look over the smoking ruins of Springfield and say " This sure is a lot like Iraq will be . " The Fox network did not have any objection to the line , but it was rejected by some of the writers as too obvious and was cut from broadcast . While cut from the aired version , the line does appear in the " review " version sent to newspapers and magazines . 
 The first " Treehouse of Horror " episode was the first time that an alternate version of the theme that airs over the end credits was used . Originally it was supposed to use a theremin , but one could not be found that could hit all the necessary notes . Usually when the producers submit an episode for the Primetime Emmy Award for " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) " , they submit a Treehouse of Horror episode , and to date , seven episodes have been nominated . The closing of " Treehouse of Horror IV " features a version of the theme that is a combination of the instruments used in The Munsters theme song and the <unk> and clicking from the Addams Family theme song . 
 Although Treehouse of Horror episodes are Halloween @-@ themed , for several years new episodes have premiered in November . This is due to Fox 's current contract with Major League Baseball 's World Series . Season 12 's " Treehouse of Horror XI " was the first episode to air in November . There have been several references to this in the show , such as in " Treehouse of Horror XIV " where Kang looks at a TV Guide and says , " Pathetic humans . They 're showing a Halloween episode ... in November ! " and Kodos replies " Who 's still thinking about Halloween ? We 've already got our Christmas decoration up . " The camera then cuts to a shot of the fireplace with Christmas decorations , and festive Christmas music plays over the opening credits . Season 21 's " Treehouse of Horror XX " aired October 18 , before the World Series , but the following year 's episode , " Treehouse of Horror XXI " , aired in November . Season 23 's " Treehouse of Horror XXII aired on October 30 , however , as the World Series ( which went the maximum of seven games ) had concluded on October 28 . As of 2011 each Treehouse of Horror episode has aired in the month of October . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 There has been a variety of merchandise based on the Treehouse of Horror episodes , including books , action figures , comic books , video games , DVDs and a " Treehouse of Horror " version of Hasbro 's board game Monopoly . Although every Treehouse of Horror episode until " Treehouse of Horror XVI " has been released along with its season in a boxset , in 2003 , The Simpsons : Treehouse of Horror DVD was released . It includes Treehouse of Horrors V , VI , VII and XII . A Treehouse of Horror comic book has been published annually since 1995 , and collected into several books , including The Simpsons Treehouse of Horror Fun @-@ Filled <unk> , Bart Simpson 's Treehouse of Horror Spine @-@ Tingling <unk> , Bart Simpson 's Treehouse of Horror <unk> @-@ <unk> Hullabaloo and The Simpsons Treehouse of Horror Hoodoo Voodoo <unk> . Several video games based on The Simpsons include levels with a Halloween theme , including The Simpsons : Hit & Run and The Simpsons Game . In 2001 , Fox Interactive and THQ released The Simpsons : Night of the Living Treehouse of Horror on Game Boy Color . The entire game has a Halloween theme as the player tries to save the Simpson family from the Treehouse of Horror . 
 Many of the special character designs featured in the episodes have become action figures . Four different playsets have been made by Playmates Toys and released as Toys " R " Us exclusives . The sets are : 
 The " Treehouse of Horror I " set was released in 2000 and included a cemetery playset as well as " Devil Flanders " , " Bart the Fly " , " Vampire Burns " , and " King Homer " . It also came with an " Evil Krusty Doll " and Gremlin as accessories . 
 The " Treehouse of Horror 2 " set was released in 2001 and included an interior alien spaceship playset as well as Kang , Kodos and " Alien Ship Homer " . The entire set was based on " Treehouse of Horror " . 
 The " Treehouse of Horror 3 " set was released in 2002 and included a playset based on the " Ironic Punishment Division " of Hell in " Treehouse of Horror IV " . It came with " <unk> Homer " , " Witch Marge " , Hugo Simpson and " Dream Invader Willie " . 
 The final " Treehouse of Horror 4 " set was released in 2003 and included a playset based on Comic Book Guy 's " Collector 's all @-@ plastic lair " . It came with " The Collector " , " Clobber Girl Lisa " , " Stretch Dude Bart " and Lucy Lawless . All the designs were based on " Treehouse of Horror X " . 
 After the Playmates Toys sets were finished , McFarlane Toys produced four Treehouse of Horror themed playsets including the " Ironic Punishment Box Set " released in 2004 , the " In the Belly of the Boss — Homer & Marge Action Figures " released in 2005 , " The Island of Dr. Hibbert Box Set " released in 2006 , and a " Lard Lad Box Set " released in 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Treehouse of Horror episodes are often among the top @-@ rated episodes of their seasons and many of the Treehouse of Horrors have generally been well @-@ received by fans . However , like The Simpsons itself , critics have noted a decline in the quality of the later episodes . In its first airing , " Treehouse of Horror " finished with a 15 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating and a 25 % audience share and would lose to The Cosby Show . It was said that it " set a level of excellence that viewers never expected creator Matt Groening to repeat " , although it was also described as " kind of stupid and unsatisfying " . " Treehouse of Horror V " is considered the best episode by several critics : it finished ninth on Entertainment Weekly 's top 25 The Simpsons episode list , fifth on AskMen.com 's " Top 10 : Simpsons Episodes " list , and was named best episode of the sixth season by <unk> In 2006 , James Earl Jones , who guest starred in " Treehouse of Horror " and " Treehouse of Horror V " was named seventh on IGN 's " Top 25 Simpsons Guest Appearances " list . 
 In 2006 , IGN.com published a list of the top ten Treehouse of Horror segments , and they placed " The Shinning " from " Treehouse of Horror V " at the top , saying it was " not only a standout installment of the annual Halloween episode , but of The Simpsons , period . " Rounding out the list were " Dial " Z " for Zombies " , " The Devil and Homer Simpson " , " Time and Punishment " , " Hungry Are the Damned " , " Clown Without Pity " , " Citizen Kang " , " If I Only Had a Brain " , " Bart Simpson 's Dracula " and " Starship Poopers " . The third , fourth and fifth episodes were each represented by two segments . The most recent episode on the list was " Treehouse of Horror IX " , which first aired in 1998 . 
 " Treehouse of Horror VII " is Simpsons creator Matt Groening 's seventh favorite episode , and the line he likes best is " We have reached the limit of what rectal probing can teach us . " " King Homer " of " Treehouse of Horror III " is one of Matt Groening 's favorite segments . " Treehouse of Horror III " is also noted for the moment where Homer shoots Ned Flanders and Bart says " Dad , you killed the Zombie Flanders ! " only for Homer to reply , " He was a zombie ? " It is also one of Groening 's favorite lines . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 1996 , the " Homer ³ " segment of " Treehouse of Horror VI " was awarded the Ottawa International Animation Festival grand prize . In 1998 , " Treehouse of Horror VIII " won a Golden Reel Award for " Best Sound Editing – Television Animated Specials " ; the recipients were Robert <unk> , Travis Powers , Norm MacLeod and Terry Greene . Bob Beecher also received a nomination for " Best Sound Editing in Television Animation – Music " for " Treehouse of Horror X " . 
 The second , third , fifth , eighth , ninth , fourteenth and fifteenth and eighteenth Treehouse of Horror episodes were nominated for " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) " at the Primetime Emmy Awards . The second and third " Treehouse of Horror " episodes were also nominated for " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Sound Mixing for a Comedy Series or a Special " . In 1996 , " Treehouse of Horror VI " was submitted for the Primetime Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming less than One Hour ) " category because it had a 3D animation sequence , which the staff felt would have given it the edge . The episode failed to win and Bill Oakley later expressed regret about submitting the episode . The twenty @-@ third and twenty @-@ fifth Treehouse of Horror episodes were nominated for the same award in 2013 and 2015 respectively . 
 = Coast Veddas = 
 The Coast Veddas or Vedar , by self @-@ designation , form a social group within the minority Sri Lankan Tamil ethnic group of the Eastern province of Sri Lanka . They are primarily found in small coastal villages from the eastern township of Trincomalee to <unk> . Nevertheless , they also inhabit a few villages south of <unk> as well . They make a living by fishing , slash and burn agriculture , paddy cultivation of rice , basket weaving for market and occasional wage labor . Anthropologists consider them to be partly descended from the indigenous Vedda people , as well as local Tamils . Residents of the Eastern province consider their Vedar ( Tamil for " hunter " ) neighbors to have been part of the local social structure from earliest times , whereas some Vedar elders believe that their ancestors may have migrated from the interior at some time in the past . 
 They speak a dialect of Sri Lankan Tamil that is used in the region . During religious festivals , people who enter a trance or spirit possession sometimes use a mixed language that contains words from the Vedda language . Most Vedar are Hindu Saivites and worship a plethora of folk deities , as well as the main Hindu deities such as Murugan , Pillaiyar and Amman . They also maintain the ancestor worship tradition of the interior Veddas . Clan divisions , if they still exist , do not play an important role in choosing of marriage partners or place of domicile . Most identify themselves as a caste among the Tamils as opposed to a separate ethnic group . Their economic conditions have been impacted by the Sri Lankan civil war . 
 = = Identity = = 
 Western observers such as James Emerson Tennent ( 1858 ) and Charles Gabriel Seligman ( 1911 ) have termed the social group Coast <unk> , Coast <unk> or East Coast Veddas . Anthropologists have considered them to be at least partly descended from the Veddas of the interior of the island who had migrated at some unknown period in the past to the east coast , intermarrying with the local Tamils . Interior Veddas clans themselves have a number of divisions , each claiming either Sinhalese , Tamil , mixed , or pure Vedda lineages . Vedda identity also depends on whether these clans are hunter @-@ gatherers or settled agriculturalists . Settled Veddas have tended over a period of time to assume Sinhalese or Tamil identity based on the area of residence . If considered a subdivision of Veddas , then they are by far the largest sub @-@ group amongst the Vedda people . Residents of Eastern Province consider those who maintain a primitive life style , or are partly dependent on hunting and gathering , as Vedar without any connotations of ethnic origins . 
 Vedar are not designated as an indigenous community of Sri Lanka . They are placed within the Sri Lankan caste system . Vedar sometimes refer to themselves as " Veda Vellalar " , thus claiming a high caste ranking ( the Vellalar are given the highest ritual position within the caste structure of Sri Lankan Tamils in many regions ) . They also claim to marry into the higher castes of the neighboring region , such as Karaiyar . But some higher ranked castes did not consider Vedar quite their equals , although still placing them above the lower castes . Members of the Karaiyar caste sometimes downplayed their connections to Vedar as there was stigma attached to such unions . Field studies have indicated that mixed marriages across all caste groups of the eastern littoral was possible with Vedar . Vedar themselves claimed that they would not marry into lower Tamil castes such as <unk> ( barbers ) , <unk> ( washerman ) and Pallar ( agricultural workers ) , but field studies indicated that such unions did sometimes take place . 
 Once a non @-@ Vedar married into a Vedar family , he or she was assimilated as part of the Vedar village . Almost all Vedar families had an ancestor who was Tamil or a family member who was married to a Tamil from a neighboring village . 
 Some Vedar have gradually lost most aspects of their aboriginal identity and culture and no longer identify themselves as Vedar . During the 1980s and 1990s , most Vedar families were displaced from their native villages due to the effects of the Sri Lankan civil war and were placed in refugee camps along with other Tamil refugees . 
 = = History = = 
 Ancestors of Vedar migrated to Sri Lanka via the Indian sub continent during the pre @-@ historic period . A number of Mesolithic sites have been excavated containing human remains dated to 35 @,@ 000 BCE . Anthropologists consider these skeletal remains to belong to a group ancestral to some of the surviving Vedar groups . Sri Lanka has also yielded Megalithic burial sites , one of which was excavated close to a present Vedar settlement , <unk> . The precise time in which some of the Vedar lineage founders migrated to the east coast of Sri Lanka is unknown . The earliest written reference to Vedar is a Tamil chronicle , <unk> <unk> <unk> , which is maintained amongst the custodians of a prominent Hindu temple in the town of <unk> in the Ampara District . It is a Tamil 14th to 16th @-@ century original text . The chronicle documents the presence of a people who practiced hunting and gathering for survival , exercising jurisdiction over vast jungle tracts close to the <unk> township . It names a number of Vedar chiefs , such as <unk> and <unk> . These Vedars were not just hunter @-@ gatherers , but were also accepted as the rightful owners of the forest lands . 
 Emerson ( 1858 ) documented the presence of Vedar north of <unk> who subsisted by fishing or helping the traditional <unk> , as well by cutting wood for Muslim traders . He speculated that there were then at least 400 to 500 individuals in the group . He also recorded that it was the British colonial officers , as well as Weslyan missionaries who provided land for them to start cultivating yams and other vegetables . 
 Neville ( 1890 ) and Seligman ( 1911 ) also documented the presence of a subdivision of Vedar called Kovil Vanam ( " Temple precincts " in Tamil ) within the southern edges of the <unk> District ; their name suggests they had originally lived in the jungles close to the Kataragama temple in the Hambantota District in the Southern Province . By the early 1900s these Vedar had mingled with the local Tamils and Sinhalese and were not encountered as a separate group any more . Local legends attribute the origins of some Hindu temples in the eastern province to the presence of Vedar . Important Hindu temples in villages such as <unk> and <unk> have such Vedar creation legends . But Vedar are no longer associated with either the ownership or maintenance of these regionally important temples . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Clans and family organization = = = 
 Clans of the interior Veddas 
 Interior Veddas have clans called Waruge or <unk> that were named after trees , animals or places of origin . Seligman speculated that these clans were territorial , thus hunting territory was divided amongst the clan , not to be violated by members of other clans . These clans were : 
 Morana ( after Mora tree ) 
 Unapana ( Water ) 
 <unk> ( <unk> tree ) 
 Ura ( Wild boar ) 
 <unk> ( Ant ) 
 Tala ( Plains ) 
 <unk> ( Village name ) 
 Kovil <unk> ( Temple precincts ) 
 Among these , the Morana and Unapana clans claimed superior status to <unk> , <unk> and Ura clans . Seligman reported that Morana and Unapana clans considered the other three as their servile groups , a classification strongly denied by the others . This also led to so @-@ called servile groups denying such clan association when questioned and claiming Morana or Unapana clan origins . 
 Retention of Clan system amongst Vedar 
 When Seligman inquired about the Waruge divisions of the Vedar , most of them did not remember their clan origins . Of those who remembered , most self @-@ identified as Ura Waruge . Others mentioned clans such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . They also had memories of other clans such as Morana and Unapana . By the 1980s the Vedar had no knowledge of any word Waruge , although they vaguely used the Tamil term <unk> ( family origin ) to indicate some division amongst them . Some had come up with a two @-@ fold division of the Vedars based on the Kuti or matrilineal descent system popular in the East coast . These <unk> were supposed to have descended from former local chiefs called <unk> , who had ruled feudal divisions called Vannimai . But these clan divisions and related rules of endogamy were not totally followed by all Vedar , and there no practical prohibitions from marrying from each Kuti . 
 As with local Tamils , the preferred marriage pattern is based on cross cousin preference . Parallel cousins are considered brothers and sisters and are ineligible as partners . As most marriages take place between first and second cousins , clan endogamy even it is present is of no value . Within a village , most of the residents are related and this carries on over to villages that are three to five miles away as well . The longer the distance the more distantly are the villagers related to each other . Related lineages also maintain places of worship that are the private property of the family group . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Vedar are nominally Hindus ; they were known to wear the marks of Saivite Hinduism such as <unk> ( " sacred ash " ) on their forehead even in the 19th century . According to local legends , Vedars are considered to be the builders of most of the regional Hindu temples associated with Hindu high god Murugan . Although Vedars frequent regionally important Hindu temples and shrines associated with high Hindu deities such as Murugan , Pillaiyar and Siva , they propitiate local deities of folk Hinduism , who are sometimes unique to <unk> . Most of the folk deities are also commonly propitiated by other local Tamils such as <unk> , <unk> , Kali and <unk> . Seligman ( 1911 ) encountered two unique deities , <unk> ( “ Ship spirit ” ) and Kumara Deivam ( “ Young god ” ) who are peculiar to Vedar . The cult of <unk> is based on legends of foreigners coming over by ships and landing along the coast where the Vedar usually lived . They are propitiated to ward off evils and hard times . Kumara Deivam was also noted amongst the primitive Sinhalese village of <unk> in the Ampara District known as Kumara <unk> . Jon Dart in the 1980s found that these deities were no longer worshipped , but were replaced by the <unk> cult . 
 The worship pattern is a combination of Devil @-@ dancing called <unk> ( " ceremony " in Tamil ) and orthodox Hindu Agamic rituals . The devil @-@ dancing is unique to Vedar , but the aspect of spirit possession as a part of devil dancing is not unique to Vedar . Locals Tamils also experience spirit procession and trance states during religious festivals . During devil @-@ dancing ceremonies , related family groups congregate in family @-@ owned worship centers and build platforms known as <unk> . These <unk> may have a weapon , such a lance known as a Vel , installed in their middle , a construction similar to the <unk> function of the interior Veddas as well . Male family members dance throughout the night and as part of the ceremony some become possessed by spirits , sometimes those of their recently diseased family members . This pattern is similar in nature to the ancestor @-@ worshipping patterns of the interior Veddas . Most of the <unk> locations are temporary ones without related permanent structures over them , but some have been turned into temples . In the village of <unk> , one of these temporary structures has become a temple now identified with Hindu high god Vishnu . Vedars also participate in Tamil folk dramas called <unk> that depict scenes from Hindu epics such as Mahabharatha and Ramayana . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Vedar use the Sri Lankan Tamil dialect peculiar to the region , known as Batticaloa Tamil dialect , in their day to day conversations . Vedar children also study in that language in schools . During <unk> ceremonies , those who are possessed by spirits speak in a mixed language that they call Vedar <unk> ( Vedar Sinhala " ) or Vedar <unk> which is the Vedda language of the interior Vedas . This Vedar <unk> is mixed with many Tamil words , as people no longer know the language . There is evidence at some point in the past that the people were bilingual in Vedda language and Tamil , but that is no longer the case . 
 = = Geographic distribution = = 
 Native chronicles have documented the presence of Vedar or Vedar @-@ like people throughout the island from the beginning of the historic period . Vedar presence in the present Eastern province has been noted during the Kandyan Kingdom period ( 1469 to 1815 ) . Tennent noted that Vedars were found chiefly from <unk> to <unk> Bay . The 1946 Sri Lankan census returned 44 Vedar villages . The largest concentration of villages was close to the <unk> peninsula ; predominantly Vedar villages there included <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Vedar are also found further south , in <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . There are also Vedars close to <unk> , in a village called <unk> , and in the Trincomalee District , between the towns of <unk> and Foul Point . 
 = = Economic status = = 
 Native chronicles such as Nadu <unk> <unk> <unk> mention the socio @-@ economic status of the Vedar as that of primitive hunter gatherers . The chronicles also mention that the chiefs amongst them received gifts such as clothes from settlers and state that the Vedar in turn provided meat and honey to the settler population , indicating a system of barter trade between the groups . Vedar also seem to have provided manual labor to clear forest lands , in exchange for an annual portion of the food crops harvested . When Tennent visited the east coast in 1858 , the Vedar were living in houses that were made of mud and thatch . They were moved seasonally from place to place dependent on the availability of fish and other game . They were surviving primarily as fishermen , as well as wage laborers working for timber merchants , cutting and transporting timber from the forests . By the time Seligman visited them in 1911 , he considered the Vedar subdivision to be economically better off than the rest of the Indigenous population of the interior . He attributed this to the assimilation of Tamil economic and cultural values by the Vedar clans , as well as to absorption of non @-@ Vedar Tamils into Vedar families by intermarriage . Studies done in the 1980s by the anthropologist Jon Dart , indicated that Vedar in general were poorer than the rest of the Tamil and Muslim communities of the Eastern Province , which Dart attributed to their physical isolation in remote villages , as well as prevailing cultural norms that prevented them from fully integrating within the society . His studies did indicate that some Vedar had successfully integrated in Eastern society , with worldly possessions that did not much differ from those of their non @-@ Vedar neighbors . The marked impact of the Sri Lankan civil war was also noted , due to the proximity of the Vedar 's native villages to the theaters of operations of both rebel LTTE and government forces . ( See <unk> bombing ) 
 = 1917 Georgia Tech Golden Tornado football team = 
 The 1917 Georgia Tech Golden Tornado football team represented the Georgia Institute of Technology ( commonly known as Georgia Tech ) in American football during the 1917 college football season as a member of the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( SIAA ) . The Golden Tornado , coached by John Heisman in his 14th year as head coach , compiled a 9 – 0 record ( 4 – 0 SIAA ) and outscored opponents 491 to 17 on the way to its first national championship . Heisman considered the 1917 team his best , and for many years it was considered " the greatest football team the South had ever produced " . 
 The backfield of Albert Hill , Everett Strupper , Joe Guyon , and Judy Harlan led the Golden Tornado , and all four rushed for more than 100 yards in a 48 – 0 victory over Tulane . During the regular season Georgia Tech defeated strong opponents by large margins , and its 41 – 0 victory over eastern Penn shocked many ; Davidson , with Buck Flowers ( a future Tech star ) , was defeated 32 – 10 . Tech 's 83 – 0 victory over Vanderbilt is the worst loss in Vanderbilt history , and its 63 – 0 defeat of Washington & Lee was the worst loss in W & L history at the time . Tech finished the season by defeating Auburn 68 – 7 , clinching the conference title . Davidson and Auburn were the only teams to score points against Georgia Tech . 
 = = Before the season = = 
 Because of the American entry into World War I in April , several SIAA schools did not field football teams . However , Georgia Tech had an increasing enrollment and bright prospects for its football team after its undefeated 1916 season . Losses from the previous season 's team included guard Bob Lang and fullback Tommy Spence . 
 In 1917 football used a one @-@ platoon system , in which players played both offense and defense . Fifteen of the 21 players on the 1917 roster were from the state of Georgia , and 10 of its 11 starters came from Georgia high schools . The team 's captain was tackle Walker " Big Six " Carpenter . Its renowned backfield consisted of quarterback Al Hill , halfback Everett Strupper , halfback Joe Guyon , and freshman fullback Judy Harlan . 
 Coach John Heisman 's swift backfield used the pre @-@ snap movement of his " jump shift " offense , and Al Hill led the team in carries . Ev Strupper , arguably the best of the four , was partially deaf ; because of his deafness , he called the signals instead of the team 's quarterback . When " <unk> " tried out for the team , he noticed that the quarterback shouted the signals every time he was to carry the ball . Realizing that the loud signals would be a tip @-@ off to the opposition , Strupper told Heisman : " Coach , those loud signals are absolutely unnecessary . You see when sickness in my kid days brought on this deafness my folks gave me the best instructors obtainable to teach me lip @-@ reading . " Heisman recalled how Strupper overcame his deafness : " He couldn 't hear anything but a regular shout . But he could read your lips like a flash . No lad that ever stepped on a football field had keener eyes than Everett had . The enemy found this out the minute he began looking for openings through which to run the ball . " 
 Joe Guyon , the team 's best passer , was a Chippewa Indian who was born on the White Earth Indian Reservation ; his brother , Charles " <unk> " Guyon , was the assistant coach . Guyon had played for Pop Warner at Carlisle , and had to sit out the 1916 season in accordance with conference transfer rules . He ran through ( and over ) opponents , in contrast to Strupper 's dodging style . Judy Harlan said about Guyon , " Once in a while the Indian would come out in Joe , such as the nights Heisman gave us a white football and had us working out under the lights . That 's when Guyon would give out the blood curdling war whoops . " 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = Week 1 : Furman and Wake Forest = = = 
 The Golden Tornado opened its season on September 29 with a doubleheader in three inches of mud . 
 = = = = Furman = = = = 
 In the first game Georgia Tech defeated Furman 25 – 0 , playing mainly substitutes . Hay was spread on the field in an attempt to counteract the steady downpour . Tech quarterback Al Hill scored two touchdowns , and Dan Whelchel ( called Walthall ) scored a third when he recovered a fumble by Theodore Shaver after crossing the goal line . Although Furman 's lineup included future South Carolina Hall @-@ of @-@ Famer Speedy Speer , there was little Speer could do to affect the outcome . Tech 's starting lineup was Ulrich ( left end ) , Higgins ( left tackle ) , Whelchel ( left guard ) , Johnson ( center ) , Wright ( right guard ) , Doyle ( right tackle ) , Colcord ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Smith ( left halfback ) , Shaver ( right halfback ) , and Harlan ( fullback ) . 
 = = = = Wake Forest = = = = 
 After the Furman game , the rain subsided and Tech defeated the Wake Forest Demon Deacons 33 – 0 . Ev Strupper and Joe Guyon had sat out the previous game . The first touchdown was on the play after Strupper dashed around end for a 17 @-@ yard gain ; Guyon 's first carry from scrimmage for Tech was a 75 @-@ yard run . 
 Strupper scored the second touchdown on a short drive set up by his 40 @-@ yard punt return . Early in the second quarter , Strupper shot through the line for 70 yards and the third touchdown . Tech 's fourth touchdown required considerable effort and a methodical drive , ending in a 15 @-@ yard dive for a touchdown by Strupper . End runs by Guyon and Simpson 's line plunging set up the fifth ( and final ) touchdown with Guyon 's 6 @-@ yard run . Strupper ran for 198 yards and three touchdowns on nine carries . Tech 's starting lineup was Bell ( left end ) , Fincher ( left tackle ) , Thweatt ( left guard ) , Phillips ( center ) , Dowling ( right guard ) , Rogers ( right tackle ) , Carpenter ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Strupper ( left halfback ) , Guyon ( right halfback ) , and <unk> ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Week 2 : Penn = = = 
 In the second week of play , Georgia Tech beat Penn 41 – 0 . Bernie McCarty called it " Strupper 's finest hour , coming through against powerful Penn in the contest that shocked the East . " In comparison , Pop Warner 's undefeated Pittsburgh defeated Penn 14 – 6 . Penn was the first northeastern powerhouse to lose to a team from the South . Both Strupper and Hill rushed for more than 100 yards . Tech outgained Penn 276 yards to 11 at halftime . According to the Florida Times @-@ Union , " The result ... demonstrates that the large Eastern colleges will have to reckon with some of those of Dixieland in future . " 
 Tech baffled Penn by playing conventionally instead of using its regular shift . On its second play from scrimmage less than two minutes into the game Strupper ran around his end , " winding and twisting out of a mass of Red and Blue players " for a 68 @-@ yard touchdown . Walker Carpenter brushed two tacklers out of the way , side @-@ stepping Penn safety Joe Berry before running the last 30 yards . Tech " scored again in this period before Pennsylvania had recovered from its bewilderment " , a touchdown by Hill . For the last score of the half , Strupper made a short run behind guard . 
 Penn did not have a first down in the first half , as the Tech defense played well . Hill scored a touchdown in the third quarter on a 27 @-@ yard run through the line . Penn 's only scoring opportunity was in the third quarter . After another Al Hill touchdown and the kickoff return , Penn worked five complete forward passes in quick succession ( one 23 yards ) to reach Tech 's 6 @-@ yard line . The Tech defense responded , and Penn turned the ball over on downs . On first down , Carpenter threw Penn back for a 6 @-@ yard loss and a pass was incomplete on second down . On third down , Penn 's quarterback dropped back to pass Carpenter and William Higgins tackled him on the 25 @-@ yard line . On fourth down , Penn came out in a " freak formation " and its pass was incomplete . In the fourth quarter , Judy Harlan had a 65 @-@ yard interception return for a touchdown . Tech 's starting lineup was Guill ( left end ) , Whelchel ( left tackle ) , Fincher ( left guard ) , Phillips ( center ) , Dowling ( right guard ) , Thweatt ( right tackle ) , Carpenter ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Strupper ( left halfback ) , Guyon ( right halfback ) , and Harlan ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Week 3 : Davidson = = = 
 The Davidson Wildcats , which scored the most points against Tech ( 10 ) , included future Tech running back Buck Flowers in his freshman year . Unlike Tech 's other 1917 opponents , Davidson held its backs to less than 100 yards rushing . Writer Bernie McCarty considered Davidson the second @-@ best southern team that year . 
 The game 's first score of the game was in the second quarter , when Davidson 's Buck Flowers converted a 28 @-@ yard drop kick field goal for a 3 – 0 lead . Set up by a 27 @-@ yard run around end by Davidson fullback R. C. Burns , Al Hill prevented Burns from scoring a touchdown by tackling him from behind . Strupper and Guyon then worked the ball close to the goal ; Strupper was forced out of bounds , and Hill scored a touchdown . 
 Tech led 6 – 3 when Strupper broke the game open in the second half . After a fumble by Strupper , Hill caught a pass from the 22 @-@ yard line and ran in for a touchdown . Strupper made the next touchdown after Tech ran through Davidson 's right guard . Strupper then recovered a punt fumbled by Flowers on Davidson 's 30 @-@ yard line , leading to a score by Hill from 18 yards out on a criss @-@ cross run . Davidson scored its only touchdown on a forward pass . From midfield , quarterback Henry Spann hit end Georgie King on a 50 @-@ yard touchdown pass that went 30 yards in the air , catching Tech by surprise . For Tech 's last score , Judy Harlan returned an interception 40 yards for a touchdown . 
 The defense of Walker Carpenter and William Thweatt was the game 's highlight . Tech made 16 first downs and Davidson 13 . Neither Pup Phillips nor Ham Dowling played in this game , with Bill Fincher replacing Phillips at center . The umpire was F. F. Wood , and Boozer Pitts was the head linesman . Davidson captain George King said , " I consider Georgia Tech the best football team I have ever played against or ever expect to play against . " Tech 's starting lineup was Guill ( left end ) , Whelchel ( left tackle ) , Higgins ( left guard ) , Fincher ( center ) , Rogers ( right guard ) , Thweatt ( right tackle ) , Carpenter ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Strupper ( left halfback ) , Guyon ( right halfback ) , and Harlan ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Week 4 : Washington & Lee = = = 
 In a 63 – 0 victory against the Washington & Lee Generals , Tech made 35 first downs to Washington & Lee 's five . At the time , it was the Generals ' worst loss . According to Judy Harlan , Joe Guyon knocked a Washington & Lee player out of the game by " wearing an old horse collar shaped into a shoulder pad but reinforced with a little steel " . The player may have been Turner Bethel , who was knocked out of the game and taken to a local hospital . 
 " The game was never in doubt after ' <unk> ' got away for his first long run " , a 35 @-@ yarder followed a few minutes later by his 16 @-@ yard touchdown run . Although Strupper only played in the first half because of a leg injury , he gained 128 yards in addition to scoring the touchdown . Al Hill scored four touchdowns , Guyon three , and Pup Phillips also had one with a 30 @-@ yard interception return . Tech 's starting lineup was Ulrich ( left end ) , Fincher ( left tackle ) , Whelchel ( left guard ) , Phillips ( center ) , Dowling ( right guard ) , Carpenter ( right tackle ) , Bell ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Strupper ( left halfback ) , Guyon ( right halfback ) , and Harlan ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Week 5 : Vanderbilt = = = 
 Tech 's 83 – 0 defeat of the Vanderbilt Commodores was the worst in Vanderbilt history . " It was not until 1917 that a Southern team really avenged long @-@ time torment at McGugin 's hands . And it took one of history 's top backfields – Joe Guyon , Ev Strupper , Al Hill , and Judy Harlan of Georgia Tech – to do it , " writes Edwin Pope . The team was not the Commodores ' worst , and had defeated Alabama . Joe Guyon was the game 's star ; according to Morgan Blake , " Guyon has been great in all games this year . But Saturday he was the superman " . Guyon ran nine times for 124 yards , with kick returns for 95 yards and 80 yards passing . He scored on <unk> and one @-@ yard runs , had a 75 @-@ yard kick return to set up a touchdown , and threw a pass to Shorty Guill for a score . Ev Strupper ran for four touchdowns and 147 yards in 14 carries , returning five punts for 111 yards . Al Hill ran 169 yards in 25 carries , scoring three touchdowns , and Judy Harlan carried 15 times for 132 yards and two touchdowns . 
 Vanderbilt captain Alf Adams praised the Tech team : " Tech 's magnificent machine won easily over Vanderbilt . It was simply the matter of a splendid eleven winning over an unseasoned , inexperienced team . Tech played hard , clean football , and we were somewhat surprised to meet such a fair , aggressive team , after the reports we had heard . I think that Vanderbilt could have broken that Tech shift if we had had last year 's eleven . Being outweighed , Vanderbilt could not check the heavy forwards , or open up the line . Thereby hangs the tale . " Tech 's starting lineup was Guill ( left end ) , Fincher ( left tackle ) , Whelchel ( left guard ) , Phillips ( center ) , Dowling ( right guard ) , Carpenter ( right tackle ) , Bell ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Strupper ( left halfback ) , Guyon ( right halfback ) , and Harlan ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Week 6 : at Tulane = = = 
 Tech played coach Clark Shaughnessy 's Tulane Olive and Blue for its only road game , winning 48 – 0 . Against a solid foe with a 5 – 3 record , all four Tech backs ran over 100 yards . According to the Times @-@ Picayune , " Strupper , Guyon , Hill , and Harlan form a backfield with no superiors and few equals in football history " . Joe Guyon threw two touchdowns and ran for one , passing 91 yards and running 112 : " Guyon 's passing was so accurate it suggest possibilities yet undeveloped in the Tech offense " . Al Hill ran for 140 yards on 24 carries , including a 48 @-@ yard touchdown . Ev Strupper scored twice ( one on a 33 @-@ yard pass from Guyon ) and ran for 118 yards ; Harlan ran for 111 . Missing an extra point in the third quarter , Bill Fincher ended his streak at 31 . The game was called with six minutes left because of darkness . Tech 's starting lineup was Guill ( left end ) , Fincher ( left tackle ) , Whelchel ( left guard ) , Phillips ( center ) , Thweatt ( right guard ) , Carpenter ( right tackle ) , Bell ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Strupper ( left halfback ) , Guyon ( right halfback ) , and Harlan ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Week 7 : Carlisle = = = 
 In a 98 – 0 win against the Carlisle Indians , Strupper 's performance was praised . Morgan Blake of the Atlanta Journal wrote , " Everett Strupper played like a veritable demon . At one time four Carlisle men pounced on him from all directions , and yet through some superhuman witchery he broke loose and dashed 10 yards further . On another occasion he attempted a wide end run , found that he was completely blocked , then suddenly whirled and ran the other way , gaining something like 25 yards before he was downed . " 
 Hill and Strupper each scored five touchdowns ; Shorty Guill had two touchdowns and 108 yards rushing . Billy Sunday wrote , " That jump shift is about the slickest offense I ever saw . " One of Strupper 's touchdowns was a 32 @-@ yard fumble return . This was Carlisle 's last season before the school closed . Guyon asked to be substituted midway through the game against his former school , perhaps for sentimental reasons . Tech 's starting lineup was Fincher ( left end ) , Higgins ( left tackle ) , Whelchel ( left guard ) , Phillips ( center ) , Dowling ( right guard ) , Carpenter ( right tackle ) , Bell ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Strupper ( left halfback ) , Guyon ( right halfback ) , and Guill ( fullback ) . 
 = = = Week 8 : Auburn = = = 
 In the season 's final game , Tech defeated the Auburn Tigers 68 – 7 . Coach Mike Donahue 's Tigers had lost only to Davidson in an upset , and held undefeated Big Ten champion Ohio State to a scoreless tie less than a week before the Tech game . Ohio State , led by Chic Harley , had been favored 4 or 5 to 1 . Coach Heisman ( who previously coached at Auburn ) and his players were at the game , rooting for the Tigers . 
 In the game with Auburn , Tech piled up 472 yards on the ground in 84 rushes and 145 yards in the air . Guyon scored four touchdowns , and Strupper had a 65 @-@ yard touchdown run . According to the Atlanta Journal , 
 It was not the length of the run that featured it was the brilliance of it . After getting through the first line , Stroop was tackled squarely by two secondary men , and yet he squirmed and jerked loosed from them , only to face the safety man and another Tiger , coming at him from different angles . Without checking his speed Everett knifed the two men completely , running between them and dashing on to a touchdown . 
 In the second quarter , Auburn 's Moon Ducote broke through the line toward the goal with blocking by Pete Bonner and William Donahue . After Guyon dove at Ducote and missed , Guyon gave chase and tackled him at the 26 @-@ yard line . For Auburn 's only score Ducote circled around end for 17 yards and lateraled to Donahue , who ran down the sideline for a six @-@ yard touchdown . Guyon was the star of the game , accounting for four touchdowns and having his best day passing . Strupper had touchdown runs of 62 and 50 yards . Auburn was considered a strong team , despite the lopsided score ; Ducote and Bonner were the only non @-@ Tech , unanimous All @-@ Southern selections . Tech 's starting lineup was Fincher ( left end ) , Higgins ( left tackle ) , Mathes ( left guard ) , Phillips ( center ) , Dowling ( right guard ) , Carpenter ( right tackle ) , Bell ( right end ) , Hill ( quarterback ) , Strupper ( left halfback ) , Guyon ( right halfback ) , and Guill ( fullback ) . 
 = = After the season = = 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 The Golden Tornado led the nation in scoring , with 491 points . Quarterback Al Hill led the nation in touchdowns with 23 , and tackle Bill Fincher kicked 49 extra points . 
 A number of Georgia Tech players received post @-@ season honors . Walker Carpenter , Everett Strupper , and Joe Guyon were All @-@ America selections , with Carpenter and Strupper the first two players from the Deep South selected for a first @-@ team . In addition to Carpenter , Strupper , and Guyon , Bill Fincher , Pup Phillips , Si Bell , Shorty Guill , and Al Hill were selected to the All @-@ Southern Team by sportswriters . Phillips also received the Hal Nowell trophy for the most efficient play during the season . 
 = = = = National champions = = = = 
 On December 8 , the Golden Tornado celebrated its national @-@ championship season at a team dinner at the Druid Hills Golf Club in Atlanta . Each member was presented with a gold football inscribed with the words , " National Champions " . Clarke Mathes , William Thweatt , Dan Whelchel , Theodore Shaver , and William Higgins had already enlisted in the U. S. Marines for the First World War ; a week later , Si Bell , Jim Fellers , Pup Phillips , and Charles Johnson also left for the Marines . 
 Heisman challenged Pop Warner 's Pittsburgh team to a postseason game to determine a national champion , but since they did not play until the following season , Tech was named national champion . Although the Golden Tornado was invited to play the 4 – 3 Oregon team in the Rose Bowl , by then many players had joined the war effort . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 " I consider the 1917 Tech team the best football I have ever coached " , Heisman said . " It 's the best team I have seen in my long career as a coach . I was lucky in having under me a team whose members possessed much natural ability and who played the game intelligently . I have never seen a team that , as a whole , was so fast in the composite . " For many years , it was considered " the greatest football team the South had ever produced " . According to a contemporary New York Sun account , " Georgia Tech looms up as one of the truly great teams of all time . " 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Depth chart = = = 
 The following chart provides a visual depiction of Tech 's lineup during the 1917 season with games started at the position reflected in parenthesis . The chart mimics the offense after the jump shift has taken place . 
 = = = Varsity letterwinners = = = 
 = = = = Line = = = = 
 = = = = Backfield = = = = 
 = = = Other players = = = 
 = = = Stats and scoring leaders = = = 
 The following is an incomplete list of statistics and scores , largely dependent on newspaper summaries . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Noctilucent cloud = 
 Night clouds or noctilucent clouds are tenuous cloud @-@ like phenomena that are the " ragged edge " of a much brighter and pervasive polar cloud layer called polar <unk> clouds in the upper atmosphere , visible in a deep twilight . They are made of ice crystals . Noctilucent roughly means night shining in Latin . They are most commonly observed in the summer months at latitudes between 50 ° and 70 ° north and south of the equator . These clouds can be observed only when the Sun is below the horizon for the observer , but while the clouds are still in sunlight . 
 They are the highest clouds in Earth 's atmosphere , located in the mesosphere at altitudes of around 76 to 85 kilometres ( 47 to 53 mi ) . They are normally too faint to be seen , and are visible only when illuminated by sunlight from below the horizon while the lower layers of the atmosphere are in the Earth 's shadow . Noctilucent clouds are not fully understood and are a recently discovered meteorological phenomenon ; there is no record of their observation before 1885 . 
 Noctilucent clouds can form only under very restricted conditions ; their occurrence can be used as a sensitive guide to changes in the upper atmosphere . They are a relatively recent classification . The occurrence of noctilucent clouds appears to be increasing in frequency , brightness and extent . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Night clouds or noctilucent clouds are composed of tiny crystals of water ice up to 100 nm in diameter and exist at a height of about 76 to 85 km ( 47 to 53 mi ) , higher than any other clouds in Earth 's atmosphere . Clouds in the Earth 's lower atmosphere form when water collects on particles , but <unk> clouds may form directly from water vapour in addition to forming on dust particles . 
 Data from the <unk> of Ice in the Mesosphere satellite suggests that noctilucent clouds require water vapour , dust , and very cold temperatures to form . The sources of both the dust and the water vapour in the upper atmosphere are not known with certainty . The dust is believed to come from <unk> , although particulates from volcanoes and dust from the troposphere are also possibilities . The moisture could be lifted through gaps in the tropopause , as well as forming from the reaction of methane with hydroxyl radicals in the stratosphere . 
 The exhaust from Space Shuttles , which was almost entirely water vapour after the detachment of the Solid Rocket Booster at a height of about 46 km , was found to generate minuscule individual clouds . About half of the vapour was released into the thermosphere , usually at altitudes of 103 to 114 km ( 64 to 71 mi ) . In August 2014 , a SpaceX Falcon 9 also caused noctilucent clouds over Orlando , FL after a launch . 
 The exhaust can be transported to the Arctic region in little over a day , although the exact mechanism of this very high @-@ speed transport is unknown . As the water migrates northward , it falls from the thermosphere down into the colder mesosphere , which occupies the region of the atmosphere just below . Although this mechanism is the cause of individual noctilucent clouds , it is not thought to be a major contributor to the phenomenon as a whole . 
 As the mesosphere contains very little moisture , approximately one hundred millionth that of air from the Sahara desert , and is extremely thin , the ice crystals can form only at temperatures below about − 120 ° C ( − 184 ° F ) . This means that noctilucent clouds form predominantly during summer when , counterintuitively , the mesosphere is coldest , therefore they can 't be observed ( even if they are present ) inside the Polar circles because the Sun is never low enough under the horizon at this season at these latitudes . Noctilucent clouds form mostly near the polar regions , because the mesosphere is coldest there . Clouds in the southern hemisphere are about 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) higher than those in the northern hemisphere . 
 Ultraviolet radiation from the Sun breaks water molecules apart , reducing the amount of water available to form noctilucent clouds . The radiation is known to vary cyclically with the solar cycle and satellites have been tracking the decrease in brightness of the clouds with the increase of ultraviolet radiation for the last two solar cycles . It has been found that changes in the clouds follow changes in the intensity of ultraviolet rays by about a year , but the reason for this long lag is not yet known . 
 Noctilucent clouds are known to exhibit high radar reflectivity , in a frequency range of 50 MHz to 1 @.@ 3 GHz . This behaviour is not well understood but a possible explanation is that the ice grains become coated with a thin metal film composed of sodium and iron , which makes the cloud far more reflective to radar , although this explanation remains controversial . Sodium and iron atoms are stripped from incoming <unk> and settle into a layer just above the altitude of noctilucent clouds , and measurements have shown that these elements are severely depleted when the clouds are present . Other experiments have demonstrated that , at the extremely cold temperatures of a noctilucent cloud , sodium vapour can rapidly be deposited onto an ice surface . 
 = = Discovery and investigation = = 
 Noctilucent clouds are first known to have been observed in 1885 , two years after the 1883 eruption of Krakatoa . It remains unclear whether their appearance had anything to do with the volcano eruption , or whether their discovery was due to more people observing the spectacular sunsets caused by the volcanic debris in the atmosphere . Studies have shown that noctilucent clouds are not caused solely by volcanic activity , although dust and water vapour could be injected into the upper atmosphere by eruptions and contribute to their formation . Scientists at the time assumed the clouds were another manifestation of volcanic ash , but after the ash had settled out of the atmosphere , the noctilucent clouds persisted . Finally , the theory that the clouds were composed of volcanic dust was disproved by <unk> in 1926 . In the years following their discovery , the clouds were studied extensively by Otto Jesse of Germany , who was the first to photograph them , in 1887 , and seems to have been the one to coin the term " noctilucent cloud " , which means " night @-@ shining cloud " . His notes provide evidence that noctilucent clouds first appeared in 1885 . He had been doing detailed observations of the unusual sunsets caused by the Krakatoa eruption the previous year and firmly believed that , if the clouds had been visible then , he would undoubtedly have noticed them . Systematic photographic observations of the clouds were organized in 1887 by Jesse , Foerster , and <unk> and , after that year , continuous observations were carried out at the Berlin Observatory . During this research , the height of the clouds was first determined , via triangulation . The project was discontinued in 1896 . 
 In the decades after Otto Jesse 's death in 1901 , there were few new insights into the nature of noctilucent clouds . Wegener 's conjecture , that they were composed of water ice , was later shown to be correct . Study was limited to ground @-@ based observations and scientists had very little knowledge of the mesosphere until the 1960s , when direct rocket measurements began . These showed for the first time that the occurrence of the clouds coincided with very low temperatures in the mesosphere . 
 Noctilucent clouds were first detected from space by an instrument on the OGO @-@ 6 satellite in 1972 . The OGO @-@ 6 observations of a bright scattering layer over the polar caps were identified as poleward extensions of these clouds . A later satellite , the Solar Mesosphere Explorer , mapped the distribution of the clouds between 1981 and 1986 with its ultraviolet spectrometer . The clouds were detected with a lidar in 1995 at Utah State University , even when they were not visible to the naked eye . The first physical confirmation that water ice is indeed the primary component of noctilucent clouds came from the <unk> instrument on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite in 2001 . 
 In 2001 , the Swedish Odin satellite performed spectral analyses on the clouds , and produced daily global maps that revealed large patterns in their distribution . 
 On April 25 , 2007 , the AIM satellite ( <unk> of Ice in the Mesosphere ) was launched . It is the first satellite dedicated to studying noctilucent clouds , and made its first observations on May 25 , 2007 . Images taken by the satellite show shapes in the clouds that are similar to shapes in tropospheric clouds , hinting at similarities in their dynamics . 
 On August 28 , 2006 , scientists with the Mars Express mission announced that they found clouds of carbon dioxide crystals over Mars that extended up to 100 km ( 62 mi ) above the surface of the planet . They are the highest clouds discovered over the surface of a planet . Like noctilucent clouds on Earth , they can be observed only when the Sun is below the horizon . 
 Research published in the journal Geophysical Research Letters in June 2009 suggests that noctilucent clouds observed following the Tunguska Event are evidence that the impact was caused by a comet . 
 The United States Naval Research Laboratory ( NRL ) and the United States Department of Defense Space Test Program ( STP ) conducted the Charged Aerosol Release Experiment ( CARE ) on September 19 , 2009 , using exhaust particles from a Black Brant XII suborbital sounding rocket launched from NASA 's Wallops Flight Facility to create an artificial noctilucent cloud . The cloud was to be observed over a period of weeks or months by ground instruments and the Spatial <unk> <unk> for <unk> Radicals ( <unk> ) instrument on the NRL / STP <unk> @-@ 1 spacecraft . The rocket 's exhaust plume was observed and reported to news organizations in the United States from New Jersey to Massachusetts . 
 = = Observation = = 
 Noctilucent clouds are generally colourless or pale blue , although occasionally other colours including red and green occur . The characteristic blue colour comes from absorption by ozone in the path of the sunlight illuminating the noctilucent cloud . They can appear as featureless bands , but frequently show distinctive patterns such as streaks , wave @-@ like undulations , and whirls . They are considered a " beautiful natural phenomenon " . Noctilucent clouds may be confused with cirrus clouds , but appear sharper under magnification . Those caused by rocket exhausts tend to show colours other than silver or blue , because of iridescence caused by the uniform size of the water droplets produced . 
 Noctilucent clouds may be seen by observers at a latitude of 50 ° to 65 ° . They seldom occur at lower latitudes ( although there have been sightings as far south as Paris , Utah , Italy , Turkey and Spain ) , and closer to the poles it does not get dark enough for the clouds to become visible . They occur during summer , from mid @-@ May to mid @-@ August in the northern hemisphere and between mid @-@ November and mid @-@ February in the southern hemisphere . They are very faint and tenuous , and may be observed only in twilight around sunrise and sunset when the clouds of the lower atmosphere are in shadow , but the noctilucent cloud is illuminated by the Sun . They are best seen when the Sun is between 6 ° and 16 ° below the horizon . Although noctilucent clouds occur in both hemispheres , they have been observed thousands of times in the northern hemisphere , but fewer than 100 times in the southern . Southern hemisphere noctilucent clouds are fainter and occur less frequently ; additionally the southern hemisphere has a lower population and less land area from which to make observations . 
 The clouds may show a large variety of different patterns and forms . An identification scheme was developed by Fogle in 1970 that classified five different forms . These classifications have since been modified and subdivided . 
 They may be studied from the ground , from space , and directly by sounding rocket . Also , some noctilucent clouds are made of smaller crystals , 30 nm or less , which are invisible to observers on the ground because they do not scatter enough light . 
 = = Connection to climate change = = 
 It has been proposed that the relatively recent appearance of noctilucent clouds , and their gradual increase , may be linked to climate change . The author of this study , atmospheric scientist Gary Thomas of the Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics at the University of Colorado has pointed out that the first sightings coincide with both Krakatoa and the nascent Industrial Revolution , and they have become more widespread and frequent throughout the twentieth century , including an uptick between 1964 and 1986 . The connecting of global warming and noctilucent clouds however , remains controversial . Gary Thomas may have penned his paper after Wilfried Schröder , who might hold the distinction of being the first to explain noctilucent clouds as " indicators " for atmospheric processes ( <unk> Beiträge zur <unk> , 1971 , <unk> Rundschau 1968 – 1970 ) . Most recently in 2012 Lonnie Cumberland 's physics PhD work supported viewing noctilucent clouds as a possible Miner 's Canary for climate change as her third conclusion as a sign of increasing the presence of water in the high atmosphere . NASA scientists speculate that methane may be driven higher into the <unk> where noctilucent clouds form by climate change and through reactions that end up producing water at such altitudes . 
 Climate models predict that increased greenhouse gas emissions cause a cooling of the mesosphere , which would lead to more frequent and widespread occurrences of noctilucent clouds . A complementing theory is that larger methane emissions from intensive farming activities produce more water vapour in the upper atmosphere . Methane concentrations have more than doubled in the past 100 years . 
 Tromp et al. also controversially suggest that a transition to a hydrogen economy would result in an increase in the free hydrogen concentration of the atmosphere by 1 ppm , which would increase the number of noctilucent clouds . 
 = Yasss Bish = 
 " Yasss Bish " is a song recorded by Trinidadian @-@ American rapper Nicki Minaj for her third studio album The Pinkprint ( 2014 ) , which did not make the final cut . It was written by Minaj along with the song 's producer Soulja Boy , who is also credited as a guest vocalist . The track was released through her official SoundCloud account as the album 's third promotional single on May 3 , 2014 following " Lookin Ass " and " Chi @-@ <unk> " . 
 Musically , " Yasss Bish " is a bounce and drill song with a trap beat . Its stripped back hip hop production encompasses intense Roland TR @-@ 808 drum hits , a " sinister , echo @-@ y " vocal loop , " eerie " shimmering synthesizers , foreboding snares , and the sound of church bells ringing in an ominous tone . Lyrically , Minaj addresses her detractors , and references several celebrities including Donald Sterling and Will and Jada Smith . 
 Minaj performed the song live for the first time along with Soulja Boy on May 18 , 2014 at the Power 106 's Powerhouse , Minaj performed the song again on June 2 at Hot 97 Summer Jam 2014 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In September 2013 , Minaj began working on her third studio album , The Pinkprint ( 2014 ) . For the album , Minaj desired to return to her hip @-@ hop roots , calling the album 's sound " a continuation of The Re @-@ Up with a lot more " . Minaj told MTV News that the sound of The Pinkprint would be " next level " and will have " so much to talk about " , saying : " I 'm really excited and the people that have been working with me now , have been people that I haven 't worked with before so it 's like they 're bringing a new sound to the album that I 've never experimented with . " 
 In April 2014 , Minaj posted a picture on Instagram of herself with Soulja Boy in a studio . Later that month , he posted a Vine of him singing the song 's chorus . Originally , Soulja Boy created the song 's beat but according to him , it lacked a hook . However , he later came up with the idea for the hook while making a Vine , and added it into the song . He then brought the unfinished version of " Yasss Bish " to Minaj , who was impressed by the song and recorded her vocals . After Minaj sent the track back to him , it took " about a day " for Soulja Boy to finish mixing the record . In May 2014 , Minaj spoke of the meaning behind the word " <unk> " : " When I watch ' RuPaul 's Drag Race , ' I live for the way they speak . Females , we adopted it and it makes us feel like very cocky and very just like sexy and feminine . So saying ' <unk> ' as opposed to ' yes , ' it 's just putting on a billion times more attitude to the word ' yes ' . " On May 3 , 2014 , Minaj posted the song on her official SoundCloud shortly after midnight . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , " Yasss Bish " has been described as a " bouncy drill anthem " with a trap beat . It features a stripped back hip hop production that encompasses intense Roland TR @-@ 808 drum hits , a " sinister , echo @-@ y " vocal loop , " eerie " shimmering synthesizers , foreboding snares , and the sound of church bells ringing in an ominous tone . Minaj 's vocals in " Yasss Bish " have been described as " melodic " with a " fierce " message , while her rapping has been compared to the works of Southern hip hop group Migos . Several critics including Kyle Harvey of The <unk> and Emma Goddard of Bustle noted the change in sound to be the beginning of a new image for Minaj . Harvey said the song continued her goal of shedding her image of a pop act , while Goddard said : " Although this song is definitely NSFW and it 's completely improbable that we 'll hear British sisters Sophia Grace and Rosie rapping her song anytime soon , Minaj has come back strong with a new image . " 
 Lyrically , she addresses her detractors and all those who don 't believe in her . The song opens with Soulja Boy singing " <unk> <unk> " repeatedly for thirty seconds before Minaj begins her rap with " Me I 'm just me / Me I 'm just real / Me I 'm that bitch that be footing the bill . " In the line " I don 't fuck with you niggas / I own the Clippers / I own some homes / I own my own liquor " Minaj references ex @-@ Clippers owner Donald Sterling , who was banned from the NBA after leaked recordings of him making racist comments were made public . She also mentions Will and Jada Smith in the lyrics : " Bitches can 't beat me they ain 't got the skill / Eye of the tiger they ain 't got the kill / Look up to Jada / I love her and Will . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , " Yasss Bish " received positive reviews from music critics . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy named " Yasss Bish " one of the " 10 tracks you need to hear " , praising Minaj 's vocal delivery , the inclusion of Soulja Boy , and the line " Fix it , Jesus . " Colin Joyce of Spin called the song an " unbridled joy " , and noted that while it may not be included on The Pink Print , the album would be " lucky , however , to feature any track half as exuberant as this one . " A writer for MTV News UK praised both the production and vocals on " Yasss Bish " , saying that Minaj 's " melodic " vocals and " fierce " rap delivery were the best part of the song . Several critics noted a musical departure from the pop and dance @-@ pop stylings of her second studio album Pink Friday : Roman Reloaded ( 2012 ) . MTV News writer Emilee Lindner said " Yasss Bish " found Minaj going back to her original sound , saying : " Nicki Minaj is letting her rapping speak for itself . She 's left her colorful wigs , fancy robes and tutus behind — along with the hyper @-@ pop production of some of her biggest hits — and now she 's getting back to her roots . " Emma Goddard of Bustle praised the chemistry between the two rappers and saw the song as a change from the more upbeat sound found in Minaj 's catalogue , which she credited with " show [ ing ] her rapping prowess much more " . Writing for The Source , Khari said of " Yasss Bish " : " [ Minaj ] sheds the wig and the excessive make @-@ up , we get the most gorgeous Nicki we 've seen in her career . Now , she grabs Soulja Boy for the hook and the beat . You guessed it , score again . " 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Common toad = 
 The common toad , European toad or in Anglophone parts of Europe , simply the toad ( Bufo bufo , from Latin bufo " toad " ) , is an amphibian found throughout most of Europe ( with the exception of Ireland , Iceland , and some Mediterranean islands ) , in the western part of North Asia , and in a small portion of Northwest Africa . It is one of a group of closely related animals that are descended from a common ancestral line of toads and which form a species complex . The toad is an inconspicuous animal as it usually lies hidden during the day . It becomes active at dusk and spends the night hunting for the invertebrates on which it feeds . It moves with a slow ungainly walk or short jumps and has greyish brown skin covered with wart @-@ like lumps . 
 Although toads are usually solitary animals , in the breeding season , large numbers of toads converge on certain breeding ponds , where the males compete to mate with the females . Eggs are laid in gelatinous strings in the water and later hatch out into tadpoles . After several months of growth and development , these sprout limbs and undergo metamorphosis into tiny toads . The juveniles emerge from the water and remain largely terrestrial for the rest of their lives . 
 The common toad seems to be in decline in part of its range but overall is listed as being of " least concern " in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . It is threatened by habitat loss , especially by drainage of its breeding sites , and some toads get killed on the roads as they make their annual migrations . It has long been associated in popular culture and literature with witchcraft . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The common toad was first given the name Rana bufo by the Swedish biologist Carl Linnaeus in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae in 1758 . In this work , he placed all the frogs and toads in the single genus Rana . It later became apparent that this genus should be subdivided , and in 1768 , the Austrian naturalist Josephus Nicolaus Laurenti placed the common toad in the genus Bufo , naming it Bufo bufo . The toads in this genus are included in the family Bufonidae , the true toads . 
 Various subspecies of Bufo bufo have been recognized over the years . The Caucasian toad is found in the mountainous regions of the Caucasus and was at one time classified as Bufo bufo <unk> . It has a larger genome and differs from Bufo bufo morphologically and is now accepted as Bufo verrucosissimus . The spiny toad was classified as Bufo bufo spinosus . It is found in the Mediterranean area and grows to a larger size and has a <unk> skin than its more northern counterparts with which it intergrades . It is now accepted as Bufo spinosus . The Gredos toad , Bufo bufo <unk> , is restricted to the Sierra de Gredos , a mountain range in central Spain . It has exceptionally large paratoid glands and its colour tends to be blotched rather than uniform . It is now considered to be a synonym of Bufo spinosus . 
 Bufo bufo is part of a species complex , a group of closely related species which cannot be clearly demarcated . Several modern species are believed to form an ancient group of related taxa from preglacial times . These are the spiny toad ( Bufo spinosus ) , the Caucasian toad ( Bufo verrucosissimus ) and the Japanese common toad ( Bufo japonicus ) . The European common toad ( Bufo bufo ) seems to have arisen more recently . It is believed that the range of the ancestral form extended into Asia but that isolation between the eastern and western species complexes occurred as a result of the development of the Central Asian Deserts during the Middle Miocene . The exact taxonomic relationships between these species remains unclear . A serological investigation into toad populations in Turkey undertaken in 2001 examined the blood serum proteins of Bufo verrucosissimus and Bufo spinosus . It found that the differences between the two were not significant and that therefore the former should be synonymized with the latter . 
 A study published in 2012 examined the phylogenetic relationships between the Eurasian and North African species in the Bufo bufo group and indicated a long evolutionary history for the group . Nine to thirteen million years ago , Bufo <unk> , a recently described species from south Azerbaijan and Iran , split from the main lineage . Further divisions occurred with Bufo spinosus splitting off about five million years ago when the Pyrenees were being uplifted , an event which isolated the populations in the Iberian Peninsula from those in the rest of Europe . The remaining European lineage split into Bufo bufo and Bufo verrucosissimus less than three million years ago during the Pleistocene . Very occasionally the common toad hybridizes with the natterjack toad ( Bufo <unk> ) or the European green toad ( Bufo viridis ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The common toad can reach about 15 cm ( 6 in ) in length . Females are normally stouter than males and southern specimens tend to be larger than northern ones . The head is broad with a wide mouth below the terminal snout which has two small nostrils . There are no teeth . The bulbous , protruding eyes have yellow or copper coloured irises and horizontal slit @-@ shaped pupils . Just behind the eyes are two bulging regions , the paratoid glands , which are positioned obliquely . They contain a noxious substance , bufotoxin , which is used to deter potential predators . The head joins the body without a noticeable neck and there is no external vocal sac . The body is broad and squat and positioned close to the ground . The fore limbs are short with the toes of the fore feet turning inwards . At breeding time , the male develops nuptial pads on the first three fingers . He uses these to grasp the female when mating . The hind legs are short relative to other frogs ' legs and the hind feet have long , <unk> toes . There is no tail . The skin is dry and covered with small wart @-@ like lumps . The colour is a fairly uniform shade of brown , olive @-@ brown or greyish @-@ brown , sometimes partly blotched or banded with a darker shade . The common toad tends to be sexually dimorphic with the females being browner and the males greyer . The underside is a dirty white speckled with grey and black patches . 
 Other species with which the common toad could be confused include the natterjack toad ( Bufo <unk> ) and the European green toad ( Bufo viridis ) . The former is usually smaller and has a yellow band running down its back while the latter has a distinctive mottled pattern . The paratoid glands of both are parallel rather than slanting as in the common toad . The common frog ( Rana temporaria ) is also similar in appearance but it has a less rounded snout , damp smooth skin , and usually moves by leaping . 
 Common toads can live for many years and have survived for fifty years in captivity . In the wild , common toads are thought to live for about ten to twelve years . Their age can be determined by counting the number of annual growth rings in the bones of their phalanges . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 After the common frog ( Rana temporaria ) , the edible frog ( Pelophylax esculentus ) and the smooth newt ( Lissotriton vulgaris ) , the common toad is the fourth most common amphibian in Europe . It is found throughout the continent with the exception of Iceland , the cold northern parts of Scandinavia , Ireland and a number of Mediterranean islands . These include Malta , Crete , Corsica , Sardinia and the Balearic Islands . Its easterly range extends to Irkutsk in Siberia and its southerly range includes parts of northwestern Africa in the northern mountain ranges of Morocco , Algeria and Tunisia . A closely related variant lives in eastern Asia including Japan . The common toad is found at altitudes of up to 2 @,@ 500 metres ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) in the southern part of its range . It is largely found in forested areas with coniferous , deciduous and mixed woodland , especially in wet locations . It also inhabits open countryside , fields , copses , parks and gardens , and often occurs in dry areas well away from standing water . 
 = = Behaviour and lifecycle = = 
 The common toad usually moves by walking rather slowly or in short shuffling jumps involving all four legs . It spends the day concealed in a lair that it has hollowed out under foliage or beneath a root or a stone where its colouring makes it inconspicuous . It emerges at dusk and may travel some distance in the dark while hunting . It is most active in wet weather . By morning it has returned to its base and may occupy the same place for several months . It is voracious and eats woodlice , slugs , beetles , caterpillars , flies , earthworms and even small mice . Small , fast moving prey may be caught by a flick of the tongue while larger items are grabbed with the jaws . Having no teeth , it swallows food whole in a series of gulps . It does not recognise its prey as such but will try to consume any small , dark coloured , moving object it encounters at night . A research study showed that it would snap at a moving 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) piece of black paper as if it were prey but would disregard a larger moving piece . Toads seem to use visual cues for feeding and can see their prey at very low light intensities where humans are unable to discern anything . Periodically , the common toad sheds its skin . This comes away in tattered pieces and is then consumed . 
 When attacked , the common toad adopts a characteristic stance , inflating its body and standing with its hindquarters raised and its head lowered . Its chief means of defence lies in the foul tasting secretion that is produced by its paratoid glands and other glands on its skin . This contains a toxin called <unk> and is enough to deter many predators although grass snakes seem to be unaffected by it . Other predators of adult toads include hedgehogs , rats and mink , and even domestic cats . Birds that feed on toads include herons , crows and birds of prey . Crows have been observed to puncture the skin with their beak and then peck out the animal 's liver , thus avoiding the toxin . The tadpoles also exude noxious substances which deter fishes from eating them but not the great crested newt . Aquatic invertebrates that feed on toad tadpoles include dragonfly larvae , diving beetles and water boatmen . These usually avoid the noxious secretion by puncturing the tadpole 's skin and sucking out its juices . 
 A parasitic fly , Lucilia <unk> , attacks adult common toads . It lays its eggs on the toad 's skin and when these hatch , the larvae crawl into the toad 's nostrils and eat its flesh internally with lethal consequences . The European fingernail clam ( <unk> corneum ) is unusual in that it can climb up water plants and move around on its muscular foot . It sometimes clings to the toe of a common toad and this is believed to be one of the means by which it disperses to new locations . 
 In 2007 , researchers using a remotely operated underwater vehicle to survey Loch Ness , Scotland , observed a common toad moving along the bottom of the lake at a depth of 324 feet ( 99 m ) . They were surprised to find that an air @-@ breathing animal could survive in such a location . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The common toad emerges from hibernation in spring and there is a mass migration towards the breeding sites . The toads converge on certain ponds that they favour while avoiding other stretches of water that seem eminently suitable . Adults use the same location year after year and over 80 % of males marked as juveniles have been found to return to the pond at which they were spawned . They find their way to these mainly by using olfactory and magnetic cues . Toads experimentally moved elsewhere and fitted with tracking devices have been found to be able to locate their chosen breeding pond when the displacement exceeded three kilometres ( two miles ) . 
 The males arrive first and remain in the location for several weeks while the females only stay long enough to mate and spawn . Rather than fighting for the right to mate with a female , male toads may settle disputes by means of the pitch of their voice . <unk> provides a reliable sign of body size and hence of prowess . Nevertheless , fights occur in some instances . In a study at one pond where males outnumbered females by four or five to one , it was found that 38 % of the males won the right to mate by defeating rivals in combat or by displacing other males already mounted on females . Male toads generally outnumber female toads at breeding ponds . A Swedish study found that female mortality was higher than that of males and that 41 % of females did not come to the breeding pond in the spring and missed a year before reproducing again . 
 The males mount the females ' backs , grasping them with their fore limbs under the armpits in a grip that is known as amplexus . The males are very enthusiastic , will try to grasp fish or inanimate objects and often mount the backs of other males . Sometimes several toads form a heap , each male trying to grasp the female at the base . It is a stressful period and mortality is high among breeding toads . A successful male stays in amplexus for several days and , as the female lays a long , double string of small black eggs , he fertilises them with his sperm . As the pair wander piggyback around the shallow edges of the pond , the gelatinous egg strings , which may contain 3000 to 6000 eggs and be 3 to 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 10 to 15 ft ) in length , get tangled in plant stalks . 
 The strings of eggs absorb water and swell in size , and small tadpoles hatch out after two to three weeks . At first they cling to the remains of the strings and feed on the jelly . They later attach themselves to the underside of the leaves of water weed before becoming free swimming . The tadpoles at first look similar to those of the common frog ( Rana temporaria ) but they are a darker colour , being blackish above and dark grey below . They can be distinguished from the tadpoles of other species by the fact that the mouth is the same width as the space between the eyes , and this is twice as large as the distance between the nostrils . Over the course of a few weeks their legs develop and their tail gradually gets reabsorbed . By twelve weeks of age they are miniature toads measuring about 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) long and ready to leave the pond . 
 = = = Development and growth = = = 
 The common toad reaches maturity at three to seven years old but there is great variability between populations . Juveniles are often parasitised by the lung nematode <unk> <unk> . This slows growth rates and reduces stamina and fitness . Larger juveniles at metamorphosis always outgrow smaller ones that have been reared in more crowded ponds . Even when they have heavy worm burdens , large juveniles grow faster than smaller individuals with light worm burdens . After several months of heavy worm infection , some juveniles in a study were only half as heavy as control juveniles . Their parasite @-@ induced anorexia caused a decrease in food intake and some died . Another study investigated whether the use of nitrogenous fertilisers affects the development of common toad tadpoles . The toadlets were kept in very dilute solutions of ammonium nitrate of various strengths . It was found that at certain concentrations , which were well above any normally found in the field , growth was increased and metamorphosis accelerated , but at others , there was no significant difference between the experimental tadpoles and controls . Nevertheless , certain unusual swimming patterns and a few deformities were found among the experimental animals . 
 A comparison was made between the growth rate of newly metamorphosed juveniles from different altitudes and latitudes , the specimens studied being from Norway , Germany , Switzerland , the Netherlands and France . At first the growth rates for males and females was identical . By the time they became mature their growth rate had slowed down to about 21 % of the initial rate and they had reached 95 % of their expected adult size . Some females that were on a biennial breeding cycle carried on growing rapidly for a longer time . Adjusting for differences in temperature and the length of the growing season , the toads grew and matured at much the same rate from the four colder localities . These juveniles reached maturity after 1 @.@ 09 years for males and 1 @.@ 55 years for females . However , the young toads from lowland France grew faster and longer to a much greater size taking an average 1 @.@ 77 years for males and 2 @.@ 49 years for females before reaching maturity . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species considers the common toad as being of " least concern " . This is because it has a wide distribution and is , over most of its range , a common species . It is not particularly threatened by habitat loss because it is adaptable and is found in deciduous and coniferous forests , scrubland , meadows , parks and gardens . It prefers damp areas with dense foliage . The major threats it faces include loss of habitat locally , the drainage of wetlands where it breeds , agricultural activities , pollution and mortality on roads . <unk> , an infectious disease of amphibians , has been reported in common toads in Spain and the United Kingdom and may affect some populations . 
 There are parts of its range where the common toad seems to be in decline . In Spain , increased aridity and habitat loss have led to a diminution in numbers and it is regarded as " near threatened " . A population in the Sierra de Gredos mountain range is facing predation by otters and increased competition from the frog Pelophylax perezi . Both otter and frog seem to be extending their ranges to higher altitudes . The common toad cannot be legally sold or traded in the United Kingdom but there is a slow decline in toad numbers and it has therefore been declared a Biodiversity Action Plan priority species . In Russia , it is considered to be a " Rare Species " in the provinces of <unk> , <unk> , Yamal @-@ Nenets Autonomous County and Irkutsk , but during the 1990s , it became more abundant in Moscow Province . 
 It has been found that urban populations of common toad occupying small areas and isolated by development show a lower level of genetic diversity and reduced fitness as compared to nearby rural populations . The researchers demonstrated this by genetic analysis and by noting the greater number of physical abnormalities among urban as against rural tadpoles when raised in a controlled environment . It was considered that long term depletion in numbers and habitat fragmentation can reduce population persistence in such urban environments . 
 = = = Roadkill = = = 
 Many toads are killed by traffic while migrating to their breeding grounds . In Europe they have the highest rate of mortality from roadkill among amphibians . Many of the deaths take place on stretches of road where streams flow underneath showing that migration routes often follow water courses . In some places in Germany , Belgium , Great Britain , Northern Italy and Poland , special tunnels have been constructed so that toads can cross under roads in safety . In other places , local wildlife groups run " toad patrols " , carrying the amphibians across roads at busy crossing points in buckets . The toads start moving at dusk and for them to travel far , the temperature needs to remain above 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) . On a warm wet night they may continue moving all night but if it cools down , they may stop earlier . An estimate was made of the significance of roadkill in toad populations in the Netherlands . The number of females killed in the spring migration on a quiet country road ( ten vehicles per hour ) was compared with the number of strings of eggs laid in nearby fens . A 30 % mortality rate was found , with the rate for deaths among males likely to be of a similar order . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The main toxic substance found in the parotoid gland and skin of the common toad is called bufotoxin . It was first isolated by Heinrich Wieland and his colleagues in 1922 and they succeeded in identifying its structure about 20 years later . Meanwhile , other workers succeeded in isolating the same compound and its parent steroid <unk> from the Japanese toad ( Bufo japonicus ) . By 1986 , researchers at the Arizona State University had succeeded in synthesizing the toad venom constituents <unk> , <unk> and bufotoxin . The chemical formula of bufotoxin is <unk> . Its physical effects resemble those of digitalis which in small doses increases the strength with which the heart muscle contracts and which is used in the treatment of congestive heart failure . The skin of one toad contains enough toxin to cause serious symptoms or even death in animals and man . Clinical effects include severe irritation and pain to eyes , mouth , nose and throat , cardiovascular and respiratory symptoms , paralysis and seizures , increased salivation , vomiting , hyperkalemia , cyanosis and hallucinations . There is no known anti @-@ venom . Treatment consists of supporting respiratory and cardiovascular functions , prevention of absorption and electrocardiography to monitor the condition . <unk> , phenytoin , <unk> and lidocaine may prove useful in its management . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 The toad has long been considered to be an animal of ill omen or a connection to a spirit world . This may have its origins in the fact that it is at home both on land and in the water . It may cause repugnance because of its blackish , wart @-@ like skin , its slow movements and the way it emerges from some dark hole . In Europe in the Middle Ages , the toad was associated with the Devil , for whom a coat @-@ of @-@ arms was invented emblazoned with three toads . It was known that the toad could poison people and , as the witch 's familiar , it was thought to possess magical powers . Even ordinary people made use of dried toads , their bile , faeces and blood . In some areas , the finding of a toad in a house was considered evidence that a witch was present . In the Basque Country , the familiars were believed to be toads wearing elegant robes . These were herded by children who were being trained as witches . Between 1610 and 1612 , the Spanish inquisitor Alonso de Salazar Frías investigated witchcraft in the region and searched the houses of suspected witches for dressed toads . He found none . These witches were reputed to use undomesticated toads as ingredients in their <unk> and brews . 
 An English folk tale tells how an old woman , a supposed witch , cursed her landlord and all his possessions when he demanded the unpaid rent for her cottage . Soon afterwards , a large toad fell on his wife and caused her to collapse . The toad was thrown into the fire but escaped with severe burns . Meanwhile , the old witch 's cottage had caught fire and she was badly burnt . By next day , both toad and witch had died , and it was found that the woman 's burns exactly mirrored those of the toad . 
 The saliva of the toad was considered poisonous and was known as " <unk> venom " and it was believed that it could spit or vomit poisonous fire . Toads were associated with devils and demons and in Paradise Lost , John Milton depicted Satan as a toad when he poured poison into Eve 's ear . The First Witch in Shakespeare 's Macbeth gave instructions on using a toad in the concoction of spells : 
 It was also believed that there was a jewel inside a toad 's head , a " <unk> " , that when worn as a necklace or ring would warn the wearer of attempts to poison them . Shakespeare mentioned this in As You Like It : 
 Mr. Toad Esq. is one of the main characters in the children 's novel The Wind in the Willows , by Kenneth Grahame . This has been dramatized by several authors including A. A. Milne who called his play Toad of Toad Hall . Mr. Toad is a very conceited , anthropomorphic toad and in the book he composes a ditty in his own praise which starts like this : 
 George Orwell in his essay Some Thoughts on the Common Toad described the emergence of the common toad from hibernation as one of the most moving signs of spring . 
 = Amateur Station Operator 's Certificate = 
 Amateur Station Operator 's Certificate or <unk> is the examination that needs to be passed to receive an amateur radio licence in India . The exam is conducted by the Wireless and Planning and Coordination Wing ( WPC ) of the Ministry of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology . The examination is held in various cities in India on monthly or quarterly basis depending on the size of the city . The licence may be awarded to an individual or a club station operated by a group of licensed amateur radio operators . 
 The first amateur radio operator was licensed in 1921 during the British rule . Partly due to low awareness among the general population and prohibitive equipment costs , the number of licensed amateur radio operators remained low for several decades . In 1970 , there were less than a thousand operators ; by 1980 , the number had risen to 1 @,@ 500 . In 2000 , there were 10 @,@ 000 operators and as of 2007 , there are more than 17 @,@ 000 licensed users in India . 
 = = History = = 
 = = Licence categories = = 
 = = Examination and syllabus = = 
 The exam consists of two parts : 
 Part I – Written Test 
 Section I : Radio Theory and Practice 
 Section 2 : Regulations 
 Part II – Morse 
 Section 1 : Morse Receiving and Sending : ( Speed : 5 words per minute ) 
 Section 2 : Morse Receiving and Sending : ( Speed : 12 words per minute ) 
 The maximum number of marks that a candidate can secure is 100 . To pass the examination , a candidate must score a minimum of 40 ( 50 for Grade I ) in each written section , and 50 ( 55 for Grade I ) in aggregate for a pass . 
 = = = Radio theory and practice = = = 
 The Radio theory and practice syllabus includes eight <unk> : 
 The first <unk> is the elementary theory of electricity that covers topics on conductors , resistors , Ohm 's Law , power , energy , electromagnets , inductance , capacitance , types of capacitors and inductors , series and parallel connections for radio circuits . The second topic is the elementary theory of alternating currents . Portions include sinusoidal alternating quantities such as peak values , instantaneous values , RMS average values , phase ; electrical resonance , and quality factor for radio circuits . The syllabus then moves on to semiconductors , specifically the construction and operation of valves , also known as vacuum tubes . Included in this portion of the syllabus are thermionic emissions with their characteristic curves , diodes , <unk> and multi @-@ electrode valves ; and the use of valves as rectifiers , oscillators , amplifiers , detectors and frequency changers , stabilisation and smoothing . 
 Radio receivers is the fourth topic that covers the principles and operation of TRF receivers and <unk> receivers , CW reception ; with receiver characteristics such as sensitivity , selectivity and fidelity ; Adjacent @-@ channel interference and image interference ; AGC and squelch ; and signal to noise ratio ( S / R ) . Similarly , the next topic on transmitters covers the principles and operation of low power transmitters ; oscillators such as the Colpitts oscillator , Hartley oscillator , crystal oscillators , and stability of oscillators . 
 The last three topics deal with radio propagation , aerials , and frequency measurement . Covered are topic such as wavelength , frequency , nature and propagation of radio waves ; ground and sky waves ; skip distance ; and fading . Common types of transmitting and receiving aerials such as Yagi antennas , and radiation patterns , measurement of frequency and use of simple frequency meters conclude the topic . 
 = = = Regulations = = = 
 Knowledge of the Indian Wireless Telegraph Rules and the Indian Wireless Telegraphs ( Amateur Service ) Rules are essential and always tested . The syllabus also includes international radio regulations related to the operation of amateur stations with emphasis on provisions of radio regulation nomenclature of the frequency and wavelength , frequency allocation to amateur radio service , measures to prevent harmful interference , standard frequency and time signals services across the world , identification of stations , distress and urgency transmissions , amateur stations , phonetic alphabets , and figure code are the other topics included in the portion . 
 Also included in the syllabus are Q codes such as QRA , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , QRS , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , QSL , QSO , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ; and CW abbreviations and prosigns such as AA , AB , AR , AS , C , CFM , CL , CQ , DE , K , <unk> , OK , R , TU , VA , WA , and WB . 
 = = = Morse = = = 
 The syllabus includes the following Morse code characters : all alphabets , numbers , prosigns , and punctuations such as the full @-@ stop ; comma ; semi @-@ colon ; break sign ; hyphen and question mark . 
 Receiving 
 For Grade II , the test piece consists of a passage of 125 letters , five letters counting as one word . Candidates are required to copy for five minutes at the speed of five words per minute , international Morse signals from an audio oscillator keyed either manually or automatically . A short practice piece is sent at the prescribed speed before the start of the test . More than five errors disqualifies a candidate . For Grade I , the test piece consists of a passage of 300 characters : letters , figures , and punctuations . The average words contain five characters and each figure and punctuation is counted as two characters . Candidates have to receive for five consecutive minutes at a speed of 12 words per minute . 
 Sending 
 For Grade II , the test piece consists of 125 letters , with five letters forming one word . Candidates are required to transmit by using a Morse key for five consecutive minutes at the minimum speed of five words per minute . A short practice piece is allowed before the test . Candidates are not allowed more than one attempt in the test . More than five uncorrected errors disqualifies a candidate . For Grade I , the speed sent is 12 words per minute . 
 = = Fees = = 
 = Tryvandshøiden ( station ) = 
 Tryvandshøiden ( also <unk> , Tryvann and <unk> ) was a planned station on the Holmenkollen Line in Oslo , Norway . It was planned by the company Tryvandsbanen in the early 1910s and partly constructed in 1916 at the end of a single @-@ tracked line from Frognerseteren . A red signalman 's house named " Norden " was the station 's only facility . Passenger trains never served the station , and the tracks from Frognerseteren to Tryvandshøiden were removed in 1939 . The signalman 's house was not demolished . In 1993 , 2004 and 2008 , proposals were made to re @-@ open the station so that it would be more convenient for Oslo residents to use the Tryvann Ski Resort . However , these proposals were all rejected by the operator Oslo Sporveier on the grounds that the extension would be too expensive . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1898 , Holmenkolbanen opened the Holmenkollen Line from Majorstuen to Besserud station ( then Holmenkollen ) . In 1910 – 11 , a recently established company named Tryvandsbanen planned to extend the line towards Frognerseteren and <unk> . The company extended the line from Besserud to Tryvandshøiden station on 15 May 1916 . The line was double @-@ tracked to Frognerseteren and single @-@ tracked from there to Tryvandshøiden , as only the first section had passenger traffic . The single @-@ tracked line from Frognerseteren to Tryvandshøiden was 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) long and ran in a curve east of Øvresetertjern . The extension was financed partly by Tryvandsbanen 's equity , and partly by loans from the Municipality of Oslo . 
 In the 1930s , the Municipality of Oslo made plans for making Tryvann the " Davos of the North " , following the opening of Tryvann stadion in the winter of 1936 . The Holmenkollen Line was planned to be extended even further , from Tryvandshøiden station to a proposed hotel with 200 beds . This never happened , since the skating rinks at Øvresetertjern were too cold and windy to become popular among Oslo residents . 
 Even though Tryvandsbanen had prepared the Frognerseteren – Tryvandshøiden Line for an upgrade to double tracks , no action was taken due to a shortage of money . The line was therefore unsuitable for regular passenger service , and Tryvandsbanen considered it to be useless . The tracks from Tryvandshøiden station to a point some 200 metres ( 660 ft ) ahead of Frognerseteren station were removed in 1939 . In the 1960s , the right @-@ of @-@ way was gravelled over and converted into a rail trail . 
 = = = Reopening = = = 
 In 1993 , proposals were made to re @-@ open the line to Tryvandshøiden Station , so that the Tryvann Ski Resort would be more accessible to Oslo residents . Oslo Sporveier , the operator , turned down the proposals , arguing that it would cost about 3 billion NOK to lay the tracks and put up overhead line equipment , and that it would not attract enough passengers . 
 In 2004 , the writer Erling <unk> gathered 356 signatures in favor of extending the line to the ski resort , which were given to the Oslo City Council . Even though the proposal was supported by the prominent council members Peter N. Myhre , Ola <unk> and Rune Gerhardsen , Oslo Sporveier declined , stating that the extension of the line would not be profitable enough . 
 Peter N. Myhre stated in 2008 that the line would be extended to the ski resort before the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships 2011 , but no action was taken as neither Ruter nor the city council wanted to allocate the required 150 million NOK . 
 = = Facilities and services = = 
 A red @-@ painted house for the signalman was put up close to the station . Tryvandsbanen also developed plans for building a station house with a waiting shed , but these never materialised . The name of the red @-@ painted house was changed from <unk> ( " The North Pole " ) to Norden ( " The North " ) and it was modernised after the removal of the tracks . The station was included on the Nordmarka maps published in 1913 and 1938 . 
 The station was never served by passenger trains , but between 1914 and 1918 Norway Telecom ( now Telenor ) used the line for transporting steel when <unk> was being constructed . Occasionally charter trips to Øvresetertjern for passengers were also arranged . 
 = Fred Tenney = 
 Frederick Tenney ( November 26 , 1871 – July 3 , 1952 ) was an American professional baseball player whose career spanned 20 seasons , 17 of which were spent with the Major League Baseball ( MLB ) Boston Beaneaters / Doves / Rustlers ( 1894 – 1907 , 1911 ) and the New York Giants ( 1908 – 1909 ) . Described as " one of the best defensive first basemen of all time " , Tenney is credited with originating the 3 @-@ 6 @-@ 3 double play and originating the style of playing off the first base foul line and deep , as modern first basemen do . Over his career , Tenney compiled a batting average of .294 , 1 @,@ 278 runs scored , 2 @,@ 231 hits , 22 home runs , and 688 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 1 @,@ 994 games played . 
 Born in Georgetown , Massachusetts , Tenney was one of the first players to enter the league after graduating college , where he served as a left @-@ handed catcher for Brown University . Signing with the Beaneaters , Tenney spent the next 14 seasons with the team , including a three @-@ year managerial stint from 1905 – 1907 . In December 1907 Tenney was traded to the Giants as a part of an eight @-@ man deal ; after two years playing for New York , he re @-@ signed with the Boston club , where he played for and managed the team in 1911 . After retiring from baseball , Tenney worked for the Equitable Life Insurance Society before his death in Boston on July 3 , 1952 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tenney was born in Georgetown , Massachusetts , the third of five children to Charles William and Sarah Lambert ( née <unk> ) Tenney . Charles Tenney attended Dummer Academy from 1850 to 1853 , and served for the 50th Massachusetts Regiment in the Civil War , where he nearly died due to " intense suffering " . Growing up , Fred led his class in drawing and sketching . He reportedly started playing baseball around 1880 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Brown University = = = 
 In 1892 , Tenney played his first professional game for the Binghamton <unk> of the Eastern League , going 1 for 4 with a single . He played as Brown University 's catcher for the 1893 and 1894 seasons . In 1894 , the team had a 23 – 8 record and were selected as national champions by Harper 's Weekly . The night of his senior dinner , Tenney received a telephone message from Frank Selee , the manager of the Beaneaters , asking him to play a game for the team at catcher , due to the injuries of other players . 
 = = = Boston = = = 
 In his MLB debut on June 16 , 1894 , Tenney had to be removed from the game in the fifth inning due to a fractured finger on his throwing hand from a foul tip . After Tenney had his finger addressed , James Billings , an owner of the Beaneaters , offered him a contract worth US $ 300 a month from that day . Tenney , later writing about the day , stated : 
 I thought they were trying to have a little joke with me , and I concluded that I could do a little kidding myself . So I thought I would call their bluff by asking for some advance money . I screwed up my courage and asked Mr. Billings whether , if I signed the contract at once , I could get some advance money . He asked how much I wanted , and I thought I would mention a big sum in order to call their bluff good and strong . So I said $ 150 . He consulted with Mr. Conant , another Director , and said that I could have the money all right , and asked me how I would like to have it – cash or check . [ ... ] I replied that I would take half cash and then half in check , and immediately he wrote out a check for $ 75 , counted out $ 75 in cash , shoved the contract over to me to sign , laying the cash and check beside it . 
 He returned to the team a month later , and finished the year batting .395 in 27 games . The following season , Tenney moved to the outfield due to an erratic throwing arm behind the plate , according to manager Selee . For the season , he hit .272 in 49 games , while also playing minor league baseball for the New Bedford Whalers . In 1896 , Tenney again caught and played outfield ; offensively , however , Tenney hit .336 in nearly double the games from the previous year ( 88 ) despite playing in the minors for the Springfield Ponies . 
 In 1897 , Tenney moved to first base to replace the aging Tom Tucker . According to Alfred Henry Spink , within two weeks of the move it was evident that Tenney had become " one of the finest first <unk> that the game [ had ] ever seen . " On June 14 , 1897 , in a game against the Cincinnati Reds , Tenney turned the first 3 @-@ 6 @-@ 3 double play in MLB history . Offensively , Tenney led MLB in plate appearances ( 646 ) and tied Duff Cooley , Gene DeMontreville , and George Van Haltren for the lead in at bats ( 566 ) as the Boston club became National League ( NL ) champions with a 93 – 39 record . 
 Boston again won the NL in 1898 while Tenney hit .328 with 62 RBIs . In 1899 he collected 209 hits , fifth most in MLB , and recorded 17 triples , good for fourth best in MLB . In 1900 Tenney , at age 28 , batted .279 over 112 games played . He began a streak of seven consecutive seasons where he led the NL in assists in 1901 ; he holds the record for most seasons leading a league in assists , with eight , including one in 1899 . He was suspended for ten games for fighting Pittsburg Pirates manager Fred Clarke in May 1902 , and finished the 1902 season with the second most sacrifice hits ( 29 ) in the majors , to go along with a .315 average . Throughout the 1901 – 1902 seasons , Tenney received contract offers worth up to $ 7 @,@ 000 ( $ 193 @,@ 172 in 2012 ) from St. Louis , Cleveland , and Detroit ; Tenney , however , decided to remain in Boston , and was named captain of the club in 1903 . For the season , he hit .313 , with 41 RBIs and three home runs , as he led his team in walks ( 70 ) and had the best on @-@ base percentage mark ( .415 ) on the squad . In 1904 , Tenney again led his team in walks and on @-@ base percentage , as he tied for the team lead in runs with Ed Abbaticchio . 
 He was named manager of the team in 1905 , but did not receive additional pay ; he was , however , offered a bonus if the team didn 't lose money . In 1905 , Tenney tried to sign William Clarence Matthews , an African @-@ American middle infielder from Harvard University , to a contract . Tenney later retracted his offer due to pressure from MLB players . Defensively , he led the majors in errors committed by a first baseman and finished second in most putouts for any position . Tenney led the 1906 Beaneaters to a 49 – 102 record . For the second straight year , the Boston team lost more than 100 games . 
 After a 158 – 295 record as manager , on December 3 , 1907 , Tenney was traded to the Giants , along with Al Bridwell and Tom Needham , for Frank Bowerman , George Browne , Bill Dahlen , Cecil Ferguson and Dan McGann ; the trade was called " one of the biggest deals in the history of National League baseball " . 
 = = = New York Giants = = = 
 In his first season with the Giants , Tenney led MLB with 684 plate appearances and finished third in runs scored , with 101 . In a game against the Chicago Cubs on September 23 , Tenney could not play due to an attack of lumbago ; it was the only game he did not play in during the season . Rookie Fred Merkle took his spot at first base . The game was at a 1 – 1 tie in the bottom of the ninth . Merkle , after hitting a single , was at first , and Moose McCormick was at third , with two outs . Al Bridwell singled to center field , but Hank O 'Day called Merkle out because Merkle had not touched second base . O 'Day ruled the game a 1 – 1 tie due to darkness . With both teams finishing the season at a 98 – 55 record , a replay game had to be played to determine who would win the National League pennant . The game was held on October 8 , with the Cubs winning , 4 – 2 . 
 After batting a career low .235 in 1909 , Tenney was released by the Giants . He spent the 1910 season as a player – manager for the minor league Lowell Tigers , leading the team to a 65 – 57 record , good for fourth ( out of eight teams ) in the New England League . 
 = = = Return to Boston = = = 
 On December 19 , 1910 , Tenney signed a two @-@ year contract with the Boston Rustlers . For the 1911 season , Tenney hit .263 over 102 games . He was released by the Braves on March 20 , 1912 , after 44 – 107 record in one season ; Tenney was paid not to manage for the second year on his contract . 
 In 1916 , he bought the Newark Indians of the International League with James R. Price for $ 25 @,@ 000 ( $ 527 @,@ 450 in 2012 ) . Mayor Thomas Lynch Raymond declared April 27 a " half @-@ holiday " for the city of Newark for the Indians ' Opening Day . Tenney played in 16 games for the Indians , hitting .318 with seven hits over 22 at @-@ bats , and managed the team to a 52 – 87 record . 
 = = Personal life and death = = 
 Tenney married Bessie Farnham Berry on October 21 , 1895 . The couple had two children together ; Barbra , born July 4 , 1899 , and Ruth , born December 8 , 1901 . Early in his career , he refused to play baseball on Sundays due to his religion , although he later changed his mind . Tenney was known as the " <unk> Collegian " at the major league level because it was unpopular for college players to become professional . Tenney served as a journalist for The Boston Post , Baseball Magazine , and The New York Times . He painted and sketched during the winter . 
 After retiring from baseball , Tenney worked for the Equitable Life Insurance Society and continued writing for The New York Times . In 1912 , he was vice @-@ president of the Usher – Stoughton shoe manufacturing company in Lynn , Massachusetts ; later , he formed the Tenney – Spinney Shoe Company in partnership with Henry Spinney . He was balloted for the National Baseball Hall of Fame from 1936 – 1942 and again in 1946 , but never received more than eight votes , receiving eight ( 3 @.@ 1 % of total ballots cast ) during the Baseball Hall of Fame balloting in 1938 . Tenney died on July 3 , 1952 at Massachusetts General Hospital after a long illness . He was interred at Harmony Chapel and Cemetery in Georgetown . 
 = Los Angeles Lakers = 
 The Los Angeles Lakers are an American professional basketball team based in Los Angeles , California . The Lakers compete in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , as a member club of the league 's Western Conference Pacific Division . The Lakers play their home games at Staples Center , an arena shared with the NBA 's Los Angeles Clippers , the Los Angeles Sparks of the Women 's National Basketball Association , and the Los Angeles Kings of the National Hockey League . The Lakers are one of the most successful teams in the history of the NBA , and have won 16 NBA championships , their last being in 2010 . As of 2015 , the Lakers are the second most valuable franchise in the NBA according to Forbes , having an estimated value of $ 2 @.@ 7 billion . 
 The franchise began with the 1947 purchase of a disbanded team , the Detroit Gems of the National Basketball League ( NBL ) . The new team began playing in Minneapolis , Minnesota , calling themselves the Minneapolis Lakers in honor of the state 's nickname , " Land of 10 @,@ 000 Lakes " . Initially a member of the NBL , the Lakers won the 1948 NBL championship before joining the rival Basketball Association of America and winning five of the next six BAA and NBA championships in Minneapolis after the NBA formed in 1949 . The team was propelled by center George Mikan , who is described by the NBA 's official website as the league 's " first superstar " . After struggling financially in the late 1950s following Mikan 's retirement , they relocated to Los Angeles before the 1960 – 61 season . 
 Led by Hall of Famers Elgin Baylor and Jerry West , Los Angeles made the NBA Finals six times in the 1960s , but lost each series to the Boston Celtics , beginning their long and storied rivalry . In 1968 , the Lakers acquired four @-@ time NBA Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) Wilt Chamberlain to play center , and after losing in the Finals in 1969 and 1970 , they won their sixth NBA title — and first in Los Angeles — in 1972 , led by new head coach Bill Sharman . After the retirement of West and Chamberlain , the team acquired another center , Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar , who had won multiple MVP awards , but was unable to make the Finals in the late 1970s . The 1980s Lakers were nicknamed " Showtime " due to their Magic Johnson @-@ led fast break @-@ offense , and won five championships in a 9 @-@ year span , including their first ever Finals championship against the Celtics in 1985 . This team featured Hall of Famers in Johnson , Abdul @-@ Jabbar , and James Worthy , and a Hall of Fame coach , Pat Riley . After Abdul @-@ Jabbar and Johnson 's retirement , the team struggled in the early 1990s before acquiring Shaquille O 'Neal and Kobe Bryant in 1996 . Led by O 'Neal , Bryant , and another Hall of Fame coach , Phil Jackson , Los Angeles won three consecutive titles between 2000 to 2002 , securing the franchise its second " three @-@ peat " . After losing both the 2004 and 2008 NBA Finals , the Lakers won two more championships by defeating the Orlando Magic in 2009 and Boston in 2010 . 
 The Lakers hold the record for NBA 's longest winning streak , 33 straight games , set during the 1971 – 72 season . 21 Hall of Famers have played for Los Angeles , while four have coached the team . Four Lakers — Abdul @-@ Jabbar , Johnson , O 'Neal , and Bryant — have won the NBA MVP Award for a total of eight awards . 
 = = Team history = = 
 = = = 1947 – 48 & 1948 – 59 : Beginnings and Minneapolis dynasty = = = 
 The Lakers ' franchise began in 1947 when Ben Berger and Morris <unk> of Minnesota purchased the recently disbanded Detroit Gems of the National Basketball League ( NBL ) for $ 15 @,@ 000 from Gems owner Maury Winston . Minneapolis sportswriter Sid Hartman played a key behind the scenes role in helping put together the deal and later the team . Inspired by Minnesota 's nickname , " Land of 10 @,@ 000 Lakes " , the team christened themselves the Lakers . Hartman helped them hire John Kundla from College of St. Thomas , to be their first head coach , by meeting with him and selling him on the team . 
 The Lakers had a solid roster which featured forward Jim Pollard , playmaker Herm Schaefer , and center George Mikan , who became the most dominant player in the NBL . In their first season , they led the league with a 43 – 17 record . 
 In 1948 , the Lakers moved from the NBL to the Basketball Association of America ( BAA ) , and Mikan 's 28 @.@ 3 point per game ( ppg ) scoring average set a BAA record . In the 1949 BAA Finals they won the championship , beating the Washington Capitols four games to two . The following season , the team improved to 51 – 17 , repeating as champions . In the 1950 – 51 season , Mikan won his third straight scoring title at 28 @.@ 4 ppg and the Lakers went 44 – 24 to win their second straight division title . One of those games , a 19 – 18 loss against the Fort Wayne Pistons , became infamous as the lowest scoring game in NBA history . In the playoffs , they defeated the Indianapolis Olympians in three games but lost to the Rochester Royals in the next round . 
 During the 1951 – 52 season , the Lakers won 40 games , finishing second in their division . They faced the New York Knicks in the NBA Finals , which they won in seven games . In the 1952 – 53 season , Mikan led the NBA in rebounding , averaging 14 @.@ 4 rebounds per game ( rpg ) , and was named MVP of the 1953 NBA All @-@ Star Game . After a 48 – 22 regular season , the Lakers defeated the Fort Wayne Pistons in the Western playoffs to advance to the NBA Finals . They then defeated the New York Knicks to win their second straight championship . Though Lakers star George Mikan suffered from knee problems throughout the 1953 – 54 season , he was still able to average 18 ppg . Clyde Lovellette , who was drafted in 1952 , helped the team win the Western Division . The team won its third straight championship in the 1950s and fifth in six seasons when it defeated the Syracuse Nationals in seven games . 
 Following Mikan 's retirement in the 1954 off @-@ season , the Lakers struggled but still managed to win 40 games . Although they defeated the Rochester Royals in the first round of the playoffs , they were defeated by the Fort Wayne Pistons in the semifinals . Although they had losing records the next two seasons , they made the playoffs each year . Mikan came back for the last half of the 1955 – 56 season , but struggled and retired for good after the season . Led by Lovellette 's 20 @.@ 6 points and 13 @.@ 5 rebounds , they advanced to the Conference Finals in 1956 – 57 . The Lakers had one of the worst seasons in team history in 1957 – 58 when they won a league @-@ low 19 games . They had hired Mikan , who had been the team 's general manager for the previous two seasons , as head coach to replace Kundla . Mikan was fired in January when the team was 9 – 30 , and Kundla was rehired . 
 The Lakers earned the top pick in the 1958 NBA draft and used it to select Elgin Baylor . Baylor , who was named NBA Rookie of the Year and co @-@ MVP of the 1959 NBA All @-@ Star Game , averaged 24 @.@ 9 ppg and 15 @.@ 0 rpg helping the Lakers improve to second in their division despite a 33 – 39 record . After upsetting the Hawks in six games in the division finals , they returned to the NBA Finals , but were swept by the Celtics , beginning their long rivalry . 
 = = = 1959 – 68 : Move to Los Angeles and Celtics rivalry = = = 
 In their last year in Minneapolis , the Lakers went 25 – 50 . On January 18 , 1960 , the team was coming off a loss and traveling to St. Louis when their plane crash @-@ landed . Snow storms had driven the pilot 150 miles off course when he was forced to land in a cornfield . No one was hurt . Their record earned them the number two pick in the 1960 NBA draft . The team selected Jerry West from West Virginia University . During the 1960 off @-@ season , the Lakers became the NBA 's first West Coast team when owner Bob Short decided to move the team to Los Angeles . Led by Baylor 's 34 @.@ 8 ppg and 19 @.@ 8 rpg , Los Angeles won 11 more than the year before in West 's first season . On November 15 that season , Baylor set a new NBA scoring record when he scored 71 points in a victory against the New York Knicks while grabbing 25 rebounds . In doing so , Baylor broke his own NBA record of 64 points . Despite a losing record , the Lakers made the playoffs . They came within two points of the NBA Finals when they lost in game seven of their second round series against St. Louis . 
 Led by Baylor and West at 38 @.@ 3 and 30 @.@ 8 ppg respectively , the Lakers improved to 54 – 26 in 1961 – 62 , and made the finals . In a game five victory , Baylor grabbed 22 rebounds and set the still @-@ standing NBA record for points in a finals game with 61 , despite fouling out of the game . The Lakers , however , lost to the Celtics by three points in overtime of game seven . Frank Selvy , after making two jumpers in the final 40 seconds to tie the game , missed a potential game @-@ winning 18 foot jump shot in regulation , a miss which he said in June 2010 still haunted him more than 40 years later . 
 Los Angeles won 53 games in 1962 – 63 , behind Baylor 's 34 @.@ 0 ppg and West 's 27 @.@ 1 ppg but lost in the NBA Finals in six games to the Celtics . After falling to 42 – 38 and losing in the first round of the 1964 NBA Playoffs to the Hawks , the team won 49 games in 1964 – 65 . The Lakers surged past the Baltimore Bullets in the division finals , behind West 's record @-@ setting 46 @.@ 3 ppg in the series . They lost again to Celtics in the Finals however , this time in five games . 
 Los Angeles lost in the finals to Boston in seven games again in 1966 , this time by two points . Down by 16 entering the fourth quarter , and 10 with a minute and a half to go , the Lakers mounted a furious rally in the closing moments which fell just short . After dropping to 36 wins and losing in the first round of the 1967 NBA Playoffs , they lost in the finals to the Celtics again in 1968 . Los Angeles moved to a brand @-@ new arena , The Forum , in 1967 , after playing seven seasons at the Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena . 
 = = = 1968 – 73 : Wilt arrives = = = 
 On July 9 , 1968 , the team acquired Wilt Chamberlain from the Philadelphia 76ers for Darrell Imhoff , Archie Clark , and Jerry Chambers . In his first season as a Laker , Chamberlain set a team record by averaging a league @-@ leading 21 @.@ 1 rpg . West , Baylor , and Chamberlain each averaged over 20 points , and Los Angeles won their division . The Lakers and Celtics again met in the finals , and Los Angeles had home court advantage against Boston for the first time in their rivalry . They won the first game behind Jerry West 's 53 points , and had a 3 – 2 lead after five . Boston won the series in seven games however , and earned their 11th NBA Championship in 13 seasons . West was named the first @-@ ever Finals MVP ; this remains the only time that a member of the losing team has won the award . In 1970 , West won his first scoring title at 31 @.@ 2 ppg , the team returned to the finals , and for the first time in 16 years , they did not have to face the Celtics ; instead playing the New York Knicks , who defeated them 4 – 3 . The next season the Lakers were defeated by the Milwaukee Bucks , led by future Laker Lew Alcindor ( now known as Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar ) in the Western Conference Finals . 
 The 1971 – 72 season brought several changes . Owner Jack Kent Cooke brought in Bill Sharman as head coach , and Elgin Baylor announced his retirement early in the season after realizing that his legs were not healthy enough . Sharman increased the team 's discipline . He introduced the concept of the shootaround , where players would arrive at the arena early in the morning before a game to practice shots . They won 14 straight games in November and all 16 games played in December . They won three straight to open the year of 1972 but on January 9 , the Milwaukee Bucks ended their winning streak by defeating the Lakers , 120 – 104 . By winning 33 straight games , Los Angeles set a record for longest winning streak of any team in American professional sports . The Lakers won 69 games that season , which stood as the NBA record for 24 years until the Chicago Bulls won 72 games in 1995 – 96 . Chamberlain averaged a career @-@ low 14 @.@ 8 points but led the league in rebounding at 19 @.@ 2 a game . West 's 9 @.@ 7 assists per game ( apg ) led the league , he also averaged more than 25 points , and was named MVP of the 1972 NBA All @-@ Star Game . The team failed to score 100 points just once all year , and at the end of the season , Bill Sharman was named Coach of the Year . The Lakers went on to reach the finals against the New York Knicks where they would avenge their 1970 finals loss by defeating them 4 games to 1 . Chamberlain tallied 24 points and 29 rebounds in game five and won the NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award . 
 The Lakers won 60 games in the 1972 – 73 NBA season , and took another Pacific Division title . Wilt Chamberlain , playing in his final season , again led the league in rebounding and set the still standing NBA record for field @-@ goal percentage at 72 @.@ 7 % . The team defeated the Chicago Bulls in seven games in the conference semifinals , then the Golden State Warriors in five in the Western Division Finals . They played the New York Knicks in the 1973 NBA Finals . Los Angeles took the first game by three points , but New York won the series in five games . 
 = = = 1973 – 79 : Building " Showtime " = = = 
 During the 1973 – 74 season , the team was hampered by the loss of West , who played only 31 games before his legs gave out . Goodrich , averaging 25 @.@ 3 points , helped the team to a late @-@ season surge . Trailing the Golden State Warriors by three games with seven left to play , the Lakers rallied to finish 47 – 35 and win the Pacific Division . They made the playoffs but managed just one win against Milwaukee in the conference semifinals . Following the season , West retired due to contract disagreements with Cooke , and filed a suit for unpaid back wages . 
 After missing the playoffs in the 1974 – 75 season , the Lakers acquired Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar , who had won three league MVP 's by that time . Abdul @-@ Jabbar wanted out of Milwaukee , demanding a trade to either New York or Los Angeles . He was traded for Elmore Smith , Brian Winters , Junior Bridgeman , and Dave Meyers . Abdul @-@ Jabbar had his fourth MVP season in 1975 – 76 , leading the league in rebounding , blocked shots , and minutes played . The Los Angeles struggled in January , going 3 – 10 , and finished out of the playoffs at 40 – 42 . 
 West and Cooke settled their differences — and the former Laker 's lawsuit — and Cooke hired him to replace Sharman as the team 's coach . West became upset , however , when Cooke refused to spend the money necessary to acquire forward Julius Erving , who the Nets were selling . Behind another MVP season from Abdul @-@ Jabbar , Los Angeles won the Pacific Division , finishing the 1976 – 77 season a league @-@ best 53 – 29 . They defeated the Warriors in a seven @-@ game series to open the postseason before being swept by Portland in the Western Conference Finals . During the offseason , Los Angeles picked up Jamaal Wilkes from Golden State and signed first @-@ round draft pick Norm Nixon . In the first two minutes of the first game of the 1977 – 78 season , Abdul @-@ Jabbar punched Bucks center Kent Benson for an overly aggressive elbow and broke his hand . Two months later , a healthy Abdul @-@ Jabbar got into an altercation with Houston Rockets center Kevin Kunnert after a rebound . The team 's starting power forward , Kermit Washington , who was averaging 11 @.@ 5 points and 11 @.@ 2 rebounds , entered the fight , and when Rudy Tomjanovich ran in from the bench to break up the action , Washington punched him in the face . Tomjanovich nearly died from the punch , suffering a fractured skull and other facial injuries which prematurely ended his playing career . Washington , who stated that he assumed Tomjanovich was a combatant , was suspended for two months by the NBA , and released by the Lakers . The team won 45 games despite being down a starter in Washington and not having Abdul @-@ Jabbar for nearly two months , but lost in the first round of the playoffs to Seattle . During the 1978 – 79 season , the team posted a 47 – 35 record but lost to the SuperSonics in the semifinal round of the playoffs . 
 = = = 1979 – 91 : " Showtime " = = = 
 In the 1979 NBA draft , Los Angeles selected 6 @-@ foot , 9 @-@ inch point guard Magic Johnson from Michigan State with the first overall pick . It took Johnson 's teammates time to acclimate themselves to his passing ability , as his " no @-@ look " passes often caught them unaware . Once they adjusted , his passing became a key part of Los Angeles ' offense . The Lakers won 60 games in Johnson 's rookie year , and defeated the Philadelphia 76ers in six games in the 1980 NBA Finals . Johnson won the series Finals MVP award , after starting at center for the injured Abdul @-@ Jabbar in game six , and tallying 42 points , 15 rebounds , and seven assists . The team fell off in the 1980 – 81 season , though , as the Lakers lost Johnson for most of the season to a knee injury . The team turned in a 54 – 28 record and finished second behind the Phoenix Suns in the Pacific Division . The Rockets , led by Moses Malone , defeated Los Angeles in the first round of the playoffs . 
 Early in the 1981 – 82 season , Johnson complained to the media about head coach Paul Westhead and demanded a trade . Westhead was fired shortly after Johnson 's criticisms , and although Lakers ' owner Jerry Buss stated that Johnson 's comments did not factor into the decision , Johnson was vilified by the national media and booed both on the road and at home . Buss promoted assistant coach Pat Riley to " co @-@ head coach " with Jerry West ( although West considered himself Riley 's assistant ) on November 19 and the team won 17 of its next 20 games . Nicknamed " Showtime " due to the team 's new Johnson @-@ led fast break @-@ offense , the Lakers won the Pacific Division title and swept both the Suns and Spurs . Los Angeles stretched its postseason winning streak to nine games by taking the first contest of the NBA Finals from the 76ers . The team won the Finals 4 – 2 to finish a 12 – 2 playoff run . On draft night in 1982 , the Lakers had the first overall pick and selected James Worthy from North Carolina . The Lakers won the Pacific Division at 58 – 24 , but Worthy suffered a leg injury in the last week of the season and missed the rest of the season however . Nevertheless , they advanced to play Philadelphia in the 1983 NBA Finals by defeating Portland and San Antonio in the first two rounds . The Sixers , however , won the series and the championship in four games . After the season West replaced Sharman as the team 's GM . 
 In the 1983 – 84 season Los Angeles went 54 – 28 , and played Boston in the Finals for the first time since 1969 . They won two of the first three games . Kevin McHale 's hard clothesline foul of Lakers forward Kurt Rambis on a fast break is credited as a turning point of the series . Boston won three of the next four to win the title and send Los Angeles 's record to 0 – 8 in Finals series against the Celtics . 
 Using the past year 's Finals defeat as motivation , the team won the Pacific Division for the fourth straight year and lost just twice in the Western Conference playoffs . In the NBA Finals , the Celtics were again the Lakers ' final hurdle . Los Angeles lost game one of the NBA Finals by a score of 148 – 114 , in what is remembered as the " Memorial Day Massacre " . The Lakers , behind 38 @-@ year @-@ old Finals MVP Abdul @-@ Jabbar , recovered to defeat the Celtics in six games . The team won the title in the Boston Garden , becoming the only visiting team to ever win an NBA championship there . 
 In the 1985 – 86 season , the Lakers started 24 – 3 . They won 62 games , and their fifth straight division title . The Rockets , however , defeated the Lakers in five games in the Western Conference Finals . Houston won the series when Ralph Sampson hit a 20 @-@ foot jumper as time expired in game five at The Forum . Prior to the 1986 – 87 season , the Lakers moved A. C. Green into the starting lineup , and acquired Mychal Thompson from the Spurs . Johnson won his first career MVP Award while leading the Lakers to a 65 – 17 record , and Michael Cooper was named NBA Defensive Player of the Year . Before the season Riley had made the decision to shift the focus of the offense to Johnson over the 40 @-@ year @-@ old Abdul @-@ Jabbar . 
 The Lakers advanced to the NBA Finals by sweeping the Nuggets , defeating the Warriors in five games , and sweeping the SuperSonics in the Western Conference Finals . The Lakers defeated Boston in the first two games of the Finals , and the teams split the next four games , giving Los Angeles their second championship in three seasons . The series was highlighted by Johnson 's running " baby hook " shot to win game four at Boston Garden with two seconds remaining . Johnson was named the NBA Finals MVP , in addition to regular @-@ season MVP . At the Lakers ' championship celebration in Los Angeles , coach Riley brashly declared that Los Angeles would repeat as NBA champions , which no team had done since the 1968 – 69 Boston Celtics . During the 1987 – 88 season , the Lakers took their seventh consecutive Pacific Division title , and met the Detroit Pistons in the 1988 NBA Finals . Los Angeles took the series in seven games , and James Worthy 's game seven triple double earned him a Finals MVP award . In the 1988 – 89 season , Los Angeles won 57 games . They swept the playoffs up till the NBA Finals , and faced the Detroit Pistons again . The Lakers , hampered by injuries to Byron Scott and Johnson , were swept by Detroit . 
 = = = 1991 – 96 : Post- " Showtime " dry spell = = = 
 On June 28 , 1989 , after 20 professional seasons , Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar announced his retirement . A year later , 1987 Defensive Player of the Year winner Michael Cooper decided to play in Europe and was waived at his request . The Lakers went 63 – 19 in the 1989 – 90 season , but lost 4 – 1 in the second round of the playoffs . Riley left the team after the season citing burnout , and was replaced by Mike Dunleavy . Riley 's departure received a mixed reaction from the players . They respected his contributions , but some , such as Worthy and Scott , had grown tired of his intense practices and felt he tried to take too much credit for the team 's successes . 
 The team made another Finals appearance in 1991 , but lost in five games to a Chicago Bulls team led by Michael Jordan . On November 7 , 1991 , Magic Johnson announced he had tested positive for HIV and would retire immediately . In their first season without Johnson , the team won 43 games , but became the first eighth seed to win the opening two games on the road against a number one seed when they took a 2 – 0 lead versus Phoenix . They lost the next two games at home however , then game five in Phoenix in overtime . Randy Pfund was let go as head coach in March 1994 and eventually replaced by Johnson , who coached the club with former teammate Michael Cooper as his lead assistant . Johnson decided not to take the job permanently due to what he felt was a lack of commitment from certain players , and Los Angeles ended the season with a 10 @-@ game losing streak to finish 33 – 49 and out of the playoffs . 
 The next two seasons , Los Angeles made the playoffs , but was eliminated in the second and first rounds respectively . The team was coached by Del Harris and led by young guards Nick Van Exel and Eddie Jones . Johnson came out of retirement in the 1995 – 96 season to lead the then 24 – 18 Lakers to a 29 – 11 finish . After some run @-@ ins with Van Exel , displeasure with Harris 's strategies , and a first round loss to the Rockets , Johnson decided to retire for the final time after the season . 
 = = = 1996 – 2016 : The Kobe Bryant era = = = 
 During the 1996 off @-@ season , the Lakers acquired 17 @-@ year @-@ old Kobe Bryant from the Charlotte Hornets for Vlade Divac ; Bryant was drafted 13th overall out of Lower Merion High School in Ardmore , Pennsylvania in that year 's draft , by Charlotte . Los Angeles also signed free @-@ agent Shaquille O 'Neal . Trading for Bryant was West 's idea , and he was influential in the team 's signing of the all @-@ star center . " Jerry West is the reason I came to the Lakers , " O 'Neal later said . They used their 24th pick in the draft to select Derek Fisher . During the season , the team traded Cedric Ceballos to Phoenix for Robert Horry . O 'Neal led the team to a 56 – 26 record , their best effort since 1990 – 91 , despite missing 31 games due to a knee injury . O 'Neal averaged 26 @.@ 2 ppg and 12 @.@ 5 rpg and finished third in the league in blocked shots ( 2 @.@ 88 bpg ) in 51 games . The Lakers defeated the Portland Trail Blazers in the first round of the 1997 NBA Playoffs . O 'Neal scored 46 points in Game 1 against the Trail Blazers , marking the highest single @-@ game playoff scoring output by a Laker since Jerry West scored 53 against the Celtics in 1969 . In the next round , the Lakers lost four games to one to the Utah Jazz . 
 In the 1997 – 98 season , O 'Neal and the Lakers had the best start in franchise history , 11 – 0 . O 'Neal missed 20 games due to an abdominal injury . Los Angeles battled Seattle for the Pacific Division title most of the season . In the final two months , the Lakers won 22 of their final 25 games , finishing 61 – 21 , and second to Seattle in the standings . The Lakers defeated Portland three games to one in the first @-@ round . The following round , they faced Seattle . Although the Sonics won the first game , the Lakers responded with four straight wins , taking the series , but were swept by the Jazz in the next round . 
 During the 1998 – 99 season , All @-@ Star guard Eddie Jones and center Elden Campbell were traded to the Charlotte Hornets . The team also acquired J. R. Reid , B. J. Armstrong , and Glen Rice . Harris was fired in February after a three @-@ game losing streak and replaced on an interim basis by former Laker Kurt Rambis . The team finished 31 – 19 in the shortened season , which was fourth in the Western Conference . Los Angeles defeated Houston in the first round of the playoffs , but were swept by San Antonio in the next round with game 4 being the last game ever played at the Great Western Forum . 
 Before the 1999 – 2000 season , West was prepared to hire Rambis as the team 's full @-@ time coach before an outcry from fans and members of the organization caused him to seek out a bigger name . Los Angeles hired former Chicago Bulls coach Phil Jackson , who had coached that team to six championships , and gave him a lucrative $ 6 million a year contract . He brought along assistant Tex Winter and they installed Winter 's version of the triangle offense . They signed veterans Brian Shaw , John Salley , Ron Harper , and A. C. Green , who was a Laker during the " Showtime " era . The team also moved to a new arena , the Staples Center . After the season , starters Rice and Green left the team , and Los Angeles signed Horace Grant . 
 Led by league MVP O 'Neal , the Lakers won 31 of their first 36 games . Los Angeles finished 67 – 15 , their highest total since they won 65 in the 1986 – 87 season . They eliminated the Sacramento Kings and Phoenix in the first two rounds of the playoffs . After the Lakers took a three games to one lead in the Western Conference Finals , the Trail Blazers won the next two games to force a game seven . The Lakers were down by 15 points in the fourth quarter but went on a 19 – 4 run to tie the game . They won 89 – 84 to advance to the NBA Finals . They defeated Reggie Miller and the Indiana Pacers 4 – 2 in the 2000 NBA Finals to win their first title since 1988 . West retired from his spot in the team 's front office after the season after a power struggle between him and Jackson over control of the team 's operations . 
 The following season , Los Angeles won 11 fewer regular season games , but swept the first three rounds of the playoffs , defeating the Portland , Sacramento , and San Antonio . They met Allen Iverson and the Philadelphia 76ers in the 2001 NBA Finals . Although the Sixers took game one in overtime , the Lakers won the next four games to win their second straight title . Their 15 – 1 postseason record is the best in NBA history . 
 Los Angeles won 58 games in 2001 – 02 . In the playoffs , they swept the Portland Trail Blazers in the first round , and defeated the Spurs 4 – 1 in the second . They faced the rival Kings in the Western Conference Finals . The series has long been cited as one of the greatest playoff matchups in NBA history . The series extended to all seven games , and ended in a Lakers victory . In game 1 , Bryant scored 30 points as the Lakers won , 106 @-@ 99 . The series would then shift in Sacramento 's favor , with the Kings winning the next two games . Facing a 3 @-@ 1 deficit in game 4 , the Lakers had the ball with under 20 seconds to play . After misses by both Bryant and O 'Neal , Kings center Vlade Divac tapped the ball away from the rim in an attempt to wind down the clock . It went straight into Robert Horry 's hands , who drained a game @-@ winning three with under 3 seconds to play . After the Kings won game 5 on a buzzer beater by Mike Bibby , the Lakers were faced with a must @-@ win game 6 . In one of the most controversial playoff games in league history , the Lakers won by 4 points . The Lakers won game 7 in overtime , with the Kings missing numerous potentially game @-@ saving shots and free throws . The Lakers then achieved a three @-@ peat by sweeping Jason Kidd and the New Jersey Nets in the NBA Finals . O 'Neal won each of the Finals series ' MVP awards , making him the only player besides Michael Jordan to win three consecutive Finals MVPs . 
 The Lakers started the 2002 – 03 season 11 – 19 . They went 39 – 13 the rest of the way to finish 50 – 32 . They defeated the Minnesota Timberwolves in the first round of the 2003 NBA Playoffs , but were eliminated by San Antonio in six games in the second . During the 2003 – 04 season , the team was the subject of intense media coverage generated by the teaming of four stars and the sexual @-@ assault case involving Kobe Bryant . Before the season , Los Angeles signed two @-@ time MVP Karl Malone formerly of the Jazz , and former Seattle Defensive Player of the Year Gary Payton . Three of the " big four " , however , struggled with injuries : O 'Neal suffered from a strained calf , Malone an injured knee , and Bryant an injured shoulder . The Lakers started 18 – 3 and finished 56 – 26 . They won the Pacific Division title , and entered the playoffs as the number two seed . They defeated the Rockets , Spurs , and Timberwolves in the first three rounds of the 2004 NBA Playoffs , before succumbing to Detroit in five games in the 2004 NBA Finals . During the 2004 offseason , the team entered a rebuilding phase when O 'Neal was traded to the Miami Heat for Lamar Odom , Brian Grant , Caron Butler , and a first @-@ round draft pick . Bryant and O 'Neal had clashed in the past , and the media credited their feud as one of the motivating factors for the trade . Jackson did not return as head coach , and wrote a book about the team 's 2003 – 04 season , in which he heavily criticized Bryant and called him " <unk> " . The Lakers front office said that the book contained " several inaccuracies " . 
 = = = = 2004 – 07 : Rebuilding = = = = 
 The Lakers traded Rick Fox and Gary Payton to Boston , for Chris <unk> , Marcus Banks , and Chucky Atkins before the 2004 – 05 season . Derek Fisher , frustrated with losing playing time , opted out of his contract and signed with the Warriors . The team hired Rudy Tomjanovich to replace Jackson . After sitting out the first half of the 2004 – 05 season , Malone announced his retirement on February 13 , 2005 . Tomjanovich coached the team to a 22 – 19 record before resigning due to health problems . Assistant Frank <unk> was named interim head coach to replace Tomjanovich for the remainder of the season . Bryant ( ankle ) and Odom ( shoulder ) suffered injuries , and the Lakers finished 34 – 48 , missing the playoffs for the fifth time in franchise history . 
 With the 10th overall pick in the draft , Los Angeles selected Andrew Bynum , a center from St. Joseph High School in Metuchen , New Jersey . The team also traded Caron Butler and Chucky Atkins to the Washington Wizards for Kwame Brown and Laron Profit . Jackson returned to coach the team after Rudy Tomjanovich resigned midway through the previous season . On January 22 , 2006 , Bryant scored 81 points against the Toronto Raptors , the second @-@ highest total in NBA history . Ending the season 45 – 37 , the team made the playoffs after a one season absence . After taking a three games to one lead in the first round , the Suns came back to take the series in seven games . In the following season , they won 26 of their first 39 games , but lost 27 of their last 43 — including seven in a row at one point — to finish 42 – 40 . They were eliminated in the first round by the Suns again , this time 4 – 1 . Frustrated by the team 's inability to advance in the playoffs , Bryant demanded to be traded in the offseason . Buss initially agreed to seek a trade , but also worked to try to change Bryant 's mind . 
 = = = = 2007 – 11 : Return to championship form = = = = 
 After re @-@ acquiring Derek Fisher , Los Angeles started the 2007 – 08 season with a 25 – 11 record , before Andrew Bynum , their center who was leading the league in field @-@ goal percentage , went out for the year due to a knee injury in mid @-@ January . They acquired power forward Pau Gasol from the Memphis Grizzlies in a trade in early February and went 22 – 5 to finish the season . The Lakers ' 57 – 25 record earned them the first seed in the Western Conference . Bryant was awarded the league 's MVP award , becoming the first Laker to win the award since O 'Neal in 2000 . In the playoffs , they defeated the Nuggets in four games , the Jazz in six , and the defending champion Spurs in five , but lost to the Celtics in six games in the NBA Finals . 
 In the 2008 – 09 season , the Lakers finished 65 – 17 ; the best record in the Western Conference . They defeated the Jazz in five games , the Rockets in seven and the Nuggets in six , to win the Western Conference title . They then won their 15th NBA championship by defeating the Orlando Magic in five games in the NBA finals . Bryant was named the NBA Finals MVP for the first time in his career . 
 The Lakers , who had added Ron Artest ( now Metta World Peace ) in place of Trevor Ariza in their starting lineup , finished the 2009 – 10 season with the best record in the Western Conference for the third straight time . On January 13 , 2010 , the Lakers became the first team in NBA history to win 3 @,@ 000 regular season games by defeating the Dallas Mavericks 100 – 95 . They defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder , the Utah Jazz , and the Phoenix Suns in the Western Conference playoffs . In the finals , the Lakers played the Boston Celtics for the 12th time . They rallied back from a 3 – 2 disadvantage in the series and erased a 13 @-@ point deficit in the fourth quarter of the seventh game to defeat the Celtics . This series win gave them their 16th NBA title overall and 11th since they moved to Los Angeles . Bryant was named Finals MVP for the second year in a row , despite a 6 – 24 shooting performance in game seven . 
 After much speculation , head coach Phil Jackson returned for the 2010 – 11 season . In the playoffs , the Lakers defeated the New Orleans Hornets in the first round . But their opportunity for a three @-@ peat was denied by the Dallas Mavericks in a four @-@ game sweep of the second round . After the season , it was announced that Jackson will not be returning to coach the Lakers . 
 = = = = 2011 – 16 : Post @-@ Jackson era = = = = 
 After Jackson 's retirement , former Cleveland Cavaliers head coach Mike Brown was hired as head coach on May 25 , 2011 . Before the start of the shortened 2011 – 12 season , the Lakers traded Lamar Odom to the Dallas Mavericks after Odom requested to be traded . On the trade deadline long time Laker Derek Fisher along with a first round draft pick were traded to the Houston Rockets for Jordan Hill . With a 41 – 25 regular season record the Lakers entered the playoffs as the third seed , the team defeated the Denver Nuggets in the first round in seven games but were eliminated by the Oklahoma City Thunder in the second round in five games . 
 On July 4 , 2012 , Steve Nash of the Phoenix Suns agreed to a sign @-@ and @-@ trade deal that would send him to the Lakers in exchange for the Lakers ' 2013 and 2015 first round draft picks , 2013 and 2014 second round draft picks , and $ 3 million . The trade was made official on July 11 , 2012 , the first day the trade moratorium was lifted . On August 10 , 2012 , in a four @-@ team trade the Lakers traded Andrew Bynum and acquired Dwight Howard . On November 9 , 2012 , Mike Brown was relieved of coaching duties after a 1 – 4 start to the 2012 – 13 season . Assistant Coach Bernie Bickerstaff took over as interim head coach , leading the Lakers to a 5 – 5 record . On November 12 , 2012 , the Lakers hired Mike D 'Antoni as head coach . On February 18 , 2013 , Lakers owner Jerry Buss died from cancer at age 80 . On the court , D 'Antoni coached the Lakers to a 40 – 32 record the rest of the way to finish 45 – 37 , their worst record since 2007 . The Lakers clinched a playoff berth on the final game of the season and finished seventh in the Western Conference after beating the Houston Rockets on April 16 , 2013 . The Lakers battled injuries all season , the most prominent of which is the Achilles tendon rupture to Kobe Bryant that ended his season after 78 games . The absence of Bryant was sorely felt as the Lakers were swept by the San Antonio Spurs in the first round of the 2013 NBA Playoffs . Nevertheless , Bryant passed Lakers legend Wilt Chamberlain to become the fourth all @-@ time leading scorer in NBA history on March 30 , 2013 against the Sacramento Kings . 
 On March 25 , 2014 , the Lakers scored 51 points in the third quarter against the New York Knicks , the most points scored in a quarter in the history of the franchise . The Lakers went on to miss the NBA playoffs for the first time since 2005 , for just the second time in the last two decades and for just the sixth time in franchise history . On April 30 , 2014 , Mike D 'Antoni resigned from his position as head coach after a 27 @-@ 55 season . 
 After spending the majority of the off @-@ season without a head coach , the Lakers named former player Byron Scott as the new head coach . After the season , he was the frontrunner to become the new Lakers head coach . Scott interviewed three times for the position , which had become vacant after Mike D 'Antoni 's resignation . On July 28 , 2014 , he signed a multi @-@ year contract to coach the Lakers . 
 During the first game of the 2014 – 15 season , the 7th overall pick in the 2014 NBA draft , Julius Randle went down with a broken leg which ended his rookie season . The Lakers began their season losing 10 of their first 16 games . After playing only 35 games , Kobe Bryant tore a rotator cuff in his shoulder ending his season . Nick Young was also forced to end his season with a fractured kneecap , leaving the team with a record of 14 – 41 . With 27 games left in the regular season , Byron Scott gave rookie Jordan Clarkson more playing time . Clarkson , the 46th overall pick in the 2014 draft , finished his rookie season with game stats of 11 @.@ 9 ppg , 3 @.@ 2 rpg , 3 @.@ 5 apg , and shooting 44 @.@ 8 % from the field . The Lakers ' season ended with a record of 21 – 61 , the 4th worst record in the league and at the time the worst record in franchise history . 
 The next season , the Lakers had the second overall pick of the 2015 NBA Draft , which they used to select Ohio State freshman point guard D 'Angelo Russell . On November 30 , 2015 , Bryant announced he would retire at the end of the season after 20 seasons with the team . In Bryant 's last season the team missed the playoffs for the third straight year with a 17 – 65 record , the worst in franchise history . 
 = = = 2016 – present : Luke Walton era = = = 
 On April 24 , 2016 , the Lakers announced that they will not to exercise their option on Byron Scott contract for the following season . On April 29 , the Lakers announced another former Laker , Luke Walton , as their new head coach . At the time of his hiring , Walton was an assistant coach for the Golden State Warriors , who were in the playoffs , so Walton could not officially begin his duties as head coach until the Warriors playoff run was over . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 = = = Boston Celtics = = = 
 The rivalry between the Boston Celtics and the Lakers involves the two most storied basketball franchises in National Basketball Association ( NBA ) history . It has been called the best rivalry in the NBA . The two teams have met a record 12 times in the NBA Finals , starting with their first Finals meeting in 1959 . They would go on to dominate the league in the 1960s and the 1980s , facing each other six times in the 60s and three times in the 80s . 
 The rivalry had been less intense since the retirements of Magic Johnson and Larry Bird in the early 1990s , but in 2008 it was renewed as the Celtics and Lakers met in the Finals for the first time since 1987 , with the Celtics winning the series 4 – 2 . They faced off once again in the 2010 NBA Finals which the Lakers won in 7 games . Since 1960 , the Lakers are 4 @-@ 2 against their fiercest rival in the Finals . 
 The two teams have won the two highest numbers of championships , the Celtics 17 , the Lakers 16 ; together , the 33 championships account for almost half of the 67 championships in NBA history . 
 = = = Los Angeles Clippers = = = 
 The rivalry between the Lakers and the Los Angeles Clippers is unique because they are the only two NBA teams to share an arena , the Staples Center . It is also one of only two intra @-@ city rivalries in the NBA , the other being the new crosstown rivalry between the New York Knicks and Brooklyn Nets . 
 Los Angeles fans have historically favored the Lakers . Some contend that the term rivalry is inaccurate until the Clippers become more successful . However , with the addition of Chris Paul and Blake Griffin to the Clippers ' roster and their emergence as playoff contenders , the rivalry has started to develop in earnest , with a recent matchup between the teams garnering ESPN its highest ratings ever for a regular season broadcast in Los Angeles . 
 = = = San Antonio Spurs = = = 
 The San Antonio Spurs and the Lakers , developed what some would classify as a rivalry in the late 1990s and early 2000s . Since 1999 , the teams have met in the NBA Playoffs five times , with the clubs combining to appear in seven consecutive NBA Finals ( 1999 – 2005 ) . Additionally , the teams combined to win five NBA championships from 1999 – 2003 . The Spurs won the NBA championship in 1999 , 2003 , 2005 , 2007 and 2014 while the Lakers won the championship in 2000 , 2001 , 2002 , 2009 and 2010 . From 1999 to 2004 the clubs ' rivalry was often considered the premier rivalry in the NBA , and each time the clubs faced each other in the playoffs the winner advanced to the NBA Finals . In 2008 the teams met again in the Western Conference Finals where the Spurs were handily defeated only to beat LA when they met again in 2013 ( though against a Lakers team without an injured Kobe Bryant ) . 
 = = <unk> , financial history , and fanbase = = 
 Berger and <unk> purchased the NBL 's disbanded Detroit Gems for $ 15 @,@ 000 in 1947 , changed their name to the Lakers and relocated them to Minnesota . Max Winter bought a third of the club in their early years , and sold his share to Mikan in 1954 . Berger bought Mikan 's share in 1956 giving him a controlling ( ⅔ ) interest . After Mikan retired , attendance plummeted and the team lost money for several seasons , leading the ownership group to put the team up for sale in 1957 . Marty Marion , a retired baseball player and manager , and his business partner Milton Fischman attempted to purchase the team with the intention of moving the club to Kansas City , Missouri . Mikan offered to mortgage his home in an attempt to buy the team and keep the club in Minnesota . The Lakers were sold to a group of investors led by Bob Short however . The team was sold to Short 's group with the agreement that it would not be relocated to Kansas City but kept in Minnesota . Short 's ownership group consisted of 117 Minnesota businesses and private citizens , who amassed a total of $ 200 @,@ 000 for the purchase ; $ 150 @,@ 000 to buy the team and $ 50 @,@ 000 to run it . By 1958 Short had become 80 % owner of the team by buying out his partners , but the team was floundering . Attendance remained poor , and the NBA had put the Lakers on " financial probation " , notifying them that if they did not meet certain ticket sales numbers they could be bought out by the league and relocated . Short was forced to move the team to Los Angeles in 1960 ; the club had lost $ 60 @,@ 000 in the first half of the 1959 – 60 season alone . The NBA 's owners originally voted 7 – 1 against the move . When Short indicated that he might take the team to new rival league that was developing however , the owners held another vote that same day and allowed the relocation ( 8 – 0 ) . Aided by Baylor 's drawing power , and the new locale , the team 's finances improved when they arrived in LA . Short sold the team to Washington Redskins owner and publisher Jack Kent Cooke in 1965 for a then league record amount of $ 5 @,@ 175 @,@ 000 . Short insisted the deal be conducted in cash as he was wary of Cooke , so guards transported the money in a cart from one New York bank to another . 
 Cooke was a more hands @-@ on owner than Short , and overhauled the team 's operations . He personally financed construction of the Forum in 1967 at a cost of $ 16 @.@ 5 million . He owned the team until 1979 when he sold it , the NHL 's Los Angeles Kings , the Forum , and some real estate to Jerry Buss for $ 67 million . Cooke was forced to sell the team as he was undergoing a costly divorce . Buss was a local chemical engineer and former University of Southern California professor who had become wealthy in real estate . Philip Anschutz bought a stake in the team in 1998 , and until October 2010 Magic Johnson was a minority owner as well . Buss started the trend of allowing sponsors to add their name to team 's stadiums when he renamed the Forum the Great Western Forum in 1988 . In 2009 major sponsors included Verizon Wireless , Toyota , Anheuser @-@ Busch , American Express , and Carl 's Jr . , and the team 's $ 113 average ticket price was the highest in the league . Fast food chain Jack in the Box is another major sponsor , the company gives all fans in attendance at home games a coupon for two free tacos if the Lakers hold their opponent under 100 points and win . The company also sponsors the team 's halftime shows on KCAL @-@ TV and Fox Sports West . In 2013 , Buss died at the age of 80 after being hospitalized for 18 months with cancer . His controlling ownership of the team passed to his six children via a trust , with each child receiving an equal vote . Buss ' succession plan had daughter Jeanie Buss assume his title as the Lakers ' governor as well as its team representative at NBA Board of Governors meetings . 
 Given the team 's proximity to Hollywood , the Lakers fanbase includes numerous celebrities , many of whom can be seen at the Staples Center during home games . Jack Nicholson , for example , has held season tickets since the 1970s , and directors reportedly need to work their shooting schedules around Lakers home games . From 2002 and 2007 the team averaged just over 18 @,@ 900 fans , which placed them in the top ten in the NBA in attendance . Red Hot Chili Peppers ' song " Magic Johnson " from their 1989 album Mother 's Milk is a tribute to the former point guard , and frontman Anthony Kiedis and bassist Michael " Flea " Balzary are frequently seen attending home games . The team has sold out every home game since the 2007 – 08 season . As of 2010 , the Lakers have the most popular team merchandise among all NBA teams , and Bryant the most popular jersey . 
 = = Name , logo and uniforms = = 
 The Laker nickname came from the state of Minnesota being the Land of 10 @,@ 000 Lakes . The team 's colors are purple , gold and white . The Lakers logo consists of the team name , " Los Angeles Lakers " written in purple on top of a gold basketball . Purple uniforms are used for road games and gold uniforms are used for home games . The team also wears white jerseys for Sunday and holiday home games . 
 = = Season @-@ by @-@ season records = = 
 Since the Lakers were established in 1948 , the team has missed the playoffs just five times . The team has 16 NBA titles and has appeared in the NBA Finals 15 other times . These appearances include eight NBA Finals appearances in the 80s . The best record posted by the team was 69 – 13 , in 1972 ; the worst record was 17 – 65 , in 2015 – 16 . 
 = = Franchise and NBA records = = 
 Bryant holds most individual team records for longevity including most games played ( 1333 ) , and most minutes logged ( 48 @,@ 298 ) . Johnson holds all significant assist records for the club including career assists ( 10 @,@ 141 ) , assists in a game ( 24 ) , and highest assist average for a season ( 13 @.@ 1 ) . Johnson also has the most triple doubles , with his 138 over 100 more than the next closest player ( Bryant ; 17 ) . Elmore Smith holds team records for blocks in a game ( 17 ) , blocks per game for a season ( 4 @.@ 85 ) , and career blocks per game ( 3 @.@ 93 ) . The scoring records are mostly shared by Elgin Baylor and Bryant , with Baylor having the highest average for a career ( 27 @.@ 4 ) while Bryant has the highest points scored in a single game ( 81 ) . Baylor , Bryant and West hold the top five single season scoring averages , with Bryant occupying the numbers one ( 35 @.@ 4 ) and four ( 31 @.@ 6 ) spots , while Baylor has the second ( 34 @.@ 8 ) , and third ( 34 @.@ 0 ) , and West the fifth ( 31 @.@ 3 ) . 
 The Lakers hold several NBA records as a team including most consecutive games won overall ( 33 ) and most consecutive road games won ( 16 ) both of which came during the 1971 – 72 season . Highest field @-@ goal percentage for a season at 54 @.@ 5 % ( 1984 – 85 ) , and highest road winning percentage at 0 @.@ 816 ( 1971 – 72 ) . They also hold records for having ( into the 2009 – 10 season ) the most wins ( 3 @,@ 027 ) , the highest winning percentage ( 61 @.@ 9 % ) , and the most NBA Finals appearances ( 31 ) . The 2000 – 01 team tied the NBA record for best playoff record at 15 – 1 . The 1971 – 72 team holds franchise records in wins ( 69 ) , most points scored , and largest margin of victory ; both of the latter came in the team 's 63 point win versus Golden State ( 162 – 99 ) . They also used to hold the record for most wins at home in the regular season ( going 36 @-@ 5 in 1971 @-@ 72 , then 37 @-@ 4 in both 1976 @-@ 77 and 1979 @-@ 1980 ) before the Boston Celtics set the current record of 40 @-@ 1 in the 1985 @-@ 86 season . 
 = = Home arenas = = 
 The Lakers play their home games at Staples Center , located at L.A. Live in Downtown Los Angeles . Staples Center opened in fall 1999 , and seats up to 18 @,@ 997 for Lakers games . The Staples Center is also home to the Los Angeles Clippers , the WNBA 's Los Angeles Sparks , and the NHL 's Los Angeles Kings . The arena is owned and operated by AEG and L.A. Arena Company . Before moving to the Staples Center , for 32 seasons ( 1967 – 1999 ) , the Lakers played their home games at The Forum in Inglewood , California , located approximately 10 miles southwest of the team 's current home at Staples Center . During the 1999 NBA preseason , the Lakers played their home games at the Forum before officially moving into Staples Center , and once again hosted a preseason game versus the Golden State Warriors on October 9 , 2009 , this time to commemorate the team 's 50th anniversary season in Los Angeles . 
 In the first seven years in Los Angeles , the team played their home games at the Los Angeles Memorial Sports Arena , south of Downtown Los Angeles . While the team played in Minneapolis , the team played their home games at the Minneapolis Auditorium , from 1947 to 1960 . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current roster = = = 
 = = = Retained draft rights = = = 
 The Lakers hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA . A drafted player , either an international draftee or a college draftee who isn 't signed by the team that drafted him , is allowed to sign with any non @-@ NBA teams . In this case , the team retains the player 's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player 's contract with the non @-@ NBA team ends . This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams . 
 = = = Draft picks = = = 
 The Lakers have had three first overall picks in their history : Elgin Baylor ( selected in 1958 ) , Magic Johnson ( selected in 1979 ) and James Worthy ( selected in 1982 ) . The Lakers have also had four Lottery picks in their history : Eddie Jones ( selected 10th overall in 1994 ) , Andrew Bynum ( selected 10th overall in 2005 ) , Julius Randle ( selected 7th overall in 2014 ) and D 'Angelo Russell ( selected 2nd overall in 2015 ) . Other draft picks include Jerry West and Gail Goodrich in the 1960s , Michael Cooper and Norm Nixon in the 1970s , A. C. Green and Vlade Divac in the 1980s , Elden Campbell , Nick Van Exel , Derek Fisher , and <unk> George in the 1990s , and Luke Walton , Sasha Vujačić , and Ronny <unk> in the 2000s . 
 = = Head coaches = = 
 There have been 22 head coaches for the Lakers franchise . John Kundla coached the team in Minneapolis when they won their first five BAA / NBA championships , from 1949 to 1954 . Pat Riley is second in franchise history in both regular season and playoff games coached and wins . Phil Jackson broke Riley 's regular season wins record in 2009 , and he passed Riley 's playoff wins and games coached records in 2010 . Jackson , Riley , Kundla , and Bill Sharman have all been inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame for their coaching careers . George Mikan , Jim Pollard , Jerry West , Pat Riley , Magic Johnson , Kurt Rambis and Byron Scott have all played and head coached for the Lakers . Jackson , who had two stints as head coach , was coach from 2005 – 2006 until 2010 – 2011 . Mike Brown was named his replacement for the 2011 – 2012 season in May 2011 . Brown was fired on November 9 , 2012 , after a 1 – 4 start . Assistant coach Bernie Bickerstaff served as interim head coach for five games before the Lakers selected Mike D 'Antoni as their new head coach . D 'Antoni resigned at the end of the 2013 – 2014 season . In July 2014 , Byron Scott was hired as head coach . After the 2015 – 2016 season ended , Scott was fired . On April 29 , 2016 , former Lakers player Luke Walton was named as Scott 's replacement . 
 = = Hall of Famers , retired and honored numbers = = 
 The Lakers have 28 Hall of Famers ( 21 players , 4 head coaches , 1 assistant coach , and 2 contributors ) who contributed to the organization . 
 On April 4 , 2016 , Beaty and O 'Neal were elected into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame . They will be inducted in September 2016 . 
 = = = FIBA Hall of Famers = = = 
 = = = Retired numbers = = = 
 The Lakers have retired nine jersey numbers and an honorary microphone in honor of their players and broadcaster : 
 In addition , several other players and coaches who were instrumental to the franchise 's success during its days in Minneapolis were named Honored Minneapolis Lakers , although their numbers are not retired by the franchise : 
 17 Jim Pollard , F , 1948 – 1955 , head coach , 1960 
 19 Vern Mikkelsen , F , 1949 – 1959 
 22 Slater Martin , G , 1949 – 1956 
 34 Clyde Lovellette , F / C , 1953 – 1957 
 99 George Mikan , C , 1948 – 1954 ; 1955 – 1956 , head coach , 1957 – 1958 
 John Kundla , head coach , 1948 – 1957 ; 1958 – 1959 
 = = Media = = 
 Chick Hearn was the team 's broadcaster for 41 years until his death in 2002 . He broadcast 3 @,@ 338 consecutive games between November 21 , 1965 , and December 16 , 2001 . Hearn came up with West 's " Mr. Clutch " nickname . He was a part of the team 's " inner sanctum " when Cooke was owner , and was consulted on basketball decisions . Paul Sunderland , who had filled in for a couple of games while Hearn recuperated in 2001 – 02 , was named the permanent play @-@ by @-@ play announcer . Stu Lantz was retained as the color commentator . Sunderland 's contract expired in the summer of 2005 , and the team chose not to renew it . Joel Meyers moved in alongside Lantz as the television announcer , while Spero Dedes and former Laker player Mychal Thompson on the radio . 
 For the 2011 – 12 NBA season , Bill Macdonald became the new television play @-@ by @-@ play announcer , joining Lantz who remained as the color analyst . Meanwhile , John Ireland joined Mychal Thompson to call the games on radio . 
 As of the 2009 – 10 season , Lakers radio broadcasts are heard on <unk> ( Los Angeles ESPN Radio affiliate ) in English and <unk> in Spanish . <unk> had the team 's radio broadcast rights from the 1976 – 77 season until the 2008 – 09 season . Until 2011 , telecasts had been split between KCAL @-@ TV ( road games ) and Fox Sports West ( home games ) , unless they are chosen for national broadcasts on ABC . KCAL had been the Lakers ' over @-@ the @-@ air television broadcaster since 1977 , dating back to when the station was the RKO General @-@ owned KHJ @-@ TV , the longest relationship between an NBA team and a television station . Prior to KHJ , Laker games were televised on KTLA . The Lakers had been on Fox Sports West since 1985 , dating to when it was the original Prime Ticket and owned by Buss . 
 On February 14 , 2011 , Time Warner Cable and the Lakers announced the formation of two new regional sports networks ( one in English , one in Spanish ) that will exclusively televise the team 's games and related programming for 20 years starting with the 2012 – 13 NBA season . The said networks eventually became Time Warner Cable SportsNet and Time Warner Cable Deportes . 
 = Ålgård Line = 
 The Ålgård Line ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a closed , but not abandoned , railway line between Ganddal and Ålgård in Rogaland , Norway . The 12 @.@ 24 @-@ kilometer ( 7 @.@ 61 mi ) line was built as a narrow gauge branch line of the Jæren Line by the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) and opened in 1924 . It runs through the villages of Foss @-@ Eikeland and Figgjo in Sandnes to Ålgård in Gjesdal . Several proposals were made for the Ålgård Line to become the first part of the main line from Stavanger to Oslo , but instead the Sørlandet Line was connected to the Jæren Line in 1944 . At the same time , the Ålgård Line was upgraded to standard gauge . 
 The line had up to ten daily round trips with diesel multiple units , until passenger traffic was terminated in 1955 . Freight traffic remained until 1988 , when most of the line was abandoned in 1988 , although 3 kilometers ( 2 mi ) was used until 2001 . The line is owned by the Norwegian National Rail Administration . The station at Figgjo has been converted to a museum , and the 3 @-@ kilometer ( 2 mi ) section from there to Ålgård is used for recreational draisines . There have been proposals to reopen the line either as part of the Jæren Commuter Rail or the planned light rail for Greater Stavanger . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Ålgård Line runs 12 @.@ 24 kilometers ( 7 @.@ 61 mi ) from Ganddal to Ålgård . The whole line was built with NSB 's standard for main lines , with a maximum gradient of 1 @.@ 5 percent and minimum curve radius of 300 meters ( 980 ft ) . It branches off from the Sørlandet Line ( previously the Jæren Line ) north of Ganddal Station , 18 kilometers ( 11 mi ) south of Stavanger . When the line opened , Ganddal Station was located south of the creek <unk> , but it was moved further north in 1935 to simplify operations . The line continues over <unk> on a 7 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 25 ft ) long bridge , and follows the creek until it reaches Foss @-@ Eikeland , 3 @.@ 43 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 13 mi ) from Ganddal . Foss @-@ Eikeland had a 91 @-@ meter ( 299 ft ) long passing loop and a 40 @-@ metre ( 130 ft ) long platform . The station building was built in wood , had a single story and was 57 square meters ( 610 sq ft ) . 
 After Foss @-@ Eikeland , the line crosses Figgjo River on a 30 @-@ meter ( 98 ft ) long truss bridge . It passes <unk> Station and continues up the steepest gradient at 1 @.@ 5 percent to Figgjo Station . It had a 69 @-@ meter ( 226 ft ) passing loop and a 50 @-@ meter ( 160 ft ) long platform , and a 97 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 040 sq ft ) single @-@ story station building in wood . Ålgård Station was the largest on the line , with two tracks and a 120 @-@ meter ( 390 ft ) long platform , a 12 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 40 ft ) long turntable and a 66 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 710 sq ft ) depot . The station was built in wood in two stories , and included living quarters for the station master . 
 The line is , along with the Namsos Line , the only railway line in Norway to holistically employ Neoclassical architecture . All the original stations were designed by R. <unk> , who used a simplistic , wooden interpretation of the 1920s Neoclassicism . The station buildings at Figgjo and Ålgård have been preserved by the Norwegian Directorate for Cultural Heritage . The line eventually received additional stops , and in 1955 , there were stations at <unk> , Vagle , Foss @-@ Eikeland , <unk> , <unk> , Figgjo <unk> , Figgjo , Figgjo <unk> and Ålgård . Some trains operated to Sandnes Station , whilst others continued all the way to Stavanger Station . 
 As of 1994 , the line was intact and operational from Ganddal to Foss @-@ Eigeland and the cement factory there . Here , an internal crane track has been welded across the line . From Foss @-@ Eigeland to Figgjo , the track is intact . At Figgjo , a bridge has been demolished , and it is not possible to traverse that section . Except for a number of level crossings where the tracks have been asphalted over , the line remains intact to Ålgård . At Ålgård Station the tracks have been removed , but the station building and depot remains . The station at Foss @-@ Eigeland has been converted to a church , while the station at Figgjo had been taken over by a wholesaler . The line has officially been closed , but has not been abandoned . The Norwegian National Rail Administration retains ownership and can in the future renovate the line for operation . 
 = = History = = 
 The first plans to build a railway line along the route of the Ålgård Line was as part of the main route between Stavanger and Oslo . In 1873 , County Engineer Th . <unk> proposed a line running through <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> and onwards through Telemark to Kongsberg . Through Rogaland , it would run further east than the Jæren Line , which was under construction from Stavanger to Egersund . When the plans for a Sørlandet Line — which would connect Stavanger to Oslo via Kristiansand — started to be developed in 1892 , some of <unk> 's plans were reconsidered . 
 On 27 September 1894 , a committee was established to plan a branch from the Jæren Line to Ålgård . The following year , the committee recommended that a line be built branching from <unk> in Klepp , which would cost 348 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . Gjesdal Municipality offered NOK 60 @,@ 000 of the capital , on the condition that NSB would build and operate it . The state , on the other hand , wanted the line to be private . Private railways were often largely or entirely owned by municipalities , counties and the state , but would operate independent of NSB and the municipalities would carry the risk for operating deficits . 
 A new committee was established in 1910 , led by Mayor Sven Nilssen of Gjesdal , who was also director at <unk> <unk> . His company paid for traffic counting along the route , and the committee concluded that there was sufficient traffic to build a line . Two routes were proposed : one branching from Sandnes Station and one from Ganddal Station . The Ganddal alternative had lower investment costs , but would give higher operating costs ; in 1913 , investments were stipulated at NOK 787 @,@ 800 . Although NSB 's board supported the line , construction was placed on hold . 
 In 1919 , local politicians proposed that the line be built administratively as part of the Jæren Line , but this was rejected by the government . Instead , the ministry wanted to again consider the Ålgård Line as part of the Sørlandet Line , and proposed that the Ålgård Line be built with standard gauge — which would be used for the Sørlandet Line — instead of the narrow gauge used by the Jæren Line . However , there would be no need for standard gauge until the Sørlandet Line was extended to Rogaland , so the line was planned to be built with narrow gauge track , but all other installations would be prepared for standard gauge . 
 Siting of the Ålgård Line from Ganddal to Ålgård started in 1920 . The final cost estimate was NOK 2 @.@ 82 million and the plan was passed by Parliament on 20 July 1921 , with construction commencing on 21 December . The construction was organized by Just Broch and led by Olaf Bakke . Between 200 and 250 people worked on the line during construction . Because of the recession , the railway works were seen as way to create jobs . Most of the workers came from Stavanger and nearly all had families to support . The first train to operate on the line went from Stavanger on 20 December 1924 , with the official opening by Minister of Labour Lars <unk> taking place when it reached Ålgård . The line became the last state @-@ owned railway in Norway to be opened with narrow gauge . 
 At the start , there were one or two daily round trips with steam locomotive @-@ hauled trains . In the first year of operation , the line transported 18 @,@ 500 passengers . The initial ticket price from Sandnes to Ålgård was NOK 1 @.@ 50 , compared to NOK 1 for a bus ticket . This was in part because NSB operated with a standard price based on the length of the line , and the line was longer than the corresponding roads . After a while NSB 's board accepted that tickets be priced as if they were the length of the road , and the price was reduced to NOK 1 @.@ 10 . Because of competition from truck drivers picking up random passengers for NOK 0 @.@ 75 , the price was then reduced to NOK 0 @.@ 80 in 1927 . The line made a profit during until the late 1940s , after which it started to operate with a deficit . In the financial year 1948 – 49 , the line transported 79 @,@ 700 passengers . 
 In 1923 , Parliament voted for a plan for the Sørlandet Line to run via <unk> instead of the city of Egersund , and then onwards via Gjesdal . This plan meant that the section from Ganddal to Stavanger would have dual gauge . During further planning , it became clear that the Gjesdal alternative , although 15 kilometers ( 9 mi ) shorter , had a greater elevation difference than that needed for connecting the Sørlandet Line to the Jæren Line . This changed the NSB board 's and Rogaland County Council 's opinion , and the Jæren alternative was chosen . The final decision to build via Jæren was made by parliament in 1937 . 
 An inter @-@ municipal railway committee was established in 1941 . Led by <unk> <unk> , it considered the possibility of extending the Ålgård Line towards <unk> via <unk> to Lunde in Telemark . The line would be built with a higher standard than the Sørlandet Line and have a shorter route , allowing travel time from Stavanger to Oslo to be reduced to four to five hours . A detailed plan was made for the extension from Ålgård to the county border with Telemark . To consider the proposal , parliament established a committee in 1949 to look at the various proposals . After considering the impact and value of the various railways that had been proposed in the 1940s , it recommended not building the Inner Trunk Line , as the expansion had been christened . 
 In 1930 , an NSB Class <unk> diesel multiple unit was taken into use , and the number of daily trips increased to four . On days with heavy traffic , it hauled a trailer , which was normally stationed at Sandnes Station . On 10 November 1935 , the new Ganddal Station opened , simplifying the stopping at the station . During World War II , the multiple units were disused , and instead the trains were hauled with steam locomotives . From 1 May 1944 , the line was converted to standard gauge , and NSB Class 14 multiple units were taken into use , running on wood gas until the end of the war . In 1945 , there were four daily round trips , but at the start of 1946 , the number of daily round trips increased to six , and from mid @-@ 1946 , to ten . From 1947 to 1953 , there were eight or nine daily round trips , and from 1953 ten . Class 14 was eventually replaced with NSB Class 86 and NSB Class 87 in 1953 . By then , the driving time from Ålgård to Sandnes had been reduced from 38 to 25 minutes . 
 In the 1940s and 1950s , several companies started a competing bus service . There were accusations that the route was cross @-@ subsidized and that price dumping was occurring along the route from Sandnes to Ålgård . In the early 1950s , discussion started about closing the line , and on 1 November 1955 , all passenger transport was terminated , after a decision in parliament on 26 May 1955 . This is the line with the most frequent passenger traffic in Norway to have been closed . 
 After it was decided that passenger transport on the railway was to be terminated , both NSB 's bus division and other private companies , particularly Sverre Hage , wanted to have the concession to operate the line . Both established a bus services with a frequency as if the other operator did not exist . At the peak of the conflict , NSB 's operations were at one point stopped by the police , although in the end , the concession was granted to them . As a response , Haga applied for concession to operate passenger transport on the railway , but this was denied by the authorities . The transfer to bus operations increased the ticket prices and travel time . 
 Freight trains to the various industrial companies along the line remained until the 1980s , when traffic sank drastically . From 1988 , the line was closed from Foss @-@ Eigeland , although the line from there to Ganddal was kept for use for a cement factory . Until 2001 only the three first kilometers ( two first miles ) of the line were used , for transport of concrete structures , but then the Norwegian National Rail Administration stopped all traffic on the line . 
 = = Heritage = = 
 The non @-@ profit organization Friends of the Ålgård Line ( <unk> <unk> ) have preserved 3 kilometers ( 2 mi ) of the line and Figgjo Station . The station has been converted to a museum , while the railway between Figgjo and Ålgård is used for renting out draisines . At Figgjo , there is a railway car and a shunter on display . 
 = = Future = = 
 Several local politicians have proposed re @-@ opening the line and either making it part of the Jæren Commuter Rail or part of the planned light rail in Greater Stavanger . Additionally , the Norwegian National Rail Administration has supported a future re @-@ opening of the line . Estimates show that the line has a traffic potential for 600 @,@ 000 passengers per year . In a proposal from the National Rail Administration , the Ålgård Line is seen as a possible branch of the commuter rail , with stations at Vagle , Figgjo , <unk> and Ålgård . Without making any investments to the Sørlandet Line , it would be possible to extend the two hourly services that terminate at Sandnes to Ålgård . Ålgård is also a good location for a park and ride for European Route E39 . However , the Ålgård Line would need a full upgrade , including new tracks , electric system and signaling . This would give a travel time from Ganddal to Ålgård of 10 to 12 minutes . The estimated cost of re @-@ opening the line is NOK 500 million . The Center Party has proposed converting the line to a bus lane . The borough council of Figgjo has voted to convert the line to a bicycle path , but this has been rejected by the National Rail Administration . 
 = Peter of Canterbury = 
 Peter of Canterbury or Petrus ( died c . 607 or after 614 ) was the first abbot of the monastery of SS . Peter and Paul in Canterbury ( later St Augustine 's Abbey ) and a companion of Augustine in the Gregorian mission to Kent . Augustine sent Peter as an emissary to Rome around 600 to convey news of the mission to Pope Gregory I. Peter 's death has traditionally been dated to around 607 , but evidence suggests that he was present at a church council in Paris in 614 , so he probably died after that date . 
 = = Life = = 
 It is presumed that Peter was a native of Italy , like the other members of the Gregorian mission . This mission was dispatched by Pope Gregory the Great in 596 to Christianize the Anglo @-@ Saxons from their native Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism . It landed in Kent in 597 , and soon converted King Æthelberht of Kent , who gave Augustine the land on which he founded the abbey that later became St Augustine 's , Canterbury . 
 The medieval chronicler Bede records that sometime after the mission 's arrival in England , probably in late 600 , Peter , along with fellow @-@ missionary Laurence , was sent back to Gregory . This deputation was to relay the news of Augustine 's successes in Kent , and to request more missionaries . They also conveyed to the pope a number of inquiries from Augustine about how to proceed with the mission , and when they returned in 601 , they brought back Gregory 's replies to Augustine . 
 Peter became the abbot of the monastery that Æthelberht founded in Canterbury , originally dedicated to the saints Peter and Paul , but later rededicated as St Augustine 's , after the leader of the mission . Bede describes Peter as both abbot and presbyter , a word usually translated as priest . 
 = = Death and veneration = = 
 Peter drowned while crossing the English Channel on the way to Gaul , at a place called Ambleteuse , near Boulogne . At first he was buried hastily nearby , but Bede reports that after a light illuminated the grave every night , the locals realised Peter was a saint and exhumed him and re @-@ interred him in Boulogne . The actual date of death is unknown , and since his feast day was celebrated on two different days , 30 December or 6 January , that information does not clear up the mystery . The date of his death is reported to have been 1 year , 7 months and 3 weeks after Augustine 's , by Thomas of Elmham , a 15th @-@ century chronicler . If this is true , this would give a year of death between 605 and 611 . This information , however , is contradicted by the fact that Peter was present at the Council of Paris in 614 , convened by Chlothar II . It is possible that he died during his return from the Council of Paris . 
 Peter is a considered a saint , with a feast day on 6 January . His cult was confirmed in 1915 . A Vita Petri , or Life of Peter , written by Eadmer in the 12th century , exists in manuscript form , but it is unreliable . There is evidence that Peter was the object of veneration in Boulogne in the 15th century , and a church in that town was associated with Peter , although probably not from the start of his cult . 
 = Battletoads Arcade = 
 Battletoads Arcade , also known as Super Battletoads or just Battletoads , is a 1994 scrolling beat ' em up arcade game in the Battletoads series developed by Rare and published by Electronic Arts . Up to three players , as the Battletoads , brawl aliens and mutant rodents through six levels to save the universe from the Dark Queen . The game also includes vertical and bonus levels . Each Toad has its own signature attack , and as customary for the series , players can knock enemies towards the screen , breaking the fourth wall . 
 Rare took greater liberties with violence and gore in Battletoads Arcade since the product was not destined for home consoles . It was Rare 's first game to use the 3D graphics technology that was implemented in Donkey Kong Country and Killer Instinct . Although the game playtested well and appeared financially viable , the publisher hesitated to release the game . A port for the Super NES was in production but canceled . The game received its console debut when it was emulated in the 2015 Rare Replay , a compilation of games from Rare 's history for the Xbox One . 
 A Rare employee reported that the game was unsuccessful in the arcades . An AllGame reviewer found that the game was true to the original 's style and had better graphics but was still a let down . Retro Gamer has stated that the game is obscure now but had all the hallmarks of a Rare release . Rare Replay reviewers were surprised by the quality of the game and some considered it a highlight of the package . Battletoads Arcade remains the last entry in the Battletoads series . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Battletoads Arcade is a coin @-@ operated , scrolling beat ' em up arcade video game . Up to three players , as the Battletoads ( Rash , Pimple , and Zitz ) , punch and kick oncoming enemies through six levels to save their alternate universe from the Dark Queen . Arcade was the first Battletoads game to feature three @-@ player cooperative multiplayer . Players control their characters with eight @-@ directional joysticks and two buttons ( attack and jump ) . Characters can run if the player pushes the joystick twice in the same direction . The Toads vary in fighting style : Rash is nimble , Pimple is burly , and Zitz is a balance of the two . As customary for the series , the Toads can knocked enemies offscreen such that they appear to fly towards the players , breaking the fourth wall . The Toads can also eat flies to regenerate health . Each Toad has its own signature exaggerated power and attack , in which their limbs turn into objects such as axes and drills . Enemies include aliens , mutant rodents , and snowmen . 
 Each level has a unique theme , such as a " Christmas grotto " , and a boss fights finale . Some bosses , such as General Slaughter , return from previous games . Some levels differ in presentation and gameplay . Some levels are Double Dragon @-@ style 2.5D brawlers , while others are strictly two @-@ dimensional . In one level , the Toads wear jetpacks and descend a tunnel , and in the final level , the Toads shoot enemies from a vehicle . Players can also destroy a spaceship in a Street Fighter II @-@ style bonus stage . Battletoads Arcade is displayed in standard definition raster graphics in horizontal orientation with either mono or stereo sound within an upright arcade cabinet . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was developed by Rare , published by Electronic Arts , and released in 1994 as the fifth game in the Battletoads series . Rare founders Tim and Chris Stamper created the series in response to interest in the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles . The Battletoads series — especially the 1991 original Battletoads for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) — became popular in its own right and led to a series of sequels . Since this sequel was in development for arcades rather than consoles , Rare took greater liberties in its depiction of violence , unlike their obligations in the rest of the series . While the original NES Battletoads censored blood , Battletoads Arcade showed gore and decapitation . The Dark Queen was also depicted in a more lascivious style . Rare had begun to experiment with 3D graphics around this time , and went with PowerAnimator ( later Autodesk Maya ) . Battletoads Arcade was the first Rare game to use PowerAnimator , well before it was implemented in Killer Instinct and Donkey Kong Country . Rare 's George Andreas had worked on the game and recalled it sitting around " for ages " despite being finished . Andreas could not discern why the game was unsuccessful , as it had playtested and sold well in their market tests . A port for the Super NES was planned but canceled , likely due to the game 's mediocre reception in arcades . Rare 's Brendan Gunn had worked on the port and said that the team had nearly finished the first level before the project was scrapped . He figured that the decision may have been linked to mediocre sales but was not sure . Battletoads Arcade is also known as Super Battletoads . 
 Battletoads Arcade received its first console release as Battletoads Arcade when it was emulated for the Xbox One as part of the 2015 Rare Replay compilation of 30 games from Rare 's 30 @-@ year history . In the Rare Replay version , additional features include a setting for unlimited continues , the ability to " rewind " time ( and replay a section ) , and the opportunity to save game progress at any time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a 2013 interview , Rare 's Chris Tilson said that the company had low expectations for future arcade releases after Battletoads Arcade " bombed badly " . Sales were mediocre . Christopher Michael Baker ( AllGame ) wrote that the arcade release rode the success of its console game predecessor when the order is usually reversed . He found the two games similar in brawling style with simple controls , but felt that the arcade game had better graphics . He noted how both included the effect of knocking enemies towards the players off @-@ screen . Baker felt that the signature attacks were interesting and added replay value . Overall , he was somewhat let down by the arcade game , having expected something more , but rated Battletoads Arcade four of five stars . AllGame compared Battletoads Arcade to Turtles in Time and The Simpsons Arcade Game . 
 Retro Gamer retrospectively wrote that Battletoads Arcade was a " relatively obscure " game , but the best in the series . They described it as " unmistakeable " Rare : " bombastic , colorful , and well @-@ designed " . Retro Gamer put it on par with the arcade games of Konami and Sega and praised its humor , combat , and character . They added that Arcade was a swan song for the series , with numerous references to moments and levels from previous games . For example , the first stage atop the Dark Queen 's ship was similar to the opening of Battletoads & Double Dragon and the jetpack level was reminiscent of the " <unk> Hole " level in the original Battletoads . The magazine added that the level of gore set it apart from previous series entries and that the game had a mediocre reception in arcades . They called its console cancellation " a tragedy " . 
 Chris Carter ( Destructoid ) wrote that the game was an unexpected favorite in his Rare Replay review . Philip Kollar ( Polygon ) was also " surprised " by the game , which he found incredibly fun . Kollar ranked the game near the middle of the Rare Replay collection . Timothy <unk> ( Engadget ) was grateful to be introduced to Battletoads Arcade on Rare Replay . He considered the game among Rare 's " finest moments " and one of two retro titles worth playing . Sam Machkovech ( Ars Technica ) described the game as one of the rarest in the compilation . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 As of 2011 , Battletoads Arcade remains the last Battletoads game released . Rare had begun planning on a possible sequel in the mid @-@ 2000s but ultimately decided that there was no original direction for the game apart from its past . They did not want to repeat the failed Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles reboot . Battletoads Arcade served as an inspiration for the cooperative play mode in the 2011 Ratchet & Clank : All 4 One . Kotaku included Battletoads Arcade in its list of 16 @-@ bit era beat ' em ups with the best graphics . 
 = Battle of Tsimba Ridge = 
 The Battle of Tsimba Ridge was an engagement of the Second World War involving Australian and Japanese forces . Part of the wider Bougainville Campaign of the Pacific theatre , the battle occurred in the northern sector of Bougainville Island between 17 January and 9 February 1945 , when the lead battalion of the Australian 11th Brigade — the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion — advanced towards the Genga River as part of a drive north to the Bonis Peninsula . 
 On the peninsula , an enclave of Japanese troops had established itself after withdrawing north following earlier engagements in the centre of the island throughout 1944 – 45 . Coming up against heavy resistance along Tsimba Ridge , the Australians ' advance was halted for three weeks as they fought to wrest control of the ridge from the defending Japanese from the 81st Infantry Regiment , whose strength was roughly equal to that of the Australians . The main Australian attack took place on 6 February , but it was not until 9 February that the Japanese completely withdrew from the position . Small @-@ scale fighting in the surrounding area continued until 22 February . The next stage of the campaign saw the Australians take Ratsua as they sought to establish a defensive line across the base of the Bonis Peninsula between Ratsua and Ruri Bay . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Strategic situation = = = 
 Japanese forces had landed on Bougainville in early 1942 , capturing it from the small force of Australians garrisoning the island . They had subsequently developed several airbases on the island , using it to conduct operations in the northern Solomon Islands and to attack the Allied lines of communication between the United States , Australia and the Southwest Pacific Area . These bases also helped protect Rabaul , the major Japanese garrison and naval base in Papua New Guinea ; throughout 1943 , Allied planners determined that Bougainville was vital for neutralising the Japanese base around Rabaul . 
 US Marines conducted an amphibious landing at Cape Torokina , on the western coast of Bougainville , north of Empress Augusta Bay , in November 1943 . After an initial counter @-@ attack that was repulsed , the Marines had been replaced by a garrison of US Army troops who began consolidating their position around Torokina , establishing a strong perimeter . In March 1944 , the Japanese launched a heavy counter @-@ attack , which was turned back with many casualties . After this , the situation on Bougainville became largely static , as the Japanese focused primarily on subsistence , and the US forces chose to adopt a mostly defensive posture aimed at maintaining the perimeter around Torokina . 
 In November – December 1944 , the Australian II Corps — consisting of Militia troops from the 3rd Division and the 11th Brigade — under Lieutenant General Stanley Savige took over responsibility for Allied operations on Bougainville from the American XIV Corps as part of a plan to free up the US troops for the fighting in the Philippines . Mistakenly believing that the Japanese forces on the island numbered just 17 @,@ 500 men it was decided that the Australians should pursue an aggressive campaign to clear the Japanese from Bougainville . After taking over the US perimeter that had been established around Torokina , the Australian campaign developed into three separate drives : in the north , it was planned that Japanese forces would be forced into the narrow Bonis Peninsula and contained ; in the centre the seizure of Pearl Ridge would give the Australians control of the east – west avenues of approach , as well as affording them protection against further counter @-@ attacks , while also opening the way for a drive to the east coast ; and the main campaign in the south , where the bulk of the Japanese forces were concentrated . Allied estimates of Japanese strength were later found to be grossly inaccurate and after the war it was found that the number of Japanese alive on the island at this time was closer to 40 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Preliminary moves = = = 
 On 31 December 1944 , Savige ordered Brigadier John Stevenson , commander of the 11th Brigade , to begin clearing operations along the northwest coast of the island towards Soraken Harbour , as the Australians attempted to drive the Japanese in the sector on to the narrow Bonis Peninsula . At the time the Australians believed there were around 390 Japanese defending the area surrounding the Genga River — considered to be the main Japanese defence line in the northern sector — but it was later determined to be closer to 900 men from the 81st Infantry Regiment , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Shinzo Nakamura . 
 Nakamura , who according to Peter Charlton was considered to be a " master of jungle warfare " , had been ordered to prevent the Australian advance along the coast . He had perceived the likelihood of stopping the Australians well forward of the Genga as being unlikely and had therefore decided that he would concentrate his defence around the river itself , establishing a strong position on Tsimba Ridge , about 400 metres ( 440 yd ) south of the river . Described by war correspondent Fred Aldridge as a " horseshoe volcanic feature with steep jungle @-@ clad sides ... each toe [ of the ridge ended ] close to the sea , forming a natural amphitheatre by the beach " , it was a " textbook fortress " . According to Aldridge , it was a " maze of dugouts , trenches , [ and ] foxholes " , and was well camouflaged and heavily defended by snipers , machine guns and artillery , while supporting elements had been placed to the north , in depth , behind the Genga , near Kunamatoro . 
 Taking over control of the northern sector from the 7th Brigade , which was subsequently transferred to the southern sector to take part in the main offensive , the 11th Brigade advanced along the coast from Kuraio Mission , sending out patrols into the interior to flush the Japanese out of their positions in the mountains as they went . The 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Kelly and roughly 800 @-@ strong , formed the vanguard of the advance , its main body moving along the coast road towards Amun , <unk> and Rukussia , while patrols were sent inland from <unk> towards <unk> and Soraken , both of which were considered key Japanese positions . By 16 January 1945 , the lead company of the 31st / 51st reached Rukussia , having encountered no Japanese up until that point . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The first contact came on 17 January when the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion 's advanced elements — drawn mainly from ' D ' Company , under Captain Thomas Titley — moved north from Rukussia and proceeded towards the Genga River . Reaching a clearing 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) north of Puto , a platoon @-@ sized patrol came across several huts in a cleared area and proceeded to attack it . One Japanese was killed in the initial assault , but as the Australians took the huts and pushed beyond them , they were engaged from entrenchments 100 yards ( 91 m ) in front of them . The Japanese then launched a counter @-@ attack using light and heavy machine guns . In response , the Australians brought up another platoon and over the course of two days the counter @-@ attack was repulsed , with six to eight Japanese estimated to have been killed and others wounded , while two Australians were wounded . 
 During the engagement the Japanese had opened up with the artillery that they had brought up in support of the main defensive position on Tsimba Ridge , firing for the first time in the sector . This barrage was largely ineffective , inflicting only one casualty , as many of the shells proved to be faulty and did not detonate . The Australians also came across a large camp , including a field hospital , which they captured intact . Another group of huts was also discovered , from where they gained intelligence identifying the Japanese troops in the area as belonging to the 81st Infantry Regiment . They also managed to capture two 70 mm guns , and ammunition for them . 
 On 19 January , the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion 's ' A ' Company , under Captain Clyde Downs , sent a platoon @-@ sized patrol out to outflank the Japanese forward positions ; this patrol moved first to the right flank and then north along the jungle tracks around <unk> and <unk> . Discovering evidence of Japanese movement in the area , they proceeded to the village of Kunamatoro , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of <unk> . Here they encountered a force of around 30 to 50 Japanese and after the initial contact , in which the Australian platoon commander was wounded , the patrol attacked the village . Within 10 minutes the battle was over : 14 Japanese had been killed , along with a further five wounded , while the Australians lost one killed , one wounded and one missing . As darkness fell , the Australian patrol withdrew from the village . 
 The following day — 20 January — the advanced elements of the Australian force pressed on towards Tsimba Ridge . A formation about 200 yards ( 180 m ) long and about 60 feet ( 18 m ) in height , and stretching westerly to the Genga River where a steep cliff fell to the southern bank of the river , the ridge blocked the Australian advance across the river , while its south @-@ eastern most protrusion ( later known to the Australians as the " Pimple " ) was separated by a shallow saddle . On top of the ridge , dense jungle provided good concealment , while most of the approaches to the ridge were open to observation . As the Australians approached the ridge , one of their platoons captured a 47 mm gun positioned along the coast about 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) south of the ridge , while another platoon contacted a lone Japanese soldier , who was killed in the subsequent firefight as they entered a garden that curved along the southern approach to the ridge , and which became known as the " Amphitheatre " . After the initial contact , the platoon 's advance through the garden was prevented by an intense burst of fire from the ridge , but the Australians managed to scale the high ground that rose to their east and were able to occupy the south @-@ eastern tip of the Pimple , capturing two 75 mm guns in the process . 
 Reports had been received from locals that the Japanese had brought reinforcements down from Soraken , <unk> Island and <unk> , and at this point the Australians realised that the Japanese were concentrated in far greater numbers than anticipated and had in fact established their line of resistance in the sector upon the ridge . This was confirmed later after the Australians moved forward once more on 21 January , moving to within 800 yards ( 730 m ) of the Genga River , where the track upon which they were advancing opened into a large garden that curved around the edge of Tsimba Ridge , from where the Japanese defenders had an excellent line of sight . Subsequent patrols determined the extent of the Japanese position , reporting that they had constructed a well @-@ fortified position with a continuous trench along the crest of ridge , weapons pits and pill boxes , all with clear fields of fire , stretching up to 150 yards ( 140 m ) . 
 The Australian commander , Kelly , ordered ' B ' Company to move up and take the ridge and over the course of a week between 21 – 28 January they made several attempts against various parts of the ridge , approaching from the south , southeast and the north . These proved fruitless , although one platoon managed to encircle the position from the north before being engaged with heavy machine gun fire . On 23 January , the Australians established fire support in the form of guns from the 2nd Mountain Battery . Another three unsuccessful attempts were made on 24 January , and on 25 January ' C ' Company carried out a movement to the flank in an attempt to get around behind the ridge and attack from the north . Crossing the crocodile @-@ infested waters of the Genga about 600 yards ( 550 m ) from the ridge , the Australians established a bridgehead across the river with a line of communications back to the Pimple , which they kept open by constantly patrolling along it . 
 Over the following six days , the Japanese attacked the bridgehead , launching a series of assaults that , in the words of Robert <unk> , bordered upon suicidal . These attacks were repulsed and the Australians began to launch patrols in all directions around the ridge . On 29 January , the Japanese launched a large @-@ scale attack on ' C ' Company 's positions and although the Australians resisted , the attack succeeded in breaking through one part of the perimeter and managed to roll up the position all the way to the main battalion position around Puto before it was turned back . The Australian counter @-@ attack , organised by the ' C ' Company 's commander , Captain Alwyn Shilton , and supported by accurate artillery fire , came on 1 February and resulted in over 30 Japanese killed or wounded . 
 Over the next few days the Japanese made further probes , which were also repulsed , and the Australians consolidated their positions prior to an assault on the ridge . Preparations included the manhandling of a mountain gun from Puto to a position 150 yards ( 140 m ) from the Pimple , from where it could fire directly upon the Japanese positions on the ridge , while aircraft from No. 5 Squadron , Royal Australian Air Force , carried out reconnaissance . To maintain the secrecy of these preparations , mortar fire was brought down upon the Japanese positions to mask the sounds of digging and movement while fire from Vickers machine guns kept the Japanese defenders from being able to leave their shelter and observe . 
 Following a day @-@ long artillery barrage , the main assault attack finally took place on 6 February . Supported by a barrage of over 500 artillery shells and mortar bombs , and airstrikes from Australian Wirraways and New Zealand Corsairs , three platoons from Captain Millett Harris ' ' B ' Company assaulted the ridge from different points in an effort to encircle the defenders . Following the preparatory artillery fire , the attack began at 09 : 00 hours when two platoons — 10 and 11 Platoons — along with company headquarters formed up south @-@ east of the amphitheatre and began to advance to the north @-@ west 200 yards ( 180 m ) to attack the ridge from behind , while another force — 12 Platoon — attacked from the garden , moving around the Pimple before assaulting the ridge from the east . From the north @-@ west , 10 Platoon , in the centre , managed to capture its objectives by 09 : 25 hours ; however , 12 Platoon came under intense fire and after suffering several casualties stopped their advance . By 11 : 30 hours the northernmost Australian platoon , 11 Platoon , had reached the high ground on the north @-@ western side of the ridge , completing the encirclement of the Japanese . The defenders subsequently withdrew from their forward positions , but refused to give up the position , occupying the reverse slope on the western side of the ridge . The attack cost the Australians nine killed and 20 wounded . 
 Throughout the night , Japanese artillery was very active , firing down on the Australian positions around The Pimple , after which a " banzai attack " was launched early on 7 February . Although repulsed , it enabled the Japanese to maintain a small pocket of resistance on the western tip of the ridge . On the evening of 7 February , Captain Kawakami 's 10th Company from the III Battalion , 81st Infantry Regiment , withdrew . Nevertheless , a small Japanese force remained until 9 February when the Australians called down an airstrike upon the position and the defenders withdrew from the feature . One of the Australians , Private Colin Jorgensen , was awarded the Military Medal for charging a Japanese weapon pit and knocking it out of action during the final assault . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Fighting around the Genga River continued for the next couple of days , with clashes occurring until the Australians had cleared the northern and southern banks by 11 February , during which time Japanese artillery opened up on the Australians , causing several casualties . In securing the ridge , the Australians captured a large amount of Japanese equipment , including four field and six anti @-@ tank guns , nine machine guns and 86 rifles . Japanese casualties were estimated at 66 killed , while Australian casualties in the Tsimba area were 12 killed and 20 wounded . Within the context of the campaign , these losses were considered heavy by the Australians , and an Australian newspaper report from shortly after the battle described it as the " bloodiest battle of the campaign " , while another described it as " fiercest " fought on Bougainville up to that point . From documents captured after the war , it was shown that the Japanese believed that these losses would slow the Australian advance . At the time they did not perceive the loss of Tsimba Ridge to be a defeat . They had been prepared to hold the position , and had the numbers to do it ; however , Nakamura had decided to withdraw from the ridge when the morale of his troops had fallen due to lack of ammunition and food , and rising casualties from tropical diseases . The real size of the force holding Tsimba Ridge was also revealed by documents captured after the war , highlighting the gross underestimation of Japanese strength by Australian intelligence sources . 
 After the fall of Tsimba Ridge , fighting continued around the Genga River for the next couple of weeks . By 10 February the area south of the Genga had been cleared of Japanese and the Australians began to patrol along the northern bank . Several minor clashes occurred , the most serious of which saw three Japanese killed and three Australians wounded when the Australians managed to capture a Japanese 37 mm gun . As the Japanese were forced to withdraw from a position along the track which ran 150 yards ( 140 m ) from the river , the Japanese artillery intensified and several men from the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion became casualties . 
 The 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion continued operations around the Genga River until 26 February , by which time three companies had reached the Gillman River , while another had struck inland , fighting a short engagement around Kunamatoro , before pressing on towards a ridge near the Soraken Plantation . Throughout the final weeks of February , ' A ' Company of the 31st / 51st , under Downs , fought the Japanese defenders off the position , which was subsequently named " Downs ' Ridge " by the Australians . On 26 February , the 31st / 51st was relieved by Lieutenant Colonel Bernard Callinan 's 26th Infantry Battalion , who continued the advance north towards the Soraken Peninsula , while the 55th / 53rd Infantry Battalion advanced on Ratsua as the Australians sought to establish a defensive line across the base of the Bonis Peninsula between Ratsua and Ruri Bay . The 31st / 51st would later take part in the failed landing at Porton Plantation in June , where they would suffer heavy casualties , including Downs , who was killed leading his company . In total , the Australians lost 34 killed and 91 wounded in the fighting around the Genga River , while it was estimated that the Japanese lost 148 killed . For its involvement in taking Tsimba Ridge , the 31st / 51st Infantry Battalion was awarded the battle honour " Tsimba Ridge " . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 664 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 664 ( designated by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as SR <unk> ) is a 17 @.@ 59 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 28 @.@ 31 km ) state highway located in Clinton and Lycoming counties in Pennsylvania . The southern terminus is at State Route 120 in Lock Haven , while the northern terminus is at State Route 44 on the Clinton @-@ Lycoming county line in the community of Haneyville . The route passes through small communities , but does not intersect with any other legislated highways in the area . 
 The route was assigned in 1930 , two years after a majority of state routes were assigned , and had continuous <unk> done from 1935 to 1966 . There have been no changes in road alignment since its inception . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 664 begins at an intersection with State Route 120 in community of Lock Haven . The highway progresses northward , leaving the community limits of Lock Haven . After the intersection with East Water Street , State Route 664 crosses the West Branch of the Susquehanna River . The bridge over the branch of river was constructed in 1986 . At the intersection with <unk> Road , the highway turns eastward , paralleling the river . Nearing State Route 150 , the highway turns northward and into Dunnstown . While winding around a few curves , State Route 664 intersects with Armory Drive , an access road to a local armory . The route 's surroundings are highly developed in Dunnstown , with the highway passing along homes . At the intersection with <unk> Street , State Route 664 leaves Dunnstown and proceeds northward . 
 The highway passes some homes and forests north of Dunnstown , entering Woodward Township soon after . At the intersection with Township Road 406 , State Route 664 starts winding in several directions , but following a northward basis . This continues until the intersection with Arbutus Drive , where it heads straight to the northwest . At a clearing in a nearby forest , State Route 664 enters the community of Swissdale . The stay in the community is short , with the highway leaving after a few blocks . Just north of Swissdale , State Route 664 makes a long hairpin turn , curving from east to west before turning north once again . Just after the intersection with Honey <unk> Lane , State Route 664 progresses towards Haneyville . 
 The next stretch of State Route 664 is full of bends , and the highway continuously turns at a constant rate . At an intersection with another Honey <unk> Lane , the highway starts its northwestern progression once again . This changes again when <unk> Lane begins paralleling the highway . Now following a steady northeastern alignment , the highway continues through the large patches of trees south of Haneyville . At Little Plum Run Road , the highway turns onto a steady northward alignment . The highway continues through the trees for a while , continuing northward on its way to Gallagher Township . 
 At a bend in the highway , there is a small patch of development , with a few houses near the highway . At the intersection with Township Road 529 , State Route 664 enters Gallagher Township . Eventually , the large patch of forests in the surroundings come towards a clearing , where the highway intersects with Old Dirt Road . After crossing a stream , State Route 664 gains the moniker of the Coudersport Pike . The highway passes a small patch of development , reaching another clearing in the forest . After entering another forest , State Route 664 ends at an intersection with State Route 44 in the community of Haneyville . 
 = = History = = 
 State Route 664 was assigned two years after the mass numbering of state routes in Pennsylvania in 1928 . The highway itself took several years to transition from gravel to actual pavement . The first segment , which occurred in 1935 , was from Little Plum Run Road and northward . The second segment was in 1936 , when the Pennsylvania Department of Highways paved the piece of State Route 664 from a point just south of Gallagher to the Gallagher Township line . In 1938 , the third segment , from Swissdale to Gallagher Township was paved . 
 In 1949 , the Department of Highways paved the piece of State Route 664 from Gallagher Township to the Lycoming County line . In 1951 , the section between Swissdale and Little Plum Run Road was paved once again . Two years after that , the section from the Lycoming County line to State Route 44 was improved in its condition . That lone section was improved in 1966 . There have been no recorded changes in alignment since its 1930 assignment . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Love Minus Zero / No Limit = 
 " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " ( read " Love Minus Zero over No Limit " ) is a song written by Bob Dylan for his fifth studio album Bringing It All Back Home , released in 1965 ( see 1965 in music ) . The song was originally written as a tribute to Dylan 's future wife Sara Lowndes . Its main musical hook is a series of three descending chords , while its lyrics articulate Dylan 's feelings for his lover , and how she brings a needed zen @-@ like calm to his chaotic world . The song uses surreal imagery , some of which recalls Edgar Allan Poe 's " The Raven " and the biblical Book of Daniel . The style of the lyrics is reminiscent of William Blake 's poem , " The Sick Rose " . 
 Dylan has performed " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " live on several of his tours . Since its initial appearance on Bringing It All Back Home , live versions of the song have been released on a number of Dylan 's albums , including Bob Dylan at Budokan , MTV Unplugged ( European versions ) , and The Bootleg Series Vol . 5 : Bob Dylan Live 1975 , The Rolling Thunder Revue , as well as on the reissued Concert for Bangladesh album by George Harrison & Friends . Live video performances have been included on the Concert for Bangladesh and Other Side of the Mirror : Live at Newport Folk Festival 1963 – 1965 DVD releases . 
 Artists who have covered " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " include Ricky Nelson , The Turtles , Joan Baez , Judy Collins , Fleetwood Mac , and Rod Stewart . Eric Clapton played it at Bob Dylan 's 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 The version of the song that appears on Bringing It All Back Home was recorded on January 14 , 1965 and was produced by Tom Wilson . This version was recorded by the full rock band that Dylan used to accompany him on the songs that appeared on side one of the album , and features a prominent electric guitar part played by Bruce Langhorne . However , like the other love song on side one , " She Belongs to Me " , " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " was recorded a day earlier in various acoustic configurations , and one of these takes was a strong contender to be included on the album . The January 13 , 1965 recordings and a first take from January 14 were released on the 6 @-@ disc and 18 @-@ disc versions of The Bootleg Series Vol . 12 : The Cutting Edge 1965 – 1966 in 2015 . 
 The song is tuneful , with a prominent series of three descending diatonic chords providing the main hook . The music is soothing , so that the love expressed seems tranquil even when images such as cloaks and daggers and trembling bridges are evoked by the lyrics . The tune and rhythm have a Latin feel and the lyrical rhyming pattern varies from verse to verse . For example , in the first verse , the first and second lines rhyme , the fourth and eighth lines rhyme and the sixth and seventh lines rhyme , but the third and fifth lines are unrhymed . But in the second verse , the first three lines rhyme . Throughout the song , the rhymes are sometimes approximate ; for example " another " is rhymed with " bother " and " trembles " is rhymed with " rambles . " 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " was written as a tribute to Dylan 's future wife Sara Lowndes . The lyrics reflect her Zen @-@ like detachment through a series of opposites , for example , that she " speaks like silence " and is both " like ice " and " like fire " . Another famous line from the song also captures this dichotomy : " She knows there 's no success like failure , and that failure 's no success at all . " 
 The first verse of the song has the singer infatuated with the woman , admiring her inner strength . The three remaining verses reflect the inauthentic chaos that the singer has to deal with in the outside world , from which the lover 's Zen @-@ like calm provides needed refuge . The final image is of the lover being like some raven at the singer 's window with a broken wing . This image recalls Edgar Allan Poe 's " The Raven " , but is also a symbol of the lover 's vulnerability in spite of her strength . The broken wing may also be a reference to the woman 's need for shelter , or else to a flaw in her . The style of the song 's lyrics are comparable to William Blake 's poem , " The Sick Rose " , in their economy of language and use of a detached tone to express the narrator 's intense emotional experience . The song 's surreal images anticipate the psychedelic songs Dylan would later write . 
 Some of the song 's images evoke prophecies from the Biblical Book of Daniel . For example , the line : 
 Statues made of matchsticks 
 Crumble into one another 
 is reminiscent of Daniel 's prophecy that Nebuchadnezzar would build a statue of precious metals only to see it crumble like " chaff " . Another line in the song states that people " Draw conclusions on the wall . " Drawing conclusions on the wall rather than from the wall evokes the story from the Book of Daniel where a hand writes on a wall the words " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , " warning that the Neo @-@ Babylonian Empire was about to end . 
 One interpretation of the lover in this song , as well as that which features in " She Belongs to Me " , is that she is Dylan 's muse . In each song , the inaccessibility of the lover / muse can be interpreted as Dylan 's acknowledgment of his own limitations — limitations that he attempts to overcome in writing the songs . In this interpretation , the final raven image sitting at the window can be viewed as a symbol of the muse 's inaccessibility , and the raven 's broken wing a symbol of its wildness . A related interpretation is that the song reflects an artist 's " self @-@ awareness through isolation . " The line " She knows there 's no success like failure , and that failure 's no success at all " can be seen as a reflection of the isolation of the American writer . 
 The original title of the song was " Dime Store " , which originates from the line " In the dime stores and bus stations ... " The official title " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " is , according to Dylan , a fraction with " Love Minus Zero " on the top and " No Limit " on the bottom , and this is how the title appeared on early pressings of the Bringing It All Back Home LP . Therefore , the correct pronunciation of the song 's title is " Love Minus Zero over No Limit " . In theory , the resulting quotient would be equal to " absolutely unlimited love . " The title is also based on gambling terminology that would mean that all love is a risk . 
 = = Performances and recordings = = 
 Dylan has frequently performed the song in concert since the time it was written , nearly always acoustically . He performed it occasionally in concert during 1965 and 1966 , but more frequently during the Rolling Thunder Revue tours from 1974 through 1976 . Dylan also played it at The Concert for Bangladesh , during the first of the two August 1 , 1971 benefit concerts organized by George Harrison and Ravi Shankar to help provide relief for refugees in Bangladesh . Dylan has also been playing the song live throughout the Never Ending Tour that began in 1988 . 
 In addition to its appearance on Bringing It All Back Home , " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " has been included on several Dylan live and compilation albums . In the 1970s , it was included on the compilation Masterpieces and on the live Bob Dylan at Budokan album , recorded in 1978 . Other live performances have been included on The Bootleg Series Vol . 5 : Bob Dylan Live 1975 , The Rolling Thunder Revue ( recorded December 1975 ) , on the European versions of MTV Unplugged ( recorded November 1994 ) , and on the 2005 reissue of the Concert for Bangladesh album . Footage of Dylan playing the song is included on the 2005 DVD of the Concert for Bangladesh film and in The Other Side of the Mirror : Live at Newport Folk Festival 1963 – 1965 , a film by Murray Lerner showing Dylan 's performances at the Newport Folk Festival . A snippet from an impromptu performance of " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " is also included in the film Dont Look Back . 
 The song was also included on the Rhino / Starbucks compilation album This is Us : Songs from Where You Live . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The song was covered several times in 1965 , including a version by The Turtles on their album It Ain 't Me Babe and a version by The Walker Brothers on their album Take It Easy with The Walker Brothers . Los Angeles band The Leaves covered the song on their 1966 album Hey Joe and Joan Baez included it on her 1968 album of Dylan covers Any Day Now . A version by singer / songwriter Turley Richards became a minor hit in 1970 ( US # 84 ) . It was also covered in 1993 by Judy Collins on Judy Collins Sings Dylan ... Just Like a Woman . Eric Clapton covered the song on during Bob Dylan 's 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration . Other musicians who have covered the song include Fleetwood Mac , Rod Stewart , Jackson Browne , Ricky Nelson , Buck Owens , Bridget St. John , Eliza Gilkyson and Les Fradkin . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In a 2005 reader 's poll for Mojo magazine , " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " was listed as the # 20 all @-@ time greatest Bob Dylan song , and a similar poll of artists ranked the song # 32 . In 2002 , Uncut magazine listed it as the # 23 all @-@ time greatest Bob Dylan song . Australian music critic Toby Creswell included the song in his book 1001 Songs : The Great Songs of All Time and the Artists , Stories and Secrets Behind Them . 
 = Burger King grilled chicken sandwiches = 
 International fast @-@ food restaurant chain Burger King and its Australian franchise Hungry Jack 's have had a variety of grilled chicken sandwiches in their product portfolio since 1990 . The BK Broiler was the first iteration , and was one of the most successful product introductions in the fast food industry to that point in time . However sales dropped in the following two years , and the product was reformulated and renamed to the Chicken Whopper to align the product with the company 's Whopper Sandwich . A change of ownership of Burger King in 2004 prompted another reformulation of the product into the BK Baguette product line that focused on a more health @-@ oriented product . This new formulation proved unpopular and was replaced in 2005 with the TenderGrill chicken sandwich . The TenderGrill sandwich was introduced as part of a series of sandwiches designed to expand Burger King 's menu with both more sophisticated , adult oriented fare and present a larger , meatier product that appealed to 24- to 36 @-@ year @-@ old males . Burger King was the first major fast food chain to introduce a grilled chicken sandwich to the marketplace , beating rivals Wendy 's by six months and McDonald 's by four years . These two chains also went through a series of reformulations and naming schemes for their grilled chicken products . 
 The company sells slightly different versions of the sandwich between international markets , using white meat chicken breast in some regions while using dark meat chicken thighs in others . To promote continuing interest in the product , Burger King occasionally releases limited @-@ time ( LTO ) variants on its grilled chicken sandwiches that have different ingredients from the standard sandwich recipe . Being one of the company 's major offerings , the grilled chicken sandwich is sometimes the center of product advertising for the company . Additionally , as a major product in the company 's portfolio , Burger King has registered many global trademarks to protect its investment in the product . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = BK Broiler = = = 
 Burger King 's first broiled chicken sandwich was introduced in 1990 and was called the BK Broiler . This sandwich was made with lettuce , tomato and a dill ranch sauce served on an oat dusted roll . The product came at a time of fundamental change in terms of chicken product in the restaurant industry ; more than 90 % of chicken products sold by the major chains were fried . Shortly after its introduction , the sandwich was selling more than a million units per day , and poaching sales from traditional fried chicken chains such as Kentucky Fried Chicken . Additionally , the sandwiches were part of an industry trend towards the diversification of menus with healthier products such as reformulated cooking methods and salads . At the time , the sandwich had 379 calories and 18 grams of fat , 10 of which came from the sauce . 
 The introduction of the BK Broiler was one of the most successful product launches in the restaurant industry at the time , encouraging the company look into introducing additional products that would match the success of the Broiler . Furthermore , the success of the product was credited by analysts from Shearson Lehman Hutton Securities as one of the main factors helping Burger King realize a 47 % increase in profit margin over the same period in 1989 . By 1992 , sales of the BK Broiler had slowed to half of what they were at the height of it introduction . 
 The company reformulated the BK Broiler in 1998 into a larger , more male @-@ oriented sandwich served on a Whopper bun , increasing its patty size while changing the ingredients to mayonnaise , lettuce and tomato . The idea behind the up @-@ sizing of the product was to give the customer a sense of value , with a company spokesman stating " When they [ the customer ] see a lot , it seems like they 're getting a lot for their money , and even if they don 't eat it all , they think they 're being treated fairly . " The move was part of the company 's " back to basics " movement in which it reorganized its menu , focusing on its core products and simplifying its product base . 
 = = = Chicken Whopper = = = 
 As part of the forty @-@ fifth anniversary of its Whopper sandwich in 2002 , BK introduced an updated version of the sandwich called the Chicken Whopper and added a smaller version called the Chicken Whopper Jr. sandwich along with a new Caesar salad sandwich topped with a Chicken Whopper filet . The introduction of the Chicken Whopper represented the company 's first move to extend the Whopper brand name beyond beef @-@ based sandwiches since the original Whopper 's introduction in the 1950s . The sandwiches featured a whole chicken breast filet , weighing either 4 @.@ 7 oz ( 130 g ) for the larger sandwich and a 3 @.@ 1 oz ( 88 g ) for the Jr . , mayonnaise , lettuce , and tomato on a sesame seed roll . A newly reformulated low fat mayonnaise was introduced in conjunction with the new sandwiches . Along with the company 's new BK Veggie sandwich , The Chicken Whopper Jr. version of the sandwich was lauded by the Center for Science in the Public Interest as being one of the best nutritionally sound products sold by a fast food chain . Conversely , the CSPI decried the rest of the Burger King menu as being vastly unhealthy . 
 Development of the sandwich began in 2001 in response to several major factors . After an overall sales decline of 17 % coupled with a profit decline of 29 % , Burger King held a series of consumer tests that showed the company 's customer base was looking for a wider variety of options when making purchases . Additional survey results revealed that a lack of newer products was discouraging consumers from visiting the chain . Furthermore , the company was seeking to counter the threat to its sales by newer fast casual restaurants that had begun to bite into sales . By July 2002 , the chain had sold nearly fifty million of the sandwiches , eventually displacing the BK Broiler 's initial launch figures as the company 's best selling product introduction . The successful introduction of the Chicken Whopper was one of the few noted positive highlights of the company during negotiations for the sale of Burger King by its owner Diageo to a group of investors led by the TPG Capital ; Chicago @-@ based consulting firm Technomic Inc. president Ron Paul was quoted that he was encouraged by recent product changes at Burger King such as the new Chicken Whopper , but he said it 's too early to tell whether the changes have been successful . Despite the Chicken Whopper 's initial success , just over a year after the Chicken Whopper 's introduction enthusiasm for the product was waning ; Burger King 's largest franchisee , Carrols Corporation , was complaining that the product line was a failure , describing the sandwich as a pedestrian product with a great name . As of November 2013 , the Chicken Whopper is the current grilled chicken sandwich sold by Burger King in the Middle East . 
 With its 2014 expansion in to India , Burger King introduced the Chicken Whopper as one of three versions of the Whopper . The other two variants are the Mutton Whopper and the Veggie Whopper . 
 = = = BK Baguette = = = 
