 In 2004 , BK introduced its BK Baguette line of sandwiches designed to replace the Chicken Whopper . The sandwiches were introduced at the insistence of the new CEO , former Darden Restaurants executive Bradley ( Brad ) Blum , shortly after the company was acquired by TPG Capital in 2002 . The sandwiches were designed to be a lower fat alternative with 5g of fat and 350 or fewer calories . The line was a health conscious oriented product that got its taste from ingredients instead of fat . They were formally introduced in 2004 as its BK Baguette line of sandwiches , that replacing the Chicken Whopper sandwiches . 
 The baguette sandwiches were introduced to Europe starting in the UK in 2003 , with several new varieties designed to cater to the population mix of the country . While the baguette sandwiches were well received and continue to be sold , several red flags have been raised by the British government and private groups in regards the healthiness of these and other products sold by the fast food industry . In 2005 , British Food Standards Agency ( FSA ) cited large levels of fats and salt in the company 's beef @-@ based Monterey Melt baguette and chided BK for backing out of an agreement to help make the company 's products healthier . In 2007 the private public interest group Consensus Action on Salt and Health , abbreviated to CASH , cited Burger King and other fast food chains over the continued levels of sodium contained in these types of foods . The group specifically claimed that the Chicken BLT Baguette sandwich , when paired with fries and a Coca @-@ Cola , was one of the three <unk> fast food products in the UK . 
 = = = TenderGrill = = = 
 The Baguette sandwiches failed to catch on in the American market , and as a result they were discontinued as part of a menu reorganization . In 2005 , they were replaced by the TenderGrill sandwich . The new sandwich was one of several products that were designed to appeal to a group of customers Burger King identified as adult males , 24 – 36 years old that desired a larger , meatier product . 
 = = = Chicken Burger = = = 
 In December 2015 , Burger King introduced the Chicken Burger in the U.S. This sandwich has a patty topped with the standard Whopper toppings of mayonnaise , lettuce , tomato , pickles , ketchup and onion on a toasted brioche bun . 
 = = = Competitive products = = = 
 Similar products from other chains have also been introduced , reformulated and generally been fluid in their presences in the marketplace since 1990 . Despite the present day competitive products from multiple vendors , Burger King was the first national fast food chain to bring a broiled chicken sandwich to market , beating rival Wendy 's by a period of several months . Wendy 's introduced their first grilled chicken product , simply called a grilled chicken sandwich , in August 1990 . The sandwich originally was made with grilled chicken on 4 @-@ inch bun with lettuce , tomato and a honey mustard sauce . Wendy 's introduced a <unk> grilled chicken sandwich in 1996 that they claimed was <unk> and <unk> . Wendy 's reformulated their grilled chicken product in 2004 as the Ultimate Chicken Grill sandwich during an overhaul of its chicken sandwich line . As of November 2013 , the Ultimate Chicken Grill is still Wendy 's main grilled sandwich in the United States . 
 While McDonald 's had been trying to develop and test a similar product for several years , the company was caught off guard at the time when its mainline competitors introduced their grilled chicken products and was not able to initially deploy a similar product . This was primarily due to the fact the company 's highly specialized kitchens could not produce a high quality product without a large investment in new equipment . By early @-@ 1991 , McDonald 's grilled chicken product was still in development , and the vendor would not introduce its version , the <unk> Chicken Classic , until 1994 . The <unk> chicken sandwich was replaced with the Grilled Chicken Deluxe sandwich in September and October 1996 as part of McDonald 's Deluxe line of " upscale " sandwiches ; the company had hoped that a higher value product would help improve average check performance at its stores . However , by 1998 the whole Deluxe line was said to be not selling well , and the Grilled Chicken Deluxe was eliminated when McDonald 's brought back the Chicken McGrill sandwich back in 1999 . The Chicken McGrill sandwich was retired in 2005 when the company introduced its new Premium line of products , which like the TenderCrisp sandwich was targeted to a more adult audience with higher quality ingredients such as natural cheeses and whole leaf lettuce . Beginning in April 2015 , McDonald 's moved to a new grilled chicken sandwich , the Artisan Grilled Chicken ; the new chicken uses a smaller list of ingredients in the chicken filet , removing ingredients such as <unk> and sodium phosphates . The new sandwich is in response to consumer @-@ based market trends of food products that have simpler , more natural ingredients . 
 = = Product description = = 
 The TenderGrill is a chicken sandwich , consisting of a 5 @.@ 2 oz ( 150 g ) flame @-@ grilled chicken breast filet , mayonnaise , lettuce and tomatoes on an brioche bun . In some Asian markets , such as Singapore , the filet is made from chicken thigh meat and uses a sesame @-@ seed bun . Burger King will also add any condiment it sells upon request based on its long standing slogan " Have It Your Way " . Additionally , Burger King has sold several different promotional varieties throughout the years as limited time offerings ( LTO ) , such as Chicken Caesar Club , made with Romaine lettuce , Parmesan cheese , bacon and caesar dressing on toasted sourdough bread , or the Carolina BBQ TenderGrill made with pepper jack cheese , bacon , jalapeños , red onion and a mustard @-@ based barbecue sauce which was sold during Burger King 's 2012 and 2013 Summer BBQ Menu promotions . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 The BK Broiler was introduced as part of the company 's Sometimes you gotta break the rules campaign designed by the firms of D 'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles and Saatchi & Saatchi , a campaign that many of Burger King 's franchisees derided as ineffectual and unclear in its message . Despite the failure of the advertising campaign , the product went on to be one of the most successful fast food product launches up to that time . 
 The Chicken Whopper was introduced initially via an April Fools ' Day ad in several major news papers that claimed the company was changing its name to " Chicken King " . A later press release announced the joke was to introduce the public to the new product . The television advertising program used to introduce the Chicken Whopper featured animated chickens in cowboy boots marching to the " Have It Your Way " tune and was created by animation house Kurtz & Friends . Later commercials featured comedian Steve Harvey . A second series of ads called @ BK , love is guaranteed that were developed by Los Angeles @-@ based ad house Amoeba , guaranteed that customers would receive a free sandwich if they don 't " love " the chain 's Whopper and Chicken Whopper sandwiches . With the discovery of mad cow disease by the FDA in 2003 , the company instructed their advertising agency at the time , Young & Rubicam of New York , to retool a forthcoming series of ads featuring the company 's signature product , the Whopper , to include the Chicken Whopper . A Burger King spokesman stated that the change was because Burger King " decided that if there 's anybody who wants a chicken option , at this point , we wanted to remind them that the Whopper comes in chicken as well as the original beef , " noting their confidence in their beef supply . 
 The BK <unk> line was introduced in the United States via an ad campaign from advertising firm Crispin , Porter + Bogusky that featured the tagline " Flavor from grilling not fat . " The American advertising campaigns for the sandwiches featured several celebrity chefs , such as Rick Bayless , visiting locations where similar style food stuffs were found , e.g. a farmers ' market , and commenting on how these ingredients make the new Baguette line better and more healthy . The advertising firm of Euro RSCG <unk> produced ads for the sandwiches in Great Britain . 
 The advertising campaign for the TenderGrill sandwich in Spain in 2010 featured a humor @-@ based ad in which men were asked what type of advertisement would get them to buy the sandwich . The responses , which included what men would like to see in the commercials , formed the basis for the ads . The advertisement , made entirely by women , was filmed in London and featured barbarians , ninjas and unicorns in an advertisement that poked fun at the men 's preferences . The making of the commercial was the basis of a mini @-@ documentary from UK firm Feral Films . In a 2011 Singapore campaign , Burger King presented an attack advertisement that was designed to counter the introduction of the Chicken McGrill sandwich from McDonald 's . The campaign took McDonald 's slogan , " Make it better " and changed it to " Make it even Better " and put the sandwich on sale for SGD $ 1 @.@ 00 on the same day the McDonald 's product was set to debut . Burger King called the McDonald 's menu item " fake grilled " as opposed to flame grilled . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 The 2012 campaign from Clemenger BBDO for the TenderGrill for the Australian Burger King franchise , Hungry Jack 's , featured a goth girl , complete with facial piercings and tattoos that loses her piercings and tattoos as she eats the sandwich . By the time she has finished her meal , her clothing and style had completely changed – much to her and her friends horror . At the end of the commercial , the announcer states the tag line " There is nothing naughty about the new Hungry Jack 's TenderGrill ... Hungry Jack 's makes it better . " The Australian Advertising Standards Bureau received several complaints from the public claiming the commercial demeaned alternative lifestyles , was discriminatory and insulting to non @-@ conformists . The Advertising Standards Board determined that the advertisement did not breach any pertinent anti @-@ discrimination codes , and dismissed the complaint . 
 = = Trademarks = = 
 The name " TenderGrill " is registered trademark of Burger King Holdings and are displayed with the " circle @-@ R " ( ® ) symbol in the markets it is sold , including the United States , Canada and Great Britain . [ Notes 1 ] Other grilled chicken @-@ related trademarks owned by Burger King include " BK Broiler " . [ Notes 2 ] 
 = The Jacket ( Seinfeld ) = 
 " The Jacket " is the third episode of the second season of the NBC sitcom Seinfeld and the show 's eighth episode overall . In the episode , protagonist Jerry Seinfeld buys an expensive suede jacket and has dinner with the father of his ex @-@ girlfriend Elaine Benes . Elaine 's father Alton ( Lawrence Tierney ) , a war veteran and writer , makes Jerry and his friend George Costanza ( Jason Alexander ) very uncomfortable . Elaine is delayed and Jerry and George are stuck with Alton waiting for her at the hotel . 
 The episode was written by Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld and was directed by Tom Cherones . Most of the episode 's storyline was based on one of David 's personal experiences . For example , Elaine 's father , a published author , was inspired by Richard Yates , author of Revolutionary Road , who Larry David had met while dating his daughter . Tierney 's performance as Elaine 's father was praised by the cast and crew . However , they were taken aback by his eccentric behavior , and it was discovered that he stole a knife from the set and pulled it threateningly towards Jerry . The majority of the episode was filmed on December 4 , 1990 . " The Jacket " premiered on American television on February 6 , 1991 , on NBC , it gained a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 4 / 16 and was praised by critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Jerry is shopping for clothes with Elaine , he finds a suede jacket that he likes . He has doubts about buying the jacket because it is very expensive and has a candy stripe lining . He eventually decides to buy it . While Jerry is at home in his living room looking at himself in a mirror with his jacket , Kramer comes in and likes the jacket , he is even more impressed when he discovers the price by reading the label . Kramer persuades Jerry to give him his old leather jacket as he will no longer be using it . 
 The following night , Jerry , Elaine , and George have dinner with Elaine 's father , writer Alton Benes . While preparing for the dinner , George arrives at Jerry 's apartment with the song " Master of the House " from the musical Les Misérables stuck in his head . George and Jerry are both very nervous to meet Alton because he is such a famous author . When they are about to leave , Jerry puts on his new jacket . George is very impressed and attempts to get Jerry to reveal its cost . Kramer enters the apartment and asks for two minutes ' help guarding his illegally parked car as he carries down some doves that he is looking after for a magician friend . However , they refuse to help because he often underestimates how long things take to do . 
 George is still singing as they enter Alton Benes 's hotel . Elaine has not arrived yet , so they sit down with her father and nervously order drinks . They have an awkward conversation with him ; Alton asks who is the " funny guy " ( Jerry ) , to which George says it 's Jerry . Alton then recalls about a funny guy in Korea who got his brains blown out over the Pacific and that " there 's nothing funny about that " . Jerry ( frightened ) eventually goes to the bathroom , abandoning George ( also frightened ) , who attempts to compliment Alton about his book , Fair Game . George gets uncomfortable and tells Alton he has to make a phone call . He meets Jerry in the bathroom and both mention how terrified they are because of Alton ; they decide to go home if Elaine does not show up in the next ten minutes . When they return , Alton receives a message from Elaine , who will arrive in thirty minutes , which worries them both . 
 When Elaine finally arrives , she explains that Kramer promised her a lift if she would wait in his car for two minutes . He returned over twenty minutes later , and the car had been towed for being illegally parked . She was eventually forced to walk to the restaurant . Alton , returning from the bathroom , greets Elaine and tells Jerry and " chorus boy " George that they are going to a Pakistani restaurant five blocks away . On their way out , they notice it is snowing . Jerry knows snow would ruin his suede jacket and asks Alton if they can take a cab , but Alton replies that it is only a few blocks away . George suggests that Jerry could turn the jacket inside out , but because of the candy stripe lining , Alton notices and tells him to turn it back , saying he looks " like a damn fool " and that he 's " not going to walk down the street with me and my daughter dressed like that . " George then reminds Jerry that the restaurant is only a few blocks away ; Jerry , reluctantly , puts his jacket back to normal . 
 The next day Kramer notices Jerry 's jacket hanging in the bathroom , badly damaged by the snow . Kramer takes it , chiding Jerry for not turning it inside out . Elaine arrives , and tells Jerry that her father had a good time . She explains how he usually hates everyone but liked Jerry , as he reminded him of a certain " somebody " from Korea ; she then mentions that he thinks George is gay because " he pretty much thinks everyone is gay . " Meanwhile , as Alton drives home , he finds himself singing " Master of the House " as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Throughout the episode , George sings the song " Master of the House " from the musical Les Misérables . Les Misérables ran on Broadway for sixteen years , making it one of the longest running musicals in the history of Broadway . In response to George constantly singing " Master of the House " , Jerry tells him about German composer Robert Schumann , who went insane from hearing the same note over and over in his head . George also mentions Bud Abbott , an actor and comedian during the 1940s and 1950s , who was part of the Abbott and Costello duo , with Lou Costello . When Jerry and George discuss their options in the bathroom at the hotel , George suggests that they should leave to which Jerry replies " he 'll clunk our heads together like Moe " ; this a reference to Moe Howard , one of The Three Stooges , who frequently <unk> the heads of the other Stooges together . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Jacket " was written by Seinfeld 's co @-@ creators Larry David and Jerry Seinfeld and directed by Tom Cherones . The episode 's storyline was based on one of David 's personal experiences ; when he was dating Monica Yates , she wanted him to meet her father , Richard Yates , a respected novelist . David had just bought a suede jacket , and met Richard Yates at the Algonquin Hotel . Richard was , as David stated in an interview , " ... every bit as intimidating as Alton Benes " . David 's story is similar to what happened in the episode , as , when they headed out to the restaurant , his jacket was ruined by the snow . Additional dialogue at the store where Jerry buys his jacket was cut before broadcast , it featured a reference to Gary Gilmore . The material was later included on the Seinfeld Volume 1 DVD set . " The Jacket " is the only episode in which one of Elaine 's parents appears ; Louis @-@ Dreyfus once suggested Mary Tyler Moore to portray Elaine 's mother , but the character never appeared on the show . The episode also contains the first mention to Elaine 's job as a manuscript reader for Pendant Publishing , in early drafts of the script her job was an optician . Also in early drafts , in the final scene Kramer entered Jerry 's house with a dove on his shoulder . 
 The episode was first read by the cast on November 28 , 1990 at 10 @.@ 30 AM . It was filmed in front of a live audience on December 4 , 1990 . The episode was filmed at CBS Studio Center in Studio City , Los Angeles , California , where , starting with the season two premiere " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " , all filming for the second season took place . The final scene in the episode , which showed Alton Benes singing " Master of the House " in his car , was pre @-@ recorded on December 3 , 1990 , as it could not be filmed in front of an audience because it took place in a car . 
 = = Lawrence Tierney = = 
 Lawrence Tierney was cast as Alton Benes . He was known for his bad @-@ guy roles in films during the 1940s and 1950s , such as Dillinger , The Hoodlum and Born to Kill . Tierney 's appearance in the episode is one of his only comedic roles . Cast and crew members were very impressed with Tierney 's performance , and intended to make Alton Benes a recurring character . However , they were frightened of him ; during filming it was discovered that Tierney had stolen a butcher knife from the knife block in Jerry 's apartment set . Various cast members remember Seinfeld encountering Tierney and stating " Hey Lawrence , what do you got there in your jacket ? " . Tierney , realizing he had been caught , tried to make a joke about how he thought taking the knife would be funny , by reenacting a scene from Alfred Hitchcock 's Psycho ( 1960 ) , holding the knife above his head and making threatening motions towards Seinfeld . Tom Cherones , Jason Alexander and Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus saw this happen , and , as Alexander recalled , it " scared the living crap out of all of us . " Cherones stated that , afterwards , Larry David would jokingly threaten to have Tierney back on the show if Cherones did his work badly . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On February 6 , 1991 , " The Jacket " was first broadcast in the United States on NBC . It gained a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 4 and an audience share of 16 , this means that 10 @.@ 4 % of American households watched the episode , and that 16 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . It faced strong competition from the CBS crime drama Jake and the Fatman ; viewers would frequently tune out of Seinfeld to watch the second half of Jake and the Fatman 's . Seinfeld once jokingly stated that this was because the " Fatman " would run in the second half of the show . 
 The episode gained positive responses from critics . Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide stated " An otherwise mediocre episode , Lawrence Tierney ’ s gruff turn as Elaine ’ s father helps redeem ' The Jacket ' " . DVD reviewer Jonathan Boudreaux considered " The Jacket " one of season two 's best episodes , along with " The Chinese Restaurant " . Critics Mary Kaye Schilling and Mike Flaherty of Entertainment Weekly graded the episode with a B- , stating " Jerry and George 's torturous hotel @-@ lobby meeting with Mr. Benes is a squirm @-@ inducing joy " . 
 = Faye Morton = 
 Faye Lindsey Byrne ( née Morton , previously Michaels , Hewson , Wilson ) is a fictional character from the BBC medical drama Holby City , portrayed by actress Patsy Kensit . The character first appeared on @-@ screen on 30 January 2007 in the episode " Into the Dark " - series nine , episode 17 of the program . Kensit had made a former unrelated guest appearance on Holby City 's sister show Casualty in 2001 . 
 Faye is a Ward Sister at Holby General , with a mysterious past including two dead husbands and a disabled son . Her storylines have seen her marry registrar Joseph Byrne ( Luke Roberts ) , and develop feelings for consultant Linden Cullen ( Duncan Pow ) following the death of her son . Her introductory storyline , shot on location in Dubai , in which she kills her third husband and leaves for Holby , proved so popular that Kensit was shortlisted " Best Actress " in the 2007 TV Quick and TV Choice Awards for her portrayal of the character within three months of arriving on the show . However , the dramaticism of the character 's storylines and the manner in which they reflect upon real NHS nurses has attracted criticism . Kensit left the show on 28 December 2010 in the episode " Snow Queens " - series thirteen , episode 11 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Early publicity for the character gave her name as Eliza Clark . This was ultimately changed to Faye Morton , and although Faye did not first appear on @-@ screen until January 2007 , the announcement that Patsy Kensit had been cast in the role was made on 14 December 2005 . Holby City 's executive producer Richard Stokes and series producer Emma Turner spoke of their delight at Kensit 's casting , describing her as " a talented and popular actress who lights up the screen . " Kensit took the role in Holby City after two years of working on the ITV soap opera Emmerdale , commenting that she was " thrilled " to be offered the part , and was looking forward to working in London . Having formerly worked in Yorkshire to film Emmerdale , working in London reduced the actress ' daily commute to 45 minutes . Television critic Jim Shelley noted that Kensit 's casting in the role followed a trend of Holby City producers for hiring established actors , including comedian Adrian Edmondson and Jesus of Nazareth star Robert Powell . 
 In preparation for the role , Kensit spent three days shadowing a real nurse , and observed open heart surgery being performed as research . She commented on the experience : " I wanted to throw up . First of all I stood in the corner but in the end I couldn 't get close enough ... nurses are incredible women . They 're doing this job for next to nothing and do it with such love and care ... I couldn 't do it , I 'd get too emotionally involved , I don 't think I could cope . " In 2001 , Kensit had made a guest appearance in series 16 of Holby City 's sister show Casualty , appearing as a domestic abuse victim and giving what TV critic Ian Hyland deemed " a convincing performance " . Prior to her move into television roles , Kensit had predominantly worked in films , but explained upon joining the cast of Holby City : " Making films isn 't for me any more because I 'm an old girl in that world ... I 've been very lucky , this is something I grew up doing , in television there 's so much satisfaction ... I 'll stay as long as they want me , I feel like I 've come back home . " 
 = = = Personality and relationships = = = 
 Initial publicity for the character billed her as " a nurse who has more than a few secrets to hide and an attitude that cannot fail to ruffle the feathers of her colleagues . " The Daily Express have described her as " Gregarious ... likes a gossip , but she 's emotionally vulnerable " , while Holby City actress Tina Hobley has compared Faye to her own character , Chrissie Williams , explaining that " Faye is a quieter character all round who will do anything for an easy life , whereas Chrissie likes to stir up a bit of drama . I think she sees Faye as a goody two shoes . " 
 In the flashback episode " What Lies Beneath " , exploring Faye 's decision to move to Holby , she is seen to fight with her husband James , then later step over his dead body on the stairs . Kensit explained : " there 's a scuffle and he pins her against the wall and practically tries to rape her . He ends up dead . It 's the way she deals with it — she coolly steps over his body and leaves . It turns out similar things have happened before . " Shortly after arriving in Holby , the character began a relationship with cardiothoracic registrar Sam Strachan ( Tom Chambers ) . The situation soon escalated into a love triangle , with Sam reigniting his former relationship with Faye 's colleague , Matron Chrissie Williams . Kensit said of the relationship in August 2007 , as the storyline was ongoing : " For Faye , Sam is not Mr Right , simply Mr Right Now . But Faye is not as sweet as she looks - there 's a streak of toughness there ... It 's all going to get very messy ! " Upon discovering Sam 's infidelity , the character terminated their relationship , and became involved with his colleague Joseph Byrne . 
 In terms of friendships , Faye is close to Ward Sister Kyla Tyson ( Rakie Ayola ) . Though the BBC describe Faye and Chrissie as rivals , Hobley has commented : " I 'd like there to be more development with Chrissie and Faye 's relationship as they 've only really had Sam as a common interest up until now . I just hope its friendship that develops , because I can 't bear all that bitchy cat @-@ fighting stuff . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Faye arrives at Holby General in the episode " Into the Dark " , requesting that registrars Joseph Byrne and Jac Naylor ( Rosie Marcel ) help her gain employment as a Bank Nurse . During her first few months at the hospital , Faye remains close to Joseph , but does not get on well with Jac , who she speaks to sternly about her close relationship with Joseph 's father , Lord Byrne ( Ronald Pickup ) . In the episode " What Lies Beneath " , flashbacks show the trio 's first meeting in Dubai . Faye 's husband James reveals to her that he has lost her life savings . The pair fight , and James ends up dead at the bottom of their stairs . Faye leaves him , and returns to England with Joseph and Jac . Faye is questioned by the police about James ' death but is not charged . 
 Faye begins a friendship with Ward Sister Kyla Tyson , and supports her through her domestic abuse ordeal at the hands of her husband , his subsequent death , and the loss of her son to foster care . She resists the advances of hospital lothario Sam Strachan , and impresses general surgical consultant Dan Clifford ( Peter Wingfield ) with her approach to patient care - leading to an on the spot promotion after a clash with Thandie Abebe ( Ginny Holder ) in the episode " Leap of Faith " . 
 Faye begins dating Sam , unaware that he is cheating on her with Ward Sister Chrissie Williams . She ends their relationship when she discovers his infidelity and turns her attention to Joseph , who had tried to warn her about Sam 's indiscretion . She supports Joseph when he is tormented by Jac about the relationship she had had with his father prior to his death . When STI clinician Tim attacks staff members with a crossbow , Faye is shot in the back , but makes a full recovery . She reveals to Joseph that she was formerly married to a much older man named Donald , who left her a substantial amount of money after his death from cancer . She is investigated by the police , who find it suspicious that she has been twice widowed . Her stepson , Carl Hewson , blackmails her for money , but is later attacked by loan sharks and dies in theatre . 
 Following a fight with Joseph , Faye disappears to South Africa . Joseph and consultant Linden Cullen travel there to find her , and discover that Faye has a young son , Archie , who has Lowe syndrome . He has been kidnapped by his father , Faye 's first husband Lucas , and Joseph is forced to operate on him to save his life . Faye and Joseph go on to become engaged , and marry at his family home . When Archie 's nurse Lauren accidentally administers him the wrong drug , he dies . Faye is arrested for his murder when post @-@ mortem results prove inconclusive , and is suspended from work . She is acquitted when Lauren confesses , and fights with the nurse , who attempts suicide . Faye is able to make her peace with Lauren , but is unable to fully forgive her . In the aftermath of Archie 's death , Faye and Joseph grow apart , and she develops romantic feelings for Linden . 
 Faye and Joseph separate , and she and Linden begin a relationship . Faye discovers that she is pregnant with Joseph 's baby , but Linden promises to support her and they become briefly engaged . Increasingly concerned that Faye may be a pathological liar , Linden terminates their engagement . Faye is later attacked by a heroin @-@ addicted patient , and when Linden attempts to defend her , he is hit in the head with a glass bottle and dies . Faye suffers a breakdown in the aftermath of Linden 's death , and is admitted to a psychiatric unit . She self @-@ harms , and refuses to leave the unit when she goes into labour , until Jac assures her that Joseph does not intend to take their child away from her . Faye delivers a boy by Caesarean . She initially fails to bond with him , but when Joseph puts their divorce proceedings on hold , she makes an effort and names him Harry , after Joseph 's deceased younger brother . Despite Joseph 's opposition , she insists on returning to the psychiatric unit . 
 Faye left her job on 28 December 2010 and went to live in France , leaving her son , Harry , in the care of Joseph . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Within four months of first appearing in Holby City , Kensit was nominated for the " Best Actress " award at the 2007 TV Quick and TV Choice Awards for her portrayal of Faye . The character 's introductory episode , " Into the Dark " drew a high of 7 million viewers , while " What Lies Beneath " , the flashback episode in which the character was seen to kill her husband in Dubai drew ratings of 6 @.@ 32 million . The character 's introduction to the series was highly publicised in the media , including a front cover and inside spread featuring Kensit discussing her new role in the week 's edition of the Radio Times . The Liverpool Echo selected the character 's introductory episode as a televisual ' Pick of the Day ' , The Mirror 's TV critic Jim Shelley selected her arrival as a highlight of the week , and Kevin O 'Sullivan of the Sunday Mirror described her debut as " sensational " . 
 Faye has continued to generate high publicity for the series , with the 11 August 2007 edition of Total TV Guide featuring Kensit , Hobley and Chambers on its front cover , appearing in character to promote their love triangle storyline , and the 1 September 2007 Daily Express television supplement again featuring Kensit and Hobley on its cover , with an inside feature on the same storyline . It was reported on 19 August 2007 that Kensit 's casting had " boosted the series ' appeal " to such an extent that for the first time , a Holby City calendar had been commissioned . The report quoted a series insider as stating : " Patsy has really set the show off this year , and what better way to thank the dedicated fans ? " . 
 The character was heavily criticised in the July 2007 edition of the Nursing and Midwifery Council magazine . The publication discussed the topic of nurses in popular culture , and the negative impression of the nursing profession conveyed by fictional nurses . With a promotional image of Kensit as Faye adorning the front cover , the magazine asserted : 
 This criticism was echoed by Shelley , who , commenting on an interview Kensit had given to publicise the show and her role with Jonathan Ross , suggested that " reality " was not a term that could be applied to Holby City 's portrayal of nursing . 
 In July 2009 , Conservative Party strategists identified " Holby City woman " as a key voter demographic who may help the party win the 2010 General Election . The " Holby City woman " archetype is modelled on Faye , a female voter in her 30s or 40s , employed in a clinical or clerical position or some other public sector job . She is a swing voter in General Elections , who has voted for the Labour Party in previous elections , though her identification with the Labour Party is not strong . Jonathan Oliver for The Times noted that " Faye Morton , the Holby City staff nurse played by Patsy Kensit is just the sort of person that Cameron might now hope to recruit " . 
 = Venus = 
 Venus is the second planet from the Sun , orbiting it every 224 @.@ 7 Earth days . It has the longest rotation period ( 243 days ) of any planet in the Solar System and rotates in the opposite direction to most other planets . It has no natural satellite . It is named after the Roman goddess of love and beauty . It is the second @-@ brightest natural object in the night sky after the Moon , reaching an apparent magnitude of − 4 @.@ 6 , bright enough to cast shadows . Because Venus is an inferior planet from Earth , it never appears to venture far from the Sun ; its elongation reaches a maximum of 47 @.@ 8 ° . 
 Venus is a terrestrial planet and is sometimes called Earth 's " sister planet " because of their similar size , mass , proximity to the Sun , and bulk composition . It is radically different from Earth in other respects . It has the densest atmosphere of the four terrestrial planets , consisting of more than 96 % carbon dioxide . The atmospheric pressure at the planet 's surface is 92 times that of Earth . Venus is by far the hottest planet in the Solar System , with a mean surface temperature of 735 K ( 462 ° C ; 863 ° F ) , even though Mercury is closer to the Sun . Venus is shrouded by an opaque layer of highly reflective clouds of sulfuric acid , preventing its surface from being seen from space in visible light . It may have had water oceans in the past , but these would have vaporized as the temperature rose due to a runaway greenhouse effect . The water has probably <unk> , and the free hydrogen has been swept into interplanetary space by the solar wind because of the lack of a planetary magnetic field . Venus 's surface is a dry <unk> interspersed with slab @-@ like rocks and is periodically resurfaced by volcanism . 
 As one of the brightest objects in the sky , Venus has been a major fixture in human culture for as long as records have existed . It has been made sacred to gods of many cultures , and has been a prime inspiration for writers and poets as the " morning star " and " evening star " . Venus was the first planet to have its motions plotted across the sky , as early as the second millennium BC , and was a prime target for early interplanetary exploration as the closest planet to Earth . It was the first planet beyond Earth visited by a spacecraft ( Mariner 2 ) in 1962 , and the first to be successfully landed on ( by Venera 7 ) in 1970 . Venus 's thick clouds render observation of its surface impossible in visible light , and the first detailed maps did not emerge until the arrival of the Magellan orbiter in 1991 . Plans have been proposed for rovers or more complex missions , but they are hindered by Venus 's hostile surface conditions . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Venus is one of the four terrestrial planets in the Solar System , meaning that it is a rocky body like Earth . It is similar to Earth in size and mass , and is often described as Earth 's " sister " or " twin " . The diameter of Venus is 12 @,@ 092 km ( only 650 km less than Earth 's ) and its mass is 81 @.@ 5 % of Earth 's . Conditions on the Venusian surface differ radically from those on Earth because of its dense carbon dioxide atmosphere . The mass of the atmosphere of Venus is 96 @.@ 5 % carbon dioxide , with most of the remaining 3 @.@ 5 % being nitrogen . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 The Venusian surface was a subject of speculation until some of its secrets were revealed by planetary science in the 20th century . Venera landers in 1975 and 1982 returned images of a surface covered in sediment and relatively angular rocks . The surface was mapped in detail by Magellan in 1990 – 91 . The ground shows evidence of extensive volcanism , and the sulfur in the atmosphere may indicate that there have been some recent eruptions . 
 About 80 % of the Venusian surface is covered by smooth , volcanic plains , consisting of 70 % plains with wrinkle ridges and 10 % smooth or lobate plains . Two highland " continents " make up the rest of its surface area , one lying in the planet 's northern hemisphere and the other just south of the equator . The northern continent is called Ishtar Terra , after Ishtar the Babylonian goddess of love , and is about the size of Australia . Maxwell Montes , the highest mountain on Venus , lies on Ishtar Terra . Its peak is 11 km above the Venusian average surface elevation . The southern continent is called Aphrodite Terra , after the Greek goddess of love , and is the larger of the two highland regions at roughly the size of South America . A network of fractures and faults covers much of this area . 
 The absence of evidence of lava flow accompanying any of the visible caldera remains an enigma . The planet has few impact craters , demonstrating that the surface is relatively young , approximately 300 – 600 million years old . Venus has some unique surface features in addition to the impact craters , mountains , and valleys commonly found on rocky planets . Among these are flat @-@ topped volcanic features called " <unk> " , which look somewhat like pancakes and range in size from 20 to 50 km across , and from 100 to 1 @,@ 000 m high ; radial , star @-@ like fracture systems called " novae " ; features with both radial and concentric fractures resembling spider webs , known as " <unk> " ; and " <unk> " , circular rings of fractures sometimes surrounded by a depression . These features are volcanic in origin . 
 Most Venusian surface features are named after historical and mythological women . Exceptions are Maxwell Montes , named after James Clerk Maxwell , and highland regions Alpha Regio , Beta Regio , and Ovda Regio . The latter three features were named before the current system was adopted by the International Astronomical Union , the body which oversees planetary nomenclature . 
 The longitudes of physical features on Venus are expressed relative to its prime meridian . The original prime meridian passed through the radar @-@ bright spot at the centre of the oval feature Eve , located south of Alpha Regio . After the Venera missions were completed , the prime meridian was redefined to pass through the central peak in the crater Ariadne . 
 = = = Surface geology = = = 
 Much of the Venusian surface appears to have been shaped by volcanic activity . Venus has several times as many volcanoes as Earth , and it has 167 large volcanoes that are over 100 km across . The only volcanic complex of this size on Earth is the Big Island of Hawaii . This is not because Venus is more volcanically active than Earth , but because its crust is older . Earth 's oceanic crust is continually recycled by subduction at the boundaries of tectonic plates , and has an average age of about 100 million years , whereas the Venusian surface is estimated to be 300 – 600 million years old . 
 Several lines of evidence point to ongoing volcanic activity on Venus . During the Soviet Venera program , the Venera 9 orbiter obtained spectroscopic evidence of lightning on Venus , and the Venera 12 descent probe obtained additional evidence of lightning and thunder . The European Space Agency 's Venus Express in 2007 detected whistler waves further confirming the occurrence of lightning on Venus . Although rainfall drives thunderstorms on Earth , there is no rainfall on the surface of Venus ( though sulfuric acid rain falls in the upper atmosphere , then evaporates around 25 km above the surface ) . One possibility is that ash from a volcanic eruption was generating the lightning . Another piece of evidence comes from measurements of sulfur dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere , which dropped by a factor of 10 between 1978 and 1986 , jumped in 2006 , and again declined 10 @-@ fold . This may mean that levels had been boosted several times by large volcanic eruptions . 
 In 2008 and 2009 , the first direct evidence for ongoing volcanism was observed by Venus Express , in the form of four transient localized infrared hot spots within the rift zone Ganis Chasma , near the shield volcano Maat Mons . Three of the spots were observed in more than one successive orbit . These spots are thought to represent lava freshly released by volcanic eruptions . The actual temperatures are not known , because the size of the hot spots could not be measured , but are likely to have been in the 800 – 1100 K range , relative to a normal temperature of 740 K. 
 Almost a thousand impact craters on Venus are evenly distributed across its surface . On other cratered bodies , such as Earth and the Moon , craters show a range of states of degradation . On the Moon , degradation is caused by subsequent impacts , whereas on Earth it is caused by wind and rain erosion . On Venus , about 85 % of the craters are in pristine condition . The number of craters , together with their well @-@ preserved condition , indicates the planet underwent a global resurfacing event about 300 – 600 million years ago , followed by a decay in volcanism . Whereas Earth 's crust is in continuous motion , Venus is thought to be unable to sustain such a process . Without plate tectonics to dissipate heat from its mantle , Venus instead undergoes a cyclical process in which mantle temperatures rise until they reach a critical level that weakens the crust . Then , over a period of about 100 million years , subduction occurs on an enormous scale , completely recycling the crust . 
 Venusian craters range from 3 km to 280 km in diameter . No craters are smaller than 3 km , because of the effects of the dense atmosphere on incoming objects . Objects with less than a certain kinetic energy are slowed down so much by the atmosphere that they do not create an impact crater . Incoming projectiles less than 50 metres in diameter will fragment and burn up in the atmosphere before reaching the ground . 
 = = = Internal structure = = = 
 Without seismic data or knowledge of its moment of inertia , little direct information is available about the internal structure and geochemistry of Venus . The similarity in size and density between Venus and Earth suggests they share a similar internal structure : a core , mantle , and crust . Like that of Earth , the Venusian core is at least partially liquid because the two planets have been cooling at about the same rate . The slightly smaller size of Venus means pressures are 24 % lower in its deep interior than Earth 's . The principal difference between the two planets is the lack of evidence for plate tectonics on Venus , possibly because its crust is too strong to subduct without water to make it less viscous . This results in reduced heat loss from the planet , preventing it from cooling and providing a likely explanation for its lack of an internally generated magnetic field . Instead , Venus may lose its internal heat in periodic major resurfacing events . 
 = = = Atmosphere and climate = = = 
 Venus has an extremely dense atmosphere composed of 96 @.@ 5 % carbon dioxide , 3 @.@ 5 % nitrogen , and traces of other gases , most notably sulfur dioxide . The mass of its atmosphere is 93 times that of Earth 's , whereas the pressure at its surface is about 92 times that at Earth 's — a pressure equivalent to that at a depth of nearly 1 kilometre under Earth 's oceans . The density at the surface is 65 kg / m3 , 6 @.@ 5 % that of water or 50 times as dense as Earth 's atmosphere at 20 ° C at sea level . The CO 
 2 @-@ rich atmosphere generates the strongest greenhouse effect in the Solar System , creating surface temperatures of at least 735 K ( 462 ° C ) . This makes Venus 's surface hotter than Mercury 's , which has a minimum surface temperature of 55 K ( − 220 ° C ) and maximum surface temperature of 695 K ( 420 ° C ) , even though Venus is nearly twice Mercury 's distance from the Sun and thus receives only 25 % of Mercury 's solar irradiance . This temperature is higher than that used for sterilization . The surface of Venus is often said to resemble traditional accounts of Hell . 
 Studies have suggested that billions of years ago Venus 's atmosphere was much more like Earth 's than it is now , and that there may have been substantial quantities of liquid water on the surface , but after a period of 600 million to several billion years , a runaway greenhouse effect was caused by the evaporation of that original water , which generated a critical level of greenhouse gases in its atmosphere . Although the surface conditions on Venus are no longer hospitable to any Earthlike life that may have formed before this event , there is speculation on the possibility that life exists in the upper cloud layers of Venus , 50 km ( 31 mi ) up from the surface , where the temperature ranges between 30 and 80 ° C but the environment is acidic . 
 Thermal inertia and the transfer of heat by winds in the lower atmosphere mean that the temperature of Venus 's surface does not vary significantly between the night and day sides , despite Venus 's extremely slow rotation . Winds at the surface are slow , moving at a few kilometres per hour , but because of the high density of the atmosphere at the surface , they exert a significant amount of force against obstructions , and transport dust and small stones across the surface . This alone would make it difficult for a human to walk through , even if the heat , pressure , and lack of oxygen were not a problem . 
 Above the dense CO 
 2 layer are thick clouds consisting mainly of sulfuric acid droplets . The clouds also contain sulfur aerosol , about 1 % ferric chloride and some water . Other possible constituents of the cloud particles are ferric sulfate , aluminium chloride and phosphoric anhydride . Clouds at different levels have different compositions and particle size distributions . These clouds reflect and scatter about 90 % of the sunlight that falls on them back into space , and prevent visual observation of Venus 's surface . The permanent cloud cover means that although Venus is closer than Earth to the Sun , it receives less sunlight on the ground . Strong 85 m / s ( 300 km / h ) winds at the cloud tops go around Venus about every four to five Earth days . Winds on Venus move at up to 60 times the speed of its rotation , whereas Earth 's fastest winds are only 10 – 20 % rotation speed . 
 The surface of Venus is effectively isothermal ; it retains a constant temperature not only between day and night but between the equator and the poles . Venus 's minute axial tilt — less than 3 ° , compared to 23 ° on Earth — also minimises seasonal temperature variation . The only appreciable variation in temperature occurs with altitude . The highest point on Venus , Maxwell Montes , is therefore the coolest point on Venus , with a temperature of about 655 K ( 380 ° C ) and an atmospheric pressure of about 4 @.@ 5 MPa ( 45 bar ) . In 1995 , the Magellan spacecraft imaged a highly reflective substance at the tops of the highest mountain peaks that bore a strong resemblance to terrestrial snow . This substance likely formed from a similar process to snow , albeit at a far higher temperature . Too volatile to condense on the surface , it rose in gaseous form to higher elevations , where it is cooler and could precipitate . The identity of this substance is not known with certainty , but speculation has ranged from elemental tellurium to lead sulfide ( galena ) . 
 The clouds of Venus are capable of producing lightning much like the clouds on Earth . The existence of lightning had been controversial since the first suspected bursts were detected by the Soviet Venera probes . In 2006 – 07 , Venus Express clearly detected whistler mode waves , the signatures of lightning . Their intermittent appearance indicates a pattern associated with weather activity . The lightning rate is at least half of that on Earth . In 2007 , Venus Express discovered that a huge double atmospheric vortex exists at the south pole . 
 Venus Express also discovered , in 2011 , that an ozone layer exists high in the atmosphere of Venus . On 29 January 2013 , ESA scientists reported that the ionosphere of Venus streams outwards in a manner similar to " the ion tail seen streaming from a comet under similar conditions . " 
 = = = Magnetic field and core = = = 
 In 1967 , Venera 4 found Venus 's magnetic field to be much weaker than that of Earth . This magnetic field is induced by an interaction between the ionosphere and the solar wind , rather than by an internal dynamo in the core like the one inside Earth . Venus 's small induced magnetosphere provides negligible protection to the atmosphere against cosmic radiation . This radiation may result in cloud @-@ to @-@ cloud lightning discharges . 
 The lack of an intrinsic magnetic field at Venus was surprising , given that it is similar to Earth in size , and was expected also to contain a dynamo at its core . A dynamo requires three things : a conducting liquid , rotation , and convection . The core is thought to be electrically conductive and , although its rotation is often thought to be too slow , simulations show it is adequate to produce a dynamo . This implies that the dynamo is missing because of a lack of convection in Venus 's core . On Earth , convection occurs in the liquid outer layer of the core because the bottom of the liquid layer is much hotter than the top . On Venus , a global resurfacing event may have shut down plate tectonics and led to a reduced heat flux through the crust . This caused the mantle temperature to increase , thereby reducing the heat flux out of the core . As a result , no internal <unk> is available to drive a magnetic field . Instead , the heat from the core is being used to reheat the crust . 
 One possibility is that Venus has no solid inner core , or that its core is not cooling , so that the entire liquid part of the core is at approximately the same temperature . Another possibility is that its core has already completely solidified . The state of the core is highly dependent on the concentration of sulfur , which is unknown at present . 
 The weak magnetosphere around Venus means that the solar wind is interacting directly with its outer atmosphere . Here , ions of hydrogen and oxygen are being created by the dissociation of neutral molecules from ultraviolet radiation . The solar wind then supplies energy that gives some of these ions sufficient velocity to escape Venus 's gravity field . This erosion process results in a steady loss of low @-@ mass hydrogen , helium , and oxygen ions , whereas higher @-@ mass molecules , such as carbon dioxide , are more likely to be retained . Atmospheric erosion by the solar wind probably led to the loss of most of Venus 's water during the first billion years after it formed . The erosion has increased the ratio of higher @-@ mass deuterium to lower @-@ mass hydrogen in the atmosphere 100 times compared to the rest of the solar system . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Venus orbits the Sun at an average distance of about 0 @.@ 72 AU ( 108 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ; 67 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 mi ) , and completes an orbit every 224 @.@ 7 days . Although all planetary orbits are elliptical , Venus 's orbit is the closest to circular , with an eccentricity of less than 0 @.@ 01 . When Venus lies between Earth and the Sun in inferior conjunction , it makes the closest approach to Earth of any planet at an average distance of 41 million km . The planet reaches inferior conjunction every 584 days , on average . Because of the decreasing eccentricity of Earth 's orbit , the minimum distances will become greater over tens of thousands of years . From the year 1 to 5383 , there are 526 approaches less than 40 million km ; then there are none for about 60 @,@ 158 years . 
 All the planets in the Solar System orbit the Sun in an anti @-@ clockwise direction as viewed from above Earth 's north pole . Most planets also rotate on their axes in an anti @-@ clockwise direction , but Venus rotates clockwise in retrograde rotation once every 243 Earth days — the slowest rotation of any planet . Because its rotation is so slow , Venus is very close to spherical . A Venusian sidereal day thus lasts longer than a Venusian year ( 243 versus 224 @.@ 7 Earth days ) . Venus 's equator rotates at 6 @.@ 5 km / h ( 4 @.@ 0 mph ) , whereas Earth 's is approximately 1 @,@ 670 km / h ( 1 @,@ 040 mph ) . Venus 's rotation has slowed down by 6 @.@ 5 min per Venusian sidereal day in the 16 years between the Magellan spacecraft and Venus Express visits . Because of the retrograde rotation , the length of a solar day on Venus is significantly shorter than the sidereal day , at 116 @.@ 75 Earth days ( making the Venusian solar day shorter than Mercury 's 176 Earth days ) . One Venusian year is about 1 @.@ 92 Venusian solar days . To an observer on the surface of Venus , the Sun would rise in the west and set in the east , although Venus 's opaque clouds prevent observing the Sun from the planet 's surface . 
 Venus may have formed from the solar nebula with a different rotation period and obliquity , reaching its current state because of chaotic spin changes caused by planetary perturbations and tidal effects on its dense atmosphere , a change that would have occurred over the course of billions of years . The rotation period of Venus may represent an equilibrium state between tidal locking to the Sun 's gravitation , which tends to slow rotation , and an atmospheric tide created by solar heating of the thick Venusian atmosphere . The 584 @-@ day average interval between successive close approaches to Earth is almost exactly equal to 5 Venusian solar days , but the hypothesis of a spin – orbit resonance with Earth has been discounted . 
 Venus has no natural satellites . It has several trojan asteroids : the quasi @-@ satellite 2002 <unk> and two other temporary trojans , 2001 <unk> and 2012 <unk> . In the 17th century , Giovanni Cassini reported a moon orbiting Venus , which was named Neith and numerous sightings were reported over the following 200 years , but most were determined to be stars in the vicinity . Alex <unk> 's and David Stevenson 's 2006 study of models of the early Solar System at the California Institute of Technology shows Venus likely had at least one moon created by a huge impact event billions of years ago . About 10 million years later , according to the study , another impact reversed the planet 's spin direction and caused the Venusian moon gradually to spiral inward until it collided with Venus . If later impacts created moons , these were removed in the same way . An alternative explanation for the lack of satellites is the effect of strong solar tides , which can destabilize large satellites orbiting the inner terrestrial planets . 
 = = Observation = = 
 To the naked eye , Venus appears as a white point of light brighter than any other planet or star ( apart from the Sun ) . The greatest luminosity , apparent magnitude − 4 @.@ 9 , occurs during crescent phase when it is near Earth . Venus fades to about magnitude − 3 when it is backlit by the Sun . The planet is bright enough to be seen in a midday clear sky , and it can be easy to see when the Sun is low on the horizon . As an inferior planet , it always lies within about 47 ° of the Sun . 
 Venus " overtakes " Earth every 584 days as it orbits the Sun . As it does so , it changes from the " Evening Star " , visible after sunset , to the " Morning Star " , visible before sunrise . Although Mercury , the other inferior planet , reaches a maximum elongation of only 28 ° and is often difficult to discern in twilight , Venus is hard to miss when it is at its brightest . Its greater maximum elongation means it is visible in dark skies long after sunset . As the brightest point @-@ like object in the sky , Venus is a commonly misreported " unidentified flying object " . U.S. President Jimmy Carter reported having seen a UFO in 1969 , which later analysis suggested was probably Venus . 
 As it moves around its orbit , Venus displays phases like those of the Moon in a telescopic view . The planet presents a small " full " image when it is on the opposite side of the Sun . It shows a larger " quarter phase " when it is at its maximum elongations from the Sun , and is at its brightest in the night sky , and presents a much larger " thin crescent " in telescopic views as it comes around to the near side between Earth and the Sun . Venus is at its largest and presents its " new phase " when it is between Earth and the Sun . Its atmosphere can be seen in a telescope by the halo of light refracted around it . 
 = = = Transits = = = 
 The Venusian orbit is slightly inclined relative to Earth 's orbit ; thus , when the planet passes between Earth and the Sun , it usually does not cross the face of the Sun . Transits of Venus occur when the planet 's inferior conjunction coincides with its presence in the plane of Earth 's orbit . Transits of Venus occur in cycles of 243 years with the current pattern of transits being pairs of transits separated by eight years , at intervals of about 105 @.@ 5 years or 121 @.@ 5 years — a pattern first discovered in 1639 by the English astronomer Jeremiah Horrocks . 
 The latest pair was June 8 , 2004 and June 5 – 6 , 2012 . The transit could be watched live from many online outlets or observed locally with the right equipment and conditions . 
 The preceding pair of transits occurred in December 1874 and December 1882 ; the following pair will occur in December 2117 and December 2125 . Historically , transits of Venus were important , because they allowed astronomers to determine the size of the astronomical unit , and hence the size of the Solar System as shown by Horrocks in 1639 . Captain Cook 's exploration of the east coast of Australia came after he had sailed to Tahiti in 1768 to observe a transit of Venus . 
 = = = Pentagram of Venus = = = 
 The pentagram of Venus is the path that Venus makes as observed from Earth . Successive inferior conjunctions of Venus repeat very near a 13 : 8 orbital resonance ( Earth orbits 8 times for every 13 orbits of Venus ) , shifting 144 ° upon sequential inferior conjunctions . The resonance 13 : 8 ratio is approximate . 8 / 13 is approximately 0 @.@ <unk> while Venus orbits the Sun in 0 @.@ <unk> years . 
 = = = Ashen light = = = 
 A long @-@ standing mystery of Venus observations is the so @-@ called ashen light — an apparent weak illumination of its dark side , seen when the planet is in the crescent phase . The first claimed observation of ashen light was made in 1643 , but the existence of the illumination has never been reliably confirmed . Observers have speculated it may result from electrical activity in the Venusian atmosphere , but it could be illusory , resulting from the physiological effect of observing a bright , crescent @-@ shaped object . 
 = = Habitability = = 
 The speculation of the existence of life on Venus decreased significantly since the early 1960s , when spacecraft began studying Venus and it became clear that the conditions on Venus are extreme compared to those on Earth . 
 The fact that Venus is located closer to the Sun than Earth , raising temperatures on the surface to nearly 735 K ( 462 ° C ) , the atmospheric pressure is 90 times that of Earth , and the extreme impact of the greenhouse effect , make water @-@ based life as we know it unlikely . However , a few scientists have speculated that <unk> extremophile microorganisms might exist in the lower @-@ temperature , acidic upper layers of the Venusian atmosphere . 
 = = Studies = = 
 = = = Early studies = = = 
 Venus was known to ancient civilizations both as the " morning star " and as the " evening star " , names that reflect the early assumption that these were two separate objects . The Venus tablet of <unk> , believed to have been compiled around the mid @-@ seventeenth century BCE , shows the Babylonians understood the two were a single object , referred to in the tablet as the " bright queen of the sky " , and could support this view with detailed observations . The Ancient Greeks thought of the two as separate stars , Phosphorus and Hesperus . Pliny the Elder credited the realization that they were a single object to Pythagoras in the sixth century BCE , while Diogenes Laertius argued that Parmenides was probably responsible . The ancient Chinese referred to the morning Venus as " the Great White " ( Tai @-@ bai <unk> ) or " the Opener of Brightness " ( Qi @-@ ming <unk> ) , and the evening Venus as " the Excellent West One " ( Chang @-@ <unk> <unk> ) . The Romans designated the morning aspect of Venus as Lucifer , literally " Light @-@ Bringer " , and the evening aspect as Vesper , both literal translations of the respective Greek names . 
 In the second century , in his astronomical treatise Almagest , Ptolemy theorized that both Mercury and Venus are located between the Sun and the Earth . The 11th century Persian astronomer Avicenna claimed to have observed the transit of Venus , which later astronomers took as confirmation of Ptolemy 's theory . In the 12th century , the Andalusian astronomer Ibn Bajjah observed " two planets as black spots on the face of the Sun " , which were later identified as the transits of Venus and Mercury by the Maragha astronomer Qotb al @-@ Din Shirazi in the 13th century . 
 When the Italian physicist Galileo Galilei first observed the planet in the early 17th century , he found it showed phases like the Moon , varying from crescent to gibbous to full and vice versa . When Venus is furthest from the Sun in the sky , it shows a half @-@ lit phase , and when it is closest to the Sun in the sky , it shows as a crescent or full phase . This could be possible only if Venus orbited the Sun , and this was among the first observations to clearly contradict the Ptolemaic geocentric model that the Solar System was concentric and centred on Earth . 
 The 1639 transit of Venus was accurately predicted by Jeremiah Horrocks and observed by him and his friend , William Crabtree , at each of their respective homes , on 4 December 1639 ( 24 November under the Julian calendar in use at that time ) . 
 The atmosphere of Venus was discovered in 1761 by Russian polymath Mikhail Lomonosov . Venus 's atmosphere was observed in 1790 by German astronomer Johann Schröter . Schröter found when the planet was a thin crescent , the cusps extended through more than 180 ° . He correctly surmised this was due to scattering of sunlight in a dense atmosphere . Later , American astronomer Chester Smith Lyman observed a complete ring around the dark side of the planet when it was at inferior conjunction , providing further evidence for an atmosphere . The atmosphere complicated efforts to determine a rotation period for the planet , and observers such as Italian @-@ born astronomer Giovanni Cassini and Schröter incorrectly estimated periods of about 24 h from the motions of markings on the planet 's apparent surface . 
 = = = Ground @-@ based research = = = 
 Little more was discovered about Venus until the 20th century . Its almost featureless disc gave no hint what its surface might be like , and it was only with the development of spectroscopic , radar and ultraviolet observations that more of its secrets were revealed . The first ultraviolet observations were carried out in the 1920s , when Frank E. Ross found that ultraviolet photographs revealed considerable detail that was absent in visible and infrared radiation . He suggested this was due to a dense , yellow lower atmosphere with high cirrus clouds above it . 
 Spectroscopic observations in the 1900s gave the first clues about the Venusian rotation . Vesto Slipher tried to measure the Doppler shift of light from Venus , but found he could not detect any rotation . He surmised the planet must have a much longer rotation period than had previously been thought . Later work in the 1950s showed the rotation was retrograde . Radar observations of Venus were first carried out in the 1960s , and provided the first measurements of the rotation period , which were close to the modern value . 
 Radar observations in the 1970s revealed details of the Venusian surface for the first time . Pulses of radio waves were beamed at the planet using the 300 m ( 980 ft ) radio telescope at Arecibo Observatory , and the echoes revealed two highly reflective regions , designated the Alpha and Beta regions . The observations also revealed a bright region attributed to mountains , which was called Maxwell Montes . These three features are now the only ones on Venus that do not have female names . 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 The first robotic space probe mission to Venus , and the first to any planet , began with the Soviet Venera program in 1961 . The United States ' exploration of Venus had its first success with the Mariner 2 mission on 14 December 1962 , becoming the world 's first successful interplanetary mission , passing 34 @,@ 833 km ( 21 @,@ 644 mi ) above the surface of Venus , and gathering data on the planet 's atmosphere . 
 On 18 October 1967 , the Soviet Venera 4 successfully entered the atmosphere and deployed science experiments . Venera 4 showed the surface temperature was hotter than Mariner 2 had calculated , at almost 500 ° C , determined that the atmosphere is 95 % carbon dioxide ( CO 
 2 ) , and discovered that Venus 's atmosphere was considerably denser than Venera 4 's designers had anticipated . The joint Venera 4 – Mariner 5 data was analysed by a combined Soviet – American science team in a series of colloquia over the following year , in an early example of space cooperation . 
 In 1975 the Soviet Venera 9 and 10 landers transmitted the first images from the surface of Venus , which were in black and white . In 1982 the first colour images of the surface were obtained with the Soviet Venera 13 and 14 landers . 
 NASA obtained additional data in 1978 with the Pioneer Venus project that consisted of two separate missions : Pioneer Venus Orbiter and Pioneer Venus <unk> . The successful Soviet Venera program came to a close in October 1983 , when Venera 15 and 16 were placed in orbit to conduct detailed mapping of 25 % of Venus 's terrain ( from the north pole to 30 ° N latitude ) 
 Several other Venus flybys took place in the 1980s and 1990s that increased the understanding of Venus , including Vega 1 ( 1985 ) , Vega 2 ( 1985 ) , Galileo ( 1990 ) , Magellan ( 1994 ) , Cassini – Huygens ( 1998 ) , and MESSENGER ( 2006 ) . Then , Venus Express by the European Space Agency ( ESA ) entered orbit around Venus in April 2006 . Equipped with seven scientific instruments , Venus Express provided unprecedented long @-@ term observation of Venus 's atmosphere . ESA concluded that mission in December 2014 . 
 As of 2016 , Japan 's Akatsuki is in a highly elliptical orbit around Venus since 7 December 2015 , and there are several probing proposals under study by Roscosmos , NASA , and India 's ISRO . 
 = = In culture = = 
 = = = Symbol = = = 
 The astronomical symbol for Venus is the same as that used in biology for the female sex : a circle with a small cross beneath . The Venus symbol also represents femininity , and in Western alchemy stood for the metal copper . Polished copper has been used for mirrors from antiquity , and the symbol for Venus has sometimes been understood to stand for the mirror of the goddess . 
 = = = In fiction = = = 
 Venus is a primary feature of the night sky , and so has been of remarkable importance in mythology , astrology and fiction throughout history and in different cultures . Classical poets such as Homer , Sappho , Ovid and Virgil spoke of the star and its light . Romantic poets such as William Blake , Robert Frost , Alfred Lord Tennyson and William Wordsworth wrote odes to it . With the invention of the telescope , the idea that Venus was a physical world and possible destination began to take form . 
 The impenetrable Venusian cloud cover gave science fiction writers free rein to speculate on conditions at its surface ; all the more so when early observations showed that not only was it similar in size to Earth , it possessed a substantial atmosphere . Closer to the Sun than Earth , the planet was frequently depicted as warmer , but still habitable by humans . The genre reached its peak between the 1930s and 1950s , at a time when science had revealed some aspects of Venus , but not yet the harsh reality of its surface conditions . Findings from the first missions to Venus showed the reality to be quite different , and brought this particular genre to an end . As scientific knowledge of Venus advanced , so science fiction authors tried to keep pace , particularly by conjecturing human attempts to terraform Venus . 
 = = Colonization and terraforming = = 
 Due to its extremely hostile conditions , a surface colony on Venus is not possible with current technology . The atmospheric pressure and temperature approximately fifty kilometres above the surface are similar to those at Earth 's surface . In Venus 's mostly carbon dioxide atmosphere , Earth 's air ( nitrogen and oxygen ) would act as a lifting gas . This has led to proposals for " floating cities " in the Venusian atmosphere . Aerostats ( lighter @-@ than @-@ air balloons ) could be used for initial exploration and ultimately for permanent settlements . Among the many engineering challenges are the dangerous amounts of sulfuric acid at these heights . 
 = = = Cartographic resources = = = 
 Map @-@ a @-@ Planet : Venus by the U.S. Geological Survey 
 <unk> of Planetary Nomenclature : Venus by the International Astronomical Union 
 Venus crater database by the Lunar and Planetary Institute 
 Map of Venus by Eötvös <unk> University 
 = Requiem ( Fauré ) = 
 Gabriel Fauré composed his Requiem in D minor , Op. 48 , between 1887 and 1890 . The choral @-@ orchestral setting of the shortened Catholic Mass for the Dead in Latin is the best @-@ known of his large works . Its focus is on eternal rest and consolation . Fauré 's reasons for composing the work are unclear , but do not appear to have had anything to do with the death of his parents in the mid @-@ 1880s . He composed the work in the late 1880s and revised it in the 1890s , finishing it in 1900 . 
 In seven movements , the work is scored for soprano and baritone soloists , mixed choir , orchestra and organ . Different from typical Requiem settings , the full sequence Dies irae is omitted , replaced by its section Pie Jesu . The final movement In Paradisum is based on a text that is not part of the liturgy of the funeral mass but of the burial . 
 Fauré wrote of the work , " Everything I managed to entertain by way of religious illusion I put into my Requiem , which moreover is dominated from beginning to end by a very human feeling of faith in eternal rest . " 
 The piece premiered in its first version in 1888 in La Madeleine in Paris for a funeral mass . A performance takes about 35 minutes . 
 = = History = = 
 Fauré 's reasons for composing his Requiem are uncertain . One possible impetus may have been the death of his father in 1885 , and his mother 's death two years later , on New Year 's Eve 1887 . However , by the time of his mother 's death he had already begun the work , about which he later declared , " My Requiem wasn 't written for anything – for pleasure , if I may call it that ! " The earliest composed music included in the Requiem is the Libera me , which Fauré wrote in 1877 as an independent work . 
 In 1887 – 88 , Fauré composed the first version of the work , which he called " un petit Requiem " with five movements ( Introit and Kyrie , Sanctus , Pie Jesu , Agnus Dei and In Paradisum ) , but did not include his Libera me . This version was first performed on 16 January 1888 for the funeral of Joseph <unk> , an architect , at La Madeleine , Paris . The composer conducted his work ; the treble soloist was Louis Aubert . 
 In 1889 , Fauré added the <unk> portion of the Offertory and in 1890 he expanded the Offertory and added the 1877 Libera me . This second version was premiered on 21 January 1893 , again at the Madeleine with Fauré conducting . 
 In 1899 – 1900 , the score was reworked for full orchestra . This final version was premiered at the <unk> in Paris on 12 July 1900 , during the Exposition Universelle . Paul <unk> conducted forces of 250 performers . 
 The composer said of the work , " Everything I managed to entertain by way of religious illusion I put into my Requiem , which moreover is dominated from beginning to end by a very human feeling of faith in eternal rest . " He told an interviewer , 
 It has been said that my Requiem does not express the fear of death and someone has called it a lullaby of death . But it is thus that I see death : as a happy deliverance , an aspiration towards happiness above , rather than as a painful experience . The music of Gounod has been criticised for its inclination towards human tenderness . But his nature predisposed him to feel this way : religious emotion took this form inside him . Is it not necessary to accept the artist 's nature ? As to my Requiem , perhaps I have also instinctively sought to escape from what is thought right and proper , after all the years of accompanying burial services on the organ ! I know it all by heart . I wanted to write something different . 
 In 1924 the Requiem , in its full orchestral version , was performed at Fauré 's own funeral . It was not performed in the United States until 1931 , at a student concert at the Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia . It was first performed in England in 1936 . 
 = = Text = = 
 Most of the text is in Latin , except for the Kyrie which is Koine Greek . As had become customary , Fauré did not set the Gradual and Tract sections of the Mass . He followed a French Baroque tradition by not setting the Requiem sequence ( the Dies irae ) , only its section Pie Jesu . He slightly altered the texts of the Introit , the Kyrie , Pie Jesu , Agnus Dei , and In Paradisum , but substantially changed the text of the Offertory ( described below ) . He did not set the Benedictus ( an optional , but conventional , adjunct to the Sanctus ) , and added two texts from the Order of Burial , Libera me and In Paradisum . 
 Fauré made changes to the text of the Offertory ; at the beginning , he adds an " O " . He changed " libera animas omnium fidelium defunctorum " ( " deliver the souls of all the faithful departed " ) to simply " libera animas defunctorum " ( " deliver the souls of the departed " ) . He replaced " Libera <unk> " ( " Deliver them " ) at the beginning of the next verse with a repetition of " O Domine Jesu Christe , Rex gloriae , libera animas defunctorum " , and he omitted the third verse ( beginning " Sed <unk> sanctus ... " ) . He concludes with an added " Amen " . 
 = = Structure and scoring = = 
 The composition is structured in seven movements : 
 The piece has a duration of about 35 minutes . 
 Fauré scored the work for two soloists , chorus and orchestra . Its movements and their sections are listed in a table for the scoring in voices , key , time signature ( using the symbol for common time , equivalent to 44 ) and tempo marking . The voices are abbreviated , S for soprano , A for alto , T for tenor , B for bass . The composer divides the choir into as many as six parts , <unk> , but frequently uses unison of one part or several . Given the liturgical nature of the work , boy trebles are often used instead of sopranos . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 The structure of Fauré 's work bears striking similarity to that of Ein deutsches Requiem by Brahms , although Fauré set Latin liturgical texts to music , whereas Brahms chose German Bible quotations . Both works have seven movements , both employ a baritone and a soprano soloist , the baritone singing with the choir in movements 2 and 6 , the soprano in a central movement , movement 4 in <unk> , movement 5 in Brahms where she appears with the choir . In both works , the four remaining movements are sung by the choir alone , whereas Verdi , for example , has the soloists sing several arias and ensembles in his Requiem . 
 = = = Introit et Kyrie = = = 
 Similar to Mozart 's Requiem , the work begins slowly in D minor . After one measure of just D in the instruments , the choir enters pianissimo in six parts on the D minor chord and stays on it in homophony for the entire text " Requiem aeternam " ( eternal rest ) . In gradual progression of harmony and a sudden crescendo , a first climax is reached on " et lux <unk> " ( and lasting light ) , diminishing on a repeated " luceat eis " ( may shine for them ) . The tenors repeat the prayer alone for eternal rest on a simple melody . The sopranos continue similarly that praise is due in Jerusalem , then all voices exclaim " Exaudi " ( hear ) . 
 The Kyrie begins with the same melody that the tenor sang before , but now in unison of soprano , alto and tenor , repeated in the following four measures in four @-@ part harmony . The call " Christe " is strong and urgent the first time , repeated more softly a few more times . The final call " Kyrie " appears pianissimo . 
 = = = Offertoire = = = 
 The Offertoire begins in B minor with a canon of alto and tenor in short succession on a simple modal melody with little <unk> , in a prayer " O Domine , Jesu Christ , rex gloriae " ( O Lord , Jesus Christ , King of Glory ) to free the souls of the departed from eternal punishment and the deep lake , ending in unison . The sequence is repeated beginning one step higher for the next line , and again one step higher for the following more urgent call to Jesus , enforced by the basses . The voices add only softly , broken by rests , what the prayer is about : " ne <unk> – in <unk> " ( that they may not fall into the obscure ) . 
 The baritone enters with " <unk> et <unk> " , offerings brought with praises , beginning on one repeated note , but asking with more melody " fac <unk> , Domine , de morte <unk> ad vitam " ( make them , Lord , transcend from death to life ) . The choir repeats the first line of the text on the same motif as in the beginning , but in more elaborate polyphony in four parts , concluded by an uplifting Amen in B major . 
 = = = Sanctus = = = 
 Sanctus ( Holy ) , in contrast with other compositions of mass and Requiem where it is often illustrated with great vocal and instrumental forces ( particularly Verdi 's Requiem ) , is here expressed in extremely simple form . The sopranos sing softly in a very simple rising and falling melody of only three notes , which the male voices repeat , accompanied by arpeggios on the harp and a dreamy rising melody in the violins ( sometimes just a solo violin ) . The pattern appears several times , with the melodies increasing in <unk> , and the volume reaching forte on " excelsis " ( the highest ) . The orchestra changes tone , the dreamy accompaniment is replaced by firm and powerful major chords with a horn fanfare marked forte , and the male voices declare " Hosanna in excelsis " ( praise in the highest ) . This is answered by the sopranos in diminuendo , and the music softens and reverts to the dreamy harp arpeggios that it began with as the violin melody floats upwards to the final note in E flat major and the full choir repeats , with the altos finally joining : " Sanctus " . 
 = = = Pie Jesu = = = 
 The solo soprano sings the prayer to the " good Jesus " for everlasting rest . The one line of text is repeated three times , the first two times asking for " requiem " ( rest ) , then intensified for " sempiternam requiem " ( everlasting rest ) . The first call is a modal melody in B @-@ flat major of six measures , the second call is similar but reaching up higher . The words " Dona eis , Domine , dona eis requiem " begin with more expansion , but reach alternating between only two notes on two repetitions of " sempiternam requiem " . The last call begins as the first and leads again to alternating between two notes in even lower range , until the last " requiem " has a gentle upward motion . 
 = = = Agnus Dei = = = 
 " Agnus Dei " , in many settings of Mass and Requiem set with dark expression , begins in F major with a fluent expansive melody in the orchestra . After six measures , the tenor sings a melody to it that gently rises and falls , and repeats it almost the same way . Then , while the motion in the orchestra stays the same , the key changes to the minor mode , and the Lamb of God is asked for rest in chords of daring harmonic progression . Then the tenor , without instrumental introduction , repeats the first line , leading to a peaceful " sempiternam " . 
 The sopranos alone begins the following section " Lux aeterna luceat eis " ( Light eternal shine for them ) with a long " Lux " , then the choir , divided in six parts , lets that light shimmer . 
 The choir closes with a reprise of the Introit , the opening of the mass ( " Requiem aeternam " ) , before the orchestra picks up the " Agnus Dei " melody to close the movement . 
 = = = Libera me = = = 
 The baritone soloist sings the first section alone . On a bass in an ostinato rhythm of two quarter notes , a rest and the upbeat to the next two quarters , he sings the text " Libera me ... " ( Free me , Lord , from eternal death on that terrible day when the heavens will move and the earth , when you come to judge the world with fire . ) , embarking on a melody of wide range , with some sharp leaps . The text is continued by the choir in four parts in homophony : " <unk> factus sum ego " ( I am trembling ) . In more motion , " Dies irae " ( day of wrath ) is expressed by fortissimo chords , giving way to the prayer for rest in the same motion , but piano , with a crescendo on " dona eis , Domine " , but suddenly softening on a last " et lux <unk> luceat eis " . Then the choir repeats the opening statement of the baritone fully in unison . Soloist , then choir , end the movement softly , repeating " Libera me , Domine " . 
 = = = In Paradisum = = = 
 The text of the last movement is taken from the Order of Burial . " In <unk> <unk> angeli " ( May angels lead you to paradise ) rests on a continuous shimmering motion in fast broken triads in the orchestra . The soprano sings a rising expressive melody , enriched by chords of the other voices , divided in six parts , on the final " Jerusalem " . A second thought is again sung by the soprano , filled on the last words by the others : Requiem aeternam . 
 = = Versions = = 
 Fauré revised and enlarged the Requiem in the years between its first performance in 1888 and the publication of the final version in 1901 . The latter is scored for full orchestra ; since the 1970s attempts have been made by several Fauré scholars to reconstruct the composer 's earlier versions , scored for smaller orchestral forces . 
 = = = First version = = = 
 Five of the seven sections of the Requiem were completed by January 1888 and performed that month at the Madeleine for the funeral of the architect Joseph <unk> . This version lacked the Offertoire and Libera me , which Fauré added at some time in the following decade . The Libera me predates the rest of the Requiem , having been composed eleven years earlier as a baritone solo . The forces required for the original 1888 version were a choir about forty in number consisting of boys and men ( the Madeleine did not admit female choristers ) , solo boy treble , harp , timpani , organ , strings ( solo violin , divided violas , divided cellos and basses ) . For a performance at the Madeleine in May 1888 Fauré added horn and trumpet parts . 
 = = = 1893 version = = = 
 Fauré continued to work intermittently on the Requiem , and by 1893 he judged the score ready to be published ( although the proposed publication fell through ) . Several attempts have been made to reconstruct the score as it was in 1893 . The Fauré specialist Jean @-@ Michel Nectoux began working on it in the 1970s , but the first edition to be published was by the English conductor John Rutter in 1989 . Nectoux 's edition , jointly edited with Roger Delage , was published in 1994 . They had the advantage of access to important source material unavailable to Rutter : a set of orchestral parts discovered in 1968 in the Madeleine and a score made in the 1890s by a bass in the Madeleine choir and annotated by Fauré . Music and Letters judged the Rutter edition , " makeshift and lacking in the standards of scholarship one expects from a university press " . The Musical Times considered the Nectoux and Delage edition " invaluable " . 
 Fauré 's own manuscript survives but , as the critic Andrew Thomson puts it , " the waters were muddied by his <unk> on the original MSS , adding two bassoons and two more horns and trumpets , together with modifications of the cello and bass parts . " Reviewing the Nectoux and Delage edition , Thomson wrote of " several pleasant surprises [ including ] the restoration of the urgent timpani rolls underlining ' Christe eleison ' , and the ethereal harp chords which so enhance the spiritual atmosphere of ' Lux aeterna ' " . 
 For the 1893 version a baritone solo , two bassoons , four horns and two trumpets are added to the original scoring . When possible Fauré employed a mixed choir and a female soprano soloist , partly because the soprano lines , particularly the solo in the Pie Jesu , are difficult to sing and demand excellent breath control , easier for adult women than for boys . 
 = = = Final version = = = 
 At the end of the 1890s Fauré 's publisher , Hamelle , suggested that the composer should rescore the Requiem for performance in concert halls . The intimate sound of the earlier versions was effective in liturgical performances , but for the large concert venues , and large choral societies of the time , a larger orchestra was required . The autograph of the resulting 1900 version does not survive , and critics have speculated whether Fauré , who was not greatly interested in orchestration , delegated some or all of the revision to one of his pupils . Many details of the augmented score differ from Fauré 's own earlier amendments to the original 1888 manuscript . The new score was published in 1901 at the same time as a vocal score edited by one of Fauré 's favourite pupils , Jean Roger @-@ Ducasse , and some critics have speculated that he reorchestrated the full score at Fauré 's instigation . Others have questioned whether so skilled an orchestrator as Roger @-@ Ducasse would have " perpetrated such pointlessly inconspicuous doublings " , or left uncorrected the many misprints in the 1901 edition . Alan Blyth speculates that the work may have been done by someone in Hamelle 's firm . The misprints have been corrected in later editions , notably those by Roger Fiske and Paul Inwood ( 1978 ) and Nectoux ( 2001 ) . 
 The orchestration of the final version comprises mixed choir , solo soprano , solo baritone , two flutes , two clarinets ( only in the Pie Jesu ) , two bassoons , four horns , two trumpets ( only in the Kyrie and Sanctus ) , three trombones , timpani ( only in the Libera me ) , harp , organ , strings ( with only a single section of violins , but divided violas and cellos , as before ) . 
 Nectoux has expressed the view that what he terms the " church " ( 1893 ) and the " concert " ( 1900 – 1901 ) versions of the Requiem should both be performed , the choice of edition being dictated by the size of the venue . It is not clear whether the composer favoured either version over the other . Blyth comments " All of his comments about the Requiem ring truer as descriptions of the 1888 and 1894 [ sic ] versions than of the published text of 1901 " . Fauré , however , complained in 1921 that the orchestra at a performance of the work had been too small , and commented to Eugène Ysaÿe on the " angelic " violins during the Sanctus in the full orchestral version . 
 = = Selected editions = = 
 Fauré : Messe de requiem , Op. 48 , ed . Jean @-@ Michel Nectoux and Reiner Zimmerman , Edition Peters 
 Fauré : Requiem , Op. 48 , ed . Roger Fiske and Paul Inwood , Eulenburg / Schott 
 Fauré : Requiem ( 1893 Version ) , ed . Jean @-@ Michel Nectoux and Roger Delage ( full score and miniature score , Hamelle ) 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The Requiem was first recorded in 1931 , by Fanny <unk> @-@ <unk> , soprano ; Louis <unk> , baritone ; the <unk> de la Société Bach and Orchestre Alexandre Cellier , conducted by Gustav Bret . It was first issued on the " Gramophone " label , and reissued in 1934 on HMV . That recording used the full 1900 orchestrations , as did all others except one over the next half century . The exception was a Columbia set recorded in 1938 , with Suzanne Dupont , soprano ; Maurice Didier , baritone ; Les <unk> de Lyon and Le <unk> instrumental <unk> , conducted by Ernest <unk> . 
 Since 1984 , when John Rutter 's edition of the 1893 score was recorded for the Conifer label , there have been numerous sets of both the 1893 and 1900 versions issued on CD . Those singled out for particular mention by critics are listed below . The Requiem is often combined in recordings and concert performances with Fauré 's early Cantique de Jean Racine , an award @-@ winning composition originally for choir and organ which the composer wrote aged 19 in his last year of ten years at the school of church music École Niedermeyer de Paris . 
 = = = 1893 version = = = 
 Caroline Ashton ; Stephen Varcoe ; Cambridge Singers ; City of London Sinfonia ; John Rutter ( 1984 ) . Recommended by The Penguin Guide to the 1000 Finest Classical Recordings ( 2011 ) and The Gramophone Guide 2012 . 
 Sandrine <unk> ; Stéphane <unk> ; <unk> de Paris ; Orchestre National de France ; Laurence <unk> ( 2008 ) . Recommended by The Gramophone Guide 2012 . 
 = = = 1900 version = = = 
 Victoria de los Ángeles ; Dietrich Fischer @-@ Dieskau ; Chorale Élisabeth Brasseur ; Orchestre de la Société des Concerts du Conservatoire ; André Cluytens ( 1963 ) . Recommended by All Music Guide to Classical Music ( 2005 ) . 
 Robert Chilcott ; John Carol Case ; Choir of King 's College , Cambridge ; New Philharmonia Orchestra ; Sir David Willcocks ( 1967 ) . Recommended by The Gramophone Guide 2012 . 
 Kathleen Battle ; Andreas Schmidt ; Philharmonia Chorus and Orchestra ; Carlo Maria Giulini ( 1986 ) . Recommended by All Music Guide to Classical Music ( 2005 ) . 
 Judith <unk> ; James Morris ; Atlanta Symphony Chorus and Orchestra ; Robert Shaw ( 1987 ) . Recommended by The American Record Guide ( 2000 ) . 
 = 1804 Antigua – Charleston hurricane = 
 The 1804 Antigua – Charleston hurricane was the most severe hurricane in Georgia since 1752 , causing over 500 deaths and at least $ 1 @.@ 6 million ( 1804 USD ) in damage throughout the southeastern United States . Originating near Antigua on 3 September , it initially drifted west @-@ northwestward , soon nearing Puerto Rico . Throughout its existence in the Caribbean Sea , the hurricane damaged , destroyed , and capsized numerous ships , and at Saint Kitts , it was considered to be the worst since 1772 . By 4 September , the storm arrived at the Bahamas and turned northward before approaching the coast of northern Florida on 6 September . The hurricane eventually came ashore along the coastline of Georgia and South Carolina while producing mostly southeasterly winds . A severe gale was noted in New England later that month , on 11 and 12 September , although it was likely not the same system as that which had passed through the Caribbean and southeastern United States earlier that month . 
 The hurricane produced a wide swath of damage along its path , especially in Georgia and South Carolina . Maritime losses along the coastlines of both states were significant , with numerous ships damaged or destroyed . Crop damage , especially to rice , cotton , and corn , was also considerable , with impending harvests ruined by the hurricane 's arrival . Strong winds and heavy rainfall inundated streets , residences , and fields , and also toppled chimneys , fences , and cracked windows across the region . Wharves , struck by stranded boats , endured significant damage as well . Hundreds of slaves drowned , with many deaths caused by owners ' neglect . Dozens of residences and other structures were destroyed or rendered uninhabitable due to inundation or collapse . Notably , Aaron Burr , then attempting to flee authorities , visited St. Simons Island in Georgia during the hurricane , later returning to Hampton and giving a detailed account of the hurricane 's effects . Damage in Savannah , Georgia , totaled $ 500 @,@ 000 , compared to $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 at Charleston , South Carolina . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The 1804 Antigua – Charleston hurricane was first sighted on 3 September as it swept past Saint Barthélemy , Saint Kitts , and Antigua , drifting toward the west @-@ northwest and soon approaching Puerto Rico and the Turks and Caicos Islands . The storm reached the Bahamas while turning northward on 4 September , nearing the northern Floridan coast by 6 September . It remained offshore on 7 September , gradually approaching the coast throughout the day , and eventually made landfall that evening along the coasts of Georgia and South Carolina . Observations in Savannah , Georgia , indicated north @-@ to @-@ northeast winds throughout 8 September , though other reports recorded northeast @-@ to @-@ easterly gusts ; at Charleston , South Carolina , however , winds , initially northeast @-@ to @-@ east , curved southeastward later in the storm . Little information exists on the hurricane 's whereabouts between North Carolina and New England , with a single report at Norfolk , Virginia of east @-@ northeasterly winds veering east @-@ to @-@ east @-@ southeast from 7 to 9 September , suggesting the disturbance 's passage west of there . A severe gale arrived in New England on 11 and 12 September , though the long pause between the departure of the hurricane from the Carolinas and its arrival in the northeastern United States evidences the possibility that the two systems may have been unrelated . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Georgia = = = 
 The hurricane of 1804 was the first since 1752 to strike Georgia with such strength . Damage to ships was considerable , especially offshore Georgia . Betsy was stripped of its freight and somewhat damaged , the Phoebe ran aground at Tybee Island , the Liberty perished with its crew killed , the Patsy nearly sank , and the Experiment capsized . At the time the hurricane struck , Aaron Burr , hiding from federal officials , was taking refuge at St. Simons Island on the property of John Couper , though was unable to return to Hampton due to deteriorating conditions . Upon the passage of the storm 's eye , Burr fled back to the residence of Pierce Butler at Hampton . In an account of the hurricane , Burr recorded strong winds , which destroyed several outhouses and uprooted numerous trees at St. Simon 's , with the storm later cracking windows , toppling chimneys , and flooding the house ; in the town proper , he discovered many local roads were obstructed . Nineteen slaves owned by Butler drowned , while Couper suffered $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1804 USD ) in losses alone , with cabins housing over a hundred slaves destroyed . Many other local planters experienced similar difficulties . Seawater inundated and ruined several acres of cotton around the Horton House plantation at Jekyll Island , devaluing the year 's harvest by 20 percent ; similar losses were endured by other rice , cotton , and corn farmers along the coast . 
 At Broughton Island , orders were given to transfer slaves away from a rice barn upon indications of a storm 's arrival ; however , efforts to do so were not undertaken promptly , and more than seventy slaves drowned , leading the plantation owner to sell the property following financial losses . Similar events transpired at St. Catherines Island , where two slaves died . At Darien , meanwhile , a tannery was destroyed , and flood waters ruined its tanning baths . At Sunbury , intense winds and high waves uprooted trees and wrecked three houses , of which two were newly built , and five slaves died after being impaled by flying wreckage or drowning . The hurricane also ruined most boats under the possession of plantation owners , and also devastated crops , storage houses , stables , and slave residences . Meanwhile , at <unk> Island , Fort Greene was obliterated with all its buildings destroyed and thirteen men killed . <unk> , canisters , bars of lead upward of 300 lb ( 140 kg ) , and cannons weighing 4 @,@ 800 lb ( 2 @,@ 200 kg ) littered the island , which was completely inundated during the storm . The fort was never rebuilt ; Fort Pulaski was later built in its former location . Meanwhile , at Wilmington Island , one house collapsed and swaths of farmland were flooded . North @-@ to @-@ northeast winds surrounded Hutchinson Island , producing tides 7 to 10 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) above normal , submerging rice crops , sweeping away plantation buildings , and drowning nearly a hundred slaves . 
 The hurricane 's effects were especially severe in the city of Savannah , where winds incessantly gusted northeast @-@ to @-@ north for 17 consecutive hours . The hurricane 's storm surge overcame sand bars , sweeping into bays , rivers , wharves , and any areas below an elevation of 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . <unk> of sea spray mixed with rain , apparently giving it a saline taste , while particles of sand were lifted from the shore to the upper floors of 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) -tall houses . By the storm 's peak , all vessels in the city harbor were damaged to some degree by the storm , while it also inflicted damage to nearly all residences in the city 's southern sector . A gunboat was swept 7 mi ( 11 km ) from its original position and landed in a faraway field . The steeple of the Presbyterian Meeting House in the city toppled and portions of a wall of the Christ Episcopal Church caved in . The local courthouse was also damaged , shingles were torn off of a jail roof , and a tobacco house was unroofed . Two children were crushed to death in one house , one individual was killed by a falling chimney at another . Maritime losses were observed throughout the city ; the Mary struck a wharf near Fort Wayne , the Thomas Jefferson came aground at Hunter and Minis 's Wharf , the General Jackson slammed into <unk> 's Wharf , the Liberty capsized near Howard 's Wharf , and the <unk> was driven ashore at Coffee House Wharf . Numerous other wharves were damaged as a result of similar accidents , and at some wharves , vessels became stacked upon each other . Fish and poultry markets , as well as businesses along the wharves , disintegrated into the Savannah River . Timber , cotton , tobacco , liquor , sugar , and produce was also strewn along the bluff . Overall , eighteen vessels were capsized in Savannah throughout the course of the hurricane . Many smaller vessels were apparently " cracked like egg shells , " floating in waters paralleling the bluff , which itself was strewn with " serpents , turtles , [ and ] marsh @-@ birds " . Damage in the city totaled at least $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 1804 USD ) . 
 = = = South Carolina = = = 
 Tides in South Carolina rose 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) above normal , causing the May River to top its banks , flooding cotton and rice fields , and sweeping plantations ' cotton storage houses and slave cabins away . Inundation also occurred at various offshore locations , including Daufuskie Island , where five slaves drowned . Bridges and roadways at Beaufort , South Carolina were flooded and carried away by high tides , while high tides of up to 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) flooded farmland , ruining fields of cotton and produce . Strong gusts knocked down chimneys and damaged the town 's Baptist church . Cotton farmland and African slave prices fell 30 percent in the region following the storm 's passage . All residences at Bay Point Island were destroyed , having been driven out to sea . The storm 's salt water storm surge rendered thirty barrels of rice aboard the <unk> , which ran ashore at Saint Helena Island , worthless , while the Collector came aground at Lady 's Island . Copious rainfall caused the <unk> , Stony , and <unk> creeks to overflow . From Sheldon to Motley , the storm flooded creeks and rivers , inundating rice and cotton fields , with the saline water destroying the year 's harvest . Roads and causeways inundated under flood waters were rendered unusable , and numerous animals were also killed in the flood . 
 The hurricane 's effects were severe in the city of Charleston , where the storm produced northeasterly winds and heavy rainfall . The bulwark of the fort at nearby James Island was destroyed , and the palisades of the fort at Castle Pinckney were wrecked at the mouth of Charleston 's harbor . The hurricane also swept vessels aground into marshes and wharves between Gadsden 's Wharf and South Bay along the Cooper River . Several wharves — Pritchard 's , Cochran 's , Beale 's , Craft 's , and William 's — were struck by vessels and consequently severely damaged . The Montserrat , Mary , Birmingham Packet , Amazon , and Orange all endured some degree of damage . Three vessels and the Mary collided with Governor 's Bridge , which was impaired as a result ; two vessels and the Favorite slammed into Faber 's Wharf , while the Concord filled with water at Prioleau 's Wharf , resulting in the loss of 50 <unk> of rice . A counting and scale house was separated from its foundation after being struck by the Lydia within the vicinity of Blake 's Wharf , while the African slave boat Christopher capsized at Geyer 's Wharf , with all aboard escaping safely . Four slaves drowned after a boat overturned in the Ashley River . 
 High waters enveloped wharves , and neighboring stores collapsed or were washed away , with rice and cotton falling into the water . A breakwater near South Bay disintegrated and a nearby home 's chimney toppled , resulting in one death . Homes were inundated , and residents along South Bay consequently fled their dwellings . The hurricane 's storm surge also permeated locations along then @-@ new East Bay Street , as well as buildings on <unk> and Water streets ; Meeting Street sank below 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) -high flood waters . High winds , meanwhile , tore off roofs , dislodged trees , and toppled fences . To the north of Charleston , at Sullivan 's Island , the storm rendered 15 to 20 houses uninhabitable ; although the island was mostly inundated , many residences were saved , encircled by dunes , and several men rescued women and children . Overall , only one death was recorded on the island . The Pee Dee and Black rivers gradually rose throughout the day , eventually spilling their banks . Meanwhile , at Georgetown , high tides flooded wharves and submerged streets and businesses , destroying corn , salt , and other goods . Turtles and fish were killed , and at the Sampit River , two individuals drowned attempting to cross . A rice harvest equivalent to ten thousand barrels was ruined by high tides and torrential rain within the vicinity of Georgetown . Damage in the city reached $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( 1804 USD ) , and overall , the 1804 hurricane was responsible for more than 500 deaths in the southeastern United States . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 At Saint Kitts , the hurricane destroyed approximately one hundred ships in the local harbor — all that were stationed there — while heavy rainfall drove houses to sea . An additional 56 of the 58 boats at Saint Barthélemy were lost , 58 were wrecked at Antigua , and 26 of 28 were ruined at Dominica . Damage to shipping was also severe on the Windward Islands , several vessels were lost in western Puerto Rico , and another 44 vessels were destroyed at Saint Thomas after the storm 's passage . Among these vessels included a 64 @-@ gun storeship HMS De Ruyter was washed ashore and broke apart , resulting in one death , and HMS Drake , a 16 @-@ gun sloop @-@ of @-@ war , which came aground on a shoal off of Nevis . At Saint Kitts , the hurricane was considered to be the worst since 1772 . 
 Although high waves and severe northeasterly gusts were noted from 6 to 7 September 1804 at St. Augustine , Florida and eight of the nine vessels in the local port were rendered unfit for use , the town proper largely escaped damage . 
 In North Carolina , the hurricane blew down trees as far as 100 mi ( 160 km ) inland , and copious rainfall isolated Scotland Neck . Around the mouth of the Cape Fear River , the vessel Wilmington Packet ran aground at Bald Point . 
 In the New England gale possibly related to the Antigua – Charleston hurricane , several ships sank in Boston 's harbor , while at Salem , the South Church 's steeple was toppled . 
 = Tropical Storm Henri ( 2003 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Henri was a weak tropical storm that formed in the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season . The eighth storm of the season , Henri was one of six tropical cyclones to hit the United States in the year . Henri formed from a tropical wave in the Gulf of Mexico in early September , and crossed over Florida as a tropical depression . Its remnants later moved into the Mid @-@ Atlantic before dissipating completely . 
 Henri caused little damage as a tropical cyclone . In Florida , it dropped heavy rainfall , though damage was limited to minor flooding damage . In Delaware and Pennsylvania , damage was greater , where heavy rainfall damaged hundreds of houses and businesses . The resulting floods in Delaware were described as a 1 in 500 year event . The total damage by Henri along its path amounted to $ 19 @.@ 6 million ( 2003 USD , $ 21 @.@ 5 million 2006 USD ) , but no deaths were reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 22 , a tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa , and it moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea without developing significantly . On September 1 the wave axis entered the Gulf of Mexico , and upon doing so convection steadily organized around a low @-@ level center of circulation . The system moved northward and developed into Tropical Depression Twelve on September 3 while located about 300 miles ( 480 kilometers ) west of Tampa , Florida . Embedded within a slow mid @-@ latitude trough , the depression moved eastward and strengthened into Tropical Storm Henri on September 5 . 
 Despite strong southwesterly vertical shear , Henri continued intensifying while moving eastward , and reached a peak strength of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) later on September 5 . Shortly thereafter , though , the shear greatly weakened the storm , and it was downgraded to a tropical depression . Henri was not able to recover its intensity , and made landfall near Clearwater , Florida on September 6 as a 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) tropical depression , and quickly crossed the state as it accelerated to the northeast . Despite initial predictions of re @-@ intensification over open waters due to potentially lower shear , Henri failed to re @-@ strengthen and degenerated into a remnant low pressure area on September 8 off the coast of North Carolina . 
 The broad and disorganized remnant low remained nearly stationary due to a ridge of high pressure to its north . Residual convection within the remnants of Henri remained disorganized , but forecasters kept watch for the potential for redevelopment . However , it moved inland near Cape Hatteras on September 12 without reorganizing . The remnants continued to the north and dissipated on September 17 over New England . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The National Hurricane Center issued a Tropical Storm Warning from Englewood to Indian Pass , Florida while Henri was a tropical depression ; however , warnings were discontinued by the time Henri made landfall . Flood warnings were issued across the state prior to the storm making landfall , with predictions of 5 to 10 inches ( 125 – 255 mm ) of rainfall . As a result of the storm 's approach , twelve shelters were placed on standby . Similarly , the Hurricane Shelter Information Hotline was placed on standby and ready to be activated within 10 minutes . Levy County officials declared a state of emergency . There , sand bags and sand were sent to Cedar Key , Yankeetown , and Inglis in anticipation for storm surge and flooding . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Henri dropped heavy rainfall along its path , with the worst of the flooding occurring in Delaware . The storm caused $ 19 @.@ 6 million in damage ( 2003 USD ) , primarily in Delaware . 
 = = = Florida , Bahamas , and Bermuda = = = 
 Prior to making landfall , the storm produced strong waves on the Florida west coast . Following a summer of tropical moisture in Florida , Henri brought more heavy rainfall to the saturated state , peaking at 9 @.@ 09 in ( 230 mm ) in Hialeah in the southeast portion of the state . Two other areas experienced over 7 in ( 180 mm ) , though most areas received only light rainfall . In Hernando County , a stationary thunderstorm dropped over 5 in ( 125 mm ) of rain in around an hour . It caused a rapid flooding of roads , though quickly retreated . Damage was minor , due to lack of many homes in the area . A feeder band in Charlotte County dropped 7 in ( 180 mm ) of rain in three hours , flooding numerous streets and homes . Throughout Florida , damage was minimal , and there were no deaths . However , lightning from a feeder band injured a man in Lee County , while an indirect injury occurred from a car crash due to hydroplaning . 
 In the Bahamas , outer rainbands from Henri dropped around 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of rain . Winds in the archipelago gusted to 32 mph ( 51 km / h ) . Just days after Hurricane Fabian struck Bermuda , moisture from Henri brought thunderstorms and heavy rainfall and thunderstorms totaling to 2 @.@ 44 inches ( 62 mm ) at the airport . This hindered cleanup efforts , though caused no known damage . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 In North Carolina , Virginia , and Maryland , rainfall was generally light , with the exception of a few areas receiving over 3 inches ( 75 mm ) . Henri produced greater amounts of rain in Delaware and Pennsylvania , with a peak of 9 @.@ 02 in ( 229 mm ) in Hockessin . In Downingtown , Pennsylvania , over eight inches ( 203 mm ) of rain fell in around six hours , while Doppler Radar estimated that Kennett Square received over 10 inches ( 255 mm ) in a five @-@ hour period . The heavy rainfall led to record discharge rates along the Red Clay Creek , which also had a record crest peaking at just below 26 feet ( 8 m ) . Parts of the creek saw a 500 @-@ year flood , which has a 0 @.@ 2 % chance of occurring in any given year . Numerous rivers in southeastern Pennsylvania also crested above their flood stage . 
 In Delaware , the flooding damaged numerous houses , including 194 in the Glenville area . The rapid flooding trapped numerous people in their cars and homes , forcing at least one rescue by helicopter . Those people were evacuated to nearby schools . The severe flooding washed out most of a bridge in Hockessin and destroyed 6 Wilmington & Western Railroad bridges , causing about $ 5 million ( 2003 USD , $ 5 @.@ 5 million 2006 USD ) in damage . The railroad bridges were still being rebuilt as of 2006 . Greenbank Mill , a historic gristmill complex , saw $ 450 @,@ 000 in damage . Damage in Delaware totaled to $ 16 @.@ 1 million ( 2003 USD , $ 17 @.@ 5 million 2006 USD ) . 
 Flash flooding in Pennsylvania resulted in 2 @,@ 600 emergency 911 calls and around 100 rescues for cars or houses . The flooding destroyed 12 homes , and damaged 336 , over half of them severely . Wet soil downed trees and power lines , causing power outages to 109 @,@ 000 PECO Energy customers . High floodwaters damaged 22 bridges and closed 2 indefinitely , while the flooding closed several roads , including a portion of U.S. Highway 1 in Chadds Ford . Damage in Pennsylvania totaled to $ 3 @.@ 5 million ( 2003 USD , $ 3 @.@ 8 million 2006 USD ) . The impacts were severely compounded the following week by Hurricane Isabel across the region . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On September 23 , just days after the storm moved through , President George W. Bush declared New Castle County , Delaware as a disaster area following the effects of Henri and later Hurricane Isabel . The declaration designated the affected citizens eligible for grants to pay for temporary housing , house repairs , and serious disaster @-@ related expenses . The declaration also allowed for federal funding for 75 % of the repair cost for replacing public facilities . By two months after the storm , 659 residents had applied for disaster aid through the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) , totaling to just over $ 1 million ( 2003 USD , $ 1 @.@ 1 million 2006 USD ) . 141 small businesses applied for loans , totaling to around $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( 2003 USD , $ 2 @.@ 75 million 2006 USD ) . In addition , FEMA received 183 applications for public assistance , which would be used for rebuilding public roads and buildings . Over twenty volunteer organizations met to establish a long @-@ term committee to find resources for disaster recovery needs . One goal sought by the committee was to find a permanent housing solution for every one who was displaced from their houses from the storms . Volunteers also helped remove ruined appliances and furniture to local landfills , totaling to more than 300 tons . State and county governments in Delaware purchased 171 homes following the damage in the Glenville area , the highest number of houses purchased in the state due to storm damage . The house purchasing was done to mitigate the flood damage by restoring the area as a wetland . 
 On September 26 , President Bush also declared Chester County , Pennsylvania as a disaster area following the damage of Henri , Tropical Storm Isabel , and severe flooding unrelated to either tropical cyclone . By a month after the declaration , 342 homeowners and business owners applied for disaster aid , totaling to around $ 600 @,@ 000 ( 2003 USD , $ 660 @,@ 000 2006 USD ) . 
 = Don 't Stop the Music ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for her third studio album , Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) . Written by <unk> Dabney and produced by StarGate , it was released worldwide on September 7 , 2007 as the album 's fourth single . The dance song , featuring rhythmic devices used primarily in hip hop music , samples the line " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " from Michael Jackson 's 1983 single " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . Rihanna and Jackson were sued by Cameroonian musician Manu Dibango , who claimed that the hook originated in his 1972 song " Soul Makossa " . 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " was critically acclaimed , with many music journalists praising its sampling of the " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " hook . It received a number of accolades , including a Grammy Award nomination for Best Dance Recording . The song reached number one in more than 10 countries , including Australia , France , Germany , and Switzerland . Reaching number four on the UK Singles Chart , it was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . The single peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the US Billboard Dance Club Songs charts . Certified four times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , it sold more than 3 @.@ 7 million copies in the US . 
 Anthony Mandler filmed the song 's music video in Prague . In the video , Rihanna and her friends sneak into the back of a candy store which contains a secret club and she parties with club @-@ goers . The singer performed " Don 't Stop the Music " at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards and the NRJ Music Awards in 2008 , and included it on her Good Girl Gone Bad , Last Girl on Earth , Loud and Diamonds World Tour set lists . The American Society of Composers , Authors , and Publishers ( ASCAP ) recognized it as one of the most @-@ performed songs of 2009 . English recording artist Jamie Cullum recorded a cover version of the song as the second single from his 2009 album , The Pursuit . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " was written and produced by the Norwegian production duo StarGate , with additional songwriting by <unk> Dabney and Michael Jackson . Tim Sturges and Phillip Ramos provided additional production for the song . " Don 't Stop the Music " was recorded at Battery Studios in New York City and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles by Mikkel S. Eriksen and Al Hemberger . Phil Tan and Josh Houghkirk mixed the single , and StarGate provided vocal production and instrumentation . 
 The song samples the line " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " from Jackson 's 1983 single , " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . In February 2009 , Cameroonian musician Manu Dibango filed a lawsuit claiming that " Don 't Stop the Music " and " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " used the hook without his permission . According to Dibango , the line is from his 1972 single " Soul Makossa " . Agence France @-@ Presse reported that Jackson admitted that he borrowed the line for " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " and settled out of court . When Rihanna asked Jackson in 2007 for permission to sample the line , he allegedly approved the request without contacting Dibango beforehand . Dibango 's attorneys brought the case before a court in Paris , demanding € 500 @,@ 000 in damages and for Sony BMG , EMI and Warner Music to be " barred from receiving ' mama @-@ say mama @-@ sa ' -related income until the matter is resolved " . 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " was the fourth single from Rihanna 's third album , Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) . Before its release , two promotional remixes of the song ( Solitaire 's More Drama and the Wideboys Club Mix ) were added to digital outlets in Canada and the United States on August 7 , 2007 . On September 7 , an EP of " Don 't Stop the Music " was released via the iTunes Store in territories including Australia , Italy , New Zealand and Spain . The EP contains the Wideboys Club Mix and instrumental and album versions of the song . That day , " Don 't Stop the Music " was released as a CD single in Germany with the same material as the EP and the song 's music video . The following month , it was released as a CD single in France . Def Jam Recordings furnished the song to contemporary hit radio stations in the United States on January 13 , 2008 , and to rhythmic contemporary stations a week later . Nine remixes , including the album version of " Don 't Stop the Music " , were released on May 14 to digital outlets in territories including Australia , Germany , New Zealand and Spain . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " is a four @-@ minute , 27 @-@ second dance song . According to Sony / ATV Music Publishing 's digital sheet music , it was written in the key of F ♯ minor in common time , with a moderate tempo of 123 beats per minute . Rihanna 's voice ranges from F ♯ 3 to A4 . The syncopated song samples a variety of layered rhythms , with hip @-@ hop rhythms and a heavy bass drumbeat predominating . The sampled " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " was added to the arrangement for a " pulsating musical structure " . 
 Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine compared " Don 't Stop the Music " to Rihanna 's 2006 single , " SOS " . According to Fraser McAlpine of BBC 's Chart Blog , Rihanna 's vocals on the song sound like she recorded them to a different backing track , " then gave them to some nerdy <unk> with an extensive collection of dark electro and classic pop . " McAlpine compared the verses ' vocal melody to that of Aaliyah 's 2000 single , " Try Again " , and the chorus to that of Madonna 's 1987 single , " La Isla Bonita " . He concluded , " The backing track is pure four @-@ to @-@ the @-@ floor trance . It 's like Eric Prydz all over again . " After the release of Rihanna 's single " Only Girl ( In the World ) " in 2010 , many critics compared its composition and structure to " Don 't Stop the Music " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally @-@ positive reviews from music critics , with many praising its " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " hook . Tom Breihan of Pitchfork Media called " Don 't Stop the Music " " an amazing bit of <unk> insanity combined with synth and bass " . According to Breihan , the hook from Jackson 's 1983 song " come [ s ] in and seamlessly blur [ s ] into the track 's overpowering beat " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy called the song " brilliant and unwitting " , and said that " Don 't Stop the Music " was the best single with a Jackson writing credit since his 1997 " Blood on the Dance Floor " . 
 McAlpine called Rihanna 's vocals " emotionally removed , a little distant and naughty , but a smidge melancholy and tearful " . According to a New York Times reviewer , in " Don 't Stop the Music " Rihanna found exuberance in a severe techno beat . Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters said , " The song that follows , the Michael Jackson @-@ sampling ' Don 't Stop the Music ' , inspires the type of tail feather shaking you can only produce when you 're chanting , ' Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa ' " . In 2012 , Billboard ranked the song 13th on its list of " Rihanna 's 20 Biggest Billboard Hits " of all time . 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " won the Best International Song award at the 2008 NRJ Music Awards . It was nominated for Single of the Year at the 2008 Teen Choice Awards , losing to the Jonas Brothers ' " When You Look Me in the Eyes " . The song was nominated for Best Dance Recording at the 50th Grammy Awards , losing to Justin Timberlake 's " LoveStoned / I Think She Knows " . At the 2009 Kids ' Choice Awards " Don 't Stop the Music " was nominated as Best Favorite Song , losing to Beyoncé 's " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . At the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers Pop Music Awards , ASCAP recognized it as one of 2009 's most @-@ performed songs . " Don 't Stop the Music " was a winning song at the 2009 BMI Pop Awards . In 2014 , David Drake of the magazine Complex called the single " one of the earliest shots fired in the mainstreaming of dance music " compared with typical 2007 Top @-@ 40 fare . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " debuted at number 94 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart in the issue dated December 8 , 2007 . After two months on the chart the song peaked at number three on February 16 , 2008 , Rihanna 's fourth top @-@ three single . It topped the US Dance Club Songs chart ( Rihanna 's sixth number @-@ one single ) , reached number two on the Pop Songs chart and number 74 on the Hot R & B / Hip Hop Songs chart . " Don 't Stop the Music " has sold 3 @.@ 7 million digital copies in the US as of June 2015 , and has been certified four @-@ times platinum from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The song reached number two on the Canadian Hot 100 , remaining on the chart for a total of 52 weeks . It was Rihanna 's second song to reach the chart 's top three , following " Umbrella " . 
 In Australia , " Don 't Stop the Music " debuted at number 22 on February 3 , 2008 . After three weeks , on February 24 , the song peaked at number one and remained there for four weeks . It was Rihanna 's third number @-@ one single in the country , after " SOS " and " Umbrella " , remaining on the chart for 27 weeks . " Don 't Stop the Music " charted at number 12 on the 2008 year @-@ end Australian Singles Chart . In 2008 , the song was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of over 70 @,@ 000 digital copies . The single debuted at number 31 in New Zealand on October 12 , 2007 . After fluctuating for four weeks , it peaked at number three for a week and spent a total of 22 weeks on the chart . " Don 't Stop the Music " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) in April 2008 for sales of over 7 @,@ 500 digital copies . 
 In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number 68 on December 15 , 2007 . After seven weeks on the chart , it peaked at number four . In July 2013 , the song was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for sales of over 400 @,@ 000 digital copies . The single was 24th on the 2008 year @-@ end UK Singles Chart . " Don 't Stop the Music " debuted atop the French Singles Chart on October 27 , 2007 , Rihanna 's first number @-@ one single on the chart . Remaining at number one for two weeks , the song spent a total of 34 weeks on the chart . On the German Singles Chart , it debuted at number two on September 24 , 2007 . After two weeks , it reached number one for two consecutive weeks . " Don 't Stop the Music " was certified gold by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . It was successful on the Swiss Singles Chart , peaking at number one for five weeks . The song also reached number one in Austria , Flanders and Wallonia in Belgium , Hungary and the Netherlands . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Rihanna 's regular director , Anthony Mandler , and filmed in a Prague nightclub . It was choreographed by Tina Landon , who had previously worked with Janet Jackson and did the dance visual for Ricky Martin 's 1999 " Livin ' la Vida Loca " . The video was digitally released on iTunes on July 26 , 2007 . 
 In the video Rihanna and two friends arrive at a nightclub in a yellow taxi , and enter a candy store where a boy is standing with his mother . Rihanna tells the boy not to tell anyone where they are going , and the singer and her friends sneak into the back of the store ( where there is a secret nightclub entrance ) . The narrative is intercut with Rihanna singing the song against a wall and dancing in the club . After she enters the club , she checks her makeup in a restroom as she sings . 
 Rihanna returns to the dance floor for the chorus , dancing and singing with her friends . Her fellow club @-@ goers clap along with a sample of " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . VH1 's Chris Rosa ranked the video 18th on his list of Rihanna 's 20 sexiest videos : " This dance @-@ by @-@ numbers song gets a facelift with its brisk , energetic video featuring R as the undisputed queen of the clubs " . For About.com , Bill Lamb called the video one of Rihanna 's ten best . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " was the fourteenth song on the set list of Rihanna 's 2007 – 09 Good Girl Gone Bad Tour , her first world tour . The singer 's performance in Manchester was released in the United Kingdom through iTunes , and is featured on the Good Girl Gone Bad Live DVD . Rihanna performed " Don 't Stop the Music " at the 2008 NRJ Music Awards in Cannes on January 26 , 2008 . She sang the song at the 50th Grammy Awards on February 10 , 2008 as half of a medley with " Umbrella " with American funk band The Time . On June 20 , 2008 Rihanna was a guest on NBC 's Today Concert Series at Rockefeller Center in New York City , performing " Don 't Stop the Music " , " Umbrella " and " Take a Bow " . 
 After the 2009 United Kingdom release of her fourth album , Rated R , Rihanna gave a Nokia promotional concert at the Brixton Academy in London . She performed songs from the new album , including " Russian Roulette " , " Wait Your Turn " and " Hard " ( the latter sung with Young Jeezy ) . Rihanna also performed " Don 't Stop the Music " and other previously @-@ released songs , including " Disturbia " , " Unfaithful " and " Take a Bow " . On December 4 , 2009 the singer performed on The Release , MySpace Music 's urban @-@ music concert series . Rihanna performed her new material , mashed up with older songs including " Don 't Stop the Music " , " Live Your Life " and " Run This Town " , against a background of stacked vintage televisions and silver mannequins . 
 On February 1 , 2010 , Rihanna performed " Don 't Stop the Music " and " Hard " on The Ellen DeGeneres Show . She performed at the 2010 Kids ' Choice Awards on March 27 , 2010 in the Pauley Pavilion of the UCLA campus , singing " Don 't Stop the Music " , " Hard " and her 2010 single " Rude Boy " . To promote Rated R Rihanna embarked upon the 2010 – 11 Last Girl on Earth Tour ( her second worldwide tour ) , where she performed the song . In June 2011 Rihanna began the Loud Tour , her third major worldwide tour , when the single was twentieth on the set list . She performed " Don 't Stop the Music " at Radio 1 's Hackney Weekend on May 24 , 2012 as the thirteenth song on the set list , with a giant onstage sphinx . The song was on the set list for Rihanna 's 2013 Diamonds World Tour , where she sang it as part of a medley with " S & M " and " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 During the sixth season of the dance reality @-@ television series America 's Best Dance Crew , the dancers Phunk Phenomenon performed a Charlie <unk> music @-@ hall version of " Don 't Stop the Music " . In 2011 , the California indie pop duo The Bird and the Bee covered the song and posted it on SoundCloud . South Korean recording artist Hyoyeon , part of the girl group Girls ' Generation , covered the song during the group 's 2011 tour . Her version was included on their second live album , 2011 Girls ' Generation Tour , which was released on April 11 , 2013 . In October 2011 Rihanna joined L.A. Reid at his home in the Hamptons to help him judge male contestants for the first season of the American version of The X Factor , where contestant Philip Lomax performed a stripped @-@ down version of " Don 't Stop the Music " for Rihanna and Reid . The song was performed by the <unk> in the 2012 film Pitch Perfect , and was included on its soundtrack . 
 = = = Jamie Cullum version = = = 
 British singer and songwriter Jamie Cullum covered " Don 't Stop the Music " on his 2009 album , The Pursuit . Produced by Martin <unk> , the song was digitally released as the second single from the album on January 20 , 2010 . Cullum 's version substituted the original 's electro @-@ house groove with a " sinuous " acoustic bass and " brushed " drumming . Cullum 's version is in the key of C major and set in common time at 100 beats per minute . His voice ranges from C ♯ 4 to F5 . 
 According to PopMatters ' Will Layman , the piano builds the groove from soft to loud ( a technique used by Herbie Hancock during the 1960s ) . Adrian Edwards of BBC Music wrote , " Cullum 's take on Rihanna 's ' Don 't Stop the Music ' is best of all , where the novel production techniques and his broken @-@ voiced pleading to his girl on the dance floor would blend well in any night club with strobe lighting and the clink of glasses at the bar " . Cullum 's version peaked at number two on the Ultratip chart in Belgium , number 28 in the Netherlands and number 58 in Germany . A music video for the song was released on December 2 , 2009 on Cullum 's YouTube Vevo channel . 
 = = = = Credits and personnel = = = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Pursuit ( Decca Records ) . 
 = = = = Charts = = = = 
 = = = = Release history = = = = 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 Notes 
 a ^ Released as separate digital singles in both United States and Canada via iTunes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Battery Studios , New York City and Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Good Girl Gone Bad ( Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records ) . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 Since May 9 , 2013 , RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Everett Strupper = 
 George Everett Strupper , Jr . ( July 26 , 1896 – February 4 , 1950 ) , known variously as " Ev " or " <unk> " or " Stroop " was an American football player . He played halfback for Georgia Tech from 1915 to 1917 . Strupper overcame deafness resulting from a childhood illness and was selected as an All @-@ American in 1917 . 
 During Strupper 's three years playing for Georgia Tech , the team compiled a record of 24 – 0 – 2 and outscored its opponents by a combined score of 1 @,@ 135 to 61 . In Georgia Tech 's record @-@ setting 222 – 0 win over Cumberland College in 1916 , Strupper scored eight touchdowns . For many years , 1917 Georgia Tech was considered the greatest football team the South ever produced . Strupper starred as part of a renowned backfield including also Joe Guyon , Judy Harlan , and Al Hill . Strupper and teammate Walker Carpenter were the first players from the Deep South selected for an All @-@ America first team . 
 Sportswriter Morgan Blake called Strupper " probably the greatest running half @-@ back the South has known . " Bernie McCarty writes " Strupper ranks among the greatest broken @-@ field <unk> in Southern football history . And he caught and threw passes , returned kicks , blocked well , punted and played a bang @-@ up defensive game . " He was posthumously inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1972 and the Georgia Sports Hall of Fame in 1974 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Strupper was born in Columbus , Georgia , in 1896 . His parents , G. Everett Strupper , Sr. ( born 1872 ) , and Bessie H. ( Hatcher ) Strupper ( born 1875 ) , were both Georgia natives . As of 1910 , his father was employed as a manager at a cotton oil company . <unk> attended Riverside Military Academy in Gainesville , Georgia . He was the star of the school 's football team in 1913 ; and is a member of the school 's sports hall of fame . 
 = = Georgia Tech = = 
 Strupper enrolled at the Georgia Institute of Technology ( Georgia Tech ) in Atlanta in 1914 . During his freshman year , Strupper became a member of the Georgia Phi chapter of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon Fraternity . He was a multi @-@ sport athlete competing for Georgia Tech in basketball , football , and track and field . 
 In 1914 , Strupper played for the freshman football team at Georgia Tech . He then played halfback for Georgia Tech 's varsity football teams under head coach John Heisman from 1915 to 1917 . Strupper was deaf , and because of his deafness , he called the signals instead of the team 's quarterback . Strupper was a small man , with his height being stated in varying accounts to be between five @-@ feet seven inches and five @-@ feet , ten inches . His coach John Heisman later wrote that Strupper was " but 5 feet 7 inches in height , weighed only 148 pounds stripped . " He was sometimes known as " little Everett Strupper . " 
 Georgia Tech never lost a game in which Strupper played , compiling three consecutive undefeated seasons from 1915 to 1917 . During Strupper 's three years playing for Georgia Tech , the team compiled a record of 24 – 0 – 2 . Only two teams managed a tie – the University of Georgia in 1915 and Washington & Lee in 1916 . In those 26 games , Georgia Tech outscored its opponents by a combined score of 1 @,@ 135 to 61 . 
 Georgia Tech coach John Heisman later described Strupper as follows : 
 " Everett Strupper was a small package of condensed lightning when you turned him loose in an open field with a ball you wanted delivered somewhere in the neighborhood of the enemy 's goal line . He was small , but he was put together like a high @-@ powered motor . His arms and legs did just what his mind told them to do , and , believe me , his mind worked faster than Ty Cobb 's when he 's running the bases . Dodging and twisting , stiff @-@ arming and <unk> , he 'd run the gauntlet of men big enough , you 'd think , to pick him up and spank him , and most of the time , too , he 'd get away from them , try as hard as they would . " 
 Heisman also said of Strupper " Were I compelled to risk my head on what one absolutely unaided <unk> might accomplish , football under arm and facing eleven ferocious opponents , I would rather choose and chance this man on how he might come through the gauntlet than any ball carrier I have ever seen in action . " 
 Heisman recalled that , when Strupper first arrived from Riverside Military Academy , Heisman could not imagine Strupper playing on the football team : " Too light for the line , I didn 't see how he could play in the backfield , because he wouldn 't be able to get the signals . He could have played quarterback fine , but his enunciation wasn 't clear enough for him to call the plays . " Heisman recalled how Strupper overcame the obstacle posed by his deafness : " He couldn 't hear anything but a regular shout . But he could read your lips like a flash . No lad that ever stepped on a football field had keener eyes than Everett had . The enemy found this out the minute he began looking for openings through which to run the ball . " He was nominated though not selected for an Associated Press All @-@ Time Southeast 1869 – 1919 era team . 
 = = = 1915 season = = = 
 In his sophomore year , Strupper proved to be an all @-@ around athlete . As Heisman told it , Strupper " was a star baseball player , a crack at basketball and the best sprint man we had in the school . " Heisman recalled that , despite his small stature , Strupper had a powerful body : " Stripped down in the dressing rooms Everett was a sight to behold . There never was a better set up lad than he ; he was a regular Apollo , beautifully muscled and built and coordinating rhythmically in every movement . " 
 When Strupper tried out for the team , he noticed that the quarterback would shout the signals every time Strupper was to carry the ball . Realizing the loud signals would be a tip @-@ off to the opposition , Strupper told Heisman , " Coach , those loud signals are absolutely unnecessary . You see when sickness in my kid days brought on this deafness my folks gave me the best instructors obtainable to teach me lip @-@ reading . " 
 Strupper first starred in a game against Transylvania , scoring four touchdowns . He was injured the next week against LSU , and blamed LSU 's Phillip Cooper . 
 Tech closed what was then the greatest season in its history with a 7 – 0 defeat of the Auburn <unk> . To begin the second quarter , Strupper had two key plays , the last of which was the game @-@ deciding touchdown . First he made 20 yards around with a pass from <unk> Morrison before being forced out of bounds . Next was the 19 @-@ yard touchdown . Strupper started around left end , then cut back into the center of the field , away from his blockers . He <unk> and eluded " every man on the Auburn team . " On the last move Strupper faked right and then dove left underneath the outstretched arms of Baby Taylor into the endzone . 
 At the end of the 1915 season , Strupper received two selections from a composite All @-@ Southern eleven selected by ten sports writers and coaches , including those from Memphis , Nashville , Atlanta , Birmingham , Chattanooga , and New Orleans . 
 = = = 1916 season = = = 
 In 1916 , Strupper had a 92 @-@ yard punt return for a touchdown on opening day against Mercer . The next week , Strupper led Georgia Tech in a 222 – 0 victory over Cumberland College , " the most lopsided game in football history . " The score ( compiled on 32 touchdowns and 30 extra points ) broke the old record of a 153 – 0 set by the University of Michigan in 1912 . Strupper scored eight touchdowns in the game , six rushing and two on punt returns . One historic account of the 1916 Cumberland game described Strupper as the " lord high executioner " : 
 " There were many executioners that crisp early @-@ fall Saturday . Halfback G.E. Strupper scored from 20 yards out on Tech 's first offensive play and went on to be lord high executioner with eight touchdowns and a conversion for a total of 49 points . " 
 In the first quarter alone , Strupper scored four touchdowns on runs of 20 , 10 , 60 , and 45 yards . Strupper chose to allow others to share in the scoring . With a 42 – 0 lead midway through the first quarter , Strupper broke clear and could have scored easily , but he intentionally grounded the ball at the one @-@ yard line to allow Georgia Tech tackle J. Cantey Alexander to score the first touchdown of his career . A teammate later recalled the play as follows : 
 " Strupper swapped positions with Alexander ... The team didn 't want to make it too easy for Cantey , though . The other boys wouldn 't block for him or help in any way . As soon as the ball was snapped , they ran away from the line and out of the play completely . Leaving poor Cantey to go it alone . Finally , on fourth down , a bruised and weary Alexander managed to get the ball across while his teammates howled with laughter . " 
 The game was eventually halted after just 44 minutes of play . It was said only one newspaper in all of the South neglected to have Strupper on its All @-@ Southern team for 1916 . He ranked third in the nation in scoring , including 16 touchdowns . 
 = = = 1917 season = = = 
 Strupper also played on the 1917 team then considered the greatest the South ever produced , including one of the greatest backfields . According to the Times @-@ Picayune , " Strupper , Guyon , Hill , and Harlan form a backfield with no superiors and few equals in football history " . Tech gave Vanderbilt its worst loss in school history 83 – 0 . " It was not until 1917 that a Southern team really avenged long @-@ time torment at McGugin 's hands . And it took one of history 's top backfields – Joe Guyon , Ev Strupper , Al Hill , and Judy Harlan of Georgia Tech – to do it , " writes Edwin Pope . The team also defeated the University of Pennsylvania , then one of the Eastern powers , 41 – 0 . It was called by one writer " Strupper 's finest hour . " In a 98 – 0 win over the Carlisle Indians in 1917 , Strupper drew praise for his performance . The Atlanta Journal wrote : 
 " Everett Strupper played like a veritable demon . At one time four Carlisle men pounced on him from all directions , and yet through some superhuman witchery he broke loose and dashed 10 yards further . On another occasion he attempted a wide end run , found that he was completely blocked , then suddenly whirled and ran the other way , gaining something like 25 yards before he was downed . " 
 Strupper scored five touchdowns against Carlisle , including a 32 @-@ yard fumble return for a touchdown . And in a 68 – 7 win over rival Auburn , Strupper had a 65 @-@ yard touchdown run that drew the following praise from the Atlanta Journal : 
 " It was not the length of the run that featured it was the brilliance of it . After getting through the first line , Stroop was tackled squarely by two secondary men , and yet he squirmed and jerked loosed from them , only to face the safety man and another Tiger , coming at him from different angles . Without checking his speed Everett knifed the two men completely , running between them and dashing on to a touchdown . " 
 Remarkably , two Georgia Tech players led the country in touchdowns for the 1917 season . Quarterback Albert Hill was first with 23 touchdowns , and Strupper was second with 20 touchdowns . Strupper rushed for some 1 @,@ 150 yards on a little over 100 carries . 
 Strupper has been recognized as a consensus first @-@ team player on the 1917 College Football All @-@ America Team , having received first @-@ team honors from Frank Menke Syndicate , Paul <unk> , and Dick <unk> of the Atlanta Constitution . Strupper and team captain Walker Carpenter were the first players from the Deep South selected for an All @-@ America first team . Strupper was named as one of four backs on Georgia Tech 's " All @-@ Era " team for the Heisman era covering the years from 1904 to 1919 . 
 = = Military football and coaching = = 
 On December 8 , 1917 , Strupper was elected by his teammates to be the captain of the 1918 Georgia Tech football team . However , Strupper enlisted in the U. S. Army on August 28 , 1918 , and was assigned to the First Replacement Regiment at Camp Gordon in Augusta , Georgia . In October 1918 , Strupper transferred to Camp Hancock and promoted to the rank of sergeant . He played football for Camp Gordon and Camp Hancock teams . In November 1918 , Camp Gordon played a game in Strupper 's home town of Columbus , Georgia , and the locals held " Strupper Day " in his honor . In a game for Camp Gordon on December 7 , 1918 , he had two runs of 80 yards and scored four touchdowns . At the end of the season , he was picked as a second @-@ team halfback on Walter Camp 's All @-@ America service team . 
 The war ended in November 1918 , and Strupper was discharged from the Army on December 20 , 1918 , as part of the post @-@ war demobilization . In August 1919 , Strupper accepted a job as the backfield coach for Oglethorpe University . He next led the Columbus High School football team . Strupper was an assistant coach under Josh Cody at Mercer in 1922 . 
 = = Family and later years = = 
 Strupper was married in approximately 1920 to his wife , Odelle . As of 1921 , Strupper was living in Columbus , Georgia , working as a salesman for E. F. Gray . From at least 1925 to 1928 , Strupper was living in Columbus with his wife , Odelle , and operating a tire business under the name Everett Strupper , Inc . The business sold Dunlop Tires and also provided <unk> , road service , washing , greasing and oil . 
 By 1930 , Strupper and his wife , Odelle , had moved to Atlanta where he was employed as the sales manager for an automobile accessories business . He was also a contributor to the Atlanta Journal . Although there are competing stories as to the origin of the Red Elephant mascot for the University of Alabama , some sources have cited a story written by Strupper about an October 1930 football game between Alabama and Mississippi . Strupper wrote : " At the end of the quarter , the earth started to tremble , there was a distant rumble that continued to grow . Some excited fan in the stands bellowed , ' Hold your horses , the elephants are coming , ' and out stamped this Alabama varsity . " 
 By 1934 , he was working as a solicitor for the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company . He worked with former teammate , Pup Phillips , at Massachusetts Mutual . As of 1941 , Strupper was still living in Atlanta and employed by Massachusetts Mutual . His spouse , apparently a second wife , was identified as Frances C. Strupper . 
 Strupper later became a general agent for the Volunteer State Life Insurance Company , and by 1948 , he became the president of the Piedmont Life Insurance Co. based in Atlanta . 
 Strupper died at his home in Atlanta 's Georgian Terrace Hotel in February 1950 from thrombosis . He was age 57 at the time of his death . He was survived by a wife and a step @-@ daughter , Gwyneth Oliver . He was buried in Columbus , Georgia . 
 In 1972 , the National Football Foundation named Strupper and nine others players who played before 1920 to the " Pioneer " section of the College Football Hall of Fame . He was also inducted into the Georgia Tech Athletics Hall of Fame in 1956 and the Georgia Sports Hall of Fame in 1974 . 
 = A Forest = 
 " A Forest " is a song by the English alternative rock band The Cure . Co @-@ produced by Mike Hedges and The Cure 's Robert Smith , it was released as a single from the band 's second album Seventeen Seconds in April 1980 . It was their debut entry on the United Kingdom chart , where it reached number 31 . The accompanying music video was first shown on BBC 's Top of the Pops programme on 24 April 1980 . 
 Recorded and mixed over seven days , along with the rest of the songs from the album , " A Forest " is representative of The Cure 's early 1980s gothic rock phase . The song has featured on the band 's setlists for many years . Several versions have appeared on concert albums , and it was remixed and released as a single from the Mixed Up album in 1990 . The song has been covered by several artists including Blank & Jones , Sophie Barker and <unk> @-@ Shak . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Mike Hedges co @-@ produced the album Seventeen Seconds as well as " A Forest " with The Cure 's Robert Smith . Hedges had first worked with the band on the track " Killing an Arab " . Interviewed in 2004 , he did not recall any demos existing for Seventeen Seconds ; the band generally played the track in the studio before laying down a backing track to which overdubs were added . At the time of the recording of the album , bass guitarist Simon Gallup and keyboardist Matthieu Hartley had been added to the band 's lineup . Gallup had replaced Michael Dempsey , who had departed to join The Associates . Gallup and Hartley joined remaining Cure members Smith ( vocals ) and Lol Tolhurst ( drums ) in late 1979 during the group 's Future Pastimes tour , on which " A Forest " was one of the new songs added to their setlist . 
 Due to budgetary restraints , Seventeen Seconds was recorded and mixed in seven days on a budget of between £ 2000 and £ 3000 , which resulted in the band working 16 or 17 hours a day to complete the album . Hedges and Robert Smith knew " A Forest " would take more work to complete than other songs on the album , and would require more overdubs . " A Forest " was one of the last tracks recorded ; the backing tracks were recorded first , followed by touch @-@ ups to the individual parts , then Smith 's vocals . Fiction Records owner Chris Parry told Smith that the song had the potential to be a hit if they made it sound " radio friendly " , but Smith refused , stating that the way the track sounded was the sound he envisioned in his head , dismissing concerns about radio friendliness . Work on mixing " A Forest " took up much of the final day of sessions for the album . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " A Forest " and its parent album Seventeen Seconds are representative of The Cure 's gothic rock phase in the late 1970s and early 1980s . Cure biographer Jeff Apter refers to " A Forest " as " the definitive early Cure mood piece " and he argued the song is the centrepiece of the album . Smith 's intention with " A Forest " was to make a song that was " really atmospheric " . He has stated that it was a pivotal recording for the group , and represented " the archetypal Cure sound " . 
 " A Forest " is performed in the key of A minor . Initially only the synth , guitar and drums are heard , followed by the introduction of the bass guitar and a second guitar part . The song initially follows an Am – C – F – Dm progression . Later on the track , its bridge contains a B – C – F # m – C – B – C sequence , which ends with a chromatic movement to the F chord before returning to Am . Following the echoing repetition of the word " again " , a guitar solo appears which avoids string bends and moving in a pentatonic manner . The single version of the song fades out at around four minutes , while on the longer ( album ) version the instruments exit one by one , concluding with the sound of the bass guitar at 4 @.@ 46 " . The sound of Smith 's guitar was a departure from that prevalent in the 1970s . Mike Hedges favored the use of flanging at the time , and he estimated that there were seven flanger devices used on " A Forest " . Rikki Rooksby said that the slow phase effect heard on the guitar in " A Forest " " almost became a Smith trademark for a while " . Simon Gallup said that his playing on the track was intended to be reminiscent of the bass work in the music of The Stranglers , whose bassist Jean @-@ Jacques Burnel was a major influence on him . 
 Smith has given varying explanations behind his lyrics for " A Forest " . He has said that the lyrics were based upon a dream he had as a child where he was lost in the woods unable to escape but later denied it and stated , " It 's just about a forest " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 " A Forest " was released as a single on 5 April 1980 . Its B @-@ side was " Another Journey by Train " , an instrumental remake of The Cure 's " Jumping Someone Else 's Train " . The single received a mixed critical reception , though commercially its sales were an improvement for the band . In early 1980 , it spent eight weeks in the UK Singles Chart , peaking at number 31 on 12 April of that year . It was the highest they had placed on the chart by that point in their career . In the United States , the song reached number 47 on the Billboard Dance Music / Club Play Singles chart . 
 The version included on 1986 compilation Standing on a Beach ( Staring at the Sea ) is neither the album version ( which was also on the 12 " single ) , nor is it the 7 " single edit ( which removes a few bars between verses and fades out part way through the guitar solo ending ) . 
 Andy Anderson , who later became the Cure 's drummer , said " A Forest " was the first song he heard by the band . He was taken by both the music and vocals , and was especially drawn to Smith 's guitar work and the keyboard melody , which he described as " haunting . " He described the spare and simple 4 / 4 drum pattern as straightforward ; " all that is needed . " 
 = = Re @-@ recordings and cover versions = = 
 Since its release , " A Forest " has become the most played Cure song , with nearly 1 @,@ 000 live appearances . A live version of " A Forest " appeared on a four @-@ song edition of " The Hanging Garden " released in July 1982 . It was performed with what has been described as a " rough , punk @-@ edged " sound on the 1984 live album Concert : The Cure Live . A performance appears on the live video The Cure in Orange , highly regarded by Allmusic reviewer Ned Raggett . , while other live versions of the song include the concert film Show , and on disc one of the live album Bestival Live 2011 . 
 In 1990 , the track was re @-@ recorded and remixed by Mark Saunders for The Cure 's Mixed Up album . The " Tree mix " version of " A Forest " was released as a single on 6 December 1990 , while the album had been released a few weeks before on 20 November . The song was redone for the second time on the Join the Dots box set , this time remixed by Mark <unk> and featuring Earl Slick on guitar . This version was described as " awful " and " instantly dated " by reviewer Chris Ott . An acoustic version was recorded and released on the bonus disc that came with some copies of the 2001 Greatest Hits CD . Robert Smith supplied vocals for a Blank & Jones cover version of the song , which appeared on their 2004 album Monument . 
 Finnish avant @-@ garde metal band <unk> recorded a cover version released on their album So Fine ! , in 1994 . 
 French band Nouvelle Vague covered A Forest in a bossa @-@ nova style , as part of its self @-@ titled debut album in 2004 . 
 Texas Band The Toadies covered A Forest for their 2008 album No Deliverance . This version was an iTunes exclusive bonus track . 
 Sophie Barker released a recording on her double A @-@ side single " A Forest / Say Goodbye " which was released on 31 October 2011 . 
 <unk> @-@ Shak , a collaboration between DJ DB and <unk> , covered the song on their only album Deep , which was released in 2005 . The music video was used in the TV Series Fringe in 2008 . English artist Bat for Lashes covered the song for the 2008 Cure tribute album Perfect as Cats : A Tribute to the Cure . Luke Lewis of NME praised the version , noting it " teases out a crepuscular , pagan atmosphere absent in the original " . 
 Norwegian black metal band Carpathian Forest recorded the song for their 1998 album Black Shining Leather . 
 British band <unk> Jesus included a cover of this song on their 1990 EP Bark . 
 British musician Steven Wilson recorded a cover of the song for his solo release " Cover Version III " in 2005 , as part of his Cover Versions series . 
 A cover of the track appears on the album 8 : 58 , a project by Paul Hartnoll , with vocals from The <unk> . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The promotional video for " A Forest " was the band 's first . It was created by David Hiller , who mixed footage from the band 's 24 April 1980 debut appearance on BBC 's Top of the Pops programme with a forest montage . Smith said that the group " came across looking very morose and disinterested " in the video because that is how they felt at the time ; he " hated " Top of the Pops as he was " really anti @-@ pop " during this period . He recalled that he had been in pain at the time of the shoot as he had broken his thumb trying to change a tyre a few days previously . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 7 " - Fiction / Polydor ( UK ) 
 " A Forest " - 3 @.@ 54 
 " Another Journey by Train " - 3 @.@ 04 
 7 " - Fiction ( UK ) 
 " A Forest " [ Tree Mix ] - 6 @.@ 55 
 " A Forest " [ Original ] 
 " Inbetween Days " [ Shiver Mix ] - 6 @.@ 24 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Robert Smith - vocals , guitar 
 Simon Gallup - bass 
 Matthieu Hartley - keyboards 
 Lol Tolhurst - drums 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Heinz Field = 
 Heinz Field is a stadium located in the North Shore neighborhood of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , United States . It primarily serves as the home to the Pittsburgh Steelers of the National Football League ( NFL ) and the Pittsburgh Panthers of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) . The stadium opened in 2001 , after the controlled implosion of the teams ' previous stadium , Three Rivers Stadium . The stadium is named for the locally based H. J. Heinz Company , which purchased the naming rights in 2001 . It hosted the 2011 NHL Winter Classic between the Pittsburgh Penguins and Washington Capitals on January 1 , 2011 . 
 Funded in conjunction with PNC Park and the David L. Lawrence Convention Center , the $ 281 million ( $ 375 @.@ 5 million today ) stadium stands along the Ohio River , on the Northside of Pittsburgh in the North Shore neighborhood . The stadium was designed with the city of Pittsburgh 's history of steel production in mind , which led to the inclusion of 12 @,@ 000 tons of steel into the design . Ground for the stadium was broken in June 1999 and the first football game was hosted in September 2001 . The stadium 's natural grass surface has been criticized throughout its history , but Steelers ownership has kept the grass after lobbying from players and coaches . Attendance for the 68 @,@ 400 seat stadium has sold out for every Steelers home game , a streak which dates back to 1972 ( a year before local telecasts of home games were permitted in the NFL ) . A collection of memorabilia from the Steelers and Panthers of the past can be found in the Great Hall . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and funding = = = 
 The Pittsburgh Steelers and the Pittsburgh Pirates shared Three Rivers Stadium from 1970 to 2000 . After discussions over the Pittsburgh Pirates building a full @-@ time baseball park , a proposal was made to renovate Three Rivers Stadium into a full @-@ time football facility . Though met with negative reaction from Steelers ownership , the proposal was used as a " fallback position " that would be used if discussions for a new stadium failed . Steelers ownership stated that failing to build a new stadium would hurt the franchise 's chances of signing players who might opt to sign with other teams , such as the other three teams in the Steelers division who had all recently built new football @-@ only stadiums . In June 2001 , the H. J. Heinz Company purchased the naming rights to the stadium . As per the deal , Heinz will pay the Steelers a total of $ 57 million through 2021 ; the " 57 " being an intentional reference to Heinz 57 . Despite Heinz later announcing its acquisition of Kraft Foods Group to form Kraft Heinz Company in 2015 , the stadium 's name will remain known as Heinz Field . 
 Originally , a sales tax increase was proposed to fund three projects : Heinz Field , PNC Park , and an expansion of the David L. Lawrence Convention Center . After the rejection of this proposal in a referendum , the city developed Plan B. Similarly controversial , the alternative proposal was labeled Scam B by opponents . The Steelers ' pledge toward the new stadium was criticized for being too little , even after it was raised from $ 50 million to $ 76 @.@ 5 million . Other local government members criticized the $ 281 million of public money allocated for Plan B. One member of the Allegheny Regional Asset District board called the use of tax dollars " corporate welfare " . The plan , totaling $ 809 million , was approved by the Allegheny Regional Asset District board on July 9 , 1998 , with $ 233 million allotted for Heinz Field . Shortly after Plan B was approved , the Steelers made a deal with Pittsburgh city officials to stay in the city until at least 2031 . The total cost of Heinz Field was $ 281 million . 
 = = = Design and construction = = = 
 HOK Sport designed the stadium . HOK Sport 's project manager for the project , Melinda Lehman , said that the Rooney family asked for the stadium 's design to " acknowledge the history of Pittsburgh and also bring in an element of looking forward , this is where Pittsburgh is going . " In order to accomplish this , HOK Sport used steel structurally and externally . The stone used in Heinz Field 's design is artificial , in order to decrease cost . Of the glass used in the stadium 's design , Lehman said , " The glass is a more modern building element , which ties into a lot of the buildings in [ Downtown ] Pittsburgh and gives great views of the surrounding areas . " The Steelers and Panthers have their own locker rooms , which differ in size based on the amount of players each team is permitted to dress for each game . The visitor facilities are modeled after the home locker rooms ' design . As with its predecessor , Heinz Field 's culinary service provider is Aramark ; over 400 eateries are located throughout the stadium . A bronze statue of Steelers founder Art Rooney , similar to those located outside PNC Park , was moved 100 feet ( 30 m ) from its previous position outside Three Rivers Stadium . In addition , a statue of a Pitt Panther over a paved depiction of Pitt 's Cathedral of Learning was placed outside Gate A. Upon opening in 2001 , Heinz Field 's 27 by 96 foot Sony JumboTron was the largest scoreboard in the NFL . In 2007 , ESPN named the " tipping " of the oversized Heinz ketchup bottles atop the scoreboard one of the top ten touchdown celebrations in the NFL . 
 Ground was broken for Heinz Field on June 18 , 1999 , at a ceremony co @-@ hosted by the Steelers and the University of Pittsburgh . The stadium was constructed by Hunt Construction Group and <unk> Corporation . The two companies directed 1 @,@ 400 workers over two years , in which there were no construction accidents or lawsuits . The stadium is inspected yearly , along with PNC Park , by Chronicle Consulting , LLC , for structural defects and maintenance . 
 = = = Opening and other events = = = 
 The first event held at Heinz Field was a concert hosted by the band ' N Sync , on August 18 , 2001 . Coincidentally , they were also the last band to perform at the Steelers ' previous home , Three Rivers Stadium . Prior to the Steelers regular season schedule , the team played a pre @-@ season game against the Detroit Lions on August 25 , 2001 . Pittsburgh won the stadium 's unofficial opening game 20 – 7 , with 57 @,@ 829 spectators in attendance . The first official football game played in the stadium was between the Pittsburgh Panthers and East Tennessee State , on September 1 . The Panthers won the game 31 – 0 , with quarterback David Priestley scoring the first touchdown on an 85 @-@ yard run . The Steelers were scheduled to open the regular season play at Heinz Field on September 16 against the Cleveland Browns ; however , due to the September 11 attacks , all NFL games of the week were postponed , thus moving the stadium 's premiere to October 7 , against the Cincinnati Bengals . Prior to the game , a speech from US President George W. Bush , ordering attacks on Taliban @-@ controlled Afghanistan , was shown live on the stadium 's JumboTron . The speech was met with much applause and support from the spectators in attendance . Pittsburgh defeated the Bengals , 16 – 7 . Steelers kicker Kris Brown scored the first NFL points in the stadium on a 26 @-@ yard field goal , and quarterback Kordell Stewart scored the first touchdown on an eight @-@ yard run . 
 On November 30 , 2002 , the Backyard Brawl college football game between Pitt and West Virginia drew 66 @,@ 731 spectators , the largest single @-@ game attendance in Heinz Field history . West Virginia won the game 24 – 17 . 
 In addition to football games , Heinz Field has hosted other various activities . Since its opening in 2001 , bands and artists including ' N Sync , Taylor Swift , Kenny Chesney , and LeAnn Rimes have performed at the stadium . In addition , hometown bands The Clarks and the <unk> Hillbillies have played multiple shows at the stadium . In 2002 , the Pittsburgh Marathon concluded at Heinz Field , the course was altered from past years to allow competitors to cross the finish line on the field . In 2005 , the Pittsburgh Wine Festival was held at Heinz Field , over 2 @,@ 000 people attended . The 2011 American Idol Auditions chose Pittsburgh of one of six cities and scheduled <unk> at Heinz Field on July 12 – 13 and auditions on July 15 , 2011 . In 2007 , writer Bill Evans named Heinz Field the second best stadium in the NFL , behind Lambeau Field , in an article for ESPN.com. Although both stadiums received a score of 54 out of 70 , Sports Illustrated named Heinz Field the second best stadium in the NFL , also behind Lambeau Field . 
 That same year , two light @-@ emitting diode ( LED ) video displays from Daktronics were installed at the field . The larger , high definition video display measures approximately 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) high by nearly 96 feet ( 29 m ) wide . 
 Heinz Field served as the home field of the Gotham Rogues in the 2012 film The Dark Knight Rises . An estimated 15 @,@ 000 unpaid extras filled the stadium during shooting on August 6 , 2011 . 
 On August 4 , 2012 , Heinz Field will host the Women 's Football Alliance 's National Championship Game , becoming the first NFL stadium to host a title game for any women 's football league . 
 The quickest score in NFL history occurred on September 8 , 2013 in the Steelers season opener against the Tennessee Titans , when the Steelers scored a safety on the opening kickoff three seconds into the game . Darius Reynaud of the Titans fielded the kickoff and took a short step backwards ( into the south end zone ) for what was ruled to be a safety , not a touchback , because the ball was not in the end zone when it was fielded . The Steelers , however , lost the game 16 @-@ 9 , which was also their first home opener loss since Heinz Field opened . 
 On July 27 , 2014 , Heinz Field hosted a soccer match between A.C. Milan and Manchester City which was part of the 2014 International Champions Cup and Manchester City won the match 5 @-@ 1 . 
 = = = NHL Winter Classic = = = 
 On May 28 , 2010 , National Hockey League commissioner Gary Bettman announced that Heinz Field would be the host of the 2011 NHL Winter Classic . The game was played January 1 , 2011 between the Pittsburgh Penguins and Washington Capitals . Pittsburgh native Jackie Evancho sang the Star Spangled Banner before local sports legends Franco Harris , Jerome Bettis and Mario Lemieux dropped the ceremonial puck . The Capitals won , 3 – 1 . The game was the highest rated NHL contest since 1996 and the highest rated regular season game since 1975 . It was also the first night Classic and the first to use " <unk> " technology . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Playing surface = = = 
 In June 2001 , Kentucky Bluegrass was laid on the field , at half the height of most NFL field 's 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) grass . The field is heated from below , using a mixture of antifreeze and hot water , to keep the field at around 62 ° F ( 17 ° C ) in order to keep the grass growing year @-@ round . The field was re @-@ surfaced multiple times , until the synthetic @-@ enhanced Desso GrassMaster was installed in 2003 . Debate continued over the surface after players began slipping during game play . Despite this players and coaches of Pitt , the Steelers , and their opponents supported keeping the current turf . 
 On Friday , November 23 , 2007 , Heinz Field hosted four <unk> championship football games which were followed the day after with a game between Pitt and South Florida . After discussion with the NFL , Steelers ownership made the decision to re @-@ surface the field for their nationally televised game against the Miami Dolphins . A layer of sod was laid overtop the 2 @.@ 5 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 0 ha ) Desso GrassMaster surface . The field 's condition was exacerbated by 1 ½ inches of rain after the new sod had been laid , which did not allow the tarp to be removed from the field until 70 minutes before the game began . The field conditions during the game ended up being so bad that at one point during the game , a punt by Dolphins punter Brandon Fields ended up sticking into the turf without bouncing . The Steelers won the game 3 – 0 , with a field goal by Jeff Reed with 17 seconds remaining in regulation ; it was the NFL 's first 3 @-@ 0 game since 1993 and the longest two teams went without scoring since the New York Giants and Detroit Lions played to a scoreless tie on November 11 , 1943 . Scott Brown , of the Pittsburgh Tribune @-@ Review , called the field a " veritable mud pit " . While Gene Upshaw , head of the National Football League Players ' Association , also criticized the field citing a 2006 survey of NFL players that ranked Heinz Field as the second worst field in the league . Steelers receiver Hines Ward called the playing conditions " horrendous " after the game . However , the following day Ward and other Pittsburgh players lobbied to keep the natural surface stating , " I think everybody wants to keep the grass . " Since that season , the Steelers have played their game on the weekend following Thanksgiving on the road at the team 's request . 
 Debate continued over the field later in the season when Jacksonville running back Fred Taylor called the field " a lawsuit pending " . Pittsburgh 's ownership stated that the decision was up to the players , who once again defended the natural surface . In February 2008 , the Steelers announced that they would keep the Desso GrassMaster surface . During the 2008 season quarterback Ben Roethlisberger was given a concussion after being hit at Heinz Field . He later stated , " I 'm glad we weren 't on FieldTurf . That grass — you know , the soft Heinz Field — might 've helped a little bit . " After the 2008 season , a poll of 1 @,@ 565 NFL players rated the surface at Heinz Field as the worst of the 18 natural surfaces in the League . 
 The <unk> surface was removed in January 2009 and replaced with the old sod placed on top of the <unk> surface for the AFC Championship also in January 2009 . 
 = = = Field design = = = 
 Unique about the field is the design itself . Initially , the south end zone had either " Steelers " or " Panthers " painted in the end zone , depending on the game itself . The north end zone has always read " Pittsburgh " , which is painted in gold lettering and trimmed in either black for the Steelers or dark blue for Pitt . Although there is typically no midfield logo when both Pitt and the Steelers are in season , both teams have applied their logo if the field 's schedule allows for a sufficient break to remove or apply the other team 's logo for that team 's next upcoming game . The Steelers have typically added their logo to midfield after Pitt 's football season has ended . 
 In 2003 , the Steelers played the Philadelphia Eagles in a preseason game to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the <unk> team , when the two merged as a result of player shortages caused by World War II . Steelers president Dan Rooney had initially considered wearing a throwback uniform for the game , but decided against it because the merged team wore the Eagles uniforms , and the Steelers didn 't want to wear the Eagles ' colors . Instead , the team had the south end zone painted in plain diagonal white lines , which were common in NFL <unk> until the 1960s . 
 Although the Steelers lost the game 21 – 16 , Rooney liked the look of the south end zone being " plain " , and decided to keep it permanently . As with the team 's logo at midfield , the Steelers paint " Steelers " in the south end zone once the college football season ends . The Green Bay Packers also adopted the plain diagonal white lines in the end zones at Lambeau Field for 2007 due to an Anniversary logo being painted on each end , before switching back to wordmark <unk> in 2008 which have remained since . 
 = = = Seating and tickets = = = 
 As of 2008 , the Pittsburgh Steelers have sold out every home game since the 1972 season . Entering the 2008 season , the Steelers average ticket price of $ 69 @.@ 47 was the 15th highest out of the NFL 's 32 teams . The majority of the 65 @,@ 050 seats are colored " Steeler gold " , though club seats are dark gray . Heinz Field features 1 @,@ 500 seats in 129 luxury boxes , with prices ranging from $ 64 @,@ 000 to $ 135 @,@ 000 depending on location and size . These boxes were predicted to increase the Steelers ' profits from $ 10 to $ 11 million per season over those at Three Rivers Stadium . The stadium also features 6 @,@ 600 club seats that include a restaurant and an indoor bar , at prices up to $ 2 @,@ 000 per person . For the 2010 season , season ticket prices for Panthers games range from a maximum of $ 295 per club seat with required donations per seat between $ 250 and $ 500 depending on location , to as low as $ 87 per seat with no required donation for upper end zone sections . Individual game ticket prices ranged from $ 30 to $ 65 depending on the seat location and the opponent . Attendance for Panthers games has varied from an average high of 59 @,@ 197 people per game throughout the 2003 season to a low of 43 @,@ 680 in 2007 . Most recently , Pitt averaged 48 @,@ 150 in home attendance during the 2015 season . 
 = = = Great Hall = = = 
 The Great Hall spans approximately 40 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m2 ) on the east side of the stadium and houses a collection of Steelers and Pittsburgh Panthers memorabilia . The Hall includes a timeline of the Steelers franchise 's major events , an oversized Steelers helmet hangs from the ceiling beside a video screen that shows entertainment for fans throughout game days . The Great Hall also features the actual lockers of several former Steelers , including Hall of Fame members Franco Harris , Joe Greene , and Bill Dudley . Six large Super Bowl trophies @-@ shaped display columns were erected and contain artifacts from each championship the Steelers have won including replica trophies . Two display columns are dedicated to the University of Pittsburgh and contain memorabilia from the Panthers ' teams . The floor is painted to resemble the field at Three Rivers Stadium , with the word " Steelers " painted in black over a gold background . University of Pittsburgh players are featured on two large murals within the Hall . Eight additional tile murals created by local high schools represent western Pennsylvania football history . In 2007 , the Great Hall was named the best concourse at an NFL stadium by writer Bill Evans , in an article for ESPN.com. 
 = = Seating expansion = = 
 The Steelers notified the Pittsburgh Stadium Authority in December 2010 of their intention to add up to 4 @,@ 000 seats to the lower southern end of the stadium . The plan would increase seating up to 69 @,@ 050 as soon as the 2012 NFL season . Seating was added in that section for the 2011 NHL Winter Classic which had an attendance of 68 @,@ 111 . The temporary seating was left in place for the 2010 – 11 NFL playoffs , with the AFC Championship game on January 23 having a record attendance of 66 @,@ 662 . 
 On April 12 , 2012 , the Steelers confirmed they would seek approval from the NFL to expand seating by 3 @,@ 000 . On May 19 , 2014 , after more than two years , the Steelers and the SEA came to an agreement to add about 3 @,@ 000 seats to the venue . After contractors surveyed the complex the final number of 2 @,@ 390 added seats with five additional suites including more parking , restrooms and concessions was determined in December 2014 to increase capacity to a total of 67 @,@ 890 . The seating was put in place by the summer of 2015 . 
 = = Transportation access = = 
 Heinz Field is located at Exit 1B of Interstate 279 within a mile of direct access to both Interstate 376 and Interstate 579 . The stadium also has dedicated elevated walkway access to the Allegheny Station of the Light Rail / Subway system . On Steelers and Pitt Panthers game days , access is also provided from Station Square parking facilities via the Gateway Clipper Fleet . 
 = Exclusion of judicial review in Singapore law = 
 Exclusion of judicial review has been attempted by the Parliament of Singapore to protect the exercise of executive power . Typically , this has been done though the insertion of finality or total ouster clauses into Acts of Parliament , or by wording powers conferred by Acts on decision @-@ makers subjectively . <unk> clauses are generally viewed restrictively by courts in the United Kingdom . The courts there have taken the view that such clauses are , subject to some exceptions , not effective in denying or restricting the extent to which the courts are able to exercise judicial review . In contrast , Singapore cases suggest that ouster clauses cannot prevent the High Court from exercising supervisory jurisdiction over the exercise of executive power where authorities have committed jurisdictional errors of law , but are effective against non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law . 
 A partial ouster or time limit clause specifies a restricted period , after which no remedy will be available . Such clauses are generally effective , unless the public authority has acted in bad faith . Similarly , the existence of bad faith entitles applicants to challenge decisions of authorities despite the existence of statutory provisions declaring such decisions to be conclusive evidence of certain facts . In the absence of bad faith , the courts will enforce conclusive evidence clauses . 
 In general , subjectively worded powers are also viewed restrictively by the Singapore courts . In Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1988 ) , the Court of Appeal took the view that an objective test applied to the exercise of discretion conferred by the Internal Security Act ( Cap . 143 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) ( " ISA " ) on the President and the Minister for Home Affairs concerning the detention without trial of persons thought to be a risk to national security . Hence , the jurisdiction of the High Court was not completely ousted , and it could objectively examine whether the relevant decision @-@ makers had exercised their powers properly . However , legislative amendments to the ISA in 1989 reversed the effect of Chng Suan Tze by mandating that the courts are to apply a subjective test to the exercise of the discretion , and by excluding judicial review except where there is doubt whether the procedures set out in the Act were adhered to . Nevertheless , the subjective test is only applicable in the context of the ISA , and the rule that an objective test applies to subjectively worded powers continues to apply where statutes other than the ISA are concerned . 
 = = Total ouster or finality clauses = = 
 An ouster clause in a statute is an attempt by the legislature to prevent an act or decision by a public authority from being challenged before the courts . Such clauses thus serve as a signal to decision @-@ makers that they may operate without fear of intervention by the courts at a later stage . One common kind of ouster clause is the total ouster or finality clause , which is inserted into a statute to indicate that the decision of a particular judge or tribunal is final and cannot be challenged by any court . 
 The main legal issue with ouster clauses is whether it is in fact possible to exclude the jurisdiction of the courts by the use of carefully drafted provisions . Thio Li @-@ ann has noted that " courts generally loathe ouster clauses as these contradict the rule of law whereby judges finally declare the legal limits of power and also as the individual 's ultimate recourse to the law is denied . Hence , courts try to construe these strictly to minimise their impact . In so doing , they may be going against the grain of parliamentary will . " 
 Ouster clauses are related to another administrative law concept : jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law . Traditionally , at common law , an ouster clause precludes a court from interfering with a decision made by a public authority which was acting within its jurisdiction , but committed a non @-@ jurisdictional error of law . However , the clause is not effective in preventing judicial review of errors of law that affect the jurisdiction of the authority to make the decision . For instance , in R. v. Medical Appeal Tribunal , ex parte Gilmore ( 1957 ) , Lord Justice of Appeal Alfred Denning said that it was " well settled that the remedy by certiorari is never to be taken away by any statute except by the most clear and explicit words . The word ' final ' is not enough . " The effect of such a clause is to make " the decision final on the facts , but not final on the law . Notwithstanding that the decision is by a statute made ' final , ' certiorari can still issue for excess of jurisdiction or for error of law on the face of the record . " However , in the light of developments in the law , such a differentiation may no longer be applicable depending on the judicial school of thought employed . 
 = = = UK position = = = 
 = = = = General rule = = = = 
 The starting point for analysing ouster clauses and their effects is the landmark decision Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission ( 1968 ) . In that case , the House of Lords is regarded as having abolished the distinction between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law when it was considering the effect of an ouster clause . In Anisminic , their Lordships were faced with a provision which stated that " the determination by the Commission of any application made to them under this Act shall not be called in question in any court of law " . In his judgment , Lord Reid differentiated between the arguments put forth by the parties . He held that while the respondents had argued that the provision clearly denied the court the ability to question the determination made by the Foreign Compensation Commission , the question at hand did not even involve the questioning of the purported determination and instead focused on whether there was in fact a valid determination . He pointed out that " if you seek to show that a determination is a nullity you are not questioning the purported determination – you are maintaining that it does not exist as a determination " . He then held it was a well @-@ established principle that a provision ousting the ordinary jurisdiction of the court must be construed strictly – if such a provision is reasonably capable of having two meanings , the meaning which preserves the ordinary jurisdiction of the court should be taken . If Parliament had intended to introduce a new kind of ouster clause that would protect such <unk> from being questioned , better drafting of the provision would be required . 
 In his judgment , Lord Reid also took the opportunity to deal with the issue of jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law . While recognizing the traditional understanding that jurisdictional errors of law are of no effect , his Lordship also stated that there are many cases where although the decision @-@ maker has jurisdiction to decide , the determination is also a nullity . He then gave a non @-@ exhaustive list of these cases : 
 The decision @-@ maker may have given its decision in bad faith . 
 It may have made a decision which it had no power to make . 
 It may have failed in the course of the inquiry to comply with the requirements of natural justice . 
 It may , in perfect good faith , have misconstrued the provisions giving it power to act so that it failed to deal with the question remitted to it and decided some question which was not remitted to it . 
 It may have refused to take into account something which it was required to take into account . 
 It may have based its decision on some matter which , under the legal provisions establishing the decision @-@ maker , it had no right to take into account . 
 However , what is of significance is that his Lordship did not expressly reject the effectiveness of such ouster clauses where the decision is valid . He recognized that " [ u ] <unk> such a provision protects every determination which is not a nullity " . Peter Cane has written that Lord Reid thus affirmed that " the ouster clause in question would be effective to prevent the award of a judicial review remedy only if the error of law was within jurisdiction " . However , it appears that Anisminic had defined the concept of jurisdictional error of law so broadly that it had made redundant the old divide between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors and had " led to the use of the word ' jurisdictional ' in a wide sense to cover all errors of law which entailed illegality " . The judgment thus had the effect of reducing the effect of statutory ouster clauses and expanding the limits of judicial review . 
 Later cases have treated Anisminic as implying that any action committed in error by an administrative agency or body is deemed to affect the jurisdiction of the body to carry out the action , and hence is reviewable by a court of law despite the ouster clause . The blurred distinction between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law was recognized and discussed in R. v. Lord President of the Privy Council , ex parte Page ( 1992 ) . The House of Lords reviewed the development of general principles of judicial review since Anisminic and concluded that the courts will intervene to ensure that the powers of public decision @-@ making bodies are exercised lawfully . In his judgment , Lord Browne @-@ Wilkinson referred to O 'Reilly v. <unk> ( 1983 ) and opined that " the decision in [ Anisminic ] rendered obsolete the distinction between errors of law on the face of the record and other errors of law by extending the doctrine of ultra vires . " Thus , an ouster clause is ineffective when the decision @-@ maker has acted unlawfully , whether the unlawfulness is jurisdictional or non @-@ jurisdictional in nature . This is because " Parliament had only conferred the decision @-@ making power on the basis that it was to be exercised on the correct legal basis : a misdirection in law in making the decision therefore rendered the decision ultra vires " . 
 The issue was revisited in the subsequent case of R. ( on the application of Cart ) v. Upper Tribunal ( 2011 ) . The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom disapproved of certain pronouncements by the lower courts which appeared to signal a return to the pre @-@ Anisminic position . According to Lord Dyson , this was not justified as " the importance of Anisminic is that it showed that a material error of law renders a decision a ' nullity ' so that the decision is in principle judicially reviewable " . He went on to state that " as a matter of principle , there is no justification for drawing the line at jurisdictional error " . In his opinion , any restrictions on judicial review require justification and , prima facie , such review should be available to challenge the legality of decisions of public bodies . 
 = = = = Exceptions = = = = 
 = = = = = Decisions under domestic laws ; court decisions = = = = = 
 Despite the <unk> of the ruling in Anisminic , it appears that there may be instances where the courts will still be bound by the jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional error of law divide . Cane has noted that there are three views . The first is that the distinction between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law is still relevant , while the second is that all errors of law go to jurisdiction . The third view takes a middle ground that allows for certain exceptions to the approach in the second view . 
 This middle ground approach was discussed in ex parte Page when their Lordships dealt with whether the court can intervene and review a decision made by a visitor ( overseer ) of a university . Lord Browne @-@ Wilkinson found that there were two reasons why the general rule that all errors of law are reviewable does not apply to visitors . First , the reason why courts can intervene in a normal case where the decision is considered ultra vires is because the law applicable to a decision made by such a body is the general law of the land . The visitor in ex parte Page did not apply the general law of the land but , rather , a " domestic law " ( the university 's charter and statutes ) of which he was the sole arbiter and over which the courts had no cognizance . Therefore , the visitor " cannot err in law in reaching [ his ] decision since the general law is not the applicable law " . 
 Secondly , there is a difference between the kinds of tribunals the decisions of which are being considered for judicial review . The source of this reasoning is the dissenting judgment of Lord Justice Geoffrey Lane in Pearlman v. Keepers and Governors of Harrow School ( 1978 ) . Lord Browne @-@ Wilkinson noted that this dissenting judgment was approved by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in South East Asia Fire Bricks Sdn . Bhd. v. Non @-@ Metallic Mineral Products Manufacturing Employees Union ( 1980 ) , and also by a majority in Re Racal Communications Ltd . ( 1980 ) . In the latter case , Lord Diplock highlighted that the decision in Anisminic only applies to administrative bodies or tribunals as there is a presumption that Parliament does not intend such bodies to be the final arbiters of questions of law . This can be contrasted with courts of law in respect of which such a presumption is not present . Instead , the presumption is that " where Parliament had provided that the decision of an inferior court was final and conclusive the High Court should not be astute to find that the inferior court 's decision on a question of law had not been made final and conclusive , thereby excluding the jurisdiction to review it . " 
 The views expressed by Lord Browne @-@ Wilkinson have been questioned by Cane . As regards the first reason , he has argued that the distinction between domestic law and general law is problematic . Such institutions may actually operate under a statutory framework which can result in a mixed issue of both general and domestic law arising . As such , the view taken by Lord Browne @-@ Wilkinson cannot be as cleanly applied as he had described it to be . Moreover , the actual scope of ex parte Page has yet to be resolved . There is some uncertainty as to the extent the exception applies to decision @-@ makers other than visitors . Where the second reason is concerned , Cane has noted that the correctness of the distinction between administrative tribunals and courts may be questionable as such an approach was " rejected by a Divisional Court and , apparently , by Lord Diplock himself . " 
 = = = = = Comprehensive tribunal system to correct errors of law = = = = = 
 Another exception can be found in the Cart judgment . Having affirmed the position taken in Anisminic , Lord Dyson then qualified his statement by emphasizing that " the scope of judicial review should be no more ( as well as no less ) than is proportionate and necessary for the maintaining of the rule of law " . On the facts of the case , he found it was neither proportionate nor necessary for the maintenance of the rule of law to require unrestricted judicial review . By enacting the Tribunals , Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 , Parliament had rationalized the system of administrative tribunals and had created the Upper Tribunal to hear appeals from lower tribunals , thus avoiding the ordinary courts from being overwhelmed by judicial review applications . As the system of tribunals provided ample opportunity for the correction of errors of law , this substantive policy reason precluded the need for all decisions of the Upper Tribunal to be subject to judicial review . Thus , judicial review would only be permitted from an Upper Tribunal decision if it would " raise some important point of principle or practice " or there was " some other compelling reason " . 
 = = = Singapore position = = = 
 The High Court case of Re Application by Yee Yut Ee ( 1978 ) suggests that the pre @-@ Anisminic position on ouster clauses applies in Singapore ; that is , the distinction between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law persists , and an ouster clause is only ineffective where a jurisdictional error of law has been committed . The ouster clause in question was section 46 of the Industrial Relations Act which states : 
 Subject to the provisions of this Act an award shall be final and conclusive , and no award or decision or order of a Court or the President or a referee shall be challenged , appealed against , reviewed , quashed , or called in question in any court and shall not be subject to certiorari , prohibition , mandamus or injunction in any court on any account . 
 The Court neither expressly rejected nor affirmed the abolition of the distinction in Anisminic and its effect on the effectiveness of ouster clauses . Instead , the Court cited UK authorities holding that ouster clauses are ineffective when there has been an absence of jurisdiction or an excess of jurisdiction on the part of the decision @-@ maker , a position which characterized the law prior to Anisminic . The Court did refer to Anisminic but only to observe that the House of Lords had held the ouster clause involved in that case to be irrelevant because a purported determination by the Foreign Compensation Commission which was legally incorrect could not be considered a real determination and had no effect at all . Ultimately , the Court quashed the order made by the Industrial Arbitration Court because it contained an error of law which had caused that court to exceed its jurisdiction . 
 In Stansfield Business International Pte . Ltd. v. Minister for Manpower ( 1999 ) , an employee fired for incompetence accused the plaintiff company of unfair dismissal and made representations to the Minister for Manpower under section 14 of the Employment Act to be reinstated . After investigating this claim , the Ministry came to the conclusion that the dismissal was made without just cause and recommended payment to the employee . Although section 14 ( 5 ) of the Employment Act provides that " the decision of the Minister on any representation made under this section shall be final and conclusive and shall not be challenged in any court " , the company applied for judicial review against the Minister 's decision . 
 The High Court held that the ouster clause in section 14 ( 5 ) of the Employment Act was ineffective as there had been a breach of the rules of natural justice in the process by which the Minister 's decision was reached . In his judgment , Justice Warren L. H. Khoo stated that the " broad principle " in Anisminic governing the matter had been restated in the case of South East Asia Fire Bricks as follows : 
 [ W ] hen words in a statute oust the power of the High Court to review decisions of an inferior tribunal by certiorari , they must be construed strictly ... they will not have the effect of ousting that power if the inferior tribunal has acted without jurisdiction or " if it has done or failed to do something in the course of the inquiry which is of such a nature that its decision is a nullity " : per Lord Reid at p . 171 [ of Anisminic ] . But if the inferior tribunal has merely made an error of law which does not affect its jurisdiction , and if its decision is not a nullity for some reason such as breach of the rules of natural justice , then the ouster will be effective . 
 In a 2010 lecture to students of the Singapore Management University School of Law , Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong briefly discussed the decision in Stansfield . He pointed out that Justice Khoo 's statements on Anisminic were obiter dicta because the decision had been " based on a breach of natural justice and not the doctrine of error of law " . He also considered an academic argument that an ouster clause may be inconsistent with Article 93 of the Singapore Constitution which vests the judicial power of Singapore in the courts . Chief Justice Chan stated that if this proposition was answered in the affirmative , it would follow that the supervisory jurisdiction of the courts cannot be ousted , and there would thus be no need for Singapore courts to draw the distinction between jurisdictional and non @-@ jurisdictional errors of law . Nevertheless , he highlighted the fact that he was not expressing an opinion on the issue . 
 = = Partial ouster or time limit clauses = = 
 Unlike a total ouster or finality clause which seeks to preclude judicial review entirely , a partial ouster or time limit clause specifies a restricted period of time after which no remedy will be available . Such clauses are generally effective , unless the public authority has acted in bad faith , in which case the decision impugned may be subject to judicial review even though the time permitted for challenging it has lapsed . 
 In Smith v. East <unk> Rural District Council ( 1956 ) , the House of Lords concluded by a majority that they could not impugn a partial ouster clause because , according to Viscount Simonds , " plain words must be given their plain meaning " , even though fraud on the part of the public authority had been alleged . In contrast , Lord Reid gave a dissenting opinion in which he doubted whether an order that had been obtained by corrupt or fraudulent means could be protected from being questioned in court . Despite the subsequent ruling in Anisminic , in R. v. Secretary of State for the Environment , ex parte Ostler ( 1976 ) the Court of Appeal of England and Wales applied Smith and upheld the validity of a partial ouster clause that gave the applicants six weeks to challenge a decision . Lord Denning , the Master of the Rolls , explained that upholding partial ouster clauses promoted the certainty of the executive 's actions . It would not be in the public interest if applicants could challenge decisions after the time limit for doing so had expired , as this would delay actions taken by the executive . As Lord Justice of Appeal Michael Mann put it in R. v. Cornwall County Council , ex parte Huntington ( 1992 ) : 
 The intention of Parliament when it uses an Anisminic clause is that questions as to validity are not excluded . When paragraphs such as those considered in ex p . Ostler are used , then the legislative intention is that questions as to invalidity may be raised on the specified grounds in the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner , but that otherwise the jurisdiction of the court is excluded in the interest of certainty . 
 = = <unk> evidence clauses = = 
 Provisions in statutes declaring that certain decisions by public authorities shall be conclusive evidence of some facts have been found by the Singapore courts to be valid , and therefore have the effect of preventing applicants from challenging most – but not all – of such decisions by way of judicial review . In <unk> v. Attorney @-@ General ( 1980 ) , the applicant alleged that the Collector of Land Revenue had compulsorily acquired more of his land that was required for public purposes pursuant to the Land Acquisition Act . The High Court held that the argument had to be rejected in the light of section 5 ( 3 ) of the Act , which provided that the President 's declaration that land was needed for a public purpose " shall be conclusive evidence that the land is needed for the purpose specified therein " . The Court said : " When the Government declares that a certain purpose is a public purpose it must be presumed that the Government is in possession of facts which induce the Government to declare that the purpose is a public purpose " . However , in Teng <unk> Holdings Pte . Ltd. v. Collector of Land Revenue ( 2006 ) , the Court clarified that section 5 ( 3 ) cannot prevent judicial intervention if there is evidence that the Government exercised its power of compulsory acquisition in bad faith . 
 = = <unk> worded powers = = 
 Another method employed by the legislature to restrict judicial review by the courts is to cast statutory language in a subjective form . A subjectively worded power suggests that the discretion to exercise this power rests entirely with the minister , statutory body or agency referred to , in which case the view might be taken that a court should not query how the power has been exercised . Examples of subjectively worded powers include powers that are stated to be exercisable " if the Minister so directs " or " as the Minister thinks fit " . However , as with ouster clauses , courts have traditionally displayed resistance to such provisions . In practice , they are subject to the normal grounds of judicial review set forth in the UK case Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service ( " the GCHQ case " , 1983 ) ; in other words , the exercise of power may be invalidated if determined to be illegal , irrational or procedurally improper . 
 = = = In the Internal Security Act = = = 
 = = = = Subjective or objective test ? = = = = 
 Section 8 ( 1 ) of the Internal Security Act ( " ISA " ) empowers the Minister for Home Affairs to detain a person without trial if the President " is satisfied " that this step is necessary because the person is , among other things , a threat to national security . Section 10 of the Act states that the Minister can direct that a detention order be suspended subject to conditions " as the Minister sees fit " , and can also revoke such a direction " if he is satisfied " that the detainee failed to observe any condition or if it is necessary in the public interest to do so . 
 In the seminal Court of Appeal decision Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1988 ) , the respondents submitted that the President 's discretion under section 8 ( 1 ) was subjective , and so was not open to review by the courts . The appellants argued that the discretion was objective , and thus a court of law could review the grounds on which the discretion had been exercised . The Court held that an objective test applied to the subjectively worded powers in sections 8 and 10 , and hence the exercise of these powers was normally <unk> on the GCHQ grounds of judicial review . In coming to this decision , it disapproved of a 1971 High Court decision , Lee Mau Seng v. Minister for Home Affairs , which had held to the contrary . While the Court 's views regarding the applicability of an objective test were obiter , later Singapore decisions have confirmed this as the correct approach . It gave several reasons for its decision . First , the reasoning in cases supporting a subjective test was found to be questionable , and , secondly , such a test was inconsistent with Article 12 ( 1 ) of the Constitution . Finally , the notion of a subjective or unfettered discretion was contrary to the rule of law and all powers had legal limits . 
 = = = = 1989 legislative intervention = = = = 
 On 25 January 1989 , the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ( Amendment ) Act 1989 and the Internal Security ( Amendment ) Act 1989 were passed by Parliament to confirm the applicability of the subjective test laid down in Lee Mau Seng as the law governing judicial review of the executive 's discretionary powers under the ISA . These Acts came into force on 27 and 30 January 1989 respectively . Speaking during the Second Reading of the constitutional amendment bill , Minister for Law S. Jayakumar said the Government was taking this step because it was of the view that the courts ' application of an objective test would amount to judicial usurpation of the executive 's functions in matters pertaining to national security , which the judiciary is ill @-@ equipped to deal with . Its stance was that the objective test would empower the courts to substitute their views on the proper exercise of discretionary power conferred under the ISA for that of the executive in contravention of the separation of powers doctrine . Moreover , the judicial process , unlike executive decision @-@ making , was not conducive to a swift response to national security threats . The courts , unlike the executive , lacked access to inadmissible evidence relevant to security matters , and judges did not possess the skill and knowledge of the security experts employed by the executive . Furthermore , the objective test did not find favour with the Government because it had been imported from the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth jurisdictions . Since the objective test had been formulated by foreign judges without consideration of Singapore 's local conditions , the Government was averse to the idea of allowing the objective test to shape the development of Singapore law on matters of national security under the ISA . 
 Jayakumar said that while the Government recognized that the subjective test enhanced the potential for abuse of executive discretion under the ISA , the best safeguard against such abuse of power was not to give the courts powers of judicial review because an unscrupulous government could still tamper with the composition of the courts to impair this judicial check . Instead , the crucial safeguard was for the electorate to make wise voting choices to put an honest and incorruptible government into power . 
 The amendments to the Constitution paved the way for intended amendments to the ISA . The new Article 149 ( 3 ) stated that if the issue of the validity of any act done or decision made by the President or the Minister for Home Affairs arose in any court proceedings commenced before or after 27 January 1989 , it was to be determined in accordance with any law enacted by Parliament for this purpose , and Article 93 of the Constitution could not be relied upon to invalidate such a law . Pursuant to Article 149 ( 3 ) , Parliament then inserted new sections into the ISA . In particular , section 8B ( 1 ) confirmed the judgment in Lee Mau Seng by declaring that " the law governing the judicial review of any decision made or act done in pursuance of any power conferred upon the President or the Minister by the provisions of this Act shall be the same as was applicable and declared in Singapore on the 13th day of July 1971 ; and no part of the law before , on or after that date of any other country in the Commonwealth relating to judicial review shall apply " . In addition , section 8B ( 1 ) was made subject to section 8B ( 2 ) , which seeks to oust judicial review in any court of any act done or decision made by the President or the Minister under the ISA , save where there is any question which relates to compliance with any procedural requirement of the ISA governing such acts or decisions . Jayakumar said in Parliament that section 8B ( 2 ) sought not only to prevent the courts from questioning the soundness of the subjective test , but also to anticipate any legal challenges on the basis that the subjective test laid down in Lee Mau Seng only applies to the judicial review of detention orders and not to other acts or decisions under the ISA by the President or Minister , such as suspension directions and revocations of such directions . 
 = = = = Operation of subjectively worded powers in the ISA after the 1989 amendments = = = = 
 The 1989 amendments to the ISA were challenged before the High Court in Teo Soh Lung v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1989 ) . Justice Frederick Arthur Chua held that sections 8B ( 1 ) and 8B ( 2 ) of the ISA govern judicial review in the context of that Act , and thus preclude any consideration of the legal position laid down in the obiter remarks of the Court of Appeal in Chng Suan Tze . Therefore , applying the subjective test , the respondents ' burden of justifying the legality of the applicant 's detention was discharged as the respondents had produced a valid detention order and evidence of the subjective satisfaction of the President , acting on the advice of the Cabinet , that the applicant was a risk to national security . 
 The applicant then appealed to the Court of Appeal . The Court of Appeal construed section 8B ( 1 ) in accordance with the clear legislative intention expressed through the plain wording of the provision . It held that the provision reinstates the legal position laid down in Lee Mau Seng as the law governing judicial review of decisions made or acts done pursuant to the executive 's powers under the ISA . In order to determine the law on judicial review of the exercise of executive discretion under the ISA , it is necessary to ascertain the exact decision laid down in Lee Mau Seng . However , the Court declined to opine whether the Lee Mau Seng decision meant that a detention order cannot be challenged on the basis that it was made for reasons completely outside the scope of the ISA . This was because on the facts of the case it had not been established that the applicant was re @-@ detained for reasons not contemplated by section 8 ( 1 ) of the ISA and completely unrelated to national security . Notably , the Court did not decide whether section 8B ( 2 ) of the ISA precludes it from reviewing a detention order shown to have been made for purposes other than national security , or whether the 1989 amendments to the ISA are outside the scope of the legislative power conferred on Parliament by the amended Article 149 of the Constitution . 
 = = = In other statutes = = = 
 Due to the 1989 amendments to the Constitution and the ISA , the exercise of the subjectively worded powers in the ISA is not judicially reviewable by the courts , except when there has been some non @-@ compliance with the procedures set out in the Act . On the other hand , the objective test laid down in Chng Suan Tze continues to be the law governing judicial review of the exercise of executive discretion under subjectively worded provisions in statutes other than the ISA . In Yong Vui Kong v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2011 ) , the Court of Appeal opined that the 1989 legislative amendments did not completely reverse Chng Suan Tze . Apart from restricting the courts ' supervisory jurisdiction to reviewing decisions made under the ISA for procedural impropriety , Parliament did not disturb the principle laid down in Chng Suan Tze that the notion of a subjective or unfettered discretion – that is , power without legal limits – is contrary to the rule of law , which demands that courts should be able to examine the exercise of discretionary power . Since Parliament did not undermine this principle when it legislatively reversed Chng Suan Tze , it should be taken to have implicitly endorsed the principle . 
 In Kamal Jit Singh v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1992 ) , the statutory provision in question was section 30 of the Criminal Law ( Temporary Provisions ) Act ( " CLTPA " ) , which states as follows : 
 Whenever the Minister [ of Home Affairs ] is satisfied with respect to any person , whether the person is at large or in custody , that the person has been associated with activities of a criminal nature , the Minister may , with the consent of the Public Prosecutor — 
 ( a ) if he is satisfied that it is necessary that the person be detained in the interests of public safety , peace and good order , by order under his hand direct that the person be detained for any period not exceeding 12 months from the date of the order ; or 
 ( b ) if he is satisfied that it is necessary that the person be subject to the supervision of the police , by order direct that the person be subject to the supervision of the police for any period not exceeding 3 years from the date of the order . [ Emphasis added . ] 
 The Court of Appeal suggested that , in the light of Chng Suan Tze , the validity of an order for preventive detention made by the Minister under section 30 of the CLTPA is dependent on the objective satisfaction of the Minister . Moreover , in Re Wong Sin Yee ( 2007 ) , which also involved judicial review of an applicant 's detention under section 30 of the CLTPA , the High Court , following the decision in Chng Suan Tze , held that the absence of the need to establish a jurisdictional or precedent fact meant that the scope of judicial review as regards the exercise of the Minister 's discretion under section 30 was limited to the GCHQ grounds of judicial review . The Court thus applied an objective test to the subjectively worded powers in section 30 ; if it Court had applied a subjective test , it would have deferred to the subjective satisfaction of the Minister that the detention was in the interests of public safety , peace and good order . 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission [ 1968 ] UKHL 6 , [ 1969 ] 2 A.C. 147 , House of Lords ( UK ) . 
 Re Application by Yee Yut Ee [ 1977 – 1978 ] S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 490 , High Court ( Singapore ) . 
 Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs [ 1988 ] SGCA 16 , [ 1988 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 525 , Court of Appeal ( Singapore ) , archived from the original on 24 December 2011 . 
 Teo Soh Lung v. Minister for Home Affairs [ 1989 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 461 , H.C. ( Singapore ) ( " Teo Soh Lung ( H.C. ) " ) . 
 Teo Soh Lung v. Minister for Home Affairs [ 1990 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 347 , C.A. ( Singapore ) ( " Teo Soh Lung ( C.A. ) " ) . 
 R. v. Lord President of the Privy Council , ex parte Page [ 1992 ] UKHL 12 , [ 1993 ] A.C. 682 , H.L. ( UK ) . 
 R. ( Cart ) v. Upper Tribunal [ 2011 ] <unk> 28 , [ 2012 ] 1 A.C. 663 , Supreme Court ( UK ) . 
 Yong Vui Kong v. Attorney @-@ General [ 2011 ] SGCA 9 , [ 2011 ] 2 S.L.R. 1189 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Cane , Peter ( 2004 ) , " Substantive Review " , An Introduction to Administrative Law ( 4th ed . ) , Oxford : Clarendon Press , pp. 228 – 261 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 926898 @-@ 6 . 
 Leyland , Peter ; Anthony , Gordon ( 2009 ) , " Express and Implied Limits on Judicial Review : Ouster and Time Limit Clauses , the Prerogative Power , Public Interest Immunity " , Textbook on Administrative Law ( 6th ed . ) , Oxford ; New York , N.Y. : Oxford University Press , pp. 392 – 437 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 921776 @-@ 2 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 10 May 2013 . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Harding , Andrew J. ( 1980 ) , " Jurisdictional Theory in the Melting Pot : South East Asia Fire Bricks Sdn . Bhd. v. Non @-@ Metallic Mineral Products Manufacturing Employees Union and Others " , Malaya Law Review 22 : 285 – 292 . 
 Todd , Paul ( 1977 ) , " Review of Ouster Clauses in Administrative Law " , Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly 28 ( 3 ) : 274 – 282 . 
 Wade , H [ enry ] W [ <unk> ] R [ <unk> ] ( 1969 ) , " Constitutional and Administrative Aspects of the Anisminic Case " , Law Quarterly Review 85 : 198 – 212 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Craig , P [ aul ] P. ( 1995 ) , " Jurisdiction , Judicial Control , and Agency Autonomy " , in Loveland , Ian , A Special Relationship ? American Influences on Public Law in the UK , Oxford : Clarendon Press , p . 173 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Forsyth , Christopher ( 1998 ) , " ' The <unk> of <unk> ' – <unk> , Conceptual Reasoning and the Rule of Law " , in Forsyth , Christopher ; Hare , Ivan , The Golden <unk> and the Crooked Cord : Essays on Public Law in Honour of Sir William Wade QC , Oxford : Clarendon Press , pp. 141 – 160 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Wade , [ Henry ] William [ Rawson ] ; Forsyth , Christopher ( 2009 ) , " Restriction of Remedies " , Administrative Law ( 10th ed . ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press , pp. 582 – 634 at 610 – 631 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 923161 @-@ 4 . 
 = Maryland Route 228 = 
 Maryland Route 228 ( MD 228 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known as Berry Road , the state highway runs 6 @.@ 88 miles ( 11 @.@ 07 km ) from MD 210 in Accokeek east to U.S. Route 301 ( US 301 ) and MD 5 Business in Waldorf . MD 228 , which is a four @-@ lane divided highway for its entire length , is a major commuter route between southwestern Prince George 's County and northern Charles County . In conjunction with MD 210 , the state highway serves as an alternative to US 301 and MD 5 as a route to Washington from Southern Maryland . MD 228 also serves as part of the connection , again via MD 210 , between Waldorf and Indian Head Naval Surface Warfare Center . 
 MD 228 did not originally connect Waldorf with Accokeek ; instead , the state highway headed west from Waldorf and turned south near the Prince George 's – Charles county line , following what is now MD 229 to Pomfret . The state highway was built from Pomfret to Berry in the late 1920s . MD 228 was completed between Berry and Waldorf in the mid @-@ 1930s . MD 228 was expanded to a divided highway in Charles County and extended into Prince George 's County in the mid @-@ 1990s . In 2000 , the Prince George 's County section of the state highway was reconstructed as a divided highway west to the MD 210 intersection , which was rebuilt as the second continuous @-@ flow intersection in the U.S. 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 228 begins at a continuous @-@ flow intersection with MD 210 ( Indian Head Highway ) in Accokeek . Three lanes leave southbound MD 210 and intersect northbound MD 210 . A short distance to the southeast , those lanes intersect a single lane from westbound MD 228 to southbound MD 210 ; that lane intersects northbound MD 210 to the northwest . The two lanes from westbound MD 228 seamlessly join northbound MD 210 , while a single lane ramp from northbound MD 210 joins eastbound MD 228 . The auxiliary lanes from the continuous @-@ flow intersection merge into the state highway 's four @-@ lane divided profile before intersecting Manning Road East ( unsigned MD <unk> ) , which serves a shopping center to the west and the historic home Bellevue to the east . 
 MD 228 heads east through a forested area , intersecting Bealle Hill Road ( unsigned MD <unk> ) immediately before crossing over Mattawoman Creek into Charles County . On the east side of the stream crossing , the state highway intersects MD 229 ( <unk> Road ) , the old alignment of MD 228 . MD 228 continues east between residential subdivisions along the northern tier of Charles County . The state highway crosses Piney Branch , a tributary of Mattawoman Creek , and passes the highway 's old alignment of Bunker Hill Road to the south in the hamlet of Berry . MD 228 curves to the southeast after passing Ironwood Drive and enters Waldorf . At Western Parkway , a county @-@ maintained suburban boulevard that parallels US 301 to the west through Waldorf , MD 228 gains continuous right @-@ turn lanes in both directions and enters a commercial area . The state highway reaches its eastern terminus at US 301 ( Robert Crain Highway ) . The roadway continues on the east side of the intersection as MD 5 Business ( Leonardtown Road ) , which heads southeast through the center of Waldorf before intersecting MD 5 on the east side of town . 
 MD 228 is a part of the main National Highway System for its entire length . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 228 originally included <unk> Road and Berry Road east of the highway 's modern intersection with MD 229 . The two named roads met at a defunct intersection with Bealle Hill Road south of Mattawoman Creek . A 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide gravel road was constructed from MD 227 in Pomfret to <unk> in 1925 and 1926 . The highway was extended to the crossing of Piney Branch in 1927 and to Berry in 1928 . MD 228 was constructed west from MD 3 ( later US 301 and now MD 925 ) to Hamilton Road ( now Western Parkway ) in 1933 . The state highway was completed in 1936 when the gap between Berry and Hamilton Road was filled . The Berry Road portion of MD 228 was reconstructed in 1958 and 1959 , leaving behind Bunker Hill Road as an old alignment . 
 The reconstruction of MD 228 in its modern form and course began in the early 1990s . The state highway was expanded to a divided highway from US 301 west to <unk> Road in Berry in 1993 . MD 228 was extended into Prince George 's County on a pair of new bridges over Mattawoman Creek in 1995 . The divided highway extended to just west of a new intersection with Bealle Hill Road ; the state highway continued west as a two @-@ lane road to a standard intersection with MD 210 . <unk> Road was renumbered as MD 229 by 1997 . The MD 228 divided highway was extended west to MD 210 and the MD 228 – MD 210 junction was reconstructed as a continuous @-@ flow intersection in 2000 . That intersection became the second continuous @-@ flow intersection in the U.S. 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD <unk> is the designation for a 0 @.@ 16 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 26 km ) section of Bealle Hill Road immediately to the north of the highway 's intersection with MD 228 just west of Mattawoman Creek in Accokeek . 
 = 2nd Army ( Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) = 
 The 2nd Army ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : 2 @.@ armija ) was a Royal Yugoslav Army formation commanded by Armijski đeneral Dragoslav Miljković that opposed the German @-@ led Axis invasion of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in April 1941 during World War II . It consisted of three infantry divisions and one horsed cavalry regiment . It formed part of the 2nd Army Group , and was responsible for the defence of the Yugoslav – Hungarian border along the Drava river from Slatina to the Danube . 
 The 2nd Army was not directly attacked during the first few days after the invasion commenced , but attacks on its flanks from 10 April resulted in successive orders to withdraw to the lines of the Danube and then the Sava . On 11 April , the Hungarians crossed the border in the sector for which the 2nd Army had been responsible , but the Yugoslavs were already withdrawing and the Hungarians faced almost no resistance . On the same day , the German 8th Panzer Division , driving on Belgrade into the flank of the 2nd Army , had effectively routed the entire 2nd Army Group . The disintegration of the 2nd Army as a combat force was accelerated by fifth column activities and desertion by many of its Croat soldiers . The Germans captured Belgrade on 12 April . Remnants of the 2nd Army continued to resist along the line of the Sava on 14 April , and the headquarters of the 2nd Army was rebuffed when it contacted the Germans in an attempt to negotiate a separate ceasefire . On 14 – 15 April , tens of thousands of Yugoslav soldiers were captured . The Germans closed on Sarajevo , capturing it on 15 April , and accepted the unconditional surrender of the Royal Yugoslav Army on 17 April , which came into effect at 12 : 00 the following day . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The 2nd Army was commanded by Armijski đeneral Dragoslav Miljković , and his chief of staff was Brigadni đeneral Bogdan <unk> . It was organised and mobilised on a geographic basis from the 2nd Army District , which was divided into divisional districts , each of which was subdivided into regimental regions . The 2nd Army consisted of : 
 10th Infantry Division Bosanska 
 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska 
 30th Infantry Division Osiječka 
 76th Cavalry Regiment ( horse ) 
 Its support units included the 76th Artillery Regiment , the 2nd Anti @-@ Aircraft Battalion , the 2nd Army Anti @-@ Aircraft Company , and a border guard battalion at Subotica . The 3rd Air Reconnaissance Group comprising sixteen Breguet 19s was attached from the Royal Yugoslav Air Force and was based at Staro <unk> just east of Brod . 
 = = Deployment = = 
 The 2nd Army was part of the 2nd Army Group , which was responsible for the eastern section of the Yugoslav – Hungarian border , with the 2nd Army in the Baranya and Slavonia regions between Slatina and the Danube , and the 1st Army in the Bačka region between the Danube and the Tisza . On the left flank of the 2nd Army was the 4th Army of the 1st Army Group , which was responsible for the defence of the Yugoslav – Hungarian border west of Slatina . The boundary with the 4th Army ran from just east of Slatina through Požega towards Banja Luka . The Yugoslav defence plan saw the 2nd Army deployed from the boundary with the 4th Army to the Danube , with two divisions along the line of the Drava and one division in depth . Of the formations of the 2nd Army , the 10th Infantry Division Bosanska and the 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska were partly mobilised , and the 30th Infantry Division Osiječka had only commenced mobilisation . The deployment of the 2nd Army from west to east was : 
 17th Infantry Division Vrbaska south of the Drava from just east of Slatina to Valpovo 
 30th Infantry Division Osiječka astride the Drava from Valpovo to the confluence with the Danube , centred on Osijek 
 10th Infantry Division Bosanska in depth on the right flank , behind the Vuka river , centred on Vinkovci 
 The 33rd Infantry Division Lička , which was under the direct command of the General Headquarters of the VKJ , was deployed further south behind the Sava river , centred on Doboj . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The 2nd Army faced the Hungarian 3rd Army , and during the first few days after the commencement of the invasion , there were exchanges of fire with Hungarian border guards , but the 2nd Army faced no direct attacks . Neither the 2nd Army nor the Hungarians were ready for full @-@ scale fighting , as they were still mobilising and deploying their forces . On 9 April , due to events in other parts of Yugoslavia , the 6th Army on the right flank of the 2nd Army Group was ordered to withdraw south of the Danube and deploy on a line facing east to defend against an attack from the direction of Sofia , Bulgaria . The headquarters of the 2nd Army issued orders to evacuate Baranja and reinforce the left flank . 
 The following day , the situation deteriorated significantly when the German XLI Motorised Corps crossed the Yugoslav – Romanian border into the Yugoslav Banat and struck the 6th Army , halting its withdrawal and disrupting its ability to organise a coherent defence behind the Danube . Also on 10 April , the main thrust of the XLVI Motorised Corps of the 2nd Army , consisting of the 8th Panzer Division leading the 16th Motorised Infantry Division crossed the Drava at Barcs in the 4th Army sector on the left of the 2nd Army . The 8th Panzer Division turned southeast between the Drava and Sava rivers , and meeting almost no resistance and with strong air support , had reached the left flank of the 2nd Army at Slatina by evening , despite poor roads and bad weather . 
 Later that day , as the situation was becoming increasingly desperate throughout the country , Dušan Simović , who was both the Prime Minister and Yugoslav Chief of the General Staff , broadcast the following message : 
 All troops must engage the enemy wherever encountered and with every means at their disposal . Don 't wait for direct orders from above , but act on your own and be guided by your judgement , initiative , and conscience . 
 The 2nd Army was able to evacuate Baranja and organised a defence of the left flank of the 2nd Army Group , now threatened by the 8th Panzer Division , but Croat reservists began to desert their units due to the fifth column activities of the fascist Ustaše and their sympathisers . This significantly reducing the combat power of the 2nd Army . By the evening of 10 April , the 2nd Army Group was ordered to withdraw from this line and form a defensive line behind the Sava , from Debrc to the confluence with the Vrbas river , for which one or two days would be needed . On the night of 10 / 11 April , the whole 2nd Army Group continued its withdrawal , but units of the 2nd Army that included significant numbers of Croats began to dissolve . 
 At dawn on 11 April , Hungarian forces , consisting of the Mobile , IV and V Corps of Altábornagy ( Lieutenant General ) Elemér Gorondy @-@ Novák 's 3rd Army , crossed the Yugoslav border north of Osijek and near Subotica , overcame Yugoslav border guards and advanced on Subotica and Palić . The XLVI Motorised Corps continued to push east south of the Drava , with the 8th Panzer Division capturing Našice , Osijek on the Drava , and Vukovar on the Danube , followed by the 16th Motorised Infantry Division which advanced east of Našice , despite bridge demolitions and poor roads . The 8th Panzer Division had effectively routed the 2nd Army Group by 11 April . On the same day , the 3rd Air Reconnaissance Group Breguet 19s were flown from Staro <unk> to Bijeljina . The following day , Messerschmitt Bf 110s of I Group of the 26th Heavy Fighter Wing ( German : Zerstörergeschwader 26 , ZG 26 ) destroyed the 3rd Air Reconnaissance Group aircraft when they swept over the airfield in one of the most effective attacks of the campaign . On the night of 11 / 12 April , the 8th Panzer Division captured Sremska Mitrovica on the Sava at 02 : 30 , after two important bridges over the Sava were captured intact . The 8th Panzer Division then destroyed a bridge over the Danube at Bogojevo , and advanced on Lazarevac about 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) south of Belgrade . These advances delayed the withdrawal of the 2nd Army Group south of the Sava . 
 = = Fate = = 
 By 12 April , the withdrawal of the 2nd Army Group was being threatened from the left flank , with 2nd Army being described by the Polish historian Andrzej <unk> as having " no combat importance at all " . On the far right flank , 6th Army attempted to regroup while being pressed by the 11th Panzer Division as it drove towards Belgrade . West of Belgrade , remnants of the 2nd Army Group tried to establish a line along the Sava , but XLVI Motorised Corps had already captured the bridges . Elements of the 8th Panzer Division captured Zemun without a fight . On 12 April , the 1st Army 's 3rd Cavalry Division counter @-@ attacked on the right flank of the 2nd Army at Šabac and pushed the Germans back across the Sava . The Ustaše had captured Brod without German assistance , but 2nd Army units recaptured the town and destroyed the bridge over the Sava . The Hungarians occupied Baranja without facing resistance . 
 On the evening of 12 April , elements of the SS Motorised Infantry Division Reich , under command of XLI Motorised Corps crossed the Danube in pneumatic boats and captured Belgrade without resistance . About the same time , most of the elements of XLVI Motorised Corps that were approaching Belgrade from the west were redirected away from the capital , but part of the 8th Panzer Division continued their thrust to capture the Sava bridges to the west of Belgrade , and entered the city during the night . The rest of the 8th Panzer Division turned southeast and drove towards Valjevo to link up with the left flank of the First Panzer Group southwest of Belgrade . The 16th Motorised Infantry Division was redirected south across the Sava , and advanced toward Zvornik . 
 On 13 and 14 April , the 8th Panzer Division led a southward thrust towards Sarajevo , where both the Yugoslav Supreme Command and the headquarters of the 2nd Army were located , and during that day the 2nd Army asked the Germans for a separate ceasefire agreement , but were rebuffed , as by this stage only the unconditional surrender of the whole Yugoslav Army would be considered by the Germans . On 14 and 15 April , tens of thousands of Yugoslav soldiers were taken prisoner by the Germans during their drive on Sarajevo in the centre of the country , including 30 @,@ 000 around Zvornik and 6 @,@ 000 around Doboj . On 15 April , the 8th Panzer Division approached Sarajevo from the east as the 14th Panzer Division entered it from the west , and the 2nd Army surrendered . After a delay in locating appropriate signatories for the surrender document , the Yugoslav Supreme Command unconditionally surrendered in Belgrade effective at 12 : 00 on 18 April . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals and papers = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = New York State Route 292 = 
 New York State Route 292 ( NY 292 ) is a short state highway in the Hudson Valley of New York in the United States , bridging Putnam and Dutchess counties . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 311 in the town of Patterson , and the northern terminus is at a junction with NY 55 in the town of Pawling . NY 292 traverses mostly rural areas as it heads northwestward through Patterson and Pawling . Along the way , NY 292 passes along the southern and western edges of Whaley Lake . 
 The portion of NY 292 between West Patterson and Whaley Lake originated as a dirt road named the Patterson – Dutchess County Line Road . This road was reconstructed in 1919 and became part of NY 39 , a highway extending from Poughkeepsie to Patterson by way of West Pawling , in the 1920s . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the segment of NY 39 from East Fishkill to West Patterson was incorporated into the new NY 52 . By the end of the 1930s , the portion of NY 52 from Stormville to West Patterson was renumbered to NY 216 . In 1970 , NY 216 was truncated to its current length and NY 216 's former alignment from West Pawling to Patterson was renumbered to NY 292 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 292 begins at NY 311 near the hamlet of Patterson . It heads west initially , paralleling the Putnam – Dutchess county line as it passes south of the Patterson Veteran Memorial Park and intersects County Route 63 ( CR 63 ) . It crosses a minor stream and briefly turns towards the southwest . After passing through the hamlet of West Patterson , NY 292 turns northwest , crosses the stream once again , and enters Dutchess County . Just north of the county line in the Pawling hamlet of Holmes , the route intersects with CR 30 . Near Holmes , the highway heads due north and passes between two small ponds . 
 The route continues onward , traveling north through a rural , wooded area of Pawling with little development before curving west to pass along the southern edge of Whaley Lake . At the southwestern tip of the lake , NY 292 turns north , paralleling the western and northern shores of the lake as it heads toward the hamlet of West Pawling . North of the lake in West Pawling , NY 292 turns east onto a former routing of NY 55 for a short distance before ending at modern NY 55 in the northwest corner of Pawling . 
 = = History = = 
 Part of the highway was once part of the Patterson – Dutchess County Line Road , a 1 @.@ 61 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 59 km ) dirt road that extended from Banks Corner to Whaley Lake . Plans were finalized in 1919 to rebuild the previously inadequate road ; the project cost an estimated $ 43 @,@ 500 ( $ 517 @,@ 298 2007 USD ) , including $ 15 @,@ 225 ( $ 181 @,@ 054 2007 USD ) of Putnam County 's portion of the construction . In May 1919 , the Danbury News reported , " On the road between Sodom and Pawling turn left and run through Patterson and continue to West Patterson . From West Patterson a new road about one and one @-@ half miles in length is under construction which connects with a good macadam road passing Whaley Pond and running to Stonehouse , thence continuing ... to Newburgh . " The new road was completed in November of that year . 
 NY 292 was originally part of NY 39 in the 1920s , which ran from Patterson to Poughkeepsie via West Patterson and East Fishkill . In the 1930 renumbering , the portion of NY 39 between East Fishkill and the western fringe of Patterson was redesignated as part of the new NY 52 . Between Patterson and NY 22 , old NY 39 was renumbered to NY 311 . 
 NY 52 was realigned c . 1937 to follow its current alignment between Stormville and Lake Carmel . The former routing of NY 52 between Stormville and Patterson became part of NY 216 . The route remained unchanged until January 1 , 1970 , when NY 216 was truncated to its current eastern terminus in Poughquag . As part of the truncation , its former alignment from West Pawling to Patterson was renumbered to NY 292 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Siege of Pensacola ( 1707 ) = 
 The Siege of Pensacola was two separate attempts in 1707 by English @-@ supported Creek Indians to capture the town and fortress of Pensacola , then one of two major settlements ( the other was St. Augustine ) in Spanish Florida . The attacks , part of Queen Anne 's War ( the North American theater of the War of the Spanish Succession ) , resulted in the burning of the town , and caused most of its Indian population to flee , although the fort withstood repeated attacks . 
 The first siege , in August 1707 , resulted in the destruction of the town , but Fort San Carlos de Austria successfully resisted the onslaught . In late November 1707 a second expedition arrived , and made unsuccessful attacks on three consecutive nights before withdrawing . Pensacola Governor Don Sebastián de Moscoso , whose garrison was depleted by disease , recruited convicted criminals to assist in the fort 's defense . 
 = = Background = = 
 English and Spanish colonization efforts in southeastern North America began coming into conflict as early as the middle of the 17th century . The Spanish population of Florida at the time was fairly small . Since its founding in the 16th century , the Spanish had set up a network of missions whose primary purpose was to pacify the local Indian population and convert them to Roman Catholicism . The founding in 1670 by the English of Charles Town ( present @-@ day Charleston , South Carolina ) in the recently established ( 1663 ) Province of Carolina heightened tensions . By the early 18th century Carolina traders like Anthony Dodsworth and Thomas Nairne had established alliances with Creek Indians in the upper watersheds of rivers draining into the Gulf of Mexico , who they supplied with arms and purchased slaves and animal pelts from . These traders penetrated into Spanish Florida , leading to raiding and reprisal expeditions on both sides . 
 In 1700 , Carolina 's governor , Joseph Blake , threatened the Spanish that English claims to Pensacola , established by the Spanish in 1698 , would be enforced . Pierre Le Moyne d 'Iberville , the French founder of Mobile , in January 1702 warned the Spanish commander at Pensacola that he should properly arm the Apalachee Indians and engage in a vigorous defense against English incursions into Spanish territory . D 'Iberville even offered equipment and supplies for the purpose . However , an attempt at a punitive expedition against the Creek resulted in a rout of the Spanish and their Apalachee allies in October 1702 , shortly before news of war declarations bringing England into the War of the Spanish Succession arrived . After a failed English assault on St. Augustine , Spanish mission towns were severely reduced by numerous raids by Carolina @-@ led Indians against the Spanish mission network from 1703 to 1706 . A French @-@ organized 1706 expedition against Charles Town was a failure but motivated Carolina authorities to again target the Spanish at Pensacola and the French at Mobile . Nairne proposed a major expedition after the attack on Charles Town , intending to recruit as many as 1 @,@ 500 Indians to capture Mobile , but political divisions in Carolina prevented execution of the plan . 
 = = First siege = = 
 In 1707 , Pensacola was under the command of Don Sebastián de Moscoso . The exact size of his garrison in 1707 is not known . The authorized strength of the garrison was 220 , but it rarely reached that strength owing to the difficulty in recruiting soldiers for what was viewed as a highly undesirable posting and a fairly high rate of desertion . Moscoso reported in 1708 that the garrison numbered about 100 , having been reduced by the events of 1707 . The garrison was housed in Fort San Carlos de Austria , a wooden stockade fort built in 1698 . 
 Extant records do not describe the composition of the forces that attacked Pensacola in August 1707 beyond " several hundred <unk> and a few South Carolina traders " . The siege began on August 12 with the arrival of a band of 20 to 30 Indians , who began terrorizing the Indians living in the town outside the fort . They took prisoners ( including some women and children ) and began burning houses . Governor Moscoso fired one of the fort 's cannons , scattering the attackers ; some of their captives managed to escape to the fort in the confusion . Two days later , ten men sent out of the fort to do laundry disappeared . On August 14 an estimated 300 Indians appeared before the fort and engaged it in a battle lasting several hours . The next day the attack resumed , as did the pillaging of the town . Activity quieted down until the 18th , when an English flag was raised over a house near the fort . This prompted Moscoso to open fire from the fort , beginning a battle that raged until dark . That day , the attackers burned down the rest of the town , and Moscoso 's men had to work to prevent the fort from burning as well . 
 This marked the end of active assaults on the fort . However , the area beyond the range of the fort 's guns was unsafe for at least the next month ; a number of people disappeared after they ventured too far from its vicinity . 
 = = Second siege = = 
 The second siege began with the arrival on November 27 of a contingent of about 20 Carolina traders and 300 Creeks , primarily <unk> and <unk> . On that day , an Englishman ( unidentified in Spanish reports , but possibly Thomas Nairne ) brought a demand for surrender written in English . Since none of the Spaniards could read it , he was sent away , and the demand was eventually transmitted orally by a French Huguenot . Moscoso rejected the demand , even though his garrison was depleted by disease . The besiegers began an ineffectual attack on the fort around midnight which lasted until daybreak , at which point they delivered a final surrender demand . Moscoso again refused . In order to supplement his forces , he successfully recruited convicts being held in the fort 's guardhouse to participate in the defense , offering them freedom and money for their service . During each of the next two nights the besiegers renewed their attacks on the fort , without significant effect . During the night of November 29 / 30 , one of the leading Creek chiefs was killed . This apparently broke the besiegers ' morale , for the siege was lifted the following morning . The attackers were reported to have suffered significant casualties . 
 Word of the attacking force had reached the French at Mobile on November 24 . Governor Jean @-@ Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville raised a force of 100 Frenchmen and 400 Indians . They reached Pensacola on December 8 , only to learn that the siege had been lifted a week earlier . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 These attacks were the last major assaults on Pensacola in the war , although there continued to be minor skirmishes and kidnappings . Most of the Indians that fled during the sieges never returned , reducing Pensacola to little more than its garrison . Governor Bienville learned from a Spaniard who had escaped English hands that Mobile was also being targeted for attack . Although he improved Mobile 's defenses in 1708 , the outpost was never attacked , although a village of Mobile Indians was attacked in May 1709 . 
 A French force from Mobile captured Pensacola from the Spanish in 1719 , during the War of the Quadruple Alliance , but it was returned to Spain after the war . The location of Fort San Carlos de Austria is now occupied by Fort Barrancas , a National Historic Landmark whose construction began late in the 18th century . 
 = Ottawa dialect = 
 Ottawa ( or Odawa ) is a dialect of the Ojibwe language , spoken by the Ottawa people in southern Ontario in Canada , and northern Michigan in the United States . Descendants of migrant Ottawa speakers live in Kansas and Oklahoma . The first recorded meeting of Ottawa speakers and Europeans occurred in 1615 when a party of Ottawas encountered explorer Samuel de Champlain on the north shore of Georgian Bay . Ottawa is written in an alphabetic system using Latin letters , and is known to its speakers as Nishnaabemwin " speaking the native language " or <unk> " speaking Ottawa " . 
 Ottawa is one of the Ojibwe dialects that has undergone the most language change , although it shares many features with other dialects . The most distinctive change is a pervasive pattern of vowel syncope that deletes short vowels in many words , resulting in significant changes in their pronunciation . This and other innovations in pronunciation , in addition to changes in word structure and vocabulary , differentiate Ottawa from other dialects of Ojibwe . 
 Like other Ojibwe dialects , Ottawa grammar includes animate and inanimate noun gender , subclasses of verbs that are dependent upon gender , combinations of prefixes and suffixes that are connected with particular verb subclasses , and complex patterns of word formation . Ottawa distinguishes two types of third person in sentences : proximate , indicating a noun phrase that is emphasized in the discourse , and obviative , indicating a noun phrase that is less prominent . Ottawa has relatively flexible word order compared with languages such as English . 
 Ottawa speakers are concerned that their language is endangered as the use of English increases and the number of fluent speakers declines . Language revitalization efforts include second language learning in primary and secondary schools . 
 = = History of scholarship = = 
 Explorer Samuel de Champlain was the first European to record an encounter with Ottawa speakers when he met a party of three hundred Ottawas in 1615 on the north shore of Georgian Bay . French missionaries , particularly members of the Society of Jesus and the <unk> order , documented several dialects of Ojibwe in the 17th and 18th centuries , including unpublished manuscript Ottawa grammatical notes , word lists , and a dictionary . In the 19th century , Ottawa speaker Andrew Blackbird wrote a history of the Ottawa people that included a description of Ottawa grammatical features . The first linguistically accurate work was Bloomfield 's description of Ottawa as spoken at Walpole Island , Ontario . The Odawa Language Project at the University of Toronto , led by Kaye and Piggott , conducted field work in Ottawa communities on Manitoulin Island in the late 1960s and early 1970s , resulting in a series of reports on Ottawa linguistics . Piggott also prepared a comprehensive description of Ottawa phonology . Rhodes produced a study of Ottawa syntax , a dictionary , and a series of articles on Ottawa grammar . Valentine has published a comprehensive descriptive grammar , a volume of texts including detailed analysis , as well as a survey of Ojibwe dialects that includes extensive description and analysis of Ottawa dialect features . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Ottawa is known to its speakers as Nishnaabemwin " speaking the native language " ( from Anishinaabe " native person " + verb suffix <unk> " speak a language " + suffix <unk> " <unk> " , with regular deletion of short vowels ) ; the same term is applied to the Eastern Ojibwe dialect . The corresponding term in other dialects is <unk> . <unk> ( from <unk> " Ottawa " + verb suffix <unk> " speak a language " + suffix <unk> " <unk> " , with regular deletion of short vowels ) " speaking Ottawa " is also reported in some sources . The name of the Canadian capital Ottawa is a loanword that comes through French from <unk> , the self @-@ designation of the Ottawa people . The earliest recorded form is " <unk> " , in a French source from 1641 . 
 Ottawa is a dialect of the Ojibwe language , which is a member of the Algonquian language family . The varieties of Ojibwe form a dialect continuum , a series of adjacent dialects spoken primarily in the area surrounding the Great Lakes as well as in the Canadian provinces of Quebec , Manitoba , and Saskatchewan , with smaller outlying groups in North Dakota , Montana , Alberta , and British Columbia . Mutual intelligibility is the linguistic criterion used to distinguish languages from dialects . In straightforward cases , varieties of language that are mutually intelligible are classified as dialects , while varieties of speech that are not mutually intelligible are classified as separate languages . Linguistic and social factors may result in inconsistencies in how the terms " language " and " dialect " are used . 
 Languages spoken in a series of dialects occupying adjacent territory form a dialect continuum or language complex , with some of the dialects being mutually intelligible while others are not . Adjacent dialects typically have relatively high degrees of mutual intelligibility , but the degree of mutual intelligibility between <unk> dialects varies considerably . In some cases speakers of <unk> dialects may not understand each other 's speech . 
 A survey conducted during the 1980s and 1990s found that the differences between Ottawa , the Severn Ojibwe dialect spoken in northwestern Ontario and northern Manitoba , and the Algonquin dialect spoken in western Quebec result in low levels of mutual intelligibility . These three dialects " show many distinct features , which suggest periods of relative isolation from other varieties of Ojibwe . " Because the dialects of Ojibwe are at least partly mutually intelligible , Ojibwe is conventionally considered to be a single language with a series of adjacent dialects . Taking account of the low mutual intelligibility of the most strongly differentiated dialects , an alternative view is that Ojibwe " could be said to consist of several languages " , forming a language complex . 
 = = Geographic distribution = = 
 The Ottawa communities for which the most detailed linguistic information has been collected are in Ontario . Extensive research has been conducted with speakers from Walpole Island in southwestern Ontario near Detroit , and Wikwemikong on Manitoulin Island in Lake Huron . South of Manitoulin Island on the Bruce Peninsula are Cape Croker and Saugeen , for which less information is available . The dialect affiliation of several communities east of Lake Huron remains uncertain . Although " the dialect spoken along the eastern shore of Georgian Bay " has been described as Eastern Ojibwe , studies do not clearly delimit the boundary between Ottawa and Eastern Ojibwe . 
 Other Canadian communities in the Ottawa @-@ speaking area extend from Sault Ste Marie , Ontario along the north shore of Lake Huron : Garden River , Thessalon , Mississauga ( Mississagi River 8 Reserve , Serpent River , Whitefish River , <unk> , and Whitefish Lake . In addition to Wikwemikong , Ottawa communities on Manitoulin Island are , west to east : Cockburn Island , <unk> , West Bay , Sucker Creek , and <unk> . Other Ottawa communities in southwestern Ontario in addition to Walpole Island are : Sarnia , Stoney and Kettle Point , and Caradoc ( Chippewas of the Thames ) , near London , Ontario . 
 Communities in Michigan where Ottawa linguistic data has been collected include <unk> , Harbor Springs , Grand Rapids , Mount Pleasant , Bay City , and Cross Village . The descendants of migrant Ottawas live in Kansas and Oklahoma ; available information indicates only three elderly speakers in Oklahoma as of 2006 . 
 Reliable data on the total number of Ottawa speakers is not available , in part because Canadian census data does not identify the Ottawa as a separate group . One report suggests a total of approximately 8 @,@ 000 speakers of Ottawa in the northern United States and southern Ontario out of an estimated total population of 60 @,@ 000 . A field study conducted during the 1990s in Ottawa communities indicates that Ottawa is in decline , noting that " Today too few children are learning Nishnaabemwin as their first language , and in some communities where the language was traditionally spoken , the number of speakers is very small . " Formal second @-@ language classes attempt to reduce the impact of declining first @-@ language acquisition of Ottawa . 
 = = = Population movements = = = 
 At the time of first contact with Europeans in the early 17th century , Ottawa speakers resided on Manitoulin Island , the Bruce Peninsula , and probably the north and east shores of Georgian Bay . The northern area of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan has also been a central area for Ottawa speakers since the arrival of Europeans . 
 Population movements of Ottawa speakers since the arrival of Europeans have been complex , with extensive migrations and contact with other Ojibwe groups . Many Ottawa speakers in southern Ontario are descended from speakers of the Southwestern Ojibwe dialect ( also known as " Chippewa " ) who moved into Ottawa @-@ speaking areas during the mid @-@ 19th century . Ottawa today is sometimes referred to as " Chippewa " or " Ojibwe " by speakers in these areas . As part of a series of population displacements during the same period , an estimated two thousand American Potawatomi speakers from Wisconsin , Michigan and Indiana moved into Ottawa communities in southwestern Ontario . The non @-@ Ottawa @-@ speaking Ojibwes who moved to these areas shifted to speaking Ottawa , as did the Potawatomi migrants . As a result of the migrations , Ottawa came to include Potawatomi and Ojibwe loanwords . 
 Two subdialects of Ottawa arise from these population movements and the subsequent language shift . The subdialects are associated with the ancestry of significant increments of the populations in particular communities , as well as with differences in the way the language is named in those locations . On Manitoulin Island , where the population is predominantly of Ottawa origin , the language is called " Ottawa " , and has features that set it off from other communities that have significant populations of Southwestern Ojibwe ( Chippewa ) and Potawatomi descent . In the latter communities the language is called " Chippewa " , but is still clearly Ottawa . Dialect features found in " Ottawa Ottawa " that distinguish it from " Chippewa Ottawa " include deletion of the sounds w and y between vowels , <unk> of w before consonants , changes in vowel quality adjacent to w , and distinctive intonation . 
 = = Phonology = = 
 Ottawa has seventeen consonants and seven oral vowels ; there are also long nasal vowels whose phonological status is unclear . In this article , Ottawa words are written in the modern orthography described below , with phonetic transcriptions in brackets using the International Phonetic Alphabet ( IPA ) as needed . 
 The most prominent feature of Ottawa phonology is vowel syncope , in which short vowels are deleted , or in certain circumstances reduced to schwa [ ə ] , when they appear in metrically defined weak syllables . Notable effects of syncope are : 
 Differences in pronunciation between Ottawa and other dialects of Ojibwe , resulting in a lower degree of mutual intelligibility . 
 Creation of new consonant clusters that do not occur in other dialects , through deletion of short vowels between two consonants . 
 Adjustments in the pronunciation of consonant sequences . 
 New forms of the person prefixes that occur on nouns and verbs . 
 Variability in the pronunciation of words that contain vowels subject to syncope , as speakers frequently have more than one way of pronouncing them . 
 = = = Consonants = = = 
 The table of consonants uses symbols from the modern orthography with the corresponding symbol in the International Phonetic Alphabet ( IPA ) following where the two vary , or to draw attention to a particular property of the sound in question . 
 * The sounds in parentheses f , r , l occur only in loanwords from English . 
 The plosive , fricative , and affricate consonants are divided into two sets , referred to as fortis and lenis . Fortis ( or " strong " ) consonants are typically distinguished from lenis ( or " weak " ) consonants by features such as greater duration or length , are voiceless where lenis consonants are typically voiced , and may be aspirated . In Ottawa , each fortis consonant is matched to a corresponding lenis consonant with the same place of articulation and manner of articulation . Ottawa fortis consonants are voiceless and phonetically long , and are aspirated in most positions : [ <unk> ] , [ <unk> ] , [ <unk> ] , [ <unk> ] . When following another consonant they are unaspirated or weakly articulated . The lenis consonants are typically voiced between vowels and word @-@ initially before a vowel , but are devoiced in word @-@ final position . The lenis consonants are subject to other phonological processes when adjacent to fortis consonants . 
 <unk> stop consonants [ <unk> ] and [ kʷ ] , consisting of a consonant with noticeable lip rounding , occur in the speech of some speakers . <unk> is not normally indicated in writing , but a subscript dot is utilized in a widely used dictionary of Ottawa and Eastern Ojibwe to mark labialization : ɡ ̣ <unk> " he is afraid " and <unk> " he is sick " . 
 = = = Vowels = = = 
 Ottawa has seven oral vowels , four long and three short . There are four long nasal vowels whose status as either phonemes or allophones ( predictable variants ) is unclear . The long vowels / iː , oː , aː / are paired with the short vowels / i , o , a / , and are written with double symbols ii , oo , aa that correspond to the single symbols used for the short vowels i , o , a . The long vowel / eː / does not have a corresponding short vowel , and is written with a single e . The phonological distinction between long and short vowels plays a significant role in Ottawa phonology , as only short vowels can be metrically weak and undergo syncope . Long vowels are always metrically strong and never undergo deletion . 
 The table below gives the orthographic symbol and the primary phonetic values for each vowel . 
 The long nasal vowels are <unk> ( [ <unk> ] ) , <unk> ( [ <unk> ] ) , <unk> ( [ <unk> ] ) , and <unk> ( [ <unk> ] ) . They most commonly occur in the final syllable of nouns with diminutive suffixes or words with a diminutive connotation , as well as in the suffix ( y ) <unk> ( [ - ( j ) <unk> ] ) ' first person ( Conjunct ) Animate Intransitive ' . Orthographically the long vowel is followed by word @-@ final <unk> to indicate that the vowel is nasal ; while n is a common indicator of nasality in many languages such as French , the use of h is an orthographic convention and does not correspond to an independent sound . One analysis treats the long nasal vowels as phonemic , while another treats them as derived from sequences of long vowel followed by / n / and underlying / h / ; the latter sound is converted to [ ʔ ] or deleted . A study of the Southwestern Ojibwe ( Chippewa ) dialect spoken in Minnesota describes the status of the analogous vowels as unclear , noting that while the distribution of the long nasal vowels is restricted , there is a minimal pair distinguished only by the nasality of the vowel : <unk> [ <unk> ] " he goes home " and <unk> [ <unk> ] " so the story goes " . Other discussions of Ottawa phonology and phonetics are silent on the issue . 
 = = Grammar = = 
 Ottawa shares the general grammatical characteristics of the other dialects of Ojibwe . Word classes include nouns , verbs , grammatical particles , pronouns , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 Ottawa grammatical gender classifies nouns as either animate or inanimate . Transitive verbs encode the gender of the grammatical object , and intransitive verbs encode the gender of the grammatical subject , creating a set of four verb subclasses . The distinction between the two genders also affects verbs through agreement patterns for number and gender . Similarly , demonstrative pronouns agree in gender with the noun they refer to . 
 = = = Morphology = = = 
 Ottawa has complex systems of both inflectional and derivational morphology . <unk> morphology has a central role in Ottawa grammar . Noun inflection and particularly verb inflection indicate grammatical information through the use of prefixes and suffixes that are added to word stems . 
 Notable grammatical characteristics marked with inflectional prefixes and suffixes include : 
 A distinction between obviative and proximate third person , marked on both verbs and nouns . 
 Extensive marking on verbs of inflectional information concerning person . 
 Number ( singular and plural ) . 
 Tense . 
 <unk> . 
 <unk> . 
 Negation . 
 Prefixes mark grammatical person on verbs , including first person , second person , and third person . Nouns use combinations of prefixes and suffixes to indicate possession . Suffixes on nouns mark gender , location , diminutive , pejorative , and other categories . Significant agreement patterns between nouns and verbs involve gender , singular and plural number , as well as <unk> . 
 Ottawa derivational morphology forms basic word stems with combinations of word roots ( also called initials ) , and affixes referred to as <unk> and finals to create words to which inflectional prefixes and suffixes are added . Word stems are combined with other word stems to create compound words . 
 Innovations in Ottawa morphology contribute to differentiating Ottawa from other dialects of Ojibwe . These differences include : the reanalysis of person prefixes and word stems ; the loss of final / -n / in certain inflectional suffixes ; a distinctive form for the verbal suffix indicating doubt ; and a distinctive form for the verbal suffix indicating plurality on intransitive verbs with grammatically inanimate subjects . 
 The most significant of the morphological innovations that characterize Ottawa is the restructuring of the three person prefixes that occur on both nouns and verbs . The prefixes carry grammatical information about grammatical person ( first , second , or third ) . <unk> modifies the pronunciation of the prefixes by deleting the short vowel in each prefix . 
 The third @-@ person prefix / o- / , which occurs with both nouns and verbs , is completely eliminated in Ottawa . As a result , there is no grammatical marker to indicate third @-@ person on inflected forms of nouns or verbs . For example , where other dialects have <unk> " a canoe " with no person prefix , and <unk> " his / her canoe " with prefix o- , Ottawa has <unk> meaning either " canoe " or " his / her canoe " ( with no prefix , because of syncope ) . Apart from the simple deletion of vowels in the prefixes , Ottawa has created new variants for each prefix . Restructuring of the person prefixes is discussed in detail in Ottawa morphology . 
