 = = = " Great scientists speak again " = = = 
 In 1970 , in order to combat boredom and absenteeism in his introductory zoology course , Eakin gave his first lecture in character , appearing unannounced in full costume and makeup as William Harvey , the 17th @-@ century physician who made the first complete descriptions of blood circulation . His portrayals of historic scientists , including Charles Darwin , Louis Pasteur , and Gregor Mendel , often involved elaborate wigs , makeup , costumes , and props , aided by professional makeup artists and drama <unk> his portrayal of Darwin required up to three hours of makeup , wig , and beard preparation . His lectures were popular with students from the start and attracted international attention , with profiles in publications such as LIFE , Der Spiegel , and the International Herald Tribune . He gave guest lectures at universities nationwide , and in 1975 compiled the text of his lectures , along with photographs , diagrams , and stage directions , into a book , Great Scientists Speak Again . Eakin typically gave six lectures in character during a course , with each " guest lecturer " introducing particular concepts . The figures portrayed , in order of appearance during a typical course , were : 
 William Harvey ( 1578 – 1657 ) 
 William Beaumont ( 1785 – 1853 ) 
 Hans Spemann ( 1869 – 1941 ) 
 Gregor Mendel ( 1822 – 1884 ) 
 Louis Pasteur ( 1822 – 1895 ) 
 Charles Darwin ( 1809 – 1882 ) 
 Eakin considered his impersonation of Spemann to be his most authoritative , due to knowing him personally from working in his lab in Germany , helping translate a book of his into English , and becoming good friends . 
 Eakin was recognized for his teaching long before he first donned a wig : in 1963 he was the first recipient of Berkeley 's Senior Citation for Distinguished Teaching and in 1968 received the Outstanding Teaching Award from the Associated Students of the University of California . 
 = = Later years ( 1977 – 1999 ) = = 
 Eakin retired in 1977 and was honored with the Berkeley Citation , the highest honor given to Berkeley faculty . He continued to periodically perform his lectures in character until 1988 , and also taught embryology at several historically black colleges and universities in the southern U.S. , including <unk> College , Mississippi ; Talladega College and Tuskegee University , Alabama ; and Fisk University in Tennessee . 
 Eakin was a member of the First Congregational Church of Berkeley for over 60 years , where his first wife , Mary Mulford Eakin – ordained by the United Church of Christ – was associate minister . He co @-@ authored a history of the church in 1999 . In a 1981 interview , Eakin stressed that matters of faith and science should be kept separate – as he did in his own life as both a Christian and a scientist – and that proponents of teaching creationism alongside evolution in public schools should similarly recognize the differences . " The great concepts of justice , mercy and <unk> science cannot test them or write a formula " , he said , " They are human beliefs and are outside the realm of science . " 
 His first wife Mary , with whom he had three children ( one of whom died prior to 1956 ) , died in 1980 . He later remarried Barbara Nichols , a former professor at the University of California , San Francisco . 
 Eakin died on November 25 , 1999 , at his home in Danville , California , at the age of 89 . He was survived by his wife Barbara , a son and daughter from his first marriage , and two stepdaughters . 
 = = Books = = 
 Vertebrate <unk> : A Laboratory Manual . University of California Press . 1973 . 
 The Third Eye . University of California Press . 1973 . 
 Great Scientists Speak Again . University of California Press . 1975 . 
 The Future is Watching : A History of the First 125 Years of First Congregational Church of Berkeley . First Congregational Church of Berkeley . 1999 . ( with James M. <unk> ) 
 = Serb Uprising of 1596 – 97 = 
 The Serb Uprising of 1596 – 97 was a rebellion organized by Serbian Patriarch Jovan Kantul ( s . 1592 – 1614 ) and led by Grdan , the vojvoda ( " duke " ) of Nikšić against the Ottomans in the Sanjak of Herzegovina and Montenegro Vilayet , during the Long Turkish War ( 1593 – 1606 ) . The uprising broke out in the aftermath of the failed Banat Uprising in 1594 and the burning of Saint Sava 's relics on April 27 , 1595 ; it included the tribes of Bjelopavlići , Drobnjaci , Nikšić and Piva . The rebels , defeated at the field of Gacko ( <unk> Polje ) in 1597 , were forced to capitulate due to a lack of foreign support . 
 = = Background = = 
 In early 1594 , the Serbs in Banat rose up against the Ottomans . The rebels had , in the character of a holy war , carried war flags with the icon of Saint Sava . The war banners were consecrated by Patriarch Jovan Kantul , and the uprising was aided by Serbian Orthodox metropolitans <unk> <unk> of Cetinje and Visarion of Trebinje ( s . 1590 – 1602 ) . In response , Ottoman Grand Vizier <unk> Sinan Pasha demanded that the green flag of the Prophet Muhammed be brought from Damascus to counter the Serb flag and ordered that the sarcophagus containing the relics of Saint Sava be removed from the <unk> monastery and transferred to Belgrade via military convoy . Along the way , the Ottoman convoy killed all the people in its path as a warning to the rebels . The Ottomans publicly incinerated the relics of Saint Sava on a pyre atop the <unk> plateau on April 27 , 1595 , and had the ashes scattered . 
 The incineration of Sava 's relics provoked the Serbs , and empowered the Serb liberation movement . From 1596 , the center of anti @-@ Ottoman activity in Herzegovina was the <unk> Monastery in Trebinje , where Metropolitan Visarion was seated . Many of the Orthodox bishops appealed to the Archduchy of Austria for help in liberating their lands . The Uskoks , irregular soldiers in Habsburg Croatia , supported Austria , being scattered over the whole area between Senj and Ragusa ( modern day Dubrovnik ) . With a daring raid on April 8 , 1596 , the Uskoks even managed to occupy the Klis Fortress , though they were unable to hold it . At one point , Austrian officials considered taking military action in Bosnia , where Dalmatian @-@ born Maltese knight Franjo <unk> was in their service . However , they did not have the strength to fight the Ottomans in Bosnia . Earlier , Austrian forces had gone to great lengths and still barely managed to resist the Ottomans in Hungary . 
 = = Uprising = = 
 In 1596 , the liberation movement spread into Ottoman Montenegro and the neighbouring tribes in Herzegovina , especially those under the influence of Metropolitan Visarion . Of the priests , Patriarch Jovan depended mostly on Visarion , and of the chieftains , mostly on Grdan , the vojvoda ( " duke " ) of Nikšić . A Ragusan document from the beginning of 1596 claimed that the metropolitan and many Herzegovinian chieftains gathered in the Trebinje Monastery where they swore oath " to give up and donate 20 @,@ 000 heroes to the [ Austrian ] emperors ' light . " The rebels sought help from the Austrians , and asked to be handed an Austrian flag to show the Ottomans that they had at least symbolic Austrian support . Shortly thereafter , on April 8 , 1596 , Klis was captured by the Uskoks , prompting a wave of excitement among Christians from Lika to Herzegovina . At the end of 1596 , after the outbreak of the Himara Revolt , Serbs began to rebel against the Ottomans . The uprising , led by Grdan , broke out in Bjelopavlići , then spread to Drobnjaci , Nikšić , Piva and Gacko . Save for the Brđani , the Montenegrin tribes did not participate in the uprising . At the time , Dervish Bey , the sanjak bey of Montenegro , threatened the Montenegrins through the provveditore ( " overseer " ) of Kotor . 
 Two Serbian monks , Damjan <unk> and Pavle , were dispatched by Patriarch Jovan Kantul to Pope Clement VIII in 1597 . Patriarch Jovan assured the pope of his " loyalty and obedience " to the Church of Rome , and sought help " to liberate the Serb people from the Ottomans " . The monks made an exhibition to the papal curia on Serbian history and , among other things , petitioned the pope to send an army to Herceg Novi , which would aid vojvoda Grdan on the land ; the tribes of <unk> , Nikšić , Piva , <unk> , Drobnjaci and Gacko would rise up in arms . From there , they would go to Onogošt ( Nikšić ) , where all chieftains of all Montenegro , <unk> , and the nearby lands , would gather . In the case of action , they could count on 100 @,@ 000 fighters . It was said that since the Ottomans took Saint Sava from the Serbs " God does not help them any more , Christians kill them from every side " . The curia then accused the monks , of " [ praying ] to God for our Evil . " The monks asked the pope , with the support of Serb spiritual and secular leaders , to send a respectable Christian to oversee them . 
 The Archbishop of Ohrid , <unk> , after his movement had largely failed in Albania , was now in Rome . The Serb uprising had no better luck ; the Herzegovinian tribes , Drobnjaci , Nikšić and Piva began fighting , but were defeated at the field of Gacko ( <unk> Polje ) by Dervish Bey sometime in 1597 . According to the Venetian Lazzaro Soranzo ( 1599 ) , the <unk> , Kuči , <unk> , Bjelopavlići and others tried to liberate themselves from Ottoman tyranny , and upon hearing the false claim that Sultan Mehmed III lost the battle and his life at the Siege of Eger , " they all rose up under the command of vojvoda Grdan and there was a great slaughter of Turks who were on their land . As I tried to find out more , I heard the contrary , that they unhappily withdrew into their mountains " ; Montenegrin historian <unk> Stanojević , based on Soranzo 's account , which he described as " the most interesting and most contradicting note on the movement of the <unk> and Herzegovina tribes in this time " , believed that the rebellion did not have the scale of a national uprising . 
 [ There were ] spontaneous uprisings or rebellions which often erupted caused by some event and quickly died away . Such disturbances , insurrections or rebellions took place earlier and later in all parts of the Balkans , and the Turks very quickly and efficiently reacted to them . If those rebellions did not lead to anything , they were another drop of hatred between the conquerors and the people . 
 When the talks between the rebels and the papacy led to nothing and no foreign support arrived , the rebels were forced to capitulate to the Ottomans . Ahmed @-@ paša <unk> , the beylerbey ( " governor " ) of Bosnia , pardoned Grdan of his crimes , and did not even strip him of his lands in Nikšić . 
 The rebels were challenged before any real action could be realized . Austria was not able to move towards Buda , let alone Bosnia or Serbia ; the papal curia did not choose to aid the rebels ; and Spain had their own problems . The diplomats — various adventurers , though well @-@ meaning — were amateurs , and had wrongfully and colourfully painted the picture to both sides . To some they promised more than they could do , and to others they presented opportunities as being more mature than they were . Many false reports were made . [ The rebels ] naïvely thought that the messages and promises they received would give them greater success than they had . The only lesson learnt was for them to be more cautious . The Ottomans , occupied in Hungary , Croatia and the coast , were willing to somewhat leave them alone for the moment being . At this time , none of the prominent leaders in the Ottoman Serb regions were hurt . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 After the failure of the uprising , many <unk> moved to the Bay of Kotor and Dalmatia . The earliest more significant Serb migrations took place between 1597 and 1600 . Grdan and Patriarch Jovan would continue to plan revolts against the Ottomans in the coming years . Jovan contacted the pope again in 1599 , without success . The Orthodox Christians in the Balkans sought the right moment to revolt against the Ottomans , and Serbian , Greek , Bulgarian and Albanian monks visited European courts for help . In 1607 , Patriarch Jovan Kantul negotiated with Emanuel I to be sent a force for the liberation of the Balkans , in exchange for " the Crown of Macedonia " . Jovan assured him that an army of 20 @,@ 000 , 25 guns and weapons for 25 @,@ 000 more to be distributed in the Balkans would overwhelm the Ottoman sultan . After years of planning , nothing concrete resulted in it , because such an operation " required Spanish naval and logistical support " . The 1596 – 97 uprising would stand as a model for multiple anti @-@ Ottoman uprisings in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the coming centuries . 
 = = Annotations = = 
 = Lemington Power Station = 
 Lemington Power Station is a small , now defunct coal @-@ fired power station , located in North East England . It is situated on the Lemington Gut , a backwater of the River Tyne , at Lemington , 3 @.@ 5 mi ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) west of Newcastle upon Tyne . The station 's main building still stands today and is a rare example of an early power station , dating from before the nationalisation of the United Kingdom 's electrical supply industry . 
 The station was opened in 1903 with a total generating capacity of 970 kilowatts , the electricity generated being used to power a tram system , and provide local households and streets with electric lighting . The station ceased generating electricity in 1919 , however the structure was retained for use as a sub @-@ station until 1946 when the tram line closed . The station was partially demolished in 1949 , but has since been made a locally listed building and is now owned by construction company <unk> Construction . In March 2012 Norland applied to Newcastle City Council for permission to demolish the building on the grounds of it being at risk of collapse . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the early 1900s , an increasing number of areas were being provided with electricity , and train and tram lines were being electrified . In the area around Newcastle upon Tyne , this required the opening of power stations at Wallsend , Forth Banks and The Close . Two supply companies built the stations , the Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne Electric Supply Company ( NESCo ) to the east of Newcastle , and the Newcastle and District Electric Lighting Company ( DisCo ) to the west . 
 DisCo built a station at Lemington , in the western outskirts of the city , to provide electricity for a tram line which ran through their supply area , from the City Centre to <unk> . The station was sited amid the derelict buildings of the Tyne Iron Company 's ironworks . They had opened in 1797 and closed in 1886 . The works were largely demolished , but some of the ironworks ' buildings and chimneys still stood unused , and the power station was built amongst them . DisCo opened Lemington Power Station in 1903 . 
 = = Design and specification = = 
 The station consists of a parallel boiler house and turbine hall , which creates a large double @-@ gabled building . It is of steel frame construction with brick cladding . Other features include round @-@ headed openings and ridge ventilators . This building originally housed the station 's boilers and turbo generators . Constructed alongside the station was a brick built chimney , to remove gasses from the boilers . The station was first brick built power station in North East England , with corrugated iron being the usual material used prior to this . 
 The station 's boiler house housed three coal @-@ fired Lancashire boilers , each of 200 HP capacity and each with individual economisers . These boilers provided steam for two 410 kilowatt ( kW ) and one 150 kW direct current Parsons turbo generators . This gave the station a total generating capacity of 970 kW . Before being used in the Lemington power station , these generators had been used in Forth Banks Power Station and in Newburn Steelworks . One of the steam turbines from these sets is now on display at the Electric Power and Historical Museum in Yokohama , Japan , after sitting on display in the entrance to Blyth Power Station for many years . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The power station was well situated for coal deliveries as it was only 200 yd ( 180 m ) from Lemington Staithes . The staithes marked the end of the Wylam <unk> , which brought coal from a number of nearby collieries to the staithes for export . Coal was hauled from the staithes to the power station , before being dumped directly into overhead hoppers in the boiler house . From there it was burned in the boilers to provide steam for the turbo generators . This steam was then cooled after use , using condensers , the water for which was taken from the Lemington Gut . This was a backwater of the River Tyne , created when a new channel was cut in 1876 . 
 As well as providing power for the tram system , the station was a source of electricity for local homes . The building of a power station brought major environmental improvements to what was a highly polluted area , because electricity represented a much cleaner source of household energy than coal , which was used at the time . Local households gradually switched to the new power source . A partner in the enterprise of the Lemington power station was Sir Matthew White Ridley , who had considerable interests in coal and banking . 
 = = Closure and present = = 
 Production of electricity in the station ceased in 1919 , ushered in by the completion of an extension to generating equipment at Newburn Steelworks . The building was retained and continued to be used to supply power to the tram route by housing a sub @-@ station , which used rotary converters . The station also provided a service for local residents who wanted their wireless accumulators recharged . The station continued to operate in this way until 1946 , when the tram route was closed . The station 's chimney was demolished in 1949 , along with remaining structures of the Tyne Iron Works , which had stood next to the power station throughout its operation . 
 The main turbine and boiler building is now a locally listed building , standing today as a monument to the important role that Tyne and Wear played in the development of electrical supply . The building had been considered for the more protected Listed Building status , but the decision was taken in May 2004 not to promote it . Other early power stations in the area ( such as those at Dunston and Wallsend ) have all been entirely demolished . The Lemington station is partly still standing due to riverside sites becoming less important to industrial development , leading to the site never being redeveloped . 
 The large remaining building currently stands in amongst a small industrial estate at the foot of the nearby Lemington Glass Cone . Along with the neighbouring Ironworks site , it is owned by Norland Construction , a crane and plant company formerly known as Reeds Cranes and Plant , the building used as storage for their machinery . The site is thought to be contaminated with coal products , fuels and oils such as PCBs , as well as dioxins and furans . In 2003 , Newcastle City Council released plans that they hoped to redevelop the site for heritage tourism in the future . 
 = Tropical Storm Helene ( 2000 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Helene was a long @-@ lived tropical cyclone that oscillated for ten days between a tropical wave and a 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) tropical storm . It was the twelfth tropical cyclone and eighth tropical storm of the 2000 Atlantic hurricane season , forming on September 15 east of the Windward Islands . After degenerating into a tropical wave , the system produced flooding and mudslides in Puerto Rico . It reformed into a tropical depression on September 19 south of Cuba , and crossed the western portion of the island the next day while on the verge of dissipation . However , it intensified into a tropical storm in the Gulf of Mexico , reaching its peak intensity while approaching the northern Gulf Coast . 
 The storm rapidly weakened before moving ashore near Fort Walton Beach , Florida on September 22 . It produced heavy rainfall along the Florida Panhandle that reached 9 @.@ 56 in ( 243 mm ) . The rains flooded hundreds of houses and caused the Sopchoppy River to reach a record crest . Gusty winds left about 5 @,@ 000 people without power , though the rains alleviated drought conditions . In South Carolina , Helene spawned a tornado that killed one person and injured six others ; heavy rainfall in the state also led to a death when a driver hydroplaned into a tree . The rainfall extended northeastward into Delaware . Overall damage in the United States was estimated at $ 16 million . Helene emerged from North Carolina as a tropical storm , and re @-@ intensified to near @-@ hurricane strength before being absorbed by a cold front on September 25 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the African coast on September 10 . Shortly thereafter , it lost most of its atmospheric convection and initially showed few signs of development as it moved westward . On September 14 , convection reformed near the center of the system . It continued to organize , and the next day the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) classified it as Tropical Depression Twelve . At this point , it was located 470 mi ( 765 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . At this point , the depression had a weak circulation and ragged convection . An anticyclone to its north caused the depression to move generally to the west , and upper @-@ level conditions were forecast to be favorable for intensification . However , the circulation moved away from the main area of convection before a Hurricane Hunters flight indicated that the depression degenerated into a tropical wave on September 16 . Although there was not a closed circulation , the flight observed flight @-@ level winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) to the north and east of the system . 
 The remnants of the depression continued westward , moving through the Lesser Antilles on September 17 . Despite favorable conditions for redevelopment including low wind shear and warm ocean temperatures , the system remained a tropical wave as it moved across the Caribbean Sea . Late on September 19 , another reconnaissance plane discovered a closed circulation to the northwest of Grand Cayman . Although there was minimal convection near the center , it organized enough to be re @-@ classified as a tropical depression . Upon redeveloping , the depression was moved west @-@ northwestward around a large anticyclone to the east of Florida . Its circulation was broad , though the NHC anticipated further strengthening . Conditions remained favorable for intensification , but instead the depression weakened as it approached Cuba . Around 1200 UTC on September 20 , it moved across the western tip of Cuba into the Gulf of Mexico with minimal thunderstorms near the center . A few hours later , the NHC noted that " the cyclone [ was ] on the verge of breaking open into an east @-@ west oriented trough " . The agency did not discontinue advisories due to an increase in convection near the center , although no intensification was expected . However , the system 's circulation and convection became better organized , and early on September 21 the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Helene . 
 Upon becoming a tropical storm , Helene gradually turned to the north while rounding an anticyclone to its east . It rapidly intensified after its upgrade , and reached its peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) late on September 21 . The storm was small with an asymmetric wind field , and wind shear displaced the circulation from the deep convection . Increasing wind shear prevented Helene from attaining hurricane status , and the storm began weakening on September 22 as it approached the northern Gulf Coast . By 0900 UTC that day , strong wind shear moved the convection away from the center and toward the north and northeast . This prompted NHC forecaster Lixion Avila to remark , " If I did not have a reconnaissance plane in the area , I would not know there was a tropical cyclone by just observing IR satellite imagery . " The storm made landfall near Fort Walton Beach , Florida at 1200 UTC on September 22 after weakening from its peak intensity to winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . 
 After moving ashore , an area of convection redeveloped over Helene 's center and the circulation became well @-@ defined on radar imagery . The storm accelerated to the northeast into the Westerlies , and about six hours following its landfall , Helene weakened to tropical depression status after crossing into southeastern Alabama . A few hours later , the NHC issued the last advisory on the system and transferred warnings to the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center . Hurricane forecast models anticipated restrengthening , and due to the forecast track north of the Gulf Stream , the NHC predicted intensification as an extratropical cyclone . The agency noted that Tropical Storm Danny re @-@ intensified in the same region as a tropical cyclone . Despite strong wind shear , convection increased over Helene 's center as the storm moved through North Carolina . Stations along the Outer Banks reported sustained winds up to 59 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Satellite imagery and buoy data indicated that Helene re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm inland over North Carolina . The storm emerged from the Virginia coast into an area of less wind shear , where conditions were thus more favorable for strengthening . The storm became compact over the northern Atlantic Ocean , with a diameter of 140 mi ( 230 km ) . Strong convection developed over the center on September 24 , and the following day Helene re @-@ attained its peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) while southeast of Nova Scotia . The wind estimate was based on observations from the Neptune Olivine , a nearby ship that recorded 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) winds and a barometric pressure of 988 mbar ( 29 @.@ 2 inHg ) ; because the ship was located to the south of the center , the storm 's minimum pressure was estimated at 986 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) . Helene continued moving rapidly to the east @-@ northeast , and late on September 25 dissipated as it was absorbed by a cold front . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 When Tropical Depression Twelve first formed , several governments across the Lesser Antilles issued a tropical storm watch , including the SSS islands , Antigua and Barbuda , Anguilla , Montserrat , and Saint Kitts and Nevis . The watch was discontinued after the depression degenerated into a tropical wave . As a tropical wave , Helene moved through the Lesser Antilles with strong winds ; gusts on Guadeloupe reached 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) . The system also produced heavy rainfall , reaching 3 @.@ 14 in ( 80 mm ) on Antigua . The wave passed to the south of Puerto Rico on September 17 and 18 . Across the southern and eastern portion of the island , the system produced 6 to 12 in ( 150 to 300 mm ) of rainfall , which resulted in flash flooding and mudslides . One house was destroyed and more than 100 houses were affected in Ponce , forcing several families to evacuate . The flooding also destroyed a bridge in Guayama and made many roads impassable . Damage on the island was estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 2000 USD ) . After the system redeveloped into a tropical depression , the government of Cuba issued a tropical storm warning for the provinces of Isla de la Juventud , Havana , and Pinar del Río , as well as for the city of Havana . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 About 21 hours before Helene made landfall , the NHC issued a tropical storm warning from the border of Louisiana and Mississippi to the mouth of the Aucilla River along the Florida Panhandle . Six hours later , the agency also issued a hurricane watch from the border of Florida and Alabama to the mouth of the Aucilla River . The day before the storm moved ashore , local American Red Cross chapters had 18 emergency shelters on standby to house storm evacuees . One shelter opened in Tallahassee and one in Apalachicola . About 130 people evacuated to shelters in the western portion of the Florida panhandle and planes evacuated military bases in the region . Government buildings were closed in Okaloosa , and schools were closed in Okaloosa , Walton , and Santa Rosa counties . 
 Despite being a weak tropical cyclone at landfall , Tropical Storm Helene caused $ 16 million in damage ( 2000 USD ) . In Alabama , wind gusts reached 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) at Brookley Air Force Base in Mobile ; the same station recorded the highest rainfall in the state , with a total of 1 @.@ 08 in ( 27 mm ) . The storm also caused minor beach erosion and coastal damage along Dauphin Island . 
 In neighboring Florida , the storm dropped heavy rainfall along the panhandle , peaking at 9 @.@ 56 in ( 243 mm ) in Apalachicola . The rains caused flooding , notably in Franklin , Wakulla , and Leon counties , all of which closed schools and public buildings . Flood warnings were issued for areas affected by Tropical Storm Gordon five days prior . High rainfall caused the Sopchoppy River to exceed its banks and reach a record crest of 34 @.@ 9 ft ( 10 @.@ 6 m ) , breaking the previous record set in 1970 . Several homes and nearby roads were flooded near the river . About 100 homes were flooded in Leon County , and 70 streets were flooded in Tallahassee . Portions of U.S. Highway 98 were flooded in Port St. Joe and near Carrabelle . About 70 people had to evacuate their homes due to the flooding . Flooding was minimal in the western Florida panhandle due to drought conditions the previous summer . Sustained winds across the state peaked at 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) , though gusts reached 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) at Cape San Blas . At that location , there was over $ 100 @,@ 000 in road damage and beach loss . The winds combined with the heavy rainfall caused trees to fall onto power lines , leaving about 5 @,@ 000 people without electricity . The storm spawned 6 tornadoes along the panhandle , one of which destroyed several mobile homes in Wakulla . As the storm moved ashore , tides were less than 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) above normal , but were high enough to cause minor beach erosion . In Leon County , the storm destroyed two homes and six mobile homes , and damaged more than 120 homes in Wakulla County . 
 When Helene moved through Georgia , it had sustained winds of around 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) , with higher gusts . It dropped heavy rainfall along its path , with a statewide peak of 5 @.@ 13 in ( 130 mm ) in Dunwoody . The rainfall alleviated persistent drought conditions across the state . However , the combination of winds and rainfall downed trees and power lines ; one falling tree damaged a car in <unk> . To the northwest of Georgia , rainfall spread into Tennessee , reaching 3 @.@ 12 in ( 79 mm ) in Copperhill . As Helene moved through South Carolina , it spawned an F2 tornado in Martin that killed one person , injured six , and damaged 12 houses . The highest rainfall in the United States associated with Helene was a total of 9 @.@ 60 in ( 244 mm ) in Bamberg , though weather radar images estimated totals of up to 14 in ( 360 mm ) . The rains caused flooding along Highway 47 near Elgin . In Berkeley County , a woman died after hydroplaning and driving her car into a tree . 
 Rainfall in North Carolina peaked at 8 @.@ 31 in ( 211 mm ) in Longwood ; in Jacksonville , the precipitation caused street flooding . Off the shore of North Carolina , a station at Diamond Shoal Light reported wind gusts of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) while Helene was re @-@ intensifying into a tropical storm . Along the coast , the highest gusts were 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) , reported at both Cape Lookout and Duck . Rainfall from the storm extended through Virginia and into Delaware . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 After re @-@ intensifying into a tropical storm for a second time , Helene passed to the southeast of Atlantic Canada . Although its strongest winds remained offshore , the outer rainbands dropped light precipitation , peaking at 0 @.@ 89 in ( 22 @.@ 5 mm ) in eastern Nova Scotia , and 1 @.@ 18 in ( 30 mm ) in southeastern Newfoundland . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On October 3 , United States President Bill Clinton declared nine Florida counties as disaster areas , which allocated federal funding for debris removal , emergency services , and restoration of damaged public facilities . In Franklin County , many residents had to boil water before consumption due to contaminated water wells . As a result , the local Red Cross chapter provided water bottles to the affected residents . The Red Cross also deployed two Mobile Feeding Vehicles to Wakulla County , and a total of 700 meals were ultimately distributed . 
 = Mary Wayte = 
 Mary Wayte <unk> ( born March 25 , 1965 ) , née Mary Alice Wayte , is an American former competition swimmer , two @-@ time Olympic gold medalist , and television sports commentator . During her international swimming career , Wayte won eight medals in major international championships , including four golds . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Wayte was born and raised on Mercer Island , Washington , where she swam for the Chinook Aquatic Club . As a 16 @-@ year @-@ old high school sophomore , Wayte won three gold medals in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke and the 800 @-@ meter freestyle relay at the 1981 National Sport Festival . She won eight Washington state high school swimming titles in five different events while attending Mercer Island High School . 
 = = College swimming career = = 
 Wayte accepted an athletic scholarship to attend the University of Florida in Gainesville , Florida , where she swam for coach Randy Reese 's Florida Gators swimming and diving team in National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) competition from 1983 to 1987 . As a Gator swimmer , she won two individual NCAA national titles in the 100 @-@ yard freestyle and the 400 @-@ yard individual medley in 1985 . With Gator teammates <unk> <unk> , Kathy Treible , Tracy Caulkins , Dara Torres and Paige <unk> , she was a member of the Gators ' NCAA championship relay teams in the 400 @-@ yard and 800 @-@ yard freestyle relays for three consecutive years ( 1984 , 1985 , 1986 ) , anchoring five of the six relays . In total , she won eight NCAA championships in those three years . She also won eleven individual Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) championships and was a member of ten SEC championship relay teams . Wayte was the SEC Swimmer of the Year in 1985 , and received a total of twenty @-@ six All @-@ American honors in her four years as a collegiate swimmer . 
 = = International swimming career = = 
 From 1981 to 1988 , Wayte was a member of the U.S. national swim team , competing in major international championships in Japan ( 1981 , 1985 ) , France ( 1982 ) , the Netherlands ( 1982 ) , Venezuela ( 1983 ) , Monaco ( 1985 ) , Spain ( 1986 ) and South Korea ( 1988 ) . At the 1983 Pan American Games in Caracas , Venezuela , she won a gold medal as a member of the winning U.S. 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay team , and the silver medal in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle event . 
 At the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , Wayte won her first Olympic gold medal in the women 's 200 @-@ meter freestyle event by defeating her American rival and former world record @-@ holder Cynthia Woodhead . Her winning 200 @-@ meter time of 1 : 59 @.@ 23 was her career best to date , overcoming Woodhead 's early lead in the final 50 meters . She earned her second Olympic gold medal by swimming in the preliminary heat for the winning U.S. women 's 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay team . 
 Four years later , when Seoul , South Korea hosted the 1988 Summer Olympics , she swam the freestyle leg for the silver medal @-@ winning U.S. team in the women 's 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay with teammates Beth Barr ( backstroke ) , Tracey McFarlane ( breaststroke ) , and Janel Jorgensen ( butterfly ) . The U.S. women 's medley relay team was fraught with last @-@ minute drama , as several previously selected swimmers dropped out to focus on individual events , or were replaced because they had performed below expectations , only hours before the event final . In the event final , the U.S. medley relay team included women with no history of competing together , no relay exchange practice , and no coach ; the East German favorites taunted the Americans before the race . Wayte would later characterize the race as one of her proudest moments . She also captured a bronze medal with the third @-@ place U.S. women 's 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay team that included Mitzi Kremer , Dara Torres and Laura Walker . Individually , she finished fourth in the women 's 200 @-@ meter freestyle ; she was also a medal contender in the women 's 200 @-@ meter individual medley , but was disqualified when the judges ruled she used an illegal butterfly kick on the breaststroke leg of the medley . 
 = = Life after swimming = = 
 Wayte graduated from the University of Florida with a bachelor 's degree in telecommunications in 1989 . She retired from competition swimming following the 1988 Olympics , and worked as a fund @-@ raiser for the International Swimming Hall of Fame . She became a celebrity promoter and endorsed products and services on behalf of Alamo Rent a Car , the National Spa and Pool Institute , and Speedo . She later worked as a television broadcaster for the Sports Channel network , covering NCAA and international swimming competitions and interviewing fans at NBA games . For the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona , Spain , Wayte worked as NBC 's women 's swimming color commentator , and later covered the NCAA women 's swimming championships for ESPN . She also served on the U.S. Olympic Committee 's athletes advisory council . 
 Wayte was inducted into the University of Florida Athletic Hall of Fame as a " Gator Great " in 1998 , the International Swimming Hall of Fame in 2000 , and the Pacific Northwest Swimming Hall of Fame in 2004 . The community swimming pool where she formerly trained in Mercer Island , Washington was renamed " Mary Wayte Pool . " 
 Wayte married business executive Jim <unk> in 1995 , and they have two daughters . She currently lives in Seattle , Washington , and works in corporate communications for Cisco Systems . Wayte participates in Swim Across America , a charitable organization that enlists former Olympic swimmers to raise funds for cancer research . 
 = Nickel ( United States coin ) = 
 A nickel , in American usage , is a five @-@ cent coin struck by the United States Mint . Composed of 75 % copper and 25 % nickel , the piece has been issued since 1866 . Its diameter is <unk> inches ( <unk> ) and its thickness is <unk> inches ( 1 @.@ 95 mm ) . 
 The silver half dime , equal to five cents , had been issued since the 1790s . The American Civil War caused economic hardship , driving gold and silver from circulation ; in response , in place of low @-@ value coins , the government at first issued paper currency . In 1865 , Congress abolished the five @-@ cent fractional currency note after Spencer M. Clark , head of the Currency Bureau ( today the Bureau of Engraving and Printing ) , placed his own portrait on the denomination . After successful introduction of two @-@ cent and three @-@ cent pieces without precious metal , Congress also authorized a five @-@ cent piece consisting of base metal ; the Mint began striking this version in 1866 . 
 The initial design of the Shield nickel was struck from 1866 until 1883 , then was replaced by the Liberty Head nickel . The Buffalo nickel was introduced in 1913 as part of a drive to increase the beauty of American coinage ; in 1938 , the Jefferson nickel followed . In 2004 and 2005 , special designs in honor of the bicentennial of the Lewis and Clark Expedition were issued . In 2006 , the Mint reverted to using Jefferson nickel designer Felix Schlag 's original reverse ( or " tails " side ) , although a new obverse , by Jamie Franki , was substituted . As of the end of FY 2013 , it cost more than nine cents to produce a nickel ; the Mint is exploring the possibility of reducing cost by using less expensive metals . 
 = = Background = = 
 The silver half disme ( as the half dime , pronounced the same , was first called ) was one of the denominations prescribed by the Mint Act of 1792 , its weight and fineness were set by law . The first pieces under federal authority were half dismes , struck in 1792 in the cellar of John Harper , a saw maker ; as the first federal mint was still under construction in Philadelphia , this took place locally at Sixth and Cherry Streets . The dies were engraved by Adam Eckfeldt , who a half @-@ century later recalled the silver for the half dimes was supplied by President George Washington , and that the 1 @,@ 500 coins struck from the bullion were given to Washington 's Secretary of State , Thomas Jefferson , for distribution to important people , both in the US and overseas . By legend , President Washington supplied silverware from his home , Mount Vernon , to provide bullion for the coins . In his annual message to Congress in late 1792 , Washington noted the ongoing construction of a mint building and stated : " There has also been a small beginning in the coinage of half dimes , the want of small coins in circulation calling the first attention to them . " 
 In 1793 , the newly established Philadelphia Mint began striking cents and half cents . Coinage of precious metal was delayed ; Congress required the assayer and chief coiner to each post a security bond of $ 10 @,@ 000 , a huge sum in 1793 . In 1794 , Congress lowered the chief coiner 's bond to $ 5 @,@ 000 , and the assayer 's to $ 1 @,@ 000 ; President Washington 's appointees to those positions were thus able to qualify and take office . Subsequently , silver coinage began that year . 
 The half dime was struck to various designs by Mint Engraver Robert Scot from 1794 until 1805 , though none were dated 1798 , 1799 , or 1804 . By 1804 , silver US coins were heavily exported , as they could be exchanged at par in the West Indies with heavier Spanish coins , which were then imported as bullion and deposited at the Mint for melting and restriking . In response , in 1804 the US stopped striking silver dollars ; issuance of the half dime was discontinued from 1805 until 1829 . In 1807 , mint Director Robert Patterson in a letter explained to Jefferson ( by then president ) " nearly the whole of our Silver Bullion ( chiefly Spanish dollars ) come through the Banks , and it is very seldom that they will consent to take any coin less than half dollars . " 
 Beginning in 1829 , the silver five @-@ cent piece was again struck ; beginning in 1837 , its fineness was increased from <unk> to .900 . Also in 1837 , the half dime 's obverse design changed from one by William Kneass , depicting a bust of Liberty , to one that featured a seated Liberty by Christian Gobrecht ; until its abolition in 1873 , the half dime would bear modifications of this design . In 1851 , it ceased to be the smallest US silver coin as a three cent piece was issued by the Mint . 
 = = Inception = = 
 The Civil War caused most American coins to vanish from circulation , with the gap filled by such means as merchant tokens , encased postage stamps , and United States fractional currency , issued in denominations as low as three cents . Although specie ( gold or silver coins ) was hoarded or exported , the copper @-@ nickel cent , then the only base metal denomination being struck , also vanished . In 1864 , Congress began the process of restoring coins to circulation by abolishing the three @-@ cent note and authorizing bronze cents and two @-@ cent pieces , with low intrinsic values , to be struck . These new coins initially proved popular , though the two @-@ cent piece soon faded from circulation . On March 3 , 1865 , Congress passed legislation authorizing the Mint to strike three @-@ cent pieces of 75 % copper and 25 % nickel . 
 In 1864 , Congress authorized a third series of fractional currency notes . The five @-@ cent note was to bear a depiction of " Clark " , but Congress was appalled when the issue came out not with a portrait of William Clark , the explorer , but Spencer M. Clark , head of the Currency Bureau . According to numismatic historian Walter Breen , Congress 's " immediate infuriated response was to pass a law retiring the five @-@ cent denomination , and another to forbid portrayal of any living person on federal coins or currency . " Clark kept his job only because of the personal intervention of Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase . 
 Mint Director James Pollock had been opposed to striking coins containing nickel , but in view of the initial success of the copper @-@ nickel three @-@ cent piece , he became an advocate of striking five @-@ cent pieces in the same metals . In his 1865 report , Pollock wrote , " From this nickel alloy , a coin for the denomination of five cents , and which would be a popular substitute for the five cent note , could easily be made ... [ The five @-@ cent coin should be struck in base metal ] only until the resumption of specie payments ... in time of peace ... coins of inferior alloy should not be permitted to take the place permanently of silver in the coinage of pieces above the denomination of three cents . " 
 Industrialist Joseph Wharton had a near @-@ monopoly on the mining of nickel in the United States , and sought to promote its use in coinage . He was also highly influential in Congress . His friends there , though they had failed to obtain the metal 's use for the two @-@ cent piece , had been more successful with the base @-@ metal three @-@ cent coin . Pollock prepared a bill authorizing a five @-@ cent coin of the same alloy as the three @-@ cent piece , with a total weight not to exceed 60 grains ( 3 @.@ 9 g ) . At the committee stage in the House of Representatives , the weight was amended to 77 @.@ 19 grains ( 5 @.@ 00 g ) , ostensibly to make the weight equal to five grams in the metric system but more likely so that Wharton could sell more nickel . This made the new coin heavy , in terms of weight per $ .01 of face value , compared to the three @-@ cent copper @-@ nickel coin . The bill passed without debate on May 16 , 1866 . The new copper @-@ nickel coin was legal tender for up to one dollar , and would be paid out by the Treasury in exchange for coin of the United States , excluding the half cent , cent and two @-@ cent . It was redeemable in lots of $ 100 for banknotes . Fractional currency in denominations of less than ten cents was withdrawn . 
 = = Shield nickel ( 1866 – 1883 ) = = 
 In anticipation of the approval of the new five @-@ cent coin , the Mint 's chief engraver , James B. Longacre , had begun preparing designs and pattern coins in 1865 . After rejecting pieces showing deceased presidents George Washington and Abraham Lincoln , Treasury Secretary Hugh McCulloch decided on a design similar to Longacre 's two @-@ cent piece , with a shield on the obverse and a numeral 5 surrounded by stars and rays on the reverse . This has come to be known as the Shield nickel . 
 The new coins proved difficult to produce ; owing to the hardness of the planchet , the coins were not of high quality and the life of the striking dies was brief . The design was widely criticized ; Wharton described the obverse as suggesting " a tombstone surmounted by a cross and overhung by weeping willows . " The American Journal of Numismatics described the Shield nickel as " the ugliest of all known coins " . The rays were eliminated from the reverse design in 1867 , in the hope of eliminating some of the production problems . The design change created confusion among the population — many people assumed that one design or the other was a counterfeit — and the Mint briefly considered abandoning the shield design entirely . After heavy production in its first years , by late 1869 , enough nickels had been struck to meet the needs of commerce ; fewer were coined in the following years . 
 The new coins tended to accumulate in the hands of merchants beyond the legal tender limit , but banks refused to accept them beyond the one @-@ dollar maximum . <unk> were forced to discount the coins to brokers . Postmasters , compelled by law to accept the coins , found that the Treasury would not accept them as deposits except in lots of $ 100 , in accordance with the authorizing statute . In 1871 , Congress alleviated the problem by passing legislation allowing the Treasury to redeem unlimited quantities of nickels and other low @-@ denomination coins when presented in lots of not less than $ 20 . It was not until 1933 , long after the shield design passed from the scene , that the nickel was made legal tender without limit . 
 Half dimes continued to be struck , at both the Philadelphia and the San Francisco Mint , until the series was ended by the Coinage Act of 1873 . Despite the abolition , the silver pieces continued to circulate in the West , where silver or gold coins were preferred , throughout the remainder of the 19th century . Improved economic conditions , combined with low silver prices , brought large quantities of hoarded silver coinage , including half dimes , into circulation beginning in April 1876 . In late 1876 , production of the Shield nickel was halted . No Shield nickels were struck in 1877 or 1878 , excepting proof specimens for collectors . As the Treasury had a large stock of nickels in storage , only small numbers were struck over the next few years ; full @-@ scale production did not resume until December 1881 . 
 = = Liberty Head or " V " nickel ( 1883 – 1913 ) = = 
 With production of nickels lagging in the late 1870s , and with minimal strikings of the copper @-@ nickel three @-@ cent piece , Wharton sought to increase the use of nickel at the Mint . The bronze cent represented a major portion of the Mint 's production , and Wharton began to lobby for the piece to be struck in copper @-@ nickel , as it had been from 1857 until 1864 . In 1881 , this lobbying led Philadelphia Mint Superintendent Archibald Loudon Snowden to order Mint Engraver Charles Barber to produce uniform designs for a new cent , three @-@ cent piece , and five @-@ cent piece . Snowden required that the new coins depict the head of Liberty with the legend LIBERTY and the date , with the nickel 's reverse to have a wreath of wheat , cotton , and corn around a Roman numeral " V " for " 5 " , to denote the denomination . Under the proposal , the nickel would retain its weight of 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 18 oz ) , but its diameter would be increased to 22 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 87 in ) . 
 Barber duly produced the required designs . Snowden eventually decided against a new cent or three @-@ cent piece , but Barber continued work on the nickel , with the size adjusted to 21 @.@ 21 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 835 in ) . When specimens were sent to Washington for routine approval by Treasury Secretary Charles J. Folger , to Snowden 's surprise , they were rejected . The secretary , on review of the coinage statutes , had realized that the laws required " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA " to appear on the reverse , not the obverse where Barber had placed it . Barber modified his design accordingly , and the coin was ready for striking in early 1883 . However , by then , Shield nickels dated 1883 had already been coined . To ensure these pieces would not be hoarded for their rarity , Mint officials kept the two designs in production side by side for several months . 
 Criminals soon realized that the new nickel , which lacked the word " CENTS " , was close in size to the five @-@ dollar gold piece , and if they were to plate the nickel with gold , it might be passed for five dollars . Some coins were even given a reeded edge by fraudsters , making them appear more like the gold coins . The Mint halted production of the new coins ; production of Shield nickels continued . Barber was told to modify his work , which he did , moving other design elements to accommodate the word " CENTS " at the bottom of the reverse . The revised nickel was issued on June 26 , 1883 , the date on which production of the Shield nickel was finally stopped . The public promptly hoarded the " <unk> " nickels , believing the Treasury Department intended to recall them , and that they would become rare . 
 The Liberty Head nickel was heavily struck during its 30 @-@ year run , except during economic downturns in 1885 – 1886 and in 1894 , when only small numbers were struck . In 1890 , Congress ended production of the three @-@ cent piece , leaving the five @-@ cent coin as the only one in copper nickel . That year , Congress also allowed the Secretary of the Treasury to authorize the redesign of United States coins , if the former design had been struck for at least 25 years . Although the nickel and silver dollar had been redesigned within the previous quarter @-@ century , a provision in the latter act made them eligible for immediate redesign . In 1896 , pattern nickels were struck for the first time since 1885 , when experimental , holed coins had been tested ; however , no redesign took place . 
 = = = Growth of the nickel in commerce = = = 
 Coin @-@ operated machines to vend food , for amusement , and for gambling became popular in the 1890s . Such machines could be placed on otherwise unused floor space in businesses , required little maintenance , and brought in money for owners . Beginning about 1898 , coin @-@ operated mechanical pianos also became popular . The Mills Novelty Company was a leading producer of such devices ; by 1906 it was producing machines ranging from a mechanically played violin to fortune @-@ telling devices . While some machines took cents or other denominations , the nickel was the coin of choice for these machines . 
 Among the innovations in business caused by the use of the nickel in coin @-@ operated machines was the <unk> , in which patrons would serve themselves by inserting a coin ( initially a nickel , though by the 1950s a higher denomination was needed ) into a mechanism , turning a handle , and removing a sandwich or dessert . These restaurants were first established in Germany , but were popularized in the United States by , among other firms , Horn & <unk> . A type of business which took its name from the coin was the <unk> cinema , where a nickel bought admission to view a series of one @-@ reel short films , generally about 12 minutes in length , which ran continuously from early afternoon until late at night , with the patron free to remain as long as he liked . Although another denomination gave the penny arcade its name , the nickel was commonly used there as well . 
 Few nickels had circulated in the western states before the 1880s ( people there preferred silver and gold coins ) ; interest in the new Liberty Head design had led to increasing use of nickels there . Good economic conditions and high demand for nickels for use in coin @-@ operated devices caused the piece to circulate throughout the nation by 1900 . That year , Mint Director George E. Roberts called on Congress to quintuple the Mint 's appropriation to purchase base metals for striking into nickels and cents . At the time , statutory restrictions permitted production of cents and nickels only at Philadelphia ; Roberts ' request that Congress allow striking at the other mints was granted in 1906 . The Denver and San Francisco Mints began striking nickels in 1912 . 
 = = = 1913 Liberty Head nickel rarity = = = 
 The Liberty Head nickel was replaced after 1912 , and initially there was no indication that 1913 @-@ dated pieces with that design existed . In December 1919 , a coin dealer , Samuel W. Brown , placed advertisements in coin publications , offering to buy 1913 Liberty Head nickels . The following August , Brown appeared at the annual American Numismatic Association ( ANA ) convention bearing such a piece . Brown claimed that a master die had been prepared for 1913 and that these pieces had been run off to test it . As it turned out , Brown possessed five coins , which he eventually sold . After spending fifteen years in the hands of the eccentric Col. E.H.R. Green , the famous Fort Worth , Texas , area collector , the coins were finally dispersed in 1943 . Since then , they have had several owners each . Today , two are on public display — at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington and the ANA 's Money Museum in Colorado Springs , while three are owned privately . The most recent sale of a 1913 Liberty Head nickel was in January 2010 , when one sold for $ 3 @,@ 737 @,@ 500 in an auction . 
 It is uncertain how the 1913 nickels came to be made . The Mint 's records show no production of 1913 Liberty head nickels , and none were authorized to be made . Dies were prepared in advance and sent to California for a 1913 @-@ S Liberty Head nickel coinage , but upon orders from Mint Director Roberts in December 1912 to end the old design , they were returned to Philadelphia . They were received by December 23 , and were almost certainly destroyed routinely by early January . Brown had been an employee at the Philadelphia Mint ( although this was not known until 1963 ) and many theories focus suspicion on him . 
 = = Buffalo or Indian Head ( 1913 – 1938 ) = = 
 President Theodore Roosevelt in 1904 expressed his dissatisfaction with the artistic state of American coins , and hoped to hire sculptor Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens to beautify them . Saint @-@ Gaudens , before his 1907 death , designed a new eagle and double eagle , which entered circulation that year ; the cent , quarter eagle , and half eagle were redesigned by other artists and were released into circulation by 1909 . That year , Mint Director Frank Leach instructed Barber to make pattern coins for new nickels . Most of these coins featured the first president , George Washington . However , the project was discontinued when Leach left office on November 1 , 1909 , to be replaced by Abram Andrew . 
 On May 4 , 1911 , Eames MacVeagh , son of Treasury Secretary Franklin MacVeagh wrote to his father : 
 A little matter that seems to have been overlooked by all of you is the opportunity to beautify the design of the nickel or five cent piece during your administration , and it seems to me that it would be a permanent souvenir of a most attractive sort . As possibly you are aware , it is the only coin the design of which you can change during your administration , as I believe there is a law to the effect that the designs must not be changed oftener than every twenty @-@ five years . I should think also it might be the coin of which the greatest numbers are in circulation . 
 Soon after the MacVeagh letter , Andrew announced that the Mint would solicit new designs for the nickel . Sculptor James Earle Fraser , who had been an assistant to Saint @-@ Gaudens , approached the Mint , and rapidly produced concepts and designs . Mint Director George Roberts , who had returned to office in place of Andrew , initially favored a design featuring Lincoln , but Fraser soon developed a design featuring a Native American on one side and a bison on the other . Secretary MacVeagh wrote , " Tell him that of the three sketches which he submitted we would like to use the sketch of the head of the Indian and the sketch of the buffalo . " In July 1912 , news of the new nickel became public , and coin @-@ operated machine manufacturers sought information . Clarence Hobbs of the Hobbs Manufacturing Company , maker of counterfeit detectors , feared the new nickel would not be passed by his devices . Hobbs demanded various changes to the design , to which the artist was reluctant to agree . 
 The Hobbs Company continued to interpose objections in 1913 . On February 3 , Hobbs sent Roberts a lengthy list of changes that he wanted in the coin , and the sculptor was required to attend a conference with Hobbs representatives . On the fifth , following the conference , which ended with no agreement , Fraser sent MacVeagh a ten @-@ page letter , complaining that his time was being wasted by the Hobbs Company , and appealing to the Secretary to bring the situation to a close . Secretary MacVeagh agreed to hold a meeting at his office in Washington on February 14 . Barber prepared patterns showing what the nickel would look like if the changes demanded by Hobbs were made . MacVeagh conducted the meeting much like a legal hearing , and issued a letter the following day . The secretary noted that no other firm had complained , that the Hobbs mechanism had not been widely sold , and that the changes demanded — a clear space around the rim and the flattening of the Indian 's cheekbone — would affect the artistic merit of the piece . MacVeagh concluded , " You will please , therefore , proceed with the coinage of the new nickel . " 
 The coins were officially released to circulation on March 4 , 1913 , and quickly gained positive comments for depicting truly American themes . However , The New York Times stated in an editorial that " The new ' nickel ' is a striking example of what a coin intended for wide circulation should not be ... [ it ] is not pleasing to look at when new and shiny , and will be an abomination when old and dull . " The Numismatist , in March and May 1913 editorials , gave the new coin a lukewarm review , suggesting that the Indian 's head be reduced in size and the bison be eliminated from the reverse . 
 Dies for the new design proved to break quickly . Barber made proposed revisions , which Fraser approved after being sent samples . These changes enlarged the legend " FIVE CENTS " and changed the ground on which the bison stands from a hill to flat ground . According to data compiled by numismatic historian David Lange from the National Archives , the changes to what are known as Type II nickels ( with the originals Type I ) actually decreased the die life . A problem not addressed was the exposure of the date to wear ; many Buffalo nickels today have the date worn away . 
 In January 1938 , the Mint announced an open competition for a new nickel design , to feature early president Thomas Jefferson on the obverse , and Jefferson 's home , Monticello on the reverse . The last Buffalo nickels were struck in April 1938 at the Denver Mint , the only mint to strike them that year . 
 = = = Design and name controversies = = = 
 The identities of the models for the Native American on the obverse and for the bison on the reverse are not known with certainty . Fraser stressed that the Indian was a type , rather than based on a specific individual , and identified various Native Americans as models , not always consistently , including Iron Tail , Two Moons , and Big Tree ( of the Kiowa people ) . There have been other claimants , the most prominent being John Big Tree , a Seneca , who made many public appearances as the " nickel Indian " until his death in 1967 . Fraser recounted that the animal on the reverse was an American bison , Black Diamond , whom he stated lived at the Bronx Zoo , and also described the model simply as a bison at the Bronx Zoo . However , Black Diamond was never at the Bronx Zoo , but instead lived at the Central Park Zoo ( both facilities are in New York City ) until the animal was sold and slaughtered in 1915 . The placement of the horns on the still @-@ extant mounted head of Black Diamond differs from that of the bison on the nickel . 
 From its inception , the coin was referred to as the " Buffalo nickel " , reflecting the common misnomer for the bison . The numismatic publication with the greatest circulation , Coin World , calls it an Indian head nickel , while R.S. Yeoman 's Red Book refers to it as an " Indian Head or Buffalo type " . 
 = = Jefferson nickel ( 1938 – present ) = = 
 When the Buffalo nickel had been struck for 25 years and could be replaced without an act of Congress , the Mint moved quickly to replace it . Although the Fraser design is popular today among numismatists , it did not enjoy that status in 1938 , and there was no public outcry at the decision . In January 1938 , the Mint announced an open competition for the new nickel design , with the winner to receive a prize of $ 1 @,@ 000 . Anticipating the 1943 bicentennial of Jefferson 's birth , competitors were to place his portrait on the obverse , and a depiction of his house Monticello on the reverse . 
 On April 24 , Felix Schlag was announced as the winner . His design featured the portrayal of Jefferson which would be used on the nickel until 2004 , closely conforming to the former president 's bust by sculptor Jean @-@ Antoine Houdon , which is to be found in Boston 's Museum of Fine Arts . However , the model differs from the nickel that was struck for circulation because it featured a view of Monticello from an angle , and a style of lettering officials did not like ; Schlag was required to change both . Either through a misunderstanding or an oversight , Schlag did not include his initials in the design ; they would not be added until 1966 . Production began on October 3 , 1938 ; they were released into circulation on November 15 . According to contemporary accounts , the Jefferson nickel was initially hoarded , and it was not until 1940 that it was commonly seen in circulation . 
 With the entry of the United States into World War II , nickel became a critical war material , and the Mint sought to reduce its use of the metal . On March 27 , 1942 , Congress authorized a nickel made of 50 % copper and 50 % silver , but gave the Mint the authority to vary the proportions , or add other metals , in the public interest . The Mint 's greatest concern was in finding an alloy that would use no nickel , but still satisfy counterfeit detectors in vending machines . An alloy of 56 % copper , 35 % silver and 9 % manganese proved suitable , and this alloy began to be coined into nickels from October 1942 . In the hope of making them easy to sort out and withdraw after the war , the Mint struck all " war nickels " with a large mint mark appearing above Monticello . The mint mark P for Philadelphia was the first time that mint 's mark had appeared on a US coin . The prewar composition returned in 1946 ; all nickels struck since then have been in 75 % copper and 25 % nickel . 
 In 1966 , a small change was made to the design to add the initials of the designer ( FS ) to the obverse , underneath Jefferson 's portrait . In commemoration of that change , two specimen 1966 nickels with the initials were struck and presented to him . Coins struck at any mint between 1965 and 1967 lack mint marks , which were omitted as the Mint replaced the silver circulating coins with copper @-@ nickel . Beginning in 1968 , mint marks were again used , and on the nickel were moved to the lower part of the obverse , to the right of Jefferson 's bust . From 1971 , no nickels were struck for circulation in San Francisco — the 1971 @-@ S was the first nickel struck in proof only since 1878 . 
 = = = Westward Journey commemoratives ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = 
 The Mint had struck circulating commemorative coins for the United States Bicentennial , giving quarters , half dollars , and dollars struck in 1975 and 1976 a dual date , " 1776 – 1976 " . After Canada issued a successful series of quarters in 1992 honoring its provinces and territories , the Mint obtained congressional permission to issue a series of US quarters honoring American states ; they began to be issued in 1999 . In 2002 , the Mint began to consider redesigning the nickel in honor of the upcoming bicentennial of the Lewis and Clark Expedition . Representative Eric Cantor ( Republican @-@ Virginia ) did not wish to see Monticello ( located in his home state ) moved permanently off the nickel . The resultant " American 5 @-@ Cent Coin Design Continuity Act of 2003 " , was signed into law on April 23 , 2003 . Under its terms , the Treasury Secretary could vary the nickel 's designs in honor of the 200th anniversary of the Expedition and of the Louisiana Purchase , but the nickel would again feature Jefferson and Monticello beginning in 2006 . Unless Congress acts again , every future five @-@ cent coin will feature Jefferson and Monticello . 
 The Mint used Schlag 's obverse in 2004 , with two new reverse designs . Mint sculptor @-@ engraver Norman E. Nemeth 's adaptation of an Indian Peace Medal struck for Jefferson was the first new design , followed by a depiction by Mint sculptor @-@ engraver Al <unk> of a keelboat like that used by the Expedition . The 2005 obverse was struck during that year only , with a design by sculptor Joe Fitzgerald based on Houdon 's bust of Jefferson . The legend " LIBERTY " on the obverse was traced from Jefferson 's handwriting in drafting the Declaration of Independence ; as the word is never capitalized in that document , Fitzgerald borrowed a capital L from Jefferson 's other writings . The reverse for the first half of the year depicted an American bison , recalling the Buffalo nickel and designed by Jamie Franki . The reverse for the second half showed a coastline and the words " Ocean in view ! O ! The Joy ! " , from a journal entry by William Clark , co @-@ leader of the Expedition . Clark had actually written the word as " <unk> " , but the Mint modernized the spelling . 
 Another Franki design has , since 2006 , been used for the obverse , depicting a view of Jefferson from the front ( rather than in profile ) based on an 1800 study by Rembrandt Peale , and includes " Liberty " in Jefferson 's script . According to Acting Mint Director David <unk> , " The image of a forward @-@ facing Jefferson is a fitting tribute to [ his ] vision . " The reverse beginning in 2006 was again Schlag 's Monticello design , but newly sharpened by Mint engravers . As Schlag 's obverse design , on which his initials were placed in 1966 , is no longer used , his initials were placed on the reverse to the right of Monticello . 
 = = = Increase in metal values = = = 
 In the first decade of the 21st century , commodity prices for copper and nickel , which make up the five @-@ cent coin , rose dramatically , pushing the cost of manufacturing a nickel from 3 @.@ 46 cents in fiscal year 2003 to 10 @.@ 09 cents in fiscal year 2012 . By comparison , a Canadian nickel ( which is primarily made of steel ) still costs less than its face value to produce as of 2013 . In response , Mint Director Henrietta Fore in 2004 asked Congress to fund research into lower @-@ cost alternatives to present coinage metals . Although the initiative lapsed when she left office in 2005 , in 2010 , Congress passed the Coin Modernization , Oversight , and Continuity Act ( <unk> ) , directing the Mint to explore alternatives to the present compositions of the six denominations , from cent to dollar . In 2011 , the Mint awarded a contract to study the issue to Concurrent Technologies Corporation of Johnstown , Pennsylvania . The report in response to the legislation declared that there is no material that would reduce the one @-@ cent coin 's manufacturing cost to below one cent , so it was removed from consideration . The report requested additional time to study the issue , ensuring the continuation , for the present , of the existing coinage metals . The Mint expects demand for nickels in commerce to increase from 840 million needed in Fiscal Year 2011 to 1 @.@ 08 billion in 2015 . 
 Meanwhile , in an attempt to avoid losing large quantities of circulating nickels to melting , the United States Mint introduced new interim rules on December 14 , 2006 , that criminalized the melting and export of pennies ( which as of 2013 cost 1 @.@ 83 cents to produce ) and nickels . Violators of these rules can be punished with a fine of up to $ 10 @,@ 000 , five years imprisonment , or both . The rules were finalized on April 17 , 2007 . The melt value of a nickel for some time was more than five cents , including nearing over one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half times its face value in May 2007 . Since then , the supply and demand of the coin 's composition metals have stabilized . A nickel 's melt value fell below its face value from late 2008 through mid @-@ 2010 , and more recently again from late mid @-@ 2012 through the present . In February 2014 , it was reported that the Mint was conducting experiments to use copper @-@ plated zinc ( the same composition used for the United States 1 cent coin ) for the nickel . 
 In December 2014 , the Mint released its next Biennial report in response to the <unk> . In it , the Mint declared that plated zinc products did not hold up to steam / wear tests and were rejected for US coins outside the penny ( which does not see significant use by the public ) . Materials considered " feasible " for the 5 @-@ cent coin were nickel @-@ plated steel , multi @-@ ply @-@ plated steel , and potentially another copper / nickel alloy , this time with ~ 77 % copper , ~ 20 % nickel , and ~ 3 % manganese . Further testing was recommended to explore even less expensive alloys that would not require changes to vending machines ( as the steel @-@ based materials would require ) . 
 = McEwan 's = 
 McEwan 's is a brand of beer that originated in Edinburgh , Scotland and is owned by the English brewer Wells & Youngs . 
 William McEwan opened the Fountain Brewery in Fountainbridge , Edinburgh , in 1856 . The firm underwent several mergers in the following century , including with local rival William Younger 's , and later with Newcastle Breweries to form Scottish & Newcastle . The McEwan 's brand passed to Heineken in 2008 after their purchase of Scottish & Newcastle 's British operations . Heineken sold the brand to Wells & Youngs in 2011 . 
 McEwan 's is best known for 80 / - , a Heavy beer , and Export , an India Pale Ale . All of the draught beers ( except Best Scotch ) are brewed at the Caledonian Brewery in Edinburgh , whilst the canned and bottled beers are produced at the Eagle Brewery in Bedford , England . The beers are sold predominantly in Scotland and the North East of England . 
 Despite being the dominant presence in Scottish brewing for around a century , the McEwan 's brands were neglected by Scottish & Newcastle , who concentrated on their global brands . The McEwan 's ales were eclipsed by John Smith 's Bitter and Belhaven Best and cask @-@ conditioned beers such as <unk> IPA , whilst the lager fell behind Tennent 's . 
 McEwan 's is well known for its cavalier mascot , broadly based on the Frans Hals painting , the Laughing Cavalier portrait , which has been used since the 1930s . The company was a well known sponsor of numerous football teams throughout the 1980s and 90s , most notably Blackburn Rovers ' Premier League title winning side , and Rangers F.C. 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Victorian beginnings = = = 
 William McEwan opened the Fountain Brewery in Fountainbridge , then a suburb on the outskirts of Edinburgh , in 1856 , using £ 2 @,@ 000 loaned by his mother and his uncle . The area and the brewery are named after the spring waters from the vicinity , which , in addition to its proximity to the Caledonian railway line and the Union Canal , determined the location of the brewery . McEwan had employed geologists to identify the prime location for a supply of well water . Beforehand , McEwan had engaged in industrial espionage at Bass and Allsopp 's breweries in order to learn techniques and assay costs . After establishing a market share in the industrial regions of the Scottish lowlands , from the early 1860s McEwan built up a successful colonial export trade by exploiting his family 's <unk> connections . It was during this time that McEwan 's India Pale Ale , the beer that was the foundation for much of the company 's reputation , was first labelled Export . 
 By the 1870s McEwan 's brewery employed 170 men and boys , and its beers were widely available in England . By 1880 , the brewery site covered 12 acres . McEwan 's 80 / - , a Heavy beer , was first brewed in the late nineteenth century ; the shilling " / - " <unk> refers to the wholesale price for a hogshead of the beer . In 1886 , as he prepared to enter Parliament , William McEwan appointed his nephew , William Younger , as managing director of the brewery . When the company was registered in 1889 it was worth £ 408 @,@ 000 and had capital of £ 1 million , and was the largest brewery in the United Kingdom under a single owner . By the turn of the twentieth century the company had a large share of the market throughout Scotland , a 90 per cent share of the Tyneside market , and was exporting to Scottish expatriates across the British Empire . At its peak the brewery was producing two million barrels of beer a year , much of it for export . 
 = = = Twentieth @-@ century mergers = = = 
 In 1907 , McEwan 's acquired the trade and goodwill of Alexander Melvin & Co of central Edinburgh . By 1914 , McEwan 's bottled beers were distributed across the United Kingdom . In December 1930 , McEwan 's merged with Edinburgh rival William Younger 's Brewery to form Scottish Brewers in a defensive move after the Great Depression diminished revenues . Each entity was initially run separately , and only certain financial and technological resources were amalgamated . During this period the company became an early pioneer of container beer , largely due to its dependence on exports , particularly to the Royal Navy , where beer might be stored on board ships for up to a year . The NAAFI continued to be an important McEwan 's customer throughout the century . In the early 1930s , Jardine Matheson approached the company regarding a potential brewing venture in China , but McEwan 's did not welcome the threat to their export business . 
 The company 's export trade declined during and after the Second World War , and as a result , the Abbey Brewery in Edinburgh , previously the Younger 's brewery , was closed down in 1956 and converted into offices . By the 1950s , McEwan 's had become the dominant party in the McEwan Younger venture , and a full merger was undertaken in 1959 . Scottish Brewers continued to increase its market share in the brewing sector , doubling its output after a costly five @-@ year programme of expansion and modernisation undertaken between 1958 and 1963 . 
 The company merged with Newcastle Breweries in 1960 , forming Scottish & Newcastle , a group with market value of £ 50 million . William McEwan Younger , the son of William Younger , was the chairman and managing director . The company dedicated itself to the free trade , and promoted its brands to an extent not previously witnessed in the British brewing industry . McEwan 's Export became one of the three core brands of the new company , alongside Newcastle Brown Ale and Younger 's Tartan Special . Scottish & Newcastle became the dominant force in brewing across Scotland and the North of England . From the 1960s , the company began to style itself MacEwan 's in export markets , in order to make pronunciation easier . The company 's McEwan 's Strong Ale was the highest gravity beer on general sale throughout the world . McEwan 's Export was alternatively sold as India Pale Ale or Scotch Ale overseas . William McEwan Younger retired in 1970 . 
 The Fountain Brewery was rebuilt in 1973 and pioneered the use of computer control for the entire brewing process . The site had a 2 million barrel capacity , and occupied 22 acres on a new site which had formerly been occupied by a British Rubber mill . McEwan 's Export became a nationally distributed beer by the 1970s , and was the highest selling canned beer in the United Kingdom by 1975 . McEwan 's Lager was introduced in 1976 as the demand for lager increased , but it struggled to gain credibility until the " Alive and kicking " campaign was launched in 1986 . McEwan 's Export was launched in the United States in 1989 . Two bottled ales were launched , McEwan 's Champion Ale ( 7 @.@ 3 % ) in 1997 and McEwan 's Parliament Ale ( 5 % ) in 1999 . In 2000 , McEwan 's had 13 percent of the Scottish lager market and around 40 percent of the Scottish ale market . In 2003 McEwan 's 70 / - was overtaken by Belhaven Best as Scotland 's best @-@ selling ale , and McEwan 's Lager was discontinued . 
 = = = Closure of the Fountain Brewery = = = 
 In February 2004 Scottish & Newcastle announced the closure of the Fountain Brewery . Production costs at Fountainbridge had become twice as high as those at the company 's lowest @-@ cost brewery in Tadcaster , North Yorkshire . It closed in June 2005 , with the loss of 170 jobs . Production of McEwan 's draught beers was transferred to the Caledonian Brewery with cans of McEwan 's Export being produced at John Smith 's Brewery in Tadcaster . The McEwan 's and Younger 's brands added around 50 @,@ 000 barrels to the production of the Caledonian . The last regular batch of the cask @-@ conditioned version of McEwan 's 80 / - was brewed in 2006 after annual production dropped below 10 @,@ 000 barrels , although the beer made a brief return in June 2011 and has since been brewed seasonally by W & Y. McEwan 's Lager was reintroduced in 2009 . 
 = = = Sale to Wells & Youngs = = = 
 In October 2011 , Heineken sold the McEwan 's beer brands to Wells & Youngs for around £ 20 million , and production of McEwan 's Best Scotch and canned and bottled brands moved to Bedford . The new owners vowed to reintroduce McEwan 's as a cask ale brand and launch an expanded premium bottled range . Together with the Younger 's brands McEwan 's generates £ 80 million of sales annually in the UK , and McEwan 's is now the largest Wells & Youngs brand . It is the highest @-@ selling ale brand in Scotland where it has a 20 per cent market share . Like most largely pasteurised ale brands in the UK it has been in a state of managed decline . The beers are sold predominantly in Scotland and the north of England ; a small amount is exported to Italy . 2012 saw the launch of McEwan 's Export in bottles , and a new seasonal cask @-@ conditioned golden ale called McEwan 's Gold . In 2013 , export sales to Canada were resumed , having been discontinued under Heineken . In April 2013 McEwan 's Red was launched , aimed at younger drinkers and with the intention of expanding the brand into England . McEwan 's beers began to be sold in France in April 2013 . The bottled beers McEwan 's Amber and Signature were launched in July 2013 . 
 = = Current product range = = 
 McEwan 's 60 / - ( 3 @.@ 2 per cent ABV ) 
 A beer style known in Scotland as " Light " , this dark coloured beer is similar to an English mild ale . 
 McEwan 's Best Scotch ( 3 @.@ 6 per cent ABV ) 
 A beer that shares style characteristics with both mild and bitter . It sells 23 @,@ 000 hectolitres annually . Sales are concentrated in the Tyneside region , and the beer is not found in Scotland . Production was moved from the Tyne Brewery in Newcastle upon Tyne to the Federation Brewery in Gateshead in 2005 . The Federation Brewery was closed in 2010 , and production of McEwan 's Best Scotch was contracted to the Burtonwood Brewery near Cheshire , until it moved to Bedford following the Wells & Youngs takeover . 
 McEwan 's 70 / - ( 3 @.@ 7 per cent ABV ) 
 Shares many characteristics with an English session bitter . 
 McEwan 's 80 / - ( 4 @.@ 2 per cent ABV ) 
 A Heavy , which until 2000 was brewed to 4 @.@ 5 per cent ABV . 
 McEwan 's Export ( 4 @.@ 5 per cent ABV ) 
 The second highest selling canned premium ale in the UK . In cans , it sold over 30 @,@ 000 hectolitres in 2012 . In Scotland it accounts for 83 per cent of the canned premium ale market . Sometimes sold as McEwan 's India Pale Ale in overseas markets . 
 McEwan 's Champion Ale ( 7 @.@ 3 per cent ABV ) 
 A Burton or Edinburgh ale , a style known locally as " Wee Heavy " . Available across the United Kingdom in <unk> bottles , it is one of the top twenty highest selling bottled ales , selling around 7 @,@ 000 hectolitres in 2012 . A stronger version is sold as McEwan 's Scotch Ale in export markets . 
 McEwan 's Lager ( 3 @.@ 6 per cent ABV ) 
 McEwan 's Red ( 3 @.@ 6 per cent ABV ) 
 An ale with a reddish tinge introduced in 2013 . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 Throughout the Victorian period , and into the twentieth century , McEwan 's drew heavily from imagery of the British Empire in its branding . The Laughing Cavalier mascot was introduced to the McEwan 's brand in the 1930s . Based on the well @-@ known Frans Hals painting , it has been used extensively in advertisements and branding ever since . During the 1960s and ' 70s , McEwan 's was advertised as " The best buy in beer " . 
 From the 1970s until the early 1990s McEwan 's Best Scotch was marketed in the North East of England as " The one you 've got to come back for " . 
 The " alive and kicking " campaign for McEwan 's Lager from 1986 until 1997 saw some of the most memorable and radical television advertisements yet produced at the time . 
 = = = Sponsorship = = = 
 During the 1980s and 1990s , McEwan 's sponsored six football clubs and two rugby league clubs : 
 Carlisle United – 1982 to 1988 ( as ' McEwan 's Younger ' ) 
 Darlington – 1984 to 1987 
 Rangers – 1987 to 1999 ( McEwan 's Lager ) 
 Notts County – 1991 to 1994 ( Away games only ) 
 Blackburn Rovers – 1991 to 1995 
 St Helens RLFC – 1991 to 1999 
 Wakefield Trinity Wildcats – 1993 @-@ 1997 
 Newcastle United – 1991 to 1996 ( Away games only ) 
 = Courage C60 = 
 The Courage C60 was a Le Mans Prototype ( LMP ) racing car built by Courage Compétition in 2000 , and used in international sports car races until 2006 . A replacement for the Courage C52 , it was Courage 's first all @-@ new prototype since the Courage <unk> was built in 1994 . Initially fitted with a 4 @-@ litre naturally @-@ aspirated Judd GV4 V10 engine in 2000 , and run by SMG Compétition , Pescarolo Sport began using a 3 @.@ 2 @-@ litre twin @-@ turbocharged <unk> @-@ Peugeot A32 V6 engined version of the car in 2001 , and the Peugeot @-@ engined versions would prove to be the most successful . In 2004 , Pescarolo redeveloped the C60 on their own , and replaced the Peugeot engines with 5 @-@ litre Judd GV5 V10s . In 2005 , Courage ran two updated versions of the C60 ( known as the C60 Hybrid , and using the Judd GV4 engines ) as a factory effort , and one of these took third place at that year 's 24 Hours of Le Mans ; Pescarolo also updated their C60s into a similar Hybrid format , and took second at the 2005 and 2006 24 Hours of Le Mans , whilst also winning the Le Mans Series in both years . In 2006 , the all @-@ new Courage <unk> was introduced by Courage , and Pescarolo introduced their 01 in 2007 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 In 2000 , Courage Compétition introduced the C60 as a clean @-@ sheet replacement for the Courage C52 . Like its predecessor , the C60 was designed by Paolo Catone , and was the first all @-@ new car since the Courage <unk> was introduced . The C60 used a carbon fibre and aluminium honeycomb monocoque chassis , whilst its suspension consisted of double wishbones , <unk> and horizontally @-@ located dynamic dampers . SMG Compétition were the first team to run the car , and their C60 was fitted with a 4 @-@ litre naturally @-@ aspirated Judd GV4 V10 engine , In 2001 , Pescarolo Sport began using the C60 and their C60s used a <unk> @-@ developed 3 @.@ 2 @-@ litre twin @-@ turbocharged Peugeot A32 V6 engine , capable of a claimed power output of 550 hp ( 410 kW ; 558 PS ) . In 2002 , André de <unk> redeveloped the C60 into the C60 Evo , which notably featured an unusual brake duct system similar to that found on an open @-@ wheel racing car at the front of the car , whilst the rear wing <unk> were redesigned and the Peugeot A32 engine now produced a claimed output of 580 hp ( 433 kW ; 588 PS ) . The <unk> were further developed in 2003 , whilst the engine 's air <unk> were decreased in size from 32 @.@ 4 to 30 @.@ 7 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) , resulting in the claimed power output decreasing to 510 hp ( 380 kW ; 517 PS ) . In 2004 , Pescarolo began running the car as a " Pescarolo C60 " with a 5 @-@ litre Judd GV5 V10 engine , as Henri Pescarolo had further developed the C60 . For 2005 , Courage and Pescarolo both released redeveloped versions of the C60 for the new LMP1 regulations ; both were designated as C60 Hybrids and used Judd engines . The Pescarolo version retained its Judd GV5 engine , with a claimed power output of 630 hp ( 470 kW ; 639 PS ) , whilst the Courage version used the smaller 600 hp ( 447 kW ; 608 PS ) Judd GV4 engine , and featured a noticeably different rear wing . Courage introduced the new Catone @-@ designed Courage <unk> in 2006 as the C60 's replacement . 
 = = Racing history = = 
 = = = 2000 – 2001 = = = 
 The C60 made its debut at the 2000 Silverstone 500 USA Challenge , when SMG Compétition 's Gary <unk> and Philippe Gache used the car to take tenth place , and eighth in the LMP category . For the 24 Hours of Le Mans , Gache and <unk> were to be joined by Didier Cottaz , but suspension failure after 219 laps forced the team to retire . SMG ran Cottaz and Gache at the 1000 km of Nürburgring , but an accident after 44 laps lead to the team 's retirement . 
 For 2001 , Pescarolo Sport replaced their <unk> with the C60 . Their first race with the C60 came at the 12 Hours of Sebring , with Jean @-@ Christophe Boullion , Sébastien Bourdais and Laurent Rédon selected to drive the car ; however , engine problems after 167 laps forced them to retire , and they were classified 25th overall , and seventh in class . At the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Catalunya , Boullion and Bourdais completed 57 laps before another engine problem forced them to retire . For the 2 Hours 45 Minutes of Donington Park , Boullion partnered Rédon to fourth place , the fastest of the non @-@ Audi entries . However , oil pump issues struck at the 1000 km of Monza , forcing Boullion , Rédon and Bourdais to retire . Three C60s were entered in the 2001 24 Hours of Le Mans ; Pescarolo ran Boullion , Bourdais and Rédon in one car , and Emmanuel <unk> , Cottaz and Boris Derichebourg in another , whilst SMG ran Gache alongside Jérôme <unk> and Anthony <unk> in their C60 . Only the Boullion / Bourdais / Rédon C60 finished ( in 13th overall , and 4th in the LMP900 category ) , as the other Pescarolo car crashed out after 42 laps , and SMG 's C60 succombed to engine problems 9 laps later . Pescarolo Sport 's next race with the C60 came at the 1000 km Estoril , where Boullion , Rédon and Derichebourg were able to take the car 's first ever victory , although they had initially been disqualified for ignoring blue flags ; Boullion and Rédon immediately followed this with another victory in their next race , which was the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Magny @-@ Cours . Boullion and Derichebourg finished the season off with second at the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Nürburgring . Courage finished the American Le Mans Series ( ALMS ) season classified in sixth , whilst they took fifth in the FIA Sportscar Championship , and third in the European Le Mans Series ( ELMS ) . 
 = = = 2002 – 2003 = = = 
 For 2002 , Courage Compétition began running a factory team again ( using a Judd @-@ engined C60 ) , whilst Pescarolo Sport continued with their Peugeot @-@ engined C60 . The 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Catalunya saw Courage 's <unk> Björk , Derichebourg and Cottaz take fifth overall , whilst Pescarolo 's Boullion and Bourdais won the race . At the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Estoril , it was Cottaz and Derichebourg who took second for Courage , whilst Boullion and Franck Lagorce finished fourth for Pescarolo . At the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Brno , Cottaz and Derichebourg took another second for Courage , whilst Pescarolo did not compete . Three C60s were entered for the 2002 24 Hours of Le Mans ; Courage selected Cottaz , Derichebourg and Björk to drive their car , whilst Pescarolo ran Boullion , Lagorce and Bourdais in one of their C60 @-@ Peugeots , and Stéphane <unk> , Ukyo Katayama and Éric Hélary drove their other car . Although the C60 of <unk> / Katayama / Hélary succombed to engine trouble after 144 laps , the other Pescarolo @-@ entered C60 finished tenth overall , and ninth in class whilst the Courage @-@ entered C60 finished 15th overall , and 11th in class . Pescarolo reverted to a single @-@ car entry for the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Magny @-@ Cours , which , with Bourdais and Boullion at the wheel , finished in second ; the Courage @-@ entered car , driven by Cottaz and Derichebourg , succumbed to electrical issues before completing a lap . Courage did not run their car again , whilst Pescarolo 's Boullion and Lagorce took third at the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Dijon , before Bourdais and Boullion finished the season with a victory at the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Spa . Courage finished the season tied with Dome on 97 points in the <unk> Constructor 's Championship , but lost the title to Dome as they had won a single race less . 
 Pescarolo started the 2003 FIA Sportscar Championship season with a victory at the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Estoril , with Boullion partnering Stéphane Sarrazin in the C60 . Like the previous year , three C60s were entered at the 24 Hours of Le Mans ; Courage ran Jonathan Cochet , Jean @-@ Marc Gounon and Stéphan Grégoire in their car , whilst Pescarolo ran Boullion , Sarrazin and Lagorce in one car , with Nicolas Minassian , <unk> Ayari and Hélary in the other . The three C60s finished seventh , eighth and ninth respectively , which equated to fifth , sixth and seventh in the LMP900 category . Pescarolo followed this result with a string of retirements at the 500 km of Monza , the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Oschersleben and the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of Donington . The 1000 km of Spa saw a return to form , as Sarrazin and Lagorce took second , before Pescarolo ended the FIA Sportscar Championship season with a victory at the 2 Hours 30 Minutes of <unk> ( where Ayari replaced Sarrazin ) . Despite the mid @-@ season slump , Pescarolo were still able to deliver Courage second in the <unk> Constructor 's Championship . The final race of the C60 's season came at the non @-@ championship 1000 km of Le Mans , where Sarrazin , Lagorce and Bourdais took second place . 
 = = = 2004 – 2005 = = = 
 In 2004 , Pescarolo Sport were the only team to use the C60 , which they ran as the " Pescarolo C60 " . The team 's first race came in the 1000 km of Monza , which formed part of the new Le Mans Endurance Series ( LMES ) ; here , Ayari and Emmanuel Collard took fourth overall , and were the fastest of the non @-@ Audi entrants . For the 24 Hours of Le Mans , Collard partnered Bourdais and Minassian in one C60 , whilst Ayari drove with Érik Comas and Benoît <unk> in the other . Although the C60 of Collard , Bourdais and Minassian succombed to engine trouble after 282 laps , the Ayari / Comas / <unk> finished fourth overall , and fastest of the non @-@ Audi runners once more . Hélary was selected to partner Ayari at the 1000 km of Nürburgring , and this time the pair brought the C60 home in fifth overall . Pescarolo 's last race of the season came at the 1000 km of Spa , where Gounon and Ayari lasted nine laps before being forced to retire due to accident damage . Pescarolo finished the LMES season in fifth place , level on points with Team <unk> . 
 In 2005 , Courage Compétition began running their updated C60 Hybrid , whilst Pescarolo also updated their C60 ; the two teams were the fastest and second fastest respectively at the Paul Ricard test session . At the LMES season opener , which was the 1000 km of Spa , the Courage @-@ entered car , driven by Cochet , Christian Vann and Alexander Frei was eliminated in a pit @-@ lane accident , whilst the Pescarolo entry , driven by Bouillon , Collard and Comas finished second . For the 24 Hours of Le Mans , both teams entered two cars ; Courage entered Frei , Vann and Dominik Schwager in one car , and Cochet , Shinji Nakano and Bruce <unk> in the other , whilst Pescarolo ran Collard , Boullion and Comas in one of their C60s , with Ayari , Hélary and Sébastien Loeb in the other . One car from each team finished ; Collard , Boullion and Comas took second for Pescarolo , whilst Schwager , Frei and Vann finished eighth for Courage . Both teams reverted to single @-@ car entries for the 1000 km of Monza , which Collard and Boullion won for Pescarolo ; the Gounon / Vann / Frei combination in the Courage finished sixth overall , and fourth in the LMP1 category . For the 1000 km of Silverstone , it was Frei , Vann and Cochet , driving for Courage , who were the fastest C60 ; they took 14th , and 13th in class , whilst Collard and Boullion had problems and finished 34th , and 17th in class . The 1000 km of Nürburgring saw Boullion and Collard take fourth for Pescarolo , whilst Frei and Cochet took eighth for Courage . At the final round of the season , which was the 1000 km of Istanbul , Collard and Boullion took another victory for Pescarolo , whilst the Courage of Gounon and Frei took 21st overall , and eighth in class . This result meant that Pescarolo had won their first ever team 's championship , whilst Courage finished seventh . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 For 2006 , Pescarolo were the only team to run the C60 in the newly @-@ renamed Le Mans Series ( LMS ) . Collard and Boullion started the season in exactly the same way they had finished the previous one , by winning the 1000 km of Istanbul in the Pescarolo C60 Hybrid . The 1000 km of Spa saw Collard and Boullion win again , despite starting the race from the pitlane after a crash in free practice . At the 24 Hours of Le Mans , Pescarolo entered two C60s , as usual ; one driven by Hélary , Loeb and Franck Montagny , whilst the other was driven by Collard , Minassian and Comas . The Montagny / Hélary / Loeb car took second overall , beating one of the brand @-@ new Audi R10 <unk> , whilst the other car finished fifth overall , and fourth in the LMP1 category . Having returned to the LMS , Collard and Boullion were joined by Hélary for the 1000 km of Nürburgring , and the trio took another win for Pescarolo . Didier André replaced Hélary in the final two rounds , which were the 1000 km of Donington and 1000 km of Jarama , and Pescarolo won both races to complete a clean sweep . As a result , Pescarolo retained the LMP1 team 's championship with the maximum score possible . The C60 was made obsolete by the new LMP1 regulations for 2007 , and thus was retired , and replaced by the Pescarolo 01 . 
 = Operation Camargue = 
 Operation Camargue was one of the largest operations by the French Far East Expeditionary Corps and Vietnamese National Army in the First Indochina War . It took place from 28 July until 10 August 1953 . French armored platoons , airborne units and troops delivered by landing craft to the coast of central Annam , modern @-@ day Vietnam , attempted to sweep forces of the communist Viet Minh from the critical Route One . 
 The first landings took place in the early morning on 28 July , and reached the first objectives , an inland canal , without major incident . A secondary phase of mopping @-@ up operations began in a " labyrinth of tiny villages " where French armored forces suffered a series of ambushes . Reinforced by paratroopers , the French and their Vietnamese allies tightened a net around the defending Viet Minh , but delays in the movement of French forces left gaps through which most of the Viet Minh guerillas , and many of the arms caches the operation was expected to seize , escaped . For the French , this validated the claim that it was impossible to operate tight ensnaring operations in Vietnam 's jungle , due to the slow movement of their troops , and a foreknowledge by the enemy , which was difficult to prevent . From then on , the French focused on creating strong fortified positions , against which Viet Minh General Giáp could pit his forces , culminating in Opération Castor and the Battle of Dien Bien Phu . 
 With the French forces withdrawn from the operation by the late summer of 1953 , Viet Minh Regiment 95 re @-@ infiltrated Route One and resumed ambushes of French convoys , retrieving weapons caches missed by the French forces . Regiment 95 occupied the area for the remainder of the First Indochina War and were still operating there as late as 1962 against the South Vietnamese Army during the Second Indochina , or Vietnam War . 
 = = Background = = 
 The First Indochina War had raged , as guerrilla warfare , since 19 December 1946 . From 1949 , it evolved into conventional warfare , due largely to aid from the communists of the People 's Republic of China ( " PRC " ) to the north . Subsequently , the French strategy of occupying small , poorly defended outposts throughout Indochina , particularly along the Vietnamese @-@ Chinese border , started failing . Thanks to the terrain , popular support for August Revolution and support for decolonization from bordering China and the U.S.S.R. , the Viet Minh had succeeded in turning a " clandestine guerrilla movement into a powerful conventional army " , following asymmetric warfare theory laid by Mao Tse Tung , something which previously had never been encountered by the western colonial powers . In October 1952 , fighting around the Red River Delta spread into the Thai Highlands , resulting in the Battle of Nà Sản , at which the Viet Minh were defeated . The French used the lessons learned at Nà Sản – strong ground bases , versatile air support , and a model based on the British Burma Campaign – as the basis for their new strategy . The Viet Minh , however , remained unbeatable in the highland regions of Vietnam , and the French " could not offset the fundamental disadvantages of a <unk> army facing a hill and forest army in a country which had few roads but a great many hills and forests " . 
 In May 1953 , General Henri Navarre arrived to take command of the French forces , replacing General Raoul Salan . Navarre spoke of a new offensive spirit in Indochina – based on strong , fast @-@ moving forces – and the media quickly took Operation Camargue to be the " practical realization " of that . 
 = = = Chinese and American backing = = = 
 Following the Communist victory in the Chinese Civil War in 1949 , the Viet Minh established close ties with China . It enabled the Chinese to expand their area of influence into Indochina and the Viet Minh to receive much @-@ needed Chinese equipment and strategic planning support . From mid @-@ 1950 , PRC military advisers were seconded to the Viet Minh at battalion , regimental and divisional levels . The common border meant that " China became a ' sanctuary ' where the Viet Minh could be trained and refitted " . When the Korean War broke out , Indochina became " an important pawn in Cold War strategy " . In December 1950 , the United States , concerned about growing Chinese Communist influence , started providing military aid to the French , with a first payment of US $ 15 million . 
 In the spring of 1953 , the Viet Minh launched campaigns in Laos and succeeded in linking up Laotian territorial gains with their bases in north @-@ western Vietnam . Meanwhile , the winding down of the Korean War meant that China was able " to give much more attention to its southern neighbour " . Similarly , the US " released from its heavy burden in the Korean conflict ... dramatically increased its military and financial support " to the French . By June 1953 , the US " had sent : 1 @,@ 224 tanks and combat vehicles ; 120 @,@ 792 rifles and machine guns ; more than 200 million rifle and machine gun cartridges ; more than five million artillery projectiles ; 302 boats and 304 aircraft " ( by end of the war , total US aid amounted to nearly four billion dollars ) . 
 = = Prelude to the battle = = 
 Route One , also known as Route Coloniale One ( or <unk> ) , had been the main north – south artery along the coastline of Vietnam since the outbreak of violence in 1949 . Communications and convoys along these lines suffered from regular attacks by Viet Minh irregulars , despite efforts by the French during 1952 in Operation <unk> . The Viet Minh paramilitary forces around Route One originated mainly from a region of fortified villages dispersed along sand dunes and salt marshes between Hué to the south , and Quang Tri to the north . French forces had suffered from Viet Minh ambushes , an attack that the latter had become very proficient at throughout the war , most notably in the annihilation of Group Mobile 42 in 1950 and of GM 100 in 1954 . The roads in Vietnam were almost all closed during the night and " abandoned to the enemy " . Between 1952 and 1954 , 398 armored vehicles were destroyed , 84 % of them from mines and booby traps . Typically , the Viet Minh ambushed convoys by obstructing the road with a fallen tree or pile of boulders , and then destroying the first and last vehicles of the halted convoy with remote mines . <unk> , mines and the steep cliff faces naturally found at the road side aided in funneling the target convoy into a small area , where machine guns , mortars and recoilless rifles were trained . Viet Minh Regiment 95 repeatedly deployed these tactics , inflicting severe losses on the French forces passing along Route One , which led to its French nickname of la rue sans joie ( " the Street Without Joy " ) . Regiment 95 was , along with regiments 18 and 101 , part of the Viet Minh Division 325 , commanded by General Tran Quy Ha . The division was formed in 1951 from pre @-@ existing units in Thừa Thiên just north of Route One , and became operational in the summer of 1952 . 
 By early summer 1953 , thanks in part to the wind @-@ down of hostilities in the Korean War , the French command had " sufficient reserves " at hand to begin clearing the Viet Minh back from Route One . They assembled 30 battalions , two armored regiments and two artillery regiments for one of the largest operations of the conflict . Called Operation Camargue , it was named for the sandy marshland to the west of Marseille , France . The difficult terrain was to prove the decisive factor and gave a major advantage to the one Viet Minh regiment tasked with defending Route One . 
 From a 100 @-@ meter ( 109 yd ) deep beach of " hard sand " the French landing forces were to advance through a series of dunes . The dunes were up to 20 meters ( 22 yd ) high and interspersed with precipices , ditches and a handful of small villages . Beyond this was an 800 @-@ meter ( 875 yd ) belt of pagodas and temples , which war correspondent Bernard Fall described as having excellent defensive potential . Beyond these temples was Route One itself with a series of closely packed and fortified villages , including Tân An , Mỹ <unk> , Van Trinh and Lai @-@ Ha . This network of villages and hedgerows made both ground and air surveillance difficult . Across from Route One the villages continued amid an area of quicksand , swamps and bogs , which would stop all but a few of the vehicles at the disposal of the French . Although there were roads , most were mined or damaged . Throughout the area , the civilian population remained and provided a further complication for the French high command . 
 = = = French order of battle = = = 
 The French divided their forces into four groupement mobiles ( " mobile groups " ) : A through D. Group A consisted of Mobile Group 14 , which contained 3rd Amphibious Group , 2nd Marine Commando , 2nd Battalion 1st Colonial Parachute Regiment , and 3rd Vietnamese Parachute Battalion . Operation Camargue was to be one of the final proving grounds for the use of French armour during the war . It was to land on the beach in line with the center of Route One . Meanwhile , Group B was to advance over land from the west of the north @-@ east facing beach . This group consisted of Mobile Group Central Vietnam 's 6th Moroccan Spahis , 2nd Amphibious Group , a tank platoon from 1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment , and two infantry companies from the Quang @-@ Tri military base . Group C was to advance from the south @-@ west into the back of Van Trinh through the swamps , and consisted of the 9th Moroccan Tabor , 27th Vietnamese Infantry Battalion , 2nd Battalion of the 4th Moroccan Rifle Regiment , 1 Commando , a tank platoon of the Moroccan Colonials , an armoured patrol boat platoon , and an LCM platoon . Group D consisted of 3rd Battalion of the 3rd Algerian Rifles , the 7th Amphibious Group , and a commando group , and was to land at the south @-@ east end of the beach , below Group A. These forces in total formed " two amphibious forces , three land @-@ borne <unk> and one airborne force " all of which was commanded by General Leblanc . This French force , vastly outnumbering the Viet Minh regiment opposing it , was tasked with sealing the Communist forces into a tight pocket , and systematically destroying them , as well as capturing as many prisoners , arms caches and as much equipment as possible . 
 = = Securing Route One = = 
 = = = French landing = = = 
 On 27 July 1953 , the French landing craft departed from their assembly points , and by 04 : 00 on the following had begun disembarking 160 amphibious landing craft belonging to Group A 's 3rd Amphibious opposite the coastline . By 06 : 00 , these vehicles had landed on the beach and proceeded to occupy sand ridges overlooking the dunes beyond . Proceeding into the dunes , the vehicles of 3rd Amphibious became stuck in the sand ; in the meantime , other regular infantry elements of Group A were experiencing more difficulties in the sea , taking two extra hours to reach the beach . Thus unsupported , elements of 3rd Amphibious that either disembarked floundering vehicles or were pushed , managed to escape the dunes and advance between Tân An and Mỹ <unk> . The French amphibious vehicles were the World War II @-@ era 29 @-@ C cargo carriers , nicknamed the " crab " or " <unk> " and LVT 4 or 4As , known as " alligators " . The latter were armed with two .30 caliber and two .50 caliber Browning machine guns and an M20 recoilless rifle . While the alligators were sufficiently armoured and well suited to the water , they struggled on land . In contrast , the crab had difficulty in water and its large size presented too great a target on land ; however , it was lighter and more maneuverable , except in paddy fields where its suspension became clogged with vegetation . 
 While Group A 's forward elements were breaching the dune barrier unopposed , two of Group B 's battalions crossed the Van Trịnh <unk> . By 07 : 45 , when they made visual contact with the crabs and alligators of Group A , they had succeeded in sealing off the northern escape route of Regiment 95 . By 08 : 30 , the 6th Moroccan Spahis also reached the canal , having had difficulty crossing the swamps on the landward side with their M24 Chaffee tanks . No French units , as yet , had made any major contact with the Viet Minh . A minor fire @-@ fight had taken place on the southern edge of Group B 's advance when an Algerian company exchanged fire with 20 – 30 Viet Minh and suffered the first French fatalities . Simultaneously , Group C had advanced into the center of the area of operation , and executed " the most complicated maneuver of the operation " . This involved crossing Route One and sealing off the land side of the operational area , and was completed by 08 : 30 . 
 Group D , finally , was tasked with advancing south from its landing point to close off an escape route that ran between the sea and an inland lagoon towards the city of Hué . Landing at 04 : 30 , the group made quick progress through the beach and dunes , secured the small city of <unk> Chi Dong and hit the north coast of the lagoon by 05 : 30 , thereby sealing off that escape route with no enemy contact . The final act of sealing the noose was to move some of the French Navy vessels north to the Vietnamese villages of Ba @-@ Lang and An @-@ Hoi where any attempt by Regiment 95 to flee by sea would have taken place . 
 = = = <unk> the loop = = = 
 With the landings and the encirclement of Regiment 95 complete and the net deemed secure , the French forces began the second phase of the operation and began to sweep through the area for the encircled Viet Minh . Each French group began to move through the villages around Route One in an attempt to locate the Viet Minh forces . Group B , which was lined up along the canal – the jump @-@ off point for the second phase of the operation – moved to sweep the northern villages while Group C did the same further south . The method of searching each village was to seal it off entirely with encircling troops , and then inspect it with a heavily armed unit of minesweepers and K @-@ 9 teams . Men of military age were arrested and screened by intelligence officers . This process was time @-@ consuming , and by 11 : 00 Group B had traveled 7 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) through the network of villages with no results or resistance . At this time , the 6th Moroccan Spahis entered the village of Dong @-@ Qué with their M @-@ 24 tanks and the support of the 1st Battalion of the Moroccan Rifles and the artillery of Colonel Piroth ( later commander of the artillery at the battle of Dien Bien Phu ) and his 69th African Artillery Regiment . 
 The Moroccan infantry took the lead , and the French commanders sealed themselves in their tank turrets and advanced behind . Viet Minh forces , which were waiting in ambush , fired almost the same instant as the lead Moroccan units who noticed their presence . The Moroccan forces spread out into the surrounding rice paddies , and the bazookas of the Viet Minh missed the French tanks . The French commander called in Piroth 's artillery and Dong @-@ Qué " disintegrated under the impact of their high @-@ angle fire " , particularly when a French shell found the Viet Minh ammunition depot . As the French tanks approached , the Viet Minh drove the civilians out to clog up the entrance to the village , however as the Viet Minh retreated they were spotted through the civilians by the Moroccan infantry and killed by 13 : 00 . During this battle , however , most of the Regiment 95 personnel who had been elsewhere managed to escape towards the southern end of the French encirclement . Leblanc had realized the intentions of Regiment 95 's commander , and had requested one of the two reserve paratroop units to be deployed at the border between the network of temples and the dune @-@ filled area in front of where Group D had originally landed . This paratroop unit , 2nd Battalion of the 1st Colonial Parachute Regiment , began to advance towards the canal at 10 : 45 , 15 minutes before Group B entered Dong @-@ Qué . 
 Group C 's 9th Tabor had also , like the M @-@ 24s of Group B , struggled through the marshes during the first phase of the operation , and were late in arriving at the jumping @-@ off point for phase two , the canal . At 08 : 45 , Moroccan units of Group C were investigating the village of Phu An on the opposite side of the lagoon from Group D 's landing area , when they came under heavy fire . Despite being nearer to Group D , the engaged units radioed their immediate commanders back in Group C , who were by now some distance away , further inland . This delay , coupled with the failure of many of the units ' <unk> radios , meant that these advance elements of Group C failed to get through until 09 : 10 . At 09 : 40 , the commander of Group C called up various reinforcements from Hué including two companies of Vietnamese trainee NCOs and five infantry companies , two of which came via landing craft and did not reach the beleaguered elements of Group C until 18 : 00 , half an hour after the Moroccans had finally counter @-@ attacked and occupied Phu @-@ An . The 2nd Battalion of the Parachute Chasseurs Regiment had been requested to drop at 14 : 00 to support the advanced elements of Group C but did not jump until 16 : 50 and thus failed to assemble before the Moroccans themselves occupied Phu @-@ An . With the final capture of Phu @-@ An , the extreme southern tip of the encirclement , the pincer movement was complete . 
 = = = Escape of Regiment 95 = = = 
 By 17 : 30 , with Phu @-@ An captured , all French reserves now committed , and one half of the pocket fully swept by groups B and A at the northern end of the battlefield , the French appeared to have gained the upper hand . By now , the expected windfall of arms caches and prisoners should have taken place . However , the unexpected time taken to capture Phu @-@ An , and the delayed arrival of the paratroop reinforcements who had been scattered by the winds , had left a gap between Phu @-@ An and the southern edge of the lagoon . This 12 @-@ kilometer ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) gap was eventually covered by only four French battalions , leaving gaps through which the Viet Minh could escape . Crabs and alligators were stationed on , or in some cases in , the canal network , and French infantry were scattered across the edge of the pocket throughout that night in order to detect escaping Viet Minh . However , despite the occasional shot , flare and searchlight , no Viet Minh were detected . 
 On the morning of 29 July 1953 , the French forces continued to advance into the remaining 23 @-@ square @-@ kilometer ( 9 sq mi ) pocket , encountering neither Viet Minh nor civilian . Groups A , B and D reached the edge of the canal opposite Group C by 13 : 00 , having retrieved a small number of suspected Viet Minh and a " few weapons " . At this time , however , a Morane aircraft detected the movement of elements of Regiment 95 towards An @-@ Hoi on the extreme northern corner of the operational area , outside of the pocket . The French carried out a raid on An @-@ Hoi by commando groups and elements of Group A , which took place at 15 : 00 and returned with suspected Viet Minh by 18 : 00 . The French then undertook a methodical house @-@ to @-@ house search of the entire area , sweeping each village , and the surrounding paddy fields and jungle , risking encounter with Viet Minh caltrops . Meanwhile , 2nd and 3rd amphibious used their crabs and alligators to herd prisoners towards Trung @-@ An for interrogation . By the end of 29 July , with resistance to the French forces having ceased , a general withdrawal of paratroopers , amphibious groups and marines began . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Rebuilding and reaction = = = 
 After the departure of all but regular French infantry , efforts to make the area suitable for permanent occupation by French forces and French @-@ friendly civilians began . This involved the rebuilding of road and rail links ( Vietnam 's North – South railway ran alongside Route One ) , the repairing of infrastructure , demining , the installation of new Vietnamese government administrators , and the provision of " everything from rice to anti @-@ malaria tablets " . Over 24 villages were placed under the authority of the Vietnamese government , and Regiment 95 had been driven from the area . In comparison to Fall , South Vietnamese general Lâm Quang Thi states in his memoirs that Operation Camargue was " one of the most successful French military operations during the Indochina war " in the area of Route One . 
 Newspapers stated that the operation had been a " total success , demonstrating once more the new aggressiveness and mobility " of the French forces . However , in the days following the end of the fighting , press reports on the French failure to capture the anticipated large numbers of Viet Minh began to appear though the British newspaper , The Times , did publish claimed casualty figures of 1 @,@ 550 for the Viet Minh , 200 of which were killed . This estimate was altered by the French the next day to 600 killed or wounded and 900 captured , and it was suggested that the operation did " not appear to have been successful " . In contrast to these figures , Bernard Fall records 182 Viet Minh casualties and 387 prisoners . He also notes that " 51 rifles , eight sub @-@ machine guns , two mortars , and five BARs " were captured . Of the prisoners , however , it is not recorded how many were confirmed to be members of Regiment 95 . Both Fall and the newspapers published in the days following the official termination of the operation on 10 August 1953 , give French casualties as 17 dead and 100 wounded . Giáp wrote " it was announced we suffered heavy losses although in fact our losses were insignificant ... their troops had to withdraw with heavy losses " . 
 Fall goes on to record that the " major defect " of Operation Camargue was that the French had nothing like the numerical superiority to encircle a force in the terrain around Road One , 15 : 1 as opposed to the 20 : 1 or 25 : 1 that he believed required . He states that the slow French progress ( around 1 @,@ 500 yards an hour ) and the large distances each unit had to guard from Viet Minh infiltration meant that the Viet Minh could easily escape the net . He also states that Viet Minh intelligence were always aware of French movements , as the size of French units and the complex technology involved in the operation gave its presence and intentions away almost immediately , whereas in contrast the simpler Viet Minh operations were far more difficult to detect . 
 = = = Route One and Regiment 95 = = = 
 Regiment 95 survived Operation Camargue and resumed ambushes in 1954 , as well as assaulting a Vietnamese garrison near Hué . The regiment remained in the area , taking part in General Giáp 's 1954 campaign season , until Vietnam was split into North and South Vietnam by the cease @-@ fire , whereupon it infiltrated back to the north along Route One during broad daylight , leaving small cells of guerillas in the area . The regiment returned to resume ambushes of the South Vietnamese Army in 1962 . 
 = Summer of 4 Ft . 2 = 
 " Summer of 4 Ft . 2 " is the twenty @-@ fifth and last episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 19 , 1996 . In the episode , the Simpson family goes to Ned Flanders family 's beach house . Hanging around with a new set of children , Lisa becomes popular , while Bart is left out . Bart tries to sabotage his sister 's newfound acceptance , but fails . 
 The episode was written by Dan Greaney and directed by Mark Kirkland . The episode guest stars Christina Ricci , who recorded her lines over the phone instead of going into the studio . The Simpson family 's rented beach house is based on the then @-@ show runner Josh Weinstein 's parents ' house in New Hampshire . The episode features cultural references to Pippi Longstocking , The New Yorker character Eustace Tilley , and Alice and The Hatter from Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland . Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from fans and television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 , and was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lisa finds out on the last day of school how unpopular she is when nobody cares enough to sign her yearbook , while Bart makes people feel grateful that he signs theirs . Meanwhile , Ned Flanders offers the Simpson family the use of his beach house in Little <unk> over the summer , though Homer makes Ned work on his faulty septic tank before he agrees . Marge likes the idea and suggests that Bart should bring Milhouse and that Lisa should bring a friend too . However , Lisa has no friends to bring and decides to change her image as a result , deliberately leaving behind her un @-@ stylish wardrobe . After reaching the beach house , Lisa lies to Marge that she forgot to pack , so they go shopping for new clothes . Lisa buys a new set of clothes that she believes will make her look " cool " , and goes to look for some <unk> people her own age . Marge , now feeling left out , decides to focus her parenting on Maggie , who looks worried . Homer , in the meantime , buys a large firework to celebrate Independence Day , only for it to backfire due to a fast @-@ burning fuse ; he initially throws it in the fridge , but changes his mind when he remembers the beer inside and instead chucks it in the dishwasher , causing it to rupture a pipe . 
 When Lisa succeeds in making friends with a group of local children ( in particular a girl named Erin ) , Bart becomes jealous and complains that they should be his friends . He tries to steal her new friends from her with a skateboarding display , but they find his effort pathetic and shun him , which Bart blames on Milhouse . Lisa is then spending more time with her new friends , to the point where they hold a beach party to celebrate the 4th of July . Bart then decides to take revenge by showing her friends the yearbook and all of Lisa 's deeply nerdy real pastimes . As her new friends stare in shock at Lisa 's nerdy hobbies , Lisa runs off in tears . 
 The next morning , Lisa is furious with Bart for exposing her true self . She is about to pour maple syrup in Bart 's eyes when Marge tells them about a carnival happening later that evening . They all go , but Bart and Lisa continue to bicker and fight , right up to when they ride the bumper cars and Bart rams Lisa 's car out of the arena . Feeling dejected , Lisa decides to leave , concluding that she was probably never meant to have friends , and Bart feels guilty for hurting Lisa . When Lisa returns to the beach house , she finds her friends in the act of seemingly vandalizing the Simpsons ' car . Thinking it 's some sort of cruel prank , she simply tells them to finish it and leave , but it 's then revealed they were actually decorating the car with sea shells in her honor , at which point they tell her they don 't care that she 's smart because she 's a good person and they learned stuff from her . Lisa is thrilled , but Homer shows up and screams in horror at how his car got messed up . Before leaving Bart presents Lisa with her yearbook , which now has wonderful messages from her new friends and even Milhouse . He reveals he felt guilty for hurting her , so he explained his behavior to her new friends and asked them to sign her yearbook . Lisa forgives Bart , while Marge tells Homer that the kids should 've cleaned out the shells before gluing them to the car , as the Simpsons are followed by seagulls trying to eat the mollusks inside . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Dan Greaney , and directed by Mark Kirkland . It was Greaney 's second episode on The Simpsons . The staff of the show wanted to do a summer episode because there was " so much stuff " about summer vacations that they felt had to be covered in an episode . David Silverman , one of the show 's animators , particularly likes the episode because he thinks it captures the feel of being on summer vacation . 
 The area in which the Flanders family 's beach house is located in is based on the Cape Cod peninsula . Many of the writers of The Simpsons spent time on Cape Cod so they decided to model the new locations on it . The animators looked at Cape Cod photographs to get inspiration for the episode , and one of the show 's background designers , Lance Wilder , grew up in that area . The beach house is based on the then @-@ show runner Josh Weinstein 's parents ' house in New Hampshire , to which the writers had paid visit many times . They played several board games when they were there , which gave them the idea to have to the Simpson family play the Mystery Date board game in the episode . Silverman said that the episode was difficult to animate and direct because it had so many new and detailed backgrounds and completely different locations . 
 American actress Christina Ricci guest starred in the episode as Erin , one of Lisa 's new friends . Ricci was not able to come to the recording studio , so she recorded all of her lines over the phone . Weinstein , who was a fan of Ricci , thought she did a nice performance in the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title is a parody of the 1971 film Summer of ' 42 . Lisa has a daydream in which the following fictional characters appear : Pippi Longstocking , The New Yorker character Eustace Tilley , and Alice and The Hatter from Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland . Milhouse compares Lisa 's new appearance to the character Blossom from the American television series Blossom . <unk> 's <unk> is a spoof of defunct retailer <unk> and parent company T.J. Maxx . Homer replicates a scene from the 1973 film American Graffiti when he buys some embarrassing products at the store in order to get some illegal fireworks . The Mystery Date board game that the family is forced to play is an actual Milton Bradley Company board game from the 1960s . Weinstein recalled playing it as a child and claim it to be " a very disappointing game to play as a little boy " because of the female target audience . The ending music of American Graffiti , " All Summer Long " by The Beach Boys , is also played at the end of the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Summer of 4 Ft . 2 " finished forty @-@ second ( tied with Melrose Place and Married ... with Children ) in the ratings for the week of May 13 to May 19 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 . The episode was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week ( tied with Melrose Place and Married ... With Children ) , following The X @-@ Files . 
 Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from fans and television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " This episode will strike a chord with anyone that 's ever tried to fit in with the crowd [ ... ] Lisa gets to show the many facets of her character , and there 's a superb slapstick sequence as Homer tries to dispose of a firework . " Dave Foster of DVD Times praised the episode and said : " The episode is quite simply my favourite Lisa episode regardless of season . From calm to cool and fiercely aggressive , we 've rarely seen Lisa so enticing as we do here , and the episode 's many elements including the side stories for the other family members culminate in one of the finest this season has to offer . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson enjoyed the episode and said that he likes how it addresses Bart 's resentment of Lisa 's popularity . " Granted , it makes [ Bart ] a little too mean , but it 's entertaining , " he added . Jacobson went on to say : " Marge gets the best moment again , as I love watching her non @-@ violent approach to the bumper cars . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best parts of the episode to be the scenes that feature Milhouse , particularly his yearbook message to Lisa and the scene with the Mystery Date board game . She concluded her review by giving the episode a grade of A. 
 = Roswell High School ( Georgia ) = 
 Roswell High School ( RHS ) is a public high school in Roswell , Georgia , USA which opened in 1949 . It serves the entire city of Roswell west of Georgia 400 and the city of Mountain Park , as well as small portions of Alpharetta and Milton . With a population of over of 2 @,@ 233 students in the 2013 – 2014 school year , RHS is one of the largest schools in the Fulton County School System . Roswell High School neighbors both Fellowship Christian School and Blessed Trinity Catholic High School . It is also the second oldest of Fulton County 's schools in the northern portion of the county , opening between Milton High School ( 1921 ) , and Chattahoochee High School ( 1991 ) . Roswell is currently on its third campus , which opened in 1990 . The current building is the oldest in use high school building in north Fulton . 
 The school offers students many extracurricular activities , including 72 clubs , 11 academic teams , and various services clubs . Some other activities meet as elective classes such as musical groups , drama , and art . These classes are supplemented by after @-@ school rehearsals , meetings , and outside concerts . Students also have the option to compete in the school 's 42 Varsity , Junior Varsity , and Freshman athletic programs . 
 Roswell is a member of the Georgia High School Association ( GHSA ) and Region 5 @-@ AAAAAA for athletic competition as of the 2013 @-@ 2014 academic year . The school 's mascot is the Hornets and the colors are green , white and black . The school offers 16 different sports comprising 23 varsity level teams . Eight of the Roswell Hornet teams have won state championships , totaling 20 overall . The most championships won by a single team is seven , accomplished by the girls ' gymnastics program . 
 = = History = = 
 Roswell High School first opened in 1949 and is the second oldest high school in Fulton County north of the Chattahoochee River . Like the city of Roswell , the school bears the name of Roswell King . King founded the cotton mill that would eventually be the city 's economic backbone for much of its early history . The immediate predecessor to Roswell High School was the Roswell Public School on Mimosa Boulevard , which housed grades 1 – 10 and opened in the 1892 after the Georgia General Assembly passed Act No. 51 on December 20 , 1892 , allowing the city to elect a school board and levy taxes for support of the school . Students from outside the city limits were required to pay tuition . In 1896 , the city council and mayor were authorized by the state to issue $ 5 @,@ 000 in bonds to build a new school building . 
 In 1914 , the existing school was torn down and two new structures were built . Since schools were segregated at that time , a two @-@ story brick building was constructed on Mimosa Boulevard to house the white students in grades 1 through 10 , and a one @-@ room wooden building was built on Pleasant Hill Avenue for black students in grades 1 through 7 . The Pleasant Hill facility also served as a meeting place for a local lodge and the Pleasant Hill Baptist Church until the church built its own facility across the street in 1922 . Grade 11 was added in the 1920s to the Mimosa Boulevard school . Black students who progressed past grade 7 could then attend Washington High School in Atlanta . 
 During the Great Depression , the city of Roswell was annexed into Fulton County from Cobb County as part of its 1932 combination with Milton County and Campbell County . Roswell students in grades ten and eleven were then sent to Milton High School in Alpharetta or North Fulton High School in Atlanta to finish their secondary education ( which ended upon completion of grade 11 ) . 
 In 1949 , the Mimosa Boulevard building was demolished , and a new school was built on the existing site to allow the 10th and 11th grades to return to Roswell as the inaugural Roswell High School . G.W. Adams was the first principal and oversaw the addition of more rooms to the school over the next few years . During this growth , the Baptist , Presbyterian and Methodist churches also located on Mimosa Boulevard were used to house auxiliary classrooms . Also in 1949 , the high school began participating in athletics with a varsity basketball team and other senior high school extracurricular activities . In 1950 , Roswell High School added grade 12 as part of state @-@ wide standard for high schools and played its first varsity football season . The first graduating class graduated in the spring of 1951 . 
 Construction began nearby on Alpharetta Highway near the present @-@ day Roswell City Hall on a new campus . That facility opened in the fall of 1954 and allowed the high school ( grades 8 – 12 ) to physically separate from the elementary school ( grades 1 – 7 ) . Roswell High 's second campus was designed by the architecture firm Stevens & Wilkinson , which innovated school designs and utilized a " finger plan " to improve functionality of the school . It had a capacity of 400 students and had facilities for industrial arts , shop , music halls , science labs , art room , indoor gymnasium , athletic fields , a football stadium , and a track . The primary school remained in the Mimosa Boulevard building as Roswell Elementary . As of 2007 , the brick elementary building is part of an expanded structure still owned by the Fulton County School System , and it houses the Crossroads Second Chance North Alternative School and the Teaching Museum North . Roswell High remained at the Alpharetta Highway campus until the fall of 1990 when the current campus on King Road was opened . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The current campus is the third that Roswell High School has occupied . It opened in the fall of 1990 on King Road , just off of Highway 92 , with an enrollment of nearly 2 @,@ 000 students . It is the oldest high school building in North Fulton . The new campus was expanded with a football stadium and softball field added in 1994 and an auditorium in 1995 , paid for by the RHS Foundation . The campus includes science , computer , video , and cosmetology labs ; baseball and softball fields , a stadium for football and soccer , a lacrosse field , an additional practice field , a dome style gymnasium , a cross country trail , and lighted tennis courts for athletics . 
 In 2008 the Roswell gymnasium was named one of the top high school gyms in the nation . Cited was the domed rotunda , the hanging four sided scoreboard , and locker room facilities . 
 On February 2 , 2007 , Roswell High had a groundbreaking ceremony for an expansion project . The 23 @,@ 851 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 215 @.@ 8 m2 ) expansion added ten new classrooms , including science labs and a new band room . This increased the school to a 1 @,@ 900 student official capacity with the state . The addition also reduced some of the need for portable classrooms , but portable units were still utilized after the expansion to handle Roswell 's enrollment ( 2400 students as of 2007 ) . Construction officially began on February 5 , 2007 . The addition was paid for by a one @-@ cent Special @-@ purpose local @-@ option sales tax ( SPLOST ) . Additional improvements to RHS for additional safety and security features , technology and curriculum equipment enhancements , and athletic facilities upgrades were to be implemented as part of third SPLOST approved by Fulton County voters on March 20 , 2007 . 
 In 2014 , Roswell High School began renovating its main entrance . The main office and front desk were relocated as a safety measure for the administration . The security office was also relocated to be near the main entrance . Due to the renovation , trailer one was removed from the property . The renovation took down the metal covering leading from the carpool drop off to the main entrance . 
 Roswell High School also added a new exterior with a stone face and large front @-@ facing windows . Small interior changes included new bathroom fixtures and tile . 
 = = Students and faculty = = 
 In the 2007 – 2008 school year , Roswell 's enrollment was 2 @,@ 428 . In that year , the student population was 68 % white , 15 % African American , 12 % Hispanic , and 1 % Asian . Roswell has a relatively large immigrant population , including students from Russia and other former Soviet republics , Korea , and African nations . More recent demographic data shows a student population composed of 63 % white , 14 percent Hispanic , 14 percent African American , 5 percent Asian , and 4 percent American Indian . According to 2007 statistics , 92 percent of the school 's graduates go on to colleges and universities across the United States . The school 's current student enrollment is 2 @,@ 436 . As of 2007 , Roswell 's faculty had 246 full @-@ time teachers , with 85 % holding an advanced degree . 
 Roswell High School is the highest @-@ level school in Fulton County 's Roswell Cluster . The schools that feed into Roswell include <unk> Springs , Mimosa , Mountain Park , Roswell North , and Sweet Apple Elementary Schools . The middle schools that feed into Roswell are Crabapple Middle School and Elkins Pointe Middle School . Also included in the Roswell Cluster is the Crossroads Second Chance North Alternative School , which serves northern Fulton County students in grades six through twelve . 
 = = Academics = = 
 RHS is a part of the Fulton County School System and is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools and the Georgia Department of Education . 
 Roswell was named a National Blue Ribbon School in 1997 – 1998 by the United States Department of Education . It was also designated a Georgia School of Excellence in 1996 . 
 26 Advanced Placement Program ( AP ) classes are offered , and SAT as well as ACT scores regularly exceed the national and state average . For the 2005 – 2006 school year , Roswell 's average SAT score was 1663 with the new SAT scoring system , which ranked Roswell third in the Fulton County School System and sixth in Metro Atlanta . The Georgia state average was 1477 while the national average was 1518 . 477 students took AP exams in 2005 , with 84 % receiving the necessary score ( 3 or higher ) to earn college credit . Nationally , only 60 % score high enough to earn college credits . Three RHS students were named National Merit Scholars in 2005 . 
 Roswell 's academic success has brought national recognition . In 2006 , the school was ranked the # 472 school in Newsweek Magazine 's top 1 @,@ 200 schools , ranking in the top 3 % nationally . Roswell was third on the list among Fulton County 's 12 high schools . 
 Roswell offers a unique curriculum with many electives not offered anywhere else in the county . The school 's unique course offerings include the Career Tech diploma track , robotics , psychology , archaeology , and foreign languages . The Foreign Language department offers French , Spanish , Latin , German , and Japanese , and was honored in the January 2007 issue of Atlanta Magazine for offering the most foreign language courses in the Atlanta area . RHS students participated in the 2007 Annual Japanese Challenge Academic Bowl and won the most awards of any school at the competition . 
 In 2007 , RHS Senior Maia <unk> was named as one of 141 Presidential Scholars by the United States Department of Education . In 2008 , Roswell High was one of 23 Georgia schools recognized by state school superintendent Kathy Cox as an AP Merit School ( 20 % of students taking AP exams , 50 % or more of those receiving a score of three or higher ) . Also in 2008 , Roswell High School student <unk> Sharma was named as one of only 139 Presidential Scholars . RHS student Anand Srinivasan received the Kroger Pinnacle Award in 2014 , the top award given at the state @-@ wide annual Georgia Science and Engineering Fair . 
 U.S. News & World Report ranked Roswell High 162nd in its 2014 list of best high schools for the academic disciplines of science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ( STEM ) and 339th on the 2014 list of best high schools in the United States . 
 = = = Career Tech = = = 
 The Career Tech department at Roswell High is made up of Broadcast and Video Production , Cosmetology , Family and Consumer Sciences , Diversified Technology , Pre @-@ Engineering , Business Education , and JROTC . Through this department , students may take three consecutive years of one of the branches to obtain a Career Technology High School Diploma in place of a College Prep Diploma . Courses cover diverse topics such as culinary arts , business , computers , interior design , and introduction to education and early childhood care . 
 = = = = Broadcast and Video Production = = = = 
 The Broadcast and Video Production department is designed to teach students about the television industry . Using a hands @-@ on method , students learn about all aspects of television from pre @-@ production to production to post @-@ production . The facility is made up of a working television studio , a large control room , six edit rooms ( each equipped with both linear and non @-@ linear editing systems ) , a radio station , and a normal classroom . Students in the program learn to produce everything from commercials and PSAs to dramas , news shows , and sporting events . The advanced classes produce a weekly news show , the Morning Buzz , which airs at the beginning of the day . The Broadcast and Video department supports the student @-@ run radio station , <unk> the Hive , the film club , and the yearly School House Rock concert . 
 = = = JROTC = = = 
 Roswell High School offers a Junior Reserve Officers ' Training Corps ( JROTC ) program . This helps students improve their grades , be more responsible , and hone leadership skills . The program at Roswell High School also offers extracurricular activities , including Drill Team , Raider Team , and Rifle Team . 
 The Drill Team provides students in the JROTC program the opportunity to learn how to properly follow orders by executing various complex series of commands given by the team 's captain . The sabre and color guards are a part of the drill team and present the colors ( national and state flags ) at various school and community events , or honor people of great importance . The Drill Team also represents the school in competitions . 
 The Raider Team is intended to improve the physical fitness of cadets ; they go through many exercises included in physical training , such as push ups , sit ups , pull ups , flexed arm hang , crunches , the one @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) run , and litter carry . The Raider Team enters various competitions , winning a championship in 2006 – 2007 . 
 The Rifle team is jointly run by the JROTC program and the Athletics Department , and represents the school in the Olympic sport of riflery . The team won the Region 6 championship six straight years between 1996 and 2001 . The team finished second in the state in 2000 finishing with a score of 1142 . State champion East Coweta High School finished with a score of 1150 . 
 = = = Fine arts = = = 
 Roswell High School offers fine arts opportunities in art , band , chorus , drama , and orchestra . The groups meet throughout the year as elective classes and extracurricular activities , and hold many events . These include performances at football games , murals painted in the school 's halls , concerts , plays , and a spring musical jointly put on by the drama and choral departments . 
 The drama department annually hosts Short Attention Span Theatre , featuring plays , shorts , and monologues which written , casted , directed , and produced by RHS students . 
 = = = = Chorus = = = = 
 Roswell Choruses have performed on numerous occasions for the Georgia Music Educator 's Association and sang at the 2003 Southern Division of the Music Educator 's National Conference in Savannah , Georgia . The Singing Hornets have performed concerts at Notre Dame , St. Peter 's Basilica , Carnegie Hall , and Disney World . They have performed with professional orchestras , including the Atlanta Symphony Youth Orchestra and Orchestra Atlanta . Each year , the Roswell Choral Music Program receives invitations for students to participate in the Georgia All @-@ State Chorus and the Governor 's Honors Program . Ensembles include the Chamber Singers , Vocal Jazz , Advanced Women 's , and Advanced Men 's Choirs . 
 = = = = Band = = = = 
 The Roswell High School band department contains the marching band , wind ensemble , symphonic band , pep band , jazz band , and percussion ensemble . The marching band performs for all varsity football games and has competitions throughout the fall , as well as parade appearances . The marching band competes in Class AAA and in 2008 placed third overall in the Georgia Invitational Band Championship . In 2009 the wind ensemble , which was one of only three selected , will take part in the Honor Bands of Georgia program hosted at Columbus State University in Columbus , Georgia . The program is an educational opportunity for the bands participating and is meant to further music education in the state . 
 = = = Hornet Advisory Program = = = 
 The Hornet Advisory Program aims to help freshmen adjust to high school life . It brings together faculty advisers , academic counselors , and upperclassmen students to act as mentors to freshmen and acclimate them to Roswell High School . The program meets with students three times a week . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 Roswell High School offers students a variety of options to get involved in the school . Roswell sponsors sports teams in fifteen different sports as well as several club sports . Students can also participate in service clubs , academic clubs , and general interests clubs for a variety of tastes and preferences . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 The Roswell High mascot is the Hornet and the school colors are green , black , and white . The Hornets compete in 16 sports at the varsity level , with additional teams competing at the junior varsity and 9th grade level . 11 sports are available to boys , 10 are for girls , and 2 are co @-@ ed . Overall , 23 teams compete at varsity level , with 43 total . 
 The Hornets have won multiple state titles in athletics , including three each in football and baseball , and two in boys ' basketball . Roswell 's most successful girls ' team is gymnastics , which has won seven state championships ( 1997 , 2000 – 2003 , 2005 , 2007 ) . In 1970 @-@ 71 Roswell completed a three @-@ peat in the GHSA , winning a state title ( including a back @-@ to @-@ back campaign in baseball ) in baseball , basketball , and football within 12 months of each other . In total the Roswell Hornets have won 19 team state championship titles in the school 's 23 sports . 
 Since its inception , Roswell 's traditional rival has been Milton , the oldest high school in northern Fulton County . The Roswell / Milton series is the most @-@ played high school football rivalry in metro Atlanta , with the 2014 game marking the sixtieth meeting between the schools . The two have competed since 1950 in every sport the two schools offer . In 1963 a fight broke out between the fans of the schools at a football game and the series was banned for several years . The football series then went uninterrupted from 1970 – 1997 but was temporarily ended when the GHSA moved Milton to a different Region , which made scheduling difficult . The series was reinstated in 2000 when Milton and Roswell were again in Region 6 @-@ AAAAA . Since 1950 , Roswell has held a 34 – 21 – 1 advantage over their arch rival in football , including winning seven straight from 2001 @-@ 2007 . The 2008 meeting was won by Milton , 20 @-@ 19 . Roswell won a series record 14 straight games from 1983 – 1995 . Roswell 's very first football game was against Milton , a 14 @-@ 0 win on September 22 , 1950 . The largest margin of victory in the series also belongs to Roswell , a 45 @-@ 0 victory on October 26 , 2007 . 
 In lacrosse , the series records are the opposite ; Roswell has a losing record to its arch rival in lacrosse . The closest sport in the rivalry is gymnastics , in which the two teams have combined for eleven state titles ( seven Roswell , four Milton ) and for seven years from 1997 to 2003 one of the two teams won every state championship . In other sports with records available , Roswell 's boys ' soccer team has gone 5 – 0 – 1 against Milton since 2004 while the girls ' soccer team has gone 2 – 4 against the Eagles . 2008 saw the Hornet soccer teams record a sweep over the Milton Eagles for the second straight year . On October 22 , 2008 , the Atlanta Journal Constitution named the Roswell @-@ Milton rivalry as the 7th best football rivalry in the state . Reasons cited included the age of the rivalry and the fight in 1963 . In 2013 the rivals played for the state baseball championship . Milton ultimately ended up winning the state championship in extra innings by one run in front of an overflow crowd . It marked the second straight year a team from the rival schools faced off for a state title , as the girls ' lacrosse teams did so in 2012 . 
 Roswell has also developed a strong rivalry with Centennial High School , the city 's other public high school , in which the two teams play for the Roswell Cup in football , the series starting in 2000 . In soccer , Centennial is the bigger rival than Milton . Roswell Football holds a 9 – 2 record over Centennial . On the soccer pitch , Roswell girls have a 3 – 3 record with the Knights since 2004 , while the boys hold a 1 – 5 record during that time period . 
 Other significant rivals include Chattahoochee , Lassiter , and Alpharetta . Blessed Trinity is Roswell 's closest rival as the two are less than a mile apart ; it is also the newest rival . The two schools started an annual series in soccer in 2007 . They have met three times in soccer , with the boys ' record being tied 1 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 and the girls ' record being 0 @-@ 1 @-@ 2 for Roswell . 
 For the 2005 – 2006 school year , Roswell 's overall athletic program finished 25th in the state 's Director 's Cup standings , which measures the top athletic programs in the state . When ranking just the boys ' teams , Roswell finished 13th in the state . 
 As of the 2014 @-@ 2015 season , Roswell varsity teams compete in the eight team Region 5 @-@ AAAAAA . The AAAAAA classification was created for the 2012 @-@ 2013 season by the GHSA for the largest schools in the state . Roswell was previously a member of Region 6 @-@ AAAAA since its inception in 2000 with the addition of class AAAAA , although Roswell 's region opponents have varied . Prior to joining AAAAA , Roswell was in Region 6 @-@ AAAA for 12 years from 1988 until 1999 . The current members of Region 6 include county rivals Alpharetta , Centennial , and Milton . Teams from neighboring Cobb are Campbell , Kell , Lassiter , Pope , Walton , and Wheeler . Region realignment for the 2010 @-@ 2011 school year kept Roswell in Region 6 , along with Alpharetta , Centennial , and Milton . North Fulton school <unk> joined the other four Fulton schools , along with the North Forsyth Raiders and West Forsyth Wolverines of Forsyth County , to create a seven @-@ team region . 
 Roswell offers all GHSA sponsored sports . Various programs offer teams at the varsity , JV , and freshman levels . Such sports for boys include football , baseball , basketball and lacrosse . Girls ' teams with all three levels are basketball and volleyball . Sports offering varsity and JV teams include cross country , golf , soccer , tennis , and track and field for both genders . Softball and lacrosse are such programs for girls while wrestling is such a program for boys . Swimming & diving is only varsity for both genders , while gymnastics is offered at the varsity level for girls . Roswell offers two co @-@ ed sports , competition cheerleading and riflery ; both are solely varsity teams . 
 = = = = Traditions = = = = 
 Every fall students are encouraged to wear their class colors on football game day Fridays to show their school spirit . The days of Homecoming Week are themed , and students dress up to win spirit points for their class , culminating in the Friday class color day and pep rally . On Wednesday or Thursday night of Homecoming Week , students decorate the halls of the school by class to reflect the theme of the dance . Each hall is judged , with the winning class receiving spirit points . On game days , the Roswell Marching Band plays the school 's fight song as they march through the halls . Roswell 's fight song is a version of the " Washington and Lee Swing . " Seniors dress up in camouflage every Friday for school and for the football games . 
 The senior class of 2010 brought the " Flour Toss " tradition to Roswell . At every kickoff of the Friday football games , students anticipate the kick , each holding <unk> of white flour . As soon as the player kicks the ball , hands go up in the air , releasing the flour , creating a cloud of white to welcome the opposing team . 
 = = = = Football = = = = 
 Roswell 's football team has won three State Championships ( 1968 , 1970 , and 2006 ) , two State Runner @-@ Ups ( 1956 and 2015 ) , and ten Region Championships , the latest in 2015 . Since 1950 Roswell has a combined record of 405 – 244 – 7 . Roswell football history started in 1950 when a spring practice and game was held . During the fall of that year , Roswell posted a 4 – 2 record , including two wins over arch rival Milton . 
 Coach Bill <unk> began building Roswell 's football success when he came to coach the Hornets in 1954 . In two years he got Roswell to the 1956 State Championship game , which Roswell lost to Monticello . He stayed at the school until 1960 , when he left for Virginia . 
 Roswell 's first and so far only undefeated season was in 1968 , when sophomore quarterback Jeff Bower led the Hornets to a 13 – 0 season and the football team 's first State Championship . It was the most wins for a season in school history until 2006 , when that state championship team went 13 – 1 – 1 , tying the 1968 team in wins . Two years later , in 1970 , Roswell won a state title with a 12 – 2 record with Jeff Bower again leading the team . He also won state championships in baseball in 1970 and 1971 and basketball in 1971 . Bower would go on to a long career as a football coach , most notably as the head coach of Southern Miss from 1990 to 2007 . 
 Roswell 's coach with the best record is Ray Manus , who was head coach for 23 seasons ( 1975 – 97 ) . and had a record of 141 – 102 – 1 . After retiring as head coach , Coach Manus returned to the team as an assistant in 2004 , and the stadium was officially named after him that year as well . Though he never won a state title as head coach , Manus was on the coaching staff for all three titles . 
 In 2006 , after a 35 year absence from being at the top of the state , the Hornets recaptured a state title for the first time in 36 years . The team finished the regular season 9 – 1 and the # 2 seed in the playoffs from Region 6 @-@ AAAAA . Roswell continued to win in the state playoffs , including a 10 @-@ 9 win over defending State Runner @-@ Up Brookwood High School , and won the right to play for a State Championship by defeating Tift County in the Georgia Dome state semi @-@ finals . Roswell was eventually crowned state co @-@ champion after a controversial 14 @-@ 14 tie against the Peachtree Ridge Lions . The Hornets finished the season 13 – 1 – 1 . Roswell players won many post @-@ season accolades , including quarterback Dustin Taliaferro , who made the Atlanta Journal Constitution and Associated Press All @-@ State First team , and running back Alex Daniel ( All @-@ State Honorable Mention ) . 
 The Roswell Hornets began the 2007 season ranked # 1 in Class AAAAA and nationally ranked by three publications , including a # 8 ranking by Rivals.com. The Hornets finished 2007 with a 10 – 3 record . Of the three losses Walton made the state semifinals and Lowndes became state champions . The Hornets finished the season ranked # 6 in the state by the AJC and # 5 by the AP . Eight members of the 2007 football team received collegiate scholarships , and six of those signees will attend Division I Football Bowl Subdivision schools . 
 Coach Tim McFarlin resigned as the head coach in the spring of 2008 . Over his ten @-@ year tenure as head coach , Roswell compiled a record of 82 – 34 – 1 , won a share of the 5A state championship in 2006 , reached the state high school playoffs seven times and won two region championships . In 2006 , he was named State AAAAA Coach of the Year . McFarlin was an assistant football coach with the Hornets for 17 years before becoming head coach in 1998 . Roswell hired Leo Barker , defensive coordinator under McFarlin for the 2006 and 2007 seasons , as the head coach for the 2008 season . Barker was the tenth head coach of the Roswell Hornets and served in that position for the 2009 and 2010 seasons before resigning . 
 Leo Barker 's first season at Roswell , 2008 , ended with a 5 @-@ 5 record and the Hornets just missing the playoffs . In his second season the Hornets rebounded and had a 9 @-@ 1 regular season record , finishing second in Region 6 @-@ AAAAA behind Lassiter who defeated the Hornets 45 @-@ 24 . The Hornets made it to the second round of the playoffs , falling to the # 1 state ranked Grayson High School 24 @-@ 14 , giving Roswell a 10 @-@ 2 record for 2009 . 
 Justin Sanderson , the assistant head coach under Barker , was promoted to head coach for the 2011 season . After compiling a 3 @-@ 17 record in 2 seasons , Sanderson was replaced after the 2012 season with John Ford . As of the 2014 season , Ford is the current head football coach at RHS . 
 = = = = Gymnastics = = = = 
 Roswell 's gymnastics program has won a total of seven state championships since 1997 , including four straight from 2000 – 2003 . Roswell 's seven state titles is second in the sports history behind only Lakeside , Dekalb 's nine . The 2006 team finished third in the state , and in 2007 Roswell won their seventh state championship in the sport on April 27 at Westminster , defeating arch rival Milton by only 1 @.@ 55 points despite having no gymnasts winning an individual championship . The 2007 team , however , placed at least one gymnast in the top six of each apparatus , including Annie Turner , who placed second in the All @-@ Around , third on vault and bars , and fifth on floor . Two Roswell gymnasts finished second and sixth on the balance beam . In 2008 the Hornets finished fourth in the state . 
 = = = = Lacrosse = = = = 
 Along with rival Centennial , Roswell became one of the first two public schools in the state to offer lacrosse in 1999 . Roswell was the host of the first GHSA sponsored tournament in May 2002 . The school was one of only six to field a women 's team in 1999 , along with Centennial and several private schools . The 2006 Boys Lacrosse team made the state playoffs for the first time by finishing second in their region , and made it to the second round . In 2008 , the Roswell Lacrosse program added a freshman boys ' team , the first such team in the state . Another milestone for the Roswell Lacrosse team came in 2008 when Michael Bender was named an All @-@ American , the first Roswell lacrosse player to be given that honor . 
 In 2013 , the boys ' team took a big step forward , making it to the state semifinals before falling to Lambert 17 @-@ 6 . The following year , Roswell went into the state playoffs as a 2 seed from Region 2 . They beat East Coweta in the first round , and then beat their cross @-@ town rival and the defending state champion , Centennial . They would then beat Walton at home , which led to a rematch of the previous years semi @-@ final match up against Lambert in the State Championship . In Ray Manus Stadium , with over 5 @,@ 000 fans in attendance , Roswell captured its first Boys ' Lacrosse State Championship , defeating the Lambert Longhorns 6 @-@ 5 . They finished the season 17 @-@ 3 and were ranked by the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution as the # 1 team in the state of Georgia . They were ranked the # 8 team in the South by Nike . 
 The Roswell Girls ' Lacrosse team made the state playoffs for the first time in 2009 . They made the second round of the state playoffs , falling to eventual champion Chattahoochee . The team finished with a 13 @-@ 5 @-@ 1 record and ranked # 5 in the state . 
 = = = = Other athletic programs = = = = 
 The Hornet baseball program has won three state titles . The team has been a state playoff participant and has been ranked nationally by such sources as USA Today Top 100 and Baseball America . For the 2007 season , Roswell 's team was ranked in the pre @-@ season nationally . The Hornets ' state championships in baseball were won in 1970 , 1971 , and 1986 . They finished second in the state in 1969 , 1976 , and 2013 . The 1986 state championship team holds the record for the most wins in program history at 29 . 
 Roswell 's boys ' golf team has one state title , taking first place in 1990 . In 2006 , Roswell finished second when rain canceled the second of the two @-@ round tournament . Coach Tim McFarlin led the 2006 State Runner @-@ Up team just seven months before taking the football team to the 2006 State Championship . 
 Roswell 's track & field program has won two boys ' state championships in 1959 and in 1961 . The 1959 State Championship in track was the school 's first state championship in any sport . The program hosts the annual Roswell Relays track meet and the Region 6 @-@ AAAAA Track Championships . The cross country program saw the girls ' team finish eighth in the state in 2007 . Roswell also won a Track and Field State Championship in 1961 . The track team partners annually with the Rotary Club of Roswell to hold the Roswell Rotary Relays . 
 Roswell won two state championships in boys basketball in 1971 and 1997 and in slow @-@ pitch softball in 1992 . The softball state title was the first for a girls ' team at Roswell . 
 = = = Clubs = = = 
 As of the 2012 @-@ 2013 academic year , RHS offers students many extracurricular activities catering to the school 's diverse interests , including 72 clubs , 11 academic teams , and service clubs . 
 Clubs include academic honor societies , political interests , service clubs , social / general interest clubs , and non @-@ varsity sport clubs . Service clubs include Key Club , Anchor Club , Animal Rescue Club , and the Habitat For Humanity Club , which raises funds and builds houses in conjunction with the local Habitat chapter . Academic clubs include Art Club , Art National Honor Society , Beta Club , and National Honor Society . Political interest clubs are the Peace Activists Club , Young Democrats , Young Republicans , and Shanti , which attempts to eliminate teenage apathy . Competitive clubs include the two @-@ time state champion Fencing Team , Roswell Ice Hockey Club , Ultimate Frisbee Club , Policy Debate Team , Breakdance Team , and the Unique Dance team . 
 General interest clubs include the Medical Club for students interested in medical careers , Chess Club , Cycling Club , Future Business Leaders of America , Fellowship of Christian Athletes , Fly Fishing Club , International Club Latino Club , Russian Club , Video Game Club , Writing Club , and Friends Club , which brings students with disabilities and regular education students together . 
 The school is served by the elected Student Council . 
 = = = Publications and media outlets = = = 
 Established in 1983 , The Sting is the school 's official student newspaper and is a member of the Georgia Scholastic Press Association . The monthly publication has been recognized on multiple occasions by the <unk> and the Henry W. Grady College of Journalism and Mass Communication at the University of Georgia . The newspaper features news , editorials , opinions , features , entertainment , and sports . The staff also maintains the paper 's related website . 
 The student literary magazine the Helicon is produced by the school 's literary magazine staff . The magazine is published once each semester and features student @-@ created poetry , short stories , essays , photos , and artwork . The Helicon has also received multiple awards from the <unk> . 
 The student @-@ published yearbook is the <unk> , and the student @-@ run radio station is <unk> The Hive . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Coach Bill <unk> , portrayed by Will Patton in the movie Remember the Titans , was a Roswell High football coach from 1954 – 1960 before leaving for Virginia . Game film from Roswell is used in several scenes in the movie . 
 Former Roswell baseball and football coach Charlie Horne , who coached the Hornets from 1967 – 1974 , was named to the Georgia Athletics Coaches Association Hall of Fame in June 2007 . At Roswell he led the football and baseball teams to the 1968 and 1970 State Football Championships as well as the 1970 and 1971 baseball championships . 
 = = = Notable alumni = = = 
 Grover Babcock , film producer and director , Atlanta Film Festival and Sundance Film Festival winner for Best Documentary , Gotham Awards and Full Frame Documentary Film Festival award winner , and Hamptons International Film Festival nominee 
 Jimmy <unk> , MLB pitcher for the Pittsburgh Pirates 
 Justin Bolli , professional golfer 
 Jeff Bower , head football coach at The University of Southern Mississippi 1990 – 2007 
 Kim Burse , musical director for Beyoncé , composer , producer 
 Filippo <unk> , Univ. of Notre Dame soccer 2000 – 2004 , US National Team member 1998 – 2002 , professionally in Italy with F.C. Matera , F.C. Olbia , and Empoli F.C. 2004 @-@ 2006 . Played in the 1999 FIFA U @-@ 17 World Championship where the US finished in fourth place . 
 Jay Clark , head coach for the Georgia gymnastics program at the University of Georgia 2009 – 2012 
 Alec Kessler , former NBA first round pick 
 Bryan Konietzko , Annie Award @-@ nominated , Daytime Emmy Award @-@ nominated , and Emmy Award @-@ nominated co @-@ creator and executive producer of Avatar : The Last Airbender 
 Carl Nyman , Emmy Award @-@ nominated art director 
 Jermaine Phillips , Tampa Bay Buccaneers safety , played during the Super Bowl victory of 2002 
 Tony Phillips , Major League Baseball player from 1982 – 1999 
 Steve Prouty , Academy Award @-@ nominated and Emmy Award @-@ nominated special effects and make @-@ up artist 
 Mike Ramsey , Major League Baseball infielder 
 Ken Ray , Major League Baseball player 
 Chris Reis , National Football League safety with the New Orleans Saints 
 Brad Schrade , Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning investigative reporter for the Star Tribune 
 Alain <unk> , swimmer on the Haitian Olympic Team at the 1996 Summer Olympics 
 Tony Skole , head baseball coach at East Tennessee State University 
 = Hurricane Mitch = 
 Hurricane Mitch was the most powerful and destructive hurricane of the 1998 Atlantic hurricane season , with maximum sustained winds of 180 mph ( 290 km / h ) . The storm was the thirteenth tropical storm , ninth hurricane , and third major hurricane of the season . Along with Hurricane Georges , Mitch was the most notable hurricane in the season . At the time , Hurricane Mitch was the strongest Atlantic hurricane observed in the month of October , though it has since been surpassed by Hurricane Wilma of the 2005 season . The hurricane matched the fourth most intense Atlantic hurricane on record ( it has since dropped to seventh ) . 
 Mitch formed in the western Caribbean Sea on October 22 , 1998 , and after drifting through extremely favorable conditions , it rapidly strengthened to peak at Category 5 status , the highest possible rating on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . After drifting southwestward and weakening , the hurricane hit Honduras as a minimal hurricane . It drifted through Central America , reformed in the Bay of Campeche , and ultimately struck Florida as a strong tropical storm . 
 Due to its slow motion from October 29 to November 3 , Hurricane Mitch dropped historic amounts of rainfall in Honduras , Guatemala , and Nicaragua , with unofficial reports of up to 75 inches ( 1 @,@ 900 mm ) . Deaths due to catastrophic flooding made it the second deadliest Atlantic hurricane in history ; nearly 11 @,@ 000 people were killed with over 11 @,@ 000 left missing by the end of 1998 . Additionally , roughly 2 @.@ 7 million were left homeless as a result of the hurricane . The flooding caused extreme damage , estimated at over $ 6 billion ( 1998 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Depression Thirteen formed on October 22 over the southwestern Caribbean Sea , from a tropical wave that exited Africa on October 10 . It executed a small loop , and while doing so intensified into Tropical Storm Mitch . A weakness in a ridge allowed the storm to track slowly to the north . After becoming disorganized due to wind shear from an upper @-@ level low , Mitch quickly intensified in response to favorable conditions , including warm waters and good outflow . It became a hurricane on October 24 and developed an eye . After turning to the west , Mitch rapidly intensified , first into a major hurricane on October 25 and then into a Category 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale the next day . 
 At peak intensity , Mitch maintained maximum sustained winds of 180 mph ( 285 km / h ) while off the northern coast of Honduras . Hurricane Hunters reported a minimum barometric pressure of 905 mbar ( 26 @.@ 7 inHg ) , which at the time was the lowest in the month of October and tied for the fourth lowest for any Atlantic hurricane . Initially , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) and various tropical cyclone forecast models anticipated a turn to the north , threatening the Yucatán peninsula . Instead , Mitch turned to the south due to a ridge that was not observed while the storm was active . Land interaction imparted weakening , and the hurricane made landfall on Honduras on October 29 with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Mitch slowly weakened while turning to the west over land , maintaining deep convection over waters . After moving across mountainous terrain in Central America , the surface circulation of Mitch dissipated on November 1 . The next day , the remnants reached the Gulf of Mexico , which reorganized into a tropical storm on November 3 . Mitch accelerated to the northeast ahead of a cold front , moving across the Yucatán peninsula before striking southwestern Florida on November 5 . Shortly thereafter , the storm became an extratropical cyclone , which was tracked by the NHC until November 9 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Due to the threat , the government of Honduras evacuated some of the 45 @,@ 000 citizens on the Bay Islands and prepared all air and naval resources . The government of Belize issued a purple alert and asked for citizens on offshore islands to leave for the mainland . Because the hurricane threatened to strike near Belize City as a Category 4 hurricane , much of the city was evacuated in fear of a repeat of Hurricane Hattie 37 years earlier . Guatemala issued a purple alert as well , recommending boats to stay in port , telling people to prepare or seek shelter , and warning of potential overflowing rivers . By the time hurricane Mitch made landfall , numerous people were evacuated along the western Caribbean coastline , including 100 @,@ 000 in Honduras , 10 @,@ 000 in Guatemala , and 20 @,@ 000 in the Mexican state of Quintana Roo . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Mitch was the deadliest Atlantic hurricane since the Great Hurricane of 1780 , displacing the Galveston Hurricane of 1900 as the second @-@ deadliest on record . Nearly 11 @,@ 000 people were confirmed dead , and almost as many reported missing . Deaths were mostly from flooding and mudslides in Central America , where the slow @-@ moving hurricane and then tropical storm dropped nearly 36 inches ( 900 mm ) of rain . The flooding and mudslides damaged or destroyed tens of thousands of homes , with total damage amounting to over $ 5 billion ( 1998 USD , $ 6 billion 2006 USD ) , most of which was in Honduras and Nicaragua . Prior to Mitch , the deadliest hurricane in Central America was Hurricane Fifi in 1974 , which killed an estimated 8 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Honduras = = = 
 While offshore northern Honduras , Hurricane Mitch passed over Guanaja island . High waves eroded northern coastlines and damaged lagoons . Most of the Bay Islands had damage to their water facilities . Two days of winds exceeding 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) destroyed nearly all of the plants and trees on Guanaja , uprooting or knocking down almost the entire mangrove forest . It is estimated that the hurricane produced waves of 44 ft ( 13 m ) in height . 
 While moving slowly for several days offshore Honduras , Hurricane Mitch drew moisture from the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea , producing high amounts of rainfall of over 300 mm ( 12 in ) per day . The highest official total was 928 mm ( 36 @.@ 5 in ) at Choluteca , which represented more than half of the annual precipitation average ; at the same location , 466 @.@ 7 mm ( 18 @.@ 37 in ) fell in a 24 @-@ hour period on October 31 , which was more than double of the previous record set in 1985 . There were unofficial rainfall totals in Central America as high as 1 @,@ 900 mm ( 75 in ) ; rain gauges in mountainous areas were washed away . The high rainfall caused many rivers in the country to overflow " to an unprecedented extent this century " , as described by the United Nations . The rainfall collected in rivers , causing extensive river flooding across the country . The greatest depth recorded was 12 @.@ 5 m ( 41 ft ) on the Ulúa River near <unk> , whilst the greatest width recorded was 359 m ( 1 @,@ 178 ft ) on the Río Lean near Arizona . The rainfall also caused widespread mudslides across the mountainous country . In the country 's interior , particularly the southern portion , the high rainfall caused hundreds of landslides , many of them shallow and about 95 % in the form of debris flow . However , two earthflows caused significant damage near Tegucigalpa . 
 Hurricane Mitch wrought significant damage to Honduras , affecting nearly the entire population and causing damage in all 18 departments . The United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean estimated that Mitch caused the worst floods of the 20th century in the country . An estimated 70 – 80 % of transportation network was destroyed , including most bridges and secondary roads , amounting to $ 236 million in damage . Hurricane Mitch left widespread power outages after damaging more than 385 km ( 239 mi ) of power lines and several power plants . About 70 % of Honduras lost access to fresh water after the storm , although many rural areas had already been experiencing water shortages . The combined damage to transportation , communication , utilities , including power and water , was estimated at $ 665 million . 
 High water levels along the Choluteca River affected the capital , Tegucigalpa , reaching levels 10 m ( 33 ft ) above their banks . The floods damaged about one @-@ third of buildings , including some more than 350 years old . Across Honduras , agriculture sustained serious damage , with initial estimates of 70 % of crops destroyed . About 50 @,@ 000 bovine were killed , as were 60 % of the fowl population . Crop and agricultural damage totaled about $ 1 billion , which would take the country years to recover . Honduras 's Social Fund for Housing estimated that 35 @,@ 000 houses nationwide were destroyed with another 50 @,@ 000 damaged , leaving 1 @.@ 5 million people homeless – about 20 % of the total population . This was the highest number of victims from any natural disaster in Honduras 's history . Overall , Hurricane Mitch killed about 7 @,@ 000 people in Honduras , and damage was estimated at <unk> ( $ 3 @.@ 8 billion ) , of which $ 2 @.@ 005 billion was from direct damages and the remainder from indirect costs . The overall impact represented about 70 % of Honduras 's annual gross domestic product ( GDP ) . 
 = = = Nicaragua = = = 
 Though Mitch never entered Nicaragua , its large circulation caused extensive rainfall , with estimates of over 50 inches ( 1 @,@ 300 mm ) . In some places , as much as 25 inches ( 630 mm ) of rain fell on coastal areas . The flank of the Casita Volcano failed and turned into a lahar from excessive rain . The resulting mudslide ultimately covered an area 10 miles ( 16 km ) long and 5 miles ( 8 km ) wide . 
 Two million people in Nicaragua were directly affected by the hurricane . Across the country , Mitch 's heavy rains damaged 17 @,@ 600 houses and destroyed 23 @,@ 900 , displacing 368 @,@ 300 of the population . 340 schools and 90 health centers were severely damaged or destroyed . Sewage systems and the electricity <unk> were severely damaged , and , combined with property , damage totaled to $ 300 million ( 1998 USD ) . 
 Transportation was greatly affected by the hurricane , as well . The rainfall left 70 % of the roads unusable or destroyed and greatly damaged 92 bridges . Over 1 @,@ 700 miles ( 2700 km ) of highways or access roads needed replacement subsequent to the storm , especially in the northern part of the country and along portions of the Pan @-@ American Highway . Total transportation damage amounted to $ 300 million ( 1998 USD ) . Agricultural losses were significant , including the deaths of 50 @,@ 000 animals , mostly bovines . Crops and fisheries were affected greatly as well , and , combined with agricultural losses , damage totaled to $ 185 million ( 1998 USD ) . 
 The situation was further compounded by a total of 75 @,@ 000 live land mines — left over from the Contra insurgency of the 1980s — that were calculated to have been uprooted and relocated by the floodwaters . 
 In all , Hurricane Mitch caused at least 3 @,@ 800 fatalities in Nicaragua , of which more than 2 @,@ 000 were killed in the towns of El <unk> and Rolando Rodriguez from the landslide at the Casita volcano . The mudslide buried at least four villages completely in several feet of mud . Throughout the entire country , the hurricane left between 500 @,@ 000 and 800 @,@ 000 homeless . In all , damage in Nicaragua is estimated at around $ 1 billion ( 1998 USD ) . 
 = = = Caribbean Sea = = = 
 Mitch was also responsible for the loss with all hands of <unk> Barefoot Cruises ' schooner Fantome . The story was recorded in the book The Ship and The Storm by Jim Carrier . The schooner , which was sailing near the center of the hurricane , experienced over 50 foot ( 15 m ) waves and over 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) winds , causing her to sink off the coast of Honduras . 
 On the south coast of Cuba , the hurricane caused waves of up to 13 feet ( 4 m ) high and winds gusts peaking at 42 mph ( 67 km / h ) , causing numerous tourists and workers on the Isle of Youth and Cayo Largo del Sur to leave for safer grounds . 
 In Jamaica , where officials declared hurricane warnings 12 hours prior to its closest approach , Mitch caused moderate rainfall and gusty winds for days . Strong waves hit western Jamaica , with wave heights unofficially estimated at nearly 7 feet ( 2 m ) in height . The rainfall in outer rainbands , at times severe , flooded many roads across the island and left them covered with debris . One house in Spanish Town collapsed from the flooding , leaving four homeless . Many other homes and buildings were flooded , forcing many to evacuate . A river in northeastern Jamaica overflowed its banks , while heavy rainfall across the mountainous parts of the country caused numerous mudslides . In all , Mitch killed three people on Jamaica . 
 On the Cayman Islands , the hurricane caused strong waves , gusty winds , and heavy rainfall at times . Damage was relatively minimal , amounting to blown out windows and beach erosion . Strong waves damaged or destroyed many docks on the south shore of the islands , and also sank one dive ship near Grand Cayman . In addition , numerous incoming and outgoing flights were cancelled . 
 = = = Rest of Central America = = = 
 Due to Mitch 's large circulation , it dropped heavy precipitation as far south as Panama , especially in the Darién and Chiriquí provinces . The flooding washed away a few roads and bridges , and damaged numerous houses and schools , leaving thousands homeless . The hurricane left three casualties in Panama . 
 In Costa Rica , Mitch dropped heavy rains , causing flash flooding and mudslides across the country , mostly in the northeastern part of the country . The storm impacted 2 @,@ 135 homes to some degree , of which 241 were destroyed , leaving 4 @,@ 000 homeless . Throughout the country , the rainfall and mudslides affected 126 bridges and 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) or roads , mostly on the Inter @-@ American Highway which was affected by Hurricane Cesar , two years prior . Mitch affected 115 sq. miles ( 300 km2 ) of crop lands , causing damage to both export and domestic crops . In all , Hurricane Mitch caused $ 92 million in damage ( 1998 USD ) and seven deaths . 
 While drifting through El Salvador , the hurricane dropped immense amounts of precipitation , resulting in flash flooding and mudslides through the country . Multiple rivers , including the Río Grande de San Miguel and the <unk> River overflowed , contributing to overall damage . The flooding damaged more than 10 @,@ 000 houses , leaving around 84 @,@ 000 homeless and forcing 500 @,@ 000 to evacuate . Crop damage was severe , with serious flooding occurring on 386 sq. miles ( 1000 & km2 ) of pasture or crop land . The flooding destroyed 37 % of the bean production , 19 % of the corn production , and 20 % losses in sugar canes . There were heavy losses in livestock as well , including the deaths of 10 @,@ 000 cattle . Total agricultural and livestock damaged amounted to $ 154 million ( 1998 USD ) . In addition , the flooding destroyed two bridges and damaged 1 @,@ 200 mi ( 1 @,@ 900 km ) of unpaved roads . In all , Mitch caused nearly $ 400 million in damage ( 1998 USD ) and 240 deaths . 
 Similar to the rest of Central America , Mitch 's heavy rains caused mudslides and severe flooding over Guatemala . The flooding destroyed 6 @,@ 000 houses and damaged 20 @,@ 000 others , displacing over 730 @,@ 000 and forcing over 100 @,@ 000 to evacuate . In addition , the flooding destroyed 27 schools and damaged 286 others , 175 severely . Flooding caused major damage to crops , while landslides destroyed crop land across the country . The most severely affected crops for domestic consumption were tomatoes , bananas , corn , other vegetables , and beans , with damaged totaling to $ 48 million ( 1998 USD ) . Export crops such as bananas or coffee were greatly damaged as well , with damage amounting to $ 325 million ( 1998 USD ) . Damage to plantations and soil totaled to $ 121 million ( 1998 USD ) . The flooding also caused severe damage to the transportation infrastructure , including the loss of 37 bridges . Across the country , flooding damaged or destroyed 840 miles ( 1350 km ) of roads , of which nearly 400 miles ( 640 km ) were sections of major highways . In all , Hurricane Mitch caused $ 748 million ( 1998 USD ) and 268 deaths in Guatemala . In addition , Mitch caused 11 indirect deaths when a plane crashed during the storm . 
 In Belize , the hurricane was less severe than initially predicted , though Mitch still caused heavy rainfall across the country . Numerous rivers exceeded their crests , though the rainfall was beneficial to trees in mountainous areas . The flooding caused extensive crop damage and destroyed many roads . Throughout the country , eleven people died because of the hurricane . 
 In Mexico , Mitch produced gusty winds and heavy rains on the Yucatán Peninsula , with Cancún on the Quintana Roo coast being the worst hit . Nine people were killed from the flooding , though damage was relatively minimal . The maximum 24 @-@ hour rainfall total from Mitch was 13 @.@ 4 inches ( 340 mm ) in Campeche , while the highest rainfall total was 16 @.@ 85 inches ( 428 @.@ 0 mm ) in Ciudad del Carmen . 
 = = = Florida and remnants = = = 
 Then a tropical storm , Mitch caused a storm surge of up to 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) feet in the lower Florida Keys before making landfall on the Florida west coast . Key West International Airport reported peak wind gusts of 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) and sustained winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) , the only report of tropical storm force in the state . Offshore , the Fowey Rocks Light reported a wind gusts of 73 mph ( 117 km / h ) . In addition , Mitch caused moderate rainfall , peaking at 7 inches ( 200 mm ) in Jupiter , though some estimates indicate localized totals of up to 10 inches ( 250 mm ) . The storm spawned five tornadoes over the state , the strongest of which was an F2 . 
 In the Florida Keys , multiple buildings that had been damaged by Hurricane Georges were leveled by Mitch . Tornadoes from the storm damaged or destroyed 645 houses across the state , in addition to injuring 65 people . Gusty winds left 100 @,@ 000 without power during the storm 's passage . In all , Mitch caused $ 40 million in damage ( 1998 USD ) in Florida and two deaths from drowning when two boats capsized . 
 As an extratropical cyclone , Mitch passed west of Ireland and the United Kingdom . In Ireland , the storm produced gusts as high as 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) and 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) waves . The winds knocked down trees and power lines , leaving over 30 @,@ 000 homes without power . One tree fell onto a car in Louth , severely injuring the driver . In Dublin , high winds knocked the roof off of a building , and several other buildings nationwide were damaged . The storm caused airports to close and ferry service to be suspended . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Because of the hurricane 's destruction in Central America and elsewhere in North America , the World Meteorological Organization retired the name Mitch in the spring of 1999 ; it will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . The name was replaced with Matthew in the 2004 season . 
 After the disaster caused by Hurricane Mitch , countries around the world donated significant aid , totaling $ 6 @.@ 3 billion ( 1998 USD ) . Throughout Central America , which was recovering from an economic crisis that occurred in 1996 , many wished to continue the growth of the infrastructure and economy . In addition , after witnessing the vulnerability to hurricanes , the affected governments endeavored to prevent such a disaster from occurring again . 
 Hundreds of thousands of people lost their homes , but many took this as an opportunity to rebuild stronger houses . With a new , structurally improved foundation , homes were redesigned to be able to withstand another hurricane . However , lack of arable crop land took away the jobs from many , decreasing an already low income even lower . 
 Following the passage of Mitch , disease outbreaks occurred throughout Central America , including cholera , leptospirosis , and dengue fever . Over 2 @,@ 328 cases of cholera were reported , killing 34 people . Guatemala was most affected by the bacterium , where most of the deaths occurred from contaminated food . 450 cases of leptospirosis were reported in Nicaragua , killing seven people . There were over 1 @,@ 357 cases of dengue reported , though no deaths were reported from the disease . 
 While stalling over the western Caribbean Sea , Mitch 's strong winds produced strong waves , damaging local coral reefs . Later , the storm 's immense rainfall led to runoff polluted with debris and fresh water . This resulted in diseases occurring within the coral . However , the hurricane 's upwelling cooled the warm water temperatures , preventing significant bleaching and destruction of the coral reef . 
 Mitch caused such massive and widespread damage that Honduran President Carlos Roberto Flores claimed it destroyed fifty years of progress in the country . Honduras , the country most affected by the hurricane , received significant aid for the millions impacted by the hurricane . Mexico quickly gave help , sending 700 tons of food , 11 tons of medicine , four rescue planes , rescue personnel , and trained search dogs . Cuba also volunteered , sending a contingent of physicians to the country . The U.S. administration offered at first troops stationed in Honduras , and then withdrew them a few days after the storm . They also at first offered only $ 2 million ( 1998 USD ) in aid , which came as a shock to residents , and president Carlos Roberto Flores alike . The U.S. later increased their offer to $ 70 million ( 1998 USD ) . The Honduran government distributed food , water , and medical services to the hurricane victims , including the more than 4 million without water . In addition , the country initially experienced a sharp increase in the unemployment rate , largely due to the destruction of crop lands . However , rebuilding provided jobs in the following years . In Costa Rica , reconstruction after the hurricane increased the number of jobs by 5 @.@ 9 % , lowering the unemployment rate slightly . 
 = Siege of Fort Stanwix = 
 The Siege of Fort Stanwix ( also known at the time as Fort Schuyler ) began on August 2 , 1777 , and ended August 22 . Fort Stanwix , in the western part of the Mohawk River Valley , was then the primary defense point for the Continental Army against British and Indian forces aligned against them in the American Revolutionary War . The fort was occupied by Continental Army forces from New York and Massachusetts under the command of Colonel Peter Gansevoort . The besieging force was composed of British regulars , American Loyalists , Hessian soldiers from Hesse @-@ Hanau , and Indians , under the command of British Brigadier General Barry St. Leger and the Iroquois leader Joseph Brant . St. Leger 's expedition was a diversion in support of General John Burgoyne 's campaign to gain control of the Hudson River Valley to the east . 
 One attempt at relief was thwarted early in the siege when a force of New York militia under Nicholas Herkimer was stopped in the August 6 Battle of Oriskany by a detachment of St. Leger 's forces . While that battle did not involve the fort 's garrison , some of its occupants sortied and raided the nearly empty Indian and Loyalist camps , which was a blow to the morale of St. Leger 's Indian support . They killed some Seneca . The siege was finally broken when American reinforcements under the command of Benedict Arnold neared , and Arnold used a ruse , with the assistance of Herkimer 's relative Hon Yost Schuyler , to convince the besiegers that a much larger force was arriving . This misinformation , combined with the departure of Indian fighters not interested in siege warfare and upset over their losses from the raids , led St. Leger to abandon the effort and retreat . 
 St. Leger 's failure to advance on Albany contributed to Burgoyne 's surrender following the Battles of Saratoga in October 1777 . Although St. Leger reached Fort Ticonderoga in late September , he was too late to aid Burgoyne . 
 The first official US flag was flown during battle on August 3 , 1777 at Fort Schuyler . The Continental Congress adopted the following resolution on June 14 , 1777 : " Resolved , that the flag of the United States be thirteen stripes , alternate red and white ; that the union be thirteen stars , white , on a blue field , representing a new constellation . " There was a delay in displaying this flag . The resolution was not signed by the secretary of the Congress until September 3 , though it was previously printed in the newspapers . Massachusetts reinforcements to Fort Schuyler brought news of the adoption by Congress of the official flag . Soldiers cut up their shirts to make the white stripes ; scarlet material was secured from red flannel petticoats of officers ' wives , while material for the blue union was secured from Capt. Abraham Swartwout 's blue cloth coat . A voucher shows that Congress paid Capt. Swartwout for his coat for the flag . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fort Stanwix occupied a strategic western portage known as the Oneida Carrying Place ( site of modern Rome , New York ) between the Mohawk River , which flowed southeast to the Hudson River , and Wood Creek , whose waters ultimately led to Lake Ontario . Built by the British in 1758 during the French and Indian War on the only dry ground in the area , the fort had fallen into disrepair . When the American Revolutionary War widened in 1776 to include the frontier areas between New York and the Province of Quebec , the site again became strategically important . 
 British Colonial Secretary Lord Germain and General John Burgoyne developed a plan for gaining control of the Hudson River valley that included an expedition that King George described as a " diversion on the Mohawk River " . In March 1777 Germain issued orders assigning the expedition to Lieutenant Colonel Barry St. Leger , an experienced frontier fighter who had served in the French and Indian War . 
 = = Forces assemble = = 
 In April 1777 , Continental Army Major General Philip Schuyler ordered the 3rd New York Regiment under the command of Colonel Peter Gansevoort to occupy and rehabilitate the fort as a defense against British and Native incursions from Quebec . Arriving in May , they immediately began working on the fort 's defenses . Although they officially renamed the fort to Fort Schuyler , it was still widely known by its original name . Warnings from the friendly Oneida Indians that the British were planning an expedition to the Mohawk Valley were confirmed by mid @-@ July , spurring the pace of the work . In early July , Gansevoort reported on the state of affairs to Schuyler , noting that provisions and ammunition were in short supply . Schuyler ordered additional supplies sent to the fort on July 8 . 
 St. Leger , who was brevetted a brigadier general for the expedition , assembled a diverse force consisting of British regulars from the 8th and 34th Regiments , a number of artillerymen , 80 jäger from Hesse @-@ Hanau , 350 Loyalists from the King 's Royal Regiment of New York , a company of Butler 's Rangers , and about 100 Canadien laborers . His artillery consisted of two six @-@ pound pieces , two 3 @-@ pounders , and four small mortars . He expected these to be adequate for the taking of a dilapidated fort with about 60 defenders , which was the latest intelligence he had when the expedition left Lachine , near Montreal , on June 23 . 
 St. Leger first learned that the Americans had occupied Stanwix in force when prisoners captured from its garrison were brought to him on the St. Lawrence . He learned from the prisoners that Fort Stanwix had been repaired and was " garrisoned by upwards of 600 men ... and the rebels are expecting us , and are acquainted with our strength and route " . Daniel Claus , the Indian agent accompanying the expedition , convinced St. Leger to go to Oswego , where a body of Indians could be recruited . They arrived at Oswego , New York on July 14 , where Joseph Brant and about 800 Indians joined the expedition . These consisted mainly of Mohawks and Senecas , but there were also warriors from the other tribes of the Iroquois League ( other than the Oneidas and the Tuscaroras , who still claimed neutrality ) , and some Indians from the Great Lakes area . 
 After leaving Oswego another report reached St. Leger that more supplies were en route to the fort . St. Leger immediately dispatched Brant with 200 Indians and 30 regulars to intercept those supplies and begin besieging the fort . Brant 's arrival at the fort on August 2 was just too late . The supply convoy , which was guarded by 200 men from the 9th Massachusetts Regiment , had arrived and been unloaded . Brant 's men were able to capture the convoy 's boat captain ; the Massachusetts men remained in the fort . St. Leger 's main force arrived the next day , although the artillery did not arrive for several more days . 
 = = Siege begins = = 
 At first , St. Leger tried to intimidate the fort 's occupants by parading his troops — including the Indians in their war dress — in front of the fort . When this failed he sent a truce flag bearing a proclamation authored by General Burgoyne ; Gansevoort refused to respond . St. Leger then began siege operations , encamping the regulars and artillery on a low rise north of the fort , and most of the Indians and Loyalists to its south , with a picket line of Indian encampments along the Mohawk River . 
 St. Leger 's artillery was held up by a tactic that was also used to slow down Burgoyne 's army after the fall of Ticonderoga . Gansevoort and his men had systematically felled trees across the wooded track the expedition came down , and St. Leger needed to clear the track to make way for his artillery . This work occupied all but 250 of St. Leger 's white men , with the actual encirclement of the fort dominated by Indians . 
 On August 5 , St. Leger received word from Joseph Brant 's sister Molly that an American relief column was marching up the Mohawk valley . 
 = = Oriskany = = 
 The Tryon County Committee of Safety received news of St. Leger 's movements on July 30 , and set about raising additional troops . On August 4 , about 800 men from the Tryon County militia were mustered at Fort Dayton ( near modern Herkimer , New York ) by Nicholas Herkimer , the committee chairman . By late the next day the column had arrived within 10 miles ( 16 km ) of Fort Stanwix . St. Leger , on learning of their approach , sent Johnson with a small number of regulars and rangers , along with Brant and most of the Indians , to oppose Herkimer 's advance . They set up an ambush , and in a bloody confrontation near Oriskany Creek , both sides suffered significant casualties , including Herkimer , who suffered a serious wound to the leg . The Americans drove St. Leger 's detachment back , but Herkimer ( who eventually died of his wounds ) was forced to retreat back to Fort Dayton due to the large number of casualties . The confrontation came at another cost to St. Leger . Gansevoort 's besieged men took advantage of the absence of a sizable part of St. Leger 's force to make a sortie , in which Gansevoort 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Marinus Willett , led 250 men out and looted the nearly empty Indian camps of " several wagon @-@ loads of spoils " , including John Johnson 's orderly book , plans for the expedition , and a letter the British had intercepted from Gansevoort 's fiancée . The tale of this party recovering actual wagonloads of materials is probably untrue . It likely dates to a memoir by Marinus Willett written late in his life ; no contemporaneous accounts of the sortie , including Willett 's earlier journals , mention the need for wagons . 
 When the British force returned from Oriskany they arrived at a camp that had been stripped of much , including personal belongings and the blankets the Indians slept in . Combined with the fact that the battle at Oriskany had cost so many Indian lives , this greatly upset the Indians . They had been told that the white men , who had thus far fought relatively little , would do most of the fighting . This breach of trust damaged relations between the Indians and St. Leger , and became instrumental in the eventual failure of the siege . 
 St. Leger took advantage of his victory to deliver another demand for the fort 's surrender , which Gansevoort also rejected . The next day St. Leger sent in a third surrender demand , which included ( false ) news that Burgoyne was in Albany as well as threats that the Indians would be permitted to massacre the garrison and destroy the Mohawk valley communities from which the garrison was drawn . In an eloquent refusal , Lieutenant Colonel Willett responded , " By your uniform you are British officers . Therefore let me tell you that the message you have brought is a degrading one for a British officer to send and by no means reputable for a British officer to carry . " 
 Taking advantage of a brief truce , Gansevoort sent Willett and another officer out on August 8 to notify Schuyler of their situation . After making their way through swampy territory on the British lines , they continued down the Mohawk valley , eventually meeting a relief column under the command of Major General Benedict Arnold . 
 = = Siege relief = = 
 Schuyler had received early reports of the action at Oriskany on August 8 , and dispatched Ebenezer Learned 's 4th Massachusetts Regiment to relieve the besieged fort the next day . On August 12 , even before Willett could reach him , Schuyler held a war council to decide how to deal with the combined threats of St. Leger and Burgoyne , whose large army had reached the Hudson River . Amid concerns that the withdrawal from Ticonderoga by General Arthur St. Clair would be repeated at Stanwix , the council decided , with near unanimity , not to send a relief column to Fort Stanwix . In opposition to the council , Schuyler insisted on a relief expedition , which Arnold offered to lead . In addition to Schuyler 's actions , Major General Israel Putnam , based in Peekskill , New York , on August 14 dispatched two regiments ( the 1st Canadian and the 2nd New York ) , which were already on guard duty in the Mohawk River valley . These two units were still en route when the siege was lifted , and turned back . 
 By August 20 , Arnold , Willett and 700 Continental Army regulars had arrived at Fort Dayton . In an attempt to enlarge his force , Arnold tried to interest the Tryon County men in another attempt against St. Leger , but raised only about 100 men . He then decided to wait , hoping that friendly Oneidas and Tuscaroras could be convinced to join the effort , or that a request to Schuyler for another 1 @,@ 000 men would be fulfilled . However , news reached him that the siege had reached a critical stage , and that action was necessary . St. Leger had learned that his guns were largely ineffective against the fort 's walls from long range , so he began entrenching operations to establish positions closer to the fort . Gansevoort reported that the siege trenches had reached within striking distance of one of the fort 's bastions . 
 Uncomfortable with the number of troops available to him , Arnold opted for a deception to sow trouble in the British camp . While at Fort Dayton , a number of Loyalists had been arrested , including Hon Yost Schuyler . Arnold convinced Hon Yost , a member of the King 's Royal Regiment of New York who grew up with many of the Mohawk Indians attacking Fort Stanwix , to spread rumors that large numbers of Americans , under the command of " The Dark Eagle " , were about to descend on St. Leger 's camp . Hon Yost 's good conduct was assured by holding hostage his brother . 
 Arnold 's stratagem seems to have met with some success . St. Leger recorded on August 21 that " Arnold was advancing , by rapid and forced marches , with 3 @,@ 000 men " , even though Arnold was still at Fort Dayton on that day . When St. Leger held a council , about 200 Indians had already abandoned the camp , and in the council the remaining Indians , unhappy with siege warfare and the loss of their equipment , threatened to leave if he did not lift the siege . On August 22 , St. Leger broke camp and began the trek back to Lake Ontario , leaving behind a sizable amount of equipment . A number of men from St. Leger 's party deserted or were captured by the fort 's garrison , including Hon Yost . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Arnold , whose force was augmented by the arrival of friendly Indians , advanced about 10 miles ( 16 km ) toward Fort Stanwix on August 23 when a messenger from Gansevoort notified him of St. Leger 's departure . Pushing on , they reached the fort that evening . Early the next day , Arnold detached 500 men to pursue St. Leger , whose column was also being taunted and harassed by his formerly supportive Indian allies . An advance party reached the shores of Oneida Lake in heavy rain just as the last of St. Leger 's boats were departing . Leaving a garrison at the fort , with smaller outposts along the Mohawk , Arnold then hurried back with about 1 @,@ 200 men to rejoin the main army . 
 While still on Oneida Lake , St. Leger learned from an Indian messenger of the true state of Arnold 's force . On August 27 , St. Leger wrote to Burgoyne from Oswego that he intended to join him by traveling via Lake Champlain . He reached Fort Ticonderoga on September 29 , too late to assist Burgoyne . 
 Burgoyne blamed the failure of his campaign in part on St. Leger 's failure to penetrate the Mohawk valley , and the lack of sufficient Loyalist support . He believed that a well @-@ placed Loyalist uprising in upstate New York would have diverted enough American resources that either his advance or St. Leger 's would have succeeded . He was also hopeful that St. Leger 's arrival at Ticonderoga would be sufficient to assist in his retreat . However , he was already surrounded by the time St. Leger arrived at Ticonderoga , and surrendered after the Battle of Bemis Heights ( second Saratoga ) . In an analysis after the surrender , Burgoyne noted that the failure of General William Howe to support him made it possible for Washington to divert resources from the area around New York City to assist both in the relief of Stanwix and at Saratoga . 
 Fort Stanwix itself saw little action after the siege , although it was a dangerous and unpopular posting because of regular harassment by Loyalists and hostile Indians . In the spring of 1779 the Continental Army used the fort as a staging ground for the destruction of Onondaga Castle . In 1780 , the garrison was blockaded for several days by a large force of Indians led by Joseph Brant . Finally , in the spring of 1781 , when flood and fire ( most likely arson ) destroyed most of the fort , the Americans evacuated the post . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Fort Stanwix was eventually destroyed in the 19th century . The site was designated a U.S. National Monument in 1935 . In 1961 the site was designated a National Historic Landmark , and in 1966 it was added to the National Register of Historic Places . The fort was reconstructed in the 1970s by the National Park Service . 
 = Ogle County Courthouse = 
 The Ogle County Courthouse is a National Register of Historic Places listing in the Ogle County , Illinois , county seat of Oregon . The building stands on a public square in the city 's downtown commercial district . The current structure was completed in 1891 and was preceded by two other buildings , one of which was destroyed by a group of outlaws . Following the destruction of the courthouse , the county was without a judicial building for a period during the 1840s . The Ogle County Courthouse was designed by Chicago architect George O. Garnsey in the Romanesque Revival style of architecture . The ridged roof is dominated by its wooden cupola which stands out at a distance . 
 In addition to the courthouse building , the public square contains several outbuildings and sites that are also historic in nature and considered contributing properties to the Oregon Commercial Historic District , including a sculpture by Lorado Taft and a cast @-@ iron fountain . The courthouse joined the Register in 1981 and was included as a contributing property to the historic district in 2006 . After initially joining the Register the structure underwent a careful restoration . The courthouse no longer serves as the primary judiciary center for the county ; its successor is located directly across the street . 
 = = History = = 
 Ogle County Courthouse has been the name of three buildings . The current structure on the public square , no longer in use as the judiciary center in Ogle County , was constructed in late 1890 and early 1891 at a cost of US $ 107 @,@ 000 . The basically square Romanesque Revival structure is topped with a cupola and features a full basement . It was designed by Chicago architect George O. Garnsey . 
 = = = First courthouse = = = 
 The first session of the Ogle County Commissioners ' Court took place on January 3 , 1837 , after the city of Oregon was picked as the county seat . The first courthouse was completed in 1840 @-@ 1841 , but it never saw use . The 1840 @-@ 41 courthouse was constructed at a cost of $ 4 @,@ 000 , partially in response to " a gang of villains " harassing citizens . On March 21 , 1841 , the night before court convened in its new building , the bandits allegedly set the courthouse on fire , completely destroying it . The town , whipped into a fury by horse whipping and thievery and , even murder , later formed a band of " Regulators " to hunt down and bring the bandits to justice . Essentially vigilantes , the group tracked down two residents , " Old Man Driscoll " ( possibly Driskell ) and his son , William Driscoll , both suspected of the murder . The Driscolls were arrested and brought to Oregon by the Regulators . A trial was organized at a nearby mill . The defendants were provided with counsel and the trial ensued , which residents involved called " fair " at the time . 
 The swift outcome of the trial resulted in the almost immediate execution of the two men . One Driscoll , led out alone , was shot first . Then the other was led out , shown his dead relative 's body and pushed for a confession . The defendant refused to confess , though he reportedly said he had committed other crimes for which he deserved death , and was also shot . 
 After the lynching , friends and relatives of the Driscolls attempted to strike back at the Regulators . They obtained an indictment against many of the Regulators charging them with murder . The Regulators responded by obtaining their own Bills of Indictment against every person who had stood by and witnessed the lynching . With 125 people under indictment no witnesses could be found , and no jury could be formed , so the judge cleared the charges . 
 = = = Courthouse limbo = = = 
 For several years , between the March 1841 arson and 1848 , court convened in various private residences . Without a courthouse in Oregon , the county seat , proposals to move the county seat began to circulate . Ogle County communities , Byron , Mount Morris , Grand Detour and Daysville were all in contention for the designation , and , ultimately , the new courthouse . At the deciding meeting the representatives from Daysville removed their town from the running and sided with Oregon . The withdrawal of Daysville gave Oregon a slim majority of votes and it retained its status as county seat of Ogle County . 
 = = = Second courthouse = = = 
 The replacement for the first courthouse , destroyed by arson , was not completed until the summer of 1848 . A one @-@ story brick building , the second Ogle County Courthouse was constructed for $ 3 @,@ 000 . The county used it for several decades but it was soon outgrown as various county offices began to accumulate more and more records and files . The structure exhibited Greek Revival style , common at the time . Some of the 1848 building 's architectural elements included , a vent cupola , double @-@ hung sash windows , complete with shutters , a gabled front roof and corniced returns . The new building was used as a multi @-@ purpose public building ; besides being the courthouse it served as the meeting hall for the Evangelical Lutheran Congregation of Oregon until 1850 . When community leader Henry Mix died in 1867 citizens gathered at the courthouse to mourn . Though the 1848 Ogle County Courthouse was soon found to be " inadequate in every respect " it would be over 40 years before a new facility was built . The idea of a new courthouse was met with staunch opposition and it was not until 1891 that the 1848 building was demolished and the current building erected . 
 = = = Third courthouse = = = 
 The current old courthouse in Ogle County was completed in 1891 and has been in constant use since . It was dedicated on August 20 , 1891 and remained the county 's primary judicial building until the same date 114 years later , in 2005 . On that day Ogle County dedicated its fourth courthouse , across the street from the historic old courthouse . The 1891 courthouse was completed at a cost of slightly more than $ 100 @,@ 000 . It is constructed of red brick and detailed with Naperville and Ashton limestone in a rock @-@ faced motif . Architect George O. Garnsey , who also designed the Ellwood House in nearby DeKalb County , designed the building in the Romanesque Revival style . The cupola was not added to the roof until 1892 . 
 During its early years , the courthouse was a popular community meeting place ; the courthouse lawn was a common setting for community events and gatherings . Today , events no longer regularly take place on the courthouse lawn , but some festivals still occur at the location . After being listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1981 a series of renovations began on the building , in order to , " preserve its historical and architectural integrity . " Inside the courthouse , each office and courtroom was renovated , the exterior of the structure was refurbished and restored as well . The work was completed in 1983 and the building opened for public tours in 1984 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 This example of Romanesque Revival architecture was designed by George O. Garnsey , a Chicago architect well known in northern Illinois . An impressive structure , the courthouse is designed on a monumental scale . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The building is constructed of red pressed brick , detailed with locally quarried limestone , and reinforced with steel girders . The building 's primary contractor was C.A. Moses . The red brick facade is detailed with significant amounts of limestone , including in its continuous lintels and sills . The entrances are covered with large round arches . The full basement is hinted at by the building 's prominent foundation and water table . The window lintels , and sills , as well as the arches and stairs are trimmed with limestone . 
 The roof is sharply angled toward its center , where a wooden cupola tops the building . It was completed after the building , in 1892 . At each of the square shaped building 's four corners are dormers , which serve to break up the monotony of the otherwise ridged roof . The dormers resemble the cupola , in that they are <unk> as well as multi @-@ gabled . The roof has had routine maintenance performed as required . The building 's dominant feature , its cupola , sits on an oversized brick base with a terra cotta belt around its base top . It features blocked openings with multiple arches , double round arches , Corinthian pilasters , and organic corner detailing . 
 The courthouse is elaborately windowed . Some windows , mostly on the first floor are straight topped . On the second floor most of the windows are topped with limestone arches . The original , wood @-@ framed windows were replaced in 1972 . The building 's two main entrances feature stone arches over recessed doors ; eleven step stairways lead to both doors . New doors were installed in both entrances in 1971 . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The remaining original woodwork , sills , door frames , and interior doors , are all solid oak . The interior walls are 12 inches thick and , either painted or covered with paneling . An open , double staircase leads from the first floor to the second and third floors and the center of the building houses an elevator which moves from the basement to the third floor . The interior floors are all white pine wood , though some of the floors have now been carpeted . First floor ceilings are 15 feet high , with doors at a height of 12 feet . The second floor features the courtrooms , which , through the 1980s remodel , had the ceilings lowered to 10 feet . The interior renovation was completed at a cost of US $ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = Other features = = 
 The public square where the Ogle County Courthouse stands is in the heart of the Oregon Commercial Historic District . Besides the courthouse , there are five other important sites on the public square , all of which are considered contributing properties to the historic district . The sites include cannons , war memorials , and a cast @-@ iron fountain . Iron Mike , the 1896 cast @-@ iron fountain , is on the south side of the 400 Block of Washington Street in the Oregon Commercial Historic District . The multi @-@ tier fountain is set into a matte green concrete base , and is four feet tall and three feet wide , at its widest point . Its lowest tier is adorned with the words " Illinois Humane Society . " 
 = = = Civil War cannons = = = 
 The public square also features two surplus Civil War era cannons . The two cannons " guard " the eastern entrance to the Ogle County Courthouse . Both cannons were put in place sometime between 1898 and 1900 . The <unk> Cannon ( the southern most cannon ) was cast in 1846 in Boston , Massachusetts . The northern most cannon , the Parrot Cannon , was cast in 1864 . 
 = = = The Soldiers ' Monument = = = 
 The Soldiers ' Monument sits on the southeast corner of the public square . The monument was designed by sculptor Lorado Taft in 1911 and Chicago architects Allen <unk> Pond and Irving Kane Pond designed the structure that encompasses Taft 's sculptures . The installation was dedicated in 1916 . The monument is adorned with plaques honoring Ogle County 's war dead from the American Civil War , Mexican War , War of 1812 and World War I , the last of which was added later . 
 = = = War Memorial = = = 
 On the north side of the public square is a terraced concrete memorial dedicated to Ogle County veterans of wars other than those included on The Soldiers ' Monument . Dedicated on June 29 , 1950 , the War Memorial is adorned with plaques representing five American wars , World War I , World War II , the Korean War , the Vietnam War and the Persian Gulf War . The plaques were added from 1951 @-@ 1991 . The memorial features four brick tiers topped with concrete caps , each cap holds a flagpole base . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Ogle County Courthouse was added to National Register of Historic Places on September 10 , 1981 . On August 16 , 2006 its historic importance was reasserted when it was included as a contributing property in the Oregon Commercial Historic District 's listing on the National Register . On its original National Register nomination form the building was cited as significant in the areas of " architecture " and " politics and government . " The courthouse has been called a " prized landmark , " and a site " that holds a special place of honor " in the city of Oregon . Three of the features on and around the courthouse grounds , Iron Mike , the War Memorial , and The Soldiers ' Monument , all greatly contribute to the sense of time and place that the Oregon Commercial Historic District conveys . 
 = Sunday Bloody Sunday = 
 " Sunday Bloody Sunday " is a song by the Irish rock band U2 . It is the opening track from their 1983 album War and was released as the album 's third single on 11 March 1983 in Germany and the Netherlands . " Sunday Bloody Sunday " is noted for its militaristic drumbeat , harsh guitar , and melodic harmonies . One of U2 's most overtly political songs , its lyrics describe the horror felt by an observer of the Troubles in Northern Ireland , mainly focusing on the Bloody Sunday incident in Derry where British troops shot and killed unarmed civil rights protesters and bystanders who were there to rally against Operation Demetrius @-@ related internment ( imprisonment without trial ) , while at the same time rejecting hate and revenge as a response noted in the lyrics , " There 's many lost , but tell me who has won . " Along with " New Year 's Day , " the song helped U2 reach a wider listening audience . It was generally well received by critics on the album 's release . 
 The song has remained a staple of U2 's live concerts . During its earliest performances , the song created controversy . Lead singer Bono reasserted the song 's anti @-@ sectarian @-@ violence message to his audience for many years . Today , it is considered one of U2 's signature songs , and is one of the band 's most performed tracks . Critics rate it among the best political protest songs , and it has been covered by over a dozen artists . It was named the 272nd @-@ greatest song by Rolling Stone on their list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . " 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 " Sunday Bloody Sunday " grew from a guitar riff and lyric written by the Edge in 1982 . While newlyweds Bono and Ali Hewson honeymooned in Jamaica , the Edge worked in Ireland on music for the band 's upcoming album . Following an argument with his girlfriend , and a period of doubt in his own song @-@ writing abilities , the Edge — " feeling depressed ... channelled [ his ] fear and frustration and self @-@ loathing into a piece of music . " This early draft did not yet have a title or chorus melody , but did contain a structural outline and theme . After Bono had reworked the lyrics , the band recorded the song at Windmill Lane Studios in Dublin . During the sessions , producer Steve Lillywhite encouraged drummer Larry Mullen , Jr. to use a click track , but Mullen was firmly against the idea . A chance meeting with Andy Newmark ( of Sly & the Family Stone ) — a drummer who used a click track religiously – changed Mullen 's mind . The opening drum pattern soon developed into the song 's hook . A local violinist , Steve Wickham , approached the Edge one morning at a bus stop and asked if U2 had any need for a violin on their next album . In the studio for only half a day , Wickham 's electric violin became the final instrumental contribution to the song . 
 Drummer Mullen said of the song in 1983 : 
 " We 're into the politics of people , we 're not into politics . Like you talk about Northern Ireland , ' Sunday Bloody Sunday , ' people sort of think , ' Oh , that time when 13 Catholics were shot by British soldiers ' ; that 's not what the song is about . That 's an incident , the most famous incident in Northern Ireland and it 's the strongest way of saying , ' How long ? How long do we have to put up with this ? ' I don 't care who 's who – Catholics , Protestants , whatever . You know people are dying every single day through bitterness and hate , and we 're saying why ? What 's the point ? And you can move that into places like El Salvador and other similar situations – people dying . Let 's forget the politics , let 's stop shooting each other and sit around the table and talk about it ... There are a lot of bands taking sides saying politics is crap , etc . Well , so what ! The real battle is people dying , that 's the real battle . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Sunday Bloody Sunday " is played at a tempo of 103 beats per minute in a 4 / 4 time signature . The song opens with a militaristic drumbeat and electric violin part ; the aggressive snare drum rhythm closely resembles a beat used to keep a military band in step . The distinctive drum sound was achieved by recording Mullen 's drumwork at the base of a staircase , producing a more natural reverb . It is followed by the Edge 's repeating arpeggios ( see notation at left ) . The riff , which follows a Bm – D – G6 chord progression , establishes the minor chord territory of the piece . As the song progresses , the lyrics and guitar become more furious . The guitar riff has been described as the " bone @-@ crushing arena @-@ rock riff of the decade " by Rolling Stone . A bass drum kick on every beat provides the musical foundation until the first chorus , when Adam Clayton 's bass guitar enters . 
 In contrast to the violent nature of the verses , the emergence of major chords creates a feeling of hope during Bono 's " How long , how long must we sing this song ? " refrain . During the chorus , the Edge 's backing vocals further develop this tread , using a harmonic imitative echo . The snare drum is absent from this section , and the guitar parts are muted . This part of the song deviates musically from the raw aggression seen in the song 's verses and gives the song a more uplifting structure . Bono once commented that " love is ... a central theme " of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " 
 The band have said the lyrics refer to the events of both Bloody Sunday and Bloody Sunday ( in 1972 and 1920 , respectively ) , but are not specifically about either event . The song takes the standpoint of someone horrified by the cycle of violence in the province . Bono rewrote the Edge 's initial lyrics , attempting to contrast the two events with Easter Sunday , but he has said that the band were too inexperienced at the time to fully realise that goal , noting that " it was a song whose eloquence lay in its harmonic power rather than its verbal strength . " 
 Early versions opened with the line " Don 't talk to me about the rights of the IRA , UDA . " U2 's bassist , Adam Clayton , recalls that better judgment led to the removal of such a politically charged line , and that the song 's " viewpoint became very humane and non @-@ sectarian ... which , is the only responsible position . " The chosen opening line , " I can 't believe the news today " crystallises the prevailing response , especially among young people , to the violence in Northern Ireland during the 1970s and 1980s . In successive stanzas , the lyrics paraphrase religious text from Matthew 10 : 35 ( " mother 's children ; brothers , sisters torn apart " ) and bring a twist to 1 Corinthians 15 : 32 ( " we eat and drink while tomorrow they die " , instead of " let us eat and drink ; for tomorrow we die " ) . The song finishes with a call for the Irish to stop fighting each other , and " claim the victory Jesus won ... on [ a ] Sunday bloody Sunday . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 U2 were aware when they decided to record " Sunday Bloody Sunday " that its lyrics could be misinterpreted as sectarian , and possibly place them in danger . Some of the Edge 's original lyrics explicitly spoke out against violent rebels , but were omitted to protect the group . Even without these lyrics , some listeners still considered it to be a rebel song — even one which glorifies the events of the two Bloody Sundays to which the lyrics refer . 
 Commercially , the single had its biggest impact in the Netherlands , where it reached number 3 on the national charts . In the US , the song gained significant album @-@ oriented rock radio airplay , and together with the earlier " New Year 's Day " helped expose U2 to a mainstream American rock audience . 
 Critical reception to the song was positive . In the Irish magazine Hot Press , Liam Mackey wrote that " Sunday Bloody Sunday " " takes the widescreen view ... a powerful riff and machine @-@ gun drumming [ is ] crisscrossed by skipping violin . " Denise Sullivan commented for Allmusic that Mullen 's opening drumwork " helps set the tone for the unforgiving , take @-@ no @-@ prisoners feel of the song , as well as for the rest of the album . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Sunday Bloody Sunday " has been performed more than 600 times by U2 . It was first heard by a live audience in December 1982 in Glasgow , Scotland , on a twenty @-@ one show " Pre @-@ War Tour . " The band were particularly nervous about playing the song in Belfast , Northern Ireland . Upon introducing the song there at the <unk> Leisure Centre , Bono promised to " never play it again " if the crowd didn 't like it . The crowd overwhelmingly enjoyed the song ; the Edge recalls that " the place went nuts , it drew a really positive reaction . " , also saying that " We thought a lot about the song before we played it in Belfast and Bono told the audience that if they didn 't like it then we 'd never play it again . Out of the 3 @,@ 000 people in the hall about three walked out . I think that says a lot about the audience 's trust in us . " The band remained apprehensive , however . Even by the song 's sixth performance , Bono was introducing the song with the statement " This song is not a rebel song . " 
 Throughout 1983 's War Tour , Bono continued to reassure audiences that " This song is not a rebel song , this song is ' Sunday Bloody Sunday ' " highlighting the non @-@ partisan intentions of the lyrics . The live performances on this tour featured a routine during which Bono would set a white flag in the front of the stage while the band vamped three chords — B minor , D major , and G major . ( though the band traditionally tune their instruments down a half step so the chords are B flat minor , D flat and G Flat ) . As the band vamped , Bono would sing " no more ! " with the audience . These performances were highly effective with U2 's audience ( at the time , U2 were most popular as a college rock act ) . Live performances of the song subsequently appeared on their 1983 live album Under a Blood Red Sky and their concert film Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky . In the Unforgettable Fire Tour of 1984 and 1985 , " Sunday Bloody Sunday " continued to be a prominent midpoint of each U2 concert — as did the " no more ! " interlude . Along with a performance of " Bad , " the song was performed at Live Aid in July 1985 . 
 As U2 reached new levels of fame in 1987 with The Joshua Tree , " Sunday Bloody Sunday " continued to be a focal point of concerts . Some performances featured slower , more contemplative versions of the song ; other concerts saw the wilder , more violent version . This tour marked the first time " Sunday Bloody Sunday " was played in Northern Ireland since 1982 , and it has not been performed there since . 
 The 1988 rockumentary Rattle and Hum includes a particularly renowned version of the song , recorded on 8 November 1987 at McNichols Sports Arena in Denver , Colorado . On this version Bono 's mid @-@ song rant angrily and emphatically condemns the Remembrance Day Bombing that had occurred earlier that same day in the Northern Irish town of Enniskillen : 
 After the Joshua Tree Tour , Bono was heard saying the band might never play the song again , because the song was " made real " with the performance in Denver , and it could never be matched again . Following their original intent , " Sunday Bloody Sunday " was not played during any of the forty @-@ seven shows on the Lovetown Tour in 1989 . The song reappeared for a brief period during the Zoo TV Tour , and late during the second half of PopMart Tour ( 1997 – 1998 ) , U2 played an emotional concert in war @-@ ravaged Sarajevo that included a solo performance of the song by the Edge . " Sunday Bloody Sunday " was subsequently played live in this style until the end of the tour in March 1998 . 
 " Sunday Bloody Sunday " was played at every concert on the 2001 Elevation and 2005 – 2006 Vertigo tours . Performances in 2001 frequently included parts of Bob Marley 's " Get Up , Stand Up " and " Johnny Was " . A memorable mid @-@ song message referencing the Omagh bombing of 1998 ( " Turn this song into a prayer ! " ) is captured on the live DVD U2 Go Home : Live from Slane Castle . In concerts in New York City after the September 11 , 2001 attacks , the " no more ! " interlude was replaced by Bono holding an American flag . 
 " Sunday Bloody Sunday " was used during the Vertigo Tour of 2005 and 2006 , often alongside " Bullet the Blue Sky " and " Love and Peace or Else " as a trio of politically driven songs performed during the middle part of the band 's set . Bono extended the " no more ! " interlude to explain a headband he had donned in the previous song . The headband depicted the word " coexist " ( written to depict a crescent , a Star of David , and a Christian cross ) . The Coexist symbol is trademarked in the United States by an LLP in Indiana , and the original artwork was created in 2001 by a Polish artist . As with the 2001 shows , the Vertigo tour saw the song applied to subjects further afield than The Troubles in Northern Ireland . During 2006 Australian shows , in Brisbane , Bono asked for Australian Terrorism suspect David Hicks to be brought home and tried under Australian laws . In subsequent Australian concerts he dedicated the song to the victims of the 2002 Bali bombings – where 88 of the fatalities were Australians – saying ' This is your song now ! ' . The song was also performed at every concert on the U2 360 ° Tour , paying tribute to the 2009 Iranian election protests on each occasion by projecting scenes from the protests and Persian writing in green on the video screen . 
 = = Music video = = 
 Although a promotional music video had not been produced for the original release , the band used footage from a 5 June 1983 live performance filmed for the concert film U2 Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky to promote the song . Directed by Gavin Taylor , the video displays Bono 's use of a white flag during performances of the song . The video highlights the intensity and emotion felt by many audience members during U2 's concerts , while the rainy , torch @-@ lit setting in Colorado 's Red Rocks Amphitheatre further adds to the atmosphere . In 2004 , Rolling Stone cited the performance as one " 50 Moments that Changed the History of Rock and Roll " and noted that " the sight of Bono singing the anti @-@ violence anthem ' Sunday Bloody Sunday ' while waving a white flag through crimson mist ( created by a combination of wet weather , hot lights and the illumination of those crags ) became the defining image of U2 's warrior @-@ rock spirit and — shown in heavy rotation on MTV — broke the band nationwide . " 
 = = Other releases = = 
 The album version of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " was originally included on War , but it can also be heard on a number of promotional releases , including the compilations The Best of 1980 @-@ 1990 and U218 Singles . Several live versions have been released ; the video available on Live at Red Rocks : Under a Blood Red Sky is from a performance at Red Rocks Amphitheatre in June 1983 , but the version on the live album Under a Blood Red Sky is from a performance in August 1983 . Audio from the Sarajevo concert of 1997 is featured as a b @-@ side on 1997 's single " If God Will Send His Angels . " The song also appears on Rattle and Hum , PopMart : Live from Mexico City , Elevation 2001 : Live from Boston , U2 Go Home : Live from Slane Castle , Vertigo 2005 : Live from Chicago , Live from Paris , U2 3D , U2 360 ° at the Rose Bowl and in the closing credits of the 2002 TV film Bloody Sunday . The only concert films that " Sunday Bloody Sunday " does not appear on are Zoo TV : Live from Sydney and Vertigo 05 : Live from Milan . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The song appears in the closing credits of the 2002 biopic Bloody Sunday . 
 In 2010 , Rolling Stone ranked " Sunday Bloody Sunday " 272nd on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . " In 2006 , Q named " Sunday Bloody Sunday " the 18th @-@ greatest song of the 1980s . The staff of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame selected " Sunday Bloody Sunday " as one of 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll . The New Statesman listed it as one of the Top 20 Political Songs , and similarly , Time named it one of the Top 10 Protest Songs . 
 In 2007 , The Roots covered " Sunday Bloody Sunday " in a medley with " Pride ( In the Name of Love ) " for an NAACP dinner honouring Bono . While the band played the song , Black Thought rapped lines from the band 's own " False Media " and bits of Edwin Starr 's " War " . 
 In 2008 , Jay @-@ Z sampled " Sunday Bloody Sunday " in a version of " Heart of the City " performed at the Glastonbury Festival . During a version of " Sunday Bloody Sunday " performed by the band at the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards , Jay @-@ Z improvised lyrics over the breakdown in the song before including a snippet of " Get Up , Stand Up . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 " Sunday Bloody Sunday " was commercially released throughout most of Europe in support of U2 's album War . Its cover art is the same as that of " Two Hearts Beat as One , " except on the Japan release . The B @-@ side on the single , " Endless Deep , " is one of the few U2 songs that features bassist Adam Clayton singing . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Bono – lead vocals 
 The Edge – guitar , backing vocals 
 Adam Clayton – bass guitar 
 Larry Mullen , Jr . – drums 
 Steve Wickham – electric violin 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Ambondro mahabo = 
 Ambondro mahabo is a mammal from the middle Jurassic ( about 167 million years ago ) of Madagascar . The only species of the genus Ambondro , it is known from a fragmentary lower jaw with three teeth , interpreted as the last premolar and the first two molars . The premolar consists of a central cusp with one or two smaller cusps and a cingulum ( shelf ) on the inner , or lingual , side of the tooth . The molars also have such a lingual cingulum . They consist of two groups of cusps : a trigonid of three cusps at the front and a talonid with a main cusp , a smaller cusp , and a crest at the back . Features of the talonid suggest that Ambondro had tribosphenic molars , the basic arrangement of molar features also present in marsupial and placental mammals . It is the oldest known mammal with putatively tribosphenic teeth ; at the time of its discovery it antedated the second oldest example by about 25 million years . 
 Upon its description in 1999 , Ambondro was interpreted as a primitive relative of <unk> ( marsupials , placentals , and their extinct tribosphenic @-@ toothed relatives ) . In 2001 , however , an alternative suggestion was published that united it with the Cretaceous Australian Ausktribosphenos and the monotremes ( the echidnas , the platypus , and their extinct relatives ) into the clade Australosphenida , which would have acquired tribosphenic molars independently from marsupials and placentals . The Jurassic Argentinean Asfaltomylos and Henosferus and the Cretaceous Australian Bishops were later added to Australosphenida , and new work on wear in australosphenidan teeth has called into question whether these animals , including Ambondro , did have tribosphenic teeth . Other paleontologists have challenged this concept of Australosphenida , and instead proposed that Ambondro is not closely related to Ausktribosphenos plus monotremes , or that monotremes are not australosphenidans and that the remaining australosphenidans are related to placentals . 
 = = Discovery and context = = 
 Ambondro mahabo was described by a team led by John Flynn in a 1999 paper in Nature . The scientific name derives from the village of <unk> , close to which the fossil was found . It is known from the Bathonian ( middle Jurassic , about 167 million years ago ) of the Mahajanga Basin in northwestern Madagascar , in the Isalo III unit , the youngest of the three rock layers that make up the Isalo " Group " . This unit has also yielded crocodyliform and plesiosaur teeth and remains of the sauropod Lapparentosaurus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Ambondro was described on the basis of a fragmentary right mandible ( lower jaw ) with three teeth in it ( Figure 1 ) , interpreted as the last premolar ( p @-@ last ) and the first two molars ( m1 and m2 ) . It is in the collection of the University of Antananarivo as specimen UA <unk> . Relative to other primitive mammals , it is small . Each of the teeth has a prominent cingulum ( shelf ) on the inner ( lingual ) side . The p @-@ last has a strong central cusp . There is a cuspule ( small cusp ) on the back of the tooth and probably another on the inner front corner . This tooth resembles the molars of symmetrodonts , a group of primitive mammals , but the back cusp is smaller than the metaconid of symmetrodonts . 
 The front half of the m1 and m2 consists of the trigonid , a group of three cusps forming a triangle : the paraconid at the front on the inner side , protoconid in the middle on the outer ( labial ) side , and metaconid at the back on the inner side ( see Figure 2 ) . The three cusps form a right angle with each other at the protoconid , so that the trigonid is described as " open " . The paraconid is higher than the metaconid . At the front margin , a cingulum is present that is divided into two small cusps . Unlike in various early tribosphenic mammals and close relatives , there is no additional cuspule behind the metaconid . At the back of the trigonid , the crest known as the distal metacristid is located relatively close to the outer side of the tooth and is continuous with another crest , the cristid obliqua , which is in turn connected to the back of the tooth . 
 The talonid , another group of cusps , makes up the back of the tooth . It is wider than long and contains a well @-@ developed cusp , the hypoconid , on the outer side and a depression , the talonid basin , in the middle . The cristid obliqua connects to the hypoconid . The smaller hypoconulid cusp is present towards the inner side of the tooth , and the hypoconid and hypoconulid are connected by a cutting edge which is suggestive of the presence of a metacone cusp on the upper molars . Further towards the inner side , a crest , the <unk> , rims the talonid basin ; on m1 , it is swollen and on m2 , it contains two small cuspules , but a distinct entoconid cusp is absent . This <unk> is continuous with the lingual cingulum . 
 Wear facets are areas of a tooth that show evidence of contact with a tooth in the opposing jaw when the teeth are brought together ( known as occlusion ) . Flynn and colleagues identified two wear facets at the front and back margins of the talonid basin ; they argue that these wear facets suggest the presence of a protocone ( another cusp on the outer side of the tooth ) on the upper molars . In a 2005 paper on Asfaltomylos , a related primitive mammal from Argentina , Thomas Martin and Oliver Rauhut disputed the presence of these wear facets within the talonid basin in Ambondro and instead identified wear facets on the cusps and crests surrounding the basin . They proposed that wear in the australosphenidan talonid occurs mainly on the rims , not in the talonid basin itself , and that australosphenidans may not have had a functional protocone . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 In their paper , Flynn and colleagues described Ambondro as the oldest mammal with tribosphenic molars — the basic molar type of metatherian ( marsupials and their extinct relatives ) and eutherian ( placentals and their extinct relatives ) mammals , characterized by the protocone cusp on the upper molars contacting the talonid basin on the lower molars in chewing . The discovery of Ambondro was thought to extend the known temporal range of tribosphenic mammals 25 million years further into the past . Consequently , Flynn and colleagues argued against the prevailing view that tribosphenic mammals originated on the northern continents ( Laurasia ) , and instead proposed that their origin lies in the south ( Gondwana ) . They cited the retention of a distal metacristid and an " open " trigonid as characters separating Ambondro from more modern <unk> . 
 In 2001 , Zhe @-@ Xi Luo and colleagues alternatively proposed that a tribosphenic molar pattern had arisen twice ( compare Figure 3 , top ) — once giving rise to the marsupials and placentals ( Boreosphenida ) , and once producing Ambondro , the Cretaceous Australian Ausktribosphenos , and the living monotremes , which first appeared in the Cretaceous ( united as Australosphenida ) . They characterized Australosphenida by the shared presence of a cingulum on the outer front corner of the lower molars , a short and broad talonid , a relatively low trigonid , and a triangulated last lower premolar . 
 Also in 2001 , Denise <unk> @-@ Russell and colleagues in their description of the earliest Laurasian tribosphenic mammal , <unk> , agreed with the relationship between Ausktribosphenos and monotremes , but argued that Ambondro was closer to Laurasian <unk> than to Ausktribosphenos and monotremes . As evidence against the integrity of Australosphenida , they cited the presence of lingual cingula in various non @-@ australosphenidan mammals ; the presence of two cusps in the anterior cingulum in Ambondro as well as some boreosphenidans ; the different appearance of the premolar in Ambondro ( flat ) and Ausktribosphenos ( squared ) ; and the contrast between the talonids of Ambondro ( with a well @-@ developed hypoconid on the labial side ) and Ausktribosphenos ( squared ) . 
 The next year , Luo and colleagues published a more thorough analysis confirming their previous conclusion and adding the Cretaceous Australian Bishops to Australosphenida . They mentioned the condition of the hypoconulid , which is inclined forward , rather than backward as in boreosphenidans , as an additional australosphenidan character and noted that Ausktribosphenos and monotremes were united , to the exclusion of Ambondro , by the presence of a V @-@ shaped notch in the distal metacristid . In the same year , Asfaltomylos was described from the Jurassic of Argentina as another australosphenidan . In contrast to Ambondro , this animal lacked a distal metacristid and did not have as well @-@ developed a lingual cingulum . 
 However , in 2003 Michael Woodburne and colleagues revised the phylogenetic analysis published by Luo and colleagues , making several changes to the data , particularly in the monotremes . Their results ( Figure 3 , bottom ) challenged the division between Australosphenida and Boreosphenida , as proposed by Luo et al . Instead , they excluded monotremes from Australosphenida and placed the remaining australosphenidans close to Eutheria , with Ambondro most closely related to Asfaltomylos . In 2007 , Guillermo Rougier and colleagues described another australosphenidan , Henosferus , from the Jurassic of Argentina ; they argued against a relationship between Eutheria and Australosphenida ( Figure 3 , top ) , but were ambivalent about the placement of monotremes within Australosphenida . Based in part on Martin and Rauhut 's earlier work on wear facets in australosphenidans , they questioned the presence of a true functional protocone on the upper molars of non @-@ monotreme australosphenidans — none of which are known from upper teeth — and consequently suggested that australosphenidans may not , after all , have had truly tribosphenic teeth . 
 = Overlord ( 2007 video game ) = 
 Overlord is an action role @-@ playing video game developed by Triumph Studios and published by Codemasters for the Xbox 360 , Microsoft Windows and PlayStation 3 . The former two versions of the game were released in North America on June 26 , 2007 , then later in Europe on June 29 and Australia on July 6 , 2007 . 
 Development on the game began in early 2006 and the game was first announced in May of the same year , with actual gameplay demonstrated at E3 2006 . After over a year and a half of development , its release in 2007 was met with generally favourable reviews and helped boost overall sales for Codemasters that year . An expansion pack entitled Overlord : Raising Hell was announced on November 1 , 2007 and released February 15 , 2008 along with additional multiplayer maps and a local split screen co @-@ op mode . A PlayStation 3 version of the game also entitled Overlord : Raising Hell was released in 2008 in Europe on June 20 , and June 24 in North America , which included both the original game and its downloadable content . A sequel for all three systems entitled Overlord II was announced the same year on August 13 along with a spin @-@ off for the Wii entitled Overlord : Dark Legend and a Nintendo DS game called Overlord : Minions . A Linux version is under development . 
 Overlord is set in a fantasy world , where the player takes the role of a resurrected warrior known simply as The Overlord who has control over hordes of gremlin @-@ like creatures known as " minions " . The player must defeat seven corrupt ruling heroes in order to reconquer the lands and establish his lordship over its inhabitants . The game features a corruption feature , similar to that of the Fable games , but allowing the player to " be evil ... or really evil , " where certain actions and choices affect different aspects of the story and gameplay . While the Overlord is controlled in a third person perspective , the way minions are controlled brings elements of real @-@ time strategy and upgrades bring those of role @-@ playing games . The game also uses black humour and is often a satire and parody of the traditional fantasy setting and plot . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game centers around simultaneously controlling the Overlord and an army of goblin @-@ like minions to traverse the 3D gameworld and defeat the seven heroes who slew the Overlord 's predecessor , and who have since been corrupted by power . Each one represents one of the seven deadly sins . 
 There are four minion races , each of which have their own colour and abilities . Browns are melee fighters , blues can revive defeated minions and swim , reds throw fireballs at enemies , can put out fires and are immune to fire attacks , and greens backstab enemies and can clear poisonous gas and plants . Minions are summoned from the spawning pits found scattered throughout the game . The player needs to pay life @-@ force , which can be gained by killing creatures , like large bugs , to summon minions . At the start of the game only five minions can be summoned at once ; as the game progresses this can increase to a maximum of fifty . In addition to controlling minions , the player can sacrifice them at altars of blood and magic to restore the Overlord 's health or mana . Once a forge is acquired , they can be used to imbue weapons and armour to increase the Overlord 's abilities . 
 The player begins in an old ruined tower that has been plundered of its magical artifacts and acts as a central hub for the player . As the stolen tower objects are recovered , new rooms and spells become available for use , and the Overlord 's maximum health and mana increase . The player also needs to recover the blue , green , and red minion hives to summon the respective minions . The player can customize the tower with a variety of visual items such as banners and statues ; the available visual items differ depending on in @-@ game actions . Armour and weapons can be purchased or improved in the forge . Most defeated enemy types appear as opponents in the dungeon , an arena where the Overlord can fight them again ( excluding bosses such as heroes and one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind beasts ) . 
 While the game claims that the Overlord is evil , the quests show him being more of an anti @-@ hero . It also tracks how corrupt the Overlord is in accomplishing his goals . During the game the Overlord is tempted by each of the deadly sins while trying to kill their corresponding heroes . The player 's choices will influence your corruption level , either raising or lowering it . <unk> inoffensive townsfolk , stealing gold and other activities can also increase the corruption level . The corruption level changes the way townsfolk treat the Overlord and will also change his appearance , a system similar to Fable . As corruption increases , the Overlord 's armour will become more devilish with horns protruding out of the back , shoulders , elbows and knees and he will acquire a black aura . The corruption level also determines which game ending the player sees and which high @-@ level spells they can cast . 
 The game offers several multiplayer modes . Slaughter pits two Overlords against each other in a head to head combat with potentially hundreds of minions . In Survival , two Overlords team up against large armies of enemies . <unk> is a competition in which two Overlords and their minions compete to see who can pillage and plunder the most gold in a selected amount of time . The Xbox 360 version provides voice chat over Xbox Live . In the PlayStation 3 version Raising Hell , the game features a mini @-@ map on screen to help the player navigate through the game 's world . 
 = = Story = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player takes the role of the Overlord , the game 's silent protagonist / anti @-@ hero , whose motivations and personality are left for the player to determine . At the outset of the game , tiny gremlin @-@ like minions pry open his coffin and revive him . In rapid succession , his minions shove him into armour , name him successor to the previous Overlord , and task him with slaying his predecessor 's murderers , the Seven Heroes . In the intervening years , the Seven Heroes each fell prey to one of the Seven Deadly Sins . Despite recalling nothing of his past , the Overlord begins to rebuild the tower at the suggestion of his adviser Gnarl . As the new Overlord , the protagonist holds absolute sway over his minions . Complementing this power , he possesses some proficiency using axes , swords , and maces . Through his tower , the Overlord can channel magical energies capable of wanton destruction or defense . 
 Although the titular Overlord is the protagonist , the game relies heavily on Gnarl , the oldest minion , to advise and guide the player . For the majority of the game , he remains by the Tower Heart relaying information and reminders since " there are evil deeds that need doing " . He acts as narrator for the plot . Eventually , the Overlord 's mistress also comes to reside in the tower . She redecorates the rooms and upgrades the minions and the tower as well as shares opinions on certain actions . Rose is the first potential mistress rescued from bandits . Despite the Overlord 's menace and actions , she is initially strong @-@ willed , cheery and unafraid of the Overlord 's minions . The other potential mistress is Rose 's sister Velvet whose evil tendencies are less ambiguous than her sister 's and dresses far more provocatively . She repeatedly ask for presents and lusts for the Overlord and shows a distinct lack of empathy or grief over her fiancé 's murder at the hands of the Overlord . 
 The " seven heroes " are corrupt themselves , each with a trait representing one of the seven deadly sins . The Halfling leader Melvin Underbelly has become gluttonous and as a result , morbidly obese – he has taken to sending bands of armed ( also obese ) halflings to steal food from neighbouring Spree to feed his unending hunger . The mightiest Elven warrior of Evernight Forest , Oberon <unk> is in a constant sleep and his sloth has caused his nightmares to haunt the forest . His apathy allowed the dwarves to invade Evernight and kill or enslave most of the elves , but they were in turn driven out when the creatures of his nightmares became real . The ruler of Heaven 's Peak and Velvet 's fiancé , Sir William the Black shows strong lust towards unorthodox sexual interests such as having relations with a succubus , and indulges in decadent parties with a secret cult . The presence of the succubus has caused a plague of <unk> in the fortified city . The Dwarf King Goldo <unk> of the Golden Hills has become overly greedy and desires wealth over all the other aspects of life where he has even forced the remaining elves to mine for it . His paranoia that his riches will be stolen has led him to heavily <unk> the entire dwarven empire – he himself rides a war @-@ like steam roller named " Rollie " . Envy drives Jewel the Thieving Hero to steal anything valuable even though she cares nothing for possessions , and Kahn the Warrior is very protective of her and is driven wild with wrath whenever anything appears to threaten her . Both of them command the bandits and beholders from the Ruborian Desert . The Previous Overlord , having possessed the body of the Wizard ( who was the founder of the group of heroes ) , shows pride in his work , which involves deception and an urge for supreme power , and is the game 's main antagonist . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game begins where Gnarl and the Brown minions awaken the Overlord from his tomb . From here they suit him in his armour and proclaim him Overlord in his old and dilapidated tower – the previous Overlord having been killed by heroes , ready to reconquer the lands . The Overlord first turns to the Mellow Hills , where the <unk> and their leader Melvin Underbelly are using the townspeople of Spree and Red minions as slave labour . The Overlord storms the Halfling Homes , slaying Melvin and reclaiming the Reds and Spree ( to the peasants ’ delight or disgust depending on whether the Overlord returns their stolen food ) . Castle Spree however has come under attack by bandits . After flushing them out , the castle mistress Rose offers her service to the Overlord . At Evernight Forest , the roots of a tree where Oberon <unk> sleeps cover the Elves ' home , nearly extinct after being ransacked by Dwarves . The Green minions are found and Oberon is slain . The Elves ' sacred statue , however , has been stolen by the Dwarves , angering Jewel , the Thieving Hero , who wanted to steal it for herself . At Heaven ’ s Peak the town is overrun by zombies and demons . Here the Overlord gains the Blue minions . At the town ’ s inn , it is discovered that town leader Sir William the Black had fallen for a <unk> , calling off his wedding to Rose ’ s sister Velvet . Killing Sir William in Angelis Keep , Velvet offers her services to the Overlord and he must choose between her and Rose . 
 The Overlord then turns to the Dwarven Golden Hills and their leader Goldo <unk> , who has become greedy for gold . Here the remaining enslaved Elves claim the last of their women are being held in the Royal Halls of the Dwarven Keep . Meanwhile , at the Dwarf construction site , Gnarl recommends that the Overlord stash a few minions inside the Elf sacred statue and allow Jewel to take it in order to follow her to her homeland , the Ruborian Desert . Back at the Royal Halls , where Goldo is defeated , the Overlord can either take his stash of gold or free the remaining Elf women before the halls collapse . The Ruborian desert is found and Jewel is captured and interrogated . An enraged Kahn the Warrior , protective of Jewel , strikes back and the Overlord now has to save Spree and Heaven ’ s Peak from his wrath . 
 Back at the tower the minions submit to the previous Overlord who has secretly possessed the Wizard , originally father to Rose and Velvet , and who now lays claim to his previous title . The old Overlord tells the current one that he was originally the eighth hero who came to slay him , yet fell from a great height and was left for dead by his companions while they looted the Tower . The Old Overlord however put him in the sarcophagus to heal his wounds in order to use him to defeat the other heroes . The Overlord battles the old Overlord , during which the old Overlord brags of being responsible for the corruption of the heroes . Upon the old Overlord 's death , the Overlord reclaims his tower and minions . Depending on the Overlord 's corruption and choices throughout , the ending will show 4 of 8 different ending cutscenes where either the Overlord is met with bliss and praise or he pillages and scorches the land and tortures the inhabitants . Regardless of the player 's unique ending , the Jester is shown performing some sort of ritual , with Gnarl narrating " Evil will always find a way " , opening up the events for Raising Hell . 
 = = Development = = 
 Overlord was officially announced by the start of May 2006 under the same name for the Xbox 360 and PC , advertised as being a next generation game set in a " twisted fantasy world where players have the choice to be evil ... or really evil ! " Along with this announcement , the first screenshots and artwork were released to game websites . Early concept art showed the Overlord with a clearly visible human face as opposed to his form in the final release as a dark covered shadow with lit up eyes . At E3 2006 , the majority of the game mechanics were revealed within the same month , while the multiplayer component had yet to be announced . 
 The Xbox 360 demo was released for download over Xbox Live on June 8 , while the PC demo was released just days later over the internet , weeks before the game 's first release in North America . The demo included only the initial portion of the game , which contained the game 's introductory cinematic and narration , the tutorial and the Overlord 's battle to free human peasants from a Halfling operated slave camp . 
 During post release , along with patches , by August there were already outlined plans for downloadable content for both versions . These were said to include the introduction of new multiplayer maps , offline co @-@ op and the possibility of an extension or an additional chapter to the game 's single @-@ player plot . A patch was released for the PC version of the game , updating the software to version 1 @.@ 2 and fixing a number of bugs , including one which occasionally prevented players from completing the game . The corresponding Xbox 360 update arrived several weeks later . The first official downloadable content was announced in November the same year , along with news of an official expansion , in the form of a " Challenge Pack " , which was to add seven new maps and two modes to the multiplayer feature , an offline split screen version and a " Legendary " difficulty for single player , with corresponding Achievement Points for the 360 version . These new modes were made available on February 15 , 2008 over the internet on various gaming sites for the PC and Xbox Live for the 360 , the Split @-@ Screen option for free . 
 In July 2007 , shortly after the release of Overlord there were rumours of a PlayStation 3 port , due to job advertisements at Triumph Studios , which mentioned one position needed " <unk> [ Xbox 360 ] / PC code base to [ PlayStation 3 ] " . A spokesman for Codemasters however quickly corrected this by stating " We are not porting Overlord to [ PlayStation 3 ] . " It wasn 't until February 2008 , when Codemasters confirmed a PlayStation 3 version of Overlord was in development . However instead of a straight port of the original , the version is to include both the original game and its additional downloadable content and expansion on one Blu @-@ ray Disc , under the title Overlord : Raising Hell to be released in Summer 2008 . The demo was made available over the online PlayStation Store on May 15 , 2008 and later fully released the following month in June . 
 = = = Overlord : Raising Hell = = = 
 On November 1 , 2007 , Codemasters announced Overlord : Raising Hell , a downloadable expansion pack . The premise behind this is that an Abyss appears in each of the five kingdoms ( Mellow Hills , Evernight Forest , Heaven 's Peak , the Golden Hills and the Ruborian Desert ) , causing the residents to disappear ( they enter the abyss because they believe it will save them from the Overlord ) . In each of the Abysses there is a hero being tortured and an Abyss stone . In order to obtain the Abyss Stone and gain control over the Abyss , the Overlord has to battle the residents of the Abysses ( <unk> ) and the fallen heroes . Once the Overlord has control of the Abysses , he will be able to battle the one who summoned these Abysses and fight for the domination of his realm . Along with the additional multiplayer content , Raising Hell was released over official game download websites for the PC and Xbox Live for the 360 , on February 15 , 2008 . 
 = = = Sequel and spin @-@ offs = = = 
 Following the games release on the PlayStation 3 , the same year on August 13 Codemasters announced a sequel entitled Overlord II to be released for all three platforms for the last Overlord to be released sometime in 2009 . According to developers , the game " massively increases the scope of the original concept " while taking the role of a different Overlord due to the events in the story of Raising Hell , continuing where the last game finished with a new " Roman @-@ inspired " prime foe . Control over minions will also be expanded allowing to do other tasks like " riding mounts , using war machines and sailing warships " In the same announcement for the official sequel were plans for a spin @-@ off for the Wii entitled Overlord : Dark Legend to feature a new Overlord although plot continuity with the main series has yet to be explained but is to establish " the idea that there have been a series of Overlords throughout time " . Being developed entirely for the Wii , it has motion controls implemented such as " plucking a minion from the horde , holding him by the neck and shaking him around " by using this feature . Another spin @-@ off entitled Overlord : Minions was released for the Nintendo DS handheld game console but with more puzzle based gameplay and only controlling the minions . Both Nintendo spin @-@ offs were developed by Climax Studios while Triumph Studios would work exclusively on developing Overlord II . All three games were eventually released during June , 2009 . A new installment in the series , Overlord : Fellowship of Evil was announced in April 2015 . The game was released on October 20 , 2015 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One and will support co @-@ operative multiplayer upon launch . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Before its release , at E3 2006 , Overlord won GameSpot 's E3 2006 Editors Choice Award of Best Surprise . Overlord gained a generally positive response from game critics with an average review score of 77 % for the Xbox 360 version and 81 % for the PC at GameRankings . Many sources praised the game for its concept , noted for being similar to that of Pikmin , which was popular for the same reason . 
 GameSpot noted " the satisfaction of running amok with your legion of wickedly enthusiastic minions is what makes Overlord worth playing " while Game Informer praised the game 's personality , notably that of the minions , where " The satire is funny , and the evil is deliciously over @-@ the @-@ top , but the minions are the real stars " . IGN stated similar pros , calling it " evil , yet light @-@ hearted , humor " and that with the " richly detailed world combine for a game that is worth diving into " . 1UP.com noted the personal element of controlling the minions , stating " If they ( minions ) die , just call up more . Something happens along the way , though : You start getting attached to the little guys " . 
 Despite the game 's premise as the choice to be " evil or really evil " , numerous reviewers pointed out that some of the game 's choices within missions are more good than evil ; such as , for example , the option to return the peasants ' stolen food stocks . While mentioning this too , Eurogamer added that , since the game humour is mainly satire , these good deeds " kind of becomes the joke . Especially early on , there 's a fairly obvious irony in that everyone else in the world is assuming that you 're this brave hero when in fact you 're clearly a sociopath " . In December 2007 , Overlord was included in Eurogamer 's Top 50 Games of 2007 . 
 Other reviewers noted that the game can become frustrating at times , due to the controls not being able to keep up with the game 's pace , and apparent glitches between platform and regional versions . IGN US gave the 360 version a 6 @.@ 6 / 10 due to a game crashing bug , calling it " the equivalent of having to critique a good book only to pause three quarters of the way through and have the author rip the remaining pages out simply because you took a break at the wrong moment " . IGN UK and Australia , however , did not find such a bug , giving Overlord a higher score of 8 @.@ 1 and 8 @.@ 0 . GameSpot had a similar issue over the poor camera control in the PC version , at first rating it with a 6 @.@ 0 , but re @-@ rated the game higher after reviewing a newer version . They still , however , held the shortcoming of the " controls that you 'll occasionally struggle against " . GameSpy noted the multiplayer mode being " sloppy " and " unstable " at times , not being as enjoyable as the single player mode , having " experienced a couple disconnects , and had more than one game end prematurely due to simple frustration " . 
 When Overlord : Raising Hell for the PlayStation 3 was released , it was met with similar praise and complaints as the previous two versions with a current review average of 75 % at GameRankings . Eurogamer continued its praise , even calling it " probably one of the best games currently available on PS3 " . IGN however found the PS3 version to harbour many technical issues including drop in frame rate , long load times and lag in multiplayer , issues that GameSpot also found by concluding while the PS3 version is the best value for money , due to " the unpredictable frame rate , sluggish controls , and fickle camera in the PS3 version " , it suggested others to " pick up the technically superior Xbox 360 version and spend a little extra to get the downloadable content " . Game Trailers also found a few technical issues but concluded that " when things are clicking ... With plenty of humor and a substantially long quest , players will be surprised at how enjoyable Overlord can be . " 
 = China = 
 China , officially the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) , in Asia , is the world 's most populous state , with a population of over 1 @.@ 381 billion . The state is governed by its vanguard party based in the capital of Beijing . It exercises jurisdiction over 22 provinces , five autonomous regions , four direct @-@ controlled municipalities ( Beijing , Tianjin , Shanghai , and Chongqing ) , two mostly self @-@ governing special administrative regions ( Hong Kong and Macau ) , and claims sovereignty over Taiwan . China is a great power and a major regional power within Asia , and has been characterized as a potential superpower . 
 Covering approximately 9 @.@ 6 million square kilometers , China is the world 's second largest state by land area , and either the third or fourth @-@ largest by total area , depending on the method of measurement . China 's landscape is vast and diverse , ranging from forest steppes and the Gobi and Taklamakan deserts in the arid north to subtropical forests in the wetter south . The Himalaya , Karakoram , Pamir and Tian Shan mountain ranges separate China from south and central Asia . The Yangtze and Yellow rivers , the third and sixth longest in the world , respectively , run from the Tibetan Plateau to the densely populated eastern seaboard . China 's coastline along the Pacific Ocean is 14 @,@ 500 kilometres ( 9 @,@ 000 mi ) long , and is bounded by the Bohai , Yellow , East China , and South China seas . 
 China is a cradle of civilization , with its known history beginning with an ancient civilization – one of the world 's earliest – that flourished in the fertile basin of the Yellow River in the North China Plain . For millennia , China 's political system was based on hereditary monarchies known as dynasties . Since 221 BCE , when the Qin Dynasty first conquered several states to form a Chinese empire , the state has expanded , fractured and reformed numerous times . The Republic of China ( ROC ) replaced the last dynasty in 1912 , and ruled the Chinese mainland until 1949 , when it was defeated by the Communist Party of China in the Chinese Civil War . The Communist Party established the People 's Republic of China in Beijing on 1 October 1949 , while the ROC government relocated to Taiwan with its present capital in Taipei . Both the ROC and PRC continue to claim to be the legitimate government of all China . 
 China had the largest economy in the world for most of the past two thousand years , during which it has seen cycles of prosperity and decline . Since the introduction of economic reforms in 1978 , China has become one of the world 's fastest @-@ growing major economies . As of 2014 , it is the world 's second @-@ largest economy by nominal GDP and largest by purchasing power parity ( PPP ) . China is also the world 's largest exporter and second @-@ largest importer of goods . China is a recognized nuclear weapons state and has the world 's largest standing army and second @-@ largest defense budget . The PRC is a member of the United Nations , as it replaced the ROC as a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council in 1971 . China is also a member of numerous formal and informal multilateral organizations , including the WTO , APEC , BRICS , the Shanghai Cooperation Organization ( SCO ) , the <unk> and the G @-@ 20 . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The English word " China " is thought to have been originally derived from the Sanskrit word <unk> ( <unk> ) , which is translated into the Persian word <unk> ( <unk> ) . <unk> was first used in early Hindu scripture , including the Mahābhārata ( 5th century BCE ) and the Laws of Manu ( 2nd century BCE ) . The word " China " itself was first recorded in 1516 in the journal of the Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa . The journal was translated and published in England in 1555 . The traditional theory , proposed in the 17th century by Martino Martini and supported by many later scholars , is that the word China and its earlier related forms are ultimately derived from the state of " Qin " ( <unk> ) , the westernmost of the Chinese kingdoms during the Zhou dynasty which unified China to form the Qin dynasty . Other suggestions for the derivation of " China " however exist . 
 The official name of the modern state is the People 's Republic of China ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Zhōnghuá <unk> <unk> ) . The common Chinese names for the state are <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> , from <unk> , " central " or " middle " , and <unk> , " state " or " states " , and in modern times , " nation " ) and Zhōnghuá ( Chinese : <unk> ) , although the state 's official name has been changed numerous times by successive dynasties and modern governments . The term <unk> appeared in various ancient texts , such as the Classic of History of the 6th century BCE , and in pre @-@ imperial times it was often used as a cultural concept to distinguish the Huaxia tribes from perceived " barbarians " . The term , which can be either singular or plural , referred to the group of states or provinces in the central plain , but was not used as a name for the state as a whole until the nineteenth century . The Chinese were not unique in regarding their state as " central " , with other civilizations having the same view of themselves . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 Archaeological evidence suggests that early hominids inhabited China between 250 @,@ 000 and 2 @.@ 24 million years ago . A cave in Zhoukoudian ( near present @-@ day Beijing ) exhibits hominid fossils dated at between 680 @,@ 000 and 780 @,@ 000 BCE . The fossils are of Peking Man , an example of Homo erectus who used fire . <unk> teeth of Homo sapiens dating to 125 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 BCE have been discovered in <unk> Cave in Dao County , Hunan . Chinese proto @-@ writing existed in Jiahu around 7000 BC , <unk> from 5800 BC to 5400 BC , <unk> around 6000 BC and <unk> dating from the 5th millennium BC . Some scholars have suggested that the Jiahu symbols ( 7th millennium BC ) constituted the earliest Chinese writing system . 
 = = = Early dynastic rule = = = 
 According to Chinese tradition , the first dynasty was the Xia , which emerged around 2100 BCE . The dynasty was considered mythical by historians until scientific excavations found early Bronze Age sites at <unk> , Henan in 1959 . It remains unclear whether these sites are the remains of the Xia Dynasty or of another culture from the same period . The succeeding Shang dynasty is the earliest to be confirmed by contemporary records . The Shang ruled the plain of the Yellow River in eastern China from the 17th to the 11th century BCE . Their oracle bone script ( from c . 1500 BCE ) represents the oldest form of Chinese writing yet found , and is a direct ancestor of modern Chinese characters . The Shang were conquered by the Zhou , who ruled between the 11th and 5th centuries BCE , though centralized authority was slowly eroded by feudal warlords . Many independent states eventually emerged from the weakened Zhou state and continually waged war with each other in the 300 @-@ year Spring and Autumn Period , only occasionally deferring to the Zhou king . By the time of the Warring States period of the 5th – 3rd centuries BCE , there were seven powerful sovereign states in what is now China , each with its own king , ministry and army . 
 = = = Imperial China = = = 
 The Warring States period ended in 221 BCE after the state of Qin conquered the other six kingdoms and established the first unified Chinese state . Qin Shi Huang , the emperor of Qin , proclaimed himself " First Emperor " ( <unk> ) and imposed reforms throughout China , notably the forced standardization of Chinese characters , measurements , length of cart axles , and currency . His dynasty also conquered the Yue tribes , incorporating the Lingnan area into China . The Qin dynasty lasted only fifteen years , falling soon after Qin Shi Huang 's death , as its harsh legalist and authoritarian policies led to widespread rebellion . 
 The subsequent Han dynasty ruled China between 206 BCE and 220 CE , and created a lasting Han cultural identity among its populace that has endured to the present day . The Han Dynasty expanded the empire 's territory considerably with military campaigns reaching southern Korea , Vietnam , Mongolia and Central Asia , and also helped establish the Silk Road in Central Asia . Han China gradually became the largest economy of the ancient world . The Han Dynasty adopted Confucianism , a philosophy developed in the Spring and Autumn period , as its official state ideology . Despite the Han 's official abandonment of Legalism , the official ideology of the Qin , Legalist institutions and policies remained and formed the basis of the Han government . 
 After the collapse of Han , a period of disunion known as the period of the Three Kingdoms followed . The brief unification of the Jin dynasty was broken by the uprising of the Five Barbarians . In 581 CE , China was reunited under the Sui . However , the Sui Dynasty declined following its defeat in the Goguryeo – Sui War ( 598 – 614 ) . 
 Under the succeeding Tang and Song dynasties , Chinese economy , technology and culture entered a golden age . After the campaigns against the Turks , China returned control of the Western Regions and reopened the Silk Road during the flourishing age of Tang dynasty , which was devastated and weakened by the An Shi Rebellion in the 8th century . The Song dynasty was the first government in world history to issue paper money and the first Chinese polity to establish a permanent standing navy which was supported by the developed shipbuilding industry along with the sea trade . Between the 10th and 11th centuries , the population of China doubled in size to around 100 million people , mostly because of the expansion of rice cultivation in central and southern China , and the production of abundant food surpluses . The Song dynasty also saw a revival of Confucianism , in response to the growth of Buddhism during the Tang , and a flourishing of philosophy and the arts , as landscape art and porcelain were brought to new levels of maturity and complexity . However , the military weakness of the Song army was observed by the Jurchen Jin dynasty . In 1127 , Emperor Huizong of Song and the capital Bianjing were captured during the Jin – Song Wars , remnants of the Song retreated to southern China . 
 In the 13th century , China was gradually conquered by the Mongol Empire . In 1271 , the Mongol leader Kublai Khan established the Yuan dynasty ; the Yuan conquered the last remnant of the Song dynasty in 1279 . Before the Mongol invasion , the population of Song China was 120 million citizens ; this was reduced to 60 million by the time of the census in 1300 . A peasant named Zhu Yuanzhang overthrew the Yuan Dynasty in 1368 and founded the Ming dynasty . Under the Ming Dynasty , China enjoyed another golden age , developing one of the strongest navies in the world and a rich and prosperous economy amid a flourishing of art and culture . It was during this period that Zheng He led voyages throughout the world , reaching as far as Africa . In the early years of the Ming Dynasty , China 's capital was moved from Nanjing to Beijing . With the budding of capitalism , philosophers such as Wang Yangming further critiqued and expanded Neo @-@ Confucianism with concepts of individualism and equality of four occupations . The scholar @-@ official stratum became a supporting force of industry and commerce in the tax boycott movements , which , together with the famines and the wars against Japanese invasions of Korea and Manchu invasions led to an exhausted treasury . 
 In 1644 , Beijing was captured by a coalition of peasant rebel forces led by Li Zicheng . The last Ming Chongzhen Emperor committed suicide when the city fell . The Manchu Qing dynasty then allied with Ming dynasty general Wu Sangui and overthrew Li 's short @-@ lived Shun dynasty , and subsequently seized control of Beijing , which became the new capital of the Qing Dynasty . 
 = = = End of dynastic rule = = = 
 The Qing dynasty , which lasted from 1644 until 1912 , was the last imperial dynasty of China . As a conquest dynasty , it successively conquered the Ming loyalists and Dzungar Khanate , adding Mongolia , Tibet and Xinjiang into the empire , and strengthened the centralized autocracy to crackdown on anti @-@ Qing sentiment . The Haijin ( " sea ban " ) and the ideological control as represented by the literary inquisition caused social and technological stagnation . In the 19th century , the dynasty experienced Western imperialism following the First Opium War ( 1839 – 42 ) and the Second Opium War ( 1856 – 60 ) with Britain and France . China was forced to sign unequal treaties , pay compensation , open treaty ports , allow extraterritoriality for foreign nationals , and cede Hong Kong to the British under the 1842 Treaty of Nanking . The First Sino @-@ Japanese War ( 1894 – 95 ) resulted in Qing China 's loss of influence in the Korean Peninsula , as well as the cession of Taiwan to Japan . 
 The Qing dynasty also began experiencing internal unrest in which millions of people died . In the 1850s and 1860s , the failed Taiping Rebellion ravaged southern China . Other major rebellions included the <unk> @-@ Hakka Clan Wars ( 1855 – 67 ) , the <unk> Rebellion ( 1851 – 68 ) , the Miao Rebellion ( 1854 – 73 ) , the <unk> Rebellion ( 1856 – 73 ) and the Dungan Revolt ( 1862 – 77 ) . The initial success of the Self @-@ Strengthening Movement of the 1860s was frustrated by the series of military defeats in the 1880s and 1890s . 
 In the 19th century , the great Chinese Diaspora began . Losses due to emigration were added to by conflicts and catastrophes such as the Northern Chinese Famine of 1876 – 79 , in which between 9 and 13 million people died . In 1898 , the Guangxu Emperor drafted a reform plan to establish a modern constitutional monarchy , but these plans were thwarted by the Empress Dowager Cixi . The ill @-@ fated anti @-@ Western Boxer Rebellion of 1899 – 1901 further weakened the dynasty . Although Cixi sponsored a program of reforms , the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 – 12 brought an end to the Qing dynasty and established the Republic of China . 
 = = = Republic of China ( 1912 – 49 ) = = = 
 On 1 January 1912 , the Republic of China was established , and Sun Yat @-@ sen of the Kuomintang ( the KMT or Nationalist Party ) was proclaimed provisional president . However , the presidency was later given to Yuan Shikai , a former Qing general who in 1915 proclaimed himself Emperor of China . In the face of popular condemnation and opposition from his own Beiyang Army , he was forced to abdicate and reestablish the republic . 
 After Yuan Shikai 's death in 1916 , China was politically fragmented . Its Beijing @-@ based government was internationally recognized but virtually powerless ; regional warlords controlled most of its territory . In the late 1920s , the Kuomintang , under Chiang Kai @-@ shek , the then Principal of the Republic of China Military Academy , was able to reunify the country under its own control with a series of deft military and political manoeuvrings , known collectively as the Northern Expedition . The Kuomintang moved the nation 's capital to Nanjing and implemented " political tutelage " , an intermediate stage of political development outlined in Sun Yat @-@ sen 's San @-@ min program for transforming China into a modern democratic state . The political division in China made it difficult for Chiang to battle the Communists , against whom the Kuomintang had been warring since 1927 in the Chinese Civil War . This war continued successfully for the Kuomintang , especially after the Communists retreated in the Long March , until Japanese aggression and the 1936 Xi 'an Incident forced Chiang to confront Imperial Japan . 
 The Second Sino @-@ Japanese War ( 1937 – 1945 ) , a theatre of World War II , forced an uneasy alliance between the Kuomintang and the Communists . Japanese forces committed numerous war atrocities against the civilian population ; in all , as many as 20 million Chinese civilians died . An estimated 200 @,@ 000 Chinese were massacred in the city of Nanjing alone during the Japanese occupation . During the war , China , along with the UK , the US and the Soviet Union , were referred to as " trusteeship of the powerful " and were recognized as the Allied " Big Four " in the Declaration by United Nations . Along with the other three great powers , China was one of the four major Allies of World War II , and was later considered one of the primary victors in the war . After the surrender of Japan in 1945 , Taiwan , including the Pescadores , was returned to Chinese control . China emerged victorious but war @-@ ravaged and financially drained . The continued distrust between the Kuomintang and the Communists led to the resumption of civil war . In 1947 , constitutional rule was established , but because of the ongoing unrest , many provisions of the ROC constitution were never implemented in mainland China . 
 = = = People 's Republic of China ( 1949 – present ) = = = 
 Major combat in the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949 with the Communist Party in control of most of mainland China , and the Kuomintang retreating offshore , reducing the ROC 's territory to only Taiwan , Hainan , and their surrounding islands . On 1 October 1949 , Communist Party Chairman Mao Zedong proclaimed the establishment of the People 's Republic of China . In 1950 , the People 's Liberation Army succeeded in capturing Hainan from the ROC and incorporating Tibet . However , remaining Nationalist forces continued to wage an insurgency in western China throughout the 1950s . 
 Mao 's regime consolidated its popularity among the peasants through the land reform with between 1 and 2 million landlords executed . Under its leadership , China developed an independent industrial system and its own nuclear weapons . The Chinese population almost doubled from around 550 million to over 900 million . However , Mao 's Great Leap Forward , a large @-@ scale economic and social reform project , resulted in an estimated 45 million deaths between 1958 and 1961 , mostly from starvation . In 1966 , Mao and his allies launched the Cultural Revolution , sparking a decade of political recrimination and social upheaval which lasted until Mao 's death in 1976 . In October 1971 , the PRC replaced the Republic of China in the United Nations , and took its seat as a permanent member of the Security Council . 
 In 1976 , Mao died . The Gang of Four was quickly arrested and held responsible for the excesses of the Cultural Revolution . In 1978 Deng Xiaoping took power and instituted significant economic reforms . The Communist Party loosened governmental control over citizens ' personal lives , and the communes were gradually disbanded in favour of private land leases . This marked China 's transition from a planned economy to a mixed economy with an increasingly open market environment . China adopted its current constitution on 4 December 1982 . In 1989 , the violent suppression of student protests in Tiananmen Square brought condemnation and sanctions against the Chinese government from various countries . 
 Jiang Zemin , Li Peng and Zhu Rongji led the nation in the 1990s . Under their administration , China 's economic performance pulled an estimated 150 million peasants out of poverty and sustained an average annual gross domestic product growth rate of 11 @.@ 2 % . The country formally joined the World Trade Organization in 2001 , and maintained its high rate of economic growth under Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao 's leadership in the 2000s . However , rapid growth also severely impacted the country 's resources and environment , and caused major social displacement . Living standards continued to improve rapidly despite the late @-@ 2000s recession , but centralized political control remained tight . 
 Preparations for a decadal Communist Party leadership change in 2012 were marked by factional disputes and political scandals . During China 's 18th National Communist Party Congress in November 2012 , Hu Jintao was replaced as General Secretary of the Communist Party by Xi Jinping . Under Xi , the Chinese government began large @-@ scale efforts to reform its economy , which has suffered from structural instabilities and slowing growth . The Xi – Li Administration also announced major reforms to the one @-@ child policy and prison system . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Political geography = = = 
 The People 's Republic of China is the second @-@ largest country in the world by land area after Russia , and is either the third- or fourth @-@ largest by total area , after Russia , Canada and , depending on the definition of total area , the United States . China 's total area is generally stated as being approximately 9 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 km2 ( 3 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Specific area figures range from 9 @,@ 572 @,@ 900 km2 ( 3 @,@ 696 @,@ 100 sq mi ) according to the Encyclopædia Britannica , 9 @,@ 596 @,@ 961 km2 ( 3 @,@ 705 @,@ 407 sq mi ) according to the UN Demographic Yearbook , to 9 @,@ 596 @,@ 961 km2 ( 3 @,@ 705 @,@ 407 sq mi ) according to the CIA World Factbook . 
 China has the longest combined land border in the world , measuring 22 @,@ 117 km ( 13 @,@ 743 mi ) from the mouth of the Yalu River to the Gulf of Tonkin . China borders 14 nations , more than any other country except Russia , which also borders 14 . China extends across much of East Asia , bordering Vietnam , Laos , and Myanmar ( Burma ) in Southeast Asia ; India , Bhutan , Nepal , Afghanistan , and Pakistan in South Asia ; Tajikistan , Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan in Central Asia ; and Russia , Mongolia , and North Korea in Inner Asia and Northeast Asia . Additionally , China shares maritime boundaries with South Korea , Japan , Vietnam , and the Philippines . 
 = = = Landscape and climate = = = 
 The territory of China lies between latitudes 18 ° and 54 ° N , and longitudes 73 ° and 135 ° E. China 's landscapes vary significantly across its vast width . In the east , along the shores of the Yellow Sea and the East China Sea , there are extensive and densely populated alluvial plains , while on the edges of the Inner Mongolian plateau in the north , broad grasslands predominate . Southern China is dominated by hills and low mountain ranges , while the central @-@ east hosts the deltas of China 's two major rivers , the Yellow River and the Yangtze River . Other major rivers include the Xi , Mekong , Brahmaputra and Amur . To the west sit major mountain ranges , most notably the Himalayas . High plateaus feature among the more arid landscapes of the north , such as the Taklamakan and the Gobi Desert . The world 's highest point , Mount Everest ( <unk> ) , lies on the Sino @-@ Nepalese border . The country 's lowest point , and the world 's third @-@ lowest , is the dried lake bed of <unk> Lake ( − <unk> ) in the Turpan Depression . 
 China 's climate is mainly dominated by dry seasons and wet monsoons , which lead to pronounced temperature differences between winter and summer . In the winter , northern winds coming from high @-@ latitude areas are cold and dry ; in summer , southern winds from coastal areas at lower latitudes are warm and moist . The climate in China differs from region to region because of the country 's highly complex topography . 
 A major environmental issue in China is the continued expansion of its deserts , particularly the Gobi Desert . Although barrier tree lines planted since the 1970s have reduced the frequency of sandstorms , prolonged drought and poor agricultural practices have resulted in dust storms plaguing northern China each spring , which then spread to other parts of east Asia , including Korea and Japan . China 's environmental watchdog , SEPA , stated in 2007 that China is losing a million acres ( 4 @,@ 000 km ² ) per year to desertification . Water quality , erosion , and pollution control have become important issues in China 's relations with other countries . Melting glaciers in the Himalayas could potentially lead to water shortages for hundreds of millions of people . 
 = = = Biodiversity = = = 
 China is one of 17 megadiverse countries , lying in two of the world 's major ecozones : the Palearctic and the Indomalaya . By one measure , China has over 34 @,@ 687 species of animals and vascular plants , making it the third @-@ most biodiverse country in the world , after Brazil and Colombia . The country signed the Rio de Janeiro Convention on Biological Diversity on 11 June 1992 , and became a party to the convention on 5 January 1993 . It later produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan , with one revision that was received by the convention on 21 September 2010 . 
 China is home to at least 551 species of mammals ( the third @-@ highest such number in the world ) , 1 @,@ 221 species of birds ( eighth ) , 424 species of reptiles ( seventh ) and 333 species of amphibians ( seventh ) . China is the most biodiverse country in each category outside the tropics . Wildlife in China share habitat with and bear acute pressure from the world 's largest population of homo sapiens . At least 840 animal species are threatened , vulnerable or in danger of local extinction in China , due mainly to human activity such as habitat destruction , pollution and poaching for food , fur and ingredients for traditional Chinese medicine . Endangered wildlife is protected by law , and as of 2005 , the country has over 2 @,@ 349 nature reserves , covering a total area of 149 @.@ 95 million hectares , 15 percent of China 's total land area . 
 China has over 32 @,@ 000 species of vascular plants , and is home to a variety of forest types . Cold coniferous forests predominate in the north of the country , supporting animal species such as moose and Asian black bear , along with over 120 bird species . The understorey of moist conifer forests may contain thickets of bamboo . In higher montane stands of juniper and yew , the bamboo is replaced by rhododendrons . Subtropical forests , which are predominate in central and southern China , support as many as 146 @,@ 000 species of flora . Tropical and seasonal rainforests , though confined to Yunnan and Hainan Island , contain a quarter of all the animal and plant species found in China . China has over 10 @,@ 000 recorded species of fungi , and of them , nearly 6 @,@ 000 are higher fungi . 
 = = = Environmental issues = = = 
 In recent decades , China has suffered from severe environmental deterioration and pollution . While regulations such as the 1979 Environmental Protection Law are fairly stringent , they are poorly enforced , as they are frequently disregarded by local communities and government officials in favour of rapid economic development . Urban air pollution is a severe health issue in the country ; the World Bank estimated in 2013 that 16 of the world 's 20 most @-@ polluted cities are located in China . China is the world 's largest carbon dioxide emitter . The country also has significant water pollution problems : 40 % of China 's rivers had been polluted by industrial and agricultural waste by late 2011 . This crisis is compounded by increasingly severe water shortages , particularly in the north @-@ east of the country . 
 However , China is the world 's leading investor in renewable energy commercialization , with $ 52 billion invested in 2011 alone ; it is a major manufacturer of renewable energy technologies and invests heavily in local @-@ scale renewable energy projects . By 2009 , over 17 % of China 's energy was derived from renewable sources – most notably hydroelectric power plants , of which China has a total installed capacity of 197 GW . In 2011 , the Chinese government announced plans to invest four trillion yuan ( US $ 618 @.@ 55 billion ) in water infrastructure and desalination projects over a ten @-@ year period , and to complete construction of a flood prevention and anti @-@ drought system by 2020 . In 2013 , China began a five @-@ year , US $ 277 @-@ billion effort to reduce air pollution , particularly in the north of the country . 
 = = Politics = = 
 China 's constitution states that The People 's Republic of China " is a socialist state under the people 's democratic dictatorship led by the working class and based on the alliance of workers and peasants , " and that the state organs " apply the principle of democratic centralism . " The PRC is one of the world 's few remaining socialist states openly endorsing communism ( see Ideology of the Communist Party of China ) . The Chinese government has been variously described as communist and socialist , but also as authoritarian and corporatist , with heavy restrictions in many areas , most notably against free access to the Internet , freedom of the press , freedom of assembly , the right to have children , free formation of social organizations and freedom of religion . Its current political , ideological and economic system has been termed by its leaders as the " people 's democratic dictatorship " , " socialism with Chinese characteristics " ( which is Marxism adapted to Chinese circumstances ) and the " socialist market economy " respectively . 
 = = = Communist Party = = = 
 China 's constitution declares that the country is ruled " under the leadership " of the Communist Party of China ( CPC ) . The electoral system is pyramidal . Local People 's Congresses are directly elected , and higher levels of People 's Congresses up to the National People 's Congress ( NPC ) are indirectly elected by the People 's Congress of the level immediately below . The political system is decentralized , and provincial and sub @-@ provincial leaders have a significant amount of autonomy . Other political parties , referred to as democratic parties , have representatives in the National People 's Congress and the Chinese People 's Political Consultative Conference ( CPPCC ) . 
 Compared to its closed @-@ door policies until the mid @-@ 1970s , the administrative climate is less restrictive than before . China supports the Leninist principle of " democratic centralism " , but critics describe the elected National People 's Congress as a " rubber stamp " body . 
 = = = Government = = = 
 The President of China is the titular head of state , serving as the ceremonial figurehead under National People 's Congress . The Premier of China is the head of government , presiding over the State Council composed of four vice premiers and the heads of ministries and commissions . The incumbent president is Xi Jinping , who is also the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China and the Chairman of the Central Military Commission , making him China 's paramount leader . The incumbent premier is Li <unk> , who is also a senior member of the CPC Politburo Standing Committee , China 's de facto top decision @-@ making body . 
 There have been some moves toward political liberalization , in that open contested elections are now held at the village and town levels . However , the Party retains effective control over government appointments : in the absence of meaningful opposition , the CPC wins by default most of the time . Political concerns in China include the growing gap between rich and poor and government corruption . Nonetheless , the level of public support for the government and its management of the nation is high , with 80 – 95 % of Chinese citizens expressing satisfaction with the central government , according to a 2011 survey . 
 = = = Administrative divisions = = = 
 The People 's Republic of China has administrative control over 22 provinces and considers Taiwan to be its 23rd province , although Taiwan is currently and independently governed by the Republic of China , which disputes the PRC 's claim . China also has five subdivisions officially termed autonomous regions , each with a designated minority group ; four municipalities ; and two Special Administrative Regions ( <unk> ) , which enjoy a degree of political autonomy . These 22 provinces , five autonomous regions , and four municipalities can be collectively referred to as " mainland China " , a term which usually excludes the <unk> of Hong Kong and Macau . None of these divisions are recognized by the ROC government , which claims the entirety of the PRC 's territory . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 The PRC has diplomatic relations with 171 countries and maintains embassies in 162 . Its legitimacy is disputed by the Republic of China and a few other countries ; it is thus the largest and most populous state with limited recognition . In 1971 , the PRC replaced the Republic of China as the sole representative of China in the United Nations and as one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council . China was also a former member and leader of the Non @-@ Aligned Movement , and still considers itself an advocate for developing countries . Along with Brazil , Russia , India and South Africa , China is a member of the BRICS group of emerging major economies and hosted the group 's third official summit at Sanya , Hainan in April 2011 . 
 Under its interpretation of the One @-@ China policy , Beijing has made it a precondition to establishing diplomatic relations that the other country acknowledges its claim to Taiwan and severs official ties with the government of the Republic of China . Chinese officials have protested on numerous occasions when foreign countries have made diplomatic overtures to Taiwan , especially in the matter of armament sales . 
 Much of current Chinese foreign policy is reportedly based on Premier Zhou Enlai 's Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence , and is also driven by the concept of " harmony without uniformity " , which encourages diplomatic relations between states despite ideological differences . This policy may have led China to support states that are regarded as dangerous or repressive by Western nations , such as Zimbabwe , North Korea and Iran . China has a close economic and military relationship with Russia , and the two states often vote in unison in the UN Security Council . 
 = = = = Trade relations = = = = 
 In recent decades , China has played an increasing role in calling for free trade areas and security pacts amongst its Asia @-@ Pacific neighbours . In 2004 , it proposed an entirely new East Asia Summit ( EAS ) framework as a forum for regional security issues . The EAS , which includes ASEAN Plus Three , India , Australia and New Zealand , held its inaugural summit in 2005 . China is also a founding member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization ( SCO ) , along with Russia and the Central Asian republics . China became a member of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) on 11 December 2001 . 
 In 2000 , the United States Congress approved " permanent normal trade relations " ( <unk> ) with China , allowing Chinese exports in at the same low tariffs as goods from most other countries . China has a significant trade surplus with the United States , its most important export market . In the early 2010s , US politicians argued that the Chinese yuan was significantly undervalued , giving China an unfair trade advantage . In recent decades , China has followed a policy of engaging with African nations for trade and bilateral co @-@ operation ; in 2012 , Sino @-@ African trade totalled over US $ 160 billion . China has furthermore strengthened its ties with major South American economies , becoming the largest trading partner of Brazil and building strategic links with Argentina . 
 = = = = Territorial disputes = = = = 
 Ever since its establishment after the second Chinese Civil War , the PRC has been claiming the territories governed by the Republic of China ( ROC ) , a separate political entity today commonly known as Taiwan , as a part of its territory , which includes the island of Taiwan as Taiwan Province , Kinmen and Matsu as a part of Fujian Province and islands the ROC controls in the South China Sea as a part of Hainan Province and Guangdong Province . These claims are controversial because of the complicated Cross @-@ Strait relations , and has been one of the most important principles in Chinese diplomacy . 
