 Hsu started helping members of the World United Formosans for Independence return to Taiwan in 1991 . In 1992 , after being nominated by the Democratic Progressive Party ( DPP ) , Hsu was elected to become a member of the Legislative Yuan . In 1995 , he was not nominated by the DPP , but was still elected as an independent candidate . He lost the election for the office of mayor of Tainan in 1997 and instead became the secretary @-@ general of the New National Coalition ( <unk> ) shortly after the establishment of the organization . He was re @-@ elected legislator in the 1998 legislative election . Hsu stepped out of the New National Coalition and rejoined the DPP shortly after his re @-@ election to the Legislative Yuan . He was nominated by the DPP Central Executive Committee as the party 's candidate for the Tainan mayoral race . 
 = = Tainan mayoralty = = 
 Hsu was elected mayor of Tainan in 2001 and was re @-@ elected to that post in 2004 . In his terms as mayor , he focused on projects to beautify the city , to set up cultural parks and to strive for major constructions . He worked to help the city profit from historical assets and restore Tainan 's former splendor . He made 2007 Tainan 's " year of culture and tourism " to promote Tainan 's tourism attractions . His major mayoral achievements were the renovation of the city transportation system and overseeing the city 's successful bids for the 2005 and 2006 Taiwan Lantern Festivals , the 2007 International <unk> Arts Festival , and the 2007 National Games of Taiwan ( <unk> ) . One of his major goals , the renovation of the Tainan Railway Station and National Cheng Kung University , is scheduled to be completed during his term in office and has earned him high compliments . 
 Hsu supported a merger between Tainan City and Tainan County to form a special municipality . The Executive Yuan passed a resolution to upgrade the city , and the official merger will occur in December 2010 . In January 2010 , Hsu declared his candidacy in the 2010 municipal election . During the DPP primary election in May , he lost to fellow Tainan politician William Lai by 12 % of the votes , ending his candidacy . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During the DPP primary election for the nomination of presidential candidate , Hsu expressed that he " will not support the candidate that opposes the construction of an underground railway system in Tainan . " Then @-@ Premier Su Tseng @-@ chang promised that the construction would be financially supported by the central government if he were elected . As a result , Hsu openly supported Su in the primary election . 
 He also believes that in order to improve the competitive advantage of Taiwan , the government should review the distribution of resources between northern and southern Taiwan , with the purpose of balancing their development . Hsu , as a member of the Democratic Progressive Party , also supports the independence movement of Taiwan . Hsu thinks that the United Nations membership referendum is an important step for democracy . He participated in the " UN for Taiwan " rally on September 15 , 2007 . 
 While the National Central Library is located in Taipei , Hsu strongly supports the establishment of a regional branch in Tainan City . The branch might be established in Kaohsiung City , another southern city . Hsu , however , is confident about Tainan being chosen as the location for the new branch because of the transport convenience and academic resources of the region . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 Under his term , the environment of the city greatly improved . Hsu started a program of having the city 's garbage trucks ring out brief English lessons in 2002 . He promoted the use of eco @-@ friendly chopsticks by requiring government officials and teachers to use their own reusable chopsticks when dining , expressing that the goal of the campaign is to reduce the use of disposable chopsticks by 100 @,@ 000 pairs per day . 
 During his second term in office , Tainan City became the first Taiwanese city to enter the Alliance for Healthy Cities of the World Health Organization . In addition , Tainan also became the first Taiwanese city to enter the Global Cities Dialogue . Hsu also believes that Tainan should become a city of international tourism and culture , and he is working towards that purpose . In September 2007 , he spoke to the 2007 Asia @-@ Pacific Cities Summit participants and stated that Tainan is blessed with natural , historic , cultural and humanistic characteristics , and that Tainan also possesses great conditions for high @-@ tech , trade and investment development . 
 Hsu worked to make Tainan a smoke @-@ free environment . After the successful ban of smoking in public areas such as shopping centers , he pushed through the ban of smoking in historical sites . The <unk> Tower became the first smoke @-@ free historical site in Taiwan after the passing of the regulation in October 2007 . Other historical sites covered by the regulation include Tainan Confucian Temple , Fort Zeelandia , and Eternal Golden Castle . 
 In January 2008 , the government of Tainan started an operation to clean up dioxin @-@ contaminated soil around the site of a defunct factory of Taiwan Alkali Industrial Corp ( <unk> ) . The Hsu administration was the first to take action since 1982 , when the government became aware of the mercury concentrations . 
 = = = Law enforcement = = = 
 Due to an accidental killing of a teenage girl while trying to shoot a psychotic suspect , the Tainan City Police Bureau made a decision to develop a special kind of baton in 2006 . When dealing with suspects without firearms , the police officers are expected to use the baton first in order to reduce accidents . To commemorate the girl who died , mayor Hsu named the baton after her . 
 In September 2007 , the Tourism Mounted Police Unit of Tainan ( Chinese : <unk> ) was established to attract tourists . The members of the unit wear green uniforms and ride bicycles around the city in the weekends . They facilitate tourists and at the same time try to reduce crime rate . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 After the DPP nominated Hsu as the 2001 Tainan mayoral race candidate , protests led by supporters of then @-@ incumbent mayor George Chang , who is also a member of the DPP , arose . The protesters called Hsu a betrayer of the party as he left the party in 1995 . They showed their disapproval of the party 's choice by burning their party membership cards . 
 The prevention of dengue fever in Taiwan was always most successful in Tainan City . In 2007 , however , outbreaks in the city was almost unstoppable . The fever outbreaks originally occurred only in Annan District , where the first case was reported in June . The health department failed to control the spread of the fever , and all six districts ended up having confirmed cases . There were also an outbreak in an old soldiers ' home . On August 22 , Mayor Hsu apologized for the disastrous outbreak of the dengue fever ; he announced that the health department would be reorganized and new officials would be appointed in six months . 
 = = = Mayoral scandals = = = 
 While then @-@ mayor of Taipei Ma Ying @-@ jeou was indicted for alleged misuse of " special allowance fund " , prosecutors dropped Hsu Tain @-@ tsair 's case in March 2007 . However , on April 10 , 2007 , Hsu was indicted by prosecutors for his alleged involvement in a construction scandal and violations of the Government Procurement Act ( Chinese : <unk> ) . The scandal was broken by the Tainan City councillor Hsieh Long @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) in May 2006 during a council meeting . 
 In April 2007 , Hsu was indicted by the Tainan prosecutors . In their statement of charges , the prosecutors accused Hsu of money grafting in an underground city construction project . According to Hsu , the prosecutors heavily used the testimonies of people who were convicted of crime . In August 2009 , Hsu was found not guilty by the Tainan District Court . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = The Kampung Boy = 
 The Kampung Boy , also known as Lat , the Kampung Boy or simply Kampung Boy , is a graphic novel by Lat about a young boy 's experience growing up in rural Perak in the 1950s . The book is an autobiographical account of the artist 's life , telling of his adventures in the jungles and tin mines , his circumcision , family , and school life . It is also the basis for the eponymous animated series broadcast in 1999 . First published in 1979 by Berita Publishing , The Kampung Boy was a commercial and critical success ; its first printing ( of at least 60 @,@ 000 copies , 16 times ) was sold out within four months of its release . Narrated in English with a smattering of Malay , the work has been translated into other languages , such as Japanese and French , and sold abroad . 
 The book made Lat an international figure and a highly regarded cartoonist in Malaysia . It won several awards when released as Kampung Boy in the United States , such as Outstanding International Book for 2007 and the Children 's Book Council and Booklist Editor 's Choice for 2006 . The Kampung Boy became a franchise , with the characters of The Kampung Boy decorating calendars , stamps , and aeroplanes . A Malaysian theme park is scheduled to open in 2012 with the fictional characters as part of its attractions . The Kampung Boy is very popular in Southeast Asia and has gone through 16 reprints . A sequel , Town Boy , which followed the protagonist in his teenage years in the city , was published in 1981 and a spin @-@ off , Kampung Boy : Yesterday and Today , in 1993 . The latter reused the setting of The Kampung Boy to compare and contrast the differences between Malaysian childhood experiences in the 1950s and 1980s . 
 = = Problem = = 
 The Kampung Boy tells the story of a young boy , Lat , and his childhood in a kampung ( village ) . A graphic novel , it illustrates the boy 's life in pictures and words . Aside from being the protagonist , Lat is also the narrator . The story opens with his birth in a kampung in Perak , Malaysia , and the traditional rituals surrounding the event : the recitation of blessings , the singing of religious songs , and the observance of ceremonies . As Lat grows older , he explores the house , gradually shifting the story 's focus to the comic activities of his family outside their abode . 
 Lat starts the first stage of his formal education — reading the Qur 'an . At these religious classes , he makes new friends and joins them in their adventures , swimming in the rivers and exploring the jungles . Lat 's parents worry over his lack of interest in his studies ; he acknowledges their concern but finds himself unmotivated to forgo play for academic pursuits . When he reaches his tenth year , he undergoes the <unk> , a ritual circumcision . The ceremonies that precede the operation are elaborate , with processions and baths in the river . The circumcision proves to be " just like an ant bite ! " 
 Sometime after recovering from the circumcision , Lat trespasses on a tin mine with his friends . They teach him how to gather the mud left in the wake of the mining dredges and pan for valuable ore . The activity is illegal but often overlooked by the miners . Lat brings the result of his labour back to his father , expecting praise . Instead , he is punished for neglecting his studies and future . After overhearing his parents ' laments and being shown the family 's rubber plantation , Lat finds the will to push himself to study . He is rewarded for his efforts , passing a " special examination " and qualifying for a " high @-@ standard " boarding school in Ipoh , the state capital . 
 Rushing home to inform his parents , Lat discovers his father in negotiations with a tin mining company , which is surveying the land . The company will offer a large sum of money for the family 's properties if they discover tin on it . Other villagers are hoping for similar deals with the company . They plan to buy houses in Ipoh if their hopes are realised . The day for Lat to depart the village has arrived and he is excited , but as he is about to depart , sadness washes over him . He acknowledges the emotions as his love of the village and hopes that the place where he was born will remain unchanged when he returns and see it changed . 
 = = Conception = = 
 The Kampung Boy is an autobiography . Its author , Lat , grew up in a kampung and moved to the city after graduating from high school . He worked there as a crime reporter and drew cartoons to supplement his income — a hobby he had started at the age of nine . Lat became the column cartoonist for his newspaper after impressing his editors with his cartoons on the <unk> . He was sent to London to study at St Martin 's School of Art and on returning to Malaysia in 1975 , he reinvented his column , Scenes of Malaysian Life , into an editorial comic series . It proved popular and as Lat 's fame grew , he began questioning his city lifestyle and reminiscing about his life in the kampung . Lat felt he and his fellow citizens had all forgotten their village origins and wanted to remind them of that . He began working on The Kampung Boy in 1977 , conceptualising and drawing the scenes when he was not drawing Scenes of Malaysian Life . His labour came to fruition in 1979 when Berita Publishing Sendirian Berhad released The Kampung Boy on the Malaysian market . 
 = = Art style and presentation = = 
 The style of Kampung Boy does not follow that commonly found in Western graphic novels . A page can be occupied fully by a single drawing , accompanied by text . The image either presents a scene that stands on its own or segues into the next , forming a story sequence that flows across two facing pages . The story is told in a local dialect of English , simpler in its grammatical structure and sprinkled with Malay words and phrases . Deborah Stevenson , editor of The Bulletin of the Center for Children 's Books , found that the narration invokes a sense of camaraderie with the reader , and carries an " understated affection for family , neighbours and village life . " Mike Shuttleworth , reviewer for The Age , said that Lat often achieved humour in this book by illustrating the scene contrary to what was described . Stevenson agreed , highlighting a scene in which Mat spoke of how his mother tenderly fed him porridge ; the illustration , however , shows her irritation as the toddler spits the porridge back at her . 
 Kevin Steinberger , reviewer for Magpies , found Lat 's layout made Kampung Boy an " easy , inviting read . " He said that Lat 's pen @-@ and @-@ ink drawings relied on the " strong contrast between black and white to create space and suggest substance . " Lat drew the children of Kampung Boy as " mostly mop @-@ topped , toothy , bare @-@ bottomed or sarong @-@ draped " kids , who are often " exaggeratedly dwarfed " by items of the adult world . He explained that the way the boys were drawn was partly due to the influence of comics he read in the 1950s ; " naughty ones with ... bushy hair " were prominent male protagonists in those books . The adult characters are easily distinguished by their exaggerated clothing and accessories such as puffed out pants and butterfly glasses . " Short and round " shapes make the design of the characters distinctive . These characters display exaggerated expressions , particularly when they are drawn to face the readers . 
 Francisca Goldsmith , a librarian and comics reviewer , found Lat 's scenes to be " scribbly " , yet " wonderfully detailed " . Similarly , comics journalist Greg McElhatton commented that The Kampung Boy was " a strange mix of caricature and careful , fine detail . " These two views lend support to Muliyadi 's assertion that Lat demonstrated his strength in The Kampung Boy ; his eye for detail extended to his characters and , more importantly , the surroundings . Lat 's characters look , dress , act , and talk like real Malaysians would , and they are placed in environments that are readily identifiable with local jungles , villages , and cities . The faithful details impart a sense of familiarity to Malaysian readers and make the scenes convincing to others . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 New Straits Times , the paper Lat was working for in the 1970s , was published in English ; its directive was to serve a multi @-@ racial readership . Redza commented that Lat understood Malaysian society and the need to engage all of its racial groups . The Kampung Boy was thus written and published in English . At Lat 's request , Berita Publishing hired his friend , <unk> Ahmad , to translate the graphic novel into Malay . This version was published under the title Budak Kampung . By 2008 , The Kampung Boy had been reprinted 16 times , and translated into various languages such as Portuguese , French , and Japanese . Countries that have printed localised versions of The Kampung Boy include Brazil , Germany , Korea and the United States . 
 = = = United States adaptation = = = 
 The United States adaptation , which dropped the definite article from the title , was published by First Second Books in 2006 . The book is in a smaller format ( 6 inches by 8 inches ) and sported Matt Groening 's testimonial — " one of the all @-@ time great cartoon books " — on its cover . According to Gina Gagliano , First Second 's Marketing Associate , the publishers left the story mostly untouched ; they had not altered the contents to be more befitting to American tastes . They did , however , change the grammar and spelling from British English ( the standard followed by Malaysia ) to the American version and lettered the text in a font based on Lat 's handwriting . First Second judged that the original book 's sprinklings of Malay terms were not huge obstacles to their customers . Most of the Malay words could be clearly understood from context , either through text or with the accompanying illustrations . The clarity of the language left the publisher few terms to explain to North American readers ; the few that remained were explained either by inserting definitions within parentheses or by replacing the Malay word with an English equivalent . 
 = = = Animated television series = = = 
 The success of The Kampung Boy led to its adaptation as an animated series . Started in 1995 , production took four years to complete and was an international effort , involving companies in countries such as Malaysia , the Philippines , and the United States . The series uses the characters of the graphic novel , casting them in stories that bear similarities to The Simpsons . Comprising 26 episodes , Kampung Boy features themes that focus on the meshing of traditional ways of life with modern living , the balance between environmental conservation and urban development , and local superstitions . One of its episodes , " Oh ! Tok " , featuring a spooky banyan tree , won a special Annecy Award for an animated episode of more than 13 minutes in 1999 . Although the pilot episode was shown on television in 1997 , the series began broadcasting over the satellite television network Astro in 1999 . Aside from Malaysia , Kampung Boy was broadcast in other countries such as Germany and Canada . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 According to Lat , The Kampung Boy 's first print — 60 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 copies — was sold out in three to four months ; by 1979 , at least 100 @,@ 000 had been sold . The Kampung Boy is regarded as Lat 's finest work and representative of his oeuvre . After being published in the United States , Kampung Boy won the Children 's Book Council and Booklist Editor 's Choice award in 2006 . It was also awarded the Outstanding International Book for 2007 by the United States Board of Books for Young People . 
 The Kampung Boy was successful due to its realistic presentation of Malaysia 's cultural past . Many Malaysians who grew up in the 1960s or earlier fondly remembered the laidback lives they had in the kampung upon reading the book . Stevenson said that The Kampung Boy 's portrayal of the past would resonate with everyone 's fondness for a happy experience in his or her own past . Those unfamiliar with the ways of the kampung could relate to the " universal themes of childhood , adolescence , and first @-@ love " . According to Stevenson , the illustrations help to clarify any unfamiliar terms the reader might face and the narrative force of Lat 's story depends more on the protagonist 's experiences than on the details . The book 's appeal to both children and adults lies in Lat 's success in recapturing the innocence of childhood . 
 Malaysian art historian Redza <unk> said that " The Kampung Boy was a masterpiece that was clearly designed to be read as a novel . " He compared the graphical depiction of childhood experience to Camara Laye 's novel The African Child and viewed The Kampung Boy as the " finest and most sensitive evocation of a rural Malay childhood ever attempted in [ Malaysia ] , in any creative medium . " Steinberger had the same thoughts , but compared The Kampung Boy to Colin Thiele 's autobiographical novel Sun on the <unk> , which expounds on the fun and mischief of early childhood . 
 Lat 's success with The Kampung Boy created new opportunities for him . He set up his own company — Kampung Boy Sendirian Berhad ( Village Boy private limited ) — to handle the merchandising of his cartoon characters and occasional publishing of his books . Kampung Boy is partnering with Sanrio and Hit Entertainment in a project to open an indoor theme park in Malaysia by the end of 2012 . One of the park 's attractions is the showcasing of Lat 's characters alongside those of Hello Kitty and Bob the Builder . The distinctive characters of The Kampung Boy have become a common sight in Malaysia . They are immortalised on stamps , financial guides , and aeroplanes . 
 = = Sequel and spinoff = = 
 = = = Town Boy = = = 
 Town Boy is the sequel to The Kampung Boy . Published in 1981 , it continues Mat 's story in the multicultural city of Ipoh , where he attends school , learns of American pop music , and makes new friends of various races , notably a Chinese boy named Frankie . Mat capers through town and gets into mischievous adventures with his friends . He and Frankie bond through their common love of rock @-@ and @-@ roll and playing air @-@ guitar to Elvis Presley 's tunes above the coffee shop run by Frankie 's parents . As Mat grows into his teens , he dates Normah , " the hottest girl in Ipoh . " Town Boy 's story is a collection of Lat 's reminiscences about his teenage days in Ipoh , an account of " the days before [ he ] moved to the capital city to venture into life as an adult ... and later a professional <unk> . " The cartoonist wanted to publicise his knowledge of music and write a subtle story about friendship . Frankie is representative of the diverse friends Lat made in those days through a common love of music . 
 The book 's layout is more varied than The Kampung Boy 's , featuring " short multi @-@ panel sequences with giant double @-@ page @-@ spread @-@ drawings . " Comics artist Seth commented that Lat 's drawings are filled with " vigor and raw energy " , " entirely based on eccentric stylizations but grounded with an eye capable of wonderfully accurate observation of the real world . " At certain points , crowd scenes spread across the pages of the book , filled with " Lat 's broadly humorous and humane " characters . Comics journalist Tom Spurgeon said after readings such scenes : " There are times when reading Town Boy feels like watching through a street fair after it rains , everyday existence altered by an event just enough to make everything stand out . You can get lost in the cityscapes . " 
 The Asian characters occasionally speak in their native tongues , their words rendered in Chinese or Tamil glyphs without translations . Goldsmith and <unk> did not find the foreign words to be a hindrance in understanding and enjoying the work . Instead , they believed the non @-@ English languages aided Lat 's construction of his world as one different from a dominantly English @-@ speaking world . Lat 's depiction of Mat 's visit to Frankie 's home transcends culture , portraying realistically the experiences most children feel when visiting the " foreign but familiar staleness " of their new friend 's home . Mat and Frankie 's growing friendship is a central theme of the book , and their bond as they enjoy rock @-@ and @-@ roll together in Frankie 's house has become a notable scene for readers such as journalist <unk> A. Rahim . Their friendship marks a shift in the story of Mat 's life from a focus on his family in The Kampung Boy to a focus beyond . As the book revolves around Mat 's friendship with Frankie , it ends with the Chinese boy 's departure to the United Kingdom from the Ipoh railway station . 
 As of 2005 , Town Boy had been reprinted 16 times . It has also been translated into French and Japanese . Reviews of Town Boy were positive . Librarian George <unk> liked the book for its detailed crowd scenes and its diverse cast of characters — both animal and human . The " energy " in Lat 's drawings reminded him of Sergio Aragonés and Matt Groening . Laurel Maury , a reviewer for the Los Angeles Times , likened the book to a Peanuts cartoon , but without the melancholy typical of Charles M. Schulz 's work . She said that Lat delivered a " rollicking " world and that his characters ' interactions made the story unpretentious and heart @-@ warming . Although Spurgeon believed any single scene in Town Boy was superior to any book from a lesser cartoonist , he preferred the narrower scope of The Kampung Boy ; he felt the tighter focus of Lat 's first book gave a more personal and deeper insight into the author 's growth as a young boy . Town Boy , with its quicker pace , felt to him like a loose collection of heady first @-@ time experiences that failed to explore all possibilities of the encounters . 
 = = = Kampung Boy : Yesterday and Today = = = 
 John Lent , a scholar of comics , described Kampung Boy : Yesterday and Today as Lat 's " crowning achievement " . Published in 1993 , Yesterday and Today returns to Lat 's roots as a kampung child as described in The Kampung Boy . It explores in greater detail the games played by Lat and his friends and the lifestyle they had in the 1960s . However , Yesterday and Today also compares these past events to similar occurrences in the 1980s and ' 90s , contrasting the two in a humorous light ; the opposition of the two time frames is further enhanced by rendering the portrayals of contemporary scenes in watercolour while those of the past remain in black and white . Lat 's goal for this book was to " tell his own children how much better it was in the old days . " 
 Like in The Kampung Boy , the scenes in Yesterday and Today are presented in great detail . Lat shows the children playing with items constructed from simple items found in the household and nature . He also illustrates the toys ' schematics . He compares the games with their modern counterparts , lamenting the loss of creativity in modern youths . Other comments on societal changes are in the book . A child is taking a swimming lesson in a pool , intently watched by his parents who have a maid in tow with various items in her hands . While the parents <unk> wildly at their son , the lifeguard and instructor calmly sit by the pool , watching the boy 's smooth progress . This scene is contrasted with Lat 's own experience at the hands of his father , who casually tosses the terrified boy into a river , letting him either swim or flounder . Such details , according to Muliyadi , invoke a yearning for the past and help readers " better appreciate [ the ] cartoons " . 
 University lecturer Zaini <unk> viewed Yesterday and Today 's comparisons as criticisms of society , putting forth the question of whether people should accept " development " to simply mean discarding the old for the new without regards to its value . Professor <unk> of the National University of Malaysia interpreted the book 's ending as a wakeup call to parents , questioning them if they should deny their children a more relaxed childhood . Lent agreed , saying that Lat had asserted the theme from the start , showing him and his childhood friends " not in a hurry to grow up " . Redza hinted that Lat 's other goal was to point out the " dehumanising environment " that Malaysian urban children are growing up in . A Japanese edition of Yesterday and Today was published by Berita Publishing in 1998 . 
 = Portland Trail Blazers = 
 The Portland Trail Blazers , commonly known as the Blazers , are an American professional basketball team based in Portland , Oregon . The Trail Blazers compete in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) as a member club of the league 's Western Conference Northwest Division . The team played its home games in the Memorial Coliseum before moving to Moda Center in 1995 ( called the Rose Garden until 2013 ) . The franchise entered the league as an expansion team in 1970 , and has enjoyed a strong following : from 1977 through 1995 , the team sold out 814 consecutive home games , the longest such streak in American major professional sports at the time , and only since surpassed by the Boston Red Sox . The Trail Blazers have been the only NBA team based in the bi @-@ national Pacific Northwest , after the Vancouver Grizzlies relocated to Memphis and became the Memphis Grizzlies in 2001 , and the Seattle SuperSonics relocated to Oklahoma City and became the Oklahoma City Thunder in 2008 . 
 The team has advanced to the NBA Finals three times , winning the NBA championship once in 1977 . Their other NBA Finals appearances were in 1990 and 1992 . The team has qualified for the playoffs in 31 seasons of their 45 @-@ season existence , including a streak of 21 straight appearances from 1983 through 2003 , the second longest streak in NBA history . The Trail Blazers ' 31 playoff appearances rank third in the NBA only behind the Los Angeles Lakers and San Antonio Spurs since the team 's inception in 1970 . Six Hall of Fame players have played for the Trail Blazers ( Lenny Wilkens , Bill Walton , Clyde Drexler , Dražen Petrović , Arvydas Sabonis , and Scottie Pippen ) . Bill Walton is the franchise 's most decorated player ; he was the NBA Finals Most Valuable Player in 1977 , and the regular season MVP the following year . Four Blazer rookies ( Geoff Petrie , Sidney Wicks , Brandon Roy and Damian Lillard ) have won the NBA Rookie of the Year award . Two Hall of Fame coaches , Lenny Wilkens and Jack Ramsay , have patrolled the sidelines for the Blazers , and two others , Mike Schuler and Mike Dunleavy , have won the NBA Coach of the Year award with the team . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Franchise inception = = = 
 Sports promoter Harry Glickman sought a National Basketball Association ( NBA ) franchise for Portland as far back as 1955 when he proposed two new expansion teams , the other to be located in Los Angeles . When the Memorial Coliseum was opened in 1960 Glickman saw the potential it could serve as a professional basketball venue but it was not until February 6 , 1970 , that the NBA board of governors granted him the rights to a franchise in Portland . To raise the money for the $ 3 @.@ 7 million admission tax , Glickman associated himself to real estate magnates Bob Schmertz of New Jersey , Larry Weinberg of Los Angeles and Herman <unk> of Seattle . Two weeks later , on February 24 , team management held a contest to select the team 's name and received more than 10 @,@ 000 entries . The most popular choice was " Pioneers " , but that name was excluded from consideration as it was already used by sports teams at Portland 's Lewis and Clark College . The name " Trail Blazers " received 172 entries , and was ultimately selected by the judging panel , being revealed on March 13 in the halftime of a SuperSonics game at the Memorial Coliseum . Derived from the trail blazing activity by explorers making paths through forests , Glickman considered it a name that could " reflect both the ruggedness of the Pacific Northwest and the start of a major league era in our state . " Despite initial mixed response , the Trail Blazers name , often shortened to just " Blazers " , became popular in Oregon . 
 = = = 1970 – 1974 = = = 
 Along with the Cleveland Cavaliers and Buffalo Braves ( now Los Angeles Clippers ) , the Trail Blazers entered the NBA in 1970 as an expansion team , under coach Rolland Todd . Geoff Petrie and Sidney Wicks led the team in its early years , and the team failed to qualify for the playoffs in its first six seasons of existence . During that span , the team had three head coaches ( including future hall @-@ of @-@ famer Lenny Wilkens ) ; team executive Stu Inman also served as coach . The team won the first pick in the NBA draft twice during that span . In 1972 , the team drafted LaRue Martin with the number one pick , and in 1974 the team selected Bill Walton from UCLA . 
 = = = 1974 – 1978 = = = 
 In 1976 , the ABA – NBA merger saw those two rival leagues join forces . Four ABA teams joined the NBA ; the remaining teams were dissolved and their players distributed among the remaining NBA squads in a dispersal draft . The Trail Blazers selected Maurice Lucas in the dispersal draft . That summer , they also hired Jack Ramsay as head coach . 
 The two moves , coupled with the team 's stellar play , led Portland to several firsts : winning record ( 49 – 33 ) , playoff appearance , and NBA Championship in 1977 . Starting on April 5 of that year , the team began a sellout streak of 814 straight games — the longest in American major professional sports history — which did not end until 1995 , after the team moved into a larger facility . 
 The team started the 1977 – 78 season with a 50 – 10 mark , and some predicted a dynasty in Portland . However , Bill Walton suffered a foot injury that ended his season and would plague him over the remainder of his career , and the team struggled to an 8 – 14 finish , going 58 – 24 overall . In the playoffs , Portland lost to the Seattle SuperSonics in the 1978 conference semifinals . That summer , Walton demanded to be traded to a team of his choice ( Clippers , Knicks , Warriors , or 76ers ) because he was unhappy with his medical treatment in Portland . Walton was never traded , and he held out the entire 1978 – 79 season and left the team as a free agent thereafter . The team was further dismantled as Lucas left in 1980 . 
 = = = 1980 – 1983 = = = 
 During the 1980s , the team was a consistent presence in the NBA post @-@ season , failing to qualify for the playoffs only in 1982 . However , they never advanced past the conference semifinals during the decade . The Pacific Division of the NBA was dominated by the Los Angeles Lakers throughout the decade , and only the Lakers and the Houston Rockets represented the Western Conference in the NBA Finals . Key players for the Blazers during the early 1980s included Mychal Thompson , Billy Ray Bates , Fat Lever , Darnell Valentine , Wayne Cooper , T. R. Dunn , Jim Paxson , and Calvin Natt . 
 = = = 1983 – 1988 = = = 
 In the 1983 draft , the team selected University of Houston guard – forward Clyde Drexler with the 14th pick ; " Clyde the Glide " would become the face of the franchise for over a decade , and the team 's second @-@ most decorated player ( after Walton ) . In the next year 's draft , the Trail Blazers landed the No. 2 pick in the NBA draft . After the Houston Rockets selected Drexler 's college teammate Akeem Olajuwon at No. 1 , the Trail Blazers selected Kentucky center Sam Bowie . Drafting third , the Chicago Bulls selected Michael Jordan . The selection of the injury @-@ plagued Bowie over Jordan has been criticized as one of the worst draft picks in the history of American professional sports . That summer , the Blazers also made a controversial trade , sending Lever , Cooper , and Natt to the Denver Nuggets for high @-@ scoring forward Kiki Vandeweghe . In the 1985 draft , the Blazers selected point guard Terry Porter with the last pick of the first round . Porter would go on to become one of the top point guards in the league , and the Blazers ' all @-@ time leader in assists . 
 However , the Blazers continued to struggle in the post @-@ season , and in 1986 , Ramsay was fired and replaced with Mike Schuler . Despite this , they were the only team to beat the Boston Celtics on the road that season . That off @-@ season , the team drafted two players from behind the Iron Curtain , Arvydas Sabonis and Dražen Petrović , and sent Thompson to the San Antonio Spurs for former Oregon State University star Steve Johnson . Johnson was a high @-@ scoring forward @-@ center who the team intended to pair with Bowie on the frontline . It was not to be , as Bowie broke his leg five games into the 1986 – 87 season , missing the next two and a half seasons . During Schuler 's brief tenure , the Blazers failed to advance out of the first round of the NBA playoffs . 
 = = = = Paul Allen ownership = = = = 
 In 1988 , Paul Allen purchased the Blazers . His first season as owner was one marked by turmoil , as conflicts erupted over who should start at several positions . Both Vandeweghe and Johnson suffered injuries ; they were replaced in the starting lineup by Jerome Kersey and Kevin Duckworth . Several players , most notably Drexler , were accused of undermining Schuler . The team went 25 – 22 to open the 1988 – 89 season , and Schuler was fired . He was replaced on an interim basis with assistant coach Rick Adelman , and Vandeweghe was traded to the New York Knicks . Under Adelman , the team went 14 – 21 to finish the season , and barely qualified for the playoffs . That off @-@ season , the team traded Sam Bowie ( who had returned to the team to end the season ) to the New Jersey Nets for forward Buck Williams , and Adelman was given the coaching job on a non @-@ interim basis . 
 = = = 1988 – 1995 = = = 
 The addition of Williams , and the replacement of the defensively challenged Vandeweghe with the defensive @-@ minded Kersey , turned the team from a poor defensive squad into a good one . Led by Drexler , the team reached the NBA Finals in 1990 and 1992 , losing to the Detroit Pistons and Chicago Bulls , respectively . Possibly inspired by the 1985 Chicago Bears 's " Super Bowl Shuffle " , during the run @-@ up to their 1990 Finals appearance , the Blazers recorded two songs : " Bust a Bucket " and " Rip City Rhapsody " ( with music played and recorded by Josh <unk> , " Rip City " being a reference to the city 's nickname ) . The year in between their two finals appearances , the team posted a league @-@ best 63 – 19 record before losing to the Los Angeles Lakers in the Western Conference finals . However , the team failed to win an NBA title , and failed to advance past the first round in 1993 and 1994 . Adelman was fired after the 1994 season , and replaced with P. J. <unk> , which led to the resignation of executive vice @-@ president Geoff Petrie , a close friend of Adelman 's . 
 In July 1994 , the Trail Blazers announced the hiring of a new team president , former Seattle SuperSonics general manager Bob Whitsitt . Whitsitt , known as " Trader Bob " for his penchant for making trades , immediately set about revamping the Blazers roster ; this included dismantling the aging Drexler @-@ led team that had twice been to the finals . Drexler requested to be traded to a contender , and the Trail Blazers traded him to the Houston Rockets . In the fall of 1995 , the team left the Memorial Coliseum for a new home , the 20 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Rose Garden Arena . The sellout streak ended in the new building . 
 = = = 1995 – 2003 = = = 
 = = = = 1995 – 2000 = = = = 
 Several players left in free agency , including Terry Porter ( 1995 ) , Buck Williams ( 1996 ) , and Cliff Robinson ( 1997 ) , which left Jerome Kersey unprotected in the 1995 expansion draft . 
 In an effort to rebuild , the team acquired several players who were highly talented , but had reputations for off @-@ court troubles . Isaiah Rider , who was traded by the Minnesota Timberwolves for a draft pick and career backups due to his frequent arrests and lack of punctuality , was arrested for cannabis possession two days before his debut with the Blazers . Rasheed Wallace , who was acknowledged as a hot @-@ tempered player since college , was also acquired , in a trade with the Washington Bullets . Point guard Kenny Anderson was signed as a free agent , and subsequently traded to the Toronto Raptors for Damon Stoudamire in February 1998 ( the Raptors traded Anderson to the Boston Celtics five days later , because he did not want to play in Canada ) . Initially , this approach worked , as the team returned to the Western Conference finals in 1999 under head coach Mike Dunleavy . After being swept by the eventual champion San Antonio Spurs , Whitsitt sent Rider and guard Jim Jackson to the Atlanta Hawks for guard Steve Smith and acquired former All @-@ Star forward Scottie Pippen from the Houston Rockets . The team again advanced to the Western Conference Finals , where they faced a Los Angeles Lakers team led by Shaquille O 'Neal and Kobe Bryant . In that series , the Trail Blazers dropped three out of the first four games before winning the next two , forcing a pivotal Game 7 . The Blazers had a 15 @-@ point lead in the fourth quarter , but lost the game and the series to the Lakers , who went on to win the first of three consecutive titles . 
 = = = = 2000 – 2003 = = = = 
 The Trail Blazers made a series of personnel moves in the 2000 and 2001 off @-@ seasons that failed to produce the desired results . Forward Jermaine O 'Neal was traded to the Indiana Pacers for Dale Davis . Brian Grant signed with the Miami Heat , and was replaced with ex @-@ Seattle forward Shawn Kemp . The team started off well , posting the Western Conference 's best record through March 2001 , and then signed guard Rod Strickland to augment their point guard corps . The move backfired , and the team lost 17 of its remaining 25 games , and was eliminated in the first round of the playoffs ( swept by the Los Angeles Lakers ) . Some in the media began to criticize the team , and Whitsitt , previously proclaimed a genius for his work in both Seattle and Portland , was criticized . A particular criticism was that Whitsitt was attempting to win a title by assembling a roster of stars , without paying attention to team chemistry . Longtime NBA coach and analyst , Doug Collins , referred to Whitsitt as a " rotisserie @-@ league manager . " A fan was ejected from the Rose Garden for holding up a banner that said " Trade Whitsitt " , and many in the national media started referring to the team as the " Jail Blazers " because of many players ' off @-@ court problems . 
 That offseason the churning continued ; Dunleavy was fired , and replaced with Maurice Cheeks , a " players ' coach " who some thought would relate better to the players than Dunleavy did . Cheeks brought on Dan <unk> as assistant coach after a failed courtship with Henry Bibby of Southern California . More transactions followed as the Blazers traded Steve Smith to the Spurs for Derek Anderson . In one of his most controversial moves to that time , Whitsitt signed free agent Ruben Patterson , who had previously pleaded no contest to a felony sexual assault charge and was required to register as a sex offender . Popular center , Arvydas Sabonis , who had a towel flung in his face by Rasheed Wallace during the playoffs , decided to leave the team . 
 The next two seasons were just as disastrous for the team 's reputation . Several players , including Wallace , Stoudamire , and <unk> Woods , were cited for marijuana possession . Woods pleaded guilty to first @-@ degree animal abuse for staging dog fights in his house , some involving his pit bull named Hollywood . Hollywood and Woods ' other pit bull , Sugar , were confiscated , and Woods was given eighty hours of community service . He also agreed to donate $ 10 @,@ 000 to the Oregon Humane Society . Wallace was suspended for seven games for threatening a referee . Zach Randolph and Patterson got in a fight during practice , with Randolph sucker punching his teammate in the eye , an injury which kept Patterson from making a meaningful contribution during the playoffs . When police came to Stoudamire 's house to respond to a burglar alarm , they noticed the smell of marijuana , searched the premises , and found a pound of cannabis located in a crawlspace ; the search was later declared illegal and charges in the matter were dropped . Guard <unk> Wells famously told Sports Illustrated in a 2002 interview : " We ’ re not really going to worry about what the hell ( the fans ) think about us . They really don ’ t matter to us . They can boo us everyday , but they ’ re still going to ask for our autographs if they see us on the street . That 's why they ’ re fans , and we ’ re NBA players . " Wells was fined $ 50 @,@ 000 by the Blazers for the statement . 
 Fan discontent soared ; despite the team continuing to post a winning record , attendance at the Rose Garden started to decline . In the summer of 2003 , with attendance declining , the team going nowhere on the court , and an exorbitant payroll , Whitsitt announced that he would leave the team to focus on Paul Allen 's other franchise , the Seattle Seahawks . 
 = = = 2003 – 2006 = = = 
 To replace Whitsitt , the team hired two men at new positions . John Nash , a veteran NBA executive , was hired as general manager , and Steve Patterson as team president . The new management promised a focus on character while remaining playoff contenders ; the team soon published a " 25 @-@ Point Pledge " to fans . Troublesome players including Wells , Wallace , and Jeff McInnis were traded . However , the team failed to qualify for the 2004 NBA Playoffs , ending a streak of 21 straight appearances . 
 The following year was marked by more trouble as the team plummeted to a 27 – 55 record . The bankruptcy of the Oregon Arena corporation , which resulted in the Rose Garden being owned by a consortium of investment firms , further alienated the fanbase , as did an incident in which forward Darius Miles ( himself African @-@ American ) called coach Maurice Cheeks a " nigger " , following it up with more racial invective when Cheeks sought out Nash , referring to Nash as Cheeks ' " daddy . " The latter incident was compounded by what many viewed as inadequate discipline for Miles , followed by a secret agreement between the team and Miles to refund the amount of his fine . Cheeks was fired that season and replaced on an interim basis by director of player @-@ personnel Kevin Pritchard . That summer the team hired Nate McMillan , who had coached the Sonics the prior season , and Pritchard returned to the front office . 
 The following 2005 – 06 season was not better , as the Blazers posted a league @-@ worst 21 – 61 record . Attendance was lower , and the year was not free of player incidents . Players such as Miles , Patterson , Randolph , and Sebastian Telfair were involved in either on @-@ court bickering or off @-@ court legal incidents . Nash was fired at the end of the season , with Steve Patterson assuming the general manager role in addition to his duties as president . In addition , the team had a poor relationship with the management of the Rose Garden , frequently complaining of a " broken economic model . " It was widely speculated by the end of the year that Paul Allen would sell the team , and the team was offered for sale that summer , with several groups expressing interest . However , Allen was willing to spend money and urged Pritchard to make draft @-@ day trades . He subsequently took the team off the market . 
 = = = 2006 – 2011 = = = 
 In the 2006 NBA draft the Blazers traded Viktor <unk> and draft rights for Tyrus Thomas for draft rights to LaMarcus Aldridge . The Blazers also traded for the sixth pick , Brandon Roy . In the spring of 2007 , Steve Patterson resigned as team president , and Paul Allen entered into an agreement to re @-@ purchase the Rose Garden . On the court , the team finished with a 32 – 50 record , an 11 @-@ game improvement , and rookie shooting guard Roy was named the 2006 – 07 Rookie of the Year . That summer Pritchard was promoted to general manager , and former Nike Inc. executive Larry Miller was hired as team president . The Blazers won the 2007 NBA draft lottery and selected Ohio State center Greg Oden with the No. 1 pick in the draft . Some had speculated that they might choose Kevin Durant instead ; Durant was picked at No. 2 by regional rivals the Seattle SuperSonics . Oden suffered a pre @-@ season knee injury requiring microfracture surgery , and missed the entire 2007 – 08 season . Oden 's constant battle with injuries and Durant 's success resulted in comparisons to the Blazers ' selection of Sam Bowie over Michael Jordan in 1984 . 
 Despite this , the Trail Blazers had a 13 @-@ game winning streak that began in early December , resulting in a 13 – 2 record , an NBA best for the month of December . Nate McMillan won NBA Coach of the Month honors , and Roy garnered NBA Western Conference Player of the Week honors in back @-@ to @-@ back weeks ( the first Trail Blazer to accomplish the feat since Clyde Drexler in the 1990 – 91 season ) . Western Conference head coaches selected Roy to the 2008 NBA All @-@ Star Game , the first All @-@ Star for the Blazers since Rasheed Wallace in 2001 . The Blazers finished the season 41 – 41 , their best record since the 2003 – 04 season . Following the season , the Blazers became the only NBA team for the Pacific Northwest , as the Seattle SuperSonics moved to Oklahoma City . 
 During the 2008 – 09 season , after much waiting , Greg Oden debuted with the Blazers , playing in 61 games . Portland also added some international flavor to the team with the arrival of Spanish swingman Rudy Fernández , a member of the Spanish national basketball team . French @-@ native Nicolas Batum emerged as a skilled defensive forward who was inserted into the starting lineup as a rookie . Roy appeared in his second @-@ straight All @-@ Star Game , and Fernández competed in the Sprite Slam Dunk Contest during NBA All @-@ Star Weekend . Roy had a career @-@ high 52 points against the Phoenix Suns and game @-@ winning shots against the Houston Rockets and New York Knicks . The Blazers clinched a playoff berth for the first time since 2003 and achieved a 54 – 28 record , their first winning record since the 2002 – 03 season . As the fourth seed and holding home court advantage , the Trail Blazers played the fifth @-@ seeded Houston Rockets in the 2009 Playoffs , losing the playoff series 4 games to 2 . 
 In the 2009 off @-@ season , the Trail Blazers traded the No. 24 pick to Dallas for the No. 22 pick and selected Víctor Claver . They also selected Villanova forward Dante Cunningham with the No. 33 pick , Jon Brockman and guard Patrick Mills . Brockman was traded to the Kings in exchange for No. 31 pick Jeff Pendergraph . Free agent Channing Frye signed with the Phoenix Suns and Sergio Rodríguez was traded to the Kings . The Blazers attempted to sign free agent small forward Hedo Türkoğlu , who led the Orlando Magic to the 2009 NBA Finals , but after a verbal agreement he decided to sign with the Toronto Raptors . The Blazers then attempted to sign restricted free agent Paul Millsap ; however , their offer was matched by the Utah Jazz . On July 24 , 2009 , the Trail Blazers signed point guard Andre Miller . 
 Despite a winning record , injuries hobbled the team for the 2009 – 2010 season . Reserves Batum and Fernández started the season on the inactive list and forward Travis Outlaw soon followed after a serious foot injury early in the season . Most notably , centers Oden and Joel Przybilla suffered season @-@ ending knee injuries , while Roy and Aldridge played through shoulder , hamstring , ankle and knee injuries . Head Coach Nate McMillan was likewise not spared , suffering a ruptured Achilles tendon during practice and was in a walking boot . Because of the void at the center position , Blazers general manager Kevin Pritchard worked out a deal to acquire Marcus Camby from the Los Angeles Clippers in exchange for Steve Blake and Outlaw . Although wins did not come as easily as the season before , the Blazers rallied to finish at 50 – 32 , and finished 6th in the West . Roy underwent surgery after suffering a torn meniscus in his right knee , but returned for Game 4 of the first round series against the Phoenix Suns . However , the accumulation of injuries was too much to bear , and the short @-@ handed Trail Blazers lost the series 4 – 2 to the Suns . 
 = = = = 2010 – 2011 = = = = 
 During the 2010 off @-@ season , the Blazers ' front office experienced significant personnel changes beginning in July with the announcement of new general manager Rich Cho , succeeding former general manager Kevin Pritchard , who was relieved of his duties after the 2010 NBA draft . Cho became the first general manager of Asian descent in NBA history . On August 12 , the Trail Blazers signed two new assistant general managers , Bill Branch and Steve <unk> . Branch and <unk> replaced former assistant general manager Tom Penn , who was released by Portland in March . The organization also made changes to Nate McMillan 's coaching staff by hiring Bernie Bickerstaff , Bob <unk> and Buck Williams , with Bickerstaff assuming the lead assistant coach position due to the departure of Monty Williams . The Blazers acquired rookies <unk> Johnson , Luke Babbitt , and Elliot Williams from the 2010 NBA draft and off @-@ season trades . On July 21 , Wesley Matthews signed a five @-@ year deal with the Blazers after his former team , the Utah Jazz , declined to match Portland 's offer . 
 Similar to the previous season , Portland was overcome with injuries from the start of the 2010 – 11 season . Jeff Pendergraph and rookie guard Elliot Williams both suffered knee injuries that sidelined them for the season ; Portland later waived Pendergraph . In November , they announced that Oden would have microfracture surgery on his left knee , ending his 2010 – 2011 season . This injury marked Oden 's third NBA season cut short due to a knee injury . Three @-@ time All @-@ Star Brandon Roy underwent double @-@ arthroscopic surgery on January 17 , 2011 , to repair both knees after dealing with constant struggles , leaving his future up in the air . Just days after , Marcus Camby also underwent arthroscopic knee surgery to repair his left knee . 
 Despite struggles with injury , Portland performed at a playoff level throughout the season . LaMarcus Aldridge emerged as the focal point of the team and posted career @-@ high numbers , as well as Western Conference Player of the Week and Month honors . Wesley Matthews also emerged in the absence of Brandon Roy , proving his worth as the Blazers ' key off @-@ season addition . Believing the team could make a significant run in the playoffs , Cho executed his first major trade on February 24 , 2011 , just seven minutes before the deadline . The Trail Blazers sent forward Dante Cunningham , center Joel Przybilla and center Sean Marks to the Charlotte Bobcats in return for former All @-@ Star and All @-@ Defensive forward Gerald Wallace . The emergence of Aldridge and the play of Matthews kept the Blazers competitive , sealing another playoff berth by winning 48 games . However , like in their last two postseasons , the Blazers were eliminated in six games of the first round , this time against the eventual champions , the Dallas Mavericks . 
 During the 2011 off @-@ season , the Blazers released Cho , reportedly due to communication and " chemistry issues " with owner Paul Allen . Director of Scouting Chad Buchanan took over as acting interim General Manager . The dismissal of Cho was criticized by Sports Illustrated as " illogical " , although they noted that Allen had done a lot of questionable moves during his tenure as team owner . 
 On June 23 , 2011 , in the NBA draft , the Trail Blazers drafted guards Nolan Smith from Duke University with the 21st selection and Jon <unk> from Ohio State University with the 51st selection . On the same day , the Blazers front office had made a three @-@ team trade with the Denver Nuggets and Dallas Mavericks . The trade sent Blazers guards Andre Miller to Denver and Rudy Fernández to Dallas along with international player Petteri <unk> , who had yet to make an appearance for Portland ; Denver then sent guard Raymond Felton to Portland and Denver also received rookie forward Jordan Hamilton from Dallas as well as a future second @-@ round pick from Portland . 
 = = = 2011 – 2013 = = = 
 A lockout put transactions on hold until early December , and the Blazers were hit with three downfalls once the date came : Brandon Roy announced his retirement due to chronic knee problems , Greg Oden was diagnosed with yet another setback involving his ongoing knee issues , and LaMarcus Aldridge underwent heart surgery . Interim GM Chad Buchanan signed three free agents in the week before Portland 's first exhibition game : Kurt Thomas , Jamal Crawford and Craig Smith . 
 In the shortened 2011 – 12 NBA season , the Blazers got off to a 7 – 2 start . But the team quickly began to collapse , as starting point guard Raymond Felton , among others , struggled with McMillan 's new approach to a running @-@ style offense . The team gained some notability as Aldridge was named to his first All @-@ Star Game . Despite Aldridge 's performance , the rest of the team became more inconsistent . 
 On March 15 , 2012 , the Trail Blazers made several moves , including two trades before the 3 pm EST deadline . Center Marcus Camby was sent to the Houston Rockets in exchange for center Hasheem Thabeet and point guard Jonny Flynn . Portland also received Houston 's second @-@ round draft pick in the 2012 NBA draft . Portland then traded forward Gerald Wallace to the New Jersey Nets for center Mehmet <unk> , forward <unk> Williams , and New Jersey 's first @-@ round , top @-@ 3 @-@ protected pick in the 2012 NBA draft . All four players acquired in the trades held expiring contracts , meaning they would be free agents at the end of the season . Oden was released from the roster after playing a total of 82 games in five NBA seasons , being cut along with Chris Johnson in order to make room for the incoming traded players . Finally , head coach Nate McMillan was also fired , leaving the franchise with the third @-@ most coaching wins , behind Jack Ramsay and Rick Adelman . Portland named Kaleb Canales as the interim head coach for the rest of the 2011 – 2012 NBA season . A few days later , Portland claimed forward J. J. Hickson off waivers from the Sacramento Kings . After shaking up the roster and limping to the end of the regular season with a 28 – 38 record and finishing out of playoff contention for the first time in three years , the team entered the offseason on the search for a general manager and new head coach . 
 At the 2012 NBA draft lottery on May 30 , the Blazers secured the number 6 pick of the draft via the Brooklyn Nets from the Gerald Wallace trade , and also ended up with the number 11 pick due to their own record . Neil Olshey became the new GM in June , making it just over a year since the Blazers had had a non @-@ interim general manager . 
 On June 28 , 2012 , the Blazers selected Weber State guard Damian Lillard and University of Illinois center Meyers Leonard with the 6th and 11th picks overall , respectively . They also selected University of Memphis guard Will Barton with the 40th pick overall , and traded the rights of the 41st overall pick , University of Kansas guard <unk> Taylor , to the Brooklyn Nets for cash considerations . 
 Headed by their new general manager Olshey , the Trail Blazers front office further made a few changes during July 2012 . The Blazers signed their 30th pick from the 2006 draft , Joel Freeland , and their 22nd pick from the 2009 draft , Víctor Claver , as well as re @-@ signing Hickson and Nicolas Batum . They also signed veteran point guard Ronnie Price to back up Lillard , who was selected as co @-@ MVP of the 2012 Las Vegas Summer League . Dallas Mavericks assistant coach Terry Stotts was hired as head coach on August 7 , 2012 . 
 Under the reins of Lillard , the Blazers played well into January 2013 , posting a 20 – 15 record . On January 11 , 2013 , at home against the Miami Heat , Wesley Matthews made two consecutive three @-@ pointers late in the fourth quarter to help the Blazers secure a 92 – 90 victory . However , despite the Blazers remaining among the playoff contenders for most of the season , injuries to starters Batum , LaMarcus Aldridge , and Matthews , as well as a losing streak of 13 games – the longest in the franchise 's history – led to the 11th position in the West , with a 33 – 49 record . Averaging 19 @.@ 0 points , 6 @.@ 5 assists , and 3 @.@ 1 rebounds , Lillard was unanimously named Rookie of the Year , joining Ralph Sampson , David Robinson , and Blake Griffin as the only unanimous selections in NBA history . 
 = = = 2013 – 2015 = = = 
 Going into the 2013 NBA draft , the Trail Blazers held four picks : the 10th pick in the first round and three second @-@ round picks . The Blazers selected guard C. J. McCollum out of Lehigh University with their 10th pick , and also selected center Jeff Withey from Kansas , power forward Grant <unk> from Arizona , and Montenegrin big man Marko Todorović . In addition , Cal guard Allen Crabbe was acquired from the Cleveland Cavaliers in exchange for two second @-@ round picks , in the 2015 and 2016 drafts . 
 The Blazers finished the 2014 season with 21 more wins than the previous season , which amounted for the largest single @-@ season improvement in franchise history . This included a period in November when they won 11 straight games , and 13 – 2 in the month overall , for which coach Terry Stotts took home Coach of the Month honors . On December 12 , 2013 , Aldridge scored 31 points and pulled down 25 rebounds in a home game against the Rockets , the first time a Trail Blazer recorded a 30 @-@ point , 25 @-@ rebound game . On December 14 , 2013 , the Blazers made a franchise @-@ record 21 three @-@ pointers against the Philadelphia 76ers . They tied the new record 19 days later against the Charlotte Bobcats , becoming the first NBA team to make 20 or more three @-@ pointers in a game more than once in a season . Lillard was voted in as a reserve to his first All @-@ Star game , joining Aldridge to represent Portland at the game . Portland finished 54 – 28 , securing the fifth seed in the playoffs against the Rockets . The team also shot 81 @.@ 5 % at the free throw line , made 770 three pointers , and started four players for all 82 regular @-@ season games , all franchise records . 
 The first @-@ round series against the Rockets was a tight one , with three of the six games going to overtime . The Blazers fared well in the first two games despite not having home @-@ court advantage , beating Houston 122 @-@ 120 and 112 @-@ 105 in Games 1 and 2 respectively , fueled by Aldridge 's 46 points and 18 rebounds in Game 1 , and 43 points and 3 blocks in Game 2 . The biggest headline came in the sixth game of the series with the Rockets threatening to force a Game 7 back at Houston . Down two points with 0 @.@ 9 seconds left in the game , Damian Lillard hit a buzzer @-@ beating three @-@ pointer to close out the series , and the Blazers advanced to the semifinals for the first time since 2000 , where they lost to the eventual champion San Antonio Spurs in 5 games . 
 During the 2014 offseason , Olshey signed center Chris Kaman and two @-@ time former Blazer guard Steve Blake to bolster the bench . Expectations by sportswriters and analysts were high for the Trail Blazers going into the 2015 NBA season given their surprise success in 2013 – 14 . The Blazers beat the reigning Northwest Division Champion Oklahoma City Thunder 106 @-@ 89 in their season opener at home on October 29 , 2014 . Like the season before , the Trail Blazers dominated the month of November , at one point winning nine straight games from November 9 to November 26 before being defeated by the Memphis Grizzlies . Injuries , which had not amounted to significance the previous season , started to inflict themselves on various players . Starting center Lopez fractured his right hand in a game against the Spurs on December 15 , 2014 , and would miss the next 23 games . Initially , the Blazers were much unfazed , winning 129 – 119 in triple overtime against the Spurs on December 19 , a game that saw Lillard and Aldridge combine for 75 points on 29 field goals ; Lillard netted a career @-@ high 43 points . Four days later , Lillard hit a three @-@ pointer to tie the game and force overtime against the Thunder en route to 40 points and a 115 – 111 victory . Three Blazers went to New Orleans for the All Star Weekend : Matthews for the Foot Locker Three @-@ Point Contest , Lillard as a reserve to the All @-@ Star Game , and Aldridge as a starter to the All @-@ Star game . 
 More injuries appeared around the start of the new year , which forced Aldridge , Batum , and Joel Freeland to miss various amounts of time , but none greater than Wesley Matthews ' Achilles tendon tear on March 5 , 2015 . Called " the heart and soul " of the team by Aldridge , Matthews was in the midst of a career year when the freak injury occurred in a game against the Mavericks . The loss of his defense , three @-@ point shooting and hustle was part of the reason why the Blazers stumbled in the latter half of the season . In the first half of the season , the Blazers had a record of 30 – 11 , allowed opponents to score an average of 97 @.@ 0 points , and forced them to shoot 29 @.@ 7 % on three @-@ pointers ; in the second half the Blazers regressed to a 21 – 20 record , allowed 100 @.@ 2 points , and let opponents shoot 37 @.@ 9 % from three . The Blazers clinched a return trip to the playoffs on March 30 , 2015 , defeating the Phoenix Suns , 109 – 86 . Finishing the season 51 – 31 , they clinched their first Northwest Division title since 1999 , but fell to the Grizzlies in five games in the first round of the playoffs . 
 = = = 2015 – present = = = 
 In the 2015 NBA draft , the Blazers selected Arizona forward <unk> Hollis @-@ Jefferson and subsequently traded him to the Brooklyn Nets along with Steve Blake for center Mason Plumlee and the 42nd pick , Pat Connaughton . 
 After losing four of their five starters at the end of the 2014 – 15 season , the Blazers won 44 games , were the 5th seed in the Western Conference , and beat the Clippers in six games in the first round but were eliminated by the Golden state Warriors in five games in the conference semifinals . 
 = = Season @-@ by @-@ season results = = 
 In the Blazers ' 46 years of existence ( through 2016 ) , they have qualified for the NBA playoffs 32 times , including a streak of 21 straight playoff appearances from 1983 through 2003 . The team has one NBA title , in 1977 , and appeared in the NBA Finals two other times , in 1990 and 1992 . The best record posted by the team was 63 – 19 , in 1991 ; the worst record was 18 – 64 , in the team 's second season . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current roster = = = 
 = = = Retained draft rights = = = 
 The Trail Blazers hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA . A drafted player , either an international draftee or a college draftee who isn 't signed by the team that drafted him , is allowed to sign with any non @-@ NBA teams . In this case , the team retains the player 's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player 's contract with the non @-@ NBA team ends . This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams . 
 = = = Retired numbers = = = 
 1 As team owner and founder , number is still available to players . 
 2 Ramsay did not play for the team ; the number represents the 1977 NBA Championship he won while coaching the Blazers . 
 3 Number retired twice in 2008 
 = = = Basketball Hall of Famers = = = 
 = = = = Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame = = = = 
 Notes : 
 1 In total , Wilkens was inducted into the Hall of Fame three times : as player , as coach and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team . 
 2 Inducted posthumously . 
 3 In total , Drexler was inducted into the Hall of Fame twice : as player and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team . 
 4 In total , Pippen was inducted into the Hall of Fame twice : as player and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team . 
 = = = = FIBA Hall of Fame = = = = 
 Notes : 
 1 Inducted posthumously . 
 = = = = Oregon Sports Hall of Fame = = = = 
 The Oregon Sports Hall of Fame honors Oregon athletes , teams , coaches , and others who have made a significant contribution to sports in Oregon . Also inducted into the Hall are the 1976 – 77 team , and the following Trail Blazers ' players : 
 = = = Franchise leaders = = = 
 Bold denotes still active with team . 
 Italic denotes still active but not with team . 
 Points scored ( regular season ) ( as of the end of the 2015 – 16 season ) 
 Other statistics ( regular season ) ( as of April 14 , 2016 ) 
 = = = Individual awards = = = 
 = = = NBA draft = = = 
 The Trail Blazers have had the No. 1 pick in the NBA draft four times in their history ; each time selecting a center . In 1972 the choice was LaRue Martin , Bill Walton was picked in 1974 , Mychal Thompson in 1978 , and Greg Oden was taken in 2007 . Several Blazer picks have been criticized by NBA commentators as particularly unwise : 
 The selection of Martin over Bob McAdoo . 
 The selection of Thompson over Larry Bird ( drafted No. 6 by the Boston Celtics ) in 1978 . 
 The selection of center Sam Bowie with the No. 2 pick in the 1984 NBA draft over Michael Jordan ( who was then drafted by the Chicago Bulls ) ; other notable players taken later in that draft include future Hall @-@ of @-@ Famers Charles Barkley and John Stockton . 
 The selection of Greg Oden over Kevin Durant in the 2007 NBA draft 
 Other notable draft picks include player @-@ coach Geoff Petrie , Sidney Wicks , Larry Steele , Lionel Hollins and Jim Paxson in the 1970s and Clyde Drexler , Jerome Kersey , Terry Porter and Arvydas Sabonis in the 1980s . 
 In the 1990s , the Blazers selected Jermaine O 'Neal and in the modern millennium drafted Zach Randolph and , in 2006 , acquired Brandon Roy and LaMarcus Aldridge in a draft day that included six trades involving the Trail Blazers . 
 = = Team branding = = 
 The team 's colors are red , black , white , and silver , which was added in 2002 . The team 's " pinwheel " logo , originally designed by the cousin of Glickman , is a graphic interpretation of two five @-@ on @-@ five basketball teams lined up against each other . One side of the pinwheel is red ; the other side is silver ( formerly black or white ) . The logo has gone from a vertical alignment to a slanted one starting in the 1991 season , creating a straight edge along the top 
 Portland 's home uniforms are white in color , with red , black , and silver accents ; the primary road uniform is black , with red , white , and silver accents . The alternate road uniform is red with white , silver , and black accents . From 1970 to the 1977 – 78 season , the team wore red road uniforms , switching to black in that year , with a switch from horizontal lettering with the tail added on the last letter to vertical lettering midway through its lifespan . The team again wore red from 1979 to 1985 , switching back to black road jerseys after that . In 2002 , the team reintroduced red jerseys . The team 's uniforms have remained nearly the same since the 1977 – 78 season , featuring a " blaze " strip diagonal down the jersey and into the shorts . Notable alterations include the change from lowercase lettering to uppercase in 1991 – 92 , tapered ends on the letters and silver trim in 2002 – 03 , and the return of the city name to the black road jerseys in 2006 – 07 . In the 2009 – 10 NBA season they introduced a special jersey commemorating the Blazers ' " Rip City " nickname , borrowing elements from their old and current logos . For the 2012 – 13 NBA season , the red jerseys were slightly altered , featuring a straightened " Portland " script and black lettering with silver trim , along with a modified " blaze " striping , " Rip City " shorts script and pinwheel logo in front of the uniform . 
 The team 's mascot is Blaze the Trail Cat , a two @-@ tone silver @-@ colored mountain lion , which has been the team 's official mascot since 2002 . Prior to Blaze 's debut , the Trail Blazers never had any official mascot . A popular unofficial mascot was the late Bill " The Beerman " Scott , a Seattle beer vendor / cheerleader who worked for numerous pro teams , including the Trail Blazers , the Seattle Seahawks , and the Seattle Mariners . Scott worked for the Trail Blazers from 1981 through 1985 . 
 = = Front office = = 
 The team is owned by Microsoft co @-@ founder Paul Allen ; ownership of the Trail Blazers is via a series of holding companies which Allen owns . Vulcan Inc. is a private corporation in which Allen is the chairman and sole shareholder . A subsidiary of Vulcan , Vulcan Sports and Entertainment ( VSE ) , manages Allen 's sports @-@ related properties , including the Trail Blazers , the Seattle Seahawks NFL team , the Seattle Sounders MLS team , and the Moda Center . In the fall of 2012 , Peter McLoughlin was named CEO of Vulcan Sports and Entertainment . 
 The Trail Blazers as a corporate entity are owned by VSE . Allen serves as the team 's chairman , and his longtime associate Bert <unk> is vice @-@ chairman . The position of president and chief executive officer is held by Chris McGowan , with Larry Miller having held the job until resigning in July 2012 . The post of chief operating officer is vacant ; the most recent COO of the team was Mike Golub , who resigned in July 2008 to take a more enhanced role with VSE . Kevin Pritchard served as general manager of the Trail Blazers until he was fired on June 24 , 2010 . The announcement was issued by the Blazers ' head office just an hour before the beginning of the 2010 NBA draft . A month later , the Blazers named Oklahoma City Thunder assistant general manager Rich Cho as their new general manager . Cho was fired less than a year later , and director of college scouting Chad Buchanan served as interim general manager for the entire 2011 – 12 season . In June 2012 , the Trail Blazers hired Neil Olshey as general manager . 
 Before Allen purchased the team in 1988 , the Trail Blazers were owned by a group of investors headed by Larry Weinberg , who is chairman emeritus . 
 = = Venues = = 
 The Trail Blazers play their home games in the Moda Center , a multipurpose arena which is located in Portland 's Rose Quarter , northeast of downtown . The Moda Center , originally named the Rose Garden , opened in 1995 and can seat a total of 19 @,@ 980 spectators for basketball games ; capacity increases to 20 @,@ 580 with standing room . Like the Trail Blazers , the Moda Center is owned by Paul Allen through subsidiary Vulcan Sports and Entertainment , and the arena is managed by Global Spectrum . During a two @-@ year period between 2005 and 2007 , the arena was owned by a consortium of creditors who financed its construction after the Oregon Arena Corporation , a now @-@ defunct holding company owned by Allen , filed for bankruptcy in 2004 . In August 2013 , the arena 's name was changed from the Rose Garden to the Moda Center , after the Blazers ' front office officials reached a $ 4 million agreement with Moda Health Corporation . The name change was met with considerable criticism from fans . 
 Prior to 1995 , the Trail Blazers home venue was the Memorial Coliseum , which today stands adjacent to the Moda Center . This facility , built in 1960 , can seat 12 @,@ 888 spectators for basketball . It was renamed the Veterans Memorial Coliseum in 2011 . 
 = = = In @-@ game entertainment = = = 
 The team has a cheerleading @-@ dance squad known as the <unk> . Consisting of 16 members , the all @-@ female <unk> perform dance routines at home games , charity events , and promotional events . The 2008 – 2009 team held auditions in late July 2008 . Seven new dancers , as well as nine returning dancers made up the new team . A junior dance team composed of 8- to 11 @-@ year @-@ old girls also performs at selected home games , as does a hip hop dance troupe . Other regular in @-@ game entertainment acts include a co @-@ educational acrobatic stunt team which performs technically difficult cheers , a break dancing squad known as the Portland <unk> , and a pair of percussion acts . 
 = = Fan support and " Blazermania " = = 
 The relationship between the team and its fans , commonly known as " Blazermania " , has been well @-@ chronicled . The Trail Blazers have long been one of the NBA 's top draws , with the exception of two periods in the team 's history . The team drew poorly during its first four seasons of existence , failing to average more than 10 @,@ 000 spectators per game . Attendance increased in 1974 , when the team drafted Bill Walton . 
 The phenomenon known as Blazermania started during the 1976 – 77 season , when the team posted its first winning record , made its first playoff appearance , and captured its only NBA title , defeating the heavily favored Philadelphia 76ers in the NBA Finals ; the team has been popular in Portland since that time . That season , the team started a sellout streak which continued until the team moved into the Rose Garden in 1995 . The team continued to average over 19 @,@ 000 spectators per game until the 2003 – 04 season , when attendance declined after the team continued to suffer image problems due to the " Jail Blazer " reputation it had gained , and was no longer as competitive on the court . After drafting eventual Rookie of the Year and three @-@ time All Star Brandon Roy in 2006 , attendance climbed in the 2006 – 07 season and continued to rebound in the 2007 – 08 season . The final 27 home games of the 2007 – 2008 season were consecutive sell @-@ outs , a streak which continued through the entire 2008 – 2009 season and into the start of the 2011 – 2012 season . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Television and radio broadcast = = = 
 Like all NBA franchises , games of the Trail Blazers are routinely broadcast via television and radio . The team was one of the first in the NBA to produce its own television broadcasts . The team 's television production facility is known as Post @-@ Up Productions . Television broadcasts of Blazer games , when not carried on a national network , are broadcast either on Comcast SportsNet Northwest or the Blazers Television Network , a network of five over @-@ the @-@ air television stations ( four in Oregon ; one in Washington ) . The flagship station of the Blazers Television Network is KGW in Portland . 
 For the 2007 – 08 season , all but six regular @-@ season games were carried on one these networks ; the other six were broadcast nationally on TNT or ESPN . Thirty @-@ four games were produced and broadcast in high @-@ definition television . The Trail Blazers ' former television play @-@ by @-@ play team was Mike Barrett and Mike Rice , joined by sideline reporter Michael Holton , who succeeded Terry Porter ( 2010 – 11 ) and Rebecca <unk> ( 2009 – 10 ) . The team was also known for its long association with Steve " Snapper " Jones , who played for the team prior to his career as a television analyst ; Jones departed the franchise in 2005 . 
 All Trail Blazer games are broadcast over the radio , with broadcasting carried on the Trail Blazers radio network , which consists of 25 stations located in the Pacific Northwest . The flagship station of the Blazers ' radio network is 620 <unk> in Portland . The radio broadcasting team consists of play @-@ by @-@ play announcer Brian Wheeler and studio host Jay Allen . All games are preceded by a pre @-@ game analysis show , Blazers <unk> , and followed by a post @-@ game show known as The 5th Quarter . Bob <unk> served as studio host until halfway through the 2010 – 2011 season , when the team hired away Adam <unk> from their over @-@ the @-@ air TV partner , KGW , and former Trail Blazers ' player Michael Holton is the studio analyst . The original radio announcer for the team was Bill <unk> , who served as the team 's radio play @-@ by @-@ play announcer from 1970 until his retirement in 1998 — calling 2 @,@ 522 Blazers games — and remains with the team as a community ambassador . 
 Trail Blazers broadcasts have been criticized on several fronts . The broadcast personalities , all of whom are Trail Blazers employees , have been criticized in the media for being " homers " ; further it has been alleged that the 2005 departure of Steve Jones was due in part to team displeasure with Jones ' sometimes frank analysis of the team 's on @-@ court performance and off @-@ court decisions . Furthermore , the team 's television contract with CSN Northwest has been criticized due to the channel 's lack of carriage on satellite television providers such as DirecTV and Dish Network , both of which compete with Comcast 's cable television operations . 
 On June 16 , 2016 , The Oregonian reported that Barrett , Rice , and analyst Antonio Harvey had been released by the Trail Blazers . Wheeler will call games on radio alone , while new television commentators are to be determined . The three personalities will still receive pay for the final season of their contracts . The change comes as part of a plan by the team to overhaul its telecasts as it enters the final year of its current television deal with CSN Northwest . 
 On July 6 , 2016 , the team renewed its contract with CSN Northwest through the 2020 @-@ 2021 season . Under the new deal , CSN Northwest will have exclusive rights to all Trail Blazers games beginning in the 2017 @-@ 18 season . The team had originally considered an arrangement with <unk> , under which games would be broadcast over @-@ the @-@ air and simulcast via an internet service , but deals with potential streaming partners fell through . Root Sports Northwest made a higher @-@ value , long @-@ term offer . However , the offer was rejected for its potential impact on reach ; although DirecTV , which serves 33 % of the Portland market , carries the network by virtue of its co @-@ ownership by AT & T , Root Sports could not guarantee whether its carriage deal with Comcast Cable , which serves 55 % of the Portland market , would be renewed . Team president Chris McGowan also praised the recent leadership changes at the CSN networks , noting that their new president David <unk> ( formerly of ESPN ) had a background in television distribution . 
 = = = Press relations = = = 
 Several local news outlets provide in @-@ depth coverage of the Trail Blazers . Chief among them is The Oregonian , the largest paper in the state of Oregon . Other newspapers providing detailed coverage of the team ( including the assignment of beat writers to cover the team ) include the Portland Tribune , a weekly Portland paper , and the Vancouver , Washington Columbian . Notable local journalists to cover the team include John <unk> of the Oregonian , Jason Quick of <unk> , and Dwight Jaynes of the Portland Tribune . Online coverage of the Oregonian is provided through <unk> , a website collaboration between the paper and Advance Internet . In addition to making Oregonian content available , <unk> hosts several blogs covering the team written by Oregonian journalists , as well as an additional blog , " Blazers Blog " , written by Sean Meagher . 
 Relations between the team and The Oregonian have often been tense ; the paper is editorially independent of the team and is often critical . During the Steve Patterson era , relations between the two institutions became increasingly hostile ; several NBA executives told ESPN 's Chris Sheridan that the situation was the " most dysfunctional media @-@ team relationship " that they could recall . For instance during a portion of a pre @-@ 2006 NBA draft workout , which was closed to the media , an Oregonian reporter looked through a curtain separating the press from the workout and wrote about this on his blog . Outraged , the team closed subsequent practices to the press altogether , leading John <unk> of the paper to respond with outrage on his blog . In November 2006 , the Oregonian commissioned an outside editor to investigate the deteriorating relationship , a move the rival Willamette Week called " unusual " . In the report , both sides were criticized somewhat , but did not make any revelations which were unexpected . 
 Additional coverage is offered by various blogs , including Blazers Edge ( part of SB Nation ) and The Portland Roundball Society ( part of ESPN 's <unk> Network ) . 
 = Béla IV of Hungary = 
 Béla IV ( 1206 – 3 May 1270 ) was King of Hungary and Croatia between 1235 and 1270 , and Duke of Styria from 1254 to 1258 . Being the oldest son of King Andrew II , he was crowned upon the initiative of a group of influential noblemen in his father 's lifetime in 1214 . His father , who strongly opposed Béla 's coronation , refused to give him a province to rule until 1220 . In this year , Béla was appointed Duke of Slavonia , also with jurisdiction in Croatia and Dalmatia . Around the same time , Béla married Maria , a daughter of Theodore I Laskaris , Emperor of Nicaea . From 1226 , he governed Transylvania with the title Duke . He supported Christian missions among the pagan Cumans who dwelled in the plains to the east of his province . Some Cuman chieftains acknowledged his suzerainty and he adopted the title of King of Cumania in 1233 . King Andrew died on 21 September 1235 and Béla succeeded him . He attempted to restore royal authority , which had diminished under his father . For this purpose , he revised his predecessors ' land grants and reclaimed former royal estates , causing discontent among the noblemen and the prelates . 
 The Mongols invaded Hungary and annihilated Béla 's army in the Battle of Mohi on 11 April 1241 . He escaped from the battlefield , but a Mongol detachment chased him from town to town as far as Trogir on the coast of the Adriatic Sea . Although he survived the invasion , the Mongols devastated the country before their unexpected withdrawal in March 1242 . Béla introduced radical reforms in order to prepare his kingdom for a second Mongol invasion . He allowed the barons and the prelates to erect stone fortresses and to set up their private armed forces . He promoted the development of fortified towns . During his reign , thousands of colonists arrived from the Holy Roman Empire , Poland and other neighboring regions to settle in the depopulated lands . Béla 's efforts to rebuild his devastated country won him the epithet of " second founder of the state " ( Hungarian : <unk> <unk> ) . 
 He set up a defensive alliance against the Mongols , which included Daniil Romanovich , Prince of Halych , Boleslaw the Chaste , Duke of Cracow and other Ruthenian and Polish princes . His allies supported him in occupying the Duchy of Styria in 1254 , but it was lost to King Ottokar II of Bohemia six years later . During Béla 's reign , a wide buffer zone — which included Bosnia , Barancs ( Braničevo , Serbia ) and other newly conquered regions — was established along the southern frontier of Hungary in the 1250s . 
 Béla 's relationship with his oldest son and heir , Stephen became tense in the early 1260s , because the elderly king favored his daughter , Anna and his youngest child , Béla , Duke of Slavonia . He was forced to cede the territories of the Kingdom of Hungary east of the river Danube to Stephen , which caused a civil war lasting until 1266 . Nevertheless , Béla 's family was famed for his piety : he died as a Franciscan tertiary , and the veneration of his three saintly daughters — Kunigunda , Yolanda , and Margaret — was confirmed by the Holy See . 
 = = Childhood ( 1206 – 20 ) = = 
 Béla was the oldest son of King Andrew II of Hungary by his first wife , Gertrude of Merania . He was born in the second half of 1206 . Upon King Andrew 's initiative , Pope Innocent III had already appealed to the Hungarian prelates and barons on the 7th of June to swear an oath of loyalty to the King 's future son . 
 Queen Gertrude showed blatant favoritism towards her German relatives and courtiers , causing widespread discontent among the native lords . Taking advantage of her husband 's campaign in the distant Principality of Halych , a group of aggrieved noblemen seized and murdered her in the forests of the Pilis Hills on 28 September 1213 . King Andrew only punished one of the conspirators , a certain Count Peter , after his return from Halych . Although Béla was a child when his mother was assassinated , he never forgot her and declared his deep respect for her in many of his royal charters . In his correspondence with his sister , the noted Franciscan saint , Elizabeth of Hungary , he was often counseled to restrain his anger at the nobles for the death of their mother . 
 Andrew II betrothed Béla to an unnamed daughter of Tzar Boril of Bulgaria in 1213 or 1214 , but their engagement was broken . In 1214 , the King requested the Pope to excommunicate some unnamed lords who were planning to crown Béla king . Even so , the eight @-@ year @-@ old Béla was crowned in the same year , but his father did not grant him a province to rule . Furthermore , when leaving for a Crusade to the Holy Land in August 1217 , King Andrew appointed John , Archbishop of Esztergom to represent him during his absence . During this period , Béla stayed with his maternal uncle Berthold of Merania in Steyr in the Holy Roman Empire . Andrew II returned from the Holy Land in late 1218 . He had arranged the engagement of Béla and Maria , a daughter of Theodore I Laskaris , Emperor of Nicaea . She accompanied King Andrew to Hungary and Béla married her in 1220 . 
 = = Rex <unk> = = 
 = = = Duke of Slavonia ( 1220 – 26 ) = = = 
 The senior king ceded the lands between the Adriatic Sea and the Dráva River — Croatia , Dalmatia and Slavonia — to Béla in 1220 . A letter of 1222 of Pope Honorius III reveals that " some wicked men " had forced Andrew II to share his realms with his heir . Béla initially styled himself as " King Andrew 's son and King " in his charters ; from 1222 he used the title " by the Grace of God , King , son of the King of Hungary , and Duke of all Slavonia " . 
 Béla separated from his wife in the first half of 1222 upon his father 's demand . However , Pope Honorius refused to declare the marriage illegal . Béla accepted the Pope 's decision and took refuge in Austria from his father 's anger . He returned , together with his wife , only after the prelates had in the first half of 1223 persuaded his father to forgive him . Having returned to his Duchy of Slavonia , Béla launched a campaign against Domald of <unk> , a rebellious Dalmatian nobleman , and captured Domald 's fortress at Klis . Domald 's domains were confiscated and distributed among his rivals , the Šubići , who had supported Béla during the siege . 
 = = = Duke of Transylvania ( 1226 – 35 ) = = = 
 King Andrew transferred Béla from Slavonia to Transylvania in 1226 . In Slavonia , he was succeeded by his brother , Coloman . As Duke of Transylvania , Béla adopted an expansionist policy aimed at the territories over the Carpathian Mountains . He supported the Dominicans ' proselytizing activities among the Cumans , who dominated these lands . In 1227 he crossed the mountains and met Boricius , a Cuman chieftain , who had decided to convert to Christianity . At their meeting , Boricius and his subjects were baptized and acknowledged Béla 's suzerainty . Within a year , the Roman Catholic Diocese of Cumania was established in their lands . 
 Béla had long opposed his father 's " useless and superfluous perpetual grants " , because the distribution of royal estates destroyed the traditional basis of royal authority . He started reclaiming King Andrew 's land grants throughout the country in 1228 . The Pope supported Béla 's efforts , but the King often hindered the execution of his son 's orders . Béla also confiscated the estates of two noblemen , brothers Simon and Michael Kacsics , who had plotted against his mother . 
 Béla 's youngest brother , Andrew , Prince of Halych was expelled from his principality in the spring of 1229 . Béla decided to help him to regain his throne , proudly boasting that the town of Halych " would not remain on the face of the earth , for there was no one to deliver it from his hands " , according to the Galician – Volhynian Chronicle . He crossed the Carpathian Mountains and laid siege to Halych together with his Cuman allies in 1229 or 1230 . However , he could not seize the town and withdrew his troops . The Galician – Volhynian Chronicle writes that many Hungarian soldiers " died of many afflictions " on their way home . 
 Béla invaded Bulgaria and besieged Vidin in 1228 or 1232 , but he could not capture the fortress . Around the same time , he set up a new border province , the Banate of Szörény ( Severin , Romania ) , in the lands between the Carpathians and the Lower Danube . In a token of his suzerainty in the lands east of the Carpathians , Béla adopted the title " King of Cumania " in 1233 . Béla sponsored the mission of Friar Julian and three other Dominican monks who decided to visit the descendants of the Hungarians who had centuries earlier remained in Magna Hungaria , the Hungarians ' legendary homeland . 
 = = His reign = = 
 = = = Before the Mongol invasion ( 1235 – 41 ) = = = 
 King Andrew died on 21 September 1235 . Béla , who succeeded his father without opposition , was crowned king in Székesfehérvár on 14 October . He dismissed and punished many of his father 's closest advisors . For instance , he had Palatine Denis blinded and Julius Kán imprisoned . The former was accused of having , in King Andrew 's life , an adulterous liaison with Queen Beatrix , the King 's young widow . Béla ordered her imprisonment , but she managed to escape to the Holy Roman Empire , where she gave birth to a posthumous son , Stephen . Béla and his brother , Coloman considered her son a bastard . 
 Béla declared that his principal purpose was " the restitution of royal rights " and " the restoration of the situation which existed in the country " in the reign of his grandfather , Béla III . According to the contemporaneous Roger of Torre Maggiore , he even " had the chairs of the barons burned " in order to prevent them from sitting in his presence during the meetings of the royal council . Béla set up special commissions which revised all royal charters of land grants made after 1196 . The annulment of former donations alienated many of his subjects from the King . Pope Gregory IX protested strongly at the withdrawal of royal grants made to the Cistercians and the military orders . In exchange for Béla 's renouncing of the taking back of royal estates in 1239 , the Pope authorized him to employ local Jews and Muslims in financial administration , which had for decades been opposed by the Holy See . 
 After returning from Magna Hungaria in 1236 , Friar Julian informed Béla of the Mongols , who had by that time reached the Volga River and were planning to invade Europe . The Mongols invaded <unk> @-@ i <unk> — the westernmost regions of the Eurasian Steppes — and routed the Cumans . Fleeing the Mongols , at least 40 @,@ 000 Cumans approached the eastern borders of the Kingdom of Hungary and demanded admission in 1239 . Béla only agreed to give them shelter after their leader , Köten , promised to convert together with his people to Christianity , and to fight against the Mongols . However , the settlement of masses of nomadic Cumans in the plains along the Tisza River gave rise to many conflicts between them and the local villagers . Béla , who needed the Cumans ' military support , rarely punished them for their robberies , rapes and other misdeeds . His Hungarian subjects thought that he was biased in the Cumans ' favor , thus " enmity emerged between the people and the king " , according to Roger of Torre Maggiore . 
 Béla supported the development of towns . For instance , he confirmed the liberties of the citizens of Székesfehérvár and granted privileges to Hungarian and German settlers in Bars ( Starý <unk> , Slovakia ) in 1237 . Zadar , a town in Dalmatia which had been lost to Venice in 1202 , acknowledged Béla 's suzerainty in 1240 . 
 = = = Mongol invasion of Hungary ( 1241 – 42 ) = = = 
 The Mongols gathered in the lands bordering Hungary and Poland under the command of Batu Khan in December 1240 . They demanded Béla 's submission to their Great Khan Ögödei , but Béla refused to yield and had the mountain passes fortified . The Mongols broke through the barricades erected in the <unk> Pass ( <unk> Pass , Ukraine ) on 12 March 1241 . 
 Duke Frederick II of Austria , who arrived to assist Béla against the invaders , defeated a small Mongol troop near Pest . He seized prisoners , including Cumans from the Eurasian Steppes who had been forced to join the Mongols . When the citizens of Pest realized the presence of Cumans in the invading army , mass hysteria emerged . The townsfolk accused Köten and their Cumans of cooperating with the enemy . A riot broke out and the mob massacred Köten 's retinue . Köten was either slaughtered or committed suicide . On hearing about Köten 's fate , his Cumans decided to leave Hungary and destroyed many villages on their way towards the Balkan Peninsula . 
 With the Cumans ' departure Béla lost his most valuable allies . He could muster an army of less than 60 @,@ 000 against the invaders . The royal army was ill @-@ prepared and its commanders — the barons alienated by Béla 's policy — " would have liked the king to be defeated so that they would then be dearer to him " , according to Roger of Torre Maggiore 's account . The Hungarian army was virtually annihilated in the Battle of Mohi on the Sajó River on 11 April 1241 . A great number of Hungarian lords , prelates and noblemen were killed , and Béla himself narrowly escaped from the battlefield . He fled through Nyitra to Pressburg ( Nitra and Bratislava in Slovakia ) . The triumphant Mongols occupied and ravaged most lands to the east of the Danube River by the end of June . 
 Upon Duke Frederick II of Austria 's invitation , Béla went to Hainburg an der Donau . However , instead of helping Béla , the Duke forced him to cede three counties ( most probably <unk> , Pozsony , and Sopron ) . From Hainburg , Béla fled to Zagreb and sent letters to Pope Gregory IX , Emperor Frederick II , King Louis IX of France and other Western European monarchs , urging them to send reinforcements to Hungary . In the hope of military assistance , he even accepted Emperor Frederick II 's suzerainty in June . The Pope declared a Crusade against the Mongols , but no reinforcements arrived . 
 The Mongols crossed the frozen Danube early in 1242 . A Mongol detachment under the command of Kadan , a son of Great Khan Ögödei , chased Béla from town to town in Dalmatia . Béla took refugee in the well @-@ fortified Trogir . Before Kadan laid siege to the town in March , news arrived of the Great Khan 's death . Batu Khan wanted to attend at the election of Ögödei 's successor with sufficient troops and ordered the withdrawal of all Mongol forces . Béla , who was grateful to Trogir , granted it lands near Split , causing a lasting conflict between the two Dalmatian towns . 
 = = = " Second Founder of the State " ( 1242 – 61 ) = = = 
 Upon his return to Hungary in May 1242 , Béla found a country in ruins . Devastation was especially heavy in the plains east of the Danube where at least half of the villages were depopulated . The Mongols had destroyed most traditional centers of administration , which were defended by earth @-@ and @-@ timber walls . Only well @-@ fortified places , such as Esztergom , Székesfehérvár and the Pannonhalma Archabbey , had successfully resisted siege . A severe famine followed in 1242 and 1243 . 
 Preparation for a new Mongol invasion was the central concern of Béla 's policy . In a letter of 1247 to Pope Innocent IV , Béla announced his plan to strengthen the Danube — the " river of confrontations " — with new forts . He abandoned the ancient royal prerogative to build and own castles , promoting the erection of nearly 100 new fortresses by the end of his reign . These fortresses included a new castle Béla had built at <unk> ( Veľký <unk> , Slovakia ) , and another castle Béla and his wife had built at Visegrád . 
 Béla attempted to increase the number of the soldiers and to improve their equipment . He made land grants in the forested regions and obliged the new landowners to equip heavily armoured cavalrymen to serve in the royal army . For instance , the so @-@ called ten @-@ lanced nobles of Szepes ( Spiš , Slovakia ) received their privileges from Béla in 1243 . He even allowed the barons and prelates to employ armed noblemen , who had previously been directly subordinated to the sovereign , in their private retinue . Béla granted the Banate of Szörény to the Knights Hospitaller on 2 June 1247 , but the Knights abandoned the region by 1260 . 
 To replace the loss of at least 15 percent of the population , who perished during the Mongol invasion and the ensuing famine , Béla promoted colonization . He granted special liberties to the colonists , including personal freedom and favorable tax treatment . Germans , Moravians , Poles , Ruthenians and other " guests " arrived from neighboring countries and were settled in depopulated or sparsely populated regions . He also persuaded the Cumans , who had in 1241 left Hungary , to return and settle in the plains along the River Tisza . He even arranged the engagement of his firstborn son , Stephen , who was crowned king @-@ junior in or before 1246 , to Elisabeth , a daughter of a Cuman chieftain . 
 Béla granted the privileges of Székesfehérvár to more than 20 settlements , promoting their development into self @-@ governing towns . The liberties of the mining towns in Upper Hungary were also spelled out in Béla 's reign . For defensive purposes , he moved the citizens of Pest to a hill on the opposite side of the Danube in 1248 . Within two decades their new fortified town , Buda , became the most important center of commerce in Hungary . Béla also granted privileges to Gradec , the fortified center of Zagreb , in 1242 and confirmed them in 1266 . 
 Béla adopted an active foreign policy soon after the withdrawal of the Mongols . In the second half of 1242 he invaded Austria and forced Duke Frederick II to surrender the three counties ceded to him during the Mongol invasion . On the other hand , Venice occupied Zadar in the summer of 1243 . Béla renounced Zadar on 30 June 1244 , but Venice acknowledged his claim to one third of the customs revenues of the Dalmatian town . 
 Béla set up a defensive alliance against the Mongols . He married three of his daughters to princes whose countries were also threatened by the Mongols . Rostislav Mikhailovich , a pretender to the Principality of Halych , was the first to marry , in 1243 , one of Béla 's daughters , Anna . Béla supported his son @-@ in @-@ law to invade Halych in 1245 , but Rostislav 's opponent , Daniil Romanovich repulsed their attack . 
 On 21 August 1245 Pope Gregory freed Béla of the oath of fidelity he had taken to Emperor Frederick during the Mongol invasion . In the following year Duke Frederick II of Austria invaded Hungary . He routed Béla 's army in the Battle of the Leitha River on 15 June 1246 , but perished in the battlefield . His childless death gave rise to a series of conflicts , because both his niece , Gertrude , and his sister , Margaret , made a claim to Austria and Styria . Béla decided to intervene in the conflict only after the danger of a second Mongol invasion had diminished by the end of the 1240s . In retaliation of a former Austrian incursion into Hungary , Béla made a plundering raid into Austria and Styria in the summer of 1250 . In this year he met and concluded a peace treaty with Daniil Romanovich , Prince of Halych in Zólyom ( Zvolen , Slovakia ) . With Béla 's mediation , a son of his new ally Roman married Gertrude of Austria . 
 Béla and Daniil Romanovich united their troops and invaded Austria and Moravia in June 1252 . After their withdrawal , Ottokar , Margrave of Moravia — who had married Margaret of Austria — invaded and occupied Austria and Styria . In the summer of 1253 , Béla launched a campaign against Moravia and laid siege to Olomouc . Daniil Romanovich , Boleslaw the Chaste of Cracow , and Wladislaw of Opole intervened on Béla 's behalf , but he lifted the siege by the end of June . Pope Innocent IV mediated a peace treaty , which was signed in Pressburg ( Bratislava , Slovakia ) on 1 May 1254 . In accordance with the treaty , Ottokar , who had in the meantime become King of Bohemia , ceded Styria to Béla . 
 Béla appointed his son @-@ in @-@ law , Rostislav Mikhailovich Ban of Macsó ( Mačva , Serbia ) in 1254 . Rostislav 's task was the creation of a buffer zone along the southern borders . He occupied Bosnia already in the year of his appointment and forced Tzar Michael Asen I of Bulgaria to cede Belgrade and Barancs ( Braničevo , Serbia ) in 1255 . Béla adopted the title of King of Bulgaria , but he only used it occasionally in the subsequent years . 
 The Styrian noblemen rose up in rebellion against Béla 's governor Stephen Gutkeled and routed him in early 1258 . Béla invaded Styria , restored his suzerainty and appointed his oldest son , Stephen , Duke of Styria . In 1259 , Batu Khan 's successor , Berke , proposed an alliance by offering to marry one of his daughters to a son of Béla , but he refused the Khan 's offer . 
 <unk> with the rule of Béla 's son , the Styrian lords sought assistance from Ottokar of Bohemia . Béla and his allies — Daniil Romanovich , Boleslaw the Chaste , and Leszek the Black of Sieradz — invaded Moravia , but Ottokar vanquished them in the Battle of Kressenbrunn on 12 June 1260 . The defeat forced Béla to renounce Styria in favor of the King of Bohemia in the Peace of Vienna , which was signed on 31 March 1261 . On the other hand , Ottokar divorced his elderly wife , Margarete of Austria , and married Béla 's granddaughter — the daughter of Rostislav Mikhailovich by Anna — Kunigunda . 
 Béla had originally planned to give his youngest daughter , Margaret , in marriage to King Ottokar . However , Margaret , who had been living in the Monastery of the Blessed Virgin on Rabbits ' Island , refused to yield . With the assistance of her Dominican confessor , she took her final religious vows which prevented her marriage . Infuriated by this act , the King , who had up to that time supported the Dominicans , favored the Franciscans in the subsequent years . He even became a Franciscan tertiary , according to the Greater Legend of his saintly sister , Elisabeth . 
 = = = Civil war ( 1261 – 66 ) = = = 
 Béla and his son , Stephen jointly invaded Bulgaria in 1261 . They forced Tzar Constantine Tikh of Bulgaria to abandon the region of Vidin . Béla returned to Hungary before the end of the campaign , which was continued by his son . 
 Béla 's favoritism towards his younger son , Béla ( whom he appointed Duke of Slavonia ) and daughter , Anna irritated Stephen . The latter suspected that his father was planning to disinherit him . Stephen often mentioned in his charters that he had " suffered severe persecution " by his " parents without deserving it " when referring to the roots of his conflict with his father . Although some clashes took place in the autumn , a lasting civil war was avoided through the mediation of the Archbishops Philip of Esztergom and Smaragd of Kalocsa who persuaded Béla and his son to make a compromise . According to the Peace of Pressburg , the two divided the country along the Danube : the lands to the west of the river remained under the direct rule of Béla , and the government of the eastern territories was taken over by Stephen , the king @-@ junior . 
 The relationship between father and son remained tense . Stephen seized his mother 's and sister 's estates which were situated in his realm to the east of the Danube . Béla 's army under the command of Princess Anna crossed the Danube in the summer of 1264 . She occupied Sárospatak and captured Stephen 's wife and children . A detachment of the royal army , under the command of Béla 's Judge royal Lawrence forced Stephen to retreat as far as the fortress at <unk> ( Codlea , Romania ) in the easternmost corner of Transylvania . The king @-@ junior 's partisans relieved the castle and he started a counter @-@ attack in the autumn . In the decisive Battle of <unk> , he routed his father 's army in March 1265 . 
 It was again the two archbishops who conducted the negotiations between Béla and his son . Their agreement was signed in the Dominican Monastery of the Blessed Virgin on Rabbits ' Island ( Margaret Island , Budapest ) on 23 March 1266 . The new treaty confirmed the division of the country along the Danube and regulated many aspects of the co @-@ existence of Béla 's regnum and Stephen 's regimen , including the collection of taxes and the commoners ' right to free movement . 
 = = = Last years ( 1266 – 70 ) = = = 
 The " nobles of all Hungary , who are called servientes regis " from both the senior and the junior king 's domains assembled in Esztergom in 1267 . Upon their request , Béla and Stephen jointly confirmed their privileges , which had first been spelled out in the Golden Bull of 1222 , before 7 September . Shortly after the meeting , Béla assigned four noblemen from each county with the task of revising property rights in Transdanubia . 
 King Stephen Uroš I of Serbia invaded the Banate of Macsó , a region under the rule of Béla 's widowed daughter , Anna . A royal army soon routed the invaders and captured Stephen Uroš . The Serbian monarch was forced to pay ransom before being released . 
 Béla 's favorite son , Béla , died in the summer of 1269 . On 18 January 1270 the King 's youngest daughter , the saintly Margaret , also died . In short order , Béla fell terminally ill . Before his death , he requested King Ottokar II of Bohemia , ( Princess Anna 's son @-@ in @-@ law ) , to assist his wife , daughter and partisans in case they were forced to leave Hungary by his son . Béla died on Rabbits ' Island on 3 May 1270 . With his death at the age of 63 , he exceeded in age most members of the House of Árpád . He was buried in the church of the Franciscans in Esztergom , but Archbishop Philip of Esztergom had his corpse transferred to the Esztergom Cathedral . The <unk> only succeeded in regaining Béla 's remains after a long lawsuit . 
 = = Family = = 
 Béla 's wife , Maria Laskarina was born in 1207 or 1208 , according to historian Gyula Kristó . She died in July or August 1270 . Their first child , Kunigunda , was born in 1224 , four years after her parents ' marriage . She married to Boleslaw the Chaste , Duke of Cracow in 1246 . 
 A second daughter , Margaret followed Kunigunda in about 1225 ; she died unmarried before 1242 . The third daughter of Béla , Anna was born around 1226 . She and her husband , Rostislav Mikhailovich were especially favored by Béla . Her great @-@ grandson , Wenceslaus — a grandson of her daughter , Kunigunda by King Ottokar II of Bohemia — was King of Hungary from 1301 to 1305 . 
 Béla 's fourth child , Catherina died unmarried before 1242 . Next , Elisabeth was born ; she was given in marriage to Henry XIII , Duke of Bavaria in about 1245 . Her son , Otto was crowned King of Hungary in 1305 , but was forced to leave the country by the end of 1307 . Elisabeth 's sister , Constance married , around 1251 , Lev <unk> , second son of Prince Daniil Romanovich of Halych . Béla 's seventh daughter , Yolanda became the wife of Bolesław the Pious , Duke of Greater Poland . 
 Béla 's first son , Stephen was born in 1239 . He succeeded his father . Béla 's youngest daughter , Margaret was born during the Mongol invasion in 1242 . Dedicated to God by her parents at birth , she spent her life in humility in the Monastery of the Blessed Virgin on Rabbits ' Island and died as a Dominican nun . The King 's youngest ( namesake ) son , Béla was born between around 1243 and 1250 . 
 The Greater Legend of Saint Elisabeth of Hungary ( Béla 's sister ) described Béla 's family as a company of saints . It wrote that the " blessed royal family of the Hungarians is adorned with resplendent pearls that irradiate all the earth " . In fact , the Holy See sanctioned the veneration of three daughters of Béla and his wife : Kunigunda was beatified in 1690 , Yolanda in 1827 ; and Margaret was canonized in 1943 . A fourth daughter , Constance also became subject to a local cult in Lemberg ( Lviv , Ukraine ) , according to the Legend of her sister , Kunigunda . 
 The following family tree presents Béla 's offspring , and some of his relatives mentioned in the article . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bryan Cartledge writes that Béla " reorganised the structure of government , re @-@ established the rule of law , repopulated a devastated countryside , encouraged the growth of towns , created the new royal town of Buda and revived the commercial life of the country " during his over three @-@ decade @-@ long reign . Béla 's posthumous epithet — the " second founder of the state " — shows that posterity attributed to him Hungary 's survival of the Mongol invasion . On the other hand , the Illuminated Chronicle notes that Béla " was a man of peace , but in the conduct of armies and battles the least fortunate " when narrating Béla 's defeat in the Battle of Kressenbrunn . The same chronicle preserved the next epigram which was written on his tomb : 
 = Water supply and sanitation in Colombia = 
 This article was last updated on substance in August 2012 . However , sections of this article are older and may need to be updated . Feel free to update this article wherever needed . 
 Water supply and sanitation in Colombia has been improved in many ways over the past decades . Between 1990 and 2010 , access to improved sanitation increased from 67 % to 82 % , but access to improved water source 's increased only slightly from 89 % to 94 % . In particular , coverage in rural areas lags behind . Furthermore , despite improvements , the quality of water and sanitation services remains inadequate . For example , only 73 % of those receiving public services receive water of potable quality and in 2006 only 25 % of the wastewater generated in the country underwent any kind of treatment . 
 = = Overview = = 
 A comprehensive sector policy , introduced in 1994 , aimed at increasing water and sanitation investments through targeted transfers to municipalities , improving service quality and efficiency by promoting private sector participation in the poorest parts of the country where utilities were not performing well , the establishment of autonomous regulatory agencies at the national level , increased cost recovery , and protecting the poorest through cross @-@ subsidies in the form of area @-@ based tariffs . This same policy has been pursued and refined by different consecutive governments . 
 Responsibilities in the sector are divided as follows : 
 The Vice @-@ Ministry of Water and Sanitation , created in October 2006 within the Ministry of Environment , Housing and Territorial Development is in charge of setting sector policy . 
 Regulation is the responsibility of two separate institutions at the national level , the Potable Water and Basic Sanitation Regulation Commission ( CRA ) and the Superintendency of Residential Public Services ( SSPD ) , a multi @-@ sector regulatory agency . 
 Service provision is the responsibility of 1 @,@ 500 water and sanitation service providers in urban areas and probably more than 12 @,@ 000 communal organizations providing services in rural and peri @-@ urban areas . While most urban service providers are public , in 2004 there were 125 private and 48 mixed public @-@ private water companies in the country . 
 Cost recovery in the sector has improved substantially . Between 1990 and 2001 , the average tariff for water and sanitation in Colombia increased from US $ 0 @.@ 32 / m3 to US $ 0 @.@ 81 / m3 , equivalent to an increase of 153 % . As a result , 24 % of investments were self @-@ financed by utilities in 2004 . Other features of the sector are the existence of some large , well @-@ performing public companies ; a strong and stable participation by the local private sector in service provision ; and some well @-@ performing community @-@ based organizations in peri @-@ urban areas . 
 Recently , the government of Álvaro Uribe has initiated a number of complementary policies to accelerate increases in access to water and sanitation services , such as the strengthening of the roles of departments in the governance of the sector , a program for marginal urban neighborhoods and an increase in investments for wastewater treatment . 
 = = Access = = 
 In 2010 , 92 % of the population had access to an improved source of water and 77 % had access to adequate sanitation . The rural population , which accounts for about 25 % of the national total , has the lowest coverage rates , with only 72 % having access to safe water and 63 % to adequate sanitation . Coverage is lowest on the Atlantic Coast ( Caribbean Region ) , in the <unk> , and in Amazonia . 
 = = Service quality = = 
 In addition to issues of service coverage , Colombia ’ s water and sanitation sector faces issues of service quality . However , service quality has improved considerably over the last fifteen years . The biggest cities tend to offer better service quality than smaller towns and rural areas . 
 Continuity of supply . The average duration of daily water service has increased from 15 @.@ 36 hours in 1993 to 19 @.@ 82 hours in 2003 at the national level . In the four biggest cities of the country , service is continuous . Nevertheless , rationing of water and interrupted sanitation are ordinary incidents in small towns and rural areas . 
 Drinking water quality . According to a survey of the <unk> de Servicios Públicos Domiciliarios ( SSPD ) or Superintendency for Residential Public Services in 2004 , 72 % of the users had water of potable quality . In some cases , the water supply system ’ s pressure is not adequate , increasing the risk of bacterial contamination . 
 Sewerage . Sewage collection systems do not have sufficient hydraulic capacity to handle wastewater flows , especially in poor neighborhoods , which results in combined sewer overflows and sanitary sewer overflows . 
 Wastewater treatment . In 2006 , 25 % of the wastewater generated in the country underwent some kind of treatment . The remaining 75 % is discharged without any treatment , contaminating a significant part of the natural water resources . 
 = = History = = 
 The water and sanitation sector in Colombia underwent one cycle of centralization and decentralization within the past several decades . Since the enactment of a comprehensive new sector policy in 1994 , various governments have pursued the same set of basic policies , including targeted transfers to municipalities , private sector participation , regulation , cost recovery and a system of cross @-@ subsidies . 
 = = = Centralization ( 1950s to late 1980s ) = = = 
 In the first half of the 20th century , municipalities were responsible for the provision of basic water and sanitation services in Colombia . In 1950 , similar to many other countries , a centralized system was adopted and the Instituto de <unk> Municipal ( INSFOPAL ) or Municipal Development Institute was created . Empresas <unk> de Acueducto y <unk> ( <unk> ) or Departmental Water and Sewerage Companies were created , consisting of the departments , the municipalities and INSFOPAL , which took care of managing and maintaining the infrastructure of the member communities . In that way , investment at the national level was channelled into this important area of public health . 
 In 1976 , within the framework of a change in sector policies , the <unk> were transformed into Empresas de Obras Sanitarias ( <unk> ) or Sanitary Works Companies at the regional or municipal level , which were put in charge of financing , planning , developing and managing public services in most municipalities . However , some municipalities kept the responsibility for service provision at the local level and created municipal companies . The most notable case are the Empresas Públicas de Medellín ( EPM ) , a municipally owned multi @-@ sector utility created in 1955 . 
 At the national level , the water sector institutionally depended on the Ministry of Health . 
 = = = Decentralization ( late 1980s to 1993 ) = = = 
 In the 1980s , the sector was in crisis , characterized by low investment , poor cost recovery and poor service quality in most of the country . As a result , the government decided to break up INSFOPAL at the end of the 1980s and to devolve the responsibility for service provision back to the municipalities after four decades , except for some cases like the Valle de Cauca department , where the regional companies continued providing the services . Furthermore , the institutional responsibility for the sector was transferred from the Ministry of Health to the Ministry of Economic Development . This change was not only an administrative change , but it introduced a different focus and perspective to the sector . 
 = = = New financing system and public @-@ private partnerships ( 1994 @-@ 2006 ) = = = 
 The two liberal governments of César Gaviria ( 1990 @-@ 1994 ) and Ernesto Samper ( 1994 @-@ 1998 ) pursued a policy of economic opening and business modernization . In the spirit of these policies , the government established a comprehensive new sector policy that aimed at increasing water and sanitation investments through targeted transfers to municipalities , improving service quality and efficiency by promoting private sector participation in the poorest parts of the country where public utilities were not performing well , the establishment of autonomous regulatory agencies at the national level , increased cost recovery , and protecting the poorest through cross @-@ subsidies in the form of area @-@ based tariffs . The basis of this sector policy was established by Law 142 of July 1994 , at the end of president César Gaviria ’ s term of office . With some modifications to that law in 2001 , the same policy continues to be pursued to today despite several changes of governments . 
 In 1995 , the first water and sanitation concession in Colombia was given to a mixed public @-@ private company in the city of Cartagena , followed by a second concession in Barranquilla in 1996 and more concessions in the next years . In 2002 , the government launched a program of business modernization to introduce private sector participation also in small and medium @-@ sized municipalities , leading to significant improvements in quality and efficiency of service provision in some municipalities . Drinking water use has decreased by 25 % between 1996 and 2001 . Tariff increases and the inclusion of low income users who did not have access to piped water before influenced this trend . 
 = = = Creation of a Vice @-@ Ministry for Water and Sanitation and Departmental Plans ( since 2006 ) = = = 
 The government of Álvaro Uribe wants to rapidly increase coverage , overtaking the Millennium Development Goals for the sector and to improve service quality , especially in small towns and rural areas , which have the highest requirement of service improvement . 
 At the end of 2006 , a Vice @-@ Ministry for Water and Sanitation was created . It has initiated four new programs : 
 Departmental Water and Sanitation Plans 
 Programa de <unk> para <unk> ( SPA ) or Sanitation Program for Settlements within the framework of an Integral Quarter Improvement Program 
 Municipal Waste Water Sanitation Program ( <unk> ) to increase the rate of treated municipal water 
 <unk> Program 
 Water Storage campaign 
 The Departmental Water and Sanitation Plans program provides such services as planning and harmonizing resources and has regional systems of service provision at the level of each department of the country . The program was first implemented in four departments which have some of the most difficult conditions : Sucre , Córdoba , Magdalena and La Guajira . The program also aimed to overcome the sector ’ s fragmentation into many small utilities to benefit from economies of scale . In 2010 30 Departmental Plans were completed and published , covering almost all of the country 's 32 departments . 
 In about 2011 , the responsibility for water supply and sanitation , and with it the Vice @-@ Ministry , was transferred to the newly created Ministry of Housing , Cities and Territories . As of August 2012 , the Vice @-@ Ministry 's website made no more reference to the Departmental Water and Sanitation Plans . The handwashing program , the SPA and <unk> were still in place . In addition , two new programs were started : 
 A " water culture " ( Cultura del Agua ) program that combats apathy and lack of interest concerning water utilities , promotes water reuse and the protection of watersheds , and fights water losses , illegal connections and the non @-@ payment of water bills . 
 A " transparent water " program to ensure greater visibility and a wider implication of various stakeholders in water projects , especially during an early stage of implementation . 
 = = Responsibility for water supply and sanitation = = 
 The current responsibilities and policies in the water and sanitation sector in Colombia are primarily defined in the 1991 constitution and in Law 142 of 1994 ( Ley de Servicios Públicos Domiciliarios or Public Housing Services Law ) 
 = = = Policy and regulation = = = 
 The Vice @-@ Ministry of Water and Sanitation , created in October 2006 within the Ministry of Environment , Housing and Territorial Development is in charge of setting sector policy . This sector policy is defined in the framework of national policy established by the Departamento Nacional de <unk> ( DNP ) or National Planning Department . 
 Responsibility for regulating water services is vested in two separate institutions at the national level . The Comisión de <unk> de Agua Potable y <unk> <unk> ( CRA ) or Potable Water and Basic Sanitation Regulatory Commission defines criteria for efficient service provision and sets the rules for tariff revision , but is not in charge of controlling the application of these rules . The latter is the responsibility of the <unk> de Servicios Públicos Domiciliarios ( SSPD ) or Superintendency for Residential Public Services , a multi @-@ sector regulatory agency . 
 The Government aims at improving the performance of the water and sanitation sector through : ( 1 ) strengthening the regulatory framework ; ( 2 ) implementing technical assistance programs ; ( 3 ) providing financial support to promote modernization and efficient management as well as to subsidize the poor ; and ( 4 ) rationalizing the institutional framework at the national level to improve coordination in the sector . The government also supports private sector participation in the sector . 
 = = = Service provision = = = 
 Colombian municipalities are responsible for “ ensuring that their inhabitants are given domestic services of water supply and sanitation in an efficient way by public companies ” . Therefore , public utilities are directly responsible for service provision , except for some special cases defined in the law , in which municipalities can offer the services directly . In rural areas and some marginal urban areas , communal water boards also offer water supply services . 
 Over the last few years , the number of companies has increased and the direct service provision by municipalities has decreased . To simplify the process of changing suppliers ' ownership structure , municipal utilities were transformed into public stock corporations , which allow private sector participation without a further change of the legal status . In 2006 , 53 % of all suppliers were public companies , the remainder being direct municipal suppliers ( 15 % ) , private companies ( 12 % ) , official companies , which are companies that are not specialized in water and sanitation ( 13 % ) , mixed companies ( 6 % ) and authorized organizations ( 1 % ) . Smaller utilities included , there are more than 1 @,@ 500 water and sanitation service providers of in urban areas , and probably more than 12 @,@ 000 communal organizations providing services in rural areas . 
 The sector is characterized by a high degree of fragmentation which makes it difficult to realize economies of scale , according to a World Bank study . To solve this problem , the creation of regional companies has been suggested . 
 = = = = Urban areas = = = = 
 Most Colombian cities - including the three largest ones , Bogota , Medellin and Cali - are served by public utilities . However , the private sector also plays an important role , including 125 private and 48 mixed public @-@ private water companies in 2004 out of 1 @,@ 500 urban service providers . 
 = = = = = Public utilities = = = = = 
 Some of Colombia 's larger cities are home to well @-@ performing public utilities , some of them providing multiple services , others being specialized in water and sanitation only . The Empresas Públicas de Medellín or Public Companies of Medellín , is a municipally owned multi @-@ sector utility in charge of water supply , sanitation , solid waste management , electricity generation and distribution as well as local telecommunications in Medellín and its surrounding areas . 
 Another multi @-@ sector utility is the Empresas <unk> de Cali ( <unk> ) , which provides fixed line local telecoms , Internet , potable water , sewage and electricity services to some 600 @,@ 000 clients . <unk> has suffered financially due to onerous payment obligations resulting from a Power Purchase Agreement signed in 1997 with an Independent Power Producer , <unk> . 
 The capital of Colombia , Bogotá , is served by a water and sanitation utility , the Empresa de Acueducto y <unk> de Bogotá ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = = = Private sector participation = = = = = 
 Private sector participation in Colombia 's water and sanitation sector has been much more stable than in some other Latin American countries . In 2004 , there were 125 private and 48 mixed public @-@ private water companies in Colombia , including large , medium and small companies . Private sector involvement in the Colombian water sector began in 1995 in Cartagena , with support from the World Bank . The most important examples are in Cartagena , Barranquilla , Santa Marta , <unk> , <unk> , Palmira , Girardot , and <unk> . Operators are to a large extent Colombian . Overall performance of utilities with private sector participation has improved , in some cases spectacularly , and some – such as Barranquilla – have had impressive successes in expanding coverage to the urban poor . 
 According to a World Bank report , the key to success of private sector participation in the Colombian water sector has been the development of homegrown solutions , and , at times , skillfully adapting models used elsewhere to the particular circumstances and culture of Colombia . 
 The World Bank 's Private Participation in Infrastructure Database shows private investment commitments in water supply and sanitation of US $ 940 million from 1995 to 2006 through 51 transactions , including 27 classified as concessions , 22 as management and lease contracts , and 2 as greenfield projects . 
 = = = = Small towns and peri @-@ urban areas = = = = 
 In some smaller towns and peri @-@ urban areas , there are examples of successful provision of water supply and sanitation services by community organizations and regional companies , which in some cases set an example in terms of community empowerment , transparency and accountability . 
 An example of a regional association is <unk> S.A. ESP , which provides drinking water and sanitation to 582 @,@ 000 inhabitants in 33 municipalities of the Valle del Cauca department . It was founded as a non @-@ profit public limited company in 1959 . The shareholders of the company are the Valle del Cauca department , the ‘ ’ Corporación Autónoma regional del <unk> del <unk> ’ ’ and 33 municipalities , which are served by the utility . 
 Another example , is the Junta <unk> del Acueducto La Sirena en el Valle del Cauca ( Water Board La Sirena ) in the southwestern outskirts of Cali , which manages 778 residential connections , offering continuous service to some 4 @,@ 200 users . It operates a sewerage system and a wastewater treatment plant . Water consumption is metered . The average monthly tariff is US $ 3 @.@ 5 for <unk> . There is no social stratification , but special tariffs are applied to those users who consume more than <unk> . The annual cash surplus is about US $ 10 @,@ 000 which is reinvested in preventive maintenance and in some cases in construction works . In this way , in the last 3 years a water capture facility was constructed in Quebrada Epaminondas , another one at Melendez River was improved , and a water tank with a capacity of <unk> was constructed . 
 Another example is the Asociación Acueducto de Río Negro de <unk> , which was formed 10 years ago integrating 10 supply systems , supplying 7 @,@ 000 residential connections . The association is preparing its own water treatment plant and preparing to install meters with the aid of the Colombian organization Asociados en Desarrollo Rural ( ADR ) or Associates in Rural Development and the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) . 
 = = = = Rural areas = = = = 
 Coverage in rural areas is unusually low , given the level of economic development and sector development . Using a broad definition of access , based on the WHO definition of an improved water source , access in rural areas in Colombia was 71 % , while it was 81 % in Honduras - a considerably poorer country - and 89 % in Ecuador , also a poorer country than Colombia . 
 In addition to the armed conflict , there are other explanations for this situation : Municipalities tend to use their financial resources from the Sistema General de <unk> or General Participation System ( Law 715 of 2001 ) mainly in urban areas . Furthermore , there is no institution or program at the national level which offers technical assistance to the 12 @,@ 000 rural community organizations . Law 142 of 1994 assigns that task to the departments , but these have not carried out the task in a satisfactory way so far . 
 The 2002 <unk> <unk> Rural ( ISR ) or Rural Sanitary Register confirms that situation . Only 21 % of the rural community organizations were considered able to carry out maintenance and only 10 % to commercially operate the service . Only 32 % issued bills and only 10 % used metering . In 2005 , the government defined guidelines for basic water supply and sanitation policy in rural areas to increase coverage and improve quality in those areas . 
 In addition a GIS study published in 2014 documented that for many rural areas the time needed to drive to water testing labs than is longer than the sample is viable . 
 = = Innovative approaches = = 
 Since 1994 Colombia has pioneered many innovative approaches for basic service provision in general and for water supply and sanitation in particular . 
 Some of them were introduced at the national level , while others were initiated in one city or region . Notable innovations at the national level are the introduction of two autonomous economic regulatory agencies ( one , CRA , to develop and fine @-@ tune regulatory tools in the water and sanitation sector , and another one , SSPD , to implement them in across all basic services ) in 1994 ; the introduction of socio @-@ economic strata as a basis for spatially differentiated tariffs , also in 1994 ; and the spatial aggregation of municipal service providers in small towns at the departmental level to benefit from economies of scale since 2006 , with strong support from the national government . 
 A notable innovation initiated by a city or a region is the creation of mixed public @-@ private enterprises for urban water supply that has begun in 1995 in Cartagena , followed by Barranquilla and other Northern and Central cities and towns . Another innovation is an association of community @-@ based organizations ( <unk> ) providing water supply in rural and peri @-@ urban areas in the departments of El Valle , Cauca and <unk> in Southwestern Colombia . It began in the late 1990s with the assistance of the Universidad del Valle in Cali in order to protect and recover source watersheds and to strengthen the <unk> ' capacity to administrate , operate and maintain their water systems . 
 In addition , Colombia boasts one of the oldest and largest multi @-@ utilities in Latin America , Empresas Públicas de Medellín ( EPM ) , created in 1955 . 
 = = Efficiency = = 
 The average level of non @-@ revenue water ( physical and economic losses ) in Colombia in 2006 is estimated to be 49 % . This level is higher than the Latin American average ( approximately 40 % ) and the regulatory goal of 30 % . In the past , the national average of non @-@ revenue water was estimated 40 % in 2001 , which is almost the same as in 1990 . In the largest cities of the country , levels of non @-@ revenue water are below the national average ( 40 % in Bogotá , 35 % in Medellín and 39 % in Cali ) . 
 = = Financial aspects = = 
 = = = Tariffs = = = 
 The Colombian tariff system is defined in the Ley de Servicios Públicos or Public Services Law from 1994 . It is applied in public , mixed and private companies . The tariff system aims at reconciling the achievement of cost recovery with the protection of the poor . The basic tariff is calculated on the basis of economic costs according to a methodology defined at the national level by CRA ( Law 287 of 2004 ) . Therefore , in principle , tariffs in different municipalities do not differ due to local government ’ s decisions to raise tariffs or not , but only because of the different costs of the services . 
 The base tariff of each service provider has to be adjusted by law for different geographic areas within the city , each assumed to correspond to one socio @-@ economic class , according to adjustment factors that are specified by law . This system of area @-@ based tariffs is supposed to provide cross @-@ subsidies from more affluent to poorer users . Every municipality has defined geographic areas that each correspond to one of the six socio @-@ economic classes . Class 1 represents the lowest income group while class 6 stands for the highest . As per 2007 , the tariff adjustment factors were the following : 
 There are many more citizens who live in areas corresponding to classes 1 – 3 than those who live in the areas corresponding to classes 5 and 6 . For example , in Bogotá 73 % of the population live in zones of classes 1 – 3 , whereas only 10 % live in zones classified as 5 and 6 . Consequently , the tariff system permanently causes deficits which require subsidies paid by the national government . 
 Between 1990 and 2001 , the average tariff for water and sanitation in Colombia increased from US $ 0 @.@ 32 / m3 to US $ 0 @.@ 81 / m3 , equivalent to an increase of 153 % . In 2006 , the average monthly bill for residential customers was about US $ 6 @.@ 80 for water supply and US $ 4 @.@ 60 for sanitation services . 
 Free basic water . Inspired by the Human Right to Water , two important cities in Colombia make a basic amount of water ( Minimo Vital de Agua Potable ) available to their poorest residents free of charge . In 2009 , Medellin made 2 @.@ 5 cubic meters of water per month and per person - or 10 cubic meters for a family of four - available for free to all urban residents in class 1 . The city wants to reach 45 @,@ 000 households and has budgeted 25 billion Pesos ( USD 14 million ) to finance free basic water and associated awareness campaigns . In February 2012 Bogota also introduced 6 cubic meters of free basic water per household for households in classes 1 and 2 , covering more than 1 @.@ 5 million households or 39 % of all households . The annual cost is estimated at 60 billion Pesos ( USD 33 million ) . 
 = = = Investment = = = 
 Between 1995 and 2003 , US $ 3 @.@ 4 billion ( 7 @,@ 965 billion Colombian pesos ) were invested in the sector , of which 16 % were financed by the private sector . Since 1998 , private financing increased from almost zero to become a significant share of the total investment . Furthermore , despite a drop in 2001 , investment in the sector has increased since 1999 . 
 The SSPD forecasts a total investment of US $ 2 @.@ 2 billion ( 4 @,@ 922 billion Colombian pesos ) in the water and sanitation sector from 2007 to 2017 
 The Minister of Environment , Housing and Territorial Development announced in May 2008 that US $ 5 @.@ 2 million ( 9 @.@ 2 billion Colombian pesos ) will be spent in order to facilitate the construction of facilities in areas without access to drinking water . The national government will control the destination of the resources and guarantees transparency in the whole spending process . According to the minister , Colombia should already have reached full drinking water coverage , given the past investments in the sector . 
 = = = Financing = = = 
 According to the ministry , the investments were mainly financed through three sources : self @-@ financing , funding by the national government and charges for the extraction of petroleum and carbon . 
 A World Bank study estimates an investment of US $ <unk> in 2004 , which was financed as follows : 
 US $ <unk> ( 26 % ) by companies through self @-@ financing 
 US $ <unk> ( 61 % ) by state funding through SGP 
 US $ 49m ( 12 % ) by <unk> Autónomas Regionales ( CAR ) or Regional Autonomous Corporations 
 US $ 5m ( 1 % ) by other sources 
 According to the report , the average annual transfers from the national government to the municipalities for water supply and sanitation ( including solid waste ) were about US $ <unk> between 1998 and 2001 . 86 % of that funding was allocated through the SGP as defined in Law 715 . A certain percentage of these resources was dedicated exclusively for water supply and sanitation . They mainly go to small municipalities that show low income levels . Nevertheless , many municipalities use funding through SGP dedicated for water supply and sanitation for other purposes . 
 The CAR receive property tax , electric power utilities , environmental charges for extracting water and charges for discharging waste water . 
 = = External cooperation = = 
 The main external cooperation partners for the Colombian water and sanitation sector are the World Bank , the Inter @-@ American Development Bank ( IDB ) and the Andean Development Corporation ( CAF ) . 
 = = = World Bank = = = 
 The World Bank supports the sector through dedicated water and sanitation projects , as well as through water and sanitation components in other , broader projects . 
 Dedicated water and sanitation projects : 
 Bogotá Urban Services Project 
 Cartagena Water Supply , Sewerage and Environmental Management Project 
 La Guajira Water and Sanitation Infrastructure and Service Management Project 
 Water And Sanitation Sector Support Project First Phase APL 
 Water Sector Reform Assistance Project 
 Non @-@ dedicated projects : 
 Disaster Vulnerability Reduction First Phase APL 
 Rio Frio Carbon Offset Project 
 <unk> River Environmental Services 
 Sustainable Development Investment Project 
 = = = Inter @-@ American Development Bank ( IDB ) = = = 
 Potable Water and Sanitation Pereira 
 = = = Andean Development Corporation ( CAF ) = = = 
 CAF supports the sector through a USD 42 @.@ 5 million loan to the Cesar Department in 2006 and a USD 58 @.@ 1 million loan to the Empresas Aguas del Magdalena approved in 2007 . 
 For information on CAF projects in Colombia see : CAF Colombia 
 = German submarine U @-@ 47 ( 1938 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 47 was a Type VIIB U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's navy ( Kriegsmarine ) during World War II . She was laid down on 25 February 1937 at Friedrich Krupp Germaniawerft in Kiel as yard number 582 and went into service on 17 December 1938 under the command of Günther Prien . 
 During U @-@ 47 's career , she sank a total of 31 enemy vessels and damaged eight more , including the British battleship HMS Royal Oak on 14 October 1939 . U @-@ 47 ranks as one of the most successful German U @-@ boats of World War II . 
 = = Design = = 
 German Type VIIB submarines were preceded by the shorter Type VIIA submarines . U @-@ 47 had a displacement of 753 tonnes ( 741 long tons ) when at the surface and 857 tonnes ( 843 long tons ) while submerged . She had a total length of 66 @.@ 50 m ( 218 ft 2 in ) , a pressure hull length of 48 @.@ 80 m ( 160 ft 1 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 20 m ( 20 ft 4 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 50 m ( 31 ft 2 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 74 m ( 15 ft 7 in ) . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft <unk> four @-@ stroke , six @-@ cylinder supercharged diesel engines producing a total of 2 @,@ 800 to 3 @,@ 200 metric horsepower ( 2 @,@ 060 to 2 @,@ 350 kW ; 2 @,@ 760 to 3 @,@ 160 shp ) for use while surfaced , two AEG GU 460 / 8 @-@ 276 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 750 metric horsepower ( 550 kW ; 740 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 23 m ( 4 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 17 @.@ 9 knots ( 33 @.@ 2 km / h ; 20 @.@ 6 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 90 nautical miles ( 170 km ; 100 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 8 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 16 @,@ 100 km ; 10 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 47 was fitted with five 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and one at the stern ) , fourteen torpedoes , one 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) SK C / 35 naval gun , 220 rounds , and one 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of between forty @-@ four and sixty . 
 = = Service history = = 
 U @-@ 47 carried out ten combat patrols and spent a total of 238 days at sea . She sank 31 enemy ships ( totalling 164 @,@ 953 tons ) and damaged eight more . Prior to her disappearance in March 1941 , U @-@ 47 lost one crewman , Heinrich <unk> , who fell overboard on 5 September 1940 . 
 = = = First patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 47 was assigned to the 7th U @-@ boat Flotilla on 17 December 1938 , ( the day she was commissioned ) . She was an operational boat in the 7th Flotilla for her entire career . U @-@ 47 was sent to sea in a pre @-@ emptive move before war broke out in September 1939 , this move would enable her to engage enemy vessels as soon as the war began . She left for her first war patrol on 19 August 1939 ( two weeks before the commencement of hostilities ) , from the port of Kiel . During her first patrol , she circumnavigated the British Isles and entered the Bay of Biscay . It was here that U @-@ 47 sank her first three ships , SS Bosnia on 5 September , SS Rio Carlo on 6 September and SS <unk> on 7 September 1939 . 
 = = = Second patrol and the sinking of HMS Royal Oak = = = 
 On 8 October 1939 , U @-@ 47 began her second patrol . On 14 October 1939 ( six days after leaving port ) , she succeeded in penetrating the Royal Navy 's primary base at Scapa Flow . Although most of the Home Fleet was not at the base at the time , U @-@ 47 managed to find a target , the battleship HMS Royal Oak . Once she had spotted Royal Oak , she opened fire with her torpedoes . Her first two salvos did nothing more than sever an anchor chain . After reloading the bow tubes the last salvo of three torpedoes struck the British warship , causing severe flooding . Taking on a list of 15 degrees , her open portholes were submerged , worsening the flooding and increasing the list to 45 degrees ; Royal Oak sank within 15 minutes with the loss of over 800 men . Following the attack , Prien received the nickname Der Stier von Scapa Flow ( " The Bull of Scapa Flow " ) ; the emblem of a snorting bull was then painted on the conning tower of U @-@ 47 and the image soon became the emblem of the entire 7th U @-@ boat Flotilla . Prien was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross , the first sailor of a U @-@ boat and the second member of the Kriegsmarine to receive this decoration . The rest of the crew members were awarded the Iron Cross . Two other U @-@ 47 crew members also earned the Knight 's Cross later on during World War II : the chief engineer ( <unk> Ingenieur ) Johann @-@ Friedrich Wessels and 1st watch officer ( I. <unk> ) Engelbert <unk> . 
 Many years later , in September 2002 , one of the unexploded torpedoes that U @-@ 47 had fired during the attack on Royal Oak rose to the surface from its resting place on the bottom . The unexploded torpedo , minus its warhead , gradually drifted towards the shore , where it was spotted by a crewman aboard the Norwegian tanker <unk> . A Royal Navy tugboat intercepted the torpedo , and after identifying it as having belonged to U @-@ 47 63 years earlier , EOD ( explosive ordnance disposal ) personnel discarded it a mile from shore . 
 On 16 April 2016 Royal Navy bomb disposal experts detonated a World War Two torpedo found in Scapa Flow in Orkney . It is believed to have been one of those fired at HMS Royal Oak by a German U @-@ boat in 1939 . 
 = = = Third patrol = = = 
 Following a lavish celebration in Berlin for the sinking of HMS Royal Oak in which the crew members of U @-@ 47 were received by Adolf Hitler and decorated , the boat returned to sea on 16 November 1939 . Once the U @-@ boat had left Kiel on 16 November , she headed out into the North Sea . After traveling around the British Isles into the Bay of Biscay and the English Channel , U @-@ 47 sank a further three vessels , Navasota on 5 December , the Norwegian steamer MV Britta on 6 December and <unk> on 7 December . Following the sinking of Navasota , British destroyers briefly fired depth charges at the U @-@ boat but she managed to safely evade the attack without any damage . 
 = = = Fourth patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 47 left the port of Wilhelmshaven and began her fourth patrol on 11 March 1940 . For 19 days , she roamed the North Sea in search of any Allied convoys . However , she only managed to torpedo the Danish steam merchantman Britta north of Scotland on 25 March . Following the sinking of Britta , U @-@ 47 returned to Wilhelmshaven on 29 March . 
 = = = Fifth patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 47 's fifth patrol was her first one that resulted in no ships sunk . She left Wilhelmshaven on 3 April 1940 , and headed once again out into the North Sea . While she did not sink any Allied vessels on her fifth patrol , around 19 April , she fired a torpedo aimed at the British battleship HMS Warspite but the torpedo missed its target or failed to detonate upon impact . Several nearby destroyers attempted to sink the U @-@ boat using depth charges . U @-@ 47 managed to escape . 
 = = = Sixth patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 47 's sixth patrol was much more successful . Having left Kiel on 3 June 1940 , she ventured out into the North Sea and operated off the southern coast of Ireland . Along with six other U @-@ boats in Wolfpack Prien , she attacked Convoy HX @-@ 47 and the first ship to fall victim to the U @-@ boat was the British vessel , SS <unk> ; which was sunk on 14 June . Within less than a month , the boat sank a further seven vessels , San Fernando on the 21st , Cathrine on the 24th , <unk> and Leticia on the 27th , Empire Toucan on the 29th , Georgios <unk> on the 30th , and SS Arandora Star on 2 July . The German submarine returned to Kiel on 6 July after 34 days at sea and eight enemy vessels sunk . 
 = = = Seventh patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 47 's seventh patrol consisted of her travelling north of the British Isles and into the North Atlantic , south of Iceland . During a period of 30 days , she sank a total of six enemy vessels and damaged another . U @-@ 47 's first victory during her seventh patrol was the sinking of the Belgian passenger ship Ville de Mons on 2 September 1940 . This was followed by the sinking of a British vessel , Titan , on 4 September and Gro , José de <unk> , and Neptunian on the 7th . On the 9th , U @-@ 47 sank the Greek merchant ship <unk> , and on 21 September she damaged the British merchant ship <unk> . Following these victories , on the 25th , U @-@ 47 entered the French port of Lorient , which was now under German control following the decisive Battle of France . 
 = = = Eighth patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 47 's eighth patrol began on 14 October 1940 when she left her home port of Lorient . While her eighth patrol lasted ten days , she sank four enemy vessels and damaged a further two in only two days . On 19 October , U @-@ 47 damaged the British vessel Shirak and sank Uganda and <unk> , both of which were British registered . The next day , the U @-@ boat damaged the British vessel <unk> and sank La <unk> as well as Whitford Point . She returned to port three days later on the 23rd . 
 = = = Ninth patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 47 left her home port of Lorient on 3 November 1940 and moved out into the North Atlantic in search of Allied convoys . During her ninth patrol , she damaged three ships , Gonçalo <unk> , Conch and <unk> and sank another , Ville d ´ Arlon . U @-@ 47 returned to Lorient for the last time on 6 December . 
 = = = Disappearance = = = 
 U @-@ 47 departed Lorient on her tenth and last patrol on 20 February 1941 . She went missing on 7 March 1941 and was believed at the time to have been sunk by the British destroyer HMS Wolverine west of Ireland , when a submarine was attacked by Wolverine and HMS Verity . The British ships took turns covering each other 's ASDIC blind spots and dropping patterns of depth charges until the submarine rose almost to the surface before sinking and then exploding with an orange flash visible from the surface . Postwar assessment showed that the boat attacked there was U @-@ A , part of the foreign U @-@ Boat corps . To date , there is no official record of what happened to U @-@ 47 , although a variety of possibilities exist , including mines , a mechanical failure , a victim of her own torpedoes , or possibly a later attack that did not confirm any claims by the corvette team of HMS Camellia and HMS Arbutus . U @-@ 47 had a crew of 45 officers and men during her last North Atlantic patrol in early 1941 , all of whom were presumed to have died . 
 = = = Wolfpacks = = = 
 U @-@ 47 took part in one wolfpack , namely . 
 Prien ( 12 – 17 June 1940 ) 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 During her service in the Kriegsmarine , U @-@ 47 sank 30 commercial ships totalling 162 @,@ 769 GRT and one warship of 29 @,@ 150 tons ; she also damaged eight commercial ships totalling 62 @,@ 751 GRT and one warship of 10 @,@ 035 tons . 
 = Bold Orion = 
 The Bold Orion missile , also known as Weapons System 199B ( WS @-@ 199B ) , was a prototype air @-@ launched ballistic missile ( ALBM ) developed by Martin Aircraft during the 1950s . Developed in both one- and two @-@ stage designs , the missile was moderately successful in testing , and helped pave the way for development of the GAM @-@ 87 Skybolt ALBM . In addition , the Bold Orion was used in early anti @-@ satellite weapons testing , performing the first interception of a satellite by a missile . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 The Bold Orion missile was developed as part of Weapons System 199 , initiated by the United States Air Force ( USAF ) in response to the U.S. Navy 's Polaris program , with funding authorised by the United States Congress in 1957 . The purpose of WS @-@ 199 was the development of technology that would be used in new strategic weapons for the USAF 's Strategic Air Command , not to deliver operational weapons ; a primary emphasis was on proving the feasibility of an air @-@ launched ballistic missile . 
 The designation WS @-@ 199B was assigned to the project that , under a contract awarded in 1958 to Martin Aircraft , would become the Bold Orion missile . The design of Bold Orion was simple , using parts developed for other missile systems to reduce the cost and development time of the project . The initial Bold Orion configuration was a single @-@ stage vehicle , using a Thiokol TX @-@ 20 Sergeant solid @-@ fuel rocket . Following initial testing , the Bold Orion configuration was altered to become a two @-@ stage vehicle , an Allegany Ballistics Laboratory Altair upper stage being added to the missile . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Having been given top priority by the Air Force , the first flight test of the Bold Orion missile was conducted on May 26 , 1958 , from a Boeing B @-@ 47 Stratojet carrier aircraft , which launched the Bold Orion vehicle at the apex of a high @-@ speed , high @-@ angle climb . The zoom climb tactic , combined with the thrust from the rocket motor of the missile itself , allowed the missile to achieve its maximum range , or , alternatively , to reach space . 
 A twelve @-@ flight test series of the Bold Orion vehicle was conducted ; however , despite suffering only one outright failure , the initial flight tests of the single @-@ stage rocket proved less successful than hoped . Authorisation was received to modify the Bold Orion to become a two @-@ stage vehicle ; in addition to the modifications improving the missile 's reliability , they increased the range of Bold Orion to over 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) . Four of the final six test firings were of the two @-@ stage vehicle ; these were considered completely successful , and established that the ALBM was a viable weapon . 
 = = = ASAT test = = = 
 The final test launch of Bold Orion , conducted on October 13 , 1959 , was a test of the vehicle 's capabilities in the anti @-@ satellite role . Launched from an altitude of 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) from its B @-@ 47 mothership , the missile successfully intercepted the Explorer 6 satellite , passing its target at a range of less than 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) at an altitude of 156 miles ( 251 km ) . Had the missile been fitted with a nuclear warhead , the satellite would have been destroyed . 
 The Bold Orion ASAT test was the first interception of a satellite by any method , proving that anti @-@ satellite missiles were feasible . However this test , along with an earlier , unsuccessful test of the High Virgo missile in the anti @-@ satellite role , had political repercussions ; the Eisenhower administration sought to establish space as a neutral ground for everyone 's usage , and the " indication of hostile intent " the tests were seen to give was frowned upon , with anti @-@ satellite weapons development being curtailed shortly thereafter . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The results of the Bold Orion project , along with those from the testing of the High Virgo missile , also developed under WS @-@ 199 , provided data and knowledge that assisted the Air Force in forming the requirements for the follow @-@ on WS @-@ <unk> , which would produce the GAM @-@ 87 Skybolt missile . 
 = = Launch history = = 
 = New Jersey Route 35 = 
 Route 35 is a state highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey , primarily traveling through the easternmost parts of Middlesex , Monmouth , and Ocean counties . It runs 58 @.@ 11 mi ( 93 @.@ 52 km ) from the entrance to Island Beach State Park in Berkeley Township , Ocean County to an intersection with Route 27 in Rahway , Union County . Between Seaside Park and Mantoloking , Route 35 follows the right @-@ of @-@ way of the former Pennsylvania Railroad along the Jersey Shore . The route heads through Point Pleasant Beach and crosses the Manasquan River on the Brielle Bridge , meeting Route 34 and Route 70 at the former Brielle Circle in Wall Township . From there , Route 35 heads north and intersects Route 138 , an extension of Interstate 195 , continuing north through Monmouth County before crossing the Victory Bridge over the Raritan River into Perth Amboy , where the route continues north to Rahway . 
 Route 35 was designated in 1927 to run from Lakewood to South Amboy , replacing Pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 from Lakewood to Belmar and from Eatontown to South Amboy . It was realigned onto its current alignment between Brielle and Belmar in 1929 and saw a northward extension along U.S. Route 9 from South Amboy to Iselin in 1947 . In 1953 , Route 35 was realigned to run from Point Pleasant to Seaside Heights along a former part of Route 37 , with Route 35 between Lakewood and Point Pleasant becoming Route 88 . At the same time , Route 35 was removed from U.S. Route 9 between South Amboy and Iselin and realigned to follow a former piece of Route 4 between South Amboy and Rahway . From the late 1950s to the mid @-@ 1970s , there were plans to build a freeway along the Route 35 corridor from Seaside Heights north into Monmouth County ; the only portion that was built became part of Route 18 . Route 35 was extended south to the Island Beach State Park entrance by the 1980s . Recent improvements to the route have removed many traffic circles and replaced the first cloverleaf interchange in the United States , built in 1929 , at U.S. Route 1 / 9 in Woodbridge Township with a partial cloverleaf interchange . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Ocean County = = = 
 Route 35 begins at the entrance to Island Beach State Park in Berkeley Township , Ocean County on the Barnegat Peninsula . It heads north on a divided highway with parking spaces in the median through residential areas of South Seaside Park . It briefly becomes an undivided highway before crossing into Seaside Park , where the route becomes four @-@ lane , divided Central Avenue , which also has median parking spaces . Route 35 passes by residences in Seaside Park , with the median widening for the Seaside Park Police Department building at the Sixth Avenue intersection , and then the road widening to six lanes further north . Upon crossing Decatur Street , the southbound lanes of Route 35 run one block to the west of the northbound lanes and then turns to the west , crossing into Seaside Heights , a beach resort that has a boardwalk and two amusement piers , Casino Pier and <unk> Pier . In Seaside Heights , Route 35 turns north and interchanges with Route 37 on the Seaside Heights / Berkeley Township border on the eastern shore of Barnegat Bay . 
 Past the Route 37 interchange , Route 35 continues north along Barnegat Bay , curving eastward and crossing into Toms River Township , where the route splits into a block @-@ wide one @-@ way pair with two lanes in each direction that heads north through residential and commercial <unk> Beach . After crossing into <unk> a mile later , the northbound direction of Route 35 becomes Grand Central Avenue and the southbound direction of Route 35 becomes Anna O. Hawkins Boulevard . The route then crosses back into Toms River Township , passing through Dover Beaches North . When Route 35 enters Brick Township , the northbound direction becomes Ocean Avenue and the one @-@ way pair between the opposing directions of Route 35 narrows as it passes oceanfront residences . Upon crossing into Mantoloking , Route 35 becomes a two @-@ lane , undivided road and heads north along a narrow peninsula , intersecting the eastern terminus of County Route 528 ( Herbert Street ) less than a mile later . 
 Route 35 continues north through Bay Head , becoming Main Avenue , then enters Point Pleasant Beach , a beach resort with a boardwalk that is home to Jenkinson 's Aquarium , where the route swings to the west and turns north onto another one @-@ way pair with two lanes in each direction — the northbound direction following Cincinnati Avenue and the southbound direction following Richmond Avenue . Southbound Route 35 intersects the eastern terminus of Route 88 in this area . The one @-@ way pair carries the route through the downtown area of Point Pleasant Beach . At the County Route 633 ( Arnold Avenue ) intersection , northbound Route 35 shifts slightly to the west and becomes Hawthorne Avenue . The route becomes a two @-@ way highway again after half a mile and becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway after intersecting County Route 635 ( Broadway ) , almost immediately crossing a channel of the Manasquan River and entering Monmouth County . 
 = = = Monmouth County = = = 
 Route 35 crosses into Brielle , Monmouth County , immediately passing over the main channel of the Manasquan River on a drawbridge . Upon crossing into Brielle , the route interchanges with Ashley Avenue and the southern terminus of Route 71 . The route continues northwest and crosses into Wall Township and meets Route 34 and Route 70 at the former Brielle Circle , now an at @-@ grade intersection with jughandles . Past this intersection , Route 35 heads north on a two @-@ lane , undivided road that passes by many businesses . It meets County Route 524 Spur at the Manasquan Circle , where the Circle Factory Outlet Center is located . Past the Manasquan Circle , Route 35 heads north as a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane that intersects County Route 524 ( Allaire Road ) . Route 35 widens to a four @-@ lane divided highway and interchanges with the eastern terminus of Route 138 , which continues west to become Interstate 195 . Route 35 curves to the east and crosses into Belmar . Here , the route runs along the south bank of the Shark River as a four @-@ lane undivided highway , intersecting Route 71 again and forming a concurrency with that route . The two routes continue north along a divided highway until the intersection with 8th Avenue , where Route 71 heads to the east . Past this intersection , Route 35 becomes a four @-@ lane , undivided road again and crosses the Shark River into Neptune Township . 
 Past the Shark River bridge , Route 35 continues as a four @-@ lane divided highway that features an interchange with County Route 40A ( Memorial Drive ) , crossing into Neptune City . The route continues northwest through residential and commercial areas of Neptune City as a four @-@ lane , undivided highway before heading north as a two @-@ lane , undivided road called Morris Avenue . Route 35 crosses back into Neptune Township , where it becomes Stokes Avenue and crosses Route 33 . It continues through suburban development and comes to the Asbury Park Circle where the route intersects County Route 16 ( Asbury Avenue ) , crosses into Ocean Township , and intersects the eastern terminus of Route 66 . The route becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway and passes by the Seaview Square Shopping Center as it continues north through commercial areas , intersecting many roads with jughandles and passing near <unk> County Park . The route becomes Neptune Boulevard at the Talmadge Avenue intersection . 
 Route 35 then enters Eatontown , where it passes by the Monmouth Mall and intersects Route 36 at the former Eatontown Circle , now an at @-@ grade intersection with ramps . After that intersection , the route becomes an undivided highway , turning into Main Street . Consequently , Route 35 passes through a few more roads and commercial areas before finally crossing County Route 547 ( Wyckoff Road ) , where it becomes Broad Street . Past this intersection , Route 35 intersects the northern terminus of Route 71 and County Route 537 , forming a concurrency with County Route 537 that lasts until the Tinton Avenue intersection adjacent to the former entrance to Fort Monmouth . Route 35 crosses into Shrewsbury and continues north through residential and commercial areas , passing by The Grove at Shrewsbury . It intersects County Route 520 ( Newman Springs Road ) , running concurrent with that route and immediately crossing into Red Bank . Upon entering Red Bank , County Route 520 , along with County Route 11 , head north on Broad Street and Route 35 heads northwest on two @-@ lane Maple Avenue , which turns north and passes by numerous homes . Route 35 splits from Maple Avenue and rejoins on four @-@ lane Riverside Avenue , where it heads northwest and then crosses the Navesink River into Middletown Township . 
 Past the Navesink River , the route runs along a four @-@ lane , divided highway with a jersey barrier , passing through commercial areas . It crosses under Normandy Road , which serves as a road and railroad link between the two sections of Naval Weapons Station Earle . Along the northbound lanes of Route 35 , just before the intersection of Kings Highway , stands the Evil Clown of Middletown , a large sign advertising a liquor store . A mixed @-@ use complex , the Middletown Town Center , is also planned to be built in this area . The route intersects County Route 516 ( Cherry Tree Farm Road ) , running concurrent with that route as it enters Holmdel Township . The concurrency with County Route 516 ends at the intersection with South Laurel Avenue , where that route heads to the north and County Route 52 heads to the south on South Laurel Avenue . Route 35 continues west past numerous businesses and runs through Hazlet before crossing into Keyport . In Keyport , the route comes to an interchange with the northern terminus of Route 36 that also features access to the Garden State Parkway . Past this interchange , the road continues northwest and intersects the northern terminus of County Route 3 , where it also features ramps to County Route 516 , which Route 35 passes under just to the north . Past this interchange , the road crosses the Matawan Creek into Aberdeen Township , where it heads northwest through Cliffwood Beach . 
 = = = Middlesex and Union Counties = = = 
 Route 35 crosses the Whale Creek into Old Bridge Township , Middlesex County , where it continues northwest through businesses and residences in Laurence Harbor and Cliffwood Beach , both sections of Old Bridge Township . It crosses the Cheesequake Creek on a drawbridge into Sayreville and turns to the west . The road then interchanges with Pine Avenue , which provides access to County Route 615 ( Bordentown Avenue ) . Past this interchange , the route turns north and crosses into South Amboy , where Route 35 comes to an interchange and forms a concurrency with U.S. Route 9 . The two routes head through commercial areas and woodland , interchanging with Raritan Street and Kearney Road , crossing back into Sayreville . U.S. Route 9 and Route 35 split at an interchange ( the former Victory Circle ) that features access to the southbound Garden State Parkway by way of Chevalier Avenue , with Route 35 continuing north on a four @-@ lane divided highway that passes through marshland and crosses the Raritan River on the Victory Bridge into Perth Amboy . In Perth Amboy , the route becomes four @-@ lane , undivided Convery Boulevard upon crossing County Route 656 ( Smith Street ) . 
 The route continues north through commercial and residential sections of Perth Amboy , crossing over a connector to Route 440 . It intersects the eastbound direction of Route 184 , the former alignment of Route 440 , before meeting Route 440 ( also an unsigned part of County Route 501 ) at an interchange . Route 35 intersects the westbound direction of Route 184 and heads north , crossing into Woodbridge Township , where it becomes Amboy Avenue . In Woodbridge Township , the route passes by William Warren County Park and crosses over the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) . Past the New Jersey Turnpike , the road heads into residential neighborhoods , crossing County Route 514 ( Main Street ) . Route 35 merges onto St. Georges Avenue and comes to a partial cloverleaf interchange with U.S. Route 1 / 9 . Past U.S. Route 1 / 9 , the road passes homes and businesses , crossing into Rahway , Union County just before crossing the Rahway River . Upon entering Rahway , Route 35 crosses under the Northeast Corridor rail line just before ending at Route 27 . Route 27 continues north on St. Georges Avenue past the terminus of Route 35 . 
 = = History = = 
 The present @-@ day alignment of Route 35 follows parts of many 19th @-@ century turnpikes , including the Keyport and Middletown Turnpike , which was chartered on March 5 , 1852 , the Middletown Turnpike , chartered in 1866 to run from Middletown Township to Red Bank , the Middletown and Keyport Turnpike , which was chartered on March 15 , 1859 to run from Middletown Township to Keyport , the Red Bank and Eatontown Turnpike , chartered on February 9 , 1865 along present @-@ day Broad Street , County Route 11 , and Route 35 , and the Shrewsbury Turnpike , which was chartered in 1857 to run from Red Bank to Eatontown . In 1916 , the current alignment of Route 35 was legislated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 between Point Pleasant and Brielle and from Eatontown to South Amboy . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 35 was designated to run from Lakewood to South Amboy , replacing pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 from Lakewood to Belmar and from Eatontown to South Amboy with the portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 between Belmar and Eatontown becoming Route 4N ( now Route 71 ) . At this time , U.S. Route 9 followed the portions of Route 35 that were formerly a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 4 . 
 By the 1940s , Route 35 was designated onto its current alignment between Brielle and Belmar with the former alignment becoming a southern extension of Route 4N . U.S. Route 9 was also moved off of Route 35 onto a newly completed alignment of Route 4 between Lakewood and South Amboy . In 1947 , Route 35 was extended north to end at Route 25 ( now U.S. Route 1 ) in Iselin , running concurrent with U.S. Route 9 . 
 In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the portion of Route 35 between Lakewood and Point Pleasant became Route 88 and Route 35 was designated to head south from Point Pleasant to Seaside Heights on what had been a part of Route 37 . This section of Route 35 follows the right @-@ of @-@ way of the former Pennsylvania Railroad between Seaside Park and Mantoloking , which was removed in 1949 . Also in the 1953 renumbering , the Route 35 designation was removed from the concurrency with U.S. Route 9 between South Amboy and Iselin and reassigned to the former alignment of Route 4 between South Amboy and Route 27 in Rahway . The western bypass of Seaside Heights was built by the 1960s , extending Route 35 south to the border with Seaside Park . 
 In the late 1950s , plans were made for a freeway along the Route 35 corridor between Seaside Heights and Long Branch to reduce congestion along the current route . This proposed freeway was built as Route 18 between Wall Township and Eatontown from 1965 to 1991 while the southern portion to Seaside Heights was never built . In the early 1970s , a Route 35 freeway was planned to run from Route 18 north to the planned Route 74 freeway in Matawan with an estimated cost of $ 53 million . This freeway was never built due to the cancellation of the Route 74 freeway in the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 Since the 1953 renumbering , the current alignment of Route 35 has seen many changes and improvements . The section of the route through downtown Point Pleasant Beach was turned into a one @-@ way pair by 1969 . Route 35 was extended south to the entrance of Island Beach State Park by the 1980s . Many traffic circles have been removed along Route 35 in recent years , including the Brielle Circle in 2001 and the Eatontown Circle , which were both converted into at @-@ grade intersections with traffic lights , and the Victory Circle , which was replaced with an interchange between 2003 and 2006 . Between 2002 and 2005 , the Victory Bridge over the Raritan River was reconstructed at a cost of $ 109 million . Between February 2006 and November 2008 , the cloverleaf interchange with U.S. Route 1 / 9 in Woodbridge Township , which was the first cloverleaf interchange in the United States built in 1929 when this portion of Route 35 was still a part of Route 4 , was replaced with a partial cloverleaf interchange , costing $ 34 million . 
 On February 1 , 2013 , Route 35 through Mantoloking was fully reopened after being closed since October 29 , 2012 after Hurricane Sandy hit the area . The night of the storm at the intersection where the Mantoloking Bridge and Route 35 meet , a new inlet was formed by the raging storm waters . This effectively cut off the island from the mainland . 
 Beginning in March 2013 ( after a 6 @-@ month delay due to Hurricane Sandy ) , a four @-@ year major construction project because on Route 35 between Raritan Blvd in Cliffwood Beach ( Old Bridge Township , New Jersey ) and Amboy Avenue in Aberdeen . The project includes several highway improvements designed to alleviate the flooding the highway is prone to due to its <unk> and being adjacent in several areas to tidal marshes and Whale Creek and Long Neck Creek , widening of four intersections ( Birchwood Drive , County Road , Cliffwood Ave and Amboy Ave ) , and lane alignments , and additions for pedestrian and bicyclist safety . Also planned are traffic signal upgrades to reduce congestion . The project is expected to be completed in 2015 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Architecture of Fremantle Prison = 
 The architecture of Fremantle Prison includes the six @-@ hectare ( 15 @-@ acre ) site of the former prison on The Terrace , Fremantle , in Western Australia . Limestone was quarried on @-@ site during construction , and the south @-@ western corner ( the South Knoll ) and eastern portion of the site are at a considerably higher ground level . The Fremantle Prison site includes the prison cell blocks , gatehouse , perimeter walls , cottages , tunnels , and related infrastructure . 
 The Main Cell Block is the longest and tallest cell range in Australia , and a dominating feature of the prison . New Division , constructed between 1904 and 1907 , continues the façade alignment of the main block . Service buildings were converted into the separate Women 's Prison . Fremantle Prison is surrounded by limestone perimeter walls , while a two storey limestone gatehouse , with a central clock , presents an imposing entrance . North and south of the gatehouse , on The Terrace , are several cottages and houses – three of which are built in Victorian style in contrast to the Georgian style of the others . 
 A network of tunnels exists under the prison , built to provide the prison , and later the town of Fremantle , with a supply of fresh water . Other elements of the site include the hospital building , prisoner workshops , open spaces , and a limestone ramp on the axis of the gatehouse , heading down towards the port area of Fremantle . Archaeological zones and sub @-@ surface remains of varying levels of significance are found throughout the area of the convict grant . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fremantle Prison dates from the early years of European settlement , when it was constructed as the centre of the British Imperial Convict Establishment in Western Australia . While the colony was established as a " free settlement " in 1829 , by the 1840s the early reluctance to accept Britain 's convicts was overcome . Cheap convict labour could overcome the significant shortage of manpower in the colony . However , the arrival of the first convict ship Scindian on 2 June 1850 was unexpected . While a sailing ship had been sent ahead to inform of the pending arrival of seventy @-@ five convicts , it had been blown off course . The Round House was full to capacity , almost overflowing , so the convicts had to be left on the ship . There was also no prepared accommodation for the warders , pensioner guards , Captain Edward Walcott Henderson , Comptroller General of Convicts , or his clerk , James Manning . Rents for accommodation in Fremantle quickly rose due to the sudden increase in demand , leaving Henderson paying more for his basic lodgings in Fremantle than for his house in London . Eventually Henderson leased two properties in Essex Street for £ 250 per year , at the site of the modern @-@ day Esplanade Hotel . He used his convicts to convert the buildings into a temporary prison . Meanwhile , Henderson was looking for a site to build a permanent convict establishment . Whilst he favoured Mount Eliza ( now known as Kings Park ) due to its height , which gave it pleasing vistas and supposedly healthier air , Governor Charles Fitzgerald rejected that proposal . Henderson ultimately settled on the current site on a hill , in a raised and dominant position overlooking the port city of Fremantle . 
 = = Site = = 
 = = = Description = = = 
 Fremantle Prison was built on a land grant of about 36 acres ( 15 ha ) from limestone quarried on @-@ site , and timber cut from Mount Eliza . The site exhibits considerable changes in ground level , natural and man @-@ made , as a result of its location and former use . The ground level is considerably higher in the south @-@ western corner of the site with what remains of the natural landform , formerly known as Church Hill , now referred to as the South Knoll . The eastern portion of the site is also considerably higher than the ground level established around the main cell block . It is a comparatively level terrace and is the highest part of the precinct . 
 Fremantle Prison comprises substantially intact convict era structures , including the limestone perimeter walls of exceptional heritage significance . Other structures , dating from the time the precinct was in use as a colonial and state prison , are also significant . The convict era complex includes the 1859 main cell block , chapel and wards , yards and refractory cells ; perimeter walls , gate house complex and prison officer residences on the Terrace ; service buildings and hospital ; south @-@ eastern workshops ; ramp access tramway ( Fairbairn Street ) and Henderson Street Warder 's Cottages . Other elements which contribute to the site 's overall heritage significance include the western workshops ( 1900 ) ; new division ( 1907 ) ; and conversion of service building to the female division and the addition of an eastern range ( 1889 – 1909 ) . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 A 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) tall boundary wall encloses the prison grounds , with a gatehouse in the centre of the western wall , facing The Terrace . Other roads bounding the site are Knutsford Street to the north , Hampton Road to the east , and Fothergill Street to the south . Cottages , which housed prison workers and officials , are located outside the wall either side of the gatehouse . Inside the walls , the parade ground is located east of the gatehouse . Beyond it is the Main Cell Block at the centre of the site , which contains two chapels . North of the main block is New Division , and west of that , in the north @-@ western corner , is the former Women 's Prison , previously the cookhouse , bakehouse and laundry . The hospital building stands in the north @-@ eastern corner , while the former workshops are located in the south @-@ eastern corner , as well as to the north of the gatehouse . A system of underground tunnels , constructed to provide fresh water from an aquifer , runs under the eastern edge of the site . 
 = = = Archaeology = = = 
 Archaeological zones and sub @-@ surface remains of varying levels of significance are found throughout the area of the convict grant . In particular , the sites of the three former cottages to the east of the perimeter wall in the Hampton Road reserve , the site of the former ' cage ' in the New Division courtyard and the features upon and under the knoll terraces . Other site features include those associated with the water supply system constructed in the 1890s : the brick @-@ vaulted underground reservoir , the associated pumping station , a complex series of rock cut shafts , drives , weirs and the one @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) underground tunnel network . Graffiti and a tablet records the progress of the excavators . 
 = = Walls and gatehouse = = 
 The prison is surrounded by limestone perimeter walls , which define the extent of the depot and its original topography to the south , east and north . The walls are of random rubble limestone and lime mortar and range in height from 1 @.@ 2 to 5 metres ( 3 ft 11 in to 16 ft 5 in ) . The additional four courses added in 1898 are of dark stone with a coping . Attached piers occur at approximately 6 @-@ metre ( 20 ft ) centres on the lee sides of the walls . There are a number of openings including both vehicular and pedestrian gates . The walls are of exceptional heritage significance being a vital part of the precinct defining its character . Sterile zones , inside the main perimeter walls and the walls encircling the female division and outside the prison wall , were standard prison practice for surveillance and contribute to the austere character of the prison . 
 The entry complex consists of a combined gate house and quarters , an entry court and military and civil guard houses with embrasures flanking the inner gate . The two storey limestone gatehouse , with a central clock , presents an imposing entry to the former prison . The gatehouse and associated entry complex was constructed between 1854 and 1855 using convict labour . It was designed by Royal Engineer Edmund Henderson , and constructed out of limestone . The gatehouse has two towers either side of a narrow gate , reminiscent of those found in 13th century English castles or walled cities . The gate was made from iron which had been scavenged from shipwrecks , while the clock at the top of the structure was imported from England . The clock was made in London in 1854 , installed two years later , and as of 2004 , was still sounding every hour . 
 The gatehouse also has a smaller , second , inner gate , engraved with the names of three significant figures : H. Wray RE , who designed the gate ; J. Manning , clerk of works , who supervised its fabrication ; and Joseph Nelson , the Royal Sappers soldier that wrought the iron . The complex was expanded and altered successively throughout the use of the entry complex for prison 's functions . The entry complex was extended north to the female division as a workshop range , the western workshops , leaving a sterile zone beside the perimeter wall . The gatehouse has remained a significant feature and landmark since the closure of the prison , as the main entrance , and housing a café and office areas . Restoration was carried out in 2005 , preserving the original stone facade and removing non @-@ original rendering . 
 = = Cell blocks = = 
 = = = Main Cell Block = = = 
 Based on the English Pentonville Prison design model of Joshua Jebb , the site 's key feature , the Main Cell Block , was designed by the Comptroller of Convicts Captain Henderson , and completed in 1859 . Designed to hold up to 1000 prisoners , it is 145 metres ( 476 ft ) long and four storeys high , the longest and tallest cell range in Australia . It was constructed by convicts in the 1850s , and there have been few changes since that time . The 1859 main cell block has an impressive facade and is built of limestone ashlar blocks quarried from the site . It is significant for the ways in which its scale , position in the precinct , simplicity , material and near pristine character ensures that it is the focal and dominating feature of the prison ; the evidence of its fabric , internal configuration and spaces reveals its functioning as a convict depot and subsequent prison and its atmosphere . It has come to symbolise the imperial convict era in colonial Western Australia . 
 The central , four @-@ storey high cell block is flanked on either end by large dormitory wards , called the Association Rooms . Here , as many as 80 men slept in hammocks , either as a reward for good behaviour or because they would soon receive their Ticket of Leave . In contrast , the cells were a confining space measuring just seven by four feet ( 2 @.@ 1 by 1 @.@ 2 m ) . While each cell initially had a basin connected to running water , the installation was before the advent of S @-@ bends ; the smells coming up the pipes lead to their removal by the 1860s . Following a Royal Commission , the cells were made larger by removing a dividing wall from between two cells . Electric lighting was installed in the 1920s , but there were never any toilets – buckets were for the duration of the prison 's operation . Since the prison 's closure , six cells have been restored to represent the varying living conditions at different times in the prison 's history . The main block also houses the gallows , solitary confinement cells , and two chapels . 
 The single storey 1855 refractory block is on the same axis as the main cell block to its east . It consists of twelve punishment cells and six dark cells with no light . The gallows chamber , built in 1888 , is between this and the main cell block and relates to the colonial use of the prison . The gallows operated via a rope tied around a beam , over a trap door , on the upper level . Opening the trap door would cause the condemned prisoner fall , and thus be hanged . 
 At the centre of the Main Cell Block is the Anglican Chapel , whose windows were the only ones without bars . It occupies a prominent position in the projecting wing in the centre of the facade . It retains its original painted and stencilled wall patterns beneath later paint layers and is the most intact early prison chapel in Australia . Its interior features include an early and substantial example of a laminated arch construction in the colonies and the first in WA , handsome <unk> boards and some original and elegant joinery . Behind the Anglican chapel altar , there is a painted representation of the Ten Commandments . The words to the sixth commandment use the unusual translation of " thou shalt do no murder " rather than " thou shalt not kill , " the more common interpretation in the Church of England . Given that the gallows were still in regular use , it was felt that " thou shalt not kill " would have been hypocritical . The Catholic Chapel was put into the upper northern Association Ward in 1861 . The floor has evidence of its former use for communal prisoner accommodation , in the form of <unk> for hammock rails and a convict painted mural which decorates its wall . 
 = = = New Division = = = 
 Fremantle Prison 's New Division was constructed between 1904 and 1907 , as a response to overcrowding . The division continues the façade alignment of the main block . The building , L shaped in plan , is three storeys high of regular coursed pale ashlar limestone blocks with rock @-@ face . Openings are set in brick and freestone and it has a handsome lantern range above the main atrium . The building is visually significant as it complements the main cell block and completes the northern zone of the prison . The interior configuration and cells are significant as an example of an attempt to introduce the separate system to Western Australia , whereby prisoners were completely isolated for the first three months of their sentence . The division 's exercise yard initially used a panopticon to facilitate this concept during the prisoners ' hour of exercise each day . The system was not successful , and considered a dated prisoner management strategy , leading its removal within five years . 
 The New Division was the first to have electricity , with underground wiring . During World War Two , the Australian Army appropriated the New Division , to keep prisoners separate from the main population , and for those condemned to death . In 1994 the building was retrofitted to cater for offices , small business premises , and meeting rooms . 
 = = = Women 's Prison = = = 
 The north @-@ western complex was originally a service area with a cookhouse , bakehouse and laundry , built in the 1850s . A place for women prisoners was needed following the closure of Perth Gaol and the transfer of prisoners to Fremantle . The buildings were converted to a prison , and a wall built around them , creating Western Australia 's first separate prison for women – a gaol within a gaol . Population and crime growth led to them being extended in the 1890s and 1910s . The single storey limestone building , also known as the female division , has a distinctive monitor roof and an upper storey addition to part of the eastern range in red brick . The construction of Bandyup Women 's Prison saw Fremantle 's Women 's Prison close in 1970 . The space was used for education and assessment until the main prison 's closure in 1991 , and has since been adapted for TAFE use as a visual arts facility . 
 = = Staff accommodation = = 
 A flat area , to the immediate west of the prison , is called The Terrace and was formed from rubble resulting from the levelling of the prison site . Adjoining the western perimeter wall , but outside the prison on the northern side of the terrace compound , is staff accommodation . Three adjoining residences were built in the 1890s as quarters for prison staff . 
 The cottages at 2 , 4 , and 6 The Terrace , at the northern end of the street , were built in a Victorian style , in contrast to the Georgian style of the other houses . Number 2 incorporates parts of an 1857 guard room and was converted in the 1890s to quarters , when Numbers 4 and 6 were built alongside as a duplex . Number 2 is a single storey house with random rubble limestone walls and corrugated iron roof separated from the perimeter wall by a rear yard . Numbers 4 and 6 are a pair of single duplex units with random rubble limestone walls , corrugated iron roofs and front verandahs , separated from the perimeter wall by a rear yard . 
 Four two storey residences , Numbers 8 , 10 , 16 and 18 The Terrace , were built during the 1850s for officer accommodation . Number 8 , also known as the Chaplain 's House , is a two storey house with rendered and painted limestone walls . The plan is roughly square with verandahs and balconies along the west and south sides . A single storey building connects the south @-@ east side of the house to the main prison wall . 
 Number 10 , also known as the Superintendent 's House , is a two storey house with rendered limestone walls and a corrugated iron roof behind parapet walls . It is connected to the gatehouse with limestone walled buildings . The plan is roughly square and there is a door from the house into the prison from the north @-@ east room of the ground floor . The house was initially built in 1853 for the Chaplain , but was taken over by the superintendent in 1878 and was later used by the prison administration . 
 Number 16 is a house is two storey building , roughly square in plan , with painted limestone walls and a corrugated sheet metal roof behind a parapet . It accommodated first the superintendent , later on the resident magistrate , and remained in @-@ use as housing for prison officers until the 1970s . Number 18 , also known as the Surgeon 's House , is a two storey structure with limestone walls . It is the southernmost house on The Terrace . Numbers 18 and 8 , the northernmost of the initial buildings , both featured two sitting rooms , three bedrooms , and two dressing rooms , as well as a kitchen , water closet and shed , but with mirrored layouts . Number 18 was expanded with additions built in the 1890s . A single storey limestone structure ( former stables ) is located to the south of Number 18 . 
 = = Other buildings = = 
 = = = Hospital = = = 
 The hospital , built between 1857 and 1859 , was a crucial component of Fremantle Prison . Public works during the convict era relied on convict labour , which could only be provided if the convicts were healthy . Located in the north @-@ eastern corner of the prison compound , the building is H @-@ shaped in plan , single storey with rendered and painted limestone walls . It features a wide verandah with timber posts . From 1886 to 1903 , medical services were relocated to the main cell block , with the former building used to keep invalids and female prisoners . The hospital was refurbished , and reopened in 1904 . It subsequently remained in continuous operation until the prison 's closure in 1991 . 
 Adjacent to the hospital building is the east reservoir . The brick vaulted reservoir and reticulation system , constructed in 1890 and about 1895 , appear as a low brick structure . The reservoir roof consists of with five rendered vaults each side of a central vault raised 600 millimetres ( 24 in ) above those each side . The centre of the eastern terrace contains the subsurface remains of the 1850s bathhouse and well . 
 = = = Workshops = = = 
 The prison 's workshops provided activities and training for the prisoners . They also reduced the cost of maintenance , repairs , and construction by providing an in @-@ house service . The original workshop was a blacksmith 's shop , one of the first buildings to be constructed on the prison site . Later known as the East Workshops , other workshops included carpenter 's , plumber 's and painter 's , a printing office , and from the 1850s , a metal shop . The West Workshops were built at the start of the twentieth century , providing more work for prisoners through a paint shop , mat maker , shoe maker , book binder and tailor shop . The five western workshops are a single storey squared limestone rubble building with openings dressed in brick , with an open saw @-@ tooth roof with southern skylights , concealed behind a parapet wall . In 1993 the western workshops were adapted for use as TAFE art workshops . 
 Buildings in the area south of the east workshops were used for a shower block , helmet workshop and associated sheds . The structures are recent and , with the exception of some terrace walling , are the last of a series that have been erected and dismantled since World War I. 
 = = Tunnels = = 
 At the south eastern corner of the eastern terrace is the former pumping station , associated tunnels and a set of 1850s workshops within an enclosing wall . Underneath parts of the eastern terrace , the adjacent Hampton Road , the pumping station and the workshops there are a complex series of shafts , drives and weirs cut from the rock during the 1890s and early twentieth century . The east workshops is a single storey limestone building on the western side with an enclosed area to the east . The entire workshops yard was roofed using a light steel truss on steel supports in 1960 . 
 A network of tunnels exists under the prison , including a one @-@ kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) connection to South Beach in South Fremantle . It was built by prisoners , but the purpose was not to enable escapes ; their labour was used to provide the prison , and later the town of Fremantle , with a supply of fresh water . Guards in a gun tower adjacent to the tunnel entrance prevented any attempted escapes . 
 In 1852 , during construction of the buildings , shafts were sunk into the limestone bedrock to provide the prison with fresh water from an aquifer . In 1874 , the Fremantle 's " Water House Well " , used to supply ships , suffered storm damage . This prompted a tank to be installed at the prison , behind the main cell block , to offer the town an alternative water supply . Prisoners worked a pump to fill the tank , which was connected to the jetties through gravity @-@ fed pipes . 
 Increasing demand led to the construction of a reservoir in 1876 , from which water was drawn , still pumped by prisoners . From 1888 to 1894 , additional wells were built , connected by a series of tunnels or horizontal drives 20 metres ( 66 ft ) under the north @-@ east of the prison . A steam pump was implemented , which drew fifteen thousand imperial gallons ( 68 @,@ 000 L ) per hour of water into the new East Reservoir . In 1896 , a town reservoir was constructed on Swanbourne Street , fed from the prison by a triple expansion steam @-@ driven pump which could take more than one million imperial gallons ( 4 @.@ 5 ML ) per day from the prison tunnels . Prisoners , relieved of manual pumping , were employed to supply wood and stoke boilers . 
 The Metropolitan Sewerage & Water Supply authority took over control of the pumping station from 1901 until 1910 , when both the prison and town were connected to Perth 's metropolitan water supply . The tunnels were closed in 1910 , but the groundwater continued to be used for the prison 's gardens . In 1989 , oil leaking from nearby tanks contaminated the water . The pollution was eventually cleared by 1996 through bioremediation . 
 Since the prison 's closure the water supply system including the tunnels , were the subject of heritage studies , including a 2004 inspection by the Western Australia Maritime Museum . The tunnels were re @-@ opened in mid @-@ 2005 , and within one year the main shaft had been refurbished , including " installation of audio @-@ visual equipment , railings and lighting as well as the removal of debris from the access shaft and tunnels , the creation of new steel platforms and ladders and the addition of extra limestone rocks in the tunnels to help lift users out of the water . " 
 = = Open spaces and related elements = = 
 The open spaces of the precinct are significant as they provide impressive settings for the structures . They are also important spaces in their own right retaining the stark open character of a penal institution required for surveillance . The extensive forecourt of the main cell block , with its scale and secure location within the perimeter walls , is particularly impressive . Paths are bitumen with grassed garden beds delineated by raised brick edging . South Knoll comprises the remains of the high , natural ground level which at least by 1896 had been terraced to form flat , grassed areas . The former playing fields and tennis courts are still in evidence . There is a <unk> vaulted reservoir located under the Knoll . The significant landscape presents an austere and formal quality within the perimeter walls . Generally the landscape is sparse and simple , comprising unobtrusive elements such as lawn , low plantings and pavement . Landscape elements outside the walls include the exotic almond and pine trees on the Terrace . 
 An inclined tramway , the ramp , was built from the front of the terrace , on the axis of the gatehouse , down towards the port area of Fremantle . The ramp , constructed between 1852 and 1853 , is of limestone rubble from the cut and fill activities required to create the prison site and the terrace . The ramp is an integral part of the original design of the prison complex and is of exceptional heritage significance . It is now cut at its western end by a modern road which severs the historic visual link with Fremantle . On each side of the alignment of the ramp , where it intersects with Henderson Street , are three terrace houses for the accommodation of prison warders . These were erected between 1851 and 1858 and mark the boundary of the Convict Establishment at this point . The limestone used for the early prison and its associated housing was quarried on the site . 
 Other surviving elements of the early convict establishment include Henderson 's house , " The Knowle " , the three Henderson Street cottages ( terrace housing ) at numbers 7 – 17 , 19 – 29 , and 31 – 41 Henderson Street , a range of terraces at 3 – 9 Holdsworth Street , paths , roads and ramps , garden sites , walls , sub surface works and the more distant routes to the Asylum , the Commissariat Store and wharf site . 
 = = = Attribution = = = 
 This article incorporates text from the source Australian Heritage Database – Fremantle Prison ( former ) , 1 The Terrace , Fremantle , WA , Australia , which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 3 @.@ 0 Australia licence ( CC @-@ BY 3 @.@ 0 AU ) . Required attribution : © Commonwealth of Australia 2013 . 
 = Legend of Mana = 
 Legend of Mana , originally released in Japan as Seiken Densetsu : Legend of Mana , is a 1999 action role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) for the PlayStation . It is the fourth game in the Mana series , following 1995 's Seiken Densetsu 3 . Set in a high fantasy universe , the game follows an unnamed hero as they restore the land of Fa 'Diel by creating the world around them and completing a number of interrelated quests in order to restore the Tree of Mana . 
 While incorporating action role @-@ playing elements from the prior games in the series , such as real @-@ time battles , Legend of Mana has its own distinct style of gameplay . Most notably , it gives the player the ability to shape the world 's structure through the Land Make system , generating regions and quests in a non @-@ linear gameplay system rather than a strong main plotline . Legend of Mana was directed by series creator Koichi Ishii , designed by Akihiko Matsui , and produced by veteran Square director and producer Akitoshi Kawazu . 
 The game had high sales , selling 400 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release and 700 @,@ 000 by the end of 1999 . Reviews were less positive than for prior games in the series . Critics gave considerable acclaim to its vibrant and colorful hand @-@ drawn graphics and soundtrack by Yoko Shimomura , but were critical of the lack of a clear main storyline , stating that it left the game feeling disjointed . The game was re @-@ released as a part of both the PlayStation 's and Square Enix 's best @-@ sellers lines , and re @-@ released on the PlayStation 3 PlayStation Network store as part of the PSone Classics series in 2011 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like previous games in the Mana series , Legend of Mana displays an angled top @-@ down perspective , in which the player characters navigate the terrain and fight off hostile creatures . The player controls the unnamed main character , and is assisted by up to two companions . One of these companions is an optional support character , which depends on what quest the player is performing , while another companion can be chosen by the player out of a roster of monsters , pets , and golems . Both companions are typically controlled by the game 's AI , though a second player can take control of the support character if present . The main character and companions each have their own set of numerical attributes including hit points and strength , which represent the amount of damage the player can take or cause . These stats grow whenever the player advances a level , after gaining enough experience points from battle with enemies . 
 Battles occur when the player character encounters an enemy while traversing the world . Combat takes place in real @-@ time , and in the location the player found the enemy rather than a separate battle screen . The main character can equip a variety of weapons , armors , and accessories . Weapons let the player perform abilities in combat . Referred to as Special Techs , these abilities are powerful attacks by the main characters and support characters that can be used when the special move meter is full . This meter fills as the player damages enemies . Each weapon , such as a sword or spear , has a set number of special attacks to learn , which can hit single or multiple targets and can be assigned to different buttons on the controller . 
 Legend of Mana , unlike most action role @-@ playing games , does not feature a set journey through a fixed world . Instead , it features a unique " Land Make " system where the player generates the structure of the game world by placing objects , named Artifacts , on empty square plots on a map . This map takes the form of a grid of spaces presented in an isometric viewpoint on a map screen . When an Artifact is placed in a space on the map , it creates a Land , and the player can enter that Land by selecting the position on the map . Adjacent Lands are not connected ; to move from one land to another the player must first return to the map screen . Different Lands are generated from different Artifacts , each containing a quest which upon completion usually gives the player another Artifact to place . Lands can also contain additional quests . Each Land is ranked from 0 ( no presence ) to 3 ( strong presence ) in its strength in each Spirit of Mana ; this in turn causes magic of that element to be stronger in that Land . The strength of the rankings is dependent on the Artifact , its position on the Map , and the rankings of adjacent Lands . Many locations have non @-@ player characters who give quests and information or sell equipment . Other areas feature enemies and bosses with which the player can battle . 
 In addition to the main game , after certain quests are completed Legend of Mana gives the player the option to delve into optional gameplay aspects centered around the hero or heroine 's house . The player can forge or improve weapons and armor using raw materials found throughout the game , or combine equipment with items to change their power or add special effects . They can grow different types of fruit in the orchard , raise pets to use as adventuring companions , create items , and build golems . Pets can also be raised with the Japan @-@ only PocketStation peripheral , and two players can battle each other in an arena . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Legend of Mana is set in the fictional world of Fa 'Diel . The Mana Tree , the giver of mana and life for the world , burned down almost entirely nine centuries prior to the events of the game . A war erupted between faeries , human , and others seeking the scarce power of mana that was left . When the war concluded , the burnt Mana Tree slept as it regrew and the many lands of the world were stored in ancient artifacts . A hero , controlled by the player , is self @-@ charged with restoring the world , and mana , to its former self . The Lands of Fa 'Diel are populated with a large number of different creatures , including humans , faeries , demons , the jewel @-@ hearted Jumi race , plant @-@ like <unk> and <unk> , miner bears called <unk> , and shadowy beings of the Underworld known as <unk> . Fa 'Diel is also the home of a host of anthropomorphic animals and objects , as well as monsters from other Mana titles such as Rabites , Chobin Hoods , and Goblins . The player controls the protagonist of the game , who is either a male or female silent protagonist . The character is unnamed and no information is given about their past ; their history and personality is meant to be determined by the player . 
 = = = Characters and story branches = = = 
 Rather than a single , overarching plot , the story of Legend of Mana is composed of a multitude of quests split into three main quest arcs , numerous other quests , and a final quest arc . Each main quest arc contains optional side @-@ quests in addition to the main quests . Whenever the player completes the required portions of one of the quest arcs they are allowed to begin the final arc and finish the game , even if the other arcs have not yet been started or completed . The three main quest arcs prior to the final arc are : the Jumi arc , the Larc and Sierra arc , and the Matilda and Irwin arc . 
 The first main arc is the story of the Jumi , a dying race of people who have external jewel hearts which are considered valuable . The Jumi have long been a persecuted people , and many magic characters in this game refer to them as " dirt " as a pejorative on their jewel cores . This branch focuses on <unk> and Pearl , who are among the few survivors of the Jumi . <unk> is a Jumi Knight , and the mission of his life is to protect the Jumi Guardian Pearl at any cost , even in the face of the jewel hunter , Sandra . The player assists them in helping the Jumi . 
 The second arc is the story of Larc and Sierra — brother and sister dragoons who serve different dragon masters and fight on opposite sides of the same war for power . Larc serves the dragon Drakonis , who wants to kill the other three dragons so that he can rule the world . Larc blackmails the game 's protagonist to help him in this quest . Sierra , a dragoon for <unk> the White Dragon , wants to stop Drakonis without hurting her brother Larc . In the end , Drakonis is defeated again and banished to the underworld , and Larc is killed . 
 The third arc is the complicated love story of four childhood friends : Matilda , Irwin , Daena and Escad . Irwin is a half @-@ demon who is angry that society prevents him from a relationship with the holy leader Matilda , and seeks to destroy the world in retribution . Escad seeks to destroy Irwin , and Daena tries to act as a mediator between all parties while keeping Matilda away from Irwin . The conflict eventually escalates into a war between humans and faeries . Depending on the choices of the player , either Daena or Escad will die , while the player helps bring an end to the conflict . 
 Regardless of which path ( s ) the hero decides to take , they begin the game 's final story , titled " Legend of Mana " . This arc concerns the re @-@ appearance of the Mana Tree . The player journeys to the Mana Tree and scales it , but upon reaching the top they find that the Mana Goddess has become corrupted and the tree is rotten . The player is forced to fight the Mana Goddess , and after winning a <unk> plants itself in the Mana Tree 's rotten trunk . Calling upon the other <unk> to join them , they restore the Mana Tree . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Legend of Mana was directed by Mana series creator Koichi Ishii , who had worked on the three previous games in the series . Many of the other developers were new to the series , including producer Akitoshi Kawazu , the director and producer of many games in Square 's SaGa series , and designer Akihiko Matsui , who had been the director for Chrono Trigger . The game 's character designs and illustrations were done by Shinichi Kameoka , who was also new to the series . Retro Gamer , in 2011 , stated that although Ishii kept the game tied to previous titles in the series by reusing gameplay elements , Kawazu had a heavy influence on the gameplay design of the game . 
 Legend of Mana was designed as a 2D game , despite the PlayStation 's 3D @-@ focus , as the console could not handle the full 3D world Ishii envisioned where one could interact with natural shaped objects . Kawazu initially let Ishii have a relaxed schedule and budget , as Ishii had a great number of ideas he wanted in the game , but when the project began to get out of control and out of time Kawazu tightened down the rest of the development schedule and convinced the Square executives to delay the game by two months — even though it had already been announced to the public — to allow it to be completed as Ishii envisioned . Kawazu has said that this experience taught him that his true skill in game development lay in working as a producer . 
 Legend of Mana was first announced by Square in March 1999 just before its debut at the Tokyo Game Show . The game was released in Japan in July 1999 with considerable hype , packaged with demos of Square 's future releases Vagrant Story , Chrono Cross , Front Mission 3 , and Threads of Fate . It was planned to be released in North America alongside the July and August 2000 releases of Chrono Cross and Threads of Fate , but was instead released early on June 6 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The original score for Legend of Mana was composed , arranged , and produced by Yoko Shimomura . Shimomura was a newcomer to the series ; the previous two Mana games were scored by Hiroki Kikuta , and the first by Kenji Ito . Shimomura said in 2002 that she considered the soundtrack to Legend of Mana to be the one that best expresses herself . She claims that she prefers " passionate music that comes from the heart " , and that she has to " feel the emotions of a piece in the extreme before I am able to write " the music by putting herself in the same mood as the piece is supposed to be in . Legend of Mana featured the first vocal track of any Mana game , " Song of Mana " , which also serves as the game 's opening theme . It was sung by Swedish vocalist Annika Ljungberg , who was chosen by Shimomura because she " wanted to stay away from working with someone popular that everyone already knows " . After hearing a sample of Ljungberg 's music , she flew to Sweden " straight away " to do an analog recording of the song . 
 The 1999 soundtrack album Seiken Densetsu / Legend of Mana Original Soundtrack collects 55 tracks of music from Legend of Mana on two discs . The music covers many styles including piano , hard rock , and electronic music . The soundtrack was published by DigiCube , and was reprinted by Square Enix in 2004 . The album reached # 65 on the Japanese Oricon music charts and stayed on the charts for two weeks . " Song of Mana " was later made available on the Square Vocal Collection album in 2001 . Four of the game 's tracks were released as part of Drammatica : The Very Best Works of Yoko Shimomura , an album of arrangements highlighting the composer 's work . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Upon the game 's Japanese release , several promotional items were made available from Square , including stuffed toy dolls of the <unk> enemy and mascot of the series , a necklace , and lighters . As a promotion for Square 's " Summer of Adventure " release schedule in 2000 , which the North American release of the game was a part of , those who preordered the game were given a free music CD with select tracks from the game . Legend of Mana was re @-@ released in Japan late in 2000 as part of the Square Millennium Collection at a budget price along with a special music box and two character figurines . A companion book titled Seiken Densetsu : Legend of Mana Ultimania including artwork and interviews was released as part of Square 's Ultimania series . It was published by DigiCube in 1999 and later reprinted by Square Enix in 2004 after the subsidiary 's closing . An artbook , Legend of Mana : Making of Mana , was published in 2000 by ASCII . A five @-@ volume manga series , created by Shiro Amano , was published between 2000 and 2002 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In Japan , Legend of Mana was a bestseller at the time of release , and sold over 400 @,@ 000 units in its first week alone as the highest @-@ selling release that week in Japan . By the end of the year , it had sold over 700 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . Legend of Mana was also the top selling PlayStation game during the week of its release in North America . 
 Legend of Mana received mixed reviews from critics . The game 's presentation was almost universally praised , especially its use of vibrant and colorful hand @-@ drawn graphics . David Smith of IGN claimed that the graphics were one of the game 's best points , and RPGamer 's Andrew P. <unk> noted that the visuals " may be the most impressive two @-@ dimensional graphics ever to grace an RPG " . Andrew Pfister of Electronic Gaming Monthly praised them even more , calling them " the most impressive 2D artwork ever seen on a console " . Damian Thomas 's RPGFan review likened the graphics to Disney animation for having " a very storybook , cutesy cartoony feel to them " , while Andrew Vestal of GameSpot said that the graphics were some of the most lush and ornate 2D graphics ever made . The game won an award for best graphics at the 4th Japan Game Awards from the Computer Entertainment Supplier 's Association . The music in Legend of Mana was also a high point in many reviews ; the reviewers for Electronic Gaming Monthly called it " fantastic " and " wonderful " . Smith of IGN 's review stated that the soundtrack is " as good as any you 'll hear today " with a good mix of intensity , suspense , and subtle nuance , and Vestal of GameSpot termed it " excellently orchestrated " and a perfect fit for the game in each environment . 
 Much of the game 's criticism stemmed from its substitution of mostly unrelated quests over a main storyline . GamePro found that the " focus of Legend of Mana is obscured by the over @-@ abundance of subplots " . Similarly , Game Revolution 's Johnny Liu commented that the game lacked depth and felt like a collection of short quests rather than a single game , while Vestal of GameSpot noted that the game 's use of <unk> will likely disappoint those seeking an action @-@ RPG classic , and said that , although fun , the gameplay had a " schizophrenic and disjointed nature " . Next Generation agreed , saying that the Land Make system was an " innovative feature " but that it left the game disjointed without a solid plot to keep everything together . The Japanese Weekly Famitsu reviewers felt that the system was ambitious , but left the game feeling disconnected , and that the divided plotlines kept the beginning of the game from having the charm of the end . 
 Gary Steinman of Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine said that the lack of a plotline gave the player no incentive to keep playing through what he felt was a poor combat system . Both of those criticisms were repeated by Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Sam Kennedy in his review . RPGamer 's <unk> felt that the smaller plots , while sometimes simplistic and not focused on the player , were enjoyable experiences . IGN 's Smith concluded that while he enjoyed the game , he felt that it was not a complete game like Secret of Mana , but instead a collection of fun experiences . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In November 2000 , Legend of Mana was ranked number 48 on Weekly Famitsu 's list of top 100 PlayStation games of all time . The game was re @-@ released on February 21 , 2002 as part of the PSone Books best @-@ sellers series in Japan , in 2006 as part of Square Enix 's Ultimate Hits collection , and re @-@ released on the PlayStation 3 PlayStation Network store as part of the PSone Classics series on March 22 , 2011 . 
 = How the García Girls Lost Their Accents = 
 How the García Girls Lost Their Accents is a 1991 novel written by Dominican @-@ American poet , novelist , and essayist Julia Alvarez . Told in reverse chronological order and narrated from shifting perspectives , the text possesses distinct qualities of a bildungsroman novel . Spanning more than thirty years in the lives of four sisters , the story begins with their adult lives in the United States and ends with their childhood in the Dominican Republic , from which their family was forced to flee due to the father ’ s opposition to Rafael Leónidas Trujillo 's dictatorship . 
 The novel 's major themes include acculturation and coming of age . It deals with the myriad hardships of immigration , painting a vivid picture of the struggle to assimilate , the sense of displacement , and the confusion of identity suffered by the García family , as they are uprooted from familiarity and forced to begin a new life in New York City . The text consists of fifteen interconnected short stories , each of which focuses on one of the four daughters , and in a few instances , the García family as a whole . Although it is told from alternating perspectives there is particular focus throughout the text on the character of Yolanda , who is said to be both the protagonist and the author 's alter ego . 
 = = Background and historical context = = 
 The years between 1956 and 1970 were a period of oppression and instability in the Dominican Republic as the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo came to an end with his assassination in 1961 , only to be followed by military rule , revolution , intervention by the United States , and further dictatorship . Central control over the military , the economy , and the people meant that only a select few were allowed to leave the island . Critic William Luis describes the situation of immigrants from the Dominican Republic to the United States during the revolution : " The displacement of Caribbean people from their islands to the United States , for political or economical reasons , has produced a tension between the culture of the country of origin and that of the adopted homeland , one representing the past and the other future of the immigrant " . 
 The García family is an example of this phenomenon . In How the García Girls Lost Their Accents , Alvarez succeeds in altering the events of her own life to create fiction . The family is displaced to the United States after living an established , upper @-@ class life in the Dominican Republic , and is forced to face the challenges which come along with being an immigrant family in a foreign land . Julia Alvarez herself was not born in the Dominican Republic , but in the United States . After her parents ' failed attempt at a life in America , she returned to the Dominican Republic at the age of three months as her parents preferred the dictatorship of Trujillo to the US . Clearly in the novel , this is not the case , however throughout , the reader witnesses the Garcia family assimilate into American society . Although their Hispanic roots are reflected in their personalities , it is evident that the stories which focus on the four daughters depict many problems that normal North American girls do . 
 Even though How the García Girls Lost Their Accents was written in the United States , there are significant historical ties between the novel and the author ’ s country of origin . Alvarez wrote an essay entitled " An American Childhood in the Dominican Republic " , in which she reveals some information about her own life . This is evidence that it may have served as the basis for the novel . For example , she mentions that it was Mr. Victor , of the US embassy and a member of the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) , who persuaded Carlos García to join the resistance against Trujillo , and later helped him in leaving the country , and obtaining a job with an international cardiovascular team . This is a parallel to the novel in which Carlos Garcia obtains work as a doctor in New York . Julia Alvarez emigrated to the United States at the age of 10 with her parents and three sisters as political refugees from the Dominican Republic . The novel is a variation of her real @-@ life experiences , which have perhaps been slightly altered . The majority of her literature is constructed from multiple viewpoints and a strongly concealed political undercurrent is present in her literature . In this case , that undercurrent is her family fleeing the Trujillo revolution , something she did as a child . The novel encompasses the impact living under a regime can have on a family , and the way it shaped the four girls ' upbringing . It is also an attempt to understand memory , the past , and a time before the sisters lost their innocence and accents . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel is written episodically and in reverse @-@ chronological order . It consists of fifteen chapters facts three parts : Part I ( 1989 – 1972 ) , Part II ( 1970 – 1960 ) , and Part III ( 1960 – 1956 ) . Part I is centered on the adult lives of the García sisters ; Part II describes their immigration to the United States and their adolescence , and Part III <unk> early childhood on the island , in the Dominican Republic . 
 The <unk> are one of the Dominican Republic 's prominent and wealthy families , tracing their roots back to the Conquistadores . Carlos García , a physician and the head of the family , is the youngest of 35 children his father sired during his lifetime , both in and out of wedlock . Laura , Carlos 's wife , also comes from an important family : her father is a factory owner and a diplomat with the United Nations . Many members of the extended family live as neighbours in large houses on an expansive compound with numerous servants . In the early 1950s the García girls are born . Carla , Sandra , Yolanda and Sofía enjoy a happy , protected childhood and are brought up by their parents , aunts and uncles to preserve the family traditions . Their countless cousins serve them as playmates . 
 = = = Part I = = = 
 The first part of the novel establishes Yolanda at the centre of the story as she narrates the opening and closing chapter : " <unk> " and " The Rudy Elmenhurst Story " , respectively . In third person , Yolanda 's return to Dominican Republic as an adult is described in the context of a family birthday party and a road trip . Their unity as sisters as " The Four Girls " is introduced in the third chapter , which is a communally narrated . They celebrate Carlos , the patriarch 's , birthday , and Sofía introduces her baby son to his grandfather , helping to repair the father and daughter 's relationship somewhat . During Sofía 's chapter , " The Kiss " , it is revealed that Carlos discovered a packet of love letters addressed to his daughter , enraging him and leading to a conflict which ends in Sofía running away to her German lover . A major focus in this section is the romantic relationships between the four sisters and their partners . Sofía is married to a " world @-@ class chemist " ; Carla and Sandra are in long @-@ term relationships ; and Yolanda is in love with her psychiatrist and has previously broken up with a man named John . Part I closes with " The Rudy Elmenhurst Story " , narrated by Yolanda . This describes Yolanda 's first real relationship , and the tension between her upbringing and American relationships : " I would never find someone who would understand my particular mix of Catholicism and agnosticism , Hispanic and American styles . " 
 = = = Part II = = = 
 Part II details the family 's collective experience of living in the United States as immigrants . The girls first attend a Catholic school in New York and later boarding school , and assimilate fairly well to their new environments , although meeting with a few set @-@ backs along the way . Their time in the US begins with the opening chapter , " A Regular Revolution " , and delivers the girls ' ( collective ) opinion that " We didn 't feel we had the best the United States had to offer . We had only second @-@ hand stuff , rental houses in one redneck Catholic neighborhood after another " . While during their first few months in New York they regularly pray to God that they will soon be able to return to their homeland , they quickly start appreciating the advantages of living in a " free country " so that even being sent back to the Dominican Republic for the summer becomes a form of punishment for them . 
 A major turning point in the novel comes with Laura 's discovery of a bag of Sofía 's marijuana , and her subsequent punishment of being removed from her boarding school and forced to spend a year in the Dominican Republic with family . This event is representative of the girls ' transformation into Americans and away from the Dominican culture and Laura and Carlos ' conflicted relationship with the assimilation . Laura " still did lip service to the old ways " , and Carlos makes a point of educating the accents out of the girls , thus showing the tension between the cultures . 
 Carla becomes the victim of racism in the third chapter , " Trespass " , with school boys telling her to " Go back to where you came from , you dirty <unk> ! " Later she is subjected to a child molester who masturbates in his car while pulling up at the curb and talking <unk> to her through the open window . The second part of the novel finishes with the chapter " Floor Show " , in which the García family goes to a Spanish restaurant and Sandra witnesses the host 's wife <unk> attempting to kiss her father on the way to the bathroom . Overall , Part II presents the unexpected aspects of living in the United States and becoming Americans , and explores the tensions that develop with the immigrant experience . 
 = = = Part III = = = 
 The five chapters in Part III , the concluding section , focus on the García family 's early years in the Dominican Republic , and are the most political of the novel . 
 The first chapter , " The Blood of the Conquistadores " , opens with an account of two of Trujillo 's agents coming to the family home looking for Carlos . His revolutionary politics and work against the <unk> made the family a target , and this chapter explicitly details the danger of their situation . The issues in past chapters appear superficial in comparison to the life @-@ or @-@ death nature of the conflicts that the <unk> face earlier in their lives . The family escapes persecution , but is forced to emigrate immediately , establishing their motive for relocating to New York . 
 The second chapter , " The Human Body " , describes what happens to Mundin , Yolanda and Sofia in the dirty shed near the house . Yolanda plays with her boy cousin , Mundin , and in exchange for a Human Body doll and a modeling clay , shows him her genitals . Sofia also follows suit . ' " Go on , " Mundin ordered impatiently . Fifi had caught on and lowered her pants and panties to her ankles . I gave my sister a defiant look as I lifted up my cowboy skirt , tucked it under my chin , and yanked my panties down ( Alvarez , 235 ) .' 
 As Part III progresses , the narrative switches to describing their upper @-@ class life on the island , and filling details of the lifestyle the family was born into . The story of the voodoo practicing Haitian family maid is elucidated : she escaped Trujillo 's massacre of Haitians and came to work for Laura , although much of her family was not so lucky . 
 In the last three chapters Carla , Yolanda and Sandra narrate stories from their childhood surrounded by the extended family , and the girls ' relationship with the United States begins . " An American Surprise " tells of their early ideas of New York City , " where it was winter and the snow fell from heaven to earth like the Bible 's little pieces of manna bread . " The reader realizes that the innocence of childhood and idealized vision of their soon @-@ to @-@ be adopted country , given the reverse @-@ chronological narration of How the García Girls Lost Their Accents , are left behind with the García 's home in the Dominican Republic . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Sofia = = = 
 Sofia , " Fifi " , is the youngest of the four girls , and is the maverick out of her sisters . She gains the attention of the reader multiple times throughout the book , as her stories are different in nature from those of the other García girls . In the book Alvarez quotes " Sofia was the one without the degrees . She had always gone her own way " . Out of her sisters , she was the plain one but had consistent boyfriends and was always being asked advice about men from the other three girls . In the first chapter , " The Kiss " , readers are told the story of her rebellious marriage to a " jolly and good natured " German man in Colombia during a rebellious vacation with her current boyfriend . After her marriage to him , her relationship with her father deteriorates significantly until her son is born . The family reunites to celebrate her father 's birthday and son ’ s christening , although Sofia still feels the same antagonism she felt towards him beforehand . 
 = = = Sandra = = = 
 Sandi is the second daughter in the novel , the pretty one who could " pass as an American , with soft blue eyes and fair skin " . We see the loving and caring part of her personality emerge in " Floor Show " where at a very young age she decides that if her family got into a really bad financial situation , she would attempt to get adopted by a rich family , get an allowance " like other American girls got " which she would then pass onto her family . The spot @-@ light falls on her again when she goes away to a graduate program and her parents receive a letter from the dean saying Sandra has been hospitalized after an extreme diet , revealing that she is anorexic . She dreams of being an artist . She broke her arm . 
 = = = Yolanda = = = 
 Yolanda is the third oldest and most imaginative of the four girls . She plays the most important role in the novel as Alvarez 's alter ego . She is a schoolteacher , a poet and a writer . Her nicknames , which reflect and represent the different aspects of her personality , consist of " Joe " , " <unk> " , " Yoyo " and simply " Yo " , which is also the title of the sequel to How the García Girls Lost Their Accents . Each of these nicknames are the product of one of Yolanda 's multiple personalities . There is important significance in her character as " Yo " , Spanish first person pronoun , the " I " of the narrator . The nickname " Yoyo " is reminiscent of the toy that goes up and down , back and forth , similar to Yolanda ’ s bouncing from culture to culture , from one extreme to the other . The last , " Joe " represents the American version of Yolanda . Her ultimate return to the Island " represents her desire to displace herself from the North American Joe to the Yolanda of her family and youth . " These nicknames " act to properly define and name the many diverse facets of her complex personality " . Her character is that whose voice and words are most frequently heard throughout the novel ; she is the most developed character and her identity is the most explored of the four girls . 
 = = = Carla = = = 
 Carla is the eldest of the four daughters . As is common for the oldest sibling , she is somewhat seen as the mediator between the four sisters in the novel . " As the therapist in the family Carla likes to be the one who understands everything " and " has a tendency to lace all her compliments with calls to self @-@ improvement " . However to her sisters , this creates a somewhat dominating character at times reminiscent of their mother . Her criticism goes farther when she writes an autobiographical paper calling her mother mildly anal @-@ retentive . In Carla ’ s first and perhaps most prominent story in the novel , " Trespass " , as she is walking home from school in New York , a man exposes himself to her and attempts to lure her into his car . Alvarez uses Carla 's character to display the language difficulties faced with only having " classroom English " , and how communication barriers affect immigrants . 
 = = Style and structure = = 
 Alvarez defies the Aristotelian notion of a well @-@ knit plot , as the story is told in reverse chronological order through a series of fifteen chapters , with no linear , unifying storyline . In Julia Alvarez : A critical companion , Scholar Silvio Sirias argues that " a well @-@ constructed plot has an underlying structure that promises the reader that the author is in control , and that any event she is telling will eventually make sense " . Sirias then goes on to explain how Alvarez 's initial exposure of the girls to the reader in their somewhat adjusted , adult states enables her to first evoke certain assumptions in the reader and subsequently shatter these assumptions with the disclosure of the García family 's troubled past . Scholar Julie Barak argues that the reverse chronological order Alvarez employs is actually a unique stylistic technique which adds " to the reader 's uncertainty and instability , [ allowing for the recreation ] of the Garcia girls ' own ambiguities " . 
 Scholar William Luis observes a strong resemblance between the structure of Julia Alvarez ’ s How the García Girls Lost Their Accents and Alejo Carpentier 's Viaje a la <unk> as both employ the tactic of backwards narration and consequently lay claim to two beginnings and two endings . Alvarez has also been said to follow the stylistic traditions established by novels such as Pedro Juan <unk> 's The Son of Two Nations : The Private Life of a Columbia Student ( 1931 ) , Marcio Veloz <unk> 's El <unk> ( 1962 ) , Humberto Cintrón 's Frankie Cristo ( 1972 ) , and Richard Ruiz 's The Hungry American ( 1978 ) . Despite the overtly North American stylistic qualities the book appears to boast at first glance , each of the aforementioned authors are of Hispanic descent . 
 Julie Barak emphasizes the significance of " one other stylistic idiosyncrasy of the work that adds to the sophistication of [ Alvarez 's ] artistry " as there is a marked transition from third to first person narration for each girl in the last section of the novel . Luis describes this shift as a pivotal moment after which the events assume a chronological order and time accelerates , illuminating life in such a manner that it suddenly makes sense . The manner in which Alvarez alters the narrative voice is a stylistic expression of the extent to which each one of the girls " wants to be in control of her own version of her history ... These first person narratives in the last section become , in effect , a defense offered by each girl in her own words , an explanation of who they have become in the present , of why they ' turned out ' the way they have . " The transition of narrative voice " changes the dynamic of the reader @-@ character @-@ author triad " and allows for the reader , who has been kept at a distance by the third person narrator , to relive " the memory with the character , closely connected to her , developing a strong empathy with a unified character " . 
 Jacqueline Stefanko rationalizes Alvarez ’ s decision to alternate amongst the varying voices of all four García girls , wither her assertion that " the amnesia produced by the diasporic cultures of Latinas gets negotiated within the text through polyphony " . After significant observation , Stefanko has concluded that " as hybrid selves who cross and recross borders of language and culture , these Latina writers create hybrid texts in order to ' survive in diaspora , ' to use Donna <unk> 's term , seeking to heal the fractures and ruptures resulting from exile and dispersal " . Through her creation of How the García Girls Lost Their Accents Alvarez has intentionally fictionalized her own life story in a <unk> manner which extends beyond the boundaries of traditional style and genre , thus setting herself apart from the average author both stylistically and structurally . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 = = = Fragmentation of self = = = 
 Perhaps one of the most prominent themes in How the García Girls Lost Their Accents is that of the fragmented concept of the self . The fragmentation of one 's personal identity is a serious issue suffered by all four García girls throughout the course of the novel . Their immigration has left them as multiple beings , torn between their Dominican and American identities . As a college student , Yolanda encounters a boy named Rudy Elmenhurst , who is relentless in his attempts to pressure her into bed with him . When he can bear frustration no longer , Rudy lashes out and ends their relationship , leaving Yolanda devastated and hoping for his return . The inner turmoil evoked in Yolanda by this traumatic episode is evident through her realization of " what a cold lonely life awaited [ her ] in this country . [ Yolanda ] would never find someone who would understand [ her ] peculiar mix of Catholicism and agnosticism , Hispanic and American styles " . Julie Barak , of Mesa State College , has described this passage as a poignant and elegant reprisal of the recurrent sense of being divided selves and speaking divided languages found throughout the majority of the text . 
 The Flamenco dance in the " Floor Show " chapter evokes similar feelings of desolation in Sandra , as Mrs. Fanning 's drunken interruption of the distinctly Hispanic dance performance makes " a parody of it , a second @-@ rate combination of cultures that Sandi cannot find fulfilling . She is searching for a unified self , something noble , true , beautiful . Just as she gets close to it , however , it is ruined , dissolving into a gauche pastiche too similar to her own divided life in the States " . 
 Latin American literature scholar , Jacqueline Stefanko , along with several of her peers , has made pointed mention of the significant implications Yolanda ’ s multiple nicknames hold for her fragile and fragmented sense of self . Stefanko observes that " as Yolanda 's names proliferate on the page , we begin to see the multiplicity of her identity [ and ] realize the struggle Yolanda must engage in to not be fragmented in a society that <unk> her " . Scholar William Luis reinforces the notion that Yolanda ’ s shattered identity stems largely from the " multiple names used [ to refer to her ] . She is Yolanda , Yoyo , <unk> , Yo and , last but not least the English Joe . And above all , she is ' Yo , ' the Spanish first person pronoun , the ' I ' of the narrator . " 
 Julie Barak finds the wording of Yolanda ’ s note to her husband , John , explaining why she must leave him , quite significant with reference to her divided self @-@ concept . Yolanda began " I 'm going home to my folks till my head @-@ slash @-@ heart clears . She revised the note . I 'm needing some space , some time , until my head @-@ slash @-@ heart @-@ slash @-@ <unk> No , no , no she didn 't want to divide herself any @-@ more , three persons in one Yo . " 
 = = = Quest for clarification of identity = = = 
 The search for a clear and distinct personal identity is thematically quite closely related to that of the fragmented self . The quest undertaken by the García sisters for the clarification of their confused identities , however , is an attempt to achieve a solution to the problem posed by the fragmented self , and thus warrants separate categorization . Scholar William Luis reminds readers of Alvarez that " Yolanda 's search for her Dominican identity must be understood within the context of the 1960s in the United States " . As they begin to grow , the girls resent their parents who appear oblivious to their need to " fit in America among Americans ; they needed help figuring out who they were , why the Irish kids whose grandparents had been <unk> were calling them <unk> " . 
 Luis uses the term " onomastic displacement " with reference to the multiple nicknames that fragment Yolanda 's concept of a whole and unified self . This continuous onomastic displacement incites in Yolanda the desire to question her divided identity , to seek unity , clarity and a coherent understanding of her circumstances . Yolanda achieves this clarity through the act of writing and even as a young girl she revels in the completion of her speech for the Teacher 's Day address because " she finally sound [ s ] like herself in English ! " Unlike her sister Sandi , " whose artistic predilections were crushed as a child , Yolanda faces and works through her identity problems in her writing " . Barak views Yolanda 's writing as a process that can be used to reunite the fragments of her identity ; as an aid in the acceptance of " her own ' hybrid ' nature ... bringing both her worlds and all her selves into balance " . It is thus only through writing , the expression of Yolanda 's most intricately personal thoughts and revelations , that the protagonist can retain the hope of restoring her unified personal identity . 
 = = = Assimilation = = = 
 Assimilation is a particularly difficult process for Hispanic Americans because they have " old countries that are neither old nor remote . Even those born in North America travel to their parents ' homeland , and constantly face a flow of friends and relatives from ' home ' who keep the culture current . This constant cross @-@ fertilization makes assimilation a more complicated process for them than for other minority groups " . Julie Barak confirms Gonzalez Echevarria ’ s assertions regarding Latin American immigration and continues on to demonstrate how the privileged , wealthy existence led by the García girls in the Dominican Republic serves to further complicate their process of assimilation . The girls are vastly unaware of their good fortune until they are faced with the economic hardships of immigration in the United States . 
 How the García Girls Lost Their Accents confirms the suspicion widely expressed in circles of Latin American literature that North Americans choose not to differentiate between political and economic exile . Alvarez pointedly demonstrates the North American tendency to undervalue cultural diversity by highlighting instances of American ignorance toward distinctions between different Hispanic @-@ Caribbean groups . The García girls are quite conflicted upon their arrival in the United States as they find that distinct cultural groups are lumped together under one broad " immigrant " category and newcomers are encouraged to assimilate silently to the American norm . Yolanda ’ s conflict with her father regarding the potentially controversial speech she has prepared for the Teacher ’ s Day Address provides a classic example of the manner in which the García girls are pressured to conform to the norm . Yolanda feels as though she has sacrificed her principles and sold out to the hyper @-@ sensitive authorities when her father forces her to discard her empowering , rebellious achievement of artistic self @-@ expression for " two brief pages of stale compliments and the polite commonplaces on teachers . A speech wrought by necessity and without much invention " . Julie Barak affirms that " although this incident is in many ways a defeat for both Yolanda and her mother , it does teach them the lesson of conformity that is so important to living peacefully in America . Yolanda learns to fit in , to do the expected " . The girls go on to attend the best schools , lose their Spanish accents and acquire the same psychological disorders as their upper @-@ class American counterparts . Sandra battles anorexia , Carla and Yolanda both have failed marriages , Yolanda and Sandra are both institutionalized for psychiatric issues at one time or another , and Sofía is impregnated out of wedlock . 
 = = = Fear = = = 
 How the García Girls Lost Their Accents is rife with the constant presence of fear which manifests itself in a seemingly endless variety of outlets . Alvarez depicts quite vividly the fear evoked in the girls ' mother , Laura , near the chronological beginning of the book , as she " sees the black <unk> [ the trademark of Dominican dictator Trujillo ’ s henchmen ] , and her heart plummets right down to her toes " . Even after the García family has spent several years in the United States , safe from the threat of Trujillo 's retribution , a relentless paranoia continues to plague Carlos , their father , " who still lives in fear of the SIM and who is afraid to speak of ' revolt ' out loud " . This initial fear of Carlos ' punishment for his role in the attempted assassination of Trujillo is what originally prompted the García family ’ s flight from the island and spawned the myriad other fears that would later plague their lives . The conflicted life the daughters would come to lead in the sexually liberated United States would be haunted by the fear of pregnancy and eternal damnation should they allow themselves to be seduced . 
 The Cuban Missile Crisis also becomes a significant source of fear for the girls . In a very brief chapter entitled " Snow " , Alvarez reveals the impact of this widespread cultural paranoia through the character of Yolanda , who mistakes her first experience of snowfall for " the beginning of a much anticipated nuclear attack " , causing a panicked outbreak of general hysteria in her classroom . 
 As they continue to grow and mature , the girls have many disappointing encounters which leave them fearful of the loneliness that must awaits them in this foreign country where they struggle hopelessly to fit in and be understood . Even as a grown woman , returning to her Dominican roots , Yolanda finds she can never truly escape the fear that has hovered over her for as long as she can remember . This is evident in the very first chapter , " <unk> " , as Alvarez reveals the panic evoked in the adult Yolanda at the sudden realization that she is stranded in a guava field in the Dominican Republic , where women do not go about <unk> at night . Alvarez evokes Yolanda 's fear as she reports that " the rustling leaves of the guava trees echo the warnings of her old aunts : you will get lost , you will get kidnapped , you will get raped , you will get killed " . 
 As scholar Julie Barak has put it , " the vocabulary of fear that accompanies them is not only a part of their Spanish , but also of their English vocabulary " and the García family can therefore never hold legitimate hopes of escaping the fear . 
 = = = Memory = = = 
 William Luis argues that How the García Girls Lost Their Accents " is an attempt to understand memory , the past and a time before the sisters lost their innocence and accents " . Memory plays a significant role in the text , as a means by which the girls can return to the past of their childhood in the attempt to make sense of their present @-@ day realities . The youngest child , Sofía carries with her only a single memory of her brief childhood on the island , in which the García 's Haitian maid , Chucha , says a voodoo goodbye to the girls before they leave for the United States . Sofía feels segregated and deprived " because she has only this one memory to help her reconstruct her bicultural , bilingual self . Though this lack of memory makes her the least divided of her sisters in many ways ... the most disturbed , the most rebellious against her circumstances . " Ironically enough , Chucha ’ s voodoo prediction itself is largely concerned with the concept of memory , as she insists that after leaving the island the girls " will be haunted by what they do and don 't remember . But they have spirit in them . They will invent what they need to survive " . Julie Barak confirms this notion of memory as both a positive and negative force in the García girls ’ constant struggle to unearth their true identities . 
 = = Literary significance and reception = = 
 When How the García Girls Lost Their Accents was published in 1991 , the book " made a resounding splash on the literary scene " according to Jonathan Bing in the 1996 Publishers Weekly review of the novel . Although it was her first novel , Alvarez gained significant attention for the book , including a part in the New York Public Library 's 1991 exhibit " The Hand of the Poet from John Donne to Julia Alvarez " . The Women 's Review of Books also lauds the author , stating that " With this first novel , Julia Alvarez joins the rank of other Latina writers such as <unk> Mohr and Helena María <unk> " . 
 The novel was generally critically acclaimed , with Cecilia Rodríguez <unk> of The Women 's Review of Books writing that " How the García Girls Lost Their Accents is a noteworthy book , demanding our attention . " The Publishers Weekly article notes that " the novel provided a keen look at the island social structure they [ the García family ] wistfully remember and the political turmoil they escaped " . 
 Since 1991 , the book has become widely read and referenced ; a well @-@ known part of the canon of Latino literature . Julia Alvarez was awarded the status of Doctor Honoris Causa , <unk> , by <unk> Universidad Católica Madre y Maestra , Santiago , Dominican Republic on January 24 , 2006 for How the García Girls Lost Their Accents . 
 In 1999 , Library Journal reported that a " select cadre of librarians representing New York City 's three public library systems have released their hand @-@ picked list of ' 21 new classics for the 21st century ' " and the novel was included on the list . 
 A number of scholarly articles and papers have been written on Alvarez 's book since its publication , including " A Search for Identity in Julia Alvarez 's How the García Girls Lost Their Accents " by William Luis and Joan Hoffman 's " She Wants to be Called Yolanda Now : Identity , Language , and the Third Sister in How the García Girls Lost Their Accents " , which was featured in the Bilingual Review . 
 = Bayshore Freeway = 
 The Bayshore Freeway is a part of U.S. Route 101 in the San Francisco Bay Area of the U.S. state of California . It runs along the west shore of the San Francisco Bay , connecting San Jose with San Francisco . Within the city of San Francisco , the freeway is also known as James Lick Freeway , named after the California philanthropist . The road was originally built as a surface road , the Bayshore Highway , and later upgraded to freeway standards . Before 1964 , it was mostly marked as U.S. Route 101 Bypass , with US 101 using the present State Route 82 ( El Camino Real ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Bayshore Freeway begins at the Blossom Hill Road interchange on US 101 , where SR 82 begins its northwesterly path along Monterey Highway to San Jose . The freeway curves north and northwest , bypassing downtown San Jose to the east , and then curves west @-@ northwest , crossing I @-@ 880 and SR 87 , the latter just north of the San Jose International Airport . The portion of the highway from San Jose to South San Francisco is relatively straight and flat , running near the west edge of the San Francisco Bay . Junctions here include SR 237 in Sunnyvale , SR 85 in Mountain View , SR 84 in Menlo Park and Redwood City , SR 92 in San Mateo , and the San Francisco International Airport and I @-@ 380 in San Bruno . In South San Francisco , the freeway curves northeast around San Bruno Mountain , crossing its east edge at Sierra Point , and then heads north on a causeway across the former Candlestick Cove to the San Francisco city line . 
 In San Francisco , where the road is also known as the James Lick Freeway , it continues north @-@ northwesterly between Bayview Park and McLaren Park , and crosses I @-@ 280 at the Alemany Maze . There it curves north @-@ northeasterly around Bernal Heights and then northwest around Potrero Hill , meeting the Central Freeway at the border between the Mission District and South of Market . The Bayshore Freeway ends at the intersection of US 101 and Interstate 80 , which , although signed as Interstate 80 , is not officially Interstate 80 until the San Francisco @-@ Oakland Bay Bridge . The freeway that goes from US 101 to the Bay Bridge that is signed as I @-@ 80 but not officially I @-@ 80 is called the San Francisco Skyway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Initial construction = = = 
 Before the Dumbarton and San Mateo @-@ Hayward Bridges were built across the San Francisco Bay in the 1920s , San Francisco was bottled up at the north end of a long peninsula , with driving south on El Camino Real towards San Jose as the only reasonable alternative to the ferries for crossing the bay . The first of several highways built as an alternate to El Camino Real was the Skyline Boulevard , which was added to the state highway system in 1919 . A second route , the Bay Shore Highway ( Route 68 ) , became a state highway in 1923 , but only from the San Francisco city limits into San Mateo County , where the Dumbarton Bridge would begin . Just prior to the start of construction on the Dumbarton Bridge , San Francisco Supervisor Richard J. Welch noted that the Bay Shore Highway would need to be built all the way to San Jose as an escape valve for the additional traffic that the bridge would attract . 
 The state legislature extended the highway in 1925 , defining it to run from near the intersection of Army Street ( Cesar Chavez Street ) and San Bruno Avenue in San Francisco to a point in San Jose . The governor approved the bill with the stipulation that only the portion between the city limits of San Francisco and San Jose would be a state highway . Construction between South San Francisco and Burlingame had begun by 1924 , funded by a $ 500 @,@ 000 contribution from San Francisco , and was completed in 1928 . A disconnected segment north of San Mateo was built by the state at the same time . It was not until February 1929 that the road was fully paved between San Francisco and Burlingame , and on October 20 , 1929 the new highway was officially dedicated to San Mateo , several months after the connecting San Mateo @-@ Hayward Bridge opened ( at what is now Third Avenue ) . Even then , motorists had to wait until May 7 , 1931 to reach Jefferson Avenue in Redwood City ( near the west end of the four @-@ year @-@ old Dumbarton Bridge ) . The roadway was extended to Oregon Avenue in Palo Alto in mid @-@ 1932 , Lawrence Station Road in mid @-@ 1933 , and to Lafayette Street near Santa Clara , across the Guadalupe River from San Jose , by 1934 . The final piece to Oakland Road ( 13th Street ) in San Jose , which was then the main road - Legislative Route 5 and Sign Route 17 - between San Jose and Oakland , was dedicated on June 12 , 1937 , over ten years after the Dumbarton Bridge opened in January 1927 . 
 Although the highway was designed and built to what were , at the time , high standards , with a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) wide right @-@ of @-@ way in most places , it was accident @-@ prone because it lacked a median barrier . One segment of the so @-@ called " Bloody Bayshore " was " <unk> Hill " , a steep grade through the Visitacion Valley near the San Francisco city line , running past a bone meal plant . Causes of the crashes included turning conflicts at intersections , and speeding drivers crossing the centerline to use the oncoming lanes as a passing lane . The roadway was entirely at @-@ grade except for crossings of rail lines . It generally followed the present alignment of the Bayshore Freeway , but deviated in several places : Old Bayshore Highway in San Jose , Veterans Boulevard in Redwood City , Bayshore Highway in Burlingame , a destroyed section of road through San Francisco International Airport , and Airport and Bayshore Boulevards from South San Francisco through Brisbane into San Francisco . Within that city , the new highway continued three miles ( 5 km ) along the present Bay Shore Boulevard to Army ( Cesar Chavez ) Street and Potrero Avenue . 
 When the Bayshore Highway was completed in 1937 , U.S. Route 101 signs were moved to it from El Camino Real , and El Camino became U.S. Route 101 Alternate . Businesses along El Camino created the El Camino Real Association to protest the move and resulting loss of business , and by 1939 the main route had been moved back , with the Bayshore Highway becoming U.S. Route 101 Bypass . The two routes split in San Jose at the junction of First and Second Streets near Keyes Street , with the El Camino route mostly following the present SR 82 and the Bayshore route using locally maintained Second , Reed , and Fourth Streets to reach the state @-@ maintained Bayshore Highway . In San Francisco , they rejoined at the present location of the Alemany Maze , with the El Camino route following Alemany Boulevard from near the city line ; from there US 101 continued north on Bay Shore Boulevard , Potrero Avenue , and 10th and Fell Streets to Van Ness Avenue , meeting the Bay Bridge approach ( US 40 / US 50 ) at Bryant and Harrison Streets . The Bryant / Harrison one @-@ way pair was added to Route 68 ( which already included the bridge ) in 1937 and removed in 1947 along with the bridge ; in 1961 the new freeway approach became part of Route 68 , which was extended back over the bridge to Route 5 at its Oakland landfall . 
 Construction of an extension to Route 115 ( Santa Clara Street , now SR 130 ) at 30th Street in San Jose began in 1939 , and was completed by late 1940 . As with the portion between Fourth and 13th Streets , it was not marked as a numbered route . The state legislature authorized an extension beyond San Jose back to El Camino Real near Ford Road in 1947 , which was already under construction , and was completed that year . This was the first segment built with interchanges , and included a median barrier . Despite this , most crossings were at @-@ grade ; only the two ends at Route 115 ( Santa Clara Street ) and regular US 101 included bridges , the former a diamond interchange and the latter a simple split with additional access to Ford Road . It also crossed over Coyote Road , though with no access , just south of the Coyote Creek bridge . The original 1947 bridge over Coyote Road remains , though widened in 1990 , and is one of the oldest road @-@ road grade separations on the present freeway . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 By 1940 , at the dawn of the freeway era , the state was making plans to convert the Bayshore Highway into a ten @-@ lane Bayshore Freeway between San Francisco and Palo Alto . The first piece built was from Peninsula Avenue at the San Mateo @-@ Burlingame line to South San Francisco . This six @-@ lane freeway , completed in 1949 , followed the existing highway to Broadway in Burlingame , but then took a more inland alignment past the San Francisco International Airport , and crossed the old road at South San Francisco , running just east of it to near the south end of the cut at Sierra Point . Construction began inside San Francisco in 1950 and was completed in 1958 ; the new causeway across Candlestick Cove , connecting the completed section in South San Francisco with San Francisco , was dedicated in mid @-@ 1957 . In 1951 , the state legislature renamed the portion within San Francisco after James Lick , a California pioneer and philanthropist . 
 A movement to make the four @-@ lane undivided " Bloody Bayshore " safer all the way to San Jose began in Palo Alto . As a temporary measure , the state lowered the speed limit , installed traffic signals , closed minor crossroads , and prohibited left turns in places . The community convinced the state to extend the six @-@ lane freeway , which was completed in 1962 . The freeway continued to end at the old El Camino Real merge near Ford Road until the early 1980s , when the South Valley Freeway was constructed . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = Silver Age of Comic Books = 
 The Silver Age of Comic Books was a period of artistic advancement and commercial success in mainstream American comic books , predominantly those in the superhero genre . Following the Golden Age of Comic Books and an interregnum in the early to mid @-@ 1950s , the Silver Age is considered to cover the period from 1956 to circa 1970 , and was succeeded by the Bronze and Modern Ages . A number of important comics writers and artists contributed to the early part of the era , including writers Stan Lee , Gardner Fox , John Broome , and Robert Kanigher , and artists Curt Swan , Jack Kirby , Gil Kane , Steve Ditko , Mike <unk> , Gene Colan , Carmine Infantino , John Buscema , and John Romita , Sr. By the end of the Silver Age , a new generation of talent had entered the field , including writers Denny O 'Neil , Gary Friedrich , Roy Thomas , and Archie Goodwin , and artists such as Neal Adams , Herb Trimpe , Jim Steranko , and Barry Windsor @-@ Smith . 
 The popularity and circulation of comic books about superheroes declined following World War II , and comic books about horror , crime and romance took larger shares of the market . However , controversy arose over alleged links between comic books and juvenile delinquency , focusing in particular on crime and horror titles . In 1954 , publishers implemented the Comics Code Authority to regulate comic content . In the wake of these changes , publishers began introducing superhero stories again , a change that began with the introduction of a new version of DC Comics ' The Flash in Showcase # 4 ( Oct. 1956 ) . In response to strong demand , DC began publishing more superhero titles including Justice League of America , which prompted Marvel Comics to follow suit beginning with Fantastic Four # 1 . Silver Age comics have become collectible , with a copy of Amazing Fantasy # 15 ( Aug. 1962 ) , the debut of Spider @-@ Man , selling for $ 1 @.@ 1 million in 2011 . 
 = = Origin of the term = = 
 Comics historian and movie producer Michael Uslan traces the origin of the " Silver Age " term to the letters column of Justice League of America # 42 ( Feb. 1966 ) , which went on sale December 9 , 1965 . Letter @-@ writer Scott Taylor of Westport , Connecticut wrote , " If you guys keep bringing back the heroes from the [ 1930s @-@ 1940s ] Golden Age , people 20 years from now will be calling this decade the Silver Sixties ! " According to Uslan , the natural hierarchy of gold @-@ silver @-@ bronze , as in Olympic medals , took hold . " Fans immediately <unk> onto this , refining it more directly into a Silver Age version of the Golden Age . Very soon , it was in our vernacular , replacing such expressions as ... ' Second Heroic Age of Comics ' or ' The Modern Age ' of comics . It wasn 't long before dealers were ... specifying it was a Golden Age comic for sale or a Silver Age comic for sale . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Spanning World War II , when American comics provided cheap and disposable escapist entertainment that could be read and then discarded by the troops , the Golden Age of comic books covered the late 1930s to the late 1940s . A number of major superheroes were created during this period , including Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Captain Marvel , and Captain America . In subsequent years comics were blamed for a rise in juvenile crime statistics , although this rise was shown to be in direct proportion to population growth . When juvenile offenders admitted to reading comics , it was seized on as a common denominator ; one notable critic was Fredric Wertham , author of the book Seduction of the Innocent ( 1954 ) , who attempted to shift the blame for juvenile delinquency from the parents of the children to the comic books they read . The result was a decline in the comics industry . To address public concerns , in 1954 the Comics Code Authority was created to regulate and curb violence in comics , marking the start of a new era . 
 = = = DC Comics = = = 
 The Silver Age began with the publication of DC Comics ' Showcase # 4 ( Oct. 1956 ) , which introduced the modern version of the Flash . At the time , only three superheroes — Superman , Batman , and Wonder Woman — were still published under their own titles . According to DC comics writer Will Jacobs , Superman was available in " great quantity , but little quality . " Batman was doing better , but his comics were " lackluster " in comparison to his earlier " atmospheric adventures " of the 1940s , and Wonder Woman , having lost her original writer and artist , was no longer " idiosyncratic " or " interesting . " Jacobs describes the arrival of Showcase # 4 on the newsstands as " begging to be bought , " the cover featured an undulating film strip depicting the Flash running so fast that he had escaped from the frame . Editor Julius Schwartz , writer Gardner Fox , and artist Carmine Infantino were some of the people behind the Flash 's revitalization . Robert Kanigher wrote the first stories of the revived Flash , and John Broome was the writer of many of the earliest stories . 
 With the success of Showcase # 4 , several other 1940s superheroes were reworked during Schwartz ' tenure , including Green Lantern , the Atom , and Hawkman , as well as the Justice League of America . The DC artists responsible included Murphy Anderson , Gil Kane and Joe Kubert . Only the characters ' names remained the same ; their costumes , locales , and identities were altered , and imaginative scientific explanations for their superpowers generally took the place of magic as a modus operandi in their stories . Schwartz , a lifelong science fiction fan , was the inspiration for the re @-@ imagined Green Lantern — the Golden Age character , railroad engineer Alan Scott , possessed a ring powered by a magical lantern , but his Silver Age replacement , test pilot Hal Jordan , had a ring powered by an alien battery and created by an intergalactic police force . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , DC established that characters appearing in comics published prior to the Silver Age lived on a parallel Earth the company dubbed Earth @-@ Two . Characters introduced in the Silver Age and onward lived on Earth @-@ One . It was established that the two realities were separated by a vibrational field that could be crossed , should a storyline involve superheroes from different worlds teaming up . 
 Although the Flash is generally regarded as the first superhero of the Silver Age , the introduction of the Martian Manhunter in Detective Comics # 225 predates Showcase # 4 by almost a year , and at least one historian considers this character the first Silver Age superhero . However , comics historian Craig Shutt , author of the Comics Buyer 's Guide column " Ask Mister Silver Age " , disagrees , noting that the Martian Manhunter debuted as a detective who used his alien abilities to solve crimes , in the " quirky detective " vein of contemporaneous DC characters who were " TV detectives , Indian detectives , supernatural detectives , [ and ] animal detectives . " Schutt feels the Martian Manhunter only became a superhero in Detective Comics # 273 ( Nov. 1959 ) when he received a secret identity and other superhero accoutrements , saying , " Had Flash not come along , I doubt that the Martian Manhunter would 've led the charge from his backup position in Detective to a new super @-@ hero age . " Unsuccessful attempts to revive the superhero archetype 's popularity include Captain Comet , who debuted in Strange Adventures # 9 ( June 1951 ) ; St. John Publishing Company 's 1953 revival of Rocket Man under the title Zip @-@ Jet ; Fighting American , created in 1954 by the Captain America team of Joe Simon and Jack Kirby ; Sterling Comics ' Captain Flash and its back @-@ up feature Tomboy that same year ; Ajax / Farrell Publishing 's 1954 @-@ 55 revival of the Phantom Lady ; Strong Man , published by Magazine Enterprises in 1955 ; Charlton Comics ' Nature Boy , introduced in March 1956 , and its revival of the Blue Beetle the previous year ; and Atlas Comics ' short @-@ lived revivals of Captain America , the Human Torch , and the Sub @-@ Mariner , beginning in Young Men Comics # 24 ( Dec. 1953 ) . 
 Cartoon animal super @-@ heroes were longer @-@ lived . <unk> and Mighty Mouse were published continuously in their own titles from the end of the Golden Age through the beginning of the Silver Age . Atomic Mouse was given his own title in 1953 , lasting ten years , and Atomic Rabbit , later named Atomic Bunny , was published from 1955 to 1959 . In England , the Marvelman series was published during the interregnum between the Golden and Silver Ages , substituting for the British reprints of the Captain Marvel stories after Fawcett stopped publishing the character 's adventures . 
 = = = Marvel Comics = = = 
