 DC Comics sparked the superhero revival with its publications from 1955 to 1960 . Marvel Comics then capitalized on the revived interest in superhero storytelling with sophisticated stories and characterization . In contrast to previous eras , Silver Age characters were " flawed and self @-@ doubting " . 
 DC added to its momentum with its 1960 introduction of Justice League of America , a team consisting of the company 's most popular superhero characters . Martin Goodman , a publishing trend @-@ follower with his 1950s Atlas Comics line , note 1 by this time called Marvel Comics , " mentioned that he had noticed one of the titles published by National Comics seemed to be selling better than most . It was a book called The [ sic ] Justice League of America and it was composed of a team of superheroes , " Marvel editor Stan Lee recalled in 1974 . Goodman directed Lee to likewise produce a superhero team book , resulting in The Fantastic Four # 1 ( Nov. 1961 ) . 
 Under the guidance of writer @-@ editor Stan Lee and artists / co @-@ plotters such as Jack Kirby and Steve Ditko , Marvel began its own rise to prominence . With an innovation that changed the comic @-@ book industry , The Fantastic Four # 1 initiated a naturalistic style of superheroes with human failings , fears , and inner demons , who squabbled and worried about the likes of rent @-@ money . In contrast to the straitlaced archetypes of superheroes at the time , this ushered in a revolution . With dynamic artwork by Kirby , Steve Ditko , Don Heck , and others complementing Lee 's colorful , catchy prose , the new style became popular among college students who could identify with the angst and the irreverent nature of the characters such as Spider @-@ Man , the X @-@ Men and the Hulk during a time period of social upheaval and the rise of a youth counterculture . Comic book readers of the Silver Age were more scientifically @-@ inclined than previous generations . Thus , comic books of the Silver Age explained superhero phenomenons and origins through science , as opposed to the Golden Age , which commonly relied on magic or mysticism . 
 Comics historian Peter Sanderson compares the 1960s DC to a large Hollywood studio , and argues that after having reinvented the superhero archetype , DC by the latter part of the decade was suffering from a creative drought . The audience for comics was no longer just children , and Sanderson sees the 1960s Marvel as the comic equivalent of the French New Wave , developing new methods of storytelling that drew in and retained readers who were in their teens and older and thus influencing the comics writers and artists of the future . 
 = = = Other publishers = = = 
 One of the top American comics publishers in 1956 , Harvey Comics , discontinued its horror comics when the Comics Code was implemented and sought a new target audience . Harvey 's focus shifted to children from 6 to 12 years of age , especially girls , with characters such as Richie Rich , Casper the Friendly Ghost , and Little Dot . Many of the company 's comics featured young girls who " defied stereotypes and sent a message of acceptance of those who are different . " Although its characters have inspired a number of nostalgic movies and ranges of merchandise , Harvey comics of the period are not as sought after in the collectors ' market as DC and Marvel titles . 
 The publishers Gilberton , Dell Comics , and Gold Key Comics used their reputations as publishers of wholesome comic books to avoid becoming signatories to the Comics Code and found various ways to continue publishing horror @-@ themed comics in addition to other types . Gilberton 's extensive Classics Illustrated line adapted literary classics , with the likes of Frankenstein alongside Don Quixote and Oliver Twist ; Classics Illustrated Junior reprinted comic book versions of children 's classics such as The Wizard of Oz , Rapunzel , and Pinocchio . During the late 1950s and the 1960s , Dell , which had published comics in 1936 , offered licensed TV series comic books from Twilight Zone to Top Cat , as well as numerous Walt Disney titles . Its successor , Gold Key — founded in 1962 Western Publishing started its own label rather than packaging content for business partner Dell — continued with such licensed TV series and movie adaptations , as well as comics starring such Warner Bros. Cartoons characters as Bugs Bunny and such comic strip properties as Beetle Bailey . 
 With the popularity of the Batman television show in 1966 , publishers that had specialized in other forms began adding campy superhero titles to their lines . As well , new publishers sprang up , often using creative talent from the Golden Age . Harvey Comics ' Harvey Thriller imprint released Double @-@ Dare Adventures , starring new characters such as Bee @-@ man and Magic Master . Dell published superhero versions of Frankenstein , Dracula and the Werewolf . Gold Key did licensed versions of live @-@ action and animated superhero television shows such as Captain Nice , Frankenstein Jr. and The <unk> , and continued the adventures of Walt Disney Pictures ' Goofy character in <unk> . American Comics Group gave its established character Herbie a secret superhero identity as the Fat Fury , and introduced the characters of Nemesis and Magic @-@ Man . Even the iconic Archie Comics teens acquired superpowers and superhero identities in comedic titles such as Archie as Capt. <unk> and Jughead as Captain Hero . Archie Comics also launched its Archie Adventure line ( subsequently titled Mighty Comics ) , which included the Fly , the Jaguar , and a revamp of the Golden Age hero the Shield . In addition to their individual titles , they teamed in their group series The Mighty Crusaders , joined by the Comet and <unk> join with three characters with their own titles . Their stories blended typical superhero fare with the 1960s ' camp . 
 Among straightforward Silver Age superheroes from publishers other than Marvel or DC , Charlton Comics offered a short @-@ lived superhero line with characters that included Captain Atom , <unk> , the Question , and Thunderbolt ; Tower Comics had Dynamo , Mercury Man , <unk> and other members of the superhero espionage group <unk> Agents ; and even Gold Key had Doctor Solar , Man of the Atom . 
 = = = Underground comix = = = 
 According to John Strausbaugh of The New York Times , " traditional " comic book historians feel that although the Golden Age deserves study , the only noteworthy aspect of the Silver Age was the advent of underground comics . One commentator has suggested that , " Perhaps one of the reasons underground comics have come to be considered legitimate art is due to the fact that the work of these artists more truly embodies what much of the public believes is true of newspaper strips — that they are written and drawn ( i.e. , authentically signed by ) a single person . " While a large number of mainstream @-@ comics professionals both wrote and drew their own material during the Silver Age , as many had since the start of American comic books , their work is distinct from what another historian describes as the " raw id on paper " of Robert Crumb and Gilbert Shelton . Most often published in black @-@ and @-@ white with glossy color cover and distributed through counterculture bookstores and head shops , underground comics targeted adults and reflected the counterculture movement of the time , 
 = = = End and aftermath = = = 
 The Silver Age of comic books was followed by the Bronze Age . The demarcation is not clearly defined , but there are a number of possibilities . 
 Historian Will Jacobs suggests the Silver Age ended in April 1970 when the man who had started it , Julius Schwartz , handed over Green Lantern — starring one of the first revived heroes of the era — to the new @-@ guard team of Denny O 'Neil and Neal Adams in response to reduced sales . John Strausbaugh also connects the end of the Silver Age to Green Lantern . He observes that in 1960 , the character embodied the can @-@ do optimism of the era . However , by 1972 Green Lantern had become world weary ; " Those days are gone – gone forever – the days I was confident , certain ... I was so young ... so sure I couldn 't make a mistake ! Young and cocky , that was Green Lantern . Well , I 've changed . I 'm older now ... maybe wiser , too ... and a lot less happy . " Strausbaugh writes that the Silver Age " went out with that whimper . " 
 Comics scholar Arnold T. Blumberg places the end of the Silver Age in June 1973 , when Gwen Stacy , girlfriend of Peter Parker ( Spider @-@ Man ) was killed in a story arc later dubbed " The Night Gwen Stacy Died " , saying the era of " innocence " was ended by " the ' snap ' heard round the comic book world — the startling , sickening snap of bone that heralded the death of Gwen Stacy . " Silver Age historian Craig Shutt disputes this , saying , " Gwen Stacy 's death shocked Spider @-@ Man readers . Such a tragedy makes a strong symbolic ending . This theory gained adherents when Kurt Busiek and Alex Ross ' Marvels miniseries in 1994 ended with Gwen 's death , but I 'm not buying it . It 's too late . Too many new directions — especially [ the sword @-@ and @-@ sorcery trend begun by the character ] Conan and monsters [ in the wake of the Comics Code allowing vampires , werewolves and the like ] — were on firm ground by this time . " He also dismisses the end of the 12 @-@ cent comic book , which went to 15 cents as the industry standard in early 1969 , noting that the 1962 hike from 10 cents to 12 cents had no bearing in this regard . Shutt 's line comes with Fantastic Four # 102 ( Sept . 1970 ) , Jack Kirby 's last regular @-@ run issue before the artist left to join DC Comics ; this combines with DC 's Superman # 229 ( Aug. 1970 ) , editor Mort Weisinger 's last before retiring . 
 According to historian Peter Sanderson , the " neo @-@ silver movement " that began in 1986 with Superman : Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow ? by Alan Moore and Curt Swan , was a backlash against the Bronze Age with a return to Silver Age principles . In Sanderson 's opinion , each comics generation rebels against the previous , and the movement was a response to Crisis on Infinite Earths , which itself was an attack on the Silver Age . Neo @-@ silver comics creators made comics that recognized and assimilated the more sophisticated aspects of the Silver Age . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Silver Age marked a decline in the prominence of American comics in genres such as horror , romance , teen and furry animal humor , or westerns , which were more popular than superhero adventures in the late 1940s through the mid @-@ 1950s , and fans of these genres see the Silver Age as a decline from that earlier era . 
 An important feature of the period was the development of the character makeup of superheroes . Young children and girls were targeted during the Silver Age by certain publishers ; in particular , Harvey Comics attracted this group with titles such as Little Dot . Adult @-@ oriented underground comics also began during the Silver Age . Some critics and historians argue that one characteristic of the Silver Age was that science fiction and aliens replaced magic and gods . Others argue that magic was an important element of both Golden Age and Silver Age characters . Many Golden Age writers and artists were science @-@ fiction fans or professional science @-@ fiction writers who incorporated SF elements into their comic @-@ book stories . Science was a common explanation for the origin of heroes in the Silver Age . 
 The Silver Age coincided with the rise of pop art , an artistic movement that used popular cultural artifacts , such as advertising and packaging , as source material for fine , or gallery @-@ exhibited , art . Roy Lichtenstein , one of the best @-@ known pop art painters , specifically chose individual panels from comic books and repainted the images , modifying them to some extent in the process but including in the painting word and thought balloons and captions as well as enlarged @-@ to @-@ scale color dots imitating the coloring process then used in newsprint comic books . An exhibition of comic strip art was held at the Musée des Arts Décoratifs of the Palais de Louvre in 1967 , and books were soon published that contained serious discussions of the art of comics and the nature of the medium . 
 In January 1966 , a live @-@ action Batman television show debuted to high ratings . Like pop art , the show took comic @-@ book tropes and re @-@ envisioned them in the context of a different medium . <unk> narration in each episode articulated the words of comic @-@ book captions while fight scenes had sound effects like " Biff " , " Bam " and " Pow " appear as visual effects on the screen , spelled out in large cartoon letters . Circulation for comic books in general and Batman merchandise in particular soared . Other masked or superpowered adventurers appeared on the television screen , so that " American TV in the winter of 1967 appeared to consist of little else but live @-@ action and animated cartoon comic @-@ book heroes , all in living colour . " Existing comic @-@ book publishers began creating superhero titles , as did new publishers . By the end of the 1960s , however , the fad had faded ; in 1969 , the best @-@ selling comic book in the United States was not a superhero series , but the teen @-@ humor book Archie . 
 = = Artists = = 
 Arlen Schumer , author of The Silver Age of Comic Book Art , singles out Carmine Infantino 's Flash as the embodiment of the design of the era : " as sleek and streamlined as the fins Detroit was sporting on all its models . " Other notable artists of the era include Curt Swan , Gene Colan , Steve Ditko , Gil Kane , Jack Kirby and Joe Kubert . 
 Two artists that changed the comics industry dramatically in the late 1960s were Neal Adams , considered one of his country 's greatest draftsmen , and Jim Steranko . Both artists expressed a cinematic approach at times that occasionally altered the more conventional panel @-@ based format that has been commonplace for decades . Adams ' breakthrough was based on layout and rendering . Best known for returning Batman to his somber roots after the campy success of the Batman television show , his naturalistic depictions of anatomy , faces , and gestures changed comics ' style in a way that Strausbaugh sees reflected in modern graphic novels . 
 One of the few writer @-@ artists at the time , Steranko made use of a cinematic style of storytelling . Strausbaugh credits him as one of Marvel 's strongest creative forces during the late 1960s , his art owing a large debt to Salvador Dalí . Steranko started by inking and penciling the details of Kirby 's artwork on Nick Fury , Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D. beginning in Strange Tales # 151 , but by Strange Tales # 155 Stan Lee had put him in charge of both writing and drawing Fury 's adventures . He exaggerated the James Bond @-@ style spy stories , introducing the vortex beam ( which lifts objects ) , the <unk> bomb ( which explodes silently ) , a miniature electronic absorber ( which protected Fury from electricity ) , and the Q @-@ ray machine ( a molecular <unk> ) — all in his first 11 @-@ page story . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 A near @-@ mint copy of Amazing Fantasy # 15 , the first appearance of Spider @-@ Man , sold for $ 1 @.@ 1 million to an unnamed collector on March 7 , 2011 . 
 = Charles Thom = 
 Charles Thom ( November 11 , 1872 – May 24 , 1956 ) was an American microbiologist and mycologist . Born and raised in Illinois , he received his PhD from the University of Missouri , the first such degree awarded by that institution . He was best known for his work on the microbiology of dairy products and soil fungi , and in particular his research into the genera Aspergillus and Penicillium . His work influenced the establishment of standards for food handling and processing in the USA . He pioneered the use of culture media to grow microorganisms , and , with food chemist James N. Currie , developed a process to mass @-@ produce citric acid using Aspergillus . Thom played an important role in the development of penicillin in World War II . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thom was born in <unk> , Illinois in 1872 , the fifth of six boys . His parents were Angus Sutherland Thom and Louisa ( <unk> ) Thom , Scottish / Irish farmers who had settled in Illinois shortly before the American Civil War . Charles Thom was raised in a strongly religious household ; his father was an elder in the Presbyterian church . Thom upheld Presbyterian values throughout his life , kept active in church affairs , and became a staunch prohibitionist . His early years spent working on his father 's farm instilled the value of a strong work ethic , and first @-@ hand knowledge of agricultural practices that would prove useful in his later career . 
 After graduating from high school , Thom attended Lake Forest Academy , a preparatory institution for college , in 1889 . He earned a bachelor 's degree from Lake Forest College in 1895 . The next year he spent as a science teacher in a Danville high school , before returning to Lake Forest College to receive his Master 's degree in 1897 . In 1899 , working under the supervision of Howard Ayers , he received his PhD from the University of Missouri on the topic of fertilization in the ferns <unk> and Adiantum . This was the first doctorate awarded by that institution . Thom married Ethel Winifred Slater in 1906 , with whom he had three children ( one died during childbirth ) . Ethel Thom died in October 1942 , shortly before his retirement . In 1944 he remarried , to Charlotte J. Bayles , with whom he lived until her death . Thom died two years after Charlotte at his home in Port Jefferson , New York , on May 24 , 1956 . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 1902 , Thom went to study with George F. Atkinson at Cornell University ; two colleagues included Benjamin <unk> and Herbert <unk> <unk> , who both later became noted botanists . Two years later , he accepted a position as dairy mycologist , working with Herbert William Conn , in charge of " cheese investigations " at the Storrs Agricultural Experiment Station in Connecticut . He remained in this institution — a branch of the U.S. Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) — holding various research and administrative positions , until his retirement in 1942 . During his employment there , Thom investigated the process of cheese ripening and sought to understand the composition of the microbiological flora required for imparting certain flavors on cheeses . Through this work he isolated and identified the fungi Penicillium <unk> and Penicillium <unk> . 
 In 1914 , Thom became the Chief of the Microbiological Laboratory at the USDA Bureau of Chemistry , where his job was to study problems with the handling and processing of foods , and to enforce the Pure Food and Drug Act , a United States federal law that mandated federal inspection of food products . Known for his dedication to maintaining high standards in the food industry , he relished arguing court cases " in defense of sanitary practices in the handling and processing of perishable foods " . In one noted case involving the adulteration of tomato catsup , he presented partially rotten tomatoes to the jury , and , concluding his testimony , asked them " Should the American people have to eat these in their catsup ? " 
 During his time at the USDA , Thom became a world authority on the genera Aspergillus and Penicillium . Thom pioneered the technique of using defined , reproducible culture media to grow microorganisms ; most of the taxa he described are still valid today . Together with Margaret B. Church , Thom maintained collections of fungus cultures for the American Type Culture Collection , established in 1925 . In 1929 , a year after discovering penicillin , Alexander Fleming published a well @-@ known paper in which he identified the mold Penicillium rubrum as the one responsible for creating the drug . Harold <unk> succeeded in growing the organism on a simple culture medium , but could not isolate the penicillin produced by the mold when grown this way . With Thom 's assistance , they correctly identified the organism as Penicillium <unk> and , in 1941 , developed a method to scale up production at the Department of Agriculture 's Northern Regional Research Laboratory in Peoria , Illinois , which ultimately resulted in an inexpensive supply of the drug . 
 Thom 's work with the food chemist James N. Currie in 1916 – 17 enabled them to develop a process to mass @-@ produce citric acid using Aspergillus , and a few years later , the first large @-@ scale mold fermentation factory had been established in Brooklyn , New York . This early work ultimately led to the Department of Agriculture 's establishing four Regional Research Laboratories in 1938 that were devoted to industrial mold <unk> . 
 Thom held his job with the Bureau of Chemistry until 1927 , when the position was abolished . He was then appointed Principal Mycologist of the Division of Soil Microbiology for the newly created Bureau of Chemistry and Soils . In a few years , Thom became known as an authority on soil microbiology , and was often invited to present papers at national and international meetings . In one of Thom 's important contributions to the field , he led the research group responsible for advances that enabled the control of cotton root rot , which at the time was a major problem in the southwestern United States . In collaboration with his protégé Kenneth Raper , they published the Manual of Penicillin in 1940 . Thom formally retired in 1942 , although he remained active as a consultant and guest speaker until shortly before his death . 
 = = Memberships and honors = = 
 Thom was the U.S. Delegate to the 1905 International Dairy Congress held in Paris , France . He helped establish a graduate education program at the USDA . In 1907 , he became a charter member of the Dairy Association of America , and in 1918 , was appointed President of the Bacteriological Association of Washington . He attended the 1935 International Soil Congress in Oxford , England and was Vice President of the 1939 International Microbiological Congress in New York . He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences , a charter member of the Mycological Society of America , and president of the Society of American <unk> in 1940 and the Society of Industrial Microbiology in 1950 . Thom was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Science degree by Lake Forest College in 1936 . For his work on penicillin , he and his research group received the Lasker Group Award in 1946 , and the USDA Distinguished Service Award in 1947 . The same year , he received a gold medal from the Spanish National Research Council for his contributions to microbiology and medicine . 
 = = Described taxa = = 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Thom , Charles ( 1906 ) " Fungi in cheese ripening ; Camembert and Roquefort " in USDA Bureau of Animal Industry Bulletin 82 pp. 1 – 39 
 Thom , Charles ( 1910 ) " Cultural studies of species of Penicillium " in USDA Bureau of Animal Industry Bulletin 118 pp. 1 – 109 
 Thom , Charles ; Currie , James N. ( 1916 ) " Aspergillus niger group " in Journal of Agricultural Research 7 : 1 pp. 1 – 15 
 Thom , Charles ; Church , Margaret B. ( 1918 ) . " Aspergillus fumigatus , A. nidulans , A. <unk> n. sp. and their allies " . American Journal of Botany 5 ( 2 ) : 84 – 104 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Thom , Charles ; Church , Margaret B. ( 1921 ) . " Aspergillus flavus , A. oryzae and associated species " . American Journal of Botany 8 ( 2 ) : 103 – 126 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Thom , Charles ; Hunter , Albert Clayton ( 1924 ) . " Hygienic Fundamentals of Food Handling " 228 pp . 
 Thom , Charles ; Church , Margaret B. ( 1926 ) . " The <unk> " . 272 pp . 
 Thom , Charles ( 1930 ) . " The <unk> " . 644 pp . 
 Thom , Charles ( 1954 ) . " The evolution of species concepts in Aspergillus and Penicillium " . Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 60 : 24 – 34 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / <unk> @-@ <unk> 
 = Last voyage of the Karluk = 
 The last voyage of the Karluk , flagship of the Canadian Arctic Expedition of 1913 – 16 , ended with the loss of the ship and the subsequent deaths of nearly half her complement . On her outward voyage in August 1913 , Karluk , a brigantine formerly used as a whaler , became trapped in the Arctic ice while sailing to a rendezvous point at Herschel Island . After a long drift across the Beaufort and Chukchi seas , the ship was crushed and sunk . In the ensuing months , the crew and expedition staff struggled to survive , first on the ice and later on the shores of Wrangel Island . In all , eleven men died before help could reach them . 
 The Canadian Arctic Expedition was organised under the leadership of Canadian @-@ born anthropologist Vilhjalmur Stefansson , and had both scientific and geographic objectives . Shortly after Karluk was trapped , Stefansson and a small party left the ship , stating that they intended to hunt for caribou . As Karluk drifted from her fixed position it became impossible for the hunting party to return to the ship . Stefansson reached land and then devoted himself to the expedition 's other objectives , leaving the crew and staff on board the ship under the charge of its captain , Robert Bartlett . After the sinking , Bartlett organised a march to Wrangel Island , 80 miles ( 130 km ) away . Conditions on the ice were difficult and dangerous ; two parties of four men each were lost in the attempt to reach the island . 
 After the survivors had landed , Bartlett and an Inuk companion set out across the ice for the Siberian coast , in search of help . The pair eventually reached Alaska , but sea ice conditions prevented any immediate rescue mission . On Wrangel Island , the stranded party survived by hunting game , but were short of food and troubled by internal dissent . Before their rescue in September 1914 , three more of the party had died , two of illness and one in violent circumstances . 
 Historians have divided views on Stefansson 's decision to leave the ship . Some of the voyage 's survivors were critical of his seeming indifference to their ordeal and the loss of their comrades . He escaped official censure , and was publicly honoured for his later work on the expedition despite the Canadian government 's reservations about its overall management . Although Bartlett was criticised by an admiralty commission for taking Karluk into the ice , he was hailed as a hero by the public and by his former Karluk shipmates . 
 = = Canadian Arctic Expedition = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Canadian Arctic Expedition was the brainchild of Vilhjalmur Stefansson , a US @-@ based , Canadian @-@ born anthropologist of Icelandic extraction who had spent most of the years between 1906 and 1912 studying Inuit life in the remote Arctic Canada . His fieldwork had resulted in the first detailed information on the life and culture of the Copper Inuit , the so @-@ called " blond Eskimos " . Stefansson had returned home with plans for another expedition to continue his Arctic studies , and obtained promises of financial backing totalling US $ 45 @,@ 000 ( around US $ 750 @,@ 000 in 2010 ) from the National Geographic Society ( NGS ) in Washington and the American Museum of Natural History in New York . However , he wanted to extend his plans to include geographical exploration in the Beaufort Sea , then a blank space on the world 's maps . For these expanded aims he needed more money , and approached the Canadian government for assistance . 
 The area known as the " High Arctic " was subject to claims of sovereignty not only from Canada , but also from Norway and the United States . The Canadian government was concerned that an American @-@ financed expedition would give the United States a legal claim to any new land discovered in the Beaufort Sea , so when the Canadian prime minister Robert Borden met Stefansson in Ottawa in February 1913 he offered to assume financial responsibility for the entire expedition . Borden 's government was hopeful that the expedition would strengthen Canada 's claim to sovereignty over the Arctic islands . The American sponsors agreed to withdraw , subject to an NGS condition that the Society could reclaim its rights to the expedition if Stefansson failed to depart by June 1913 . This created a narrow deadline and hurried preparations for the journey north , although Stefansson maintained in his 1921 account that " forethought appeared to have anticipated every eventuality " . 
 = = = Objectives and strategy = = = 
 The Canadian government 's financial involvement represented a shift in the expedition 's emphasis , towards geographical exploration rather than the original purpose of ethnological and scientific studies . In a letter to the Canadian Victoria Daily Times , Stefansson set out these separate aims . The main object was to explore the " area of a million or so square miles that is represented by white patches on our map , lying between Alaska and the North Pole " . The expedition also aimed to be the most comprehensive scientific study of the Arctic ever attempted . While a Northern Party searched for new lands , a mainly land @-@ based Southern Party under zoologist Rudolph Anderson would carry out surveys and anthropological studies in the islands off the northern Canadian coast . 
 The Northern Party 's ship , Karluk , would proceed north from the Canadian coast until it either found land or was stopped by ice . It would explore any land it encountered ; otherwise it would follow the ice edge eastward and attempt to winter at either Banks Island or Prince Patrick Island . If the ship was trapped in the ice and forced to drift , the party would study the direction of Arctic currents and carry out oceanographic research . Meanwhile , Rudolph Anderson 's party was expected to continue with the anthropological studies of the " blond Eskimo " , to collect varieties of Arctic flora and fauna , to carry out geological research , and to seek open @-@ water channels in the hope of establishing new trade routes . 
 = = = Organisation and personnel = = = 
 Stefansson 's plan was to take the expedition to the old whaling station at Herschel Island off the Canadian Arctic coast , where the final composition of the Northern and Southern Parties would be decided and where equipment and supplies would be divided among the different strands of the venture . The haste to meet the NGS deadline led to concerns among the expedition 's members about the adequacy of the provision of food , clothing and equipment . Stefansson , who was largely absent in the hectic weeks immediately before sailing and who revealed few of his plans to his team , dismissed such concerns as " impertinent and disloyal " . There were disputes between Stefansson and the scientists over the chain of command ; the Canadian Geological Survey , which had provided four scientists to the expedition , wanted these men to report to them rather than to Stefansson . Southern Party leader Rudolph Anderson threatened to resign over Stefansson 's claim to the publication rights of all private expedition journals . 
 The scientific team , made up of some of the most distinguished men in their fields , included representatives from the United States , Denmark , Norway and France , as well as from Britain and its Empire . Only two , however , had previous polar experience : Alistair Forbes Mackay , the expedition 's medical officer , had visited Antarctica with Sir Ernest Shackleton 's Nimrod expedition in 1907 – 09 , and had been one of the party of three to discover the location of the South Magnetic Pole . Another Nimrod veteran , the 46 @-@ year @-@ old James Murray , was Stefansson 's oceanographer . Among the younger scientists were William Laird McKinlay ( 1889 – 1983 ) , a 24 @-@ year @-@ old science teacher from Glasgow who was recommended by the Scottish explorer William Speirs Bruce , and <unk> Mamen ( 1893 – 1914 ) , a 20 @-@ year @-@ old skiing champion from Christiania , Norway , who was taken on as a forester , despite lacking scientific experience . 
 Stefansson had wanted American whaling skipper Christian Theodore Pedersen to captain Karluk , the ship designated for the Northern Party . When Pedersen withdrew , the captaincy was offered to 36 @-@ year @-@ old Newfoundland @-@ born Robert Bartlett , an experienced polar navigator who had commanded Robert Peary 's ship on the latter 's 1909 polar expedition . Bartlett did not have time , however , to select Karluk 's crew , which was hurriedly assembled from around the Royal Navy Dockyard at Esquimalt in British Columbia . McKinlay later wrote of the crew that " one was a confirmed drug addict ... another suffered from venereal disease ; and in spite of orders that no liquor was to be carried , at least two smuggled supplies on board . " McKinlay worried that this crew might lack the qualities and character necessary in the arduous months ahead , concerns shared by Bartlett , whose first act on arrival in Esquimalt was to fire the first officer for incompetence . In his place he appointed the 22 @-@ year @-@ old Alexander " Sandy " Anderson . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 Karluk had been chosen by Pedersen and bought by Stefansson for the bargain price of US $ 10 @,@ 000 . Stefansson was advised by Pedersen that , of four ships that were available , Karluk was " the soundest and best adapted for our purpose " , but Bartlett had deep reservations about her fitness for prolonged Arctic service . The ship , a 29 @-@ year @-@ old brigantine , was 129 feet ( 39 m ) in length with a beam of 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) . She had been built for the Aleutian fishing industry ( <unk> is the Aleut word for " fish " ) and later converted for whaling , when her bows and sides had been sheathed with 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) Australian ironwood . Despite 14 arctic whaling voyages , including six <unk> , she had not been built to withstand sustained ice pressure , and lacked the engine power to force a passage through the ice . She did not match the expectations of Bartlett , or of many of the more experienced crew . 
 The ship spent most of April and May 1913 undergoing repairs and refitting at the dockyard in Esquimalt . When Bartlett arrived in early June he immediately ordered further repair work . In addition to Karluk , Stefansson had purchased sight unseen a small gasoline @-@ driven schooner , Alaska , to act as a supply ship for the Southern Party . He later added a second schooner , Mary Sachs , when the hold space in Alaska proved inadequate . In the confusion surrounding the expedition 's departure , McKinlay notes , no attempt was made to align men or equipment to their appropriate ships . Thus anthropologists Henri Beuchat and Diamond Jenness , both designated for the Southern Party , found themselves sailing with Karluk , while their equipment was on board Alaska . McKinlay himself , aboard Karluk as magnetic observer , discovered that most of his equipment was with Alaska . Stefansson insisted that all would be sorted out when the ships reached their Herschel Island rendezvous . " Heaven help us all if we failed to reach Herschel Island " , McKinlay wrote . 
 = = = Towards Herschel Island = = = 
 Karluk left Esquimalt on 17 June 1913 , sailing north towards Alaska . The immediate destination was Nome , on the coast of the Bering Sea . There was trouble from the beginning with the steering gear and with the engines , both of which needed frequent attention . On 2 July Karluk reached the Bering Sea in mist , fog and rapidly falling temperatures ; six days later she arrived at Nome where she joined Alaska and Mary Sachs . While the ships were being loaded in Nome , some of the scientists pressed for a meeting with the leader to clarify plans , particularly with regard to the Northern Party whose schedule was vague . The meeting was unsatisfactory . Stefansson 's attitude offended several of the men , some of whom threatened to leave the expedition . They had read press reports in which Stefansson had apparently said that he expected Karluk to be crushed , and that the lives of the staff were secondary to the scientific work . Stefansson would not explain these matters , nor give further details of his plans for the Northern Party . Despite the scientists ' alarm and dissatisfaction , none resigned . 
 At Port Clarence , just north of Nome , 28 dogs were taken on board before Karluk sailed north on 27 July . The next day she crossed the Arctic Circle , and almost immediately encountered rough weather which resulted in flooded cabins and seasickness . However , McKinlay noted that " whatever defects she had , Karluk was proving herself a fine sea @-@ boat . " On 31 July they reached Point Hope , where two Inuit hunters , known as " Jerry " and " Jimmy " , joined the ship . On 1 August the permanent Arctic ice pack was seen ; Bartlett made several attempts to breach the ice , but each time was forced back . On 2 August , about 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Point Barrow , Karluk thrust her way into the ice but was soon trapped , and drifted slowly eastward for three days before reaching open water off Cape Smythe . Meanwhile , Stefansson had left to travel over the ice to Point Barrow . He rejoined the ship at Cape Smythe on 6 August , bringing with him Jack Hadley , a veteran trapper who required passage east . Hadley , a long @-@ time acquaintance of Stefansson 's , was entered in the ship 's books as carpenter . 
 At Cape Smythe two more Inuit hunters , <unk> and Kataktovik , joined the expedition , together with <unk> 's family — wife <unk> and their two young daughters Helen and Mugpi . As the voyage proceeded , Bartlett became increasingly anxious about the extent of ice in the area , and noted that the brass <unk> on the ship 's bow had already been damaged . Over the next few days Karluk struggled to make headway , as Bartlett took the ship northwards away from the coast , following channels of open water . The only scientific tasks of substance that could be carried out during this period were Murray 's dredging operations , through which he collected many species of Arctic sea life , and the regular depth soundings . On 13 August Bartlett calculated their position as 235 miles ( 378 km ) east of Point Barrow , with a similar distance to travel to Herschel Island . However , this proved to be the ship 's farthest point east , as at that position she became firmly trapped in the ice and began to move slowly westward ; by 10 September Karluk had retreated nearly 100 miles ( 160 km ) back towards Point Barrow . Shortly afterwards , Stefansson informed Bartlett that all hopes for further progress that year had ended , and that Karluk would have to winter in the ice . 
 = = In the ice = = 
 = = = Drifting west = = = 
 On 19 September , with Karluk ice @-@ bound and largely stationary , Stefansson announced that in view of the shortage of fresh meat and the likelihood of a long sojourn in the ice , he would lead a small hunting party that would search for caribou and other game in the area of the Colville River . He would take with him the two Inuit " Jimmy " and " Jerry " , the expedition secretary Burt McConnell , the photographer George Wilkins , and the anthropologist Diamond Jenness . Stefansson expected to be gone for about ten days ; Bartlett was instructed by letter that , if the ship should move from its present position , he should " send a party ashore , to erect one or more beacons giving information of the ship 's whereabouts . " The next day the six men departed . On 23 September , following a blizzard , the ice floe in which Karluk was trapped began to move , and soon the ship was travelling at between 30 and 60 miles ( 48 and 97 km ) a day — but to the west , steadily further from Herschel Island and from Stefansson 's party who , it soon became clear , would not be able to find their way back to the ship . 
 In an unpublished journal and later correspondence , McKinlay suggested that Stefansson 's departure amounted to abandoning the ship to its fate . The expedition 's historian S.E. Jenness ( son of Diamond Jenness ) rejects this view , pointing out that Stefansson and the hunting party members had left valuable property aboard Karluk ; a possible motive for the trip , Jenness surmises , was to train the younger staff . The anthropologist Gísli Pálsson , writing of the expedition , asserts that while the anger of Bartlett and the crew is understandable , there is no evidence that Stefansson deliberately abandoned the men . It is arguable , Pálsson says , that Stefansson acted responsibly in attempting to secure a supply of fresh meat which would counter the possibility of scurvy , should Karluk be trapped in the ice for a long time . The historian Richard <unk> writes " The evidence suggests that this was a normal hunting trip " and " ... there is strong evidence to suggest he [ Stefansson ] wished he had never left [ the ship ] " . 
 The constant snow and thick mists made it difficult for Bartlett to calculate the Karluk 's position accurately , although during a brief break in the weather on 30 September they glimpsed land which they took to be Cooper Island , in the vicinity of Point Barrow where they had been at the start of August . On 3 October the anxiety of crew and staff increased when , with Point Barrow just 5 miles ( 8 km ) distant , the drift turned northwards , away from the land . There were fears among some that Karluk would repeat the experience of the Jeannette , an American vessel that 30 years previously had drifted in the Arctic ice for months before sinking , with the subsequent loss of most of her crew . Bartlett became aware that Murray and McKay , the two veterans of Shackleton 's Nimrod expedition , were openly contemptuous of their captain 's leadership . They were making plans to leave the ship at an appropriate time , and head for land on their own . 
 As the weather grew worse Bartlett ordered supplies and equipment to be transferred on to the ice , both to lighten the ship and as a precaution should it be necessary to abandon the vessel in a hurry . Food supplies were augmented by seal hunts — two or three seals a day was the average bag , according to McKinlay — and by a single polar bear that had wandered near the ship in mid @-@ November . On 15 November Karluk reached 73 ° N , the most northerly point of its drift , and then began moving south @-@ west , in the general direction of the Siberian coast . By mid @-@ December the estimated position was 140 miles ( 230 km ) from Wrangel Island . Despite the bleak outlook — Bartlett was privately convinced that Karluk would not survive the winter — a determined effort was made to celebrate Christmas , with decorations , presents , a programme of sports on the ice , and a banquet . By then they were just 50 miles ( 80 km ) north of Herald Island , a rocky outpost east of Wrangel Island ; on 29 December land was visible in the distance , though whether this was Herald Island or Wrangel Island was not clear . The sighting of land briefly raised morale , but in the New Year the ice began breaking up and forming pressure ridges . Over the next few days , wrote McKinlay , " the twanging , drumming , ominous ice sounds got louder and nearer . " 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 Early in the morning of 10 January 1914 , McKinlay records , " a severe shudder shook the whole ship " as the ice attacked the hull . Bartlett , still hoping to save his ship , gave orders to lighten her by removing all accumulated snow from the decks . He also ordered all hands to have warm clothing ready . At 6 @.@ 45 in the evening a loud bang indicated that the hull had been punctured ; Bartlett went immediately to the engine room and observed water pouring in through a gash 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) long . There was no possibility that the pumps could deal with the inflow , and the captain gave the order to abandon ship . Weather conditions , says McKinlay , could hardly have been worse , but the crew and staff worked throughout the night , in pitch darkness and driving snow , to add to the quantities of rations and equipment already stashed on the ice . Bartlett remained on board until the last moments , playing loud music on the ship 's Victrola . At 3 : 15 p.m. on 11 January , Bartlett put on Chopin 's Funeral March as a final salute to the ship , and stepped off . Karluk sank within minutes , her yardarms snapping off as she disappeared through the narrow hole in the ice . McKinlay took stock of the stranded party : 22 men , one woman , two children , 16 dogs and a cat . 
 = = = Shipwreck Camp = = = 
 Bartlett 's decision to deposit stores on the ice ensured that an ice camp , known as " Shipwreck Camp " , was more or less established by the time Karluk sank . Two shelters had been built , one a snow igloo with a canvas roof , the other constructed from packing cases . To the latter was added a kitchen with a large stove rescued from Karluk 's engine room . A small , separate shelter was built for the five Inuit , and a rough perimeter created from coal bags and assorted containers . In McKinlay 's words , the camp provided " substantial and comfortable houses on which we could rely for shelter for a long time . " Stores were plentiful , and the party was able to eat well . Much of the time in the first days of the camp was spent preparing and adjusting clothing and sleeping gear , in readiness for the forthcoming march to Wrangel Island . The ice drift was slowly moving the camp in the direction of the island , but as yet there was insufficient daylight to attempt the march . 
 Amid this activity Mackay and Murray , now joined by the anthropologist Henri Beuchat , played little part in the general life of the camp and expressed their determination to leave it , independently , as soon as possible . Bartlett wanted to wait for the longer daylight hours of February before attempting the march , but was persuaded by McKinlay and Mamen to send a <unk> group to set up an advance camp on Wrangel Island . A party of four , led by Karluk 's first officer Alexander Anderson and including crew members Charles Barker , John Brady and Edmund Golightly , left Shipwreck Camp on 21 January with instructions from Bartlett to establish their camp at or near Berry Point on the north shore of Wrangel Island . On 4 February <unk> Mamen , who accompanied the party as a scout , returned to Shipwreck Camp and reported that he had left the group a few miles short of land that was evidently not Wrangel Island , and was probably Herald Island , 38 miles ( 61 km ) from their intended destination . This was the last sighting of Anderson 's party ; their ultimate fate was not established until ten years later , when their remains were found on Herald Island . 
 = = = March to Wrangel Island = = = 
 Bartlett decided to send a team back to establish the exact location of the island that the Anderson party had approached , and to determine if Anderson had actually landed there . An injury to his knee ruled Mamen out from this mission , which was undertaken by ship 's steward Ernest Chafe , with the Inuit pair , Kataktovik and Kuraluk . Chafe 's group came within 2 miles ( 3 km ) of Herald Island before being stopped by open water . A careful examination through binoculars revealed no signs of the missing party , and Chafe concluded that Anderson and company had not reached the island . Chafe and his party then returned to Shipwreck Camp . 
 Meanwhile , on 4 February , Mackay and his group ( Murray and Beuchat , joined by seaman Stanley Morris ) announced they were leaving the next day , to seek land . Mackay presented Bartlett with a letter dated 1 February that began : " We , the undersigned , in consideration of the present critical situation , desire to make an attempt to reach the land . " The letter requested appropriate supplies , and concluded by emphasising that the journey was on their own initiative and absolving Bartlett from all responsibilities . Bartlett allocated them a sledge , a tent , six gallons of oil , a rifle and ammunition and food for 50 days . They left on 5 February ; the last sighting of them was a few days later , by Chafe and the Inuit , returning from their abortive trip to Herald Island . They found Mackay 's party struggling to make headway , with some of their provisions lost and clothing and other equipment discarded to lighten their load . Beuchat in particular was in a distressed state , nearly delirious and in the throes of hypothermia . However , the party refused assistance and rejected Chafe 's pleas that they return with him to Shipwreck Camp . Thereafter the only hint of their fate was a sailor 's scarf belonging to Morris , later found buried in an ice floe . It was assumed that the four had either been crushed by the ice , or had fallen through it . 
 Bartlett 's party now consisted of eight Karluk crew members ( himself , engineers John Munro and Robert Williamson , seamen Hugh Williams and Fred Maurer , fireman George Breddy , cook Robert Templeman , and Chafe ) , three scientists ( McKinlay , Mamen and geologist George Malloch ) , John Hadley , and five Inuit ( the family of four and Kataktovik ) . Hadley , nearing 60 years of age , was one of the few , along with Bartlett and the Inuit , with experience of travelling for distances over ice . Bartlett sent his forces out , in groups , to blaze a trail and lay down supply depots on the route to Wrangel Island , thus preparing his inexperienced party for the hazards of ice travel . When he felt they were ready for the main journey he divided them into four teams and sent the first two away on 19 February . Bartlett himself led the last two groups from the camp on 24 February , leaving a note of the party 's location in a copper drum in case the camp should drift into an inhabited area . The distance to Wrangel Island was estimated at 40 miles ( 64 km ) , but the journey proved to be twice that in length . 
 The ice surface was very broken up , making travel slow and difficult . At first the parties were able to travel along a track that had been marked out by the advance parties . However , recent storms had destroyed much of the trail , and in places progress was held up by breaking ice which at one point almost wrecked Bartlett 's camp as his team slept . On 28 February all the parties came together in front of the first of a series of high ridges , from 25 to 100 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 to 30 @.@ 5 m ) in height , that halted their progress . These stretched east and west , blocking any route to the island . McKinlay , Hadley and Chafe were sent on a risky journey back to Shipwreck Camp to pick up supplies that had been left there , while the rest slowly chopped and cut a pathway through the towering ridges . When McKinlay 's group returned to the main party a week later , the path forward had been advanced by only three miles ( 5 km ) , but the worst of the ridges had been overcome . Hadley claimed that the ridges were worse than anything he had seen in his long years of Arctic experience . The later stages of the journey were easier , as the group travelled over steadily smoother ice , and on 12 March they reached land , a long spit of sand stretching out from the northern shores of Wrangel Island . 
 = = Bartlett 's journey = = 
 Bartlett 's initial plan had been for the group to rest briefly on Wrangel Island and then to move on together to the Siberian coast . However , because three men — Mamen , Malloch and Maurer — were injured , and others were weak and frostbitten , Bartlett decided that the main party should remain on the island while he went for help taking only Kataktovik . The pair started off on 18 March , with seven dogs and provisions for 48 days ( 30 days for the dogs ) , and took an extended route round the island 's southern shores to look for signs of Anderson 's or Mackay 's parties . After finding nothing , they headed across the ice towards Siberia , but progress was slow over a surface that was frequently shifting and breaking up to form leads of open water . More time was lost digging out their provisions from the steadily drifting snow . As they drew nearer to the mainland , Kataktovik became nervous ; he had heard that the Alaskan Inuit were disliked in Siberia by the native Chukchi people , and feared for his life . Bartlett did his best to reassure him as they moved slowly forward . 
 On 4 April the pair reached land near Cape <unk> , west of Cape North on the northern Siberian coast . The presence of sledge marks in the snow showed they had landed in an inhabited area . They followed these tracks for a day , before arriving at a small Chukchi village . Here , contrary to Kataktovik 's fears , they were received hospitably , and given shelter and food . On 7 April they set out for East Cape and the villages on the Bering coast . Bartlett had not previously experienced such relentlessly cold weather , with blizzards , hurricane @-@ force winds , and temperatures often below − 50 ° C ( − 58 ° F ) . On the way they passed through other Chukchi villages , where Bartlett traded goods for necessary supplies — he exchanged his Colt revolver for a young , strong dog . Bartlett was touched by the kindness and generosity shown by many of those they encountered on the way , " typical of the true humanity of these kindly people " . On 24 April they arrived at Emma Town , a settlement a few miles west of East Cape . Bartlett calculated that in the 37 days since leaving Wrangel Island , he and Kataktovik had travelled about 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) , all but the last stage on foot . 
 At Emma Town Bartlett met Baron Kleist , a distinguished Russian official who offered to take him to Emma Harbour on the coast , a week 's journey away , where he could look for a ship to Alaska . Bartlett accepted , and on 10 May , though still weak from his journey and an attack of tonsillitis , said goodbye to Kataktovik ( who was remaining for the time being in Emma Town ) , and set off with the baron . On the way they learned that Captain Pedersen was in the area . On 16 May they reached Emma Harbour ; five days later Pedersen arrived in the whaler Herman and , without delay , took Bartlett on board and set out for Alaska . They arrived off Nome on 24 May , but ice prevented them reaching the shore . After three days ' waiting they turned south , and landed at St Michael , where Bartlett was at last able to send a radio message to Ottawa informing the government of Karluk 's fate . He also made enquiries about the whereabouts of the United States revenue cutter Bear , which he saw as a possible rescue vessel for the stranded party . 
 = = On Wrangel Island = = 
 The landfall from Shipwreck Camp had been on the north side of Wrangel Island , at a spot which they named " Icy Spit " . Before his departure , Bartlett asked the party to set up several camps around the island , which would increase the hunting areas . The captain also felt that separation into smaller groups would assist general harmony by keeping incompatible characters apart . He wanted all groups to reassemble at Rodgers Harbor , on the south side of the island , about the middle of July . 
 However , dissension broke out almost immediately after Bartlett 's departure over the sharing of food . It had not been possible to drag all the supplies from Shipwreck Camp , and the trek had taken longer than expected ; consequently there were shortages of biscuit , pemmican ( a compound of dried meat , fat and sugar ) and dog food . There was little prospect of augmenting supplies by hunting birds and game until the weather improved in May or June . When Hadley and the Inuit , Kuraluk , returned from a seal hunt on the ice , Hadley was widely suspected of concealing the proceeds of the hunt for his own consumption ; the same pair were also accused of wasting scarce cooking oil . McKinlay records that the circumstances depressed morale and destroyed comradeship : " The misery and desperation of our situation multiplied every weakness , every quirk of personality , every flaw in character , a thousandfold . " 
 Two attempts were made to travel back to Shipwreck Camp to pick up extra food , but both failed , the second resulting in further losses of dogs and equipment . Chafe , whose feet had become gangrenous after severe frostbite , had his toes removed by second engineer Williamson , with improvised tools . McKinlay and Munro risked their lives by travelling over the sea ice towards Herald Island , in a final effort to locate either of the missing parties . They could get no nearer than 15 miles ( 24 km ) , and from an examination of the distant island through binoculars could see no indications of life . 
 Other health problems persisted ; Malloch 's frostbitten feet failed to heal , and Mamen 's knee , which he had dislocated during the days at Shipwreck Camp , troubled him continuously . A worrying illness began to affect many of the party , the general symptoms were swelling of the legs , ankles and other body parts , accompanied by acute lethargy . Malloch was the worst affected ; he died on 17 May , but his tent @-@ mate Mamen was too ill to see to his burial , so the body lay in the tent for several days , creating a " frightful smell " , until McKinlay arrived to help . Mamen himself died ten days later of the same debilitating disease . 
 From early June the diet was augmented with the appearance of birds . These birds and their eggs became a vital source of food ; as the supply of seal meat dwindled to nothing , the party was reduced to eating rotten flippers , hide , or any part of a seal that was remotely edible . The sharing of birds became another bone of contention ; according to Williamson " Wednesday last , [ Breddy and Chafe ] really obtained 6 eggs and 5 birds instead of 2 eggs and 4 birds as they reported . " Breddy was suspected of other thefts . On 25 June , after a gunshot was heard , Breddy was found dead in his tent . The circumstances of his death , whether accident , suicide or in Hadley 's view , murder ( with Williamson as the chief suspect ) could not be determined . Williamson later called Hadley 's suspicions " hallucinations and absolutely untrue . " Various items stolen from McKinlay were found among Breddy 's personal effects . 
 Despite the sombre outlook , the Canadian flag was raised at Rodgers Harbor on 1 July in honour of Dominion Day . Later in the month the party 's spirits improved when Kuraluk caught a 600 @-@ pound ( 270 kg ) walrus , which provided fresh meat for several days . As August came without sign of a ship and the weather began to turn wintry again , hopes of rescue fell ; the party began to prepare for another winter . 
 = = Rescue = = 
 The revenue cutter Bear arrived in St Michael , Alaska , midway through June . Her master , Captain Cochran , agreed to go to Wrangel Island as soon as he got permission from the United States government . It would be impossible , in any event , to attempt the rescue before mid @-@ July ; ice conditions in the Arctic that year were reported as severe . After receiving permission , Bear , with Bartlett aboard , left St Michael on 13 July ; the ship had many calls to make along the Alaskan coast before she could proceed with the rescue . On 5 August , at Port Hope , Bartlett met with Kataktovik and gave him his expedition wages and a new suit of clothing . At Point Barrow on 21 August Bartlett encountered Burt McConnell , Stefansson 's erstwhile secretary , who gave details of Stefansson 's movements after leaving Karluk the previous September . In April 1914 , McConnell reported , Stefansson had headed north with two companions , searching for new lands . 
 McConnell left Point Barrow for Nome aboard King and Winge , an American @-@ registered walrus hunter , while Bear finally sailed for Wrangel Island . On 25 August Bear was stopped by ice 20 miles ( 32 km ) from the island , and after failing to force a way through , Cochran had to return to Nome for more coal — a decision which , says Bartlett , gave him " days to try a man 's soul " . Back in Nome Bartlett met Olaf Swenson , who had chartered King and Winge for the season and was about to sail for Siberia . Bartlett requested that , if possible , King and Winge stop by Wrangel Island and look for the stranded Karluk party . Bear left Nome on 4 September , a few days after Swenson 's ship . King and Winge , with McConnell still aboard , reached Wrangel Island on 7 September . That morning the group at Rodgers Harbor were awakened early in the morning by the sound of a ship 's whistle , and found King and Winge lying a quarter of a mile offshore . They were rapidly transferred to the ship , which then picked up the remainder of the stranded party who were camped along the coast at Cape Waring . By the afternoon all 14 survivors were aboard . 
 After a futile attempt to approach Herald Island , the ship began the journey back to Alaska ; next day she encountered Bear , with Bartlett aboard . McConnell records that the party were unanimous in their desire to remain with the ship that had effected their rescue , but Bartlett ordered them aboard Bear . Before returning to Alaska , Bear made a final attempt to reach Herald Island ; ice limited their approach to 12 miles ( 19 km ) , and they saw no signs of life . The reunited party arrived at Nome on 13 September , to a great welcome from the local population . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Bartlett , celebrated as a hero by press and public , was honoured for " outstanding bravery " by the Royal Geographical Society . However , he was later censured by an admiralty commission for taking Karluk into the ice , and for allowing Mackay 's party to leave the main group — despite the letter that Mackay and the others had signed , absolving the captain from responsibility . Stefansson , too , was privately critical of Bartlett 's conduct . Bartlett resumed his career at sea , and over the next 30 years led many more excursions to the Arctic . During the Second World War he carried out surveying and supply work for the Allies ; he died , aged 70 , in April 1946 . His account of the Karluk disaster , published in 1916 , makes no direct criticism of Stefansson or anyone else ; Niven records , however , that to his friends Bartlett was highly uncomplimentary about his former leader . 
 In 1918 Stefansson returned after four years ' absence , reporting the discovery of three new islands . He was honoured by the National Geographical Society , received tributes from polar veterans such as Peary and Adolphus Greely , and was given the presidency of the Explorers Club of New York . In Canada his reception was more muted ; there were questions relating to the overall costs of the expedition , its poor initial organisation , and his handling of the Southern Party which , under Rudolph Anderson , completed its work independently of Stefansson . Anderson and other members of the Southern Party later petitioned the Canadian government to investigate statements made by Stefansson in his 1921 book The Friendly Arctic , which they felt reflected poorly on their honour . The request was declined on the ground that " no good could come of the enquiry . " In his book Stefansson takes responsibility for the " bold " decision to take Karluk into the ice rather than hugging the coast on the way to Herschel Island , and accepts that he " chose the wrong alternative " . However , McKinlay felt that the book gave an inaccurate account of the Karluk voyage and its consequences , " putting the blame ... on everyone but Vilhjalmur Stefansson . " The historian Tom <unk> believes that McKinlay 's biggest complaint against his leader was that " Stefansson never at any time seemed able to express an appropriate sorrow over his lost men . " Stefansson , who never returned to the Arctic , died in 1962 at the age of 82 . 
 The fate of First Officer Alexander Anderson 's party remained unknown until 1924 , when an American vessel landed at Herald Island and found human remains , with supplies of food , clothing , ammunition and equipment . From these artefacts it was established that this was Anderson 's party . No cause of death was established , though the plentiful <unk> supplies ruled out starvation . One theory was that the tent had blown away in a storm and that the party had frozen to death . Another was carbon monoxide poisoning within the tent . 
 The mystery illness which affected most of the Wrangel Island party and accelerated the deaths of Malloch and Mamen was later diagnosed as a form of nephritis brought about by eating faulty pemmican . Stefansson explained this by saying that " our pemmican makers has failed us through supplying us with a product deficient in fat . " Peary had emphasised that a polar explorer should " give his personal , constant and insistent attention " to the making of his pemmican ; McKinlay believed that Stefansson had devoted too much time selling the idea of the expedition , and too little ensuring the quality of the food that its members would depend upon . 
 Of the survivors , Hadley continued working for the Canadian Arctic Expedition , becoming second officer and later master of the supply ship Polar Bear . He died of influenza , in San Francisco in 1918 . Hadley and McConnell wrote accounts of their experiences for Stefansson , who incorporated them in The Friendly Arctic . Chafe also wrote and published a short account . Most of the others quickly returned to relative obscurity , but in 1922 Fred Maurer was persuaded by Stefansson to join an attempt to colonise Wrangel Island . To the embarrassment of the Canadian government , Stefansson insisted on going ahead , even though Wrangel Island was indisputably part of what had then become the Soviet Union . A party of five , including Maurer , was sent to the island ; only one , an Inuit woman Ada Blackjack , survived . Despite their ordeal , many of the Karluk survivors lived long lives ; Williamson , who declined to speak or write of his experiences in the Arctic , lived to be 97 , dying in Victoria , Canada , in 1975 . McKinlay died in 1983 , aged 95 , having published his account of the expedition in 1976 . Kuraluk , <unk> and their daughters , Helen and Mugpi , returned to their former life at Point Barrow . The two girls , says Pálsson , had provided " important sources of cheer at the darkest moments . " Mugpi , who later was known as Ruth <unk> <unk> , became the very last survivor of the Karluk voyage , dying in 2008 after a full life , aged 97 . 
 = = Published voyage accounts = = 
 Six first @-@ hand accounts of Karluk 's last voyage have been published . These include Stefansson 's account which only covers the June to September 1913 period . Expedition secretary Burt McConnell wrote an account of the Wrangel Island rescue which was published in The New York Times , 15 September 1914 . A version of McConnell 's account appears in Stefansson 's book . 
 = Ebenezer Avery House = 
 The Ebenezer Avery House was originally located on Latham Street and Thames Street in Groton , Connecticut , United States . The date of the house 's construction is unknown , but it is believed to be from the 1760s and it was the house of Ebenezer Avery . The Ebenezer Avery House was the location where the British brought the injured soldiers after the Battle of Groton Heights on September 6 , 1781 . In 1971 , the house was moved to Fort Griswold Battlefield State Park in Groton and restored . Though it stands in a state park , the historic house museum continues to be maintained by the Avery Memorial Association . 
 = = History = = 
 Constructed around the 1760s , the Ebenezer Avery House is a 10 @-@ room house was owned by Ensign Ebenezer Avery . It was originally located on Latham Street and Thames Street in Groton , Connecticut . Avery was a tailor that answered the call for battle on September 6 , 1781 and went to defend of Fort Griswold from British attack . The Battle of Groton Heights ended with the American defeat and the deaths of its leader , Lieutenant Colonel William Ledyard and resulted in nearly 100 families being left homeless and much of the town 's waterfront . 
 Part of the Ebenezer Avery House history is how it came to be used after the battle while its owner was absent . Some of the wounded from the battle , those unable to walk , including Stephen Hempstead , were taken prisoner and placed on a wagon with others to be taken down to the fleet . The British men allowed the wagon to run down the hill , where it stopped when it struck a tree , throwing some of the men off the wagon and aggravated their injuries . 
 The wounded were set upon the beach in preparation for the boat trip to New York , but Ebenezer Ledyard , the brother of William Ledyard , offered himself as hostage . The British took the wounded to Ebenezer Avery 's house and placed Ebenezer Avery and other wounded inside and had them " <unk> " . The house was later set on fire with the men inside and " with difficulty extinguished " . In the battle , Avery was shot in the neck " which cut the cords , and left him senseless as one of the dead . " Hempstead said that thirty @-@ five men had been laid upon the floor and the British left them , unattended and uncovered , until Dr. Downer and Dr. Prentiss arrived . Ebenezer Avery recovered , but lost his hearing , and continued to live in the house until his death on January 11 , 1828 at age 81 . The blood stains were still visible at the time of the centennial of the battle in 1881 , but no longer are present . In 1896 , the Thomas Starr Society placed a memorial tablet on the site . 
 = = Move and restoration = = 
 In 1970 , the Ebenezer Avery House was in danger of being torn down to construct apartments and it was purchased by R. Stanton Avery . R. Stanton Avery purchased the property with the intention of turning it over to the Avery Memorial Association . Edwin Park , an architect , assessed the house as in need of extensive reconstruction and the association discussed the plan to move the house to Fort Griswold Battlefield State Park . A meeting held on the association on July 24 , 1971 , was held to discuss the movement plan which involved disassembling and reassembling the house at its new location . The project to move the house was a shared cost between R. Stanton Avery and the Avery Memorial Association . By the 1972 meeting , the total cost of the relocation was $ 43 @,@ 000 and the act provoked interest from the State of Connecticut . The house was donated to the State of Connecticut for use as a historic house museum . 
 In 1973 , the association debated over the sale of land to cover costs of restoring and maintaining the Ebenezer Avery House . The total cost of the move was listed at $ 80 @,@ 000 with an expected $ 3000 per year and the intention was to serve have enough income generated by interest to cover the cost of the house . The Association owned 1 @.@ 3 acres , but would reserve the .3 acre upon which the Avery Monument is located . In May 1975 , the Ebenezer Avery House was opened after being restored to its " original condition " and filled with period items including Lieutenant Ebenezer Avery 's sword , a cousin of Ensign Ebenezer Avery , killed in the Battle of Groton Heights . According to Leary , bricks from the Fitz @-@ John Winthrop house , located in Bluff Point State Park were reclaimed and used to reconstruct the chimney of the Ebenezer Avery House . Fitz @-@ John Winthrop 's house was a sixteen room mansion that fell into disrepair before being destroyed by a fire in 1962 . 
 As of 2014 , the Ebenezer Avery House is opened from Memorial Day weekend through Labor Day weekend from 12 : 00 p.m. to 4 : 00 p.m. on Fridays , Saturdays and Sundays . 
 = Goodman Beaver = 
 Goodman Beaver is a comics character created by American cartoonist Harvey Kurtzman . Goodman is a naive and optimistic Candide @-@ like character , oblivious to the corruption and degeneration around him , and whose stories were vehicles for biting social satire and pop culture parody . Except for the character 's first appearance , which Kurtzman did alone , the stories were written by Kurtzman and drawn by Will Elder . 
 Goodman first appeared in a story in Harvey Kurtzman 's Jungle Book in 1959 ; the best @-@ remembered were the five strips the Kurtzman – Elder team produced in 1961 – 62 for the Kurtzman @-@ edited magazine Help ! They tend to be in the parodic style Kurtzman developed when he wrote and edited Mad in the 1950s , but with more pointed , adult @-@ oriented satire and much more refined and detailed artwork on Elder 's part , filled with numerous visual gags . 
 The best @-@ known of the Goodman Beaver stories is " Goodman Goes Playboy " ( 1962 ) . A satire on the hedonistic lifestyle of Hugh Hefner using parodies of Archie comics characters , whose publisher threatened a lawsuit . The issue was settled out of court , and the copyright for the story passed to Archie Comics . Hefner , the actual target of the strip , found it amusing . Kurtzman and Elder developed a female version of Goodman Beaver for Playboy magazine called Little Annie Fanny ( 1962 – 88 ) . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Goodman Beaver is a naïve and optimistic character , oblivious to the degeneration around him . According to Kurtzman , the character was partially inspired by Voltaire 's Candide and Harold Gray 's comic strip character Little Orphan Annie , who , like Goodman , was drawn with blank circles for eyes . Art critic Greil Marcus compares Goodman to Young Goodman Brown in Nathaniel Hawthorne 's tale of the same name — both are pure @-@ souled characters who become disillusioned by the depravity they confront in the world . 
 Kurtzman wrote five Goodman Beaver stories for his long @-@ time collaborator Will Elder . Most of the stories were in the parodic style Kurtzman had developed as the creator , editor , and writer of Mad , but dealt with more significant issues concerning modernity . Published in the Kurtzman @-@ edited Help ! in the early 1960s , they were drawn in Elder 's " <unk> " style , in which he crammed every panel with humorous detail and throwaway gags . Elder cited the Flemish Pieter Bruegel the Elder and the Spanish Diego Velázquez as influences on this style . 
 = = Stories = = 
 = = = " The Organization Man in the Gray Flannel Executive Suit " = = = 
 As an editor hired by Schlock Publications Inc . , Goodman loses his youthful idealism when awash in the sea of avarice and selfishness he encounters in the publishing world . In this story Kurtzman used his own personal experiences to satirize the corrupting influence of capitalism and power . Goodman finds himself groping the secretaries , just as the other cynical executives at Schlock do , and ends up stealing from the company . 
 Goodman was a semi @-@ autobiographical character , reflecting Kurtzman 's disillusioning experiences in the publishing industry . Kurtzman 's artwork is in an exaggerated cartoon style with round , fluid , elongated characters rendered with loose , fluid , and sketchy brushwork and gray wash . Dialogue is in an expressive , handwriting @-@ like style . Kurtzman blends the verbal and visual aspects of the work — for example , when an enraged Goodman Beaver confronts his diminutive boss Mr. Schlock , Goodman is graphically overwhelmed by Schlock 's word balloons , which demonstrates Goodman 's helpless subservience and Schlock 's effortless psychological dominance over his employees . 
 = = = " Goodman Meets T * rz * n " = = = 
 " Goodman Meets T * rz * n " first appeared in the September 1961 issue of Help ! , and was Elder 's first take on Goodman Beaver . Set against the backdrop of the fall of European colonialism in the face of the rise of African nationalism , such as in the Kenyan Mau @-@ Mau Uprising , and the spread of the Soviet sphere of influence , the story throws a modern 1960s spin on the romance of jungle adventure as exemplified by the Tarzan tales . Kurtzman sends up T * rz * n 's attitude of superiority , as when T * rz * n ( Tarzan ) confronts an African tribe , or when J * ne ( Jane ) gives T * rz * n basic English lessons . 
 Elder 's first efforts had Goodman depicted with more monkey @-@ like features — thick , black eyebrows , a large mouth , and small jaw and chin . Kurtzman and Elder desired to have a more " lovable " Goodman , so Elder reworked Goodman 's appearance in later stories , redrawing Goodman 's features to conform with this new look for later reprintings of the " Goodman Meets T * rz * n " story . 
 = = = " Goodman Goes Playboy " = = = 
 Help ! ' s most famous story was " Goodman Goes Playboy " , first published in the February 1962 issue of Help ! The story satirized Hugh Hefner and his lifestyle while parodying Archie comics in a much more outlandish way than Kurtzman 's parody " <unk> " in Mad a decade earlier . Kurtzman called this his favorite Goodman Beaver story , and said that Hefner would point people to it when he wanted to explain to people what Kurtzman 's work was about . 
 Goodman has returned to his hometown , and the Archie characters , home from college , are drinking , partying , skirt @-@ chasing hedonists . Jughead is a beatnik , and the others are leading glamorous lifestyles . Archie Andrews parody Archer explains to a behind @-@ the @-@ times Goodman , " You 've been away too long . Nowadays , the gang is interested mainly in hip @-@ ness — awareness " , rather than keeping up with how the football team is doing . Archer shows Goodman to his place , which must be entered through a staircase built into an enormous statue of a female abdomen . Archer leads Goodman to a Roman @-@ style orgy and has him change into a toga . The party is Archer 's last , as he reveals he has signed a pact with the Devil , and the debt ( Archer 's soul ) was due that night . 
 " Goodman Goes Playboy " appeared in altered form in the book collection Executive 's Comic Book in 1962 : in the orgy scene the exposed nipples were covered with white ink and the parody Archie characters were altered to obscure the resemblance to characters they were based on in a failed attempt to escape legal action from Archie 's publishers . 
 = = = " Goodman , Underwater " = = = 
 While trying to enjoy a book as he floats in a swim ring off a crowded beach , Goodman is interrupted by undersea adventurer Hammer Nelson , who invites Goodman to help him fight underwater crime . Don Quixote @-@ like , the overeager Nelson sees crime where there is none , interrupting swimmers and boaters at play . The pair set out to find a Russian submarine — and find one , but Nelson mistakes it for a monster to be subdued with his speargun . Goodman realizes Nelson 's insanity , abandons the adventurer , and returns to his book . 
 Framed within the story of Don Quixote , " Goodman , Underwater " satirizes Cold War tensions and sets out to deflate the deluded ideals of do @-@ gooders while parodying the 1960s television series Sea Hunt , which starred Lloyd Bridges as Mike Nelson . The illustrations that bookend the story are from 19th @-@ century French artist Gustave Doré 's Don Quixote illustrations . The story first appeared in Help ! # 14 ( May 1962 ) . 
 = = = " Goodman Meets S * perm * n " = = = 
 In " Goodman Meets S * perm * n " , Goodman stumbles across the superhero on a fishing trip . S * perm * n ( Superman ) has gone into hiding from society , sporting a beard and moccasins . He no longer has the desire to help a society he has lost faith in , and which criticizes him for his good deeds . Goodman takes him back to the city to prove that society is still full of good people . While in the city , Goodman encounters an old woman being attacked by a knife @-@ wielding maniac . Goodman flees in terror , but is stopped by S * perm * n who reveals himself as the old woman in disguise — he had been testing Goodman 's selflessness . S * perm * n is horrified and disappointed by the degeneration and corruption he sees in the city , and abandons society again . 
 First published in Help ! # 15 ( August 1962 ) , Elder described " Goodman Meets S * perm * n " and its detailed splash page as " Marx Brothers on paper . You never knew what to expect " , referring to the busy wealth of gags it was filled with . With artwork by Wally Wood , Kurtzman first parodied Superman in " Superduperman " in the fourth issue of Mad in 1953 . 
 = = = " Goodman Gets a Gun " = = = 
 Goodman attends a pool party in his hometown Riverdale , fresh from joining the police force . He spots the popular Liz <unk> , with whom he had been smitten since high school , but he is too passive and timid to draw her attention . After watching a Marlon Brando movie on TV in the lounge he is infused with courage and returns to the party imitating Brando 's attitude and mannerisms . He draws the attention of Liz <unk> and the crowd , but not for his Brando impression as he thinks — rather , they are impressed to learn that , as an off @-@ duty police officer , Goodman is carrying a pistol . The group coaxes him into going with them to a night club known for its rough clientele . When the rough crowd arrives , Goodman 's group expects the gun to serve as their protection — until Goodman lets them know his newfound self @-@ confidence drove him to quit the police force two hours earlier . The group abandons Goodman to a thrashing by the thugs . 
 " Goodman Gets a Gun " appeared first in Help ! # 16 ( November 1962 ) . It was the only Elder @-@ drawn story not to appear in the Executive 's Comic Book collection of 1962 . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Goodman Beaver made his first appearance in Harvey Kurtzman 's Jungle Book in 1959 , in " The Organization Man in the Gray Flannel Executive Suit " . Jungle Book was the first American book of original comics , a mass @-@ market paperback that was the first in a planned series . The book sold poorly , but has been a favorite among Kurtzman fans . 
 The first Elder @-@ drawn Goodman story appeared in Help ! # 12 in 1961 and was followed in 1962 with four more stories in Help ! # 13 – 16 . A Goodman Beaver collection called Executive 's Comic Book appeared in 1962 from Macfadden Books . In this paperback collection of four stories — " Goodman Meets T * rz * n " , " Goodman Goes Playboy " , " Goodman , Underwater " , and " Goodman Meets S * perm * n " — the strips were reformatted to one panel per page . Elder extended the artwork of each panel to fit the page dimensions . 
 Kurtzman approached Hugh Hefner in 1960 with the idea of a comic strip feature for Playboy that would star Goodman Beaver . Until then , Playboy had printed many cartoons , but not a comic strip . After exchanging ideas with Hefner the project was approved , but Goodman Beaver was required to be transformed into a voluptuous female . Kurtzman brought in Will Elder as his primary collaborator on Little Annie Fanny . 
 In 1984 Kitchen Sink Press published a collection called Goodman Beaver , which reprinted four Kurtzman – Elder stories from Help ! — all the Elder @-@ drawn stories except for " Goodman Goes Playboy " , which appeared only in short excerpts permitted by fair use exemptions under US copyright law . The book reprinted the elongated versions of those strips that had appeared in Executive 's Comic Book . Original artwork for 38 of the 139 reproduced panels were lost ; according to Kurtzman , several pages were sent to French magazine Charlie Hebdo for translation and never returned . Kitchen Sink used proofs , <unk> , or original magazine appearances for sources from which to reproduce the missing panels . 
 = = = List of original appearances = = = 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Kurtzman had avoided drawing legal fire from the litigious DC Comics and Edgar Rice Burroughs , Inc. when he parodied their copyrighted properties , but the <unk> depictions of the Archie characters in " Goodman Goes Playboy " provoked legal action from Archie publisher John L. Goldwater , who had earlier played a role in founding the comics industry 's self @-@ censorship body , the Comics Magazine Association of America . 
 Help ! publisher Jim Warren received a letter on 6 December 1961 accusing the magazine of copyright infringement and demanding removal of the offending issue from newsstands . Warren 's lawyer believed they could succeed if they fought the suit , but the legal costs would make it a " Pyrrhic victory " , and thus recommended settling out of court . Warren could not have the magazine recalled , but he agreed to pay Archie Comics $ 1000 and ran a note of apology in a subsequent issue of Help ! — the August 1962 issue , in which appeared another character franchise parody , " Goodman Meets S * perm * n " . Warren 's action disappointed Kurtzman , who felt that giving in to such censorship set a " terrible precedent " , and amounted to a kind of prostitution . 
 When the story was reprinted in the book collection Executive Comic Book in 1962 , Elder modified the artwork to obscure the appearance of the Archie characters . Archie Comics found the characters ' appearances still too close to their copyrighted properties and threatened another lawsuit . Kurtzman and Elder settled out of court by handing over the copyright to the story . Archie Comics held on to the copyright and refused to allow the story to be republished . 
 The actual target of " Goodman Goes Playboy " had been Hefner , who loved it . Kurtzman began working for Hefner again soon afterwards . The strip Kurtzman produced , Little Annie Fanny , is often thought of as a compromise — virtuosic in its visuals , but lacking in content in comparison to the Goodman Beaver stories . R. Fiore and other commentators have considered this ironic in light of the Faustian theme of " Goodman Goes Playboy " . 
 In June 1983 Denis Kitchen requested the right to reprint the story as part of a planned Goodman Beaver collection . Archie Enterprises chairman Michael J. Silberkleit responded that publishing a story that included the likenesses of the Archie characters would be " a serious breach of copyright and trademark law " . When the company learned that Kitchen planned to publish the story with the pages reduced in size and the characters ' faces blacked out , Archie Enterprises threatened another lawsuit , and Kitchen dropped the story from the collection , which appeared in 1984 . Kitchen went as far as to have the book 's cover redone , as the planned one had incorporated a " Goodman Goes Playboy " panel in the background . 
 Publisher and critic Gary Groth wrote that Elder 's artwork in the Goodman Beaver stories " clinched his reputation as the cartoon Brueghel [ sic ] with his intricate portraits of a world cheerfully going mad " . Elder considered the stories to be the funniest of his collaborations with Kurtzman , though he said that towards the end of the run he was getting tired of the painstaking work he put into the drawings . The stories placed sixty @-@ fourth on The Comics Journal 's " Top 100 English @-@ Language Comics of the Century " in 1999 , along with four other works with which Kurtzman was involved . Late @-@ 1990s talk of a Goodman Beaver feature film or television series circulated , but the Kurtzman estate was uninterested . 
 After Comics Journal co @-@ owner Gary Groth discovered that Archie Comics had let the copyright on " Goodman Goes Playboy " expire , he had the story reprinted in The Comics Journal # 262 ( September 2004 ) . It was also made available as a PDF file on the magazine 's website . The story has yet to appear in any reprint collection since the lapse of copyright . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals and magazines = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = Marionette ( Fringe ) = 
 " Marionette " is the ninth episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode was co @-@ written by Monica Owusu @-@ Breen and Alison Schapker , and directed by Joe Chappelle . It followed a series of organ recipients being tracked down and having their donated organs removed , all in a scientist 's attempt to resurrect his deceased love interest , whose organs were donated to the victims . Meanwhile , Olivia ( Anna Torv ) copes with the consequences of being back in the prime universe . 
 The episode first aired on December 9 , 2010 in the United States to an estimated 4 @.@ 74 million viewers . " Marionette " was the series ' winter finale , as well as the last episode to air on Thursdays in the US . It received generally positive reviews . Many critics praised Torv 's portrayal of Olivia after her recent trauma , as well as the aftereffects of Fauxlivia 's deception , as realistic and well @-@ acted . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Olivia ( Anna Torv ) has recovered from her ordeal of being trapped in the parallel universe and has rejoined the Fringe team , while others on the team , particularly Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , struggle with the idea that the parallel universe 's Olivia , Fauxlivia , had successfully pretended to be Olivia . Throughout the episode , Olivia is shown to be struggling emotionally with knowing that Fauxlivia has lived in her apartment and has slept with Peter . 
 The team is called to the home of a man whose heart was removed through a makeshift operation . They learn that not only did someone call for emergency help shortly after the heart 's removal , but the man was found alive by the emergency response team well after his heart was removed , though he eventually died by the time Fringe arrived . Walter ( John Noble ) and Peter recognize scars on the blood vessels leading to the heart , identifying the victim as one that received a heart transplant . During the autopsy at the lab , Walter concludes that a serum was used to prolong the victim 's life well after the heart 's removal , a chemical based on his own past research into life restoration . 
 A second victim is found , this time a man whose eyes have been removed by forced surgery . Again , they discover the eyes were obtained from organ donation , and they find a connection to a woman called Amanda ( Anja Savcic ) , a ballerina who had committed suicide . They also note the care that the culprit performed the work , and speculate that the person they are looking for is showing some compassion for his victims , calling for emergency help and using the serum to hope that they are given the proper care in time . They find that Amanda 's alleged cremated remains are bogus , and that her body had been stolen before it could be cremated . They start to trace connections to Amanda , finding she was in a depression counseling support group . Though there are several possible suspects , Olivia 's intuition leads her to a man named Roland David Barrett ( Mark Ivanir ) , who was noted to have become enamored with Amanda at the meetings . At Roland 's home , he has recovered the corpse and surgically replaced the organs in her body . Using a makeshift set of ropes and pulleys , Roland engages Amanda 's body in a marionette act to make her perform like a ballerina , promising her he will bring her back to life . 
 As the Fringe division sets out to Roland 's home , Roland injects Amanda 's body with more of the serum , and she is brought back to life . By the time Fringe arrives , Roland gives himself up willingly , and they find Amanda dead again . Roland explains that though she was alive , when he looked into her eyes , he realized she wasn 't the same person and thus terminated the process . As Roland and Amanda 's body are taken away , Olivia breaks down in front of Peter ; she questions that if Roland could tell that Amanda wasn 't the same person by looking at her eyes , why couldn 't Peter do the same with Fauxlivia ? Peter is unable to answer her , and a distressed Olivia leaves on her own . As Walter takes Peter to get a milkshake , the two are identified by an Observer , who reports on his phone that " he is still alive " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was co @-@ written by co @-@ executive producers Alison Schapker and Monica Owusu @-@ Breen , while being directed by executive producer Joe Chappelle . When asked why they chose " Marionette " and not the previous episode " Entrada " as the mid @-@ season finale , co @-@ showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J. H. Wyman stated they were more interested in consequences , such as the repercussions of having both Olivias back in their own worlds . Pinkner explained , " We 're always more interested in the ' And then what ? ' After ' Entrada , ' what are the consequences of what we witnessed for the first eight episodes ? We very much wanted to play that before the break . " 
 Pinkner and Wyman summarized the episode in an interview , " The headline here is ' Picking up the pieces . ' Olivia 's had this real Rip Van Winkle experience ; while she was away , life went on without her . Now she 's back and she 's going to find out what happened while she was gone . It 's going to shatter her " . In a conference call interview , Pinkner and Wyman further described the episode as " pretty fantastic " because " it 's one of our most cinematic episodes " . " Marionette " ended the episode arc begun in the season premiere , where one episode would take place entirely in one universe and then the following episode would alternate to the other ; now Fringe would take place entirely in the prime universe , something that Pinkner deemed " less predictable " for viewers . 
 The episode featured onetime guest appearances by Mark Ivanir as the puppeteer Roland David Barrett , Anja Savcic as the dead ballerina Amanda Walsh , Barbara Tyson as her mother Mrs. Walsh , Michael Bean as Grant Russo , Genevieve <unk> as <unk> , and Elizabeth McLaughlin as Dr. Alexandra Ross . Actor John Noble believed Barrett to be " very gifted . " Recurring guest star Michael Cerveris also appeared as the Observer . 
 Noble tweeted live during the episode as part of a special promotion . A week after " Marionette " aired , Fox came out with a promotional video meant to reassure Fringe fans that the show 's move to Friday did not automatically mean it was on the road to being canceled . The new video featured the message " You May Think Friday Is Dead … But We 're Gonna <unk> It , " a reference to the resurrection plot in " Marionette " . As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Marionette " , with the intention of having " students learn about 3 @-@ dimensional protein models and how their use allows scientists to predict biological behavior . " 
 Lead actress Anna Torv later cited two scenes in " Marionette " of which she was most proud of during her time on Fringe . The first was Olivia 's discovery that Peter was sleeping with Fauxlivia and her reaction — going through all of her clothes in disgust ; the second related to her comment to Peter that she couldn 't " believe that you didn 't know it was me . " Torv explained , " The reason I love those scenes is because it ’ s really easy to be great in your own bedroom [ rehearsing ] , but when you get on set you have so many different obstacles . The scene with Peter and me outside was done at like 1 : 30 in the morning , in the middle of town , so we had piles of drunk people screaming up and down the street , and massive fire engines and trucks coming through … . We 're doing this quiet scene where I have to cry and we 're on the clock , but that ’ s what TV teaches you - – to just go with it very quickly . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Marionette " first aired on December 9 , 2010 in the United States on the Fox network . It was watched by an estimated 4 @.@ 74 million viewers , with a 2 @.@ 8 / 4 rating among all households and a 1 @.@ 7 / 5 ratings for viewers 18 @-@ 49 . Time shifted viewing increased the episode 's ratings by 53 percent among adults , resulting in a rise from 1 @.@ 7 to 2 @.@ 6 . This was the largest increase of the week in time @-@ shifting viewers . It was Fringe 's winter finale , with the next episode airing January 21 , 2011 . " Marionette " was the last episode to air in its Thursday timeslot , as the series moved to Fridays in the US . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received critical acclaim . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly wrote that despite the " burden " placed on " Marionette " because of its timing , " by now , the series is so sure of its tone , its surging story @-@ telling power , that it more than met its challenges " . Tucker believed the show had become " exhilaratingly fearless " by pulling in the many references from literature , movies and other sources , and also thought that Olivia 's reaction to the Peter @-@ Fauxlivia relationship " felt right " . The A.V. Club 's Noel Murray gave the episode an A , explaining that he felt the episode was " very strong " and " was especially impressed with how Fringe handled the Olivia / Peter relationship " . Television Without Pity graded the episode a B. Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times called the episode " the perfect epilogue to that first chapter , " explaining : 
 " I ’ ve always wanted to see more of what happens after the ending of a big action movie . Sure , we ’ ve defeated the evil alien mothership and saved mankind , but all our cities are blown up . Or we ’ ve fallen in love while escaping the malfunctioning homicidal robots , but whose side are we spending Christmas with ? It isn ’ t often that you get to see how people move on from these huge events , but “ Marionette ” gives us just that . Bundled with a retelling of the quintessential horror / sci fi story " . 
 Like Ken Tucker , Hanson also loved how Olivia coped with someone posing as herself , saying that it made her seem like an " honest , real woman " . Despite not typically liking " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episodes , James Poniewozik of Time Magazine thought it " did quite a good job using the case to tell the story of the tension between Peter and Olivia , and the emotional aftermath of returning to a life someone else has borrowed " . Rhea Dee of Pinkraygun.com almost entirely focused on Olivia 's reactions to being back in the prime universe . Dee praised the realistic tone , writing that normally in other shows she was used to the female character being " annoying " after trauma , but " not once in this episode did I feel like Olivia ’ s emotions were irrational " . 
 The staff of Open Salon.com enjoyed the episode , writing " While I enjoyed the last eight weeks of alternate universe hijinks , this week 's episode reminded me of what I had been missing from the earlier seasons ... It 's nice to know we 'll be back with our good old regular Earth @-@ 1 team for the foreseeable future . Overall , this week was really well done - very effectively creepy , well directed and plotted with just the right about of gore to make you jump " . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly named " Marionette " the eleventh best episode of the series , calling it " a strong , disturbing outing that was part of Fringe 's mid @-@ series peak , in which the show found its best storytelling voice by crafting strange , emotionally resonant case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week plots that thematically paralleled the ongoing character arcs in ways that felt organic , not contrived . " In a similar 2013 list , Den of Geek ranked the episode as the third best of the entire series . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Anna Torv submitted " Marionette " , along with the season three episodes " Olivia " , " Entrada " , and Bloodline " for consideration in the Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series category at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . She failed to receive a nomination . 
 = Bolshoy Ice Dome = 
 The Bolshoy Ice Dome ( Russian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is an indoor arena located in Olympic Park , Sochi , Russia . Opened in 2012 , the 12 @,@ 000 @-@ seat arena was primarily constructed to host hockey competitions during the 2014 Winter Olympics . Following the Games , it became the home arena of HC Sochi , an expansion team of the KHL . The arena has also hosted concerts and other events . Prior to the Games , the arena hosted the IIHF World U18 Championships and Channel One Cup in 2013 . 
 The arena 's exterior is distinguished by its LED @-@ illuminated roof , which its designers described as resembling <unk> eggs and frozen water droplets 
 = = Name and location = = 
 The arena was named " Bolshoy " , meaning " major " or " great " in Russian . This highlights the integral role of ice hockey at the Olympics , which has been dubbed " the most popular sport " of the Games by the organizers themselves . Furthermore , the name was chosen due to its universal familiarity in other countries , in addition to its allusion to the Bolshoi Theatre , Bolshoi Ballet , and other great Russian accomplishments . 
 The Ice Dome was situated in the Coastal Cluster zone of venues for the 2014 Winter Olympics . It served as the main arena for the men and women 's ice hockey tournament throughout the Games . It is the only venue in the Olympic Park located on top of a hill , and is less than 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) away from <unk> Arena , which was the secondary ice hockey venue that hosted mainly preliminary round matches . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The construction of the Bolshoy Ice Dome started in 2009 and finished in 2012 . It was designed by architect firm <unk> and completed at a cost of approximately US $ 180 million , although <unk> @-@ TASS estimated the cost to be as high as $ 300 million . A total of 20 architects and 70 engineers – headed by Andrey Ustinov – were responsible for the construction of the arena . 
 The exterior structure of the Ice Dome was designed to resemble a frozen ice droplet . It has also drawn comparisons to a Fabergé egg , due to the light @-@ emitting diodes ( LEDs ) resembling the " jewel @-@ encrusted surface " of the famous Russian art piece . Ustinov confirmed that the building was designed to be " a combination of both . " The roof of the dome is mostly silver in colour and is covered with aluminium panels . It is decorated with 38 @,@ 000 LED lights which illuminate the outside of the arena at night . The roof also doubles as a scoreboard that displays the live score of the game being played inside and an animation of a hockey puck whenever a goal is scored . However , it famously did not display the final score after the United States defeated the hosts Russia 3 – 2 in an overtime shootout during the 2014 Winter Olympics . 
 In the arena 's interior , the 12 @,@ 000 seats are arranged in bowl @-@ like configuration . The concourse features 35 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 300 m2 ) of glazed glass , which enables spectators to have a view of the Caucasus Mountains . The hockey rink 's dimensions are 60 metres ( 200 ft ) × 30 metres ( 98 ft ) , in line with the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) specifications . This contrasts with the dimensions of the previous Olympics , which utilized National Hockey League ( NHL ) sized rinks that are 4 metres ( 13 ft ) narrower in width . It contains 12 dressing rooms for players , an entry tunnel that can be accessed by large vehicles , and a practice ice rink . Moreover , the Ice Dome uses heat transfer fluids on the ice and in the air conditioning system . This helps to preserve the quality of the ice , as well as moderate the temperature within the arena so that spectators are kept warm while maintaining the coolness of the ice . These technologies – along with the arena 's insulation – were developed by the Dow Chemical Company , one of the official sponsors of the Olympic Games . 
 = = Events = = 
 In order to test the arenas built for the Olympics , the Bolshoy Ice Dome served as one of the venues for the 2013 IIHF World U18 Championships . It subsequently held the Channel One Cup from 19 – 22 December 2013 in final preparation before the start of the Games . As the main venue for the 2014 Olympic ice hockey competition , the Ice Dome hosted most of the preliminary round games and almost all the playoff round matches for the men 's tournament , while hosting solely the medal matches of the women 's tournament . On February 20 , it held the gold medal match for the women 's tournament , which saw Canada overcome a 0 – 2 deficit against the United States to tie the game with less than a minute of regulation time remaining , before scoring in overtime to secure their fourth consecutive Olympic gold medal . The arena hosted the gold medal game of the men 's tournament three days later on 23 February – the final gold medal of the 2014 Games up for contention – in which Canada defeated Sweden by a score of 3 – 0 . In doing so , the Canadian team won an Olympic gold medal outside of North America for the first time in 62 years , became the first team since the Soviet Union in 1984 to finish the tournament with a perfect record , and the first team to successfully defend their gold medal since the Soviets in 1992 . 
 The venue hosted the 2015 Kontinental Hockey League All @-@ Star Game . 
 = = Future = = 
 After the conclusion of the Olympics , the arena will continue to host a variety of sports , in addition to becoming an entertainment centre and concert venue . The arena will host HC Sochi , a KHL expansion team . 
 = Thurso = 
 Thurso ( pronounced / <unk> / , Scots : <unk> , Scottish Gaelic : Inbhir Theòrsa ) is a town and former burgh on the north coast of the Highland council area of Scotland . Situated in the historical area of Caithness , it is the northernmost town on the British mainland . It lies at the junction of the north @-@ south A9 road and the west @-@ east <unk> road , connected to Bridge of <unk> in the west and Castletown in the east . The 34 miles ( 55 km ) River Thurso flows through the town and into Thurso Bay and the Pentland Firth . The river estuary serves as a small harbour . At the 2011 Census , Thurso had a population of 7 @,@ 933 . The larger Thurso civil parish including the town and the surrounding countryside had a population of 9 @,@ 112 . 
 Thurso was an important Norse port , and has a later history of trade with ports throughout northern Europe until the 19th century . A thriving fishing centre , Thurso also had a reputation for its linen @-@ cloth and tanning activities . As of 2015 the Dounreay Nuclear power plant , although decommissioned at the end of the 20th century , employs a significant number of the local population . The Category @-@ A listed ruined Old St Peter 's Church ( St. Peter 's Kirk ) is one of the oldest churches in Scotland , dating to at least 1125 . The current church , St Andrew 's and St Peter 's , was built in 1832 to a design by William Burn in the Gothic style . 
 The town contains the main campus of North Highland College and Thurso High School , the northernmost secondary school on the British mainland , which was established in 1958 . Thurso Castle , built in 1872 , is in ruins . Thurso is home to the football ( soccer ) team , Thurso FC , established in 2008 , which play in the North Caledonian League , and the rugby teams Caithness Crushers and Caithness RFC . Thurso railway station , opened in 1874 , was the most northern station on the Sutherland and Caithness Railway . The nearby port of Scrabster provides ferry services to the Orkney Islands ; the Northlink ferry ( MV <unk> ) operates between Scrabster and Stromness . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Originally Thurso was known by the Celtic name of <unk> meaning " bull water " or " bull river " ; similarly Dunnet Head was <unk> standing for " bull fort " and the name of the town name may have its roots there . Norse influence altered its name to <unk> , then <unk> , based on the deity of Thor and translating as the place on Thor ’ s River . 
 The local Scots name , <unk> , derives from the Norse , as does the modern Scottish Gaelic Inbhir Theòrsa ( The " th " is pronounced as " h " and the " bh " as " v " . ) . Inbhir means a river mouth , and is generally found as " Inver " in many anglicised names . It is possible that there was also a pre @-@ Norse Gaelic name as well , as " <unk> " is cognate with the modern Gaelic terms , " tarbh " ( bull ) , " <unk> " and " dun " . 
 = = History = = 
 Thurso 's history stretches back to at least the era of Norse Orcadian rule in Caithness , which ended conclusively in 1266 . Neolithic horned cairns found on nearby <unk> Hill , which were used for burials and rituals , date back about 5000 years . The town was an important Norse port , and has a later history of trade with ports throughout northern Europe until the 19th century . In 1330 Scotland 's standard unit of weight was brought in line with that of Thurso at the decree of King David II of Scotland , a measure of the town 's economic importance . Old St Peter 's Kirk is said to date from circa 1220 and the time of Caithness Bishop Gilbert Murray , who died in 1245 . 
 In 1649 , the Irish , led by Donald Macalister Mullach , attacked Thurso and were chased off by the residents , headed by Sir James Sinclair . One of the locals , a servant of Sinclair was said to have killed Mullach by " cutting a button from his master 's coat and firing it from a musket " . In 1811 , the parish had 592 houses with a population of <unk> . Following the passage into law of the 1845 Poor Law Act , a combination poorhouse was constructed ; work commenced in 1854 and was completed by 1856 . The building , which had a capacity to house 149 inmates , was on a five acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) site to the west of Thurso Road and provided poor relief for Thurso and the parishes of Bower , Canisbay , Dunnet , Halkirk , <unk> , Reay and Watten . Many of the poorhouses in Scotland were under used , and by 1924 the building had been unoccupied for several years so was sold ; it was later utilised as housing but by 2001 was again abandoned . 
 Much of the town is a planned 19th @-@ century development . In 1906 , a new Royal National Lifeboat Institution boathouse and slipway was inaugurated near Scrabster Harbour . A fire on 10 December 1956 destroyed the building and its <unk> Watson @-@ class lifeboat and a new building and boat was built , launched the following year . A new lifeboat , named " The Three Sisters " was inaugurated in 1971 by The Queen Mother . A major expansion occurred in the mid @-@ 20th century when the Dounreay nuclear power plant was established at Dounreay in 1955 , 9 miles ( 14 km ) to the west of the town . The arrival of workers related to the power station caused a three @-@ fold increase in the population of Thurso ; the 1951 census gave a figure of 3 @,@ 000 but this had swelled to 9 @,@ 000 by 1971 . This led to around 1 @,@ 700 new houses being built in Thurso and nearby Castletown , a mixture of local authority housing blended with private houses and flats built by the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority . Decommissioned at the end of the 20th century , it is estimated the site will not be cleared of all the waste until the <unk> , so will continue to provide employment . 
 Thurso is also the name of the viscountcy held by the Sinclair family in the Peerage of the United Kingdom . Thurso hosted the National Mòd in 2010 , which was the first time this festival of Gaelic language and culture had been held so far north . 
 = = = Governance = = = 
 Thurso has history as a burgh of barony dating from 1633 when it was established by Charles I. In 1975 , under the Local Government ( Scotland ) Act 1973 , the local government burgh was merged into the Caithness district of the two @-@ tier Highland region . In 1996 , under the Local Government etc ( Scotland ) Act 1994 , the district was abolished and the region became a unitary council area . From 1996 until 2007 , the town of Thurso was covered by two or three wards , each electing one councillor by the first past the post system of election . In 2007 , a single Thurso ward was created to elect three councillors by the single transferable vote system . The new ward is one of three within the Highland Council 's Caithness ward management area and one of seven within the council 's Caithness , Sutherland and Easter Ross corporate management area . 
 Thurso Community Council was created in 1975 when the burgh was abolished . The community council is not a tier of local government , but it is recognised as a level of statutory representation . The community council represents an area which is somewhat smaller than that represented by ward councillors . The ward area also includes parts of other community council areas . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Thurso is the most northerly town on the British mainland , situated on the northern coastline overlooking the Orkney Islands . It is situated at the northern terminus of the A9 road , the main road linking Caithness with the south of Scotland , and is 19 @.@ 5 miles ( 31 @.@ 4 km ) west of John o ' Groats and 20 @.@ 4 miles ( 32 @.@ 8 km ) northwest of Wick , the closest town . Thurso railway station is the most northerly location served by Britain 's rail network , which links the town directly with Wick , the county town of Caithness , and with Inverness . Thurso is bordered by the parishes of <unk> and Bower to the east , Halkirk to the south , and Reay to the west , and stretches from <unk> Head and Crosskirk Bay in the west to Dunnet Head and Dunnet Bay in the east . 
 The 34 miles ( 55 km ) River Thurso , reputable for its salmon fishing , flows through the town and into Thurso Bay and the Pentland Firth . The river estuary serves as a small harbour . Thurso has a fine harbour and beach and looks out over the Pentland Firth to the Orkney island of Hoy and the towering Old Man of Hoy ( a stack of rock standing out from the main island ) . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Thurso has a cool oceanic climate , similar weather to the Scottish Highlands , Iceland , Alaska and the Scandinavian West Coast of Norway . The highest temperature recorded was 25 ° C ( July 1995 ) and the lowest <unk> ° C ( December 2010 ) . Similar parallels in nearby Sweden have much more continental climates with much more extensive heat and <unk> , further demonstrating the moderating effect of the North Atlantic . The moderate winter climate is some 30 ° C warmer than marine areas around Hudson Bay in Canada on similar latitudes . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Historically , Thurso was known for its production of linen cloth and had a thriving tanning business . Fishing has always been of major significance in the running of the local economy , and the Thurso <unk> 's Association overlooked much of the shipping activity . The port of Scrabster lies about 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) to the west of the estuary of the River Thurso , and plays a significant role in the white fish industry in Scotland . Scrabster has deep water in the shelter of Holborn Head . The harbour includes a berth for the MV <unk> , a roll @-@ on / roll @-@ off ferry operated by Northlink linking the Scottish mainland with Stromness on Orkney . There is also a large <unk> and the local lifeboat is stationed there too . From June 2007 , a summer @-@ only weekly ferry service operated by the Faroese company <unk> Line reopened , connecting Scrabster with the Faroe Islands , Iceland and Norway , but has now been discontinued . 
 Thurso boasts a small museum , Caithness Horizons , several hotels and bars , a surf shop / cafe stocking famous brands , and a large skatepark . There is also a sizeable British Telecom call centre and a plant making special lithium @-@ ion batteries for the MoD on the west side of the town , which along with the Dounreay Nuclear power plant , provide a high level of employment in Caithness . On 12 January 2010 , approval was granted for the Baillie wind farm near Thurso which will feature 21 turbines and supply 52 @.@ 5 MW , enough for 25 @,@ 000 homes . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The Category A listed ruined Old St Peter 's Church ( St. Peter 's Kirk ) is one of the older churches in Scotland , dated to at least 1125 , and at one time it was the principal church for the county , administered by the Bishops of Caithness . The church held hearings against criminal activity and determined how those caught should be punished . In 1701 , a woman who had a relationship with a Dutch sailor had her head shaved and was publicly shamed , paraded through the town by the local hangman . 
 The current church , St Andrew 's and St Peter 's , was built in 1832 to a design by William Burn in the Gothic style with buttressed walls and a square tower . The pipe organ was added by Norman & Beard in 1914 , and in 1922 Oscar Paterson contributed some of the stained glass windows such as ' The Sower ' . In 2013 gravestones were vandalised in the graveyard . <unk> Head Lighthouse , within the parish territory , was completed in 1862 to a design by David & Thomas Stevenson and has since achieved Category B listed status . 
 The Swanson Gallery of Thurso hosts exhibitions throughout the year , and showcases glass art by Ian Pearson . The Caithness Horizons building contains a museum and also hosts exhibitions . Hotels of note include the 103 @-@ room Royal Hotel , Pentland Hotel , Waterside House , Murray House and the Category B listed <unk> House Hotel , about 4 miles to the west of Thurso in a Georgian country mansion . At Sir John 's Square is an ornamental garden and statue which was donated to the town by Sir Tollemache Sinclair in memory of his grandfather Sir John Sinclair , a prominent local figure responsible for the " compilation of the First Statistical Account of Scotland and the pioneering of agricultural reforms in Caithness " . A Category C listed fountain was built in 1894 by the son of Sir George Sinclair . Also of note is the wellhouse of Meadow Well at the junction of Traill Street and Manson 's Lane , which was the primary water supply for Thurso for centuries . The current well , with a conical roof , was completed in 1823 . 
 = = Education = = 
 The main campus of North Highland College , formerly Thurso College , is one of several partner colleges which constitute the University of the Highlands & Islands . It offers several certificate , diploma and degree courses from subjects as diverse as Nuclear Decommissioning , <unk> , <unk> and Golf Management . Adjacent to the UHI is Thurso High School , the most northerly secondary school on the British mainland , established in 1958 . The town also has three primary schools , <unk> , Miller Academy Primary and Mount Pleasant . Mount Pleasant Primary School teaches in Scottish <unk> , part of a revival of the language in Caithness . According to the 2011 census , 110 residents of the town age three and over ( 1 @.@ 43 % ) speak Gaelic while 181 overall ( 2 @.@ 35 % ) have some facility with the language . A Gaelic language nursery school , <unk> Inbhir Theòrsa , was created in the town in 1996 . 
 Caithness Horizons is a small museum that opened in 2008 . The museum now houses panels from the control room at the Dounreay Materials Testing Reactor ( <unk> ) , which in 1958 had become Scotland 's first operation nuclear reactor . 
 = = Sport = = 
 With its powerful swells , Thurso is a notable location for surfing and kayaking , with international surfing championship events having regularly been held in the area . It attracts surfers from all over the world , and both the European Surfing Championships and Scottish Surf Kayaking Championships have been held in Caithness , with Thurso East being the main focus of activity . An annual raft race is organised by the North Coast Branch of Coastguard Association . 
 The football ( soccer ) team , Thurso FC ( nicknamed " the Vikings " ) , was established in 2008 and plays in the North Caledonian League . Caithness Crushers are a rugby league club playing in the Scotland Rugby League Conference Division 1 , while Caithness RFC are a rugby union club that participate in the Caledonia One . The local athletics club is Caithness Amateur Athletics Club ( <unk> ) ; hurdler Moira <unk> was a 1986 Commonwealth Games athlete . Thurso has the largest swimming club in the Highland area , Thurso Amateur Swimming Club ( <unk> ) , with over 250 members . Thurso Bowling Club is next door to the Tesco supermarket . Also of note is Caithness Motocross Club , which stages races fortnightly during the summer on tracks around the county . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Thurso railway station opened in 1874 . It was the most northern station on the Sutherland and Caithness Railway . The station became part of the Highland Railway Company in the late 19th century before being absorbed into the London , Midland and Scottish Railway in 1923 @.@ and it is now part of the Far North Line . 
 The nearby port of Scrabster provides ferry services to the Orkney Islands . The A9 trunk road , which connects Thurso to Inverness , Perth and the Central Belt ends at the ferry terminal . Stagecoach run bus services from Thurso to Wick and John O ' Groats , and a long distance service to Helmsdale and Inverness . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Thurso has been twinned with <unk> , Germany since 1972 , after two men from the respective towns met in London and agreed a formal link . The twinning has come under threat as Thurso High School no longer participates in its activities and there is a lack of young people willing to preserve relationships between the towns . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Andrew Geddes Bain ( 1797 – 1864 ) — geologist , road engineer , palaeontologist and explorer . 
 David Orson Calder ( 1823 – 1884 ) — academician and pioneer settler in Utah . 
 John Charles " Jock " Campbell ( VC ) ( 1894 – 1942 ) — British Army officer . 
 Martin Carr ( born 1968 ) — writer and musician . 
 Robert Dick ( 1811 – 1866 ) — geologist ; lived in Thurso from 1830 until death . 
 John <unk> ( 1783 – 1860 ) — civil servant and government actuary . 
 George Finlayson ( 1790 – 1823 ) — naturalist and traveler . 
 Bryan Gunn ( born 1963 ) — professional football goalkeeper and manager . 
 Robin Harper ( born 1940 ) — politician . 
 William Henderson ( 1810 – 1872 ) — physician and homeopath . 
 Jock Macdonald ( 1897 – 1960 ) — Canadian painter and art educator . 
 Gary Mackay @-@ Steven ( born 1990 ) — professional football winger , currently playing for Celtic . 
 Tommy McGee ( born 1979 ) — professional rugby player . 
 Anne McKevitt ( born 1967 ) — entrepreneur , TV Personality , author and philanthropist . 
 Martin Rennie ( born 1975 ) — professional football coach . 
 Sir William David Ross , KBE ( 1877 – 1971 ) — moral philosopher , editor and translator of Aristotle . 
 Arthur St. Clair ( 1737 – 1818 ) — American Revolutionary War soldier and politician . 
 Sir William Alexander Smith ( 1854 – 1914 ) — founder of the Boys Brigade . 
 Colin Stone ( born 1991 ) — Scottish television presenter and journalist , currently with STV News . 
 Donald Swanson ( 1848 – 1924 ) — senior police officer in the Metropolitan Police during the Jack the Ripper murders . 
 = The Xindi = 
 " The Xindi " is the 53rd episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the first episode of the third season . It first aired on September 10 , 2003 , on the UPN network in the United States . The episode was written by executive producers Rick Berman and Brannon Braga , and directed by Allan Kroeker . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . Beginning with this episode , season three of Enterprise features an ongoing storyline following an attack on Earth by previously unknown aliens called the Xindi at the end of season two . In this episode , the crew of the Enterprise attempt to track down the location of the Xindi homeworld from a lone Xindi working in a mining colony . After being tricked by the mining foreman , Captain Jonathan Archer ( Scott Bakula ) and Commander Charles " Trip " Tucker III ( Connor Trinneer ) escape with the alien , with assistance from Lieutenant Malcolm Reed ( Dominic Keating ) and the ship 's new Military Assault Command Operations ( MACO ) team . 
 " The Xindi " saw the first appearance of several new sets , as well as a new costume for Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol ( Jolene Blalock ) . The episode saw a large number of guest stars , including several who would recur several more times during the third season such as Major Hayes played by Steven Culp , Tucker Smallwood as the Xindi @-@ Primate Councilor and Randy Oglesby as Degra . The episode received ratings of 2 @.@ 6 / 5 percent according to Nielsen Media Research , and was watched by 4 @.@ 1 million viewers . " The Xindi " received a mixed reception from critics , who praised the increase of action promised for the season by this episode but criticised elements such as the writing and the MACOs . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Enterprise travels deeper into the Delphic Expanse , a secret council of aliens discuss what to do with the lone human spaceship . Meanwhile , Captain Jonathan Archer ( Scott Bakula ) directs Enterprise to a mining penal colony within the Expanse . He then strikes a deal with the mine 's foreman ( Stephen McHattie ) : in exchange for a half @-@ liter of liquid platinum , Archer and Commander Charles " Trip " Tucker III ( Connor Trinneer ) will be allowed to meet a Primate worker named Kessick ( Richard <unk> ) . 
 Archer requests the coordinates of <unk> , the Xindi homeworld , from Kessick . But the alien refuses to help unless Archer helps him escape . Archer declines , but he soon learns that the foreman had ulterior motives , since he has ordered three warships to overpower Enterprise and enslave his crew . Kessick claims to know how to escape the mine , but asks for Archer 's help in return for guiding the Starfleet officers . Archer reluctantly agrees , and Kessick leads him and Tucker through the mine 's sewage removal system . However , the group is soon detected in a conduit , and the foreman floods the system with plasma in an effort to kill them . They narrowly escape being killed , but quickly fall into the hands of the mine 's security forces . 
 Meanwhile , Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol ( Jolene Blalock ) persuades Lieutenant Malcolm Reed ( Dominic Keating ) to allow the newly assigned MACOs ( Military Assault Command Operations ) to attempt an extraction . Led by him , they perform remarkably well in combat , and manage to rescue Archer , Tucker , and Kessick . Enterprise then leaves orbit just as the warships arrive . Unfortunately , Kessick dies , but not before providing coordinates for the Xindi homeworld . When the ship reaches this position , there is nothing but a 100 @-@ year @-@ old field of space debris . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode followed up on the plot introduced in the final instalment of the second season in which a probe from an unknown alien race attacks Earth . A number of new sets and costumes were required , with preparations beginning for some departments up to three weeks before filming began . One change which was made was a new outfit for T 'Pol , with costume tests taking place a week before filming began . The redesign was because of studio executives wanting the show to appeal more to the 18 – 49 male demographic . The production team looked to the mid @-@ series boost that the introduction of Seven of Nine provided on Star Trek : Voyager and sought for Enterprise to appeal to that demographic in the same manner . Kate O 'Hara of New York Magazine later joked in reference to the change , " Women of the future will certainly choose to wear tight , uncomfortable , skin @-@ tight catsuits ! " 
 " The Xindi " was seen as a new pilot by executive producers Brannon Braga and Rick Berman , who also wrote the episode . Braga said " We were re @-@ establishing an Enterprise that was going to be a little bit different this year , so we had to think of it in those terms . " They felt the best way to do this was to immediately reveal the Xindi to the audience , and to give the MACOs something to do in order to introduce them as well . He called it a " big episode " as they sought to set up the rest of season . The shoot began on June 26 , 2003 , with the expectation that it would take nine days ( as opposed to the usual seven ) to complete . One of the special effects on the episode used ground Styrofoam which had been painted blue and processed through a wood chipper . It was used to represent the mineral <unk> @-@ D within the mine . However , the ground Styrofoam stuck to the actors ' shoes and costumes and ended up being spread throughout the Paramount lot where the series was filmed . It would turn up in unexpected places on set for the rest of the series , and was found in among the sets as they were being dismantled after the end of season four . 
 = = = Guest cast = = = 
 " The Xindi " featured several actors who would go on to recur in their roles throughout the third season of Enterprise . These included the MACO marines under the command of Major Hayes , played by Steven Culp . At the time of his appearance in the " The Xindi " , he felt that he did not have any characterisation to work with . During the production of his second episode , " The Shipment " , Culp read an article in the Los Angeles Times about a troubled youth who joined the military and in serving in the Iraq War had found himself . After discussing it with the director , this became the basis for the character . Daniel Dae Kim made his first of three appearances in " The Xindi " as Corporal Chang ; he had previously appeared as <unk> @-@ Retz in the Voyager episode " Blink of an Eye " . Nathan Anderson had previously appeared as <unk> in the Voyager episode " Nemesis " ; he made one further appearance as Sergeant Kemper in the following episode , " Anomaly " . 
 Other actors appearing in " The Xindi " included the members of the Xindi council . As with Kim and Anderson , Tucker Smallwood had already appeared on Voyager . In his case , it was as Admiral Bullock in the episode " In the Flesh " . He appeared as his Xindi character nine times during the third season of Enterprise . Randy Oglesby , who played Degra , was another Voyager alumnus . He had appeared as Kir in the episode " Counterpoint " . Rick Worthy had appeared as several different characters in the Star Trek franchise , including an appearance in the 1998 film Star Trek : Insurrection . As well as <unk> in the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Soldiers of the Empire " , he too had appeared in Voyager , but in two roles ; first as the androids <unk> and 122 in " Prototype " and then as Noah Lessing in " Equinox " . In addition , making a return to the Star Trek franchise was Stephen McHattie , who had previously appeared as the Romulan senator <unk> in the Deep Space Nine episode " In the Pale Moonlight " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Xindi " was first aired in the United States on UPN on September 10 , 2003 . According to Nielsen Media Research , it received a 2 @.@ 6 / 5 percent share among adults . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 6 percent of all households , and 5 percent of all of those watching television at the time of the broadcast . It was estimated that " The Xindi " was watched by 4 @.@ 1 million viewers . The following episode , " Anomaly " , received the same rating but the viewer number increased by 200 @,@ 000 . 
 Robert Bianco reviewed " The Xindi " for USA Today , giving it two out of four stars . He said that while the Xindi storyline " does promise to provide more action and excitement " , some of the alterations " smack [ ed ] of desperation " . He called T 'Pol " Seven of Vulcan " , and said the main issue with the series was the " subpar " writing . In this episode , he felt that Tucker was written so poorly that <unk> seemed like he was overacting to compensate for it . 
 A reviewer by the moniker KJB watched the episode for IGN , giving it one out of five stars . He said it was " like watching a television episode made up of all the things from the ' Stuff We 've Tried That Doesn 't Work on Star Trek ' list . " Criticism was directed at the introduction of the MACOs , which were described as Starship Troopers clones , and at the modification to the theme tune . The Xindi themselves were described as " bad Farscape knock offs " , and the reviewer said that they set a poor tone for the rest of the season . Michelle Erica Green said she was in a " double mind " about " The Xindi " in her review at TrekNation as there were both good and bad elements . She praised the action sequences , the make @-@ up and McHattie as the alien foreman . Green enjoyed the twist at the end with the Xindi homeworld being already destroyed , and felt that the Xindi races would be interesting . On the other hand , she thought that the MACO scenes were too dark and that the T 'Pol nude scenes were unnecessary . 
 = = Book adaptation and home media release = = 
 " The Xindi " was adapted as a novel in conjunction with the preceding episode , " The Expanse " , by J.M. Dillard . Entitled The Expanse , the book was published by Pocket Books in trade paperback format in October 2003 . The first home media release of " The Xindi " was as part of the season three DVD box set , released in the United States on September 27 , 2005 . The Blu @-@ ray release of Enterprise was released on January 7 , 2014 . 
 = Æthelhard = 
 Æthelhard ( also <unk> , <unk> , Aethelheard or <unk> ; died 12 May 805 ) was a Bishop of Winchester then an Archbishop of Canterbury in medieval England . Appointed by King Offa of Mercia , Æthelhard had difficulties with both the Kentish monarchs and with a rival archiepiscopate in southern England , and was deposed around 796 by King Eadberht III Præn of Kent . By 803 , Æthelhard , along with the Mercian King Coenwulf , had secured the demotion of the rival archbishopric , once more making Canterbury the only archbishopric south of the Humber in Britain . Æthelhard died in 805 , and was considered a saint until his cult was suppressed after the Norman Conquest in 1066 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nothing is known of Æthelhard 's family background or early life , however it is assumed that he was a native of Mercia . He first appears in the historical record as abbot of a monastery at Louth , Lincolnshire before being named to the diocese of Winchester . He was consecrated Bishop of Winchester sometime after 759 and before 778 . 
 = = Canterbury = = 
 Æthelhard was translated from the see of Winchester to the see of Canterbury in 792 and was enthroned as archbishop on 21 July 793 . Æthelhard owed his appointment to King Offa of Mercia , and the enthronement was presided over by the then @-@ senior bishop of the land : Hygberht , the Archbishop of Lichfield . King Offa consulted Alcuin of York over proper procedure , as the archbishopric of Lichfield was a new creation . 
 Around 796 , Æthelhard was deposed by King Eadberht III Præn of Kent because Æthelhard had been appointed by Offa . Offa had died in 796 , and Eadberht seized control of Kent , forcing Æthelhard to flee to the court of Offa 's son Ecgfrith of Mercia . Ecgfrith himself died before 796 , and a distant relative Coenwulf took the throne . Alcuin encouraged Æthelhard to return to Canterbury , and suggested a compromise over the status of Lichfield , which had been established by Offa in rivalry to Canterbury . Alcuin 's plan would have allowed Hygberht to retain archiepiscopal status during his lifetime , but it would be a purely ceremonial rank . In this proposal , Canterbury would regain its status as the only archbishopric south of the Humber and Æthelhard would return to Canterbury . However , Æthelhard was unable to do this while Eadberht was still in power . Alcuin had previously stated that Lichfield had been elevated because of a " lust for power " , presumably by Offa , and not through any consideration of the merits of the plan . 
 Although Alcuin had scorn for Æthelhard for fleeing Canterbury , the papacy saw it differently . Pope Leo III praised Æthelhard for fleeing and refusing to submit to Eadberht , whom Leo compared to the later Roman emperor Julian the Apostate . There are indications , though , that the Kentish community considered electing another archbishop while Æthelhard was in exile . 
 = = Troubles with Lichfield = = 
 Because Lichfield had been established by the papacy , any change in its status required papal assent . Coenwulf 's first embassy to Leo III in 797 about demoting Lichfield did not succeed , mainly because Leo seems to have resented the implied criticism of his predecessor Hadrian I , who had approved the elevation of Lichfield . Coenwulf 's embassy bore a letter to the pope that asked for papal advice on how to resolve the problems surrounding Lichfield and Canterbury . The letter reminded the papacy of Pope Gregory the Great 's old scheme to have two metropolitans in Britain , one in the north and one in the south , with the southern one being based in London . The letter implied that Coenwulf was asking for Æthelhard 's metropolitan see to be moved to London . The same embassy carried a letter from Æthelhard also , which has not survived . The pope , however , did not agree with the embassy . The papal reply to Coenwulf stated that the southern archbishopric must remain at Canterbury , as well as excommunicated Eadberht and authorised his expulsion from Kent if he persisted in keeping Æthelhard from Canterbury . 
 In 798 Coenwulf invaded Kent and captured Eadberht , whom he blinded and imprisoned . Æthelhard was restored to Canterbury , where he set about restoring the see 's possessions . He also managed to secure professions of obedience from a number of southern bishops , including Eadwulf of Lindsey and <unk> of <unk> . But , Hygberht was still being called archbishop in 799 . Because Pope Leo was involved in disputes in Rome during 799 and 800 , and was unable to spare attention for English affairs , no papal decisions could be made on the dispute . 
 Æthelhard resolved to go to Rome and consult with the pope about the decline in power of the see of Canterbury . The archbishop went to Rome along with Bishop <unk> of Winchester , and carried two letters from Coenwulf to the pope . After some discussions , Leo sided with Canterbury and demoted Lichfield back down to a bishopric . Besides these papal actions , there are indications that the cathedral clergy of Canterbury never recognised the elevation of Lichfield . 
 = = Return from exile = = 
 Æthelhard returned to England in 803 , and convened the Council of Clovesho , which decreed that no archiepiscopal see besides Canterbury should ever been established in the southern part of Britain . Hygberht attended the council , but as an abbot , which makes it apparent that he had resigned his see before the council met . At that same council , Æthelhard also presented a papal decision that asserted the freedom of churches from secular authority . While at the council , Æthelhard once more proclaimed that the papacy had been deceived into elevating Lichfield , and that it was a " <unk> power " that had been behind the effort . Æthelhard presided over at least eleven synods , and possibly one more . 
 Æthelhard died on 12 May 805 and was buried in Canterbury . He was later revered as a saint , with a feast day of 12 May , but his cult was suppressed by Archbishop Lanfranc in the late 11th century and never was revived . 
 = Darla ( Buffy the Vampire Slayer ) = 
 Darla is a recurring fictional character created by Joss Whedon and played by Julie Benz in the first , second , and fifth seasons of the American supernatural television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer . The character later appeared in the Buffy spin @-@ off series Angel , making at least one appearance in every season . She made her last television appearance in 2004 , appearing as a special guest star in the fifth and final season of Angel . 
 Darla is introduced in " Welcome to the Hellmouth " , the first episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer , in 1997 . It is revealed early on that she is a vampire , initially in league with the Master , Buffy Summers ' primary antagonist in the first season . Darla 's backstory is disclosed in the episode " Angel " , where it is revealed that she is Angel 's sire ( the one who turned him into a vampire ) and former longtime lover . The character appears in numerous flashback episodes , until she receives a significantly expanded role in Angel . In Angel , she is resurrected by the evil law firm Wolfram & Hart in an attempt to weaken Angel . She later becomes intertwined in many of the story arcs in the second and third season . Darla becomes pregnant , a unique occurrence for a vampire . She sacrifices herself in order to give birth to her and Angel 's human son Connor , ending her run on the series . However , Darla continues to appear in flashback episodes during the next two seasons . 
 The character was well @-@ reviewed by television critics , with Eric Goldman of IGN saying " Not even dying ( twice ! ) could keep Darla from being an important part of the story behind Buffy the Vampire Slayer and the spinoff series Angel . " 
 = = Conception and casting = = 
 Julie Benz initially auditioned for the role of Buffy Summers , but that later went to Sarah Michelle Gellar , who had previously won the part of Cordelia Chase . Benz was offered the small role of the vampire Darla in the pilot episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Her performance was so well @-@ received that her character appeared in a few more episodes . In an interview with <unk> , Benz said of her casting : " I was supposed to die in the pilot , but about halfway through the pilot Joss Whedon was like , ' We 're giving you a name and we 're not going to kill you . ' And he did that for a while until it finally came time to kill me , and kill me , and kill me and killed [ sic ] me . " She later went on to say : 
 For me , I was a new actor to Los Angeles , didn ’ t know the TV business very well so I was just excited to work and play a vampire . I had no clue what I was going to do or how I was going to be scary . Until that is , they put the vampire makeup on me and I went into the trailer and smiled , which I thought was creepy . Joss always said he was intrigued that someone who looked like me and talked like me was like the scariest vampire ever . That 's what he wanted , my sweet voice and demeanour until all of a sudden I 'm just this vicious vampire . " 
 Darla is first killed in the seventh episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer . In that episode , it is revealed that Darla was once romantically involved with Angel and that she made him a vampire . Angel stakes her through the heart . Benz was asked to return to the role three years later , but not on Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Joss Whedon wanted her to appear on the spin @-@ off Angel , which focused on Angel 's adventures in Los Angeles . Benz said in an interview : 
 I was shocked , really . When they sent me the script [ for Angel ] I kept asking , ' Where 's Darla ? ' I remember calling my agent asking , ' Are you sure they want me for this episode because I can 't seem to find me ? ' And then I get to the last page and there I am ... naked in a box . Awesome . It was exciting . 
 When asked in an interview with Robert Canning of IGN about how she felt about being asked to come on to Angel after previously being killed off , Benz commented : 
 I was shocked . I just thought once you poof 'd , you poof 'd ! I thought that was it . So when they threw it out to me that I was coming back ... They didn 't tell me they were bringing her back to life . They just sent me the script for the season finale for season one of Angel , when they rose me from the dead . I was reading the script , and half way through , Darla still hadn 't shown up . 
 Benz went on to add , 
 I was like , ' Alright ... ' I get three quarters of the way through and I think , ' Maybe they sent me the wrong script ... ? ' And then I get to the last page , and I was like , ' Oh my god ! I can 't believe this ! This is so cool ! ' At that time I 'd been committed to another project too . We didn 't even know if I was going to be available or not . But it all ended up working out . 
 Darla appears in twenty Angel episodes , mainly as an evil antagonist . The character is known for dying the most in the Buffy The Vampire Slayer franchise . Benz later emphasized : 
 I just didn 't know how it was going to happen . So when they sent me the script [ for my last episode of Angel ] — which I basically had to sign my life away to read — I was sitting in my trailer and I just started to cry . I thought it was such a beautiful ending , it was the payoff and just really brought her whole life kind of to that one moment . So I was really upset my last day of filming because I really thought it was over to me . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Darla is presented in the series as a wicked vampire with , as Benz put it , generally " pure " intentions . In an interview with <unk> , Benz said : 
 Darla 's just misunderstood . Her intentions are pure , they 're just kind of warped . From her perspective — first she has to eat — she just happens to eat people ! Second , she was in love with Angel , and I always viewed Darla as the jilted ex @-@ wife that could never get over being dumped . If you really look at her , you can have sympathy and empathy for her . In the beginning of her life she was a prostitute , Joss and I actually talked about that a lot , that she was probably abused growing up . She did what she needed to do to survive , she just lacked the people skills . 
 Achieving Darla 's look was a struggle for Benz . She said : " Taking that makeup off , it was like having six layers of skin ripped off your face every time . It was miserable and the contact lenses were terrible . I don ’ t wear contacts and I don ’ t know how people do it , sticking things in their eyeballs all the time . " The character 's sense of fashion is vital to understanding her past . Benz says Darla is " dressed to the nines " in every time period in which she lives , and " she fully goes after a certain look . If she ’ s going to be living during the Boxer Rebellion time , she ’ s got the big Gibson Girl hair style and the beautiful kimono @-@ style clothes . " Benz points out that in the Buffy pilot episode , Darla — attempting to dress like a high school student — exaggerates it with a " little twist " , wearing a Catholic schoolgirl uniform instead . " I think I influenced Darla fashion @-@ wise in the second season of Angel where she was a little more classic @-@ looking and tailored , " Benz says , explaining she collaborated with the costume designer to transition Darla into a " hipper look " when she became a vampire again . Darla shockingly becomes pregnant in the third season of Angel . In an interview with the BBC , Benz admitted : 
 Yeah , I really felt at that point she was pretty strung out . Her whole world was rocked . She never thought she could get pregnant and then all of a sudden she 's carrying this child and she 's experiencing this soul for the first time in four hundred years . [ There 's ] the realisation that as soon as the baby 's born the soul 's going to go away , and it 's the first time she really experienced true love , so she was going through a lot emotionally . I just didn 't think that she would have time to really think about how she looked . I don 't think it was a priority , and so for me as an actor it was important that I reveal that . Not get caught up in my own vanity as an actress , and portray the character as where she really was . 
 In an interview with the BBC , Benz described Darla as strong : " I have an amazing stunt double , Lisa Hoyle who looks exactly like me . She ’ s just brilliant and fearless and she does about 90 per cent of the stunts . I think part of the element of Darla is how strong she is and how fierce she can be and Lisa definitely adds to that element . I would be a doing huge disservice to Darla if I didn ’ t allow her to do the work that she does and to help add to that element that ’ s so important to Darla , which is her strength . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Darla is born in the late 16th century in the British Isles . Her birth name is never revealed in either series , and Darla herself eventually forgets it . As a young prostitute , she emigrates to the Virginia Colony in North America and becomes independently wealthy but also contracts a fatal case of syphilis . By 1609 , Darla lies dying in the luxurious house she owns . She scoffs at a " priest " who comes to her deathbed before he reveals his true identity : the Master , leader of an elite cult of vampires known as the Order of Aurelius . Darla despises the clergy and religion , a trait that follows her as a vampire . The Master turns her into a vampire and renames her " Darla , " meaning " dear one " in early modern English ( " darling " ) . 
 Darla spends four centuries torturing innocent people , often accompanied by Angel ( until his soul is restored ) , before showing up in Sunnydale . Her first appearance is in " Welcome to the Hellmouth " , the first episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer , which aired in 1997 . She breaks into Sunnydale High School with a student who goes there . Darla first toys with the youth , then her face morphs into that of a vampire and she bites the boy . Darla later appears in the episode " The Harvest " , where she participates in the ascension of the Master , a very old and powerful vampire . Darla 's role in the series is more prominent in the episode " Angel " , where it is revealed that she is Angel 's sire and former lover . Darla bites an unsuspecting Joyce Summers ( Buffy 's mother ) , making it look as if Angel did it . Angel eventually kills her . She later appears in numerous flashbacks , illuminating her involvement not only with Angel , but also with Spike . 
 Darla 's role in the franchise increased dramatically after her resurrection by the law firm Wolfram & Hart in the final episode of Angel 's first season , titled " To <unk> in L.A. " In the second season opener , " Judgement " , Wolfram & Hart lawyers Lindsey McDonald and Lilah Morgan question Darla about her past . She talks of how she can feel Angel , and slowly her memory begins to return . In the episode " First Impressions " , Angel begins having romantic dreams about his maker . The dreams sap his strength . In " Dear Boy " , Angel is shocked to see Darla walking the streets . When he tells his partners , Wesley <unk> @-@ Pryce and Cordelia Chase , they think he is starting to lose his sanity . During the course of a stakeout by Angel Investigations of a woman suspected of having an affair , Angel confronts the woman , who looks exactly like Darla . She claims she is <unk> Kramer . When she runs away from him , she walks outside into the sunlight , meaning Darla has not only been resurrected , but is now human . However , Darla and Lindsey 's plan to convert Angel back to evil fails . In the end , Wolfram & Hart bring in Drusilla to make Darla a vampire again after her syphilis returns and she starts to die . Ironically , she is turned back into a vampire as she accepts her fate after a failed attempt by Angel to save her . Drusilla and Darla unsuccessfully attack Angel and leave Los Angeles . 
 Knowing that Angel has been cursed so that if he ever experiences pure happiness , he will once again lose his soul , Darla later returns and sleeps with him , but her plot fails ; being with her only brings Angel despair , as well as providing him with a new understanding of his role as a champion . Their one @-@ night stand leads to an unexpected development for the both of them : Darla reappears in season three , pregnant with Angel 's child , despite the fact that vampires cannot normally conceive . Her pregnancy allows Darla to experience emotions that had previously been lost to her in the presence of the human soul of her unborn child . Admitting that creating life with Angel was the only good thing they ever did together , Darla makes sure Angel will relay that to their child before she stakes herself through the heart , sacrificing her life so their son , Connor , can be born . Darla turns to dust , but the baby remains . Darla later appears as a spirit , trying to persuade her son in an effort to save him from the renegade deity Jasmine 's manipulations , as the latter 's actions are bringing Connor into the same dark path both Darla and Angel had taken . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Darla was well @-@ received by Eric Goldman of IGN . He said : " As the very first character seen on Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Julie Benz instantly made an impression as the vampiress Darla . For the next 8 television seasons , she would get to show many different facets of the role , as not even dying ( twice ! ) could keep Darla from being an important part of the story and mythos behind Buffy the Vampire Slayer and the spinoff series Angel , the latter of which allowed Benz to greatly expand her character . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Buffy the Vampire Slayer 
 Darla appears as a guest in 5 episodes 
 Season 1 ( 1997 ) : " Welcome to the Hellmouth " , " The Harvest " , " Angel " 
 Season 2 ( 1997 – 98 ) : " Becoming ( Part 1 ) " 
 Season 5 ( 2000 – 01 ) : " Fool for Love " 
 Angel 
 Darla appears as a guest in 20 episodes 
 Season 1 ( 1999 – 2000 ) : " The Prodigal " , " Five by Five " , " To <unk> in L.A. " 
 Season 2 ( 2000 – 01 ) : " Judgment " , " First Impressions " , " Untouched " , " Dear Boy " , " Darla " , " The Trial " , " Reunion " , " <unk> " , " Reprise " , " Epiphany " 
 Season 3 ( 2001 – 02 ) : " Heartthrob " , " That Vision Thing " , " Offspring " , " Quickening " , " Lullaby " 
 Season 4 ( 2002 – 03 ) : " Inside Out " 
 Season 5 ( 2003 – 04 ) : " The Girl in Question " 
 = Delaware Route 48 = 
 Delaware Route 48 ( DE 48 ) is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from DE 41 in Hockessin east to U.S. Route 13 Business ( US 13 Bus . ) in downtown Wilmington . The route passes through suburban areas of Wilmington such as Lancaster Pike , intersecting DE 100 and DE 141 . DE 48 continues into Wilmington as Lancaster Avenue and intersects DE 2 , where it splits into the one @-@ way pair of Lancaster Avenue eastbound and Second Street westbound . Upon reaching downtown Wilmington , the route intersects Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) / US 202 and DE 4 before continuing to the eastern terminus . 
 What is now DE 48 was originally built as the Lancaster Pike in 1817 , a turnpike that was to connect Wilmington to the Gap and Newport Turnpike . The turnpike became county maintained in 1877 . The Lancaster Pike became DE 48 by 1936 , with the route continuing east through Wilmington to the Wilmington @-@ Penns Grove Ferry across the Delaware River , where it connected to Route 48 in Penns Grove , New Jersey . The ferry was discontinued in 1949 and the eastern terminus of DE 48 was cut back to its current location by 1952 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 48 begins at an intersection with DE 41 in Hockessin , heading southeast on Lancaster Pike , a two @-@ lane undivided road . The road runs through wooded areas and residential development , curving east and gaining a second westbound lane . The route widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway and crosses the Wilmington and Western Railroad and Red Clay Creek . DE 48 comes to an intersection with DE 100 / DE 141 , at which point DE 100 forms a concurrency with DE 48 . The two routes head southeast as a four @-@ lane undivided road , passing through residential and commercial areas . The road crosses an East Penn Railroad line and runs to the north of a cemetery , with DE 100 splitting from DE 48 by turning south on South Dupont Road as it passes south of the Cab Calloway School of the Arts and Charter School of Wilmington . 
 DE 48 continues into Wilmington as Lancaster Avenue and heads into areas of homes and businesses , with the eastbound direction narrowing to one lane at an intersection with Greenhill Avenue . Following this intersection , the route crosses over CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision on a bridge . The road narrows to two lanes and passes to the north of another cemetery . The route intersects DE 2 , which follows the one @-@ way pair of Lincoln Street northbound and Union Street southbound , in the Union Park Gardens neighborhood . 
 At this point , DE 48 itself splits into a one @-@ way pair that follows Lancaster Avenue eastbound and West Second Street westbound , with westbound DE 48 using westbound DE 2 ( North Union Street ) to get from West Second Street to Lancaster Avenue . The one @-@ way pair carries two lanes in each direction . DE 48 continues into downtown Wilmington , where it crosses under a viaduct carrying I @-@ 95 / US 202 , with ramp connections to and from the southbound direction of I @-@ 95 / US 202 via Jackson Street , which parallels I @-@ 95 / US 202 to the west . 
 Upon crossing under I @-@ 95 / US 202 , a westbound ramp to I @-@ 95 / US 202 complements the eastbound direction of DE 48 , with the road becoming Martin Luther King , Jr . Boulevard , a six @-@ lane divided highway . Westbound DE 48 remains along one @-@ way West Second Street , which carries three lanes . DE 48 intersects the eastern terminus of DE 4 , which provides access to DE 48 from the northbound direction of I @-@ 95 / US 202 . The one @-@ way pair continues further into the downtown and runs a short distance to the north of Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor . The route intersects the southbound direction of US 13 Bus . , which shifts west from North King Street to South Market Street where it intersects DE 48 . Following the intersection with US 13 Bus. southbound , DE 48 follows the one @-@ way pair of East Front Street eastbound and East Second Street westbound , passing to the north of Wilmington Station along the Northeast Corridor that serves Amtrak and SEPTA 's Wilmington / Newark Line . DE 48 reaches its eastern terminus at an intersection with the northbound direction of US 13 Bus . , which follows Walnut Street . 
 DE 48 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 30 @,@ 195 vehicles at the DE 4 intersection to a low of 13 @,@ 264 vehicles at the <unk> Church Road intersection near Hockessin . The entire length of DE 48 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 The Wilmington Turnpike Company was founded on October 23 , 1809 to build a turnpike from Wilmington to the Pennsylvania border , connecting to the Gap and Newport Turnpike . The turnpike was completed in 1817 at a cost of $ 39 @,@ 549 @.@ 97 . The turnpike became known as the Lancaster Pike and was surfaced with stone . The Wilmington Turnpike Company operated the Lancaster Pike until 1877 when they abandoned the road . The turnpike 's charter was repealed and the road was then under the control of the county levy court . The road leading to the Wilmington @-@ Penns Grove Ferry across the Delaware River between Wilmington and Penns Grove , New Jersey was completed as a state highway by 1931 . 
 By 1936 , the Lancaster Pike became a part of DE 48 . In addition , the route continued through Wilmington on Lincoln Street , Fourth Street , and Christiana Avenue to the ferry across the Delaware River to Penns Grove , New Jersey , where it connected to Route 48 in New Jersey . In 1939 , DE 48 was rebuilt between DE 41 and Centre Road , eliminating curves and grades . In 1949 , the Wilmington @-@ Penns Grove Ferry was discontinued . DE 48 was realigned onto Lancaster Avenue to continue to US 13 / US 202 ( now US 13 Bus . ) , its current eastern terminus , by 1952 . By 1990 , DE 100 was realigned to follow a portion of DE 48 , bypassing a part of Dupont Road . DE 48 was widened into a divided highway at the DE 141 intersection by 1996 . The divided highway was extended west to Centerville Road a year later . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Ganting Grand Mosque = 
 The Ganting Grand Mosque ( Indonesian : Masjid Raya Ganting ; also written and pronounced <unk> in Minang ) is a Sunni mosque located in Ganting , Padang , West Sumatra , Indonesia . Construction began in 1805 , making it the oldest in Padang and one of the oldest in Indonesia . It is a Cultural Property of Indonesia . 
 The building , which involved persons from various cultural backgrounds in its construction , was the centre of an Islamic reform in the area during the 19th century . Future president Sukarno spent a time of exile at the mosque in 1942 . It survived the tsunami which struck Padang following the 1833 Sumatra earthquake , but was severely damaged after earthquakes in 2005 and 2009 . 
 The one @-@ floor establishment continues to be used as a center for prayer , as well as religious education ; it also functions as a pesantren for the community . The mosque is also a tourist attraction . 
 = = Early history = = 
 According to Abdul Baqir Zein , the mosque was first built in 1700 at the foot of Mount Padang , then moved to the bank of Batang <unk> , as the Dutch colonial government intended to use the previous location to build a road to Emma Haven Port . It was later moved to its present location . However , the Indonesian Department of Religion documents the mosque as having been constructed in 1790 with a wooden frame and a roof made from <unk> palms . According to this documentation , a sturdier mosque was built in 1805 . Another history of the mosque , from the Culture and Tourism Department of the City of the Padang , suggests that the mosque was first constructed in 1805 . The small mosque had stone flooring , wood and dirt walls , and a pyramidal ceiling like the mosques in Java . 
 The construction of the mosque was spearheaded by three local figures , Angku <unk> ( a rich merchant ) , Angku Syekh Haji Uma ( the village chief ) , and Angku Syekh <unk> Koto ( an ulama ) , while the funds were provided by Minang businesspeople and ulamas throughout Sumatra . It was erected on waqf land donated by locals and located in the center of the city 's Minang district . Construction of the mosque finished in 1810 ; it measured 30 by 30 metres ( 98 ft × 98 ft ) and had a fence 4 metres ( 13 ft ) out from the mosque . 
 Since its establishment , the mosque has been used to counsel future hajj participants . It also served as the first point of departure for hajj participants from Central Sumatra , who left Sumatra via Emma Haven after the port was opened in 1895 . Before the end of the <unk> War , in 1818 the Minang <unk> held a meeting at Ganting to discuss the steps they would take to eliminate mysticism and superstition from Islam on the island . 
 In 1833 a large earthquake on the west coast of Sumatra struck up a tsunami which destroyed much of Padang . The mosque was one of several buildings which survived the tsunami . Its stone floor was later replaced by a mixture of clam shells and pumice . 
 = = Modern history = = 
 The floor had received work beginning in 1900 , when tiles from the Netherlands , ordered through Jacobson van den Berg . The tiles were installed by a company @-@ appointed worker ; installation was completed in 1910 . That year , the Dutch established a cement factory in <unk> , Padang . To transport the cement to the port at Emma Haven , the Dutch built a stone road in front of Ganting Grand Mosque ; this road took up roughly a third of the waqf land the mosque had been built on . As compensation , the Dutch sent the Genie Command Corps of West Sumatra ( an area that includes modern day West Sumatra and Tapanuli ) . The corps expanded the front chamber until it was 20 metres ( 66 ft ) in length ; they also built a Portuguese style façade . The mosque 's floor was replaced with cement imported from Germany . Meanwhile , ethnic Chinese under Captain Lo Chian Ko began working on an octagonal dome , resembling the top of a vihara . The mihrab for the imam to lead prayers and preach was given Chinese @-@ style carvings . In 1921 Abdul Karim Amrullah established the <unk> Schools in Padang mosques , including Ganting , to better educate the local populace in Islam . The alumni later established the Persatuan Muslim Indonesia ( <unk> ) , under the Masyumi Party . The mosque was the location of the first national jamboree of Muhammadiyah 's scouting organisation , Hizbul Wathan , in 1932 . 
 When the Japanese began occupying the Indies in 1942 , Sukarno – at the time a Dutch prisoner in Bengkulu – was evacuated to <unk> . However , once they reached <unk> they discovered that the Japanese forces had already occupied Bukittinggi ; this quashed hopes of bringing Sukarno to <unk> in Tapanuli . The Dutch left Sukarno in <unk> . Hizbul Wathan members , at the time based out of Ganting , went to retrieve Sukarno and bring him to Padang by cart . For several days after arriving in Padang , Sukarno slept at the mosque ; he also delivered a speech . During the three @-@ year Japanese occupation the mosque served as the military 's headquarters in central and western Sumatra . It also functioned as a training camp for <unk> and Heiho soldiers , military units formed by the Japanese which consisted of native soldiers ; the <unk> was formed by the ulamas , while the <unk> were taken from the <unk> . 
 After the Allies landed in Sumatra , many of the Muslim Indian soldiers brought by the English deserted and joined the native revolutionaries . They planned strategy in the mosque , including the assault on a British barracks . One of these Indian soldiers , who had died in the assault , was buried at the mosque . Since 1950 , after Indonesia 's independence was recognised , the Ganting Grand Mosque has hosted numerous statesmen from both Indonesia and abroad , including Vice President Mohammad Hatta , Minister of Defence Sultan Hamengkubuwana IX , and General Abdul Haris Nasution . Foreign dignitaries who have visited the mosque included people from Malaysia , Saudi Arabia , and Egypt . 
 Construction on the mosque has continued . In 1960 the mosque 's 25 columns , originally constructed from brick , were covered in ceramic tiles ; seven years later , this was followed seven years later by the construction of minarets on the left and right of the dome . In 1995 , the walls of the main chamber were covered in tile . 
 On 10 April 2005 an aftershock measuring 6 @.@ 7 on the Richter scale struck the west coast of Sumatra two weeks after a larger earthquake struck Nias . This caused <unk> to the columns supporting the mosque 's roof . Three years later , the Ganting Grand Mosque was one of 608 places of worship severely damaged when another large earthquake struck the area on 30 September 2009 . The earthquake collapsed part of the mosque 's façade and caused severe structural damage to the interior columns ; as a result , the community feared that the mosque would collapse . Before renovations were completed in 2010 , prayers had to be held in the yard . In 2011 the Ganting Grand Mosque was listed as one of Indonesia 's 100 most beautiful mosques in a book compiled by <unk> Media . The only other mosque from West Sumatra included was Raya <unk> Mosque , Agam Regency . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Ganting Grand Mosque is built on land measuring 102 by 95 @.@ 6 metres ( 335 ft × 314 ft ) ; the mosque itself is 42 by 39 metres ( 138 ft × 128 ft ) . The building has verandas on its front and sites , a mihrab , and a central area . The extra land can hold more people during the Eid prayers , on both Eid ul @-@ Fitr and Eid al @-@ Adha . The courtyard is surrounded by an iron fence , separating it from the busy streets on the eastern and northern sides of the mosque . On the southern side , as well as behind the mosque proper , there are numerous graves , including that of Angku Syekh Haji Uma , one of the mosque 's founders . 
 The architectural blend of numerous schools shows clearly because of the different cultural groups involved in the mosque 's construction , including the architecture of Europe , the Middle East , China , and the Minangkabau . The mosque 's roof goes upwards in five steps , with the dome at the top ; the first step is square , while the rest are octagonal . Each part of the roof has slits in it for lighting . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The mosque proper has two main verandas , at the façade and its side . Both verandas measure 30 by 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 98 ft × 15 ft ) and have two doorways , one of which leads to the rooms for wudu located on the northern and southern sides of the mosque . On the western side of the mosque is a room ( <unk> ) for its keeper , measuring 4 @.@ 5 by 3 metres ( 14 @.@ 8 ft × 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . The <unk> has a 225 @-@ by @-@ 90 @-@ centimetre ( 89 in × 35 in ) door facing east and a window measuring 90 by 90 centimetres ( 35 in × 35 in ) . 
 The forward veranda measures 12 by 39 metres ( 39 ft × 128 ft ) and has six doorways to the east and two each to the north and south ; in each doorway hangs an iron grate door . Each of the east facing doorways is decorated with a pair of non @-@ supporting columns . In the center of the veranda is the 220 by 120 by 275 centimetres ( 87 in × 47 in × 108 in ) minbar , which juts out to the front and has an iron grate door . The minbar is only used during Eid prayers . Aside from the doors , the veranda has two windows with iron trellises , one each to the north and south . 
 On the eastern wall of the front veranda hangs a geometric carving created with square and rectangular panels . There are also arc designs which merge into ring and axehead shapes . The walls measure 34 centimetres ( 13 in ) thick and 320 centimetres ( 130 in ) high . Inside the veranda there are seven double iron @-@ wrought cylindrical columns with a diameter of 45 centimetres ( 18 in ) . These columns rest on concrete pedestals measuring 113 by 70 by 67 centimetres ( 44 in × 28 in × 26 in ) . There are also two square columns on the northern and southern sides , near a central , octagonal room which has one doorway from the east and one window . 
 = = = Main chamber = = = 
 The main chamber is a 30 @-@ by @-@ 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft × 98 ft ) square , with eight entrances on the east and due each on the north and south . The doors measure 160 by 264 centimetres ( 63 in × 104 in ) and have wooden doors with spread fan carvings on the threshold above . There are two windows with wooden frames on the eastern wall , flanking the doors , as well as three windows on both the north and south walls and eight on the west . These windows measure 1 @.@ 6 by 2 metres ( 5 ft 3 in × 6 ft 7 in ) . As with the doors , the threshold above the windows is decorated with spread fan carvings . The walls are made of concrete covered in ceramic , while the floor is made of white tiles with a flower motif . 
 This main room includes 25 soko guru , or main columns . They are hexagonal in shape and with diameters ranging from 40 to 50 centimetres ( 16 to 20 in ) . These columns are made of red brick and bound with egg whites , lacking any iron framework . The 25 columns are arranged in 5 rows , representing the 25 prophets in Islam . Each column is covered in marble engraved with the names of the prophets , from Adam to Muhammad . These columns are the main supports for the octagonal roof above . 
 On the western side of the room is a mihrab flanked by two smaller rooms on its north and south . The mihrab measures 2 by 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 6 ft 7 in × 4 ft 11 in ) . It is 320 centimetres ( 130 in ) tall on the east side and 210 centimetres ( 83 in ) tall on the west side . 
 = = = Other areas = = = 
 The Ganting Grand Mosque Masjid has wudu chambers measuring 10 by 3 metres ( 32 @.@ 8 ft × 9 @.@ 8 ft ) on the north and south sides of the side verandas . These enclosed chambers were built as permanent structures in 1967 . The mosque 's library is in a structure on the northern side of the mosque , which is connected to the mosque proper . There are also three smaller structures on the grounds for the consultation of future hajj pilgrims . One of the structures was once part of the a <unk> school . 
 = Ann Dunham = 
 Stanley Ann Dunham ( November 29 , 1942 – November 7 , 1995 ) was the mother of Barack Obama , the 44th President of the United States , and an American anthropologist who specialized in economic anthropology and rural development . Dunham was known as Stanley Dunham through high school , then as Ann Dunham , Ann Obama , Ann Soetoro , Ann <unk> ( after her second divorce ) , and finally as Ann Dunham . Born in Wichita , Kansas , Dunham spent her childhood in California , Oklahoma , Texas and Kansas , her teenage years in Mercer Island , Washington , and most of her adult life in Hawaii and Indonesia . 
 Dunham studied at the East – West Center and at the University of Hawaii at Manoa in Honolulu , where she attained a bachelor 's of anthropology and master 's and PhD in anthropology . She also attended University of Washington at Seattle in 1961 – 1962 . Interested in craftsmanship , weaving and the role of women in cottage industries , Dunham 's research focused on women 's work on the island of Java and blacksmithing in Indonesia . To address the problem of poverty in rural villages , she created microcredit programs while working as a consultant for the United States Agency for International Development . Dunham was also employed by the Ford Foundation in Jakarta and she consulted with the Asian Development Bank in Gujranwala , Pakistan . Towards the latter part of her life , she worked with Bank Rakyat Indonesia , where she helped apply her research to the largest microfinance program in the world . 
 After her son was elected President , interest renewed in Dunham 's work : The University of Hawaii held a symposium about her research ; an exhibition of Dunham 's Indonesian batik textile collection toured the United States ; and in December 2009 , Duke University Press published Surviving against the Odds : Village Industry in Indonesia , a book based on Dunham 's original 1992 dissertation . Janny Scott , an author and former New York Times reporter , published a biography about Ann Dunham 's life titled A Singular Woman in 2011 . Posthumous interest has also led to the creation of The Ann Dunham Soetoro Endowment in the Anthropology Department at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa , as well as the Ann Dunham Soetoro Graduate Fellowships , intended to fund students associated with the East – West Center ( <unk> ) in Honolulu , Hawaii . 
 In an interview , Barack Obama referred to his mother as " the dominant figure in my formative years ... The values she taught me continue to be my touchstone when it comes to how I go about the world of politics . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dunham was born on November 29 , 1942 at Saint Francis Hospital in Wichita , Kansas , the only child of Madelyn Lee Payne and Stanley Armour Dunham . She was of predominantly English ancestry , with some German , Swiss , Scottish , Irish , and Welsh ancestry . Wild Bill Hickok is her sixth cousin , five times removed . 
 <unk> announced on July 30 , 2012 , after using a combination of old documents and <unk> analysis , that Dunham 's mother may have been descended from African John Punch , who was an indentured servant / slave in seventeenth @-@ century colonial Virginia . 
 Her parents were born in Kansas and met in Wichita , where they married on May 5 , 1940 . After the attack on Pearl Harbor , her father joined the United States Army and her mother worked at a Boeing plant in Wichita . According to Dunham , she was named after her father because he wanted a son , though her relatives doubt this story and her maternal uncle recalled that her mother named Dunham after her favorite actress Bette Davis ' character in the film In This Our Life because she thought Stanley , as a girl 's name , sounded sophisticated . As a child and teenager she was known as Stanley . Other children teased her about her name but she used it through high school , " apologizing for it each time she introduced herself in a new town " . By the time Dunham began attending college , she was known by her middle name , Ann , instead . After World War II , Dunham 's family moved from Wichita to California while her father attended the University of California , Berkeley . In 1948 , they moved to Ponca City , Oklahoma , and from there to Vernon , Texas , and then to El Dorado , Kansas . In 1955 , the family moved to Seattle , Washington , where her father was employed as a furniture salesman and her mother worked as vice president of a bank . They lived in an apartment complex in the Wedgwood neighborhood where she attended Nathan Eckstein Junior High School . 
 In 1956 , Dunham 's family moved to Mercer Island , an Eastside suburb of Seattle . Dunham 's parents wanted their 13 @-@ year @-@ old daughter to attend the newly opened Mercer Island High School . At the school , teachers Val <unk> and Jim <unk> taught the importance of challenging social norms and questioning authority to the young Dunham , and she took the lessons to heart : " She felt she didn 't need to date or marry or have children . " One classmate remembered her as " intellectually way more mature than we were and a little bit ahead of her time , in an off @-@ center way " , and a high school friend described her as knowledgeable and progressive : " If you were concerned about something going wrong in the world , Stanley would know about it first . We were liberals before we knew what liberals were . " Another called her " the original feminist " . 
 = = Family life and marriages = = 
 On August 21 , 1959 , Hawaii became the 50th state to be admitted into the Union . Dunham 's parents sought business opportunities in the new state , and after graduating from high school in 1960 , Dunham and her family moved to Honolulu . Dunham soon enrolled at the University of Hawaii at Mānoa . 
 = = = First marriage = = = 
 While attending a Russian language class , Dunham met Barack Obama , Sr. , the school 's first African student . At the age of 23 , Obama Sr. had come to Hawaii to pursue his education , leaving behind a pregnant wife and infant son in his home town of Nyang <unk> Kogelo in Kenya . Dunham and Obama Sr. were married on the Hawaiian island of Maui on February 2 , 1961 , despite parental opposition from both families . Dunham was three months pregnant . Obama Sr. eventually informed Dunham about his first marriage in Kenya but claimed he was divorced . Years later , she would discover this was false . Obama Sr. ' s first wife , Kezia , later said she had granted her consent for him to marry a second wife , in keeping with Luo customs . 
 On August 4 , 1961 , at the age of 18 , Dunham gave birth to her first child , Barack Obama II . Friends in the state of Washington recall her visiting with her month @-@ old baby in 1961 . She took classes at the University of Washington from September 1961 to June 1962 , and lived as a single mother in the Capitol Hill neighborhood of Seattle with her son while her husband continued his studies in Hawaii . When Obama Sr. graduated from the University of Hawaii in June 1962 , he was offered a scholarship to study in New York City , but declined it , preferring to attend the more prestigious Harvard University . He left for Cambridge , Massachusetts , where he would begin graduate study at Harvard in the fall of 1962 . Dunham returned to Honolulu and resumed her undergraduate education at the University of Hawaii with the spring semester in January 1963 . During this time , her parents helped her raise the young Obama . Dunham filed for divorce in January 1964 , which Obama Sr. did not contest . In December 1964 , Obama Sr. married Ruth Baker , a Jewish American of Lithuanian heritage ; they were separated in 1971 and divorced in 1973 after having two sons . In 1965 , Obama Sr. received a MA in economics from Harvard . In 1971 , he came to Hawaii for a month and visited his son Barack , then 10 years old ; it was the last time he would see his son , and their only major personal interaction . In 1982 , Obama Sr. was killed in a car accident . 
 = = = Second marriage = = = 
 It was at the East – West Center that Dunham met Lolo Soetoro , a Javanese surveyor who had come to Honolulu in September 1962 on an East – West Center grant to study geography at the University of Hawaii . Soetoro graduated from the University of Hawaii with an M.A. in geography in June 1964 . In 1965 , Soetoro and Dunham were married in Hawaii , and in 1966 , Soetoro returned to Indonesia . Dunham graduated from the University of Hawaii with a B.A. in anthropology on August 6 , 1967 , and moved in October the same year with her six @-@ year @-@ old son to Jakarta , Indonesia , to rejoin her husband . 
 In Indonesia , Soetoro worked first as a low @-@ paid topographical surveyor for the Indonesian government , and later in the government relations office of Union Oil Company . The family first lived at 16 Kyai Haji Ramli Tengah Street in a newly built neighborhood in the Menteng Dalam administrative village of the <unk> subdistrict in South Jakarta for two and a half years , with her son attending the nearby Indonesian @-@ language Santo <unk> <unk> ( St. Francis of Assisi ) Catholic School for 1st , 2nd , and part of 3rd grade , then in 1970 moved two miles north to 22 Taman Amir Hamzah Street in the <unk> Dalam neighborhood in the <unk> administrative village of the Menteng subdistrict in Central Jakarta , with her son attending the Indonesian @-@ language government @-@ run Besuki School one and half miles east in the exclusive Menteng administrative village of the Menteng subdistrict for part of 3rd grade and for 4th grade . On August 15 , 1970 , Soetoro and Dunham had a daughter , Maya Kassandra Soetoro . 
 In Indonesia , Dunham enriched her son 's education with correspondence courses in English , recordings of Mahalia Jackson , and speeches by Martin Luther King Jr . In 1971 , she sent the young Obama back to Hawaii to attend Punahou School starting in 5th grade rather than having him stay in Indonesia with her . Madelyn Dunham 's job at the Bank of Hawaii , where she had worked her way up over a decade from clerk to becoming one of its first two female vice presidents in 1970 , helped pay the steep tuition , with some assistance from a scholarship . 
 A year later , in August 1972 , Dunham and her daughter moved back to Hawaii to rejoin her son and begin graduate study in anthropology at the University of Hawaii at Manoa . Dunham 's graduate work was supported by an Asia Foundation grant from August 1972 to July 1973 and by an East – West Center Technology and Development Institute grant from August 1973 to December 1978 . 
 Dunham completed her coursework at the University of Hawaii for an M.A. in anthropology in December 1974 , and after having spent three years in Hawaii , Dunham , accompanied by her daughter Maya , returned to Indonesia in 1975 to do anthropological field work . Her son chose not to go with them back to Indonesia , preferring to finish high school at Punahou School in Honolulu while living with his grandparents . Lolo Soetoro and Dunham divorced on November 5 , 1980 ; Lolo Soetoro married Erna <unk> in 1980 and had two children , a son , Yusuf <unk> Soetoro ( born 1981 ) , and daughter , <unk> <unk> Soetoro ( born 1987 ) . Lolo Soetoro died , age 52 , on March 2 , 1987 , due to liver failure . 
 Dunham was not estranged from either ex @-@ husband and encouraged her children to feel connected to their fathers . 
 = = Professional life = = 
 From January 1968 to December 1969 , Dunham taught English and was an assistant director of the Lembaga <unk> Indonesia Amerika ( LIA ) – the Indonesia @-@ America Friendship Institute at 9 Teuku Umar Street in the <unk> administrative village of the Menteng subdistrict in Central Jakarta – which was subsidized by the U.S. government . From January 1970 to August 1972 , Dunham taught English and was a department head and a director of the Lembaga Pendidikan dan <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) – the Institute of Management Education and Development at 9 Menteng Raya Street in the <unk> <unk> administrative village of the Menteng subdistrict in Central Jakarta . 
 From 1968 to 1972 , Dunham was a co @-@ founder and active member of the Ganesha Volunteers ( Indonesian Heritage Society ) at the National Museum in Jakarta . From 1972 to 1975 , Dunham was crafts instructor ( in weaving , batik , and dye ) at the Bishop Museum in Honolulu . 
 Dunham then had a career in rural development , championing women 's work and microcredit for the world 's poor and worked with leaders from organizations supporting Indonesian human rights , women 's rights , and grass @-@ roots development . 
 In March 1977 , Dunham , under the supervision of agricultural economics professor Leon A. Mears , developed and taught a short lecture course at the Faculty of Economics of the University of Indonesia ( <unk> ) in Jakarta for staff members of <unk> ( Badan <unk> Pembangunan Nasional ) — the Indonesian National Development Planning Agency . 
 From June 1977 through September 1978 , Dunham carried out research on village industries in the Daerah <unk> Yogyakarta ( DIY ) — the Yogyakarta Special Region within Central Java in Indonesia under a student grant from the East – West Center . As a weaver herself , Dunham was interested in village industries , and moved to Yogyakarta City , the center of Javanese handicrafts . 
 In May and June 1978 , Dunham was a short @-@ term consultant in the office of the International Labour Organization ( ILO ) in Jakarta , writing recommendations on village industries and other non @-@ agricultural enterprises for the Indonesian government 's third five @-@ year development plan ( <unk> III ) . 
 From October 1978 to December 1980 , Dunham was a rural industries consultant in Central Java on the Indonesian Ministry of Industry 's Provincial Development Program ( PDP I ) , funded by USAID in Jakarta and implemented through Development Alternatives , Inc . ( DAI ) . 
 From January 1981 to November 1984 , Dunham was the program officer for women and employment in the Ford Foundation 's Southeast Asia regional office in Jakarta . While at the Ford Foundation , she developed a model of microfinance which is now the standard in Indonesia , a country that is a world leader in micro @-@ credit systems . Peter Geithner , father of Tim Geithner ( who later became U.S. Secretary of the Treasury in her son 's administration ) , was head of the foundation 's Asia grant @-@ making at that time . 
 From May to November 1986 and from August to November 1987 , Dunham was a cottage industries development consultant for the Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan ( <unk> ) under the Gujranwala Integrated Rural Development Project ( <unk> ) . The credit component of the project was implemented in the Gujranwala district of the Punjab province of Pakistan with funding from the Asian Development Bank and <unk> , with the credit component implemented through Louis Berger International , Inc . Dunham worked closely with the Lahore office of the Punjab Small Industries Corporation ( <unk> ) . 
 From January 1988 to 1995 , Dunham was a consultant and research coordinator for Indonesia 's oldest bank , Bank Rakyat Indonesia ( BRI ) in Jakarta , with her work funded by USAID and the World Bank . In March 1993 , Dunham was a research and policy coordinator for Women 's World Banking ( WWB ) in New York . She helped WWB manage the Expert Group Meeting on Women and Finance in New York in January 1994 , and helped the WWB take prominent roles in the UN 's Fourth World Conference on Women held September 4 – 15 , 1995 in Beijing , and in the UN regional conferences and NGO forums that preceded it . 
 On August 9 , 1992 , she was awarded PhD in anthropology from the University of Hawaii , under the supervision of Prof. Alice G. Dewey , with a 1 @,@ 043 @-@ page dissertation titled Peasant blacksmithing in Indonesia : surviving and thriving against all odds . Anthropologist Michael Dove described the dissertation as " a classic , in @-@ depth , on @-@ the @-@ ground anthropological study of a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ year @-@ old industry " . According to Dove , Dunham 's dissertation challenged popular perceptions regarding economically and politically marginalized groups , and countered the notions that the roots of poverty lie with the poor themselves and that cultural differences are responsible for the gap between less @-@ developed countries and the industrialized West . According to Dove , Dunham : 
 found that the villagers she studied in Central Java had many of the same economic needs , beliefs and aspirations as the most capitalist of Westerners . Village craftsmen were " keenly interested in profits " , she wrote , and entrepreneurship was " in plentiful supply in rural Indonesia " , having been " part of the traditional culture " there for a millennium . 
 Based on these observations , Dr. Soetoro concluded that underdevelopment in these communities resulted from a scarcity of capital , the allocation of which was a matter of politics , not culture . <unk> programs that ignored this reality had the potential , perversely , of exacerbating inequality because they would only reinforce the power of elites . As she wrote in her dissertation , " many government programs inadvertently foster stratification by channeling resources through village officials " , who then used the money to strengthen their own status further . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 In late 1994 , Dunham was living and working in Indonesia . One night , during dinner at a friend 's house in Jakarta , she experienced stomach pain . A visit to a local physician led to an initial diagnosis of indigestion . Dunham returned to the United States in early 1995 and was examined at the Memorial Sloan – Kettering Cancer Center in New York City and diagnosed with uterine cancer . By this time , the cancer had spread to her ovaries . She moved back to Hawaii to live near her widowed mother and died on November 7 , 1995 , 22 days short of her 53rd birthday . Following a memorial service at the University of Hawaii , Obama and his sister spread their mother 's ashes in the Pacific Ocean at Lanai Lookout on the south side of Oahu . Obama scattered the ashes of his grandmother ( Madelyn Dunham ) in the same spot on December 23 , 2008 , weeks after his election to the presidency . 
 Obama talked about Dunham 's death in a 30 @-@ second campaign advertisement ( " Mother " ) arguing for health care reform . The ad featured a photograph of Dunham holding a young Obama in her arms as Obama talks about her last days worrying about expensive medical bills . The topic also came up in a 2007 speech in Santa Barbara : 
 I remember my mother . She was 52 years old when she died of ovarian cancer , and you know what she was thinking about in the last months of her life ? She wasn 't thinking about getting well . She wasn 't thinking about coming to terms with her own mortality . She had been diagnosed just as she was transitioning between jobs . And she wasn 't sure whether insurance was going to cover the medical expenses because they might consider this a preexisting condition . I remember just being heartbroken , seeing her struggle through the paperwork and the medical bills and the insurance forms . So , I have seen what it 's like when somebody you love is suffering because of a broken health care system . And it 's wrong . It 's not who we are as a people . 
 Dunham 's employer @-@ provided health insurance covered most of the costs of her medical treatment , leaving her to pay the deductible and uncovered expenses , which came to several hundred dollars per month . Her employer @-@ provided disability insurance denied her claims for uncovered expenses because the insurance company said her cancer was a preexisting condition . 
 = = Posthumous interest = = 
 In September 2008 , the University of Hawaii at Mānoa held a symposium about Dunham . In December 2009 , Duke University Press published a version of Dunham 's dissertation titled Surviving against the Odds : Village Industry in Indonesia . The book was revised and edited by Dunham 's graduate advisor , Alice G. Dewey , and Nancy I. Cooper . Dunham 's daughter , Maya Soetoro @-@ Ng , wrote the foreword for the book . In his afterword , Boston University anthropologist Robert W. Hefner describes Dunham 's research as " prescient " and her legacy as " relevant today for anthropology , Indonesian studies , and engaged scholarship " . The book was launched at the 2009 annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association in Philadelphia with a special Presidential Panel on Dunham 's work ; The 2009 meeting was taped by C @-@ SPAN . 
 In 2009 , an exhibition of Dunham 's Javanese batik textile collection ( A Lady Found a Culture in its Cloth : Barack Obama 's Mother and Indonesian Batiks ) toured six museums in the United States , finishing the tour at the Textile Museum of Washington , D.C. in August . Early in her life , Dunham explored her interest in the textile arts as a weaver , creating wall hangings for her own enjoyment . After moving to Indonesia , she was attracted to the striking textile art of the batik and began to collect a variety of different fabrics . 
 In December 2010 Dunham was awarded the Bintang Jasa Utama , the highest civilian award in Indonesia . 
 A lengthy major biography of Dunham by former New York Times reporter Janny Scott , titled A Singular Woman , was published in 2011 . 
 The University of Hawaii Foundation has established the Ann Dunham Soetoro Endowment , which supports a faculty position housed in the Anthropology Department at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa , and the Ann Dunham Soetoro Graduate Fellowships , providing funding for students associated with the East – West Center ( <unk> ) in Honolulu , Hawaii . 
 In 2010 the Stanley Ann Dunham Scholarship was established for young women graduating from Mercer Island High School , Ann 's alma mater . In its first six years the scholarship fund has awarded eleven college scholarships . 
 On January 1 , 2012 , President Obama and family visited an exhibition of his mother 's anthropological work on display at the University of Hawaii . 
 Filmmaker Vivian Norris 's feature length biographical film of Ann Dunham entitled Obama Mama ( La mère d <unk> @-@ French title ) premiered on May 31 , 2014 as part of the 40th annual Seattle International Film Festival , not far from where Dunham grew up on Mercer Island . 
 = = Personal beliefs = = 
 In his 1995 memoir Dreams from My Father , Barack Obama wrote , " My mother 's confidence in <unk> virtues depended on a faith I didn 't possess ... In a land [ Indonesia ] where fatalism remained a necessary tool for enduring hardship ... she was a lonely witness for secular humanism , a soldier for New Deal , Peace Corps , position @-@ paper liberalism . " In his 2006 book The Audacity of Hope Obama wrote , " I was not raised in a religious household ... My mother 's own experiences ... only reinforced this inherited skepticism . Her memories of the Christians who populated her youth were not fond ones ... And yet for all her professed secularism , my mother was in many ways the most spiritually awakened person that I 've ever known . " " Religion for her was " just one of the many ways — and not necessarily the best way — that man attempted to control the unknowable and understand the deeper truths about our lives , " Obama wrote . 
 Dunham 's daughter , Maya Soetoro @-@ Ng , when asked later if her mother was an atheist , said , " I wouldn 't have called her an atheist . She was an agnostic . She basically gave us all the good books — the Bible , the Hindu Upanishads and the Buddhist scripture , the Tao Te Ching — and wanted us to recognize that everyone has something beautiful to contribute . " " Jesus , she felt , was a wonderful example . But she felt that a lot of Christians behaved in un @-@ Christian ways . " On the other hand , Maxine Box , Dunham 's best friend in high school , said that Dunham " touted herself [ then ] as an atheist , and it was something she 'd read about and could argue . She was always challenging and arguing and comparing . She was already thinking about things that the rest of us hadn 't . " 
 In a 2007 speech , Obama contrasted the beliefs of his mother to those of her parents , and commented on her spirituality and skepticism : " My mother , whose parents were <unk> Baptists and Methodists , was one of the most spiritual souls I ever knew . But she had a healthy skepticism of religion as an institution . " 
 Obama also described his own beliefs in relation to the religious upbringing of his mother and father : 
 My father was from Kenya and a lot of people in his village were Muslim . He didn 't practice Islam . Truth is he wasn 't very religious . He met my mother . My mother was a Christian from Kansas , and they married and then divorced . I was raised by my mother . So , I 've always been a Christian . The only connection I 've had to Islam is that my grandfather on my father 's side came from that country . But I 've never practiced Islam . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Dunham , S Ann ( 1982 ) . Civil rights of working Indonesian women . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dunham , S Ann ( 1982 ) . The effects of industrialization on women workers in Indonesia . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dunham , S Ann ( 1982 ) . Women 's work in village industries on Java . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dunham , S Ann ( 1983 ) . Women 's economic activities in North Coast fishing communities : background for a proposal from <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dunham , S Ann ; Haryanto , <unk> ( 1990 ) . BRI Briefing Booklet : <unk> Development Impact Survey . Jakarta : Bank Rakyat Indonesia . 
 Dunham , S Ann ( 1992 ) . Peasant blacksmithing in Indonesia : surviving against all odds ( Thesis ) . Honolulu : University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa . OCLC <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . 
 Dunham , S Ann ; <unk> , <unk> ; <unk> , <unk> ( 2008 ) . Pendekar @-@ <unk> <unk> Nusantara : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> di Indonesia [ Nusantara iron warrior @-@ warrior : anthropological studies of traditional blacksmiths in Indonesia ] ( in Indonesian ) . Bandung , Indonesia : Mizan . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dunham , S Ann ( 2010 ) [ 2009 ] . Dewey , Alice G ; Cooper , Nancy I , eds . Surviving against the odds : village industry in Indonesia . Foreword by Maya Soetoro @-@ Ng ; afterword by Robert W. Hefner . Durham , NC : Duke University Press . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> , <unk> . 
 Dunham , S Ann ; <unk> , Anita ( 2012 ) . Ann Dunham 's legacy : a collection of Indonesian batik . Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia : Islamic Arts Museum Malaysia . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = New Jersey Route 49 = 
 Route 49 is a state highway in the southern part of the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs 53 @.@ 80 mi ( 86 @.@ 58 km ) from an interchange with the Delaware Memorial Bridge extension of the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 295 and U.S. Route 40 ) in Deepwater , Salem County , where it continues north as U.S. Route 130 southeast to Route 50 and County Route 557 in Tuckahoe , Cape May County . The route serves Salem , Cumberland , Atlantic , and Cape May Counties , passing through rural areas and the communities of Salem , Bridgeton , and Millville along the way . It is a two @-@ lane , undivided road for most of its length . 
 Route 49 was established in 1927 to run from Salem to Clermont , running along its present alignment between Salem and Millville , following current Route 47 between Millville and South Dennis , and running along present @-@ day Route 83 between South Dennis and Clermont . It replaced a branch of pre @-@ 1927 Route 6 between Salem and Bridgeton and a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 15 between Bridgeton and South Dennis . In 1953 , Route 49 was routed onto its current alignment , replacing a part of Route 44 between Salem and Deepwater and following the former alignment of Route 47 between Millville and Tuckahoe . In the 1960s , a freeway was planned for Route 49 between Deepwater and Millville ; it was never built . In the 2000s , many improvements have been or are being made to bridges along Route 49 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Salem County = = = 
 Route 49 heads south on Broadway from an interchange with the Delaware Memorial Bridge extension of the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 295 / U.S. Route 40 ) in the community of Deepwater in Pennsville Township , Salem County . North of here , the road continues to the north as U.S. Route 130 . Route 49 passes through residential areas of Pennsville and intersects County Route 630 ( Fort Mott Road ) , continuing into farmland . Route 49 then intersects the southern terminus of County Route 551 ( Hook Road and County Route 632 ( Lighthouse Road ) . It crosses the Salem River into Salem and becomes Front Street . 
 In Salem , the route intersects County Route 657 ( Griffith Street ) and makes a right turn . It turns left onto Broadway and forms the main business district of the town . In downtown Salem , Route 49 intersects County Route 625 ( Chestnut Street ) , the southern terminus of Route 45 ( Market Street ) , and County Route 665 ( Walnut Street ) . It crosses County Route 658 ( Keasbey Street / York Street ) and enters Quinton Township , becoming Main Street and heading into agricultural areas . Route 49 heads east , meeting County Route 650 ( Hancocks Bridge Road ) and County Route 653 ( Action Station Road ) . It crosses the Alloway Creek into the community of Quinton , where it intersects the southern terminus of County Route 581 ( Quinton Alloway Road ) and County Route 654 ( Sickler Street ) . The route leaves Quinton and intersects County Route 626 ( Jericho Road ) , continuing southeast into wooded areas , where Route 49 crosses County Route 667 ( Pecks Corner Road ) and County Route 647 ( Telegraph Road / Jericho Road ) . 
 = = = Cumberland County = = = 
 Route 49 crosses a stream , Sarah Run , into Stow Creek Township , Cumberland County and heads into farmland as Shiloh Pike . Here , it crosses County Route 624 ( Jericho Road ) and County Route 617 ( Columbia Highway ) . The route then intersects County Route 635 ( Old Cohansey Road ) and continues south along the border of Stow Creek Township to the west and Hopewell Township to the east , entering Shiloh at the intersection with Mill Road . In Shiloh , Route 49 meets County Route 620 ( <unk> Road ) and County Route 753 ( East Avenue / West Avenue ) in the center of town and heads southeast , crossing County Route 695 ( Maple Avenue / Randolph Road ) . The route enters Hopewell Township and intersects County Route 661 ( Barretts Run Road ) . 
 Past this intersection , Route 49 enters a more suburban landscape , crossing County Route 621 ( W. Park Drive ) . The route enters Bridgeton and becomes Broad Street . In Bridgeton , it intersects County Route 607 ( West Avenue ) , County Route 650 ( Fayette Street ) , and County Route 697 ( Atlantic Street ) . Route 49 crosses the Cohansey River and comes to an intersection with Pearl Street , which heads to the north as Route 77 and to the south as County Route 609 . Past Pearl Street , Route 49 crosses County Route 670 ( Commerce Street / <unk> Road ) and Route 49 continues to the east on Commerce Street . It crosses County Route 638 ( N. Burlington Road ) and enters Fairfield Township . 
 Route 49 continues east through a mix of woods and farms , intersecting County Route 553 ( <unk> @-@ Woodruff Road ) and County Route 675 ( <unk> @-@ <unk> Road ) . It enters Millville and becomes Main Street , intersecting County Route 682 ( Sugarman Avenue ) and County Route 634 ( <unk> Avenue ) . It intersects three more county routes , County Route 714 ( <unk> Avenue ) , County Route 625 ( <unk> Road ) , and County Route 712 ( <unk> Road ) , before heading into the city . It intersects County Route 608 ( Carmel Road ) and County Route 698 ( Beech Street ) , County Route 667 ( Sharp Street ) , and County Route 610 ( <unk> Avenue ) before meeting County Route 555 ( Cedar Street ) , which it forms a concurrency with . The route crosses the Maurice River and enters downtown Millville , where it intersects Route 47 ( Second Street ) . Past Route 47 , County Route 555 splits from Route 49 by turning north onto Third Street . Route 49 heads east through the eastern part of Millville , intersecting County Route 678 ( Wade Boulevard ) and interchanging with Route 55 . Past Route 55 , Route 49 heads southeast into woodland and crosses into Maurice River Township . In Maurice River Township , Route 49 intersects County Route 671 ( Union Road ) , County Route 646 ( Port Elizabeth @-@ Cumberland Road ) , and County Route 644 ( <unk> Road ) . Route 49 eventually forms the border of Maurice River Township to the north and Upper Township , Cape May County to the south . 
 = = = Atlantic and Cape May Counties = = = 
 Route 49 crosses the Tuckahoe River into <unk> Manor , Atlantic County . It runs a short distance to the north of the Tuckahoe River and intersects County Route 649 ( Aetna Avenue ) and County Route 666 ( Cape May Avenue ) . The route crosses the Tuckahoe River into Upper Township , Cape May County and intersects the eastern terminus of County Route 548 ( Tuckahoe Road ) , heading to the east . It intersects County Route 632 ( <unk> Road ) and then comes to County Route 617 ( Woodbine Road ) , which heads south to provide access to County Route 557 . Route 49 continues east into Tuckahoe , where it intersects County Route 659 ( Railroad Avenue ) and ends at Route 50 and County Route 557 . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 49 was legislated in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering to run from Route 45 in Salem to Route 4 ( now U.S. Route 9 ) in Clermont . The route replaced a branch of pre @-@ 1927 Route 6 between Salem and Bridgeton and a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 15 between Bridgeton and South Dennis . A spur route of Route 49 , Route S49 , was created in 1927 to run from Route 49 in South Dennis to Route 4 in Rio Grande along the remainder of pre @-@ 1927 Route 15 . Route S49 was extended to Wildwood in 1938 . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 49 was extended west along what was a part of Route 44 to Deepwater to end at U.S. Route 40 and U.S. Route 130 near the Delaware Memorial Bridge . The eastern part of the route was realigned to head from Millville east to Route 50 in Tuckahoe , replacing what had been the southern part of Route 47 . Meanwhile , Route 47 was realigned to head south from Millville , replacing Route 49 from Millville to South Dennis and the length of Route S49 . The portion of Route 49 from South Dennis to Clermont became Route 83 . 
 A freeway was proposed for Route 49 in the early 1960s , running from Interstate 295 and U.S. Route 40 at the Delaware Memorial Bridge to Route 55 in Millville . However , this freeway was canceled by 1967 as it closely paralleled the planned Route 60 freeway , which itself was never built . 
 In the 2000s , construction has occurred to replace many bridges along Route 49 . The drawbridge over the Salem River was replaced by a fixed span in the mid @-@ 2000s . On October 1 , 2008 , the bridge over the railroad line in Tuckahoe was closed for reconstruction and is expected to reopen in June 2009 . The bridge over the Cohansey River in Bridgeton is also being reconstructed . Construction on this bridge started in October 2008 and is expected to be completed in July 2009 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Thomas S. Hinde = 
 Thomas <unk> Hinde ( April 19 , 1785 – February 9 , 1846 ) was an American newspaper editor , opponent of slavery , author , historian , real estate investor , Methodist minister and a founder of the city of Mount Carmel , Illinois . Members of the Hinde family were prominent in Virginia , Kentucky , Ohio , and Illinois . His sons Charles T. Hinde became a shipping magnate and Edmund C. Hinde an adventurer . He was the father @-@ in @-@ law of judge Charles H. Constable . 
 Hinde was an active businessman , pursuing real estate , construction , and publishing opportunities in Kentucky , Ohio and Illinois . In his early years , Hinde publicly opposed slavery . He also used his newspaper , The Fredonian , in Chillicothe , Ohio between 1806 @-@ 1808 , to highlight issues about Indian treaties and the conspiracy of Aaron Burr . He served in the War of 1812 . In later years he was a pioneer in the settlement of Indiana and Illinois , and the expansion of the Methodist Church in these areas . He contributed to the Madoc Tradition and was a noted historian and biographer . Hinde cofounded the Wabash Navigation Company , which engaged in real estate speculation and dam construction . The company dammed the Wabash River next to Hinde 's property , creating the Grand Rapids Dam . The dam was abandoned by the Federal government in 1931 . 
 Hinde was an ordained Methodist minister and traveled extensively to advance the interests of the church . He was a pioneering circuit rider in the early 1800s in Kentucky , Indiana , Illinois , and Missouri . Hinde wrote and published religious articles in many leading publications . Francis Asbury , one of the first two bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church in the United States , considered Hinde important to the church . He frequently met with him and mentioned him in his journals . Historian Lyman Draper spent more than twenty years collecting documents by and about the Hinde family , along with papers of other important figures of the Trans @-@ Allegheny West . The Draper Manuscript Collection at the Wisconsin Historical Society holds 47 volumes of Hinde 's personal papers , donated by his family after his death . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Thomas S. Hinde was born April 19 , 1785 in Hanover County , Virginia , to Dr. Thomas Hinde ( 1737 – 1828 ) and Mary Todd Hubbard ( 1734 – 1830 ) , as the seventh of eight children . His father was an English doctor who served as a physician to Patrick Henry and General James Wolfe . Little is known about Hinde 's early years except that the family moved from Virginia to Newport , Kentucky , in 1797 when his father was awarded a land grant of 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 40 km2 ) for his services in the American Revolutionary War . In a letter to President James Madison many years later , Hinde related that while walking to school in the wilderness of Kentucky , he once successfully fought off a wolf and a panther . Daniel Boone and Simon Kenton were neighbors of the Hinde family while they lived in Kentucky , and the three men grew up as colleagues . One of Hinde 's sisters married Richard Southgate ; his nephews William Wright Southgate and William Taylor became prominent lawyers and politicians . 
 After a conversion by his mother Mary and older sister Susannah in 1798 , all of Hinde 's family , including his father , converted to Christianity as Methodists . Thomas delayed a while . Shortly afterward the younger Hinde became close friends with Francis Asbury , who became a prominent bishop in the church . Hinde later described the conversion of his youngest sister , Martha Harrison Hinde , in an 1827 article published in the Methodist Review under his pen name , Theophilus Arminius . Hinde recounted Bishop Asbury visiting his father 's home in 1803 and telling Martha that she had better find God , because before he could meet her again she would be dead . The bishop 's prophecy came true when Martha died in 1811 without having seen Asbury again . Hinde said she had converted before her death and tried to convert the nonbelievers in the room while on her deathbed . He shared a letter in which his sister had tried to convert her close friends . Hinde named his first daughter after his late sister Martha . Hinde did not immediately convert but attended Methodist camp meetings of the period . During his life , he frequently wrote about the importance of the camp meeting in bringing Christianity and democracy to the west . 
 In 1801 , Hinde got a job as deputy clerk for the Kentucky Court of Appeals . William Kavanaugh , the husband of Hinde 's older sister Hannah , assigned him to Achilles Sneed of Frankfort . He received a good legal education with Sneed , who was Clerk of the Court of Appeals . During this time , Hinde became acquainted with many of the state 's leading men , and acquired a knowledge of the law . He also developed a reputation as one of Kentucky 's most efficient businessmen . Hinde wrote to Henry Clay that he was the first lawyer whom Hinde heard address a court . Hinde resided in a boarding house , shared with many of the leading judges and politicians of the day , where he strengthened his personal and political contacts . 
 = = Newspaper publisher = = 
 From an early age , Hinde opposed slavery . Although their parents owned slaves , he and his siblings repudiated slavery on religious grounds . Hinde 's opposition increased and eventually he and other friends became outspoken critics of the institution in Kentucky , where slavery was commonplace in the middle and western parts of the state . In the Great Awakening , Methodists were prominent among those who opposed slavery , although they also converted slaves and welcomed them into congregations . In Kentucky Hinde joined other Methodist ministers in the abolitionist movement . 
 In a letter to President Madison , Hinde attributed his opposition to slavery to the influence of his mother . He wrote : 
 In 1805 , Messrs. Wood and Street , from Richmond , Va . , found their way to Kentucky . Friendly considerations led me to patronize them . This was done through the solicitations of a young friend from Virginia . They commenced a paper , published in 1806 , called the ' Western World . ' <unk> strong prejudices against slavery , perhaps from my mother 's repeating , in my infancy , the nurse 's songs composed by Cowper , designed to make such impressions . In June 1806 , to the great astonishment of my friends , I left Kentucky , with all the flattering prospects a youth could have , and hastened to Ohio . Connecting circumstances , and from hints that fell from Wood and others , a deep impression had been made on my mind , that an eventful period was fast approaching . 
 Because of the slavery issue , in 1806 Hinde moved from Kentucky to Chillicothe in the free state of Ohio . In partnership with his brother @-@ in @-@ law R.D. Richardson , beginning in 1806 , he edited and published a newspaper titled the Fredonian . Fredonian was a sonorous name for ' a citizen of the United States . ' In later years it was applied to an American @-@ inspired rebellion to separate Texas from Mexico . 
 From early in his career , Hinde fought the projects of Aaron Burr . He collected and published material in The Fredonian related to what he said was Burr 's conspiracy to overthrow the US government . Hinde sent the evidence to Henry Clay , a longtime friend of his family and later secretary of state , but the papers disappeared . 
 While working at the Kentucky Court of Appeals , Hinde had developed a close relationship with George Madison and his nephew John Madison . In 1829 Hinde wrote to their relation , President James Madison , to provide him with information about the Burr conspiracy for a political history the president was said to be writing . Madison denied the project , but asked Hinde to send copies of The Fredonian to include in his presidential papers . Hinde sent newspaper issues dealing with the Burr Conspiracy . The copies of the newspaper were filed with the President 's papers . 
 After moving to Ohio , Hinde was unanimously elected by the Ohio House of Representatives to the position of clerk pro tempore . He held the position for three years before shifting to focus on his successful speculation in military lands . 
 = = Marriages and family = = 
 On October 19 , 1809 , with minister William Lynes officiating , Hinde at the age of 24 married Belinda Bradford , the daughter of the late James Bradford , in Hamilton County , Ohio . His father @-@ in @-@ law was a descendant of William Bradford of Plymouth Colony . He had been killed in 1791 in St. Clair 's Defeat , and buried in Fort Recovery . 
 Hinde and Belinda had three children : James B. , John Madison , and Martha . The second son was named after Hinde 's friend Dr. John Madison , a nephew of George Madison and a relative of James Madison . The daughter Martha married Charles H. Constable , who became a prominent Illinois politician . He is notable for his decision as judge to allow four Union deserters to go free during the Civil War . Belinda died in 1827 . 
 In 1828 , Hinde married Sarah Neal ( Daugherty ) Cavileer . They had three children : Edmund C. , Charles T. and Belinda . Edmund was a pioneer who participated in the California Gold Rush ; after his death , his journals were published . Charles became a business tycoon in Southern California , playing a pivotal role in its development through his shipping expertise . Belinda married Jacob Zimmerman , a successful newspaper editor and owner who in later years held a number of political offices in Illinois . 
 = = Conversion to Methodism = = 
 Hinde was involved with the newspaper for less than two years . He converted from Deism to Methodism and decided that operating a political journal conflicted with his new religious views . After retiring from the newspaper business , he engaged in locating military lands and in land speculation . For the rest of his life , Hinde published editorials in newspapers and religious publications . He organized several camp meetings with other preachers , saying that the camp meeting could unite the different Protestant denominations . 
 At times , Francis Asbury ventured into the wilderness to visit Hinde . An 1856 account states , 
 In 1810 Bishop Asbury visited an obscure part of the western country ( Kanawha ) which was then a wilderness , and pleasantly told the Rev. Thomas S. Hinde that he had visited the region in order that the people might see and know their superintendent ; remarking , " The shepherd ought to know the flock , and the flock the shepherd : they ought to know what man it is that governs them , and I have come nearly one hundred miles out of my way to see them . " The writer exclaims , " O Asbury , the inhabitants of these hills and mountains will long make mention of thee ! " 
 Hinde is thought to have received his license to preach sometime around 1810 . His first sermon was in Chillicothe in either 1807 or 1808 , and people were so eager to hear him that they filled the church . The sermon was described as having " ... no coherence in his discourse . " During the sermon , Hinde repeatedly stated , " My bowels , my bowels ! " 
 According to a 19th @-@ century account , 
 As a preacher , he was rather eccentric . He was not very fluent and gifted as a speaker , but had the power of engaging the attention of his hearers , and was very successful and useful in a revival of religion . He entertained rather singular views on the subject of the orders in the ministry , objecting to the order of deacons , and holding that the eldership is the only true order . In consequence of these peculiar views , he would never consent to be ordained a deacon , and therefore never entered into orders at all . 
 Hinde became a circuit rider in the early 1800s . While his circuit varied over the years , he served large portions of Kentucky , Indiana , Illinois , and Missouri . Much of the territory he covered was generally lawless , violent and dangerous . Circuit riders served numerous churches and were supposed to plant new ones in new or underserved communities . They were critical to the development of the frontier . 
 An avid writer , Hinde wrote mostly about Methodism and church songs . He wrote a popular hymnal entitled The <unk> ' songster ; or , A choice collection of spiritual songs , which was said to have sold more than 10 @,@ 000 copies . Rev. Thomas S. Hinde was said to be , " ... exceedingly earnest , and very zealous in promoting the interests of the Church and of religion and morality . His zeal , however , was rather of the ascetic kind ; and he usually took prominent part in the arraignment and trial of brethren accused of offenses . " He was quoted as saying that he was , " ... doing God service . " 
 = = Indian affairs = = 
 Growing up in Kentucky in the late 1790s , Hinde learned of the danger of Indian attacks . After moving to Chillicothe , he became interested in prehistoric Indian sites . In a letter to President James Madison , he mentioned taking friends to <unk> 's mound ( now the Hopewell Culture National Historical Park ) , but focused on his opposition to slavery , saying he called 
 their attention to the surrounding scenery , my former pursuits , my friends , my country , my prospects — all these had been abandoned for the pride of opinion , against the entailment and perpetuation of slavery upon the rising generation ! I remember their looks when I remarked , that after all , ( pointing to the sun eclipsed , ) I spoke of the gloom that overshadowed my future prospects ! 
 Hinde purchased property from William Mc 'Intosh near the Wabash River , an area that had been a Piankashaw Indian campground . It contained numerous earthwork mounds built by cultures that predated the Piankashaw . 
 Hinde met the Shawnee chief Tecumseh in Chillicothe and in Vincennes , Indiana , during either the 1810 or the 1811 meeting between Tecumseh and William Henry Harrison at Grouseland . Hinde also met prominent Shawnee Blue Jacket and reported on him for the local newspapers . One source says that Hinde played a crucial role in negotiating early Indian treaties signed with the United States government , without defining his actions . 
 = = War of 1812 = = 
 Hinde served in the U.S. Army in the War of 1812 under William Henry Harrison , then governor of the Indiana Territory . Both from Virginia families , the two men were close in age . Hinde was made responsible for prisoners of war starting in 1813 , when he was about 27 or 28 years old . 
 Hinde served under Captain Oliver Hazard Perry , who was the commander at the Battle of Lake Erie . Captain Perry 's decisive victory ensured American control of the lake , improved American morale after a series of defeats , and compelled the British to fall back from Detroit . In 1813 , Hinde was placed in charge of prisoners captured at this battle . 
 = = Founding Mount Carmel = = 
 In the early 1800s , Hinde purchased large land holdings in what would become Wabash County , Illinois . In 1817 , he , William McDowell and William Beauchamp collectively founded the city of Mount Carmel , Illinois . All three men were ministers . They chose the Biblical name " Mount Carmel " , because it meant " the garden of the Lord " and was a historic city in Palestine . According to one source : 
 The site chosen for the town was a point on the west bank of the Wabash opposite the mouth of the White River , and twenty @-@ four miles southwest of Vincennes . This point was selected because of the available water power and of the likelihood that main roads from east to west would pass here . The town became a railroad and manufacturing center and justified the wisdom of its founders . An elaborate circular , called the " Articles of Association for the City of Mount Carmel , " was issued at Chillicothe in 1817 . The purpose of the association was announced to be " to build a city on liberal and advantageous principles , and to constitute funds for the establishment of seminaries of learning and for religious purposes . " The proprietors reserved for themselves one @-@ fourth of the lots , these being called " proprietors ' lots ; " one @-@ fourth were called " private donation lots . " The plan of survey and sale was described as follows : " The in @-@ lots are six poles in front , and eleven and a half in back ; containing each sixty @-@ eight perches , nearly half an acre . The most of the out @-@ lots contain four acres and eight square poles ; some of them more , ( five and six acres on the back range ) ; and a few of them less . There are 748 in @-@ lots , and 331 out @-@ lots <unk> in the whole . 
 Hinde donated the majority of the land for the city . Shortly after it was incorporated , he gave permission for city residents to use part of his land near the Wabash River as a " commons " for livestock . Hinde , Beauchamp and McDowell were granted permission by the legislature to establish a ferry on Hinde 's land at the river . During this time Hinde did the primary survey work for the Grand Rapids Dam on the river . According to a local history published in 1883 , he was believed to reside in a house located on the " bluff " in Mount Carmel . In letters to Congress written in the 1820s , Hinde said that he resided near the Grand Rapids Dam . He wrote a poem about Mount Carmel and had it published in Ohio . 
 Originally , Mount Carmel was located in Edwards County . After a drought in 1820 killed a majority of the settlers , the county seat was moved from Palmyra , Illinois to Albion . At that time Albion was settled primarily by English immigrants . The Americans from Mount Carmel and surrounding settlements were resentful and tried to return the county seat to Mount Carmel by force . During the bickering for the county seat location , Hinde ran for county commissioner in 1821 against John Buckles , receiving only two votes against Buckles ' 151 . In 1822 Hinde ran for the office of Illinois House of Representatives and narrowly lost to Gilbert T. Pell . On December 24 , 1824 the Illinois Legislature resolved the county seat issue by creating Wabash County from the eastern half of Edwards County . 
 Based on newspaper accounts , the lots held by Hinde did not sell quickly . More than 27 years after having developed the plans for Mount Carmel , Hinde was still advertising lots for sale there in national newspapers . In one advertisement Hinde said , " The place I offer is midway between St. Louis and Louisville and the next improvement will be the completion of the railroad connecting the two places , and a dam across the Great Wabash , at the Grand Rapids , at the junction of the White , Patoka , and Wabash , giving the greatest water power in the great West . " 
 Another source notes that Hinde and other founders " ... may have been over zealous and puritanical in the construction of their laws ... no theater or play @-@ house shall ever be built within the boundary of the city ; no person shall be guilty of drunkenness , profanity , sabbath @-@ breaking , and many other offenses of greater magnitude , etc . , he shall be subject to trial by the court of Mayor and on conviction , was disqualified from holding any office in the city , or the bank ; was disqualified to vote ; ostracism was to continue for three years after the commission of the so @-@ called crimes . " 
 Around 1825 , Hinde settled in Mount Carmel , leaving the Methodist circuit to focus on religious and historical writing , and business . He founded one of the first churches in the town and occasionally held Methodist gatherings at his home . On September 20 , 1827 more than 27 Methodist ministers met in the upper room of his house . It was one of the largest gatherings of the time . 
 = = Real estate disputes = = 
 After his father died in 1828 , Hinde inherited real estate in Kentucky . Shortly thereafter , he began investing in real estate in Ohio . Property titles were frequently complicated in this period due to turnover of military lands , as well as issues related to acquisition of former Native American lands . Several of his Ohio property disputes reached the Supreme Court of the United States , including Hinde v. Vattier and Mallow v. Hinde . 
 = = = Johnson v. M 'Intosh = = = 
 William M 'Intosh was a former Revolutionary War veteran who had become a fur trader and investor in military lands along the Wabash River . Hinde and M 'Intosh lived on adjoining tracts of land near what would become the site of the Grand Rapids Dam . 
 M 'Intosh became associated with the Supreme Court Case of Johnson v. M 'Intosh . Chief Justice John Marshall , an acquaintance of Hinde and his father , used the case to establish the " Discovery Doctrine , " which ruled that the discovering people gain title over the indigenous peoples in respect to land title . Hinde also knew Associate Justice Thomas Todd , a justice on the Kentucky Court of Appeals when Hinde served as the court 's clerk . In the case , in which Johnson and M 'Intosh were claiming title to the same property , the Supreme Court ruled that private citizens could not purchase land from Native Americans , and therefore the plaintiff Johnson 's land purchases were invalid . M 'Intosh 's land purchases from the Federal government were affirmed as legal . 
 Hinde purchased a portion of M 'Intosh 's litigated property not long after the litigation . Correspondence between Hinde and M 'Intosh discussing land sales form part of the Hinde documents at the Lyman Draper Manuscripts Collection in the Wisconsin Historical Society . Due to the favorable ruling in the case , Hinde benefited greatly because of his large land holdings in the area . After the ruling had settled ownership issues between the Indians and settlers , Hinde founded the towns of Mt . Carmel , <unk> , and Selima in the Illinois territory . 
 = = = Hinde v. Vattier = = = 
 One of Hinde 's own real estate disputes was based on property he owned in Cincinnati . The dispute was between the Hinde family and Charles Vattier . Vattier was a known scam artist and underworld giant in Cincinnati . One source described Vattier as owning " ... a gambling empire , including grog shops , Bawdy houses and taverns . " Vattier was involved in a number of other fraudulent real estate schemes with other people in Ohio . In 1807 Vattier was convicted of burglary and larceny for stealing large sums of money from James Findlay , Receiver of Public <unk> for the District of Cincinnati . Hinde knew Findlay since they were both involved in exposing the Burr conspiracy and both were prominent in Ohio . 
 Allegedly , Vattier had tried to take title to a piece of property in Cincinnati already owned by the Hinde family . Hinde challenged Vattier in court . Henry Clay represented Hinde in the Ohio State Court proceedings . Hinde claimed that Vattier tried to use the lot to pay Findlay by claiming to have a bill of sale and title that was superior to the Hinde family . After more than fifteen years , the case reached the United States Supreme Court in 1833 . The Court ruled that Vattier took title to the property illegally and that the property belonged to Hinde and his children . Originally owned by Hinde 's father @-@ in @-@ law , James Bradford , after his death the property passed to Hinde 's wife , Belinda ( Bradford ) Hinde . 
 = = Wabash Navigation Company = = 
 In 1825 , Hinde joined the Wabash Navigation Company . Seventeen members of the company came from prominent families in Indiana and Illinois . The company had capital of more than $ 1 million . Hinde was one of the company 's first nine directors and remained active until his death . The company charter was eventually approved by both the Illinois and Indiana legislatures . The company built a dam next to land Hinde owned . 
 In a letter to Congress in 1842 , Hinde stated that his goal was to connect the Wabash River with the Maumee River that flowed to Lake Erie . He cited in support the opinion of unnamed hunters and traders and George Washington 's hope of connecting the waters of the east with the Ohio and Mississippi rivers . Hinde also declared , " ... I have seen the whole wilderness of the West subdued and savages and wild beasts or prey receding before civilization and enterprise . " He said that , on the Wabash from the Grand Rapids to Terre Haute , steamboats could navigate almost all year ; therefore it was essential to connect the river to the Ohio . He also suggested that an armory should be built by the U.S. Government next to the proposed dam . 
 Dr. John Lescher was a business partner and friend of Thomas S. Hinde . Both men invested in the Wabash Navigation Company . Lescher later joined Hinde 's children in a lawsuit against the company . Not long after the death of Hinde , his son James and his son @-@ in @-@ law Charles H. Constable joined with Lescher and sued the Company for entering their land and taking timber and other materials for the construction of dam . But , the company 's charter permitted them to enter the land and take construction material without the owner 's consent , forcing the owner to seek legal redress . The court ordered compensation . 
 A letter written by Jacob Lescher in 1841 and submitted to Congress in support of the Grand Rapids Dam project and the building of a U.S. Armory , stated that he and Hinde owned more than 1 @,@ 200 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 km2 ) acres of land around the proposed dam site . Additional information submitted to Congress stated that the town of Powhatan was owned by Hinde and Lescher and was a " river addition " to Mount Carmel . The location of the town of Selima was not clearly stated , but was near the dam . Hinde did the original surveying for Grand Rapids Dam . 
 The wooden timber dam deteriorated and needed to be replaced in the late nineteenth century . On September 19 , 1890 , Congress appropriated money for the construction of a new dam , to be built by the Army Corps of Engineers . The report stated that the old dam had partially washed away and that the new dam would raise the water level by 11 @.@ 5 feet . According to an annual report to the Secretary of War in 1908 , the mid @-@ 19th century lock and dam were " ... not of a substantial character .... , " and " ... rapidly deteriorated and became useless . " The same report said that by March 31 , 1881 expenditures for the dam were $ 317 @,@ 845 @.@ 44 and the government was forced to pay the Wabash Navigation Company an additional $ 7 @,@ 000 to extinguish their franchise and purchase their property . 
 = = Later years and legacy = = 
 Hinde settled in Mount Carmel toward the end of his life . During Hinde 's final years , he was an active letter writer and watched over his many business and real estate interests . Hinde was prominent in church and Illinois society and compiled many documents and interviews . During his later years , he shared much of this information with various writers and publications . 
 In his later writings , Hinde espoused some questionable theories such as the Hollow Earth theory and the Madoc tradition . Hinde was published in the Methodist Magazine , the " Short Sketches of Revivals of Religion in the Western Country " ( incomplete ) , the Advocate and Journal ( New York ) and the Western Christian Advocate ( Cincinnati ) . His writings have been described as , " ... abound [ ing ] in vague <unk> and religious <unk> this is especially true of his <unk> thus making them of slight value .... " 
 Hinde dedicated a substantial amount of time to investigating the Madoc Tradition in North America . Madoc or Madog ab Owain Gwynedd was , according to folklore , a Welsh prince who sailed to America in 1170 , more than 300 years before Christopher Columbus 's voyage in 1492 . Hinde interviewed hundreds of individuals on the topic . In 1824 , Hinde wrote a letter to John S. Williams , editor of The American Pioneer regarding the Madoc Tradition . He claimed to have testimony from numerous sources that said Welsh people under Owen Ap <unk> had come to America in the twelfth century , over 300 years before Christopher Columbus . Hinde claimed that in 1799 , the remains of six soldiers had been dug up near Jeffersonville , Indiana with breastplates containing Welsh coats of arms . In 1799 , John Sevier , the first governor of Tennessee , also wrote of the alleged discovery of six skeletons in brass armor bearing Welsh coat @-@ of @-@ arms . Hinde claimed that M 'Intosh recounted that American Indians and Welshmen living on the Mississippi River were conversing in Welsh in the late 1700s . 
 In an 1842 letter Hinde stated , " I have just returned from the East , having visited the Atlantic cities generally for the first time , after forty @-@ five years pioneering in the wilderness of the West . I have been three time a citizen of Kentucky , twice of Ohio , and twice of Illinois . " After returning from the visit , Hinde claimed that eastern ministers were unsuccessful because they underrated the people of the West . He said , 
 " If we expect to find on crossing the mountains a people either illiterate or ignorant as a body , we will assuredly , in many instances be disappointed . It too often happens , that one puffed up with self @-@ importance , and possesses a conceited and heated imagination , will form wild conjectures as to men and things . We have been amused at the bewildered minds of such , with the ' <unk> ' and ' <unk> ' ; and one of the most ridiculous whims of some , is to endeavor to press every thing into their own mould ; and shape it , be it what it may , if possible , after their own manner , custom , or operation , forgetting that ' we have to take the world as it is , and not as we would have it to be . ' " 
 A large collection of Hinde 's diaries are held among the Lyman Draper Manuscripts in the Wisconsin Historical Society . In his diaries Hinde stated that he supported the Hollow Earth theory . Throughout his life Hinde maintained correspondence with many of the prominent men of the day . His correspondents included James Madison , George Madison , Thomas Jefferson , Henry Clay , Simon Kenton , Daniel Boone , and John Marshall . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Hinde was sick a few days before dying from " winter fever . " Hinde is buried in Sandhill Cemetery in Mount Carmel next to his daughter Belinda and his second wife , Sarah Doughty Cavileer Neal . The wrought iron fence surrounding their graves was paid for by his son Charles in the early 1900s . Since he died at a relatively early age and his wife died shortly after him , his orphaned children were forced to live with other relatives or fend for themselves . Martha married Judge Charles H. Constable ; together they looked after many of her younger siblings until they married or found work . Her brother Charles Hinde became a successful businessman and riverboat captain . One of Captain Hinde 's accomplishments was investing in the Hotel del Coronado in San Diego , California . Hinde 's grandson , Frederick Zimmerman , built the Grand Rapids Hotel on the Hinde family farm in Mount Carmel near the Grand Rapids Dam and Hanging Rock . 
 = Cyrus K. Holliday = 
 Colonel Cyrus Kurtz Holliday ( April 3 , 1826 – March 29 , 1900 ) was one of the founders of the township of Topeka , Kansas , in the mid 19th century ; and was Adjutant General of Kansas during the American Civil War . The title Colonel , however , was honorary . He was the first president of the Atchison , Topeka and Santa Fe Railway , as well as one of the railroad 's directors for nearly 40 years , up to 1900 . A number of railway locomotives have been named after him . 
 = = Education and early career = = 
 He was born on April 3 , 1826 , to David and Mary ( Kennedy ) Holliday , in Kidderminster , Pennsylvania ( near Carlisle ) . The younger Holliday received a public school education , graduating from Allegheny College in Meadville , Pennsylvania , where he studied law , in 1852 . Although he moved to Kansas in 1854 , Allegheny College 's alumni records show Holliday receiving a master 's degree in 1855 . 
 While he was still in Meadville , he was asked to prepare legal documentation for a new railroad that would connect to the city . The proposed railroad ( likely the Pittsburgh and Erie Railroad which was sometimes known as " The Meadville Line " ) would almost connect with a larger nearby system ( the Atlantic and Great Western Railroad ) , which meant that it could become a feeder route to the larger railroad . Holliday saw the potential of the line and instead of asking for a standard fee to create the documents , he asked for and was granted a partnership in the new railroad . When this railroad was purchased by the larger system , Holliday earned $ 20 @,@ 000 from the sale . 
 After the sale was completed , he married Mary Dillon Jones . He soon followed the many others making the migration to settle land west of the Mississippi River , but Mary stayed behind in Pennsylvania . The two were reunited later in Kansas after the births of their children , Lillie and Charles King . 
 = = Founding Topeka and military service = = 
 In 1854 he moved to Kansas , leaving his wife behind in Pennsylvania to follow later . He first settled in Lawrence in October 1854 . On December 10 , 1854 , after helping to find a location for the new townsite of Topeka , he wrote a letter to his wife saying : 
 " I am now thirty miles above Lawrence on the Kansas River assisting in starting a new town . We are just about in the central portion of the " settled " Territory and with perhaps the best landing and the most eligible site for a city in the entire country . ... So I think it must be , and in a few years when civilization by its magic influence shall have transformed this glorious country from what it is now to the brilliant destiny awaiting it , the Sun in all his course will visit no land more truly lovely and desirable than this . Here , Mary , with God 's kind permission , we will make our home ; and I have every reason to believe a home it will truly be . " 
 In 1855 Holliday received the honorary title of Colonel for supervising a regiment during the <unk> War . He also served as the Adjutant General of Kansas during the Civil War from May 2 , 1864 to March 31 , 1865 . Although his Colonel title was only honorary , he continued to use it long after his military service . 
 In 1861 , Holliday served in the Kansas State Senate , and although he ran for Congress in 1874 , he was defeated in that election . He was a Republican . 
 Holliday had broad interests in developing the natural resources of Kansas . In the 1890s he became mistakenly convinced that Ellis and Trego counties in central Kansas contained mineral deposits of tin , zinc , and gold . In 1899 his son Charles K. Holliday founded Smoky Hill City , Kansas near the supposed mineral deposits . 
 = = The Santa Fe Railroad = = 
 Once Topeka was founded , it needed transportation to connect it to the rest of the country . Holliday 's legal skills were called on again to create the paperwork for a new railroad . In 1859 he singlehandedly wrote the charter for the Atchison and Topeka Railroad Company , which would connect the two cities by rail following the route of the Santa Fe Trail . Kansas Territory governor Samuel Medary approved the charter on February 11 , 1859 . Holliday was named a director and president of the new railroad on September 17 , 1860 , which was renamed in 1863 to the Atchison , Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad . During his tenure as president , Holliday secured land grants from the federal government that would soon be used by the railroad to populate the western portion of Kansas in order to build a customer base for the railroad . He stepped down from the presidency at the end of 1863 , but remained on the board of directors until July 27 , 1865 . He rejoined the board on September 24 , 1868 , this time serving until his death on March 29 , 1900 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Holliday is buried in Topeka Cemetery , Topeka , Kansas . He is memorialized for his contributions to Kansas and the Santa Fe : 
 Cyrus K. Holliday , Locomotive # 1 , a vintage locomotive was displayed by the A , T & SF into the 1960s . 
 He is portrayed in the 1940 movie " Santa Fe Trail " by Henry O 'Neill as a promoter of commerce and development in the American West of his time . 
 In World War II , the United States liberty ship SS Cyrus K. Holliday was named in his honor . 
 Locomotive # 1 on the Disneyland Railroad bore the name " C.K. Holliday " since the park 's opening in 1955 . 
 Locomotive # 2 of the Paris Disneyland Railroad was also named C.K. Holliday in his honor . 
 = Adrian Crowley = 
 Adrian Crowley is a singer @-@ songwriter from Galway , based in Dublin and was born in Sliema , Malta . 
 Beginning his career at the age of 25 , Crowley has released six albums , with his debut A Strange Kind arriving in 1999 . He followed this with When You Are Here You Are Family ( 2002 ) , A Northern Country ( 2004 ) , Long Distance Swimmer ( 2007 ) , Season of the Sparks ( 2009 ) and " I See Three Birds Flying " ( 2012 ) In a 2005 Rolling Stone interview , Ryan Adams cited Crowley when asked " Who 's the best songwriter that no one 's heard of " . The Irish Times placed this artist at number eight in a list of " The 50 Best Irish Acts Right Now " published in April 2009 . 
 Crowley has won the Choice Music Prize for Irish Album of the Year on one occasion for Season of the Sparks and been nominated on two another occasion for Long Distance Swimmer and " I See Tree Birds Flying " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Crowley is from a multicultural background , ( his father is Irish and mother is Maltese ) He was born in Sliema in Malta but reared in Galway . Crowley 's parents met in Africa and the family spent time in Sierra Leone , Cameroon and Malta . After his birth his family departed Malta for Cameroon . Crowley has been based in Dublin since the 1990s but has also spent time living in France . 
 = = Career = = 
 Crowley was a late developer as a musician , having originally spent time on other pursuits , such as studying architecture , painting and photography . Alongside this he wrote songs but did not perform his first show until the age of 25 , some days after finding material he had written in the early 1990s in his attic . He departed from a career in photography around 2004 to enter the music profession on a full @-@ time basis . 
 Crowley released his debut album A Strange Kind independently in 1999 . The song " Capricorn " was played regularly on No Disco that year . When You Are Here You Are Family followed in 2002 , being recorded at the Electrical Audio studios of one of his heroes , Steve Albini , in Chicago . This successful spell in the United States inspired him to begin communicating with American record labels . 
 He joined the label Ba Da Bing who were keen to produce his next two albums . A Northern Country was due for release in on 2 July 2004 , though was delayed before appearing on a smaller label with little publicity . Crowley later referred to A Northern Country as " the least ceremonious album of them all " . 
 Long Distance Swimmer was released as soon as it was recorded as , according to Crowley , he became " fed up waiting " . It was recorded with engineer Stephen Shannon . The record received positive reviews and was nominated for the Choice Music Prize . The NME said it was " a lo @-@ furnished , snug , auburn @-@ tinged folk album which calls to mind Bill Callahan , Johnny Cash , and Edwyn Collins " . The Irish Independent 's John Meagher named it his favourite album of 2007 and sixteenth best Irish album of the decade , while his colleague Eamon Sweeney suggested Crowley 's record was one of the few Irish albums preventing that year from being " an absolute stinker " . It was around this time that Crowley began working with The Fence Collective and members of <unk> . He featured on the edition of 12 March 2008 of the sixth series of Other Voices . Also that month , he performed a residency at Whelan 's . 
 Season of the Sparks was released on 24 April 2009 and featured an expanded palette of instruments including <unk> , <unk> box , upright harmonium , viola de gamba , baroque viola . It was generally well received by critics in both and Ireland and the UK , and , so pleased was the reviewer with the French magazine Les Inrockuptibles that he wrote a letter of thanks to Crowley . He was also one of the first acts to be announced for Electric Picnic 2010 . 
 = = Other work = = 
 Crowley collaborated with Estel on " Electric Eels " , a track from the 2003 album A Guide in Time of Great Danger . He performed at the Elliott Smith Memorial Tribute Show in Dublin on 19 January 2004 . He has performed with James <unk> on several occasions . The pair have recorded an eight track mini @-@ album as a tribute to Daniel Johnston . Crowley also curates the <unk> Festival in Dublin . He is also interested in film and has composed a number of scores . He is responsible for scoring the Irish feature film , ' Where The Sea Used To Be ' directed by Paul Farren . His song , ' The Wishing Seat ' prominently features in the award winning feature film , ' Love Eternal ' ( 2014 ) directed by Brendan <unk> and stars Pollyanna Mackintosh and Robert de <unk> . 
 = = Style = = 
 Crowley 's style has been compared to that of Bill Callahan , Nick Drake and Tim Buckley , while Irish Independent reviewer Eamon Sweeney has said the singer is " a master of understatement " . The vocals of Noah and the Whale 's Charlie Fink are said to be reminiscent of Crowley 's . As well as singing Crowley plays the electric guitar and the Rhodes piano ; he never plays the acoustic guitar . He experiences music while he sleeps : 
 = = Discography = = 
 Adrian Crowley has released seven albums . 
 A Strange Kind ( 1999 ) 
 When You Are Here You Are Family ( 2002 ) 
 A Northern Country ( 2004 ) 
 Long Distance Swimmer ( 2007 ) 
 Season of the Sparks ( 2009 ) 
 I See Three Birds Flying ( 2012 ) 
 Some Blue Morning ( 2014 ) 
 = = Band members = = 
 The following have performed with Crowley . 
 Mary <unk> <unk> 
 Katie Kim - vocals 
 Jeff Martin – Guitar 
 Steven Shannon – Bass guitar 
 Cillian Mc Donnell – Drums 
 Kevin Murphy – Cello 
 Marja <unk> Gaynor – Viola , violin , viola de gamba , viol 
 Adem <unk> – <unk> , vocals , percussion 
 Kate Ellis – Cello 
 Thomas Haugh – Drums , zither 
 Andrew Bushe – Drums 
 Sarah Fox – Bass guitar , double bass , vocals 
 Emma Smith – Violin , vocals 
 Vince <unk> – Viola 
 Cameron Miller – Bass guitar , double bass , vocals 
 Sarah Jones – Drums 
 Christopher Mayo – Bass guitar 
 James <unk> – <unk> , guitar , vocals 
 Alex Neilson – Drums 
 Otto Hauser – Drums 
 Jesse Sparhawk – Bass guitar 
 Viking Moses 
 Dave <unk> - drums 
 Bill Blackmore - flugelhorn , trumpet 
 = = Awards = = 
 The Irish Times placed Crowley at number eight in a list of " The 50 Best Irish Acts Right Now " published in April 2009 , noting his " majestic songs , rich voice and subtle blend of atmospherics and master @-@ level wordplay " . 
 In a 2005 Rolling Stone interview , Ryan Adams cited Crowley when asked " Who 's the best songwriter that no one 's heard of " . 
 = = = Choice Music Prize = = = 
 Long Distance Swimmer was nominated for the Choice Music Prize for Irish Album of the Year 2007 but lost to Super Extra Bonus Party 's Super Extra Bonus Party LP . 
 Season of the Sparks won the Choice Music Prize for Irish Album of the Year 2009 . Crowley received a prize of € 10 @,@ 000 cheque . He described himself as " totally flabbergasted " , adding " I didn 't really think it was the sort of record that was going to win awards " . Crowley promised to use the money to fund his music . He was one of eight nominees who performed at the awards ceremony . He is a friend of fellow nominee Valerie Francis . 
 = Curse of Enchantia = 
 Curse of Enchantia is a graphic adventure game developed and released by the British video game company Core Design for the PC DOS and Amiga in 1992 . The game tells the comic fantasy story of Brad , a teenage boy from modern Earth who was magically abducted to the world of Enchantia by an evil witch @-@ queen . Brad needs to escape and take on the forces of darkness to find a way back to his own dimension . 
 Curse of Enchantia was Core Design 's first attempt in the adventure genre as they set up to compete with LucasArts and Sierra On @-@ Line . The game features several highly unconventional and controversial game mechanics and design choices for an adventure title from that era , including having many simple action game style sequences and being practically devoid of in @-@ game text and conversations . 
 Nevertheless , Curse was generally well received upon its release , especially by the Amiga magazines , where the game 's graphics and animation received particular praise even as its illogical puzzles and unusual design choices were often criticized . A direct sequel was briefly planned but eventually turned into a spiritual successor game titled Universe and released in 1994 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Curse of Enchantia uses a point and click style user interface , similar to Sierra 's Creative Interpreter from the King 's Quest series . The player character is commanded with an icon based control bar that is accessible by pressing the right mouse button , which also pauses the game . The control bar features seven main actions : inventory , pick up / take , manipulate / use ( opening up a sub @-@ menu with eight further actions : unlock , insert , push / pull , eat , wear , throw , give and combine ) , look , talk ( only either " Help ! " or " Hi ! " ) , attack , and jump . Usually , the protagonist has to stand in the immediate vicinity to the game 's objects and characters , which then appear as icons in a separate bar , in order to interact with them . A joystick or computer keyboard input can also be used . 
 The game does not feature text @-@ based object descriptions or conversations , as its few short scenes of rudimentary communication with friendly non @-@ player characters use only a minimalist system of pictograms in comic book @-@ style speech balloons , usually displaying the objects that the characters need to be delivered . Instead , the game features several action @-@ style sequences , such as dodging hazards or timing the use of items . However , the character is never at risk of dying , being effectively ' immortal ' no matter the dangers , and thus every such task can be repeated until successfully completed , risking only losing a few points from the score . Jewels , gold coins , and other objects of value can be collected throughout the game for a higher score . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a parallel universe , a fantasy world of Enchantia is suffering under the terrible rule of a powerful coven of wicked witches . Their queen , who managed to surpass the rest in her boundless cruelty and depravity , frantically seeks a live male child from another dimension as the main ingredient of her desired spell of eternal youth . Having borrowed magic powers from all the other witches in Enchantia on the promise to make them too young forever , she created an invisible portal connection to Earth . One day in our world in the 1990s , an American young teenager named Brad plays a baseball practice with his sister Jenny when the witch spots him through the portal and <unk> a summoning spell , making him suddenly vanish in a flash of light . The game begins as Brad , dressed in medieval @-@ style clothing , wakes up in a dungeon cell . But the boy soon manages to escape , and then sets out on a journey to return home safely . In the course of his surreal adventure , he braves various dangers , meets a host of friendly and hostile characters , and rises to become a reluctant hero who just might break the titular curse and bring down the evil 's reign . 
 After breaking out from his prison , Brad falls into a moat before coming to a halt in a maze of an underground cavern . Reaching the surface , he arrives at a nearby village ; this location is repeatedly revisited throughout the game , as Brad comes back there after traveling to the various corners of the land , encountering bizarre characters and experiencing absurd adventures : the Edge of the World cliff , the Ice Palace , and the Valley of the Lost ( a place where all kinds of things lost on Earth have gone to ) , all while searching for an unlikely set of items that would help him emerge victorious from the game 's final showdown ( including a fire extinguisher and an mechanical fan ) . In the end , the boy enters the evil Queen 's castle to find and defeat her once and for all . Once she is no more , he gets instantly transported back to the baseball field where it all had started . 
 = = Development = = 
 Core Design 's original concept for the game was to make it more like an action @-@ adventure , before the project has evolved into a more classic adventure game . The game was supposed to be " an adventure for people who hadn 't played that kind of game before . " The protagonist 's effective invincibility was a late demand by the executive producer Jeremy Heath @-@ Smith , resulting in a series of minor plot changes . The game 's co @-@ designer and the Amiga version 's chief programmer Rob Toone said that their idea was to make these parts of the game " interesting without being difficult . " Co @-@ designer and the PC version programmer Ian Sabine stated that the lack of text " speeds up gameplay " . Regarding the decision to keep the onscreen text to a minimum , Toone said that " too much reading can slow the game or kill it , like The Adventures of Willy Beamish , " with the main artist Rolf Mohr adding that " hopefully , a picture will say a thousand words and make this system easy to use . " According to Toone , " Lucasfilm gets most of its humour out of its text , whereas we hopefully get ours from comical animations and daft happenings . " 
 The both versions of the game , for the PC and the Amiga , were developed separately and simultaneously , in order to make the best possible product for each platform rather than a quick port from one system to another . A version for the Amiga CD32 had also been planned . The game mixes backgrounds hand @-@ drawn with acrylic paint and then digitized by the Mohr , and sprite bitmap graphics made in Deluxe Paint and Brilliance on the Amiga with some rotoscoped animations . The animators Billy Allison and Stuart Atkinson created " huge " <unk> @-@ made character sequences but they had to implement them in game in more efficient way due to computer memory limitations . In addition , the PC version used the full 8 @-@ bit color of a 256 color palette , but the Amiga version had to be <unk> to only 32 colors ( including 24 colors for the background and eight colors for the main character ; the other characters had to be drawn with these colors ) . The game also uses various digitized sound effects . Allison said , " there were whole sections that never made it in , like a roller skating <unk> , that shattered into loads of tiny versions of him if you ' killed ' him , I did the sprites etc , it just never made it to the game . " 
 It took a month for the project to be completely storyboarded before any programming work started on it . While the game 's design evolved over time , its original plot remained largely intact . Several revisions resulted in some of the already made some graphics and other content being cut from the game , in particular in the final area of the castle 's interior ( which at first was intended to be much longer and to feature monsters that would guard it , but in the end was reduced to a small area with the task basically limited to finding a secret chamber ) . The game 's story and elements were partially inspired by The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe , The Wonderful Wizard of Oz , The Snow Queen , and Disney animated films , and relies heavily on surreal humor and slapstick . It contains several Easter egg pop culture references , including the shop called " Benn 's Costume Shop " ( complete with a costume of Batman ) , a band named " The Slugs " ( consisting of four humanoid slugs ) , getting into a frozen realm through a wardrobe , and encountering the wreck of Marie [ sic ] Celeste . Curse of Enchantia was described by Stuart Campbell as " a funny version of Lure of the Temptress with a different plot . " He was not the only one who noted the both games ' similarities to each other . Its working title was initially <unk> , which later caused some confusion as several video game magazines continued to use " <unk> " as the name of the world in the game ( some other magazines also incorrectly assumed Enchantia to be the name of the game 's antagonist , who is actually unnamed ) . Some articles featured an earlier and slightly different version of the plot , which involved a castle of three witches , who needed to drink a special potion every hundred years or else they would turn to dust , and the protagonist Brad 's original task involved a rescue of his captured sister Jenny . 
 = = Release = = 
 Curse of Enchantia was officially revealed under this title at the European Computer Trade Show ( <unk> ) in April 1992 . The game was originally planned to be released in September 1992 , but got delayed two months to November 1992 . It was the first adventure game by Core Design as well as one of the first CD @-@ ROM adventure games . Virgin Games bundled it with many of the earliest PC CD @-@ ROM drives in 1993 . It was also re @-@ released on CD as part of Encore <unk> , together with Heimdall and <unk> . The game 's original release was accompanied by a promotional campaign with valuable prizes ( computers and money ) in some magazines such as France 's Joystick . Owners of computers with newer PC operating systems need to run it using <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of Curse of Enchantia was mostly positive , especially in regard to its graphics and animation . However , the game was derided by some for its confusing user interface system , often illogical puzzle solutions and what some reviewers thought was a lack of quality humor , plot development and atmosphere , attributing it to the absence of text and dialogue . 
 British reviewers in particular have often praised the Amiga version of the game . Brian Sharp of Amiga Action gave this " well @-@ made and cleverly constructed package " the Amiga Action Accolade award , calling it " flawless " and " easily the best adventure game on the Amiga to date . " It hinted that using a joystick for control may make certain sections of the game " less annoying to play . " Amiga Computing gave it the Gamer Gold award , calling the game " excellent " , " down @-@ right bloody enchanting " and Core Design 's " easily greatest and most impressive game yet , " and even advising to " buy it today because if you don 't you will more than likely commit suicide , it 's that good . " Tony Gill of CU Amiga gave the game the CU Gold Screen award and said that while " some of the puzzles are a bit illogical , the further into the game you get the more luxurious it becomes . Around each bend the graphics get better and better . " Les Ellis of Amiga Power said it was one of funniest games he has ever played and called it " a classic adventure , which with a few tweaks could have easily beaten the Monkey Island [ series ] and a worthy addition to any collection and will stand as a challenge to any adventurer . " According to Amiga Power one year later , " with such a high degree of humour this adventure is well on its way to becoming a classic . It 's slightly overpriced and some of the puzzles are a little obscure but these are minor quibbles . Overall this is a great game . " Atari ST User even called it a " contender for the best game of the year . " 
 There was also much positive reception in the gaming press elsewhere in the English world . The " absolutely enchanted " Ken Simpson from Australia 's ACAR said the game 's " delightful " graphics and animation " are among the most tastefully executed [ he has ] ever seen , " but noted the problems with its interface system and difficulty . One preview in North American magazine Computer Gaming World called it " a pretty looking product " of " a Loom / <unk> / Legend of Kyrandia approach , " even as another called it " actually more of a multi @-@ screen puzzle game than a traditional animated adventure , " adding that " gamers with a strong penchant for puzzle should find it entertaining " despite its " a bit clumsy " interface . Bill Holder of Australia 's OZ Amiga called it " a light @-@ hearted and funny adventure that appeals to almost everyone " and " one of the better releases of 1993 . " 
 On the other hand , Ed Ricketts of Amiga Format called Curse of Enchantia " light years behind " Monkey Island with " no comparison " to Monkey Island 2 , as " the textless interface just doesn 't work - despite the designers ' belief , you do need words " and there is " no humour to speak of , no genuinely amusing humour , anyway . " Even as a preview in The One Amiga called it a " game set to rival even the mightiest of American adventures , " the magazine 's David Upchurch wrote that " the game lacks real humour and atmosphere . This may be partly due to the lack of text in the game - it 's hard to relate to the characters you meet , " and " although entertaining , Curse of Enchantia is to Monkey Island 2 what Smash is to mashed potato , " that is " just a weaker substitute . " Lee Perkins of The Age opined that " Curse of Enchantia might be seen as a mite disappointing by fantasy gamers with moderately sophisticated tastes . " PC Gamer UK described it an " average generic fare " as " the graphics are pretty " but the game " lacks atmosphere and feels too much like a succession of annoyingly vague puzzles rather than an adventure story . " 
 In France , Curse of Enchantia was given the high ratings of 84 % in Génération 4 ( PC ) and 90 % ( Amiga ) / 91 % ( PC ) in Joystick . The game also received a score of 79 % from Sweden 's Datormagazin . Nevertheless , German magazine PC Player gave it only 38 % , saying that the game may make the players " nostalgic for Sierra titles . " It received better scores from other German magazines , including 53 / 60 in ASM , 79 % in Amiga Joker , 81 % in Power Play ( DOS ) , 68 % in both PC Joker and PC Games , and 70 % ( DOS ) and 71 % ( Amiga ) in Power Play . Italian magazines The Games Machine and K gave scores of 91 % and 802 / 1000 , respectively . Reception was also strong in Poland , where Curse of Enchantia was positively reviewed in C & A ( 95 % ) and Secret Service ( 77 % ) , and featured among " the best adventure games " of 1992 ( alongside Alone in the Dark , Indiana Jones IV and The Legend of Kyrandia ) by Computer Studio . However , in a 1993 ranking of graphic adventures games by Spanish magazine <unk> , Curse of Enchantia received only three stars out of six due to its " strange " design and despite Core Design 's " trademark " good graphics . A 1996 retro review by France 's PC <unk> gave it three stars out of five , stating that the game 's interesting characters , surrealist feel and varied graphics were dragged down by " a bit weak " plot and an interface that was not intuitive enough . 
 Retrospectively , the website <unk> found the lack of any text messages and dialogue in the game to be " an interesting design element . " However , <unk> @-@ Online included the lack of even partial descriptions of objects among the reasons why Curse of Enchantia failed to become an outstanding game , along with a too many user interface icons and " useless " features . Wirtualna Polska ranked it as the 27th best Amiga game , but noted that " proponents of adventure genre 's purity " to this day dislike the game for its " unwise flirt " with action @-@ adventure , as well as the 19th best adventure game in history , opining that the lack of written text " perfectly " fits with the game 's story and specific type of humor . It was also ranked as the 26th best Amiga game by Polish console gaming magazine PSX Extreme , noted for its strong playability . Curse of Enchantia was also the first Amiga video game owned by Ben " Yahtzee " Croshaw , who in 2012 made a Let 's Play video of the PC version of the game , saying it had " great graphics , great animation , appalling game design . " Yahtzee said , " it was a game I had difficulty putting down , with beautiful scenery and a great sense of humour , although I understand it 's looked down upon by modern standards . " An advertisement for Curse of Enchantia was featured in GamesRadar 's humor article about " what game ads looked like when the SNES was alive " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A direct sequel for the game was briefly planned by Core Design . Few details were made available , but it would continue Brad 's fight against the witches but his sister Jenny was considered to play a much larger role . However , it was never released ( in part because of Robert Toone 's departure from the company ) , as the new game " has grown up so much during the development that it has simply became a follow up . " Its working title has still remained " Curse of Enchantia 2 " , but only " for practical reasons " . This spiritual successor game ultimately became known as Universe . Released in 1994 , the game uses an upgraded game engine of Curse of Enchantia and a similar user interface . Responding to some of the criticism of directed at Curse of Enchantia , Core Design described Universe as being " a lot " more logical and less linear than their first adventure game . They also described the text @-@ based system as an improvement over the use of only icons , its benefits including allowing conversations between characters . They also acknowledged that Curse of Enchantia has " suffered considerably " due to inclusion of action sequences , something that " adventure gamers don 't want in their games . " The game 's plot premise has remained similar to that of Curse of Enchantia , featuring a young man ( the protagonist 's name was changed from Brad to Boris , but he also has a sister named Jenny ) who is transported to another world which has to save from an evil overlord . But Universe is more serious in its tone , as the game 's humor only serves as comic relief and " it was never intended to be as silly as Enchantia . " 
 Simon the Sorcerer , a 1994 adventure game similarly featuring a modern boy protagonist transported to a fantasy world where he has to vanquish an evil wizard , which was partially inspired by Curse of Enchantia , and a similar cover art was used for King 's Quest VII . The game has also inspired the name of the Polish reggae band Enchantia , who chose this name because they thought it " feels warm " . The game 's chief artist Rolf Mohr said the cover art for Disney 's 2007 film Enchanted could have been inspired by his cover art for Curse of Enchantia . He called it " a case of Art imitating Disney imitating Art , " since he has been himself " definitely " inspired by Disney while working on the game . The " magical world of Enchantia " is the setting of the video game Enchantia : Wrath of the Phoenix Queen , but it does not appear to be otherwise related . Curse of Enchantia was also a " pretty big " influence on Yahtzee 's own adventure games . 
 = Tenacious D = 
 Tenacious D is an American comedy rock duo that was formed in Los Angeles , California in 1994 . Composed of lead vocalist and guitarist Jack Black and lead guitarist and vocalist Kyle Gass , the band has released three albums – Tenacious D ( 2001 ) , The Pick of Destiny ( 2006 ) and Rize of the Fenix ( 2012 ) . Tenacious D 's studio releases , and ( as of 2006 ) its live performances , feature a full band lineup , including such musicians as guitarist John Konesky and bassist John Spiker . Drummer Dave Grohl ( Foo Fighters , Nirvana ) has played on every studio release . 
 The band first gained popularity in 1997 when they starred in their eponymous television series and began to support large rock acts . In 2001 , they released Tenacious D , their debut album featuring a full band . The first single , " Tribute , " was the band 's most successful achieving their only Top 10 in any chart , until they released " The Metal " , which was shown on Saturday Night Live . In 2006 , they starred in , and recorded the soundtrack for , the film Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny . In support of the film , the band went on a world tour , appearing for the first time with a full band . They released their newest album Rize of the Fenix on May 15 , 2012 . 
 Tenacious D 's music showcases Black 's theatrical vocal delivery and Gass ' acoustic guitar playing abilities . Critics have described their fusion of vulgar absurdist comedy with rock music as " mock rock " . Their songs discuss the duo 's purported musical and sexual prowess , as well as their friendship and cannabis usage in a style that music critics have compared with the storyteller @-@ style lyrics of rock opera . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Jack Black and Kyle Gass initially met in Los Angeles in 1985 , both members of the theatre troupe , The Actors ' Gang . Black admits the duo did not see eye to eye due to animosity between the two as Gass — who was the main musician for the Actor 's Gang - felt threatened by Black . This all changed in 1989 in Edinburgh , Scotland , during the Edinburgh Fringe of 1989 . They were performing Tim Robbins ' and Adam Simon 's play Carnage . After arriving home from the trip , the two became very close friends and Black would regularly visit Gass 's Cochran Avenue studio apartment in the deal that Gass would teach Black guitar in return for food from fast food chain Jack in the Box . They would also work on productions at the theater group together regularly too . 
 The two were just friends between 1989 and 1994 and did not play any concerts or record any music . Gass and Black wrote their first song " Mellisa " in 1994 after Black had been dumped by a girlfriend , this song was scrapped aside from the pair playing it at later Tenacious D concerts as a joke and referencing it in interviews . Their second song came about when Black was listening to Metallica 's " One " in 1994 and told Gass that it was the " best song in the world " . Gass told Black that they couldn 't write the best song in the world but Black put a twist on it and said they could write a tribute . Gass played an A minor chord at his apartment and the two spent three full days crafting the song , when it was done Gass mentioned " they knew they had something " . The song was comedic and evolved their comedy music persona . 
 At their first concert , at Al 's Bar ( now an apartment complex ) , the band only played their one song " Tribute " and the duo also gave the audience the chance to vote for their name . Black and Gass gave them the choice between " Pets or Meat " , " Balboa 's Biblical Theatre " and " The Axe Lords Featuring <unk> 's Mischief " ( Gass ' personal favorite ) . " Tenacious D " — a basketball term used by commentators to describe robust defensive positioning in basketball — did not get the majority of votes , however , but according to Black " we forced it through " . The venue had become a hotbed for upcoming bands due to the success of Nirvana and the Red Hot Chili Peppers , so much so that in attendance was David Cross who later cast Jack Black in his sketch comedy television series , Mr. Show . Black and Gass recorded their songs " Tribute " , " Kyle Quit the Band " , " Krishna " and " History " and released them in a demo tape called Tenacious Demo , in the early @-@ to @-@ mid 1990s with Andrew Gross and distributed it to various record companies until HBO offered them a TV show based upon the tape and Black 's work on Mr. Show . 
 = = = Television series ( 1997 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Cross , with Mr. Show writer Bob Odenkirk , continued his involvement with Tenacious D by producing three half @-@ hour shows based on the band . The series , entitled Tenacious D , premiered on HBO in 1997 , immediately following an episode of Mr. Show . While a total of three episodes consisting of two shorts each , ten to twelve minutes in length , were produced , only the first was aired that year ; the final two episodes did not air until the summer of 2000 . According to Gass , the series was cancelled after HBO requested ten episodes with the stipulation that he and Black would have to relinquish their role as executive producers , and only write songs . After the series aired , the band continued to perform live . At a show at the Viper Room in Los Angeles , they met Dave Grohl , who remarked that he was impressed with their performance ; this led to their cameo in the Foo Fighters ' " Learn to Fly " music video . The popularity of Tenacious D further increased as they began to open for high @-@ profile acts , including Beck , Pearl Jam and Foo Fighters . 
 = = = First album Tenacious D ( 2001 – 03 ) = = = 
 In May 2000 , Tenacious D signed to Epic Records . As Black 's profile increased due to his roles in films such as High Fidelity the band worked on recording their first album with producers the Dust Brothers . In 2001 , they released their debut Tenacious D. It peaked at # 33 on the Billboard 200 on October 13 , 2001 . While Tenacious D usually appears as a duo , the album was backed by a full band , consisting of Dave Grohl on drums and guitar , keyboardist Page McConnell of Phish , guitarist Warren Fitzgerald of The Vandals , and bassist Steven Shane McDonald of Redd Kross . According to Black , they chose to use a band because " no one 's ever heard us with a band " . The majority of songs on the album were performed previously on their short @-@ lived television series . 
 Although the critical reaction varied , by November 2005 , the album had achieved platinum status in the US . Entertainment Weekly described the release as " hilarious " , and " no mere comedy record " . AllMusic wrote that the album " rocks so damn hard " , but lamented the absence of some of the songs from the television show . Flak Magazine criticised the band 's use of skits between songs , describing them as " distracting " and a " nuisance " . In addition , The Independent remarked that the album was full of " swearing and scatology " and was " bereft of even the slightest <unk> of humour " . 
 The first single from the album was " Tribute " : a tribute to the " greatest song in the world " which , in the song , Tenacious D claimed they had performed in order to save their souls from a demon . A music video , directed by Liam Lynch , was shot for the song . The video achieved success and was voted the fifth best music video ever by Kerrang ! readers . This was followed by the second single , " Wonderboy " , the music video of which was directed by Spike Jonze . A third video , an animation depicting Black and Gass as cherubs , was made for " Fuck Her Gently " , directed by Ren and Stimpy @-@ creator John Kricfalusi . 
 The album also included " Dio " , a song written as a tribute to rock singer Ronnie James Dio , which mocked him somewhat for being too old . Dio liked the song enough to ask the band to appear in the music video for his song , " Push " . An EP entitled D Fun Pak was released in 2002 . It featured a skit and acoustic versions of " Jesus Ranch " and " Kyle Quit The Band " , as well as a megamix by <unk> Worker . The Complete Masterworks , a music DVD featuring the entire run of their TV series , music videos , and a live performance from London 's Brixton Academy recorded in 2002 , was released on November 9 , 2003 . 
 = = = The Pick of Destiny ( 2003 – 08 ) = = = 
 On November 7 , 2000 , Tenacious D had just finished writing the rough first script for a movie . This script was later scrapped for a plot line about the two searching for a sacred guitar pick . 
 In October 2003 Black announced that the screenplay for The Pick of Destiny — a fictional portrayal of the band 's formation — had been completed . Again working with director Liam Lynch , the film was initially to be written and developed by Working Title Films , but Black and Gass decided to assume creative control when they were not satisfied with the writers ' ideas . Filming had been expected to take place by the end of 2003 ; however , it was delayed by almost a year due to Black being cast in Peter Jackson 's big budget remake of King Kong . The band started recording songs for the soundtrack of the film , their second studio album , The Pick of Destiny . The album had John Konesky and John Spiker from Trainwreck on electric guitar and bass respectively . Dave Grohl again played drums , and further lent vocals to " <unk> ( The Final Showdown ) " as well as acting in the film , as Satan . 
 The film had its premiere at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles on November 9 , 2006 . Many of the actors who had cameos in the film were in attendance ; including Ronnie James Dio , Dave Grohl , and Ben Stiller . The film was released worldwide on November 22 . The soundtrack had been released just over a week earlier , on November 14 . Tenacious D in the Pick of Destiny grossed US $ 8 @,@ 334 @,@ 575 in the US and Canada and a total of US $ 13 @,@ 426 @,@ 450 worldwide , falling well short of its US $ 20 million production budget and US $ 40 million in estimated marketing costs . Financially , it is regarded as a box office bomb . The soundtrack reached # 8 on the Billboard 200 in the US as well as topping the iTunes chart , and # 10 in the UK . The film was released globally on DVD on February 27 , 2007 . In an interview on the Daily Show on November 30 , 2006 , Black admitted the film had " bombed " , but has recently said that DVD sales have shown that the film has picked up a cult audience . 
 Kevin Crust of the Los Angeles Times said that the film " might best be enjoyed in an enhanced state of consciousness , a herbal supplement , and we aren 't talking ginkgo biloba . " Stephen Rae of The Philadelphia Inquirer said that the frequent drug @-@ use in the film gives " the term potty humor a new meaning . " Michael Phillips criticized the frequency of the drug @-@ use by saying : " This may be the problem . Pot rarely helped anybody 's comic timing . " Stephen Holden of The New York Times suggested that the film could be viewed as a " jolly rock ' n ' roll comedy " , but he also described the progression of the film as being a " garish mess . " 
