 The soundtrack was produced by John King of the Dust Brothers , but the reviews were less favourable than for the band 's first album . Rolling Stone comments that the soundtrack " never quite takes off " . It criticises the reliance the album makes on a knowledge of the film , and some songs ' existence only to " advance the plot " . It summarizes by saying the album is inferior to the band 's previous effort . Allmusic also describes the follow @-@ up as less " satisfying " than Tenacious D , noting that the songs feel like " narrative filler " . Blender continues the criticism of the songs being plot devices calling them " plot @-@ nudging song @-@ sketches " . The Guardian views the album more positively , describing the album as a meeting of " old school <unk> " and " schoolboy humour " . 
 To coincide with the release of their new film and album , Tenacious D embarked on their 2006 – 07 tour of the US , Canada , UK , Australia , and New Zealand . This tour included the band 's first appearance at New York City 's Madison Square Garden . Unlike other tours , this one featured a full backing band . Konesky and Spiker resumed their roles from the album , and Brooks Wackerman was added as drummer . Each member used a pseudonym ; Konesky as the Antichrist , Spiker as Charlie Chaplin , and Wackerman as Colonel Sanders . JR Reed also toured as Satan . Black has said that the band lost money on the tour due to the cost of touring with a full band for the first time . 
 = = = Rize of the Fenix and touring ( 2008 – 2015 ) = = = 
 In November 2006 , Black expressed wishes to take a year @-@ long break from acting , though Gass hinted a desire for Tenacious D to end at their current highpoint . However , Black confirmed that a third album would be recorded by announcing that a new song has been written for it entitled " Deth Star " . He said that the album would likely be released in 2010 , but on other occasions had mentioned the year 2012 . In early 2008 , Black announced that the band was working on a new album , and a DVD titled The Complete Masterworks Part 2 . The DVD was released later that year , and included a documentary of their world tour entitled D Tour : A Tenacious Documentary . The film focuses on the tour Tenacious D made in support of the film and soundtrack and the consequences of their film 's poor showing at the box office . Kyle has commented that the new album only has " one to one and a half " songs written for it , and would like to write between twelve and fifteen . 
 The band played the main stage at the 2008 Reading and Leeds Festivals in the UK , playing Leeds on Friday , August 22 and Reading on Sunday , August 24 . In addition to this , the band provided support for Metallica at Marlay Park , Dublin in Ireland on August 20 . They headlined the last night of the 2009 Outside Lands Festival in Golden Gate Park , San Francisco , on Sunday August 30 , 2009 . Music magazine Billboard quoted Black as revealing that " We just laid down a hot [ ... ] we 're calling it the bomb track . It 's a very powerful recording called " Deth Starr " [ ... ] so it has nothing to do with the Star Wars [ Death Star ] , " adding that " It 's kind of sci @-@ fi , doomsday rock . " Jack Black also stated on the Late Show with David Letterman that he had an idea for a song called " Rize of the Fenix " , which he described as a " rise from the ashes " workout song similar to " Eye of the Tiger " . He performed a vocal sample of the song along to keyboards . Tenacious D played the main stage at Bonnaroo music festival in 2010 , which featured the band playing the song " Dio " as a tribute to the late Ronnie James Dio . 
 Gass has hinted that the band 's third album may be called Tenacious D 3 @-@ D , reasoning that " It 's the third record , so it should probably be ' Tenacious 3 @-@ D. ' There 's going to be a ' 3' and a ' D , ' so you have to connect them . " Dave Grohl has confirmed that he will appear as the drummer on the album , after performing on both Tenacious D and The Pick of Destiny . In an interview with Spinner.com in December 2010 , Black revealed that the band was " about halfway through the writing process " for its new album , telling fans to expect the release of new material " at the end of 2011 " . In terms of lyrical themes for the new songs , Black noted that " We 're gonna be talking about love , there are gonna be some songs about sex and there 's gonna be songs about food " . 
 In a May 2011 interview at Attack of the Show , Black announced that three songs on their upcoming album would be named " Rize of the Fenix " , distinguishable by either letter or number . Also in the same interview , he named another song called " Señorita " . John Konesky estimated that the new album would come out " in spring 2012 " . Tenacious D also played at Download Festival . In February 2012 it was revealed that the title of the album would in fact be spelled Rize of the Fenix and will be released on May 15 , 2012 . 
 On March 26 , 2012 a 6 @-@ minute film was uploaded to the Tenacious D VEVO channel on YouTube . The mockumentary , titled ' Tenacious D - To Be the Best ' , documents the uncertain future Tenacious D faced after the box @-@ office failure of The Pick of Destiny , KG 's subsequent breakdown and incarceration in " an institution " , and Jack 's embracing of an indulgent Hollywood lifestyle . The film shows a deranged Kyle escaping the facility and attempting to kill Jack and then himself , before they each realize their importance to each other and revive the band . They produce a new album in 75 minutes in the studio , described as " awful " , but try again and emerge with another new album , described at the end of the film as " the greatest album recorded by anyone , ever " . The film features numerous cameo appearances , including Maria Menounos , Val Kilmer , Dave Grohl , Yoshiki Hayashi , Josh Groban , Richard <unk> , Mike White , Tim Robbins and Jimmy Kimmel . 
 The band released the album on April 28 , 2012 in its entirety on their Soundcloud account . Rize of the Fenix was officially released on May 15 , 2012 with mostly positive reviews from music critics . 
 On the Rize of the Fenix commentary on Spotify , Black stated , " We 'll be coming out with another album probably in 2017 " . 
 Tenacious D provided a cover of " The Last in Line " on the Dio tribute album This Is Your Life . The recording won a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance . 
 = = = Fourth album and touring ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 In early 2015 , Black confirmed that after Tenacious D 's " Unplugged and Unprotected " European tour , the band would work on their fourth album , though no release date was announced . Prior to this confirmation , Gass and Black teased a 2015 release date the previous year in an interview . Also , it was announced that the band would perform at the Boston Calling Music Festival in May , the Amnesia Rockfest in June and Riot Fest in Chicago in September . 
 In December 2015 , Black and Gass auctioned off props and costumes in support of the Sweet Stuff Foundation in response to the November 2015 Paris attacks where an Eagles of Death Metal concert was attacked . Tenacious D 's 2014 Festival Supreme concert featured Eagles of Death Metal as an act on the main stage . The props auctioned include costumes worn on MTV 's Total Request Live in 2003 , JR Reed 's The Metal from The Pick of Destiny tour , the costumes from the Low Hangin ' Fruit music video and more . 
 The European tour will cover territories from Germany , Denmark , and Sweden in early summer 2016 . 
 In addition to playing their own European tour , the band has confirmed playing in two international festivals . The first one , is The <unk> Festival in Denmark , which is hosted on June 30 , 2016 . In addition to this festival , the artists announced playing at the <unk> Festival in <unk> , Sweden , only days after , on July 1 , 2016 . 
 On February 5 , 2016 , Black was a guest on BBC Radio 2 's Chris Evans Breakfast Show . When asked about the status of the band , Black confirmed that they were working on a new album . Stating that they were " very slow , " Black suggested that it would likely be completed in 2018 . Black also mentioned that so far they just had a few song titles . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Satire and comedy are a major aspect of Tenacious D 's lyrical content . Gass said of their approach : " I 'd love to do the straight music thing , but that 's kind of against our mission , which is to rebel against the serious singer @-@ songwriter mentality . " Their songs evoke heavy metal clichés of bands like Iron Maiden and Judas Priest . In particular , the song " Dio " pokes fun at the idea of a torch being passed . Songs like " Friendship " parody the lack of real friendship , as well as point out the [ <unk> ] traits in rock groups with the lyric " As long as there 's a record deal , we 'll always be friends " . Tenacious D also employs the technique of deliberate backmasking on " Karate " , a technique employed by other metal bands like Slayer , who recorded a message in Hell Awaits . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Black has said that the first song he enjoyed was ABBA 's " Take a Chance on Me " . His style was distinctly shaped by " big dinosaurs of rock " such as The Who and Led Zeppelin . In addition , Gass lists his influences as being Tom Waits and Tony Robbins . The band claimed that the inspiration for the song " Tribute " came after Black played Metallica 's " One " for Gass , describing it as " the best song in the world " , leading to an attempt to themselves write an even better song . 
 Gass has described Tenacious D 's comic assertion that they are the best band as being " ridiculous because it 's a matter of opinion " . Black characterizes Tenacious D 's comic nature as an antidote to " the masculinity of rock " , adding " There 's also something funny about the macho @-@ ness of rock . Like the bands that are the fucking hardest rocking are like , ' We 'll fucking kick your ass , dude ... with our rock . ' " Russell Brand , All Shall Perish , The Lonely Island , and Kanye West have in turn been influenced by the work of Tenacious D. 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 Black and Gass first performed together in Bio @-@ Dome ( 1996 ) , followed by The Cable Guy ( 1996 ) , Bongwater ( 1997 ) , Cradle Will Rock ( 1999 ) , Saving Silverman ( 2001 ) , Shallow Hal ( 2001 ) , School of Rock ( 2003 ) and Year One ( 2009 ) . Black has starred in a number of films himself , and he has provided voices for animated films . In 2006 , Tenacious D starred in their own film , Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny , in which they set out to become the greatest rock band in the world , by means of a guitar pick with mystic powers . 
 Black and Gass have made several television appearances performing songs from their first album . On June 16 , 2001 , Tenacious D were featured as puppets performing " Friendship " on an episode of Crank Yankers . They were guest starred when they were taught by <unk> how to perform in an episode of the Cartoon Network / Adult Swim series Space Ghost Coast to Coast . In 2002 they guest starred on MADtv playing the songs " Tribute " , & " Lee " with Foo Fighters frontman Dave Grohl on drums . Later , Tenacious D made an appearance in the first episode of Tom Goes to the Mayor televised on Adult Swim . 
 In the run up to the release of the film The Pick of Destiny , Tenacious D performed the " Pick of Destiny " at the 2006 American Music Awards and on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . Tenacious D was a musical guest on Saturday Night Live for the first time , although they had previously appeared as an uncredited musical guest on May 2 , 1998 . They also opened the 2006 Spike TV Video Game Awards with a performance of " The Metal " , and played " Friendship " at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards . The band 's first television appearance of 2008 was in support of the Who at the VH1 Rock Honors . 
 = = = Internet = = = 
 Black and Gass were interviewed on August 29 , 2012 , by Tony Hawk as part of the " Dissent " series on the web channel , Ride . The interview was conducted in the Sirius / XM studios as part of the Hawk 's " Demolition Radio " program . The interview 's topics include comedy rock and Upland Skatepark . 
 = = = Live = = = 
 In 2001 , Tenacious D started their second nationwide concert tour , performing at larger venues , many of which sold out . Until 2006 , Tenacious D usually performed only with acoustic guitars , rarely with a full backing band . The band has also staged two international concert tours as well as numerous domestic tours , though they have rarely played in non @-@ English speaking countries . Black says this is because foreign concerts are " a little funky " because " the subtleties do get lost in translation " . In addition , he comments on the angst they experience before concerts saying : " We 're always looking for a loophole . Pretty much every concert we 've ever done , we 're trying to find a way to cancel the show at the last minute . " The band permits live recording during concerts if the venue allows recording . Many of these recordings have been recorded and released through Live Music Archive and are available for free digital download . 
 The band uses an electronic musical toy saxophone called a Sax @-@ A @-@ Boom on @-@ stage . Each of its keys plays a clip of music that sounds almost like a saxophone . 
 In August 2008 , the band performed on the main stages of the Reading and Leeds Festivals . The band played a Guns N ' Roses cover . 
 On October 23 , 2010 , the band performed live at the BlizzCon 2010 convention in Anaheim , California . The performance , featured the debut of new songs , and was viewed via an online stream ( BlizzCon Virtual Ticket ) at <unk> and on DIRECTV as a Pay Per View event . 
 On Friday , June 11 , 2010 , Tenacious D was in the middle of their " One Day Tour " in Manchester , TN for the annual Bonnaroo Music Festival . The band opened for ' Kings of Leon ' , the first headliner of Bonnaroo 2010 . 
 Throughout November and December 2011 , the band supported Foo Fighters during their Wasting Light tour of Australia and New Zealand . 
 In June 2012 , Tenacious D played at the Rock am Ring music festival in Germany . This is the biggest event that Tenacious D have ever played with 86 @,@ 500 people in attendance . 
 On Saturday 9 June 2012 , Tenacious D played the main stage at Download Festival at Donington Park in Derbyshire , England . 
 On Sunday 11 August 2013 , Tenacious D played at a theme park Gröna Lund in Stockholm , Sweden . The area holding 17 @,@ 000 fans was quickly full , forcing Gröna Lund to close the gates 3 hours before the concert . Over 5000 fans were left outside with no chance to see Tenacious D. The Swedish Police called it " chaos " and some fans were even seen swimming into the theme park via the water entrance . Lots of fans also rented peddle boats to see the show from the water This is the biggest show that Tenacious D have ever played that has not been a collaboration with other artists such as a festival . 
 On November 27th 2015 , Tenacious D released their first live album , compiling some of their 2012 @-@ 2013 live performances , to vinyl and on January 15th 2016 , to all digital platforms , including iTunes , Spotify , Amazon , and Google Play . The live performances album is called Tenacious D Live , and contains music from all 3 albums . 
 = = Political activity = = 
 Tenacious D are supporters of cannabis legalization . They have also performed at a NORML benefit concert . Black described his view that allowing drug use would remove the stigma of feeling " naughty " attached to users , making the activity mundane and less attractive . Black was the executive producer for a documentary about Randy <unk> entitled Sixty Spins Around the Sun . It calls for the so @-@ called Rockefeller drug laws to be repealed . Black said of it , " They 're populating our prisons with people , you know , first time drug offenders — single mothers that have a little bit of coke end up going to prison for 20 years or something . It 's just cruel and unusual punishment . " 
 In 2004 , Tenacious D supported John Kerry 's US presidential election campaign by playing a benefit concert for him . Black and Gass were also outspoken critics of George W. Bush 's presidency . The band performed a benefit concert for Barack Obama 's presidential campaign on November 2 , 2008 in Milwaukee . Other performers included Ben Harper and <unk> , David Crosby and Graham Nash , and the Beastie Boys . Tenacious D guested with Crosby and Nash on " Find the Cost of Freedom " which concluded the Crosby @-@ Nash set . In 2010 , Tenacious D agreed to boycott Arizona due to laws passed there concerning illegal immigration . In 2012 , Tenacious D performed at the House of Blues in Cleveland and did a surprise gig at Kent State University earlier on that day too to encourage voting . Tenacious D supported Barack Obama that year . 
 = = Other projects = = 
 Tenacious D have appeared in numerous music videos by other bands , including " Push " by Dio , and " Photograph " by Weezer . Black has appeared on his own in many music videos , including a cameo alongside Dave Grohl in the music video for the Eagles of Death Metal song " I Want You So Hard ( Boy 's Bad News ) " , alongside Grohl again in the music video for the Foo Fighters ' songs " Low " and " Learn to Fly " and a cameo in the music video for the song " <unk> Laws " by Beck . 
 In addition to appearing in videos , Black and Gass sang backup vocals on the 2002 Styx album Cyclorama , on the song " Kiss Your Ass Goodbye " . Tenacious D lent backing vocals to The Vandals album Look What I Almost Stepped In ... , on the song " Fourteen " . Tenacious D appeared on KROQ @-@ FM 's twelfth full @-@ length Christmas compilation , Swallow My Eggnog , with Sum 41 , on a song entitled " Things I Want " . 
 Gass appeared in the Good Charlotte music video for the song " Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous " . Gass also performed lead acoustic guitar and vocals for the band Trainwreck , under the pseudonym " Klip Calhoun " . The band also featured JR Reed under the pseudonym " Darryl Donald " , as well as John Konesky and John Spiker , who played lead guitar and bass , respectively , on The Pick of Destiny album . They have released a live album , Trainwreck Live , and were working on recording a studio album with producer John King . Black occasionally appeared with the band under the name " Tuffy <unk> " . Trainwreck has broken up as of early 2011 . 
 Gass also has a YouTube series called " <unk> " , co @-@ hosted by Tenacious D touring and session guitarist John Konesky , in which they interview musicians , give guitar lessons and discuss a range of topics related to guitars , such as video lessons on the band 's songs such as the widely popular " <unk> " from the album " The Pick of Destiny " . Jack Black , co @-@ founder of the band , has also appeared as a guest on the successful webseries a number of times before . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Official members 
 Jack Black – lead vocals , rhythm guitar ( 1994 – present ) 
 Kyle Gass – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 1994 – present ) 
 Additional members 
 John Konesky – electric guitar , backing vocals ( session and touring ) ( 2005 – present ) 
 John Spiker – bass , backing vocals ( session and touring ) ( 2005 – present ) 
 Brooks Wackerman – drums ( occasional session and touring ) ( 2006 – present ) 
 Scott <unk> – drums , percussion ( occasional session and touring ) ( 2011 – present ) 
 Dave Grohl – drums , percussion ( session and occasional live performances ) ( 2001 – present ) 
 Former additional members 
 Page McConnell – keyboards ( session and occasional live performances ) ( 2001 – 2002 ) 
 Warren Fitzgerald – electric guitar ( session and occasional live performances ) ( 2001 – 2002 ) 
 Steve McDonald – bass ( session and occasional live performances ) ( 2001 – 2002 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Tenacious D ( 2001 ) 
 The Pick of Destiny ( 2006 ) 
 Rize of the Fenix ( 2012 ) 
 = Holy Jesus Hospital = 
 The Holy Jesus Hospital is a working office Newcastle upon Tyne , England , in the care of the National Trust . 
 The site of the hospital has been in use for 700 years helping the townspeople . There was an Augustinian friary on the site from the thirteenth century , then an almshouse for housing retired freemen , then a soup kitchen was built next to Almshouse in the nineteenth century , before the site acquired its current function as a working office . The building also serves as the basis of the Inner City Project of the National Trust . This project takes people of ages 12 – 25 and over 50 out to the countryside in order to increase appreciation of the city 's natural surroundings . 
 The building is of architectural interest because it still retains architectural elements from many previous centuries , including a 14th @-@ century sacristy wall and 16th @-@ century tower connected with the King 's Council of the North . It is also one of only two intact 17th @-@ century brick buildings that survive in the city , the other being Alderman Fenwick 's House . 
 = = Augustinian Friary ( 1291 – 1539 ) = = 
 In the 13th century , Newcastle upon Tyne had a population of around 4 @,@ 000 ; and it was difficult for the four parish churches to care for the needs of such a large population . The priests were expected to be educators , doctors and counsellors , as well as meeting the spiritual needs of their parishioners . Therefore , in 1291 land was donated by William Baron of Wark on Tweed to found an Augustinian friary on the land on which the museum now stands . 
 The Augustinian Friars were originally an order of hermits in northern Italy who Pope Alexander IV first congregated into a single body in 1256 . The Order spread to France and then to England after being invited by Richard de Clare , 6th Earl of Hertford , to found Clare Priory in Suffolk , by the River Stour . On 3 September 1249 , de Clare was able to obtain a writ of protection for the friars from the King . The brethren were clothed in black and observed the rule of St Augustine of Hippo . <unk> friars had been in England since 1250 and they helped by preaching and healing in the community . 
 The friary was also used as a lodgings house because it was on one of the main roads to the north . On the day that King Edward I passed through Newcastle in December 1299 the brethren each received three shillings and four pence ( 3s . 4d ) . In 1306 , the King also granted the monastery additional lands to enlarge the burial ground . Richard II directed the bailiffs of the city to issue a proclamation against dumping waste near the site . Apparently some local people threw " excrements , filth , and garbage , in a certain way that led near to the house of the Austin Friars , to their great annoyance and peril . " 
 It is possible that the site was used by English kings before its later use as a temporary seat for the Council of the North after the Dissolution of the Monasteries . Henry Bourne , an 18th @-@ century historian of Newcastle Upon Tyne wrote of the site : " the Kings of England since the Conquest , kept house in it , whence they came with an Army Royal against Scotland , and since the Suppression of the Monasteries , made a Magazine and Store @-@ house for the North Parts . " 
 Bourne also suggests that the use of the site as a religious centre might predate the friary . He wrote , " the same authority tells us also , that there was an ancient Religious House founded by the Kings of Northumberland and that several of them were buried here ; but it cannot be true that they built any Thing for the St Austin Fryers , for they came not into England ' till long after the Conquest , in the year 1252 . " 
 = = Dissolution of the Monasteries ( 1539 ) = = 
 In 1539 , the friary was seized by the crown along with five others in the area including the Dominican monastery of Blackfriars . At the time of its capture the friary had seven brethren and three novices including the prior , Andrew Kell . The monks and nuns were pensioned and the friars received gratuities . Some took jobs as chantry priests or accommodation in parish livings . Those nuns who were of good birth returned to their families . The bells , lead plate and vestments were turned over to the crown . Most of the building and lands were sold to the lesser gentry , new nobility , and town merchants or to borough corporations . At the time of the Dissolution there were a prior , ten friars and three novices . 
 In 1537 , Thomas Cromwell was asked if the Austin Friary site could be left intact after the dissolution , to be used as northern headquarters of the King 's Council of the North when it was not sitting at York . It was rarely used for this purpose ( Elizabeth I decreed that the council spend 20 days a year there ) . It appears that in 1551 the site was granted to John Dudley , 1st Duke of Northumberland " as parcel of Tynemouth Monastery . " In 1553 , Richard Benson occurs as keeper of this house for the crown for a fee of 40s per annum . In the map of the city by John Speed in 1610 , the site appears as ' Kings <unk> ' . It was much dilapidated by 1595 . During the confused period of the English Civil War , it passed into the hands of the Corporation . The area became known as Kings Manor which was a short lived counterpart to the famous King ’ s Manor at York . Military drills were performed by the townspeople at an area called the artillery ground . All that remains of the friary is part of the sacristy wall , though a model in the interpretation room gives a possible layout of some of the friary buildings . 
 = = = The tower = = = 
 The tower was constructed sometime between the Dissolution and the Union of the Crowns but the exact date is not known . It was probably constructed as a strong room to store munitions or provide a secure location if the city walls were breached . This turned the ground floor room into a lock up where troublesome citizens would be thrown until they came before the law to be punished . Much about the tower has changed . The wall to the right of the door is 13th @-@ century , while the dividing wall including the door is 18th @-@ century . 
 = = Private ownership ( 1605 – 1646 ) = = 
 In 1605 , the tower and friary buildings were given by James I of England to George Home , 1st Earl of Dunbar . In the same year , Home was also made a Knight of the Garter and received his Earldom of Dunbar . Bourne quotes one of his sources as saying , " a Scot did beg it ( the Hospital ) of King James ; after that took the lead off it and sold it ; but it was cast away before it came to its market . " Also in 1605 , Home consolidated all the lands given to him into a free Earldom , Lordship of Parliament and Barony of Dunbar . The site was one of many Home acquired under the patronage of the king including the Manor and Castle of <unk> and the Castle of St Andrews . Home died in Whitehall , London , in 1611 without a male heir and thus his Earldom and Barony became extinct . A Captain Dykes became the next owner of the land . Bourne wrote ' He ( George Home ) sold also some stones to Sir Peter Riddel , who with them built the south end of his fine house ; but now it belongs to Captain Dykes , and his posterity hath no right . ' The site disappears from the historical record until 1646 when it is recorded as being owned by the council . 
 = = The Hospital ( 1646 – 1825 ) = = 
 The Holy Jesus Hospital was built in 1681 by public subscription to house retired Freemen , their widows or unmarried sons or daughters . The hospital was commonly known by local people as the " Freeman 's Hospital " and the " Town 's Hospital " but on 26 March 1684 the building was incorporated by the name of the master , brethren , and sisters of the Hospital of the holy Jesus . The Mayor , alderman and Common Council of Newcastle were appointed as visitors and charged with setting the rules for the hospital . Shortly afterwards the founders bought a quay and garden , in the Close for £ 700 and an estate in <unk> , County Durham for £ 1610 , and another estate at Whittle , Northumberland for £ 1300 and the master and brethren of the hospital were settled across these properties . The building itself was constructed using brick construction which was then a relatively new method ( brick was usually used as an infill for timber @-@ framed buildings ) . Indeed the structure is one of only two 17th @-@ century brick buildings in Newcastle upon Tyne , the other being nearby Alderman Fenwick ’ s House in Pilgrim Street . To be allocated a room , one had to meet the committee ’ s criteria and once were admitted one had to abide by the master ’ s rules . It remained in use until 1937 , when the new hospital was built at Spital Towers . Strict rules governed the " inmates " including being locked in their rooms at 9 pm and having their doors unlocked again at 6 am . There were no children allowed , and the inmates were instructed to attend church each week and take the sacrament . Each year the residents would have been given a free suit of clothing , a measure of coal and , if the charity allowed it , some pocket money ( Alms ) . 
 The first master of the house was a man named Thomas <unk> , a merchant by trade . The master 's seal had a cross engraved on it and bore the words " Sigillum <unk> Sancti Jesu in Novo Castro . " The original allowance for the inmates of the hospital was 20 shillings per ' quarterly ' , while the master would get 30 shillings . On 2 January 1752 , the council decreed that forty ' <unk> ' of coal be given to the hospital annually and , on 18 December 1769 , the master was required to be paid £ 8 , and each inmate sister £ 6 per annum . By the early 19th century this allowance had increased to £ 13 for each inmate per annum , four <unk> of ' best Benwell ' coals as well as providing clothing . In addition to this the inmates were required to see the Mayor at the Guildhall once each quarter where grievances would be heard . The inmates could also receive money from charities , and this was often called escutcheon money . 
 In 1705 , the inmates of the Newcastle House of Correction were commissioned to produce ' purple and grey cloth ' for the uniforms of the widows of the Holy Jesus Hospital . 
 There is an inscription in Latin on the front on the building . Roughly translated it reads ; 
 " Hospital for poor people by the expense of the citizens and leaders of Newcastle upon Tyne in the year of salvation 1683 . Built by Timothy Robson , Mayor , John Squire Sheriff , but now only remains the three of Faith Hope and Charity , and the greatest of these is Charity . " 
 In 1646 , the council allowed the Barber Surgeons to build their hall just east of the site : this agreement was given on 15 March 1647 . In 1648 , the plot of land was leased to the barber surgeons on condition that they constructed their hall within two years and that part of the site was to be laid out as a garden for medicinal herbs . A second hall built in 1730 disappeared under the railway viaduct in the 1840s . The most aged claimants were preferred for placements at the Hospital and on 22 March 1779 , the Mayor and common council of Newcastle ordered that several candidates produce certificates to prove their respective ages , to be filed in the town @-@ clerk 's office . 
 = = Nineteenth century = = 
 While the modern site is heavily enclosed by modern constructions , particularly Swan House roundabout , Mackenzie , in 1827 , portrays a much more open space : 
 A soup kitchen was built in 1880 , replacing the police station which adjoined the hospital on the west side , by public subscription and dispensed soup to the ‘ deserving poor ’ until 1891 . The soup was not free : it cost half a pence per pint . People who had donated each had a number of tickets which they could give to those people who they believed qualified for the ration . The deserving poor in Victorian times were those unable to work during the winter months . Those individuals classed as undeserving were those whose poverty was deemed to be caused by indolence and alcoholism . A recent article has suggested that the soup provided by the kitchen was highly nutritious . The kitchen was open from December to March , seven days a week , weather permitting . Advertisements were placed in local newspapers such as the Daily Chronicle and The Journal and Courant to solicit donations for the kitchen . The donations were used to pay the kitchen staff and buy the provisions for the soup . The names of prominent contributors were also listed in those newspapers and annual receipts and expenditures were also published in the press . The kitchen was run by a committee of prominent townsmen , including Thomas Pumphrey , Henry E Armstrong , James Joicey and the banker Thomas Hodgkin . 
 Lynn Redhead , customer services administrator at the Holy Jesus Hospital , has described what the kitchen would have looked like in the following way : 
 " People wanting soup came in through an 18 @-@ inch wide brick @-@ lined corridor one at a time to be served from troughs . Nine copper boilers were on the first floor of the building with storage below where raw materials were weighed to be hoisted up . They were making 100 gallons of soup at a time , that ’ s 800 people all queuing at the back of the building . " 
 In 1881 , the committee from the Discharged Prisoner ’ s Aid Society asked to use the building when it was not in use for discharged female convicts from the prison at <unk> Square ( 1828 – 1925 ) to do laundry work and the Society continued to use it for this purpose until the turn of the century . Between 1882 and 1883 City Road was built over the front lawn of the Hospital . 
 The soup kitchen closed in 1891 . The building was leased to pork butcher <unk> Thompson , who made alterations to the building presumably to separate his business from the laundry and ex @-@ convicts . <unk> Chemical Factory operated on the site from 1913 , producing industrial and domestic chemicals and pharmaceuticals as well as filing first aid boxes until 1961 when it moved to Stepney bank in <unk> . In 1937 , the Council decided that the hospital was no longer fit to house people because the area around the almshouse was very unhealthy . Therefore a new hospital was built at Spital Tongues . Some of the building 's original fixtures were moved to the new site at this time . 
 = = = The Peoples Kitchen = = = 
 The 19th @-@ century soup kitchen inspired ' The People 's Kitchen ' , a 20th @-@ century charity organization dedicated to helping Newcastle 's homeless . The People 's Kitchen was founded by 76 @-@ year @-@ old Alison Kay who was moved to help the homeless after finding an unidentified man dead under a bush in Newcastle . First she held a " friendship picnic " attended by four homeless men in which she delivered flasks of tea and sandwiches prepared in her own kitchen . Then , after liaising with the police and social services she inaugurated The People 's Kitchen . After occupying temporary premises in Blenheim Street , the people 's hospital moved its headquarters to Bath Lane , Newcastle , in 1997 and distributes clothing and equipment to the homeless . 
 = = The first museum ( 1950 – 1993 ) = = 
 In the late 1960s , the Museum Board was looking to have more museums in Newcastle and thought the Holy Jesus Hospital could be used . The fact that the building had stood empty for decades meant that the condition of the building had suffered greatly . The restoration cost £ 67 @,@ 000 , the money coming from the John George Joicey bequest and a new roof was needed . During the restoration some of the original fabric of the building such as door frames , doors and walls on the top floor were lost . In 1970 John George Joicey Museum opened . During this time the soup kitchens were joined to the Holy Jesus Hospital . The first floor rooms were used for teaching the history of Newcastle from the Roman period to the present date . There were period rooms illustrating living styles from the early Stuart to late Victorian periods . Much of the collection was donated by bequest by John George Joicey , a Gateshead businessman and owner of the mining company James Joicey & Co. ltd , and after whom the museum was named . Joicey was also a prominent donor to the Laing Art Gallery . The tower of the hospital had the Alnwick Armoury and the Shotley Bridge Sword makers displays on the first and second floors . The Shotley Bridge Sword makers were sword makers and knifemakers from Solingen , Germany who settled in Shotley Bridge , Durham , in 1690 . The soup kitchen was mainly used as a Victorian schoolroom where children were dressed and taught as Victorian children would have been . There were also audio @-@ visual presentations that illustrated the Tyne Flood of 1771 and the Great Fire of 1854 . Part of the museum was devoted to the Northumberland Hussars and the 15th and 19th Regiments of the King 's Royal Hussars . The museum 's location combined with the city ’ s underpasses and roads system made access to the museum difficult and it was little visited . In 1993 , the museum closed and all artifacts were taken to the Discovery Museum on Blandford Street . These included the effigy of a knight from the 15th century that was found next to the sacristy wall outside the tower . 
 = = The Inner City Project ( 2000 ) = = 
 The Holy Jesus Hospital has been the centre of the National Trust ’ s Inner City Project . By August 2004 , £ 800 @,@ 000 had been spent on renovating the building . Funds for the restoration of the site came from the Heritage Lottery Fund and the Tyne and Wear Partnership . The project been running since 1987 in the east end of Newcastle working with young people from 12 @-@ 25 and with the over 50s , taking them out to the countryside . The National Trust needed a central office to expand their work into other inner city areas , so a 25 @-@ year lease was negotiated with the council . The Exhibition Room on the site features touch screens and 3D models to help teach people about the site 's history of helping the townspeople . In the book The Remains of Distant Times : Archaeology and the National Trust , Priscilla Boniface criticizes what she believes to be the National Trust 's lack of interest in operating in urban environments but praises the Inner City Project as a step towards rectifying this . She wrote " Its occasional ventures - such as the Newcastle Inner City Project ... by their frequent mention in National Trust communications , merely serve to underline how few of their type the Trust has to call on for report . " She argues that although the aim of introducing town dwellers to the countryside is " laudable " , the " respectful and serious suggestion might be made , though , that a person or person 's might be usefully employed also with the objective of raising National Trust people 's understanding of and confidence in their ability to visit and enjoy , or at least encounter , the city . " However , Collins and Kay cite research suggesting that the scheme has been effective in promoting " social inclusion " . They note , however , that the project has been limited by the funds made available to it . 
 = = Notable visitors to the site = = 
 Princess Margaret Tudor – daughter of Henry VII spent four days there in 1503 on her journey north to marry James IV of Scotland 
 Thomas Howard , 4th Duke of Norfolk , stayed there in 1560 . As a result , £ 67 was spent on materials and repairs : the walls were re @-@ pointed , roof lead re @-@ laid , gutters and broken windows repaired , a chimney rebuilt , dining chamber on the Great Hall enlarged , two doors cut through a wall and the construction of a new stone window . Materials purchased included 4000 bricks and a considerable amount of glass from Hartlepool . Norfolk was imprisoned nine years later by Elizabeth I for plotting to marry Mary , Queen of Scots . 
 Eric XIV of Sweden visited in 1561 for which the Great Hall was whitewashed and hung with borrowed tapestries for his visit . 
 = 39th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 39th Battalion was an infantry unit of the Australian Army . It was originally raised in February 1916 for service during World War I as part of First Australian Imperial Force . Making up part of the 10th Brigade , it was attached to the 3rd Division and served on the Western Front in France and Belgium before being disbanded in March 1919 . Following the re @-@ organisation of the Australian Army in 1921 , the battalion was raised again as a unit of the Citizens Force , known as the " Hawthorn – Kew Regiment " . In 1937 , it was amalgamated with the 37th Battalion to become the 37th / 39th Battalion . Later it was delinked with the 37th and amalgamated with the 24th Battalion to form the 24th / 39th Battalion , before being raised again as a single unit in October 1941 . During World War II the battalion was sent to New Guinea in 1942 and between July and August of that year the unit was heavily engaged in the defence of the Kokoda Trail during which time they fought several desperate actions against the Japanese as they attempted to hold out until further reinforcements could be brought up from Port Moresby . Such was their involvement in the battle that by the time they were withdrawn they could only muster 32 men and following its return to Australia , the unit was disbanded in early July 1943 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 = = = = Formation = = = = 
 The 39th Battalion was first formed on 21 February 1916 at the Ballarat Showgrounds , in Victoria , for service during World War I. Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Robert Rankine , the battalion was raised as part of an expansion of the First Australian Imperial Force ( 1st AIF ) that took place at the conclusion of the Gallipoli Campaign . The majority of the battalion 's recruits came from the Western District of Victoria , and together with the 37th , 38th and 40th Battalions , it formed the 10th Brigade , which was part of the 3rd Division . Following a brief period of training in Ballarat , the 39th Battalion marched through Melbourne on 15 May as the city farewelled the unit and they subsequently embarked upon HMAT Ascanius on 27 May 1916 , bound for the United Kingdom . Sailing via Cape Town , the battalion landed at Plymouth on 18 July 1916 , and moved by train to Amesbury , before marching to Larkhill on Salisbury Plain , where they undertook a period of four months training before being sent to France in November . After completing the Channel crossing on 23 / 24 November , they landed at Le Havre and moved to the front by train . On the night of 10 December , the battalion took its place in the trenches along the Western Front , relieving its sister battalion , the 37th , around <unk> in the Armentieres sector . They remained at the front for the next week , as part of their introduction to trench warfare , during which time the battalion repelled a small German raid and sent out patrols into " no man 's land " . 
 = = = = Western Front = = = = 
 After having endured a long winter in Flanders serving in mainly a defensive role , the battalion 's first major engagement came at Messines , in Belgium in early June 1917 . The battle began badly for the 39th . Near Ploegsteert Corner , during the march to the line of departure , the battalion suffered a high number of casualties following a German gas attack which subsequently resulted the 39th only being able to muster about a third of its manpower for the attack , amounting to an assault force of only 120 men . Despite this , the 39th was quickly reorganised into a single wave , and attacking on the 10th Brigade 's right , it subsequently overcame the initial German opposition facing them and then , during the second phase of the battle advanced south of Douve , on the southern edge of the Messines Ridge . It was involved in further fighting north of Grey Farm , where they were initially held up by German machine @-@ gun fire , but after this was overcome they continued to advance to their final objective , eventually digging @-@ in 100 yards ( 91 m ) beyond the farm , having managed to capture all of its objectives . Later , in October , the 39th Battalion took part in two other major attacks in that same sector , firstly at Broodseinde and then at Passchendaele , the first of which was a brilliant success , while the second was a disastrous failure . 
 During the fighting around Broodseinde on 4 October , the 39th formed the third wave of the 10th Brigade 's attack , which went in around 6 : 00 am . Following up the 37th and 38th Battalions , they advanced against strongly held pill @-@ boxes towards the Gravenstafel Switch . After digging @-@ in , a party from the 39th joined the 40th Battalion as it launched the final wave in the brigade 's attack . As the 40th came up against stiff opposition , more men from the 39th were pushed forward and the objective was finally secured around 11 : 00 am . After the battle , the 39th remained in the line until 6 October , when it was withdrawn back to <unk> for reorganisation and rest . A couple of days later , the battalion was recommitted to the fighting and ordered to advance towards Passchendaele Ridge , attacking on the morning of 12 October despite heavy rain the previous evening . In the heavy fighting that followed , the battalion managed to secure its first objective , but was forced to withdraw when its flanks became threatened as neighbouring units had been unable to advance with them through the thick mud . 
 Over the course of the next five months , the 39th Battalion rotated between the front line and rear areas , holding the line in Belgium throughout winter . In the spring of 1918 , when the German Army launched its last effort at victory , known as the Spring Offensive , the 39th was among the many Australian battalions that were hurriedly moved south to France in order to stem the tide of the German onslaught towards Amiens ; fighting a series of defensive actions in the Somme between late March and early June . When the Allies launched their own offensive – the Hundred Days Offensive – on 8 August 1918 , the battalion along with the rest of the 10th Brigade , was serving as the divisional reserve and they did not participate in the advance that has since become known as one of the greatest days for the Allies on the Western Front . On 10 August , the battalion was committed to battle once more , undertaking an attack on the village of Proyart , but this attack was ill @-@ conceived and ultimately failed . Despite this , the battalion remained in the line throughout August and early September as the 3rd Division advanced through the Somme Valley . 
 The battalion undertook its last major action of the war at the end of September 1918 when , serving alongside the Americans , they breached parts of the Hindenburg Line along the St Quentin Canal . During this final battle , the battalion 's long serving commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Robert Henderson , who had taken command in February 1917 before the battalion 's first major battle , was killed in action . Late on 2 October , while around <unk> Crescent , the 39th was relieved and the battalion was removed from the line to undertake training and reorganisation . In the middle of October , the 39th was bolstered by a company of reinforcements from the 37th , which had been disbanded to help make up losses in the other 10th Brigade units . Nevertheless , the 39th did not see action again and they were still at the rear when the Armistice was declared on 11 November 1918 . With the fighting over , the process of demobilisation began and slowly the men began marching out for repatriation to Australia . Finally , in March 1919 , the 39th Battalion was disbanded . At this point , the battalion 's remaining personnel were amalgamated with other units to form the 10th Demobilisation Regiment , with the last of its soldiers returning to Australia in May . 
 During the course of the war the 39th Battalion suffered 405 men killed , while a further 1 @,@ 637 were wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : one Member of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) , two Distinguished Service Orders ( DSOs ) , 14 Distinguished Conduct Medals ( DCMs ) , 14 Military Crosses ( MCs ) , 78 Military Medals ( MMs ) with three bars , and 22 Mentions in Dispatches ( MIDs ) . For their involvement in the fighting on the Western Front , the 39th Battalion were awarded 14 battle honours in 1927 . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 At the end of World War I there was a wholesale disbandment of units of the Australian Army as the wartime Army was disbanded and its personnel demobilised . In 1921 , it was decided that there was a need to raise a part @-@ time military force , known as the Citizens Force , which would take responsibility for the defence of the Australian mainland . This force was organised along the same lines of the 1st AIF , and the units raised kept the same numerical designation as the 1st AIF battalions . The AIF ceased to exist officially on 1 April 1921 , and the Citizens Force was reorganised the following month on 1 May , adopting the numerical designations and structures of the AIF . As a part of this , the 39th Battalion was raised in 1921 in Melbourne . Upon formation , the battalion was attached to the 10th Brigade , 3rd Division , and the battalion drew personnel from the 22nd and 24th Infantry Regiments and the 29th Light Horse . 
 In 1927 , territorial designations were adopted and the battalion assumed the title of the " Hawthorn Regiment " . Three years later this was changed to the " Hawthorne – Kew Regiment " . It assumed the motto of <unk> Non <unk> in 1927 . Initially , the battalion was kept up to strength with volunteers and men serving under the terms of the compulsory training scheme , but in 1929 the scheme was suspended by the newly elected Scullin Labor government and the Citizen Forces were renamed the Militia . The combination of the end to compulsory training and the financial hardships of the Great Depression meant that there were few volunteers available as men could not risk losing their jobs to undertake training and as a result throughout the 1930s a number of units were amalgamated or disbanded as the size of the Army was reduced . In 1937 , the 39th Battalion was merged with the 37th Battalion , before later being delinked with the 37th and being amalgamated with the 24th Battalion , becoming the 24th / 39th Battalion . An alliance with the Dorsetshire Regiment was approved in 1930 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = Formation = = = = 
 On 1 October 1941 , the Australian Military Board issued an order re @-@ raising the 39th Battalion as a single battalion of the Australian Military Forces , as Militiamen were called up for national service . The intent was to raise the battalion to relieve the Queensland @-@ based 49th Battalion , which was serving as a garrison force around Port Moresby , and from the outset the battalion was formed from men who were transferred from a variety of infantry and light horse units , including the 24th / 39th Battalion that had been deployed at Nagambie Road , in Seymour , Victoria , as well as elements from the Militia 2nd Cavalry and 3rd and 4th Infantry Divisions . Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Conran became the battalion 's new commanding officer , having previously served with the 23rd Battalion during World War I , and in the Citizens Military Force after the war . 
 The battalion headquarters was opened at Darley Camp , near Bacchus Marsh , and by 8 October 1941 , a nucleus of officers and senior non @-@ commissioned officers ( NCOs ) , many of whom had experience from World War I , had prepared the battalion for the arrival of the soldiers or other ranks ( <unk> ) that would bring it up to its required establishment . On 10 October 1941 , the first draft of nine officers and 523 men from the 3rd Infantry Division assembled at Caulfield Racecourse Transit Camp and were transported by rail to Darley Camp . The following day numbers increased further with the arrival of another seven officers and 400 men from the 2nd Cavalry and 4th Infantry Divisions . Later , in June 1942 , after it had arrived in New Guinea , the battalion 's strength was bolstered with the transfer of 16 officers from the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , including a new commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel William Owen . 
 On 21 November 1941 , the 39th Battalion paraded through the streets of Melbourne with weapons . It had taken 52 days to form the battalion and while the battalion had still been understrength , they were declared ready for training . In the end , however , as events in the Pacific unfolded , this training was cut short and the battalion was only able to undertake one training exercise in this time . This exercise was code named the " Battle of <unk> " , and was conducted in the Victorian Western District , at the end of October . 
 Two days after the Japanese attack on the US fleet at Pearl Harbor and the British in Malaya , on 9 December 1941 the battalion was ordered to " prepare to move " as it was mobilised for war service . The threat of invasion by the Japanese changed the strategic situation and with it the planning forecasts of the Australian high command . As such , instead of relieving the 49th Battalion , the 39th was combined with the 49th and the New South Wales @-@ based 53rd Battalion to form the 30th Brigade , and plans were made for the entire formation to deploy to New Guinea . Christmas Day 1941 was spent in camp , before the 39th Battalion was loaded onto two trains the following day for a rapid move north . One train went straight to Albury and the other departed from Spencer Street Station , Melbourne , two hours later . Both trains arrived in Sydney at 10 : 40 hours , on 27 December 1941 . The battalion then detrained and moved by ferry to Woolloomooloo Wharf where the 1 @,@ 068 officers , NCOs and men of the battalion boarded the passenger ship the Aquitania bound for New Guinea . 
 = = = = Kokoda Track = = = = 
 Initially upon their arrival in New Guinea in January 1942 the 39th Battalion was used to defend the airfield at Seven Mile Aerodrome near Port Moresby and to carry out various other garrison tasks such as building defences and unloading stores at the wharf . In May 1942 , the battalion 's commanding officer , Conran , was deemed medically unfit for service and on 24 May he relinquished command . In June 1942 , as the military situation in New Guinea deteriorated further , the battalion received orders to move up the Kokoda Track in order to act as a blocking force against the possibility of a Japanese advance overland from the north . In order to counter this threat , Maroubra Force composed of troops the 39th Battalion and the Papuan Infantry Battalion ( PIB ) were sent to Kokoda , arriving there on 15 July . This move proved prescient as a large Japanese force landed at Gona only a week later , and they quickly began to move inland towards Kokoda . 
 The first clash occurred at <unk> on 23 July , when a platoon from ' B ' Company , under the command of Captain Sam Templeton , having destroyed the footbridge over the Kumusi River , engaged the Japanese on the far side of the river . The Australians were forced to withdraw , however , when hundreds of Japanese marines began crossing the river under a barrage of mortar and machine gun fire . They withdrew only a few miles , before Templeton set up a successful ambush for the advancing Japanese on the banks of the Gorari Creek . Nevertheless , they were forced back further towards the high ground at Oivi where they attempted to make a stand while Templeton tried to make contact with battalion headquarters and the rest of the battalion who were spread out further along the track , in order to get more reinforcements . 
 On the evening of 29 July the Japanese attacked the main position Kokoda . There were only 80 men from ' B ' Company left at that time , and armed only with small arms and a few Bren light machine guns , they were no match for the assaulting Japanese . Casualties on both sides were high as the Australians resorted to hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , and the battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel William Owen , who had flown in to take over the battalion following Templeton 's death , was killed while organising the withdrawal . It became clear that Kokoda was lost and the following morning , under the cover of a dense mist , with the PIB 's commanding officer , Major William Watson , assuming temporary command , the survivors abandoned the position and fell back towards the village of Deniki , a mile or so back along the Kokoda Track towards Isurava . 
 The remnants of ' B ' Company regrouped at Deniki , but they were in a bad state and when on 4 August , Major Allan Cameron , brigade major of the 30th Brigade , arrived to take command of Maroubra Force , most of them were sent back to Isurava in disgrace as he was under the mistaken belief that they had run away from the fighting . Nevertheless , on 8 August the rest of the 39th Battalion , now without the only troops who had any experience fighting the Japanese , launched a counterattack at Kokoda . They managed to secure one side of the airfield , but due to the close proximity of the Japanese on the other side , relief aircraft were unable to land and short of food and ammunition , they were forced to fall back to Deniki once again after almost two days of fighting . They eventually managed to halt the Japanese advance and on 14 August Maroubra Force fell back to Isurava . 
 At this point the fighting ceased for almost two weeks and during this time the 39th was joined by the 53rd and the 30th Brigade headquarters ; and Lieutenant Colonel Ralph Honner arrived from <unk> to take command . Reaching the battalion at Isurava on 16 August , he subsequently began organising the battalion 's defence of Isurava . On 23 August Brigadier Arnold Potts took over command of Maroubra Force and further reinforcements arrived as first the 2 / 14th , 2 / 16th and later the 2 / 27th Battalions from the 7th Division 's 21st Brigade also reached the area . Despite this , the situation remained bleak as the supply issue was becoming a serious problem for the Australians and the reinforcements that had arrived were also in a state of disarray having been committed to the battle in a piecemeal fashion and suffering badly from hunger and disease . 
 Although the Japanese were experiencing similar problems in relation to supplies , they began their advance once again on 26 August and despite several rugged defensive actions the Australians were forced back again , first to Eora Creek on 30 August , then Templeton 's Crossing on 2 September , and finally to Efogi three days later . Exhausted from their efforts and no longer able to be considered an effective fighting force , the 39th was relieved and sent down the track to Koitaki to rest . They had done the job that was required of them , having stalled the Japanese advance in order to allow reinforcements to be brought up . These reinforcements came in the shape of the 25th Brigade , comprising the 2 / 25th , 2 / 31st and 2 / 33rd Battalions . Bitter fighting ensued and the Australians withdrew once again on 17 September , this time to Imita Ridge ; however , the Japanese had reached their limit and on 24 September began to withdraw . By 2 November , Kokoda was back in Australian hands . 
 = = = = Fighting around Gona and disbandment = = = = 
 Following the 39th Battalion 's withdrawal from the line in September 1942 , they spent a month at Koitaki before being sent back to Port Moresby in mid @-@ October , where they were detailed to prepare defensive positions . In November , they were attached to the 21st Brigade , and throughout December the 39th Battalion was involved in further fighting as the brigade fought around Gona . During this time the 39th suffered heavy casualties , but the fighting continued and having captured the Gona Mission , the battalion moved to the Sanananda Track on 21 December , taking up a forward position at Huggins ' Road Block . In the New Year the battalion was withdrawn to Soputa and returned to the 30th Brigade . They had suffered heavy casualties and in January 1943 , when it was flown back to Port Moresby , it had a frontage of only seven officers and 25 men . In February , the 39th was ordered to prepare for operations in the Wau area , in anticipation of a further Japanese attack , but this attack did not eventuate and on 12 March the 39th Battalion embarked for the return journey to Australia . 
 Following the 39th Battalion 's return to Australia , the men were given a period of leave before 30th Brigade was reconstituted on the Atherton Tablelands in Queensland . Initially , the plan was to reorganise the brigade and rebuild it prior to returning it to New Guinea , but in July it was decided that the 30th Brigade , along with its component battalions — the 39th , 49th , and 3rd Battalions — would be disbanded and used to reinforce the 6th Division , with reinforcements being sent to the 16th and 19th Brigades . This came into effect on 3 July 1943 and as a result of this decision , the Militiamen that had been called up for service were transferred to the 36th Battalion , a Militia battalion from New South Wales , while those who had volunteered for overseas service were sent to the 2 / 2nd Battalion ; both of these units later saw further service in New Guinea . 
 At the end of the battalion 's involvement in the fighting in New Guinea , 1 @,@ 666 men had served in its ranks . The battalion suffered 403 combat casualties , which consisted of 118 killed in action , 13 died of wounds , five died other causes , and 266 wounded in action . Illness and disease also took a heavy toll and as a result , after six months of combat the 39th Battalion 's muster roll was only seven officers and 25 other ranks . For their service during World War II members of the 39th Battalion received the following decorations : two MBEs , one DSO , four DCMs , seven MCs , 10 MMs , one US Distinguished Service Cross and 11 MIDs . The 39th received eight battle honours for the war in 1961 ; it was the only Australian unit to receive the " Kokoda Trail " battle honour . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 39th Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 World War I : Messines 1917 , Ypres 1917 , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle , Passchendaele , Somme 1918 , Ancre 1918 , Amiens , Albert 1918 , Mont St Quentin , Hindenburg Line , St Quentin Canal , France and Flanders 1916 – 18 . 
 World War II : South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 43 , Kokoda Trail , Kokoda – Deniki , Isurava , Eora Creek – Templeton 's Crossing I , Buna – Gona , Sanananda Road , <unk> River . 
 = = Commanding Officers = = 
 World War I 
 Lieutenant Colonel Robert Rankine ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Robert Henderson ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Thomas Paterson . 
 World War II 
 Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Marcell Conran ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel William Taylor Owen ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Ralph Hyacinth Honner . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since the end of the war , the 39th Battalion 's involvement in the fighting around Kokoda has become a significant part of the narrative surrounding the Anzac legend and Australia 's emergence as a modern nation . The battalion 's actions were first shown in Damien Parer 's 1942 film Kokoda Front Line , and more recently in the 2006 Australian movie Kokoda , which was based partly on Victor Austin 's To Kokoda and Beyond . 
 After the war when Australia 's part @-@ time military forces were reformed in 1948 , while many battalions that had been disbanded during the war were re @-@ raised , the 39th was not . On 8 August 2006 , the Australian Army raised the 39th ( Personnel Support ) Battalion ( later re @-@ designated the 39th Operational Support Battalion ) , adopting the 39th 's numerical designation in order to perpetuate them on the order of battle . During the ceremony that was held at the Shrine of Remembrance in Melbourne , the Governor General , Major General Michael Jeffery , described the 39th Battalion as some of " Australia 's most gallant soldiers " , stating that the Australian nation was indebted to them for " their heroic service " . 
 = Killing Time ( Star Trek novel ) = 
 Killing Time is a Star Trek : The Original Series novel written by Della Van Hise and published by Pocket Books in 1985 . The original manuscript had Kirk / Spock slash fiction elements , and these were requested to be removed by Paramount . However , they were not removed , and 250 @,@ 000 copies were printed . These romantic undertones between Spock and James T. Kirk were brought to the attention of the office of the creator of Star Trek , Gene Roddenberry , who made Pocket Books recall the first edition . This edition subsequently became a collector 's item , with more than fifty changes made to a revised version . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The USS Enterprise is on patrol near the Romulan neutral zone and the crew is experiencing unusual dreams . Captain James T. Kirk and Science Officer Spock both confess that they are having dreams that Spock is Captain of the ship and Kirk is an Ensign . Kirk informs Spock that Starfleet intelligence has discovered that the Romulans are attempting to use time travel and are sending more ships to investigate . Captain Kirk goes to sleep , and awakes as Ensign Kirk on the <unk> ShiKahr , which appears to otherwise be the Enterprise . The Ensign is a drug addled ex @-@ convict who has been on board for only a day . 
 The Romulans had attempted to travel back in time and destroy the Federation , but they instead created a Federation dominated by Vulcans . They shielded a ship from the changes and compare the differences , realising that it needs to be reversed . Meanwhile , Captain Spock begins to act protectively of Ensign Kirk , but the Captain is injured on an away mission . After Doctor McCoy conducts a series of mental scans , the crew of the ShiKahr realise that history has been altered . The Romulans plot to use Kirk to force Spock to impersonate their leader . Spock <unk> with Kirk , each realising their personas from the main timeline . 
 Romulan agents board the ShiKahr and capture Kirk . Spock agrees to their demands and travels with them . Whilst en route , Spock enters pon farr and finds that he is linked to Kirk , but mates with the Romulan Thea to allow it to pass . They retrieve Kirk , and discover that taking Kirk and Spock was a ploy to have them both travel back in time to stop the Romulan agents from preventing the formation of the Federation . They travel back in time and disable the agents , but Spock is seriously injured and dying . Kirk and Spock <unk> as reality shifts once more and restores the original timeline . 
 = = Development = = 
 The original manuscript of Killing Time included Kirk / Spock based slash fiction overtones . The foundation of this genre of writing dated back to the 1970s with fan created fiction about Kirk and Spock . This has since become a term typically used for same @-@ sex unofficial fiction . Author Della van Hise had previously written these types of stories about those characters . When that manuscript was sent by Pocket Books for approval by Paramount Studios , the pages with the slash fiction were marked to be edited out of the eventual novel . It was returned , but at the time Pocket Books were between editors as Mimi <unk> had just left , and her replacement Karen Haas had not yet arrived . At some point , someone went through the manuscript and marked the pages which Paramount had asked to be removed with the letters " <unk> " , which is a Latin term used by <unk> to tell the printer to disregard earlier changes . 
 Pocket Books published 250 @,@ 000 copies of Killing Time in the first print run . After the publishing , Gene Roddenberry 's assistant , Richard Arnold , received a letter from a reader stating that the book was suggesting a romantic link between Kirk and Spock . This was passed to Roddenberry , the creator of Star Trek , who reportedly " became livid " . Following his complaints to Pocket Books , the first print run of the novel was recalled and destroyed . Pocket Books had already shipped between 100 @,@ 000 to 150 @,@ 000 copies of the book to retailers . When the news broke , fans began purchasing the novels before they could be removed from the shelves as the first edition was expected to become a collector 's item . Van Hise later said of that version of the novel , " If someone went looking for ' questionable material ' , in Killing Time , they could find it ... Just as beauty is in supposedly in the mind of the beholder , so is questionable material . " More than fifty changes were made to the novel before it was republished as a second edition . 
 Following the issues with the publishing of Killing Time , there was increased oversight by Roddenberry 's staff regarding the novels published by Pocket Books . This was delegated to Arnold , and would later cause confusion for Pocket Books as comments would be sent back and it was sometimes unclear whether they were from Roddenberry or Arnold . These comments rejected plot developments in the novels where they were stepping out of the bounds set by the television series . Rumours subsequently spread that there was an alternative version of the manuscript with more explicit Kirk / Spock slash details , something that Van Hise later denied . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Ellen Cheeseman @-@ Meyer , writing for Tor.com in February 2013 , said that Killing Time was " incredibly romantic " . She stated that it reminded her of 18th century literary Romanticism , " which suggested that morality lay in nature and civilization was a corrupting influence " . She said that whilst it could be considered " a trivial piece of fluff tossed off by a fan writer and published when Pocket Books wasn ’ t paying much attention " , it could also be seen to be a " call to action that requires readers to examine their relationships and their actions " . In Elizabeth <unk> 's article for Extrapolation , entitled " From Slash to the Mainstream : Female Writers and Gender Blending Men " , she describes Killing Time as " erotic but not sexual " and said that Spock and Kirk both " combine masculine and feminine imagery " . She suggested that it was not the romantic overtones that caused the reaction , but rather that it was this gender @-@ blending that was the issue . 
 = Round Church , Preslav = 
 The Round Church ( Bulgarian : <unk> църква , <unk> tsarkva ) , also known as the Golden Church ( <unk> църква , Zlatna tsarkva ) or the Church of St John ( църква " Свети Йоан " , tsarkva " Sveti Yoan " ) , is a large partially preserved early medieval Eastern Orthodox church . It lies in Preslav , the former capital of the First Bulgarian Empire , today a town in northeastern Bulgaria . The church dates to the early 10th century , the time of Tsar Simeon I 's rule , and was unearthed and first archaeologically examined in 1927 – 1928 . 
 Considered to be one of the most impressive examples of medieval Bulgarian architecture , the Round Church takes its name from the distinctive shape of one of its three sections , the cella ( naos ) , which is a rotunda that serves as a place of liturgy . The church 's design also includes a wide atrium and a rectangular entrance area , or narthex , marked by two circular turrets . 
 The church has been likened to examples of religious architecture from the late Roman ( Early Christian ) period , the Caucasus , and the Carolingian Pre @-@ Romanesque of Charlemagne because of its characteristic plan , which is significantly different from contemporaneous Bulgarian or Byzantine buildings . The church 's alternative name , the Golden Church , stems from its possible and popular identification with a " new golden church " in Preslav referenced in a medieval literary source . 
 The Round Church 's rich interior decoration , which makes ample use of mosaics , ceramics and marble details , distinguishes it from other churches in Preslav . Its interior features hundreds of drawings depicting ships , fauna , and Christian figures . Medieval inscriptions on the walls range from names of saints in Byzantine Greek to separate letters and short texts in the Glagolitic and Cyrillic alphabets . 
 = = Background = = 
 Founded in 681 as a pagan state , Bulgaria was formally Christianised by Byzantine clergy in the 860s , under Prince Boris ( r . 852 – 889 ) . The right to convert Bulgaria to Christianity was the subject of a political dispute between Byzantium and the Papacy . With the conversion to Christianity , Boris hoped to solve internal ethnic issues and improve the foreign relations of his state , which was not treated equally by the Christian rulers of Europe . 
 The Round Church was constructed during the rule of Boris ' son and successor , Simeon ( r . 893 – 927 ) , whose successful campaigns established Bulgaria 's temporary superiority over Byzantium , at times threatening the Byzantine capital at Constantinople . He extended the territory of the First Bulgarian Empire over most of the Balkans , to the Adriatic and the Aegean . Simeon also conquered the lands of modern Serbia and Montenegro and efficiently eliminated the Magyar threat from the north . Counted among Bulgaria 's greatest leaders , Simeon was a benefactor of literature and the arts ; his reign is considered the " Golden Age " of medieval Bulgarian culture because of Bulgaria 's literary influence over contemporary Slavic Europe . 
 The city of Preslav was made the capital of Bulgaria early in Simeon 's reign , partly because of the former capital Pliska 's association with pre @-@ Christian paganism . Simeon turned Preslav into a cultural centre , a true rival to Constantinople . Some of the most eminent scholars of Bulgaria 's Golden Age worked at the Preslav Literary School . Intended more as a royal residence and a showcase of cultural power than a fortress , the city boasted impressive architecture , including a large number of characteristic palaces and dozens of churches . Among them the Round Church , regarded as " one of the most impressive monuments of medieval Bulgarian architecture " and an " expression of the highest achievements of Old Bulgarian culture " , stood out . 
 = = Identification and history = = 
 The Round Church is popularly identified with the " new golden church " referenced in a colophon to an Old Bulgarian translation of Athanasius of Alexandria 's Orations Against the Arians . The text says that the translation was done on the order of Prince Simeon by Constantine of Preslav and copied by Theodore Dox , " at the mouth of the Ticha in the [ Byzantine ] year <unk> indiction 14 [ 907 AD ] , where the same prince had the holy new golden church built " . It is uncertain whether the " mouth of the Ticha " refers to a narrow section of the river , to the <unk> pass near the city , or possibly to a certain location next to the outer city walls and in the direct vicinity of the Round Church ruins . This problem aside , if " golden " is to be taken literally , the source is also unclear as to whether the church is the new one among the city 's golden churches , or the single golden one among the new churches in Preslav . Scholar <unk> <unk> considers the identification of the Round Church as the " new golden church " from literature " incontestable " , while art historian Nikola Mavrodinov is of the opinion that it is probable . On the other hand , historian A. P. Vlasto believes this identification to be " not absolutely certain " . 
 If the church from the marginal note is equated with the Round Church , then it can be conclusively dated to no more than a few years before 907 . While the church can be ascribed to no later than the 10th century , some scholars have suggested that it may have been constructed directly on top of a much earlier late Roman basilica due to its antiquated plan . A possible donor ( <unk> ) of at least part of the church 's construction is a high @-@ ranking church official ( chartophylax ) named Paul , who is mentioned in an inscription inside the church . The main part of the work was likely funded by Simeon , who may have acted as a chief sponsor . 
 There is debate in Bulgarian academic circles as to whether the church was built as a monastery church or as a separate cathedral . If the buildings neighbouring the church are interpreted as the residential part of a monastery , it was most probably established after the construction of the Round Church , during the rule of Tsar Peter I ( r . 927 – 969 ) . The absence of entrances on these buildings on the sides facing the church and the presence of a large atrium make it unlikely . Another argument against the Round Church being a monastery church is its location , isolated from other buildings yet accessible to the public outside the inner city . Scholar Bistra Nikolova considers it a city cathedral and compares it in function to the Great Basilica in Pliska . Another researcher , Krastyu Miyatev , sees it as a royal church of Simeon , but art historian Nikola Mavrodinov and archaeologist <unk> <unk> insist it belonged to a monastery from the beginning . 
 The earliest excavations of the site were carried out in 1927 – 1928 by archaeologists from the National Archaeological Museum in Sofia and the Bulgarian Antiquities Society under the direction of Yordan <unk> . A second effort headed by Krastyu Miyatev resulted in a much more in @-@ depth study , and archaeological research at the site is ongoing . In 1927 , the Round Church , along with the entirety of medieval Preslav , was proclaimed a historical and archaeological reserve and placed under state protection as a national antiquity . In 1970 , it was individually included in the list of monuments of culture of national importance with a publication in that year 's State Gazette , issue 46 . As part of the Veliki Preslav architectural reserve , the Round Church is listed as No. 98 among the 100 Tourist Sites of Bulgaria . 
 The Church of St Petka in Ruse , opened in 1944 , was built as a reconstruction of the Round Church in Preslav . The Round Church underwent partial restoration in the late 1990s and early 2000s . In December 2009 , plans were announced to reconstruct the church in its entirety , without demolishing or altering any of the original structural remains . A monument dedicated to Tsar Simeon was unveiled in the immediate vicinity of the Round Church on 27 May 2007 to honour the <unk> anniversary of his death . Despite not being an active church , it is regularly used for baptisms and weddings . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Location and style = = = 
 The Round Church was built outside Preslav 's inner city , which mostly included the royal palace and its associated buildings such as the Royal Basilica . It was still within the outer city limits , and lay in Preslav 's southeastern part , some 250 metres ( 820 ft ) from the South Gate of the inner city . It was situated on a high terrace . Today the Round Church , along with the other ruins of medieval Preslav , lie not far from the modern town of Veliki Preslav , which is the administrative centre of a municipality in Shumen Province , northeastern Bulgaria . 
 While no church from this age in the Slavic @-@ populated parts of the Balkans was up @-@ to @-@ date with contemporary Byzantine architecture , the Round Church differs markedly because of its centralized , circular plan , which is unique in medieval Bulgarian architecture . The rounded and dynamic nature of its shapes is in contrast with the sharp rectangular designs of that period . It is most likely based on the abundant examples of late Roman or early Byzantine buildings that lay ruined in the Bulgarian lands . The layout , particularly the rotunda , resembles churches from the time of Justinian I such as the Basilica of San Vitale in Ravenna , the Little Hagia Sophia in Constantinople ( today Istanbul ) , and the Rotunda of Galerius in Thessaloniki . Even if the plan is unusual , the technology and principles employed in its construction are contemporary to the 10th century and in accord with other monuments in Preslav . 
 Byzantine churches are not the only source of inspiration that researchers attribute to the Round Church . Some scholars link its design to an Armenian influence , perhaps brought to Bulgaria by craftsmen from the Caucasus . In general , churches with such an antiquated plan in the Balkans are associated with the migration of Cappadocian , Armenian , or Georgian monks . Another possible model for the Round Church in Preslav may well be found in Carolingian architecture from the time of Charlemagne , and particularly the Palatine Chapel in Aachen , western Germany , with which it shares some characteristics . At the time of the Round Church 's construction , Bulgaria was in direct contact with the Frankish Empire . One trait of the Round Church that is claimed by scholars to be a very recognisable Carolingian influence is the presence of a monumental <unk> . 
 = = = Description = = = 
 The Round Church includes three sections : the wide atrium ( or courtyard ) , the narthex and the cella ( also naos or , due to its shape , rotunda ) , each serving as a premise to the other . The sections were not necessarily built at the same time , and it is generally accepted that a reconstruction of the church was carried out some time after its completion . Mavrodinov and archaeologist Karel Škorpil believe the narthex and cella comprised the first building period , while the atrium was added very shortly after that and by the same architect . 
 The church has a total length of 38 @.@ 5 m ( 126 ft ) , including the atrium . It was mostly built of rectangular limestone blocks sparingly joined with mortar . Inside the apse , the mortar is red @-@ coloured . The floor was covered by marble and stone tiles glued on top of red mortar in the narthex and white mortar elsewhere . Red and yellow bricks and pieces of bricks were used for the atrium , the arches , and possibly the dome ; some brick pieces were used to fill spaces between the stones on the walls . 
 = = = = Atrium = = = = 
 The outermost part of the Round Church is its atrium , the flanked open space leading into the narthex . It is accessed by means of three gates ( one on each wall ) , of which the entrance on the main west wall is the most elaborate and grandest in appearance . The atrium is almost square in shape and measures 12 @.@ 20 m × 14 @.@ 30 m ( 40 @.@ 0 ft × 46 @.@ 9 ft ) . A water well was constructed in the middle of the courtyard ; it was linked to a water conduit . 
 The sides of the atrium are decorated by a multitude of vaults with piers in between . In total , there are fourteen vaults : four on each of the courtyard 's three walls and one each where the west wall meets the sides . The atrium includes an equal number of round limestone columns each standing opposite one of the piers , 0 @.@ 60 m ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) apart . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The rectangular narthex constitutes the middle part of the building , between the atrium and the cella , and serves as the lobby of the church . It lies directly east of the atrium , through a wide gate flanked by a couple of high circular turrets . Mavrodinov likens the narthex of the Round Church to similar structures in the churches of Mount Athos , because of its depth . 
 Together with the north and south wall , the entrance of the narthex effectively isolates two smaller parts of the atrium , similar in plan and accessible through doors . The north part includes a small necropolis , while the south part was probably a baptistery , as it features a square installation with a clay pipe that resembles a baptismal font . However , Nikolova considers its shape much too unusual and its depth unsuitable for baptism , and believes it may instead have been designed as a vessel for dispensing holy water . 
 Measuring 5 m × 9 @.@ 50 m ( 16 @.@ 4 ft × 31 @.@ 2 ft ) , the narthex is the part of the Round Church which has survived in best shape , as some of its walls reach 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . Its two turrets have a diameter of 3 @.@ 20 m ( 10 @.@ 5 ft ) ; each has an entrance facing the interior of the narthex and three windows . The higher reaches of the towers were reached via spiral stairways , archaeological remains of which have been unearthed in the north turret . There are two pairs of columns inside the narthex , supporting its second floor , which is accessible from the north tower . The columns divide the narthex into three naves and mark the way from the narthex entrance to the gates of the rotunda . 
 = = = = Rotunda = = = = 
 The round cella is the easternmost and most important part of the church , as it was where the liturgy was performed . The diameter of the rotunda is 10 @.@ 50 m ( 34 @.@ 4 ft ) . It is accessed through three gates , all from the narthex . It was entirely covered by a dome . Twelve vaults , semicircular as seen from the inside and pentagonal on the outer wall , were constructed north and south of the rotunda 's eastern part , the apse , which itself fits into one of the vaults . Large buttresses reinforce the structure both inside and outside . A circle of ten or twelve white marble columns was inscribed inside the rotunda , 0 @.@ 55 m ( 1 @.@ 8 ft ) from the interior buttresses . The capitals of the columns are similar to those of the royal palace in Preslav . A copper @-@ plated wooden coffin lay in a burial chamber by one of the vaults near the apse . 
 The semicircular apse fits naturally with the other vaults of the rotunda despite being larger , and features vaults on its north and south walls . The marble ambon was situated in the middle of the circle of columns and of the whole rotunda , directly under the dome 's centre , as evidenced by a mortar padding . Stairs from the east and west , aligned with the apse , used to lead up to the ambon . The bishop 's throne or cathedra probably lay near one of the south vaults , which was likely enlarged for the purpose . 
 = = Decoration = = 
 The interior was lavishly decorated with colourful Byzantine @-@ style mosaics , cornices , and ceramics . With the exception of the Corinthian and Doric column capitals , which are of Roman or Byzantine origin , the rest of the decoration was created specifically for and during the church 's construction . Vlasto finds a Proto @-@ Bulgarian flavour in the church 's interior and a relationship with the art of Persia or Central Asia . Thus , he believes that it is not based on Byzantine examples of that age . Of a contrary opinion is Miyatev , who points out significant similarities between the decoration of the Round Church and that of the Church of the Mother of God ( now part of the <unk> Isa Mosque ) from 908 in Constantinople . Mavrodinov goes a step further to claim that the architect of the Round Church was directly inspired by ancient examples , citing in particular the rich sculptural decoration . 
 The Round Church was unmatched in its ceramic decoration by any church in Preslav , and was the only known building in the city to rely heavily on polychrome ceramic tiles . Ceramic and mosaic icons were a highlight of the interior ; they ranged in size from almost life @-@ sized to miniature . While the ceramic images were constructed out of clay tiles , the mosaic icons were more varied in their material , which included clay , glass , and stone of various shades on a gold @-@ coloured background . Among the portrayed saints and biblical figures are <unk> and perhaps Joel . Some of the images were enclosed in ellipses . 
 The Round Church featured marble and limestone cornices . These included a large number of intertwined ornaments and details , such as <unk> , grape clusters , leaves , and <unk> . Besides classic ornamental shapes , the cornices feature some that are entirely new in character or well @-@ known yet redesigned motifs . Floral decoration dominates the cornices . Tiles found inside the church ruins depict birds and other animals in addition to geometric shapes and floral motifs , all glazed in either brown , yellow , green , blue , or blue @-@ green . The walls were covered in polished marble facing with encrusted shapes . 
 = = Epigraphy = = 
 The Round Church contains many medieval inscriptions , both official and scratched on its walls as graffiti . One study counted a total of 193 signs and 30 drawings , the vast majority bearing some kind of Christian symbolism . As a whole , the epigraphy of the Round Church dates from the 10th century , and three alphabets are represented : the Greek , the Glagolitic , and the Cyrillic , as well as two languages : Byzantine Greek and Old Bulgarian ( the eastern Bulgarian recension of Old Church Slavonic ) . The Glagolitic inscriptions of the Round Church bear evidence that the use of that alphabet in Preslav continued alongside Cyrillic . 
 Perhaps the most famous and valuable writing on the walls of the church is a Cyrillic inscription on the south wall of the premises south of the narthex , conventionally known as the baptistery . The inscription was clumsily written on top of a mortar putty and says in translation : " Church of Saint John , built by chartophylax Paul " . Despite being dated to the 10th century and its mention of the church 's dedication and its potential donor , it cannot be described a classic donor 's inscription because of its unnatural location and clumsy writing . Nikolova considers it more likely that the author of the inscription was a literate person who served under chartophylax Paul and desired to spread his fame . She believes the text may refer to the construction of the narthex only rather than the whole church , because she is of the opinion that the narthex may have been added after the building of the rotunda . 
 Other examples of the epigraphy of the Round Church include several short Glagolitic and Cyrillic texts and separate letters . Among the Glagolitic inscriptions is the Preslav <unk> , a liturgical text including the first thirteen letters of that alphabet ; some of the Cyrillic texts were written on ceramic tiles . The names and descriptions attached to the icons are in Greek , while there are also bilingual inscriptions in Greek and Bulgarian . Individual letters inscribed on the walls illustrate the way Greek and simplified Glagolitic letterforms were combined to form the early Cyrillic alphabet . On the walls of the church are graffiti of Christian crosses , animals , and up to 11 depictions of ships . At least one epitaph has been discovered , inscribed on the tombstone of a woman described as " God 's servant <unk> " . 
 = Music of the Final Fantasy Tactics series = 
 The music of the Final Fantasy Tactics series , composed of Final Fantasy Tactics , Final Fantasy Tactics Advance , Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift , and Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions , was primarily composed by Hitoshi Sakimoto . He was assisted by Masaharu Iwata in composing the music for Final Fantasy Tactics . The Final Fantasy Tactics Original Soundtrack , a compilation of almost all of the music in the game , was released by DigiCube in 1997 , and re @-@ released by Square Enix in 2006 . No separate soundtrack has been released for Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions . The soundtrack was well received by critics , who found it to be astounding and one of the best video game music soundtracks in existence at the time of its release . 
 The music of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance was again composed by Hitoshi Sakimoto , with assistance from Nobuo Uematsu , Kaori Ohkoshi , and Ayako Saso . The Final Fantasy Tactics Advance Original Soundtrack , a compilation of almost all of the music in the game , was released by DigiCube in 2003 . A new age arrangement album entitled White : Melodies of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance , a selection of musical tracks from the game arranged by Yo Yamazaki , Akira Sasaki , and Satoshi Henmi , was released by SME Visual Works in 2003 . Final Fantasy Tactics Advance Original Soundtrack was well received by critics , who praised the album 's composition . Critics did not react as well to the White : Melodies of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance album , finding it to be a mediocre album with poor arrangements . 
 The music for Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift was also composed by Hitoshi Sakimoto , this time with the assistance of composers from his company Basiscape . The music was released as Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift Original Soundtrack by Square Enix in 2007 . It was enjoyed by reviewers , who found it to be pleasant and rewarding . 
 = = Albums = = 
 = = = Final Fantasy Tactics Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy Tactics Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of video game music from Final Fantasy Tactics , and was composed by Hitoshi Sakimoto and Masaharu Iwata . Sakimoto composed 46 tracks for the game , and Iwata composed the other 25 . The album was first released on two Compact Discs by DigiCube on June 21 , 1997 bearing the catalog number SSCX @-@ 10008 , and was re @-@ released by Square Enix on March 24 , 2006 with the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . It spans two discs and 71 tracks , covering a duration of 2 : 31 : 03 . 
 The Final Fantasy Tactics Original Soundtrack reached # 62 on the Japan Oricon charts and received positive reviews from critics such as Patrick Gann of RPGFan , who says " It is the best soundtrack I own , and I don 't believe that any other soundtrack known to man surpasses it yet as a whole . " Ryan of Square Enix Music Online praised the way that the two composers ' pieces blended together , and termed the album " one of the greatest soundtracks ever made and a true work of inspiration . " 
 Track list 
 = = = Final Fantasy Tactics Advance Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy Tactics Advance Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of video game music from Final Fantasy Tactics Advance . The album contains the musical tracks from the game , composed mainly by Hitoshi Sakimoto , with assistance from Nobuo Uematsu , Kaori Ohkoshi , and Ayako Saso . It spans 74 tracks and covers a duration of 2 : 05 : 27 . The first disk includes every piece of music from the game , as it sounds through the Game Boy Advance hardware . The second disk contains synthesized versions of 32 of the same 42 tracks . The album was released on February 19 , 2003 , by DigiCube . The release bears the catalog numbers SSCX @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 or SQEX @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 ( reprint ) . 
 The album reached # 130 and was received favorably by critics ; Richard <unk> of RPGFan found it to be " beautifully composed " and compared it favorably to the soundtrack to Final Fantasy Tactics . However , he questioned the inclusion of the Game Boy Advance version of the soundtrack , finding it to be " tinny and raspy " . Chris of Square Enix Music Online also enjoyed the soundtrack , seeing it as " creative , appealing , and mature " and " a must @-@ have " . 
 Track list 
 = = = White : Melodies of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance = = = 
 White : Melodies of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance is an arranged album of music from Final Fantasy Tactics Advance . The album contains the musical tracks from the game , composed mainly by Hitoshi Sakimoto , with assistance from Nobuo Uematsu , Kaori Ohkoshi , and Ayako Saso , and arranged by Yo Yamazaki , Akira Sasaki , and Satoshi Henmi . It spans 11 tracks and covers a duration of 46 : 10 . It was released on February 26 , 2003 , by SME Visual Works . The release bears the catalog number SVWC @-@ <unk> . 
 White was not received well by critics , with Patrick Gann finding it to be a mediocre album and saying that he felt " very disappointed " with it . He found the " new @-@ age " style to be poorly chosen and the arrangements to be sub @-@ par . Zeugma of Square Enix Music Online was more approving of the album , saying that it conveyed the " quiet mood " it promised , but finding it to sometimes be " dangerously close to muzak " with too many synthesized instruments and too little variation . 
 = = = Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of music from Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift . The album contains the musical tracks from the game , composed mainly by Hitoshi Sakimoto , with assistance of composers from Basiscape , his composing studio . Several compositions were also taken from the scores of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance and Final Fantasy XII . It spans 56 tracks across two disks and covers a duration of 2 : 13 : 10 . It was released on November 28 , 2007 by Square Enix . The release bears the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 The album received positive reviews from critics , with Vincent Chorley of RPGFan terming it " one of the most <unk> pleasant soundtracks this year . " Ovelia of Square Enix Music Online also enjoyed the soundtrack , saying that it was " mature yet still playful " , but worried that it hinted at a stagnation in Sakimoto 's musical style . 
 Track list 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A radio drama based on Final Fantasy Tactics Advance was broadcast starting in January 2003 , preceding the release of the game . The shows were compiled in a series of four of CDs entitled Final Fantasy Tactics Advance Radio Edition vol . 1 @-@ 4 . The CDs were released by DigiCube on February 26 , 2003 , March 26 , 2003 , April 23 , 2003 , and May 21 , 2003 , with the catalog numbers SSCX @-@ <unk> , SSCX @-@ <unk> , SSCX @-@ <unk> , and SSCX @-@ <unk> , respectively . Additionally , a single was released by Sony Records on November 27 , 2002 with the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> containing the song " Shiroi hana " , performed by Zone , which was used as an image song for commercials for Final Fantasy Tactics Advance . A medley of pieces from Final Fantasy Tactics A2 was played at the Fantasy Comes Alive concert in Singapore on April 30 , 2010 . Selections of music from the Final Fantasy Tactics series have also appeared on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites . 
 = 1995 Football League Cup Final = 
 The 1995 Football League Cup Final was a football match played between Liverpool and Bolton Wanderers on 2 April 1995 at Wembley Stadium , London . It was the final match of the 1994 – 95 Football League Cup , the 35th staging of the Football League Cup , a football competition for the 92 teams in the Premier League and The Football League . Liverpool were appearing in their seventh final , they had previously won four and lost twice . Bolton were appearing in their first final . 
 Both teams entered the competition in the second round . The majority of Liverpool 's matches were close affairs , with the exception of a 4 – 1 victory over Burnley in the second round . Otherwise , their biggest margin of victory was by two goals over Blackburn Rovers in the fourth round . Bolton 's matches were equally close . Their biggest margin of victory was three goals in the second round against Ipswich Town , while they beat Norwich City by a single goal in the quarter @-@ finals . 
 Watched by a crowd of 75 @,@ 595 , Bolton controlled the early exchanges in the match , but it was Liverpool who took the lead in the 37th minute when Steve McManaman scored . McManaman scored again in the 68th minute to extend Liverpool 's lead to two goals . However , a minute later , Alan Thompson scored for Bolton to reduce the deficit to one goal . Despite repeated attacks , Bolton did not score an equaliser and Liverpool won the match 2 – 1 . 
 Liverpool 's victory was their fifth in the competition . McManaman was named as man of the match and awarded the Alan Hardaker Trophy . His performance was praised by both managers , as was the performance of both teams . Liverpool 's win qualified Liverpool to play in European competition the following season , while Bolton would win promotion to the Premier League following a 4 – 3 victory in the First Division play @-@ off final . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool entered the competition in the second round , where they drawn against First Division team Burnley . The tie was played over two legs , with the first leg held at Liverpool 's home ground Anfield . Goals from defender John Scales and striker Robbie Fowler secured a 2 – 0 victory for Liverpool . The second leg was held at Burnley 's home ground Turf Moor , which Liverpool won 4 – 1 to progress to the third round courtesy of a 6 – 1 aggregate victory . 
 First Division team Stoke City were the opposition in the third round , with the match held at Anfield . Striker Ian Rush put Liverpool ahead in the fourth minute , but Stoke striker Paul Peschisolido equalised in the 40th minute . A further goal from Rush in the second half secured a 2 – 1 victory for Liverpool . Liverpool 's opposition in the fourth round were fellow Premier League team Blackburn Rovers , at whose ground , Ewood Park , the match was held at . Three goals from Rush gave Liverpool a 3 – 1 victory and progression to the quarter @-@ finals . 
 Fellow Premier League team Arsenal were the opposition in the quarter @-@ finals . A goal from Rush in the 59th minute secured a 1 – 0 victory . Liverpool 's opponents in the semi @-@ finals , which were held over two legs , was First Division team Crystal Palace . The first leg , held at Anfield , was goalless until the 90th minute when striker Fowler scored . The second leg was held at Palace 's home ground , Selhurst Park . A goal from Fowler in the 27th minute secured victory and a 2 – 0 aggregate win meant Liverpool progressed to the final . 
 = = = Bolton Wanderers = = = 
 Bolton entered the competition in the second round , where they faced Premier League team Ipswich Town . The first leg , held at Ipswich 's home ground Portman Road , was won 3 – 0 by Bolton . Bolton won the second leg 1 – 0 at their home ground , Burnden Park , to progress to the third round courtesy of a 4 – 0 aggregate victory . Fellow First Division team Sheffield United were the opposition in the third round . The march held at United 's home ground , Bramall Lane , was won 2 – 1 by Bolton . 
 Bolton were drawn against Premier League team West Ham United in the fourth round . The match held at West Ham 's home ground , The Boleyn Ground , was won 3 – 1 by Bolton as they progressed to the quarter @-@ finals . Their opposition were Norwich City of the Premier League . Bolton won 1 – 0 at Burnden Park to progress to the semi @-@ finals . 
 Fellow First Division side Swindon Town were the opposition in the semi @-@ finals . Swindon won the first leg at their home ground , the County Ground 2 – 1 . Bolton recovered in the second leg to win 3 – 1 , which meant they progressed to the final courtesy of a 4 – 3 aggregate victory . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Liverpool were appearing in their seventh final . They had won four ( 1981 , 1982 , 1983 , 1984 ) and lost two ( 1978 , 1987 ) . Bolton were appearing in their first final , they had previously reached the semi @-@ finals during the 1976 – 77 Football League Cup . The last meeting between the two sides was on 13 January 1993 , in a replay of their third round tie in the 1992 – 93 FA Cup . Bolton won the match 2 – 0 . 
 Despite their history in the competition , Liverpool manager Roy Evans , felt this would not count for anything in the final : " Our players haven 't really got that much Wembley experience , certainly not in terms of finals . It will be good for us to have Ian Rush and John Barnes out there . " Striker Rush had picked up a hamstring injury while playing for the Welsh national team against Bulgaria , but was expected to be fit . Midfielder Mark Kennedy would not feature in the final as he was ineligible . 
 Bolton defender Alan Stubbs was confident Bolton could cause Liverpool problems : " I think if you look round the team we have got good quality everywhere and that 's why we are doing so well , we have also got good players in reserve who can come in and do a job . We have played together for a long time and we are strong both mentally and physically this year . And if the forwards have not been scoring , the midfield and wingers have . " 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Bolton had the best chances in the first part of the first @-@ half . Midfielder David Lee caused trouble for Liverpool defender Stig Inge Bjørnebye in the opening minutes , while fellow defender Phil Babb was shown a yellow card in the 20th minute for tripping Lee . The Bolton midfielder came close to opening the scoring in the 30th minute . A lofted pass by Jason McAteer sent him clear of the Liverpool defence , he subsequently beat Liverpool goalkeeper David James to the ball , but his shot 30 yards ( 27 m ) from goal went wide of the goal . Bolton had another chance four minutes later . Midfielder Alan Thompson received the ball from a Jimmy Phillips thrown in , but his volleyed shot 25 yards ( 23 m ) from goal was pushed onto the crossbar by James . 
 Despite their strong first half up to that point , Bolton went a goal behind in the 37th minute . Liverpool midfielder Steve McManaman received the ball from John Barnes , he ran past Bolton defender Alan Stubbs , then past Scott Green . His subsequent shot was not powerful , but Bolton goalkeeper Keith <unk> could not stop the ball from going into the goal , giving Liverpool a 1 – 0 lead . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Bolton started the second half on the attack . Bolton were awarded a free @-@ kick , following a foul on Thompson , by Liverpool defender Rob Jones , who was shown a yellow card . From the subsequent free @-@ kick , Bolton striker John McGinlay received the ball , keeping it from the onrushing James , his pass into the Liverpool penalty area found Mixu Paatelainen whose volleyed shot went wide of the Liverpool goal . Bolton had another attack almost immediately . A pass by McAteer found Thompson on the right side of the pitch , but his shot went across the face of the Liverpool goal . Liverpool began to assert more pressure following the attack . A pass by striker Ian Rush in the 52nd minute found Bjørnebye , whose subsequent shot hit the post . Another Liverpool attack was stopped by Bolton defender Mark <unk> as he intercepted a cross from Bjørnebye to Rush , but his interception went towards the Bolton goal and was only stopped by <unk> . 
 Liverpool 's pressure paid off in the 68th minute as McManaman scored a second goal . From the left side of the pitch , McManaman went past Green , then McAteer , before he got in front of <unk> and scored with a shot into the Bolton goal . Bolton replied immediately . Liverpool defender Neil Ruddock 's clearance was played back into the Liverpool penalty area by <unk> <unk> who had replaced Green . Paatelainen headed the ball onto Thompson , whose shot went into the Liverpool goal . Bolton continued to pressure Liverpool in search of the equaliser but were unable to score and Liverpool won the match 2 – 1 to claim their fifth League Cup victory . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post match = = 
 Liverpool captain Rush collected the trophy from the Royal box at Wembley Stadium . Liverpool 's victory meant Rush won the competition for the fifth time in his career , which is a record . McManaman was awarded the Alan Hardaker Trophy as man of the match . McManaman praised the performance of the Bolton players : " Give Bolton their due , they battled back in the second half like we knew they would but it was a great team effort by our lads and I was just happy to get two goals like that . " Liverpool manager Roy Evans praised the performance of McManaman stating : " The two goals were fantastic . Sometimes he does need a kick up the backside , but they were really two great goals . " Evans was also delighted to have won his first trophy as Liverpool manager : " We believed that we 've always had a decent squad with players of outstanding ability . The way the lads have worked this season is outstanding . This cup is the first step . We are in Europe and we are delighted . " 
 Despite his team 's defeat , Bolton manager Bruce Rioch praised the performance of Liverpool : " I 'm delighted for Roy , if you 're going to lose in a cup final then the winner couldn 't have gone to a better club . " Rioch also stated that the final " was great for the town and great for the people . " Bolton would return to Wembley in May when they progressed to the First Division play @-@ off final . A 4 – 3 win secured promotion to the Premier League for the following season . Liverpool 's victory earned them qualification into European competition , the 1995 – 96 UEFA Cup . They would finish the 1994 – 95 season in fourth place in the Premier League , 15 points behind eventual winners Blackburn Rovers . 
 = John Lymburn = 
 John Farquhar Lymburn ( September 25 , 1880 – November 25 , 1969 ) was a Canadian politician who served as Attorney @-@ General of Alberta from 1926 until 1935 . 
 Born and educated in Scotland , he came to Canada in 1911 and practiced law in Edmonton . In 1925 , John Edward Brownlee became Premier of Alberta , and sought a lawyer without partisan affiliation to succeed him as attorney @-@ general . Lymburn accepted the position , and was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Alberta in the 1926 election . 
 As attorney @-@ general , Lymburn took part in negotiations between the Alberta and federal governments over natural resource rights , prepared Alberta 's submission in the Persons case , and played a minor role in the sex scandal that forced Brownlee from office . 
 In the 1935 provincial election , Lymburn and all other United Farmers of Alberta candidates were defeated , as William Aberhart led the Social Credit League to victory . Lymburn briefly returned to prominence during the Bankers ' Toadies incident , and made an strong but unsuccessful attempt to return to the legislature in 1942 , before dying in 1969 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lymburn was born in Ayr , Scotland to William and Margaret ( Farquhar ) Lymburn . He attended Ayr Grammar School and Ayr Academy before studying law at Glasgow University . After graduating , he apprenticed with Dougall , Gouldie , and Douglas ; he qualified as a solicitor in 1903 . In 1911 he emigrated to Canada , settling in Edmonton where he joined Short , Cross , and Biggar . Two years later , he co @-@ founded Lymburn , Mackenzie , and Cooke ( later renamed Lymburn , Reid , and Cobbledick ) . In the interim , he had married fellow Scot Isabella Marguerite Clark on July 19 , 1912 . The couple would have three daughters : Marguerite Dormer , Mary Doreen Farquhar , and Constance Clark . John Lymburn was made King 's Counsel in 1926 . 
 = = Attorney @-@ general = = 
 In 1925 , attorney @-@ general John Edward Brownlee succeeded Herbert Greenfield as the leader of the United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) ' s provincial caucus and Premier of Alberta . Brownlee was the only lawyer in the UFA caucus , which was dominated by farmers . In appointing an attorney @-@ general to replace himself , he looked outside his caucus and appointed Lymburn , in part because of his lack of affiliation with any provincial political party . By convention , cabinet ministers , including attorneys @-@ general , were expected to sit in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . Accordingly , Lymburn ran in the 1926 provincial election in Edmonton as a UFA candidate . He finished first of eighteen candidates in Edmonton , and became one of Edmonton 's five Members of the Legislative Assembly ( MLAs ) . 
 As attorney @-@ general , Lymburn was involved in many of the Brownlee government 's most important initiatives . He was a major figure in securing the transfer of resource rights from the federal government to the Alberta government . Once the Great Depression proved fertile breeding ground for labour militancy , at Brownlee 's request he prepared a list of Communist leaders so that the government could take action to deport the non @-@ naturalized residents among them , ( although no deportations were ordered ) . Alberta was the only provincial government to support the appellants in the " Persons case " , and Lymburn was responsible for its submission . 
 He was also involved in scandal : the former head of the Liquor Investigation Bureau made allegations against him after Lymburn eliminated the Bureau to save money , though the charges had little effect either in the legal system or in the public eye . During the John Brownlee sex scandal , in which Brownlee was sued for the seduction of a family friend , Lymburn became the focus of controversy after his department hired a private investigator to look into claims that a Liberal lawyer had offered a young woman money to " put Mr. Brownlee in such a position that Mrs. Brownlee could get a divorce " . Taking the stand during the trial , Lymburn stated that the investigation had been initiated not to aid in the premier 's defense , but because the alleged solicitation was a criminal offense . He noted further that Brownlee had insisted on <unk> to the government the cost of the investigator . 
 When the scandal forced Brownlee 's resignation as premier , Lymburn stayed on as attorney @-@ general in the short @-@ lived government of Richard Gavin Reid . The popularity of the Reid government faltered during the Great Depression due to its inability to take radical action to ensure employment and a reasonable standard of living for all Alberta residents , while radical economic theories , most notably the version of social credit espoused by Calgary evangelist William Aberhart , gained support among the public . The government 's position was that Aberhart 's proposals were beyond the legal authority of the provincial government , since they involved banking , which the Constitution of Canada makes a responsibility of the federal government . As attorney @-@ general , Lymburn played a major role in defending this position . When Lymburn 's UFA government brought Social Credit leader C. H. Douglas from the United Kingdom as an advisor , Lymburn provided him with a copy of one of Aberhart 's speeches and asked him to critique it ; Douglas concluded that Aberhart 's proposals did not align with " <unk> " social credit , and that many of them would not have the desired effect . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In the 1935 provincial election , the UFA was wiped out of the legislature by Aberhart 's upstart Social Credit League . As historian Franklin Foster has noted , " it was an ironic footnote to the demise of the most politically successful farmers ' group in history that the one UFA candidate who came closest to re @-@ election was lawyer John Lymburn in the City of Edmonton . " 
 After defeat , Lymburn remained active in community life as an elder in Edmonton 's First Presbyterian Church , chairman of the Advisory Board of the Students ' Christian Movement , chairman of the Board of Directors of the Beulah Home for unmarried mothers , and president of the Edmonton Scottish Society . He was also a long @-@ standing member of the Mayfair Golf and Country Club . He was an aficionado of the work of fellow Ayrshire native Robbie Burns , whose poetry he could recite in Gaelic , and often spoke at Burns suppers . 
 Lymburn briefly re @-@ entered the public eye in 1937 , when he was named in a Social Credit @-@ produced pamphlet as one of eight " Bankers ' Toadies " who should be " exterminated " ; Social Credit whip Joseph Unwin was convicted of criminal libel in relation to the pamphlet . 
 In 1942 , Lymburn contested a by @-@ election in Edmonton ; In the initial vote count , he finished third of five candidates . After subsequent re @-@ distribution of the votes as per the STV system in use , he came in second in the final vote count , with Elmer Roper of the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation emerging victorious . 
 Marguerite Lymburn died in 1958 . John Lymburn died eleven years later , on November 25 , 1969 . 
 = = Electoral record = = 
 = The Apartment ( Seinfeld ) = 
 " The Apartment " is the fifth episode of the second season of the NBC sitcom Seinfeld and the show 's tenth episode overall . In the episode , protagonist Jerry Seinfeld ( Jerry Seinfeld ) gets his ex @-@ girlfriend Elaine Benes ( Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ) an apartment above his , but regrets this after realizing it might be uncomfortable living so close together . Meanwhile , Jerry 's friend George Costanza ( Jason Alexander ) wears a wedding ring to a party to see what effect this will have on women . 
 The episode was written by Peter Mehlman and directed by Tom Cherones . Series co @-@ creators Seinfeld and Larry David asked Mehlman to write an episode for the show after they read a few articles he wrote for newspapers and magazines . Mehlman originally had the idea of Elaine moving away from Jerry , but David and Seinfeld felt it would be funnier if Elaine moved closer to Jerry instead . " The Apartment " was first broadcast in the United States on April 4 , 1991 on NBC , and was watched in 15 @.@ 7 million homes , making it the ninth most @-@ watched program of the week it was broadcast . The episode gained mostly positive responses from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While Elaine is depressed about the low quality of her apartment , Jerry overhears Harold ( Glenn Shadix ) and Manny ( Tony Plana ) , the managers of his apartment building , discussing a death that makes an apartment available . Shocked by the low rent , Jerry immediately tells Elaine that he will be able to get her the apartment above his . She is extremely excited to hear this , as she will be able to live near Jerry . Though excited at first , Jerry later realizes how intrusive Elaine might become , and that living with her might get annoying . He discusses his problem with George , but the topic of their conversation changes and they eventually talk about wearing a wedding ring to a party , to see how women will react . George dislikes the idea at first , but eventually borrows one from Jerry 's neighbour Kramer ( Michael Richards ) to experiment . 
 Jerry still worries about Elaine , but Harold and Manny inform him that someone else has bid higher than Elaine and will get the apartment unless Elaine is able to pay $ 5 @,@ 000 . Elaine is very disappointed when she hears the news . However , Kramer convinces Jerry to lend Elaine the money . When Elaine , Jerry and George go to a party of a friend of Elaine , Elaine asks Jerry if it would be uncomfortable for them to live so close to each other , but Jerry says he does not worry . George 's wedding ring plan backfires , as he discovers that wearing the ring is actually causing women who would otherwise date him to reject him . Jerry feels stupid for not telling Elaine the truth , but , the following day , Kramer informs him that he found somebody who is willing to pay $ 10 @,@ 000 for the apartment . However , Kramer 's friend , a musician , plays loud music all day long , and Jerry regrets not letting Elaine rent the apartment . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Apartment " was written by Peter Mehlman and directed by Tom Cherones . Seinfeld and co @-@ creator Larry David contacted Mehlman and asked him to write an episode for the show after reading a few articles Mehlman had written for The New York Times and Esquire . Mehlman noted that , prior to Seinfeld , he had " barely written any dialogue in [ his ] life " . He first conceived the idea of an episode in which Elaine would move away from Manhattan and Jerry had to confront his feelings about her . He discussed the idea with Seinfeld , David and staff writer Larry Charles , who felt that it would be funnier if Elaine would move closer to Jerry instead . After their meeting , Mehlman was told to write the episode , which surprised him , describing it as " unlike any other show , where they would have given beat for beat for beat . " As Mehlman was writing the script , he came up with the idea of George wearing a wedding ring to a party to see how women would react . Though the wedding ring idea was not included in the approved script , Seinfeld and David decided to keep it as it suited George well . 
 The first table read of the episode was held on January 9 , 1991 . The episode was filmed in front of a live audience on January 15 , 1991 . Filming of the episode took place at the CBS Studio Center in Studio City , Los Angeles , California , where , starting with the season premiere " The Ex @-@ Girlfriend " , filming of all the show 's episodes took place . A few scenes were changed prior to the filming of the episode . The scene in which Jerry informs George he told Elaine about the apartment initially showed them standing in line for the movies , talking about sitting in the front of the theatre . George would tell Jerry that he once pretended to have a grotesque physical impairment while he was standing in line to get a ticket for The Exorcist ( 1973 ) , and people would let him go in front of them without saying anything . The location of this scene , however , was changed to Monk 's Cafe , a regular hangout for the show 's main characters , and George and Jerry 's dialogue was shortened . In the original script , Jerry , instead of George , proclaimed himself " lord of the idiots " , but this was changed during rehearsals . 
 " The Apartment " featured the only appearance of Harold and Manny , the two building superintendents . Veteran actors Glenn Shadix and Tony Plana portrayed Harold and Manny respectively . Their part in the episode was originally smaller , but they were written into the final scene of the episode . Harold was set to return in the season two episode " The Revenge " , in which he would tell the show 's central characters that Jerry 's suicidal neighbour Newman jumped from the building , but an awning broke his fall . However , the Newman sub plot in the episode was significantly reduced during production and Harold 's part was cut . Theresa Randle , Patricia Ayame Thomson and Leslie Neale guest starred as women George flirts with unsuccessfully when he is wearing his wedding ring . Louis @-@ Dreyfus ' half @-@ sister Lauren Bowles appeared as an extra at the party George , Jerry and Elaine attend . Bowles would continue to appear regularly throughout the series ' run , frequently as a waitress at Monk 's Cafe . Additionally , David Blackwood , who appeared as a guest at the party , would also continue to make small appearances on the show . Assistant director Joan Van Horn appeared as a woman feeding her baby at Monk 's Cafe . 
 The episode marks the first time Elaine does her trademark " Get Out ! " shove ; the catchphrase was not in the original script , but was added at Louis @-@ Dreyfus ' suggestion . It became one of the show 's popular catchphrases . " The Apartment " is the first episode in which Jerry 's apartment number is 5A ; it had been changed a few times prior to the broadcast of this episode , but would remain 5A until the end of the show . It is also contains one of the few references to Kramer 's father , who remained unseen throughout the show 's run . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was first aired in the United States on NBC on April 4 , 1991 as part of a Thursday night line @-@ up that also included Cheers and L.A. Law . " The Apartment " gained a Nielsen rating of 16 @.@ 9 and an audience share of 28 , meaning that 16 @.@ 9 % of American households watched the episode , and that 28 % of all televisions in use at the time were tuned into it . Nielsen also estimated that 15 @.@ 7 million homes were tuned into the episode , making Seinfeld the ninth most @-@ watched show in the week the episode was broadcast , while 20 @.@ 5 million homes tuned into Cheers . Seinfeld 's ability to keep a large number of Cheers ' audience eventually helped the show get a third season order . 
 Ocala Star @-@ Banner critic Jon Burlingame praised the episode for its " smart humor " and stated the show could be a perfect fit between Cheers and L.A. Law . Mike Flaherty and Mary Kaye Schilling of Entertainment Weekly reacted very positively to the episode and praised Alexander 's performance in particular , stating " George 's profound self @-@ hatred is now in full bloom ( ' Please , a little respect , for I am Costanza , Lord of the Idiots ! ' ) . Kramer 's input , meanwhile , remains limited to off @-@ the @-@ wall , often annoying cameos . Which reminds us : Why in the world has Alexander been denied an Emmy , while Richards has scored two ? " Schilling and Flaherty graded the episode with a B + . However , The Kitchener @-@ Waterloo Record critic Bonnie <unk> gave the episode a particular negative review , comparing Seinfeld to It 's Garry Shandling 's Show , she stated " Seinfeld isn 't neurotic enough to be as funny as [ Garry Shandling ] . So , instead of being nervously funny , he 's just nervously dull " . 
 = The One with Ross 's Wedding = 
 " The One with Ross 's Wedding " is the two @-@ part fourth season finale of the American television sitcom Friends , comprising the 96th and 97th episodes of the series overall . Originally broadcast by NBC on May 7 , 1998 , the episode features Ross , Monica , Joey , Chandler and later Rachel travelling to England to attend the wedding of Ross Geller ( David Schwimmer ) to his fiancée Emily ( Helen Baxendale ) in London . Ross and Emily 's wedding vows are ruined when Ross accidentally says " I , Ross , take thee Rachel " ; as the registrar asks Emily if he should continue , the episode ends on a cliffhanger until the season 5 premiere " The One After Ross Says Rachel " . 
 The episode 's teleplay was written by Shana Goldberg @-@ Meehan & Scott Silveri from a story by Michael Borkow ( part one ) and Jill Condon & Amy Toomin ( part two ) . The episode 's genesis came during the break between seasons three and four , when Channel 4 , the British first @-@ run broadcaster of Friends proposed an episode set in the United Kingdom to the series producers . The proposal fitted neatly with a storyline already being planned , whereby the character of Ross would be married at the end of the fourth season . The episode was filmed in March 1998 under the direction of executive producer Kevin S. Bright on locations in London , and in front of a live studio audience at The Fountain Studios . Scenes featuring Lisa Kudrow 's character Phoebe Buffay were filmed on the show 's sets in Burbank , California , as Kudrow was too pregnant to fly to London with the rest of the cast . Kudrow gave birth to her son on the day of the episode 's original airing . 
 " The One with Ross 's Wedding " features supporting roles from Tom Conti , Jennifer Saunders , Elliott Gould , Christina Pickles and Olivia Williams , and cameos by Richard Branson , Sarah , Duchess of York , Hugh Laurie and June Whitfield . The episode received good critical feedback in the US on its first broadcast , and is often cited as one of the series ' best episodes ; however , when it aired in the United Kingdom it was poorly received , with criticism focused on the one @-@ dimensional portrayal of Britain and the British . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Part 1 begins as the group heads off to Ross 's wedding in London leaving behind a heavily @-@ pregnant Phoebe ( Lisa Kudrow ) , and Rachel ( Jennifer Aniston ) , who has declined the invitation . In London , Joey ( Matt LeBlanc ) and Chandler ( Matthew Perry ) go see the sights in a musical montage featuring The Clash 's song " London Calling " , with Joey filming everything on his camcorder . Chandler becomes embarrassed by his friend 's enthusiasm , and after Joey buys a large Union Flag hat from a vendor ( played by guest star Richard Branson ) , they part company . They reunite in their hotel room and Chandler apologizes . Joey impresses him with a video recording of Sarah , Duchess of York ( who played herself ) . Emily takes and Ross to the hall where the wedding will be , but they discover it is being demolished earlier than originally scheduled . Monica later suggests Emily postpone the wedding until everything is perfect . She passes the thought on to Ross , angering him ; he tells her people have flown from America to be there and that it is " now or never " ; she chooses " never " . Monica berates Ross for his insensitivity and Ross apologizes to Emily , showing her the ceremony can still take place in the half @-@ demolished hall that he has tidied up . She agrees . In New York , Rachel realizes she still loves Ross , and flies to London to tell him . 
 In Part 2 , Phoebe tries to contact someone by phone to warn them about Rachel , eventually getting through to Joey at the hotel and stirring up homesickness in him . At the rehearsal dinner , Ross introduces his parents , Jack and Judy ( Elliott Gould and Christina Pickles ) to Emily 's , Steven and Andrea ( Tom Conti and Jennifer Saunders ) . Jack and Judy have volunteered to pay for half of the wedding expenses but when they discover extravagant costs Ross spends much of the evening trying to bargain down his future in @-@ laws . Chandler makes a toast that is not well received by the guests and Monica is taken aback when a drunken guest mistakes her for Ross 's mother . She and Chandler console each other over alcohol and wake up in bed together the next morning . Rachel eventually boards a plane , after forgetting her passport , and annoys other passengers ( including guest star Hugh Laurie ) by telling them about her relationship with Ross . At the hall , she sees how happy Ross is with Emily and just wishes him luck . Phoebe phones Joey to hear the wedding , to the annoyance of Ross . As Ross says his vows , he accidentally says Rachel 's name rather than Emily 's , registrar to ask Emily if he should continue , while the camera shoots from character to character , settling on a shocked Rachel . 
 = = Production = = 
 During the summer hiatus of 1997 the producers were contacted by Channel 4 , the British first @-@ run broadcaster of Friends , with a proposal to film an episode in London . Producer Greg Malins is quoted as saying " We had to come up with a storyline that would cause all the Friends to go to London [ ... ] and that ended up being Ross getting married , because they would all have to go to his wedding " . 
 The episode featured numerous supporting roles from British actors . For her role as Andrea Waltham , Saunders " heard Joan Collins ' voice in [ her ] head " . Her Absolutely Fabulous co @-@ star June Whitfield appeared in cameo as the housekeeper . Felicity , the bridesmaid who Joey entices , is played by Olivia Williams . Further cameos were made by Sarah Ferguson as herself , Richard Branson as the vendor who sells Joey a hat , and Hugh Laurie as the man sitting next to Rachel on the plane . Lisa Kudrow did not join the others in London as she was too heavily pregnant to fly , like her character Phoebe . Elliott Gould inadvertently revealed to the public that Rachel was to turn up at the wedding , upsetting Marta Kauffman . 
 Scenes not involving the main apartments were all filmed in London during the week beginning March 30 , 1998 . Location shooting was done mostly for scenes featuring Joey and Chandler ; outside the London Marriott , Grosvenor Square , and the top of an open @-@ top London bus as it crosses Tower Bridge ( this scene was excised from the final cut but features in the opening titles of the next episode ) . Interiors , such as the restaurant , the Waltham 's hallway and the hotel rooms , were all filmed on purpose @-@ built sets at The Fountain Studios , Wembley . The reaction from the audience when Monica came out from under Chandler 's bed covers meant the actors had to hold their position for 27 seconds . When filming ran late one evening , the production team ordered pizzas for the audience . 
 The episode was a coup for Channel 4 , who erected crush barriers outside their building to hold back fans when the cast arrived for a press conference ( though no fans actually turned up ) . The broadcaster also commissioned a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes program from Princess Productions . Hosted by British television personality Johnny Vaughan , The One Where Johnny Makes Friends features comedic tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek interviews with all six main cast ( Vaughan contacted Kudrow by payphone , claiming that he couldn 't make international calls from his dressing room ) and was broadcast on Channel 4 on May 6 , 1998 . 
 Two brief behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes were filmed , titled Friends Goes to London and Friends on Location in London , which were included on the DVD releases of seasons four and five . A tie @-@ in book , Making Friends in the UK ( ISBN <unk> ) was published by Channel 4 Books in November 1998 . Said book was bundled into a gift pack entitled " The One with the Whole London Wedding " , which featured an extended cut of this episode merged with the next episode . 
 Ross and Emily 's marriage was originally planned to last , but Helen Baxendale did not wish to remain in America while pregnant . The writers could not script a convincing story for why Emily would not be seen , despite being married to Ross , so Baxendale was written out in the next season , making only three cameo appearances after the season premiere . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing , " The One with Ross 's Wedding " finished third in ratings for the week of May 4 – 10 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 21 @.@ 2 , equivalent to approximately 20 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on NBC that week , following Seinfeld and ER – all of which aired on the network 's Thursday night Must See TV lineup . The episode aired in the Republic of Ireland on RTÉ on May 25 , 1998 , six days earlier than in the United Kingdom on Sky1 . It also aired on Channel 4 on December 11 , 1998 and was watched by 6 @.@ 49 million viewers , making Friends the highest rated show on the channel for the week ending December 13 , 1998 . 
 Entertainment Weekly gives the episode an A rating , calling it a " near @-@ perfect finale that finds everyone at the top of their game " with a " tantalizing cliff @-@ hanger , and , in Chandler and Monica , a relationship that will have reverberations for seasons to come " . The authors of Friends Like Us : The Unofficial Guide to Friends state there are " too many ' best moments ' to list in detail " , but single out Rachel describing the perfect wedding to Ross , and Sarah Ferguson 's cameo ( though they call Branson 's " embarrassing " ) . Following the broadcast of the episode in the UK , The Independent was critical , saying " Twice the length of a normal episode , last night 's offering was approximately half as funny " and suggested the cast were behaving out of character . Many British viewers regarded the episode as an ill @-@ informed and patronising caricature of the UK and its people , causing the episode to be labelled " The One Where They Insult the English " . 
 David Schwimmer has expressed dissatisfaction that Ross was married again , saying it was " a mistake " and that Ross was not given " enough credit " . He says that Ross 's " taking on the world would just be shattered " following the character 's and that he wouldn 't have risked another . David Crane has said that filming in front of a different audience " energized the actors and writers " . The hall where the wedding ceremony took place would inspire the location for the wedding of David and Victoria Beckham . The events of this episode are revisited in the seventh season episode " The One with the Truth About London " , where flashbacks reveal how Monica and Chandler ended up in bed together . The hotel room set was recreated for those scenes . 
 In 2013 , TV Guide ranked the beginning of the Monica @-@ Chandler affair as the third greatest twist of all time . 
 = Mantra @-@ Rock Dance = 
 The Mantra @-@ Rock Dance was a counterculture music event held on January 29 , 1967 , at the Avalon Ballroom in San Francisco . It was organized by followers of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness ( ISKCON ) as an opportunity for its founder , A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada , to address a wider public . It was also a promotional and fundraising effort for their first center on the West Coast of the United States . 
 The Mantra @-@ Rock Dance featured some of the most prominent Californian rock groups of the time , such as the Grateful Dead and Big Brother and the Holding Company with Janis Joplin , as well as the then relatively unknown , Moby Grape . The bands agreed to appear with Prabhupada and to perform for free ; the proceeds were donated to the local Hare Krishna temple . The participation of countercultural leaders considerably boosted the event 's popularity ; among them were the poet Allen Ginsberg , who led the singing of the Hare Krishna mantra onstage along with Prabhupada , and LSD promoters Timothy Leary and Augustus Owsley Stanley III . 
 The Mantra @-@ Rock Dance concert was later called " the ultimate high " and " the major spiritual event of the San Francisco hippie era . " It led to favorable media exposures for Prabhupada and his followers , and brought the Hare Krishna movement to the wider attention of the American public . The 40th anniversary of the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance was commemorated in 2007 in Berkeley , California . 
 = = Background = = 
 A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada ( also referred to as " Bhaktivedanta Swami " or " Prabhupada " ) , a Gaudiya Vaishnava sannyasi and teacher , arrived in New York City from his native India in 1965 and " caught the powerful rising tide " of a counterculture that was fascinated with his homeland and open to new forms of " consciousness @-@ expanding spirituality . " After establishing his first American temple in New York City at 26 Second Avenue , Prabhupada requested his early follower Mukunda Das and his wife Janaki Dasi to open a similar ISKCON center on the West Coast of the United States . 
 Mukunda and Janaki met up with friends from college , who would later come to be known as Shyamasundar Das , Gurudas , Malati Dasi , and Yamuna Dasi . Teaming up with them , Mukunda rented a storefront in the San Francisco Haight @-@ Ashbury neighborhood , which at that time was turning into the hub of the hippie counterculture , and stayed to take care of the developing new center . 
 = = Preparation and promotion = = 
 To raise funds , gain supporters for the new temple , and to popularize Prabhupada 's teachings among the hippie and countercultural audience of the Haight @-@ Ashbury scene , the team decided to hold a charitable rock concert and invited Prabhupada to attend . Despite his position as a Vaishnava sannyasi and some of his New York followers objecting to what they saw as an inappropriate invitation of their guru to a place full of " amplified guitars , pounding drums , wild light shows , and hundreds of drugged hippies , " Prabhupada agreed to travel from New York to San Francisco and take part in the event . Using their acquaintance with Rock Scully , manager of the Grateful Dead , and Sam Andrew , founding member and guitarist of the Big Brother and the Holding Company – who were among the most prominent rock bands in California at the time – Shyamasundar and Gurudas secured their consent to perform for charity at the concert , charging only the " musicians ' union minimum " of $ 250 . Malati Dasi happened to hear Moby Grape , a relatively unknown group at the time , and she convinced the other team members to invite the band to play at the concert as well . 
 Another leading countercultural figure , the beatnik poet Allen Ginsberg , was a supporter of Prabhupada . He had met the swami earlier in New York and assisted him in extending his United States visa . Despite disagreeing with many of Prabhupada 's required prohibitions , especially the ones pertaining to drugs and promiscuity , Ginsberg often publicly sang the Hare Krishna mantra , which he had learned in India . He made the mantra part of his philosophy and declared that it " brings a state of ecstasy . " He was glad that Prabhupada , an authentic swami from India , was now trying to spread the chanting in America . Along with other countercultural ideologues like Timothy Leary , Gary Snyder , and Alan Watts , Ginsberg hoped to incorporate Prabhupada and the chanting of Hare Krishna into the hippie movement . Ginsberg agreed to take part in the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance concert and to introduce the swami to the Haight @-@ Ashbury hippie community . 
 As for the choice of venue , the team considered both the Fillmore Auditorium and the Avalon Ballroom , finally settling on the latter as its impresario , Chet Helms , appeared to be " more sympathetic to the spirit of the concert " and agreed to let it be used for a charity event . Artist Harvey Cohen , one of the first ISKCON followers , designed a Stanley Mouse @-@ inspired promotional poster with a picture of Prabhupada , details of the event , and a request to " bring cushions , drums , bells , cymbals . " To generate interest among members of the countercultural community of Haight @-@ Ashbury , Mukunda published an article entitled " The New Science " in the San Francisco Oracle , a local underground newspaper specializing in alternative spiritual and psychedelic topics . He wrote : 
 The Haight @-@ Ashbury district is soon to be honored by the presence of His Holiness , A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami , who will conduct daily classes in the Bhagavad Gita , discussions , chanting , playing instruments , and devotional dancing in a small temple in the neighborhood . ... Swamiji 's use of the Hare Krishna Mantra is already known throughout the United States . Swamiji 's chanting and dancing is more effective than Hatha or Raja Yoga or listening to Ali Akbar Khan on acid or going to a mixed media rock dance . 
 Ginsberg helped plan and organize a reception for Prabhupada , who was scheduled to arrive from New York on January 17 , 1967 . When the swami arrived at the San Francisco Airport , 50 to 100 hippies chanting " Hare Krishna " greeted him in the airport lounge with flowers . A few days later the San Francisco Chronicle published an article entitled " Swami in the Hippie Land " in which Prabhupada answered the question , " Do you accept hippies in your temple ? " by saying , " Hippies or anyone – I make no distinctions . Everyone is welcome . " 
 = = Event = = 
 The Mantra @-@ Rock Dance was scheduled on Sunday evening , January 29 , 1967 – a day of the week that Chet Helms deemed odd and unlikely to generate substantial attendance . Admission was fixed at $ 2 @.@ 50 and limited to door sales . Despite the apprehensions of the organizers , by the beginning of the concert at 8 PM an audience of nearly 3 @,@ 000 had gathered at the Avalon Ballroom , filling the hall to its capacity . <unk> had to wait outside for vacancies in order to enter . Participants were treated on prasad ( sanctified food ) consisting of orange slices and , regardless of the prohibition on drugs , many in the crowd were smoking marijuana and taking other intoxicants . However , the atmosphere in the hall was peaceful . Strobe lights and a psychedelic liquid light show , along with pictures of Krishna and the words of the Hare Krishna mantra , were projected onto the walls . A few Hells Angels were positioned in the back of the stage as the event 's security guards . Prabhupada 's biographer <unk> Dasa Goswami thus describes the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance audience : 
 Almost everyone who came wore bright or unusual costumes : tribal robes , Mexican ponchos , Indian kurtas , " God 's @-@ eyes , " feathers , and beads . Some hippies brought their own flutes , lutes , gourds , drums , rattles , horns , and guitars . The Hell 's Angels , dirty @-@ haired , wearing jeans , boots , and denim jackets and accompanied by their women , made their entrance , carrying chains , smoking cigarettes , and displaying their regalia of German helmets , emblazoned emblems , and so on – everything but their motorcycles , which they had parked outside . 
 The evening opened with Prabhupada 's followers – men in " Merlin gowns " and women in saris – chanting Hare Krishna to an Indian tune , followed by Moby Grape . When the swami himself arrived at 10 PM , the crowd of hippies rose to their feet to greet him respectfully with applause and cheers . Gurudas , one of the event 's organizers , describes the effect that Prabhupada 's arrival had on the audience , " Then Swami Bhaktivedanta entered . He looked like a Vedic sage , exalted and otherworldly . As he advanced towards the stage , the crowd parted and made way for him , like the surfer riding a wave . He glided onto the stage , sat down and began playing the <unk> . " 
 Ginsberg welcomed Prabhupada onto the stage and spoke of his own experiences chanting the Hare Krishna mantra . He translated the meaning of the Sanskrit term mantra as " mind deliverance " and recommended the early @-@ morning <unk> at the local Radha @-@ Krishna temple " for those coming down from LSD who want to stabilize their consciousness upon reentry , " calling the temple 's activity an " important community service . " He introduced Prabhupada and thanked him for leaving his peaceful life in India to bring the mantra to New York 's Lower East Side , " where it was probably most needed . " 
 After a short address by Prabhupada , Ginsberg sang " Hare Krishna " to the accompaniment of sitar , tambura , and drums , requesting the audience to " [ j ] ust sink into the sound vibration , and think of peace . " Then Prabhupada stood up and led the audience in dancing and singing , as the Grateful Dead , Big Brother and the Holding Company , and Moby Grape joined the chanting and accompanied the mantra with their musical instruments . The audience eagerly responded , playing their own instruments and dancing in circles . The group chanting continued for almost two hours , and concluded with the swami 's prayers in Sanskrit while the audience bowed down on the floor . After Prabhupada left , Janis Joplin took the stage , backed by Big Brother and the Holding Company , and continued the event with the songs " The House of the Rising Sun " and " Ball ' n ' Chain " late into the night . 
 = = Reaction and effect = = 
 The LSD pioneer Timothy Leary , who made an appearance at the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance along with Augustus Owsley Stanley III and even paid the entrance fee , pronounced the event a " beautiful night " . Later Ginsberg called the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance " the height of Haight @-@ Ashbury spiritual enthusiasm , the first time that there had been a music scene in San Francisco where everybody could be part of it and participate , " while historians referred to it as " the ultimate high " and " the major spiritual event of the San Francisco hippy era . " 
 Moby Grape 's performance at the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance catapulted the band onto the professional stage . They subsequently had gigs with The Doors at the Avalon Ballroom and at the " First Love Circus " at the Winterland Arena , and were soon signed to a contract with Columbia Records . 
 The Mantra @-@ Rock Dance helped raise around $ 2 @,@ 000 for the temple and resulted in a massive influx of visitors at the temple 's early morning services . Prabhupada 's appearance at the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance made such a deep impact on the Haight @-@ Ashbury community that he became a cult hero to most of its groups and members , regardless of their attitudes towards his philosophy or the life restrictions that he taught . The Hare Krishna mantra and dancing became adopted in some ways by all levels of the counterculture , including the Hells Angels , and provided it with a " loose commonality " and reconciliation , as well as with a viable alternative to drugs . As the Hare Krishna movement 's popularity with the Haight @-@ Ashbury community continued to increase , Prabhupada and followers chanting and distributing prasad became a customary sight at important events in the locale . 
 At the same time , as the core group of his followers continued to expand and become more serious about the spiritual discipline , Prabhupada conducted new Vaishnava initiations and named the San Francisco temple " New Jagannatha Puri " after introducing the worship of Jagannath deities of Krishna there . Small replicas of these deities immediately became a " psychedelic hit " worn by many hippies on strings around their necks . 
 Since the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance brought the Hare Krishna movement to the wider attention of the American public , Prabhupada 's increased popularity attracted the interest of the mainstream media . Most notably , he was interviewed on ABC 's The Les Crane Show and lectured on the philosophy of Krishna consciousness on a KPFK radio station program hosted by Peter Bergman . Prabhupada 's followers also spoke about their activities on the San Francisco radio station KFRC . 
 On August 18 , 2007 , a free commemorative event dedicated to the 40th anniversary of the Mantra @-@ Rock Dance was held at the People 's Park in Berkeley , California . 
 = The Yes Album = 
 The Yes Album is the third studio album by the English progressive rock band Yes , released on 19 February 1971 by Atlantic Records . It is their first album with guitarist Steve Howe who replaced Peter Banks in 1970 , and their last in the 1970s to feature keyboardist Tony Kaye . 
 The album was the first by the group not to feature any cover versions , which had been a staple of their material until that point . The band spent mid @-@ 1970 writing and rehearsing new material at a farmhouse in South Molton , Devon , and the new songs were recorded at Advision Studios in the autumn . While the album retained close harmony singing , Kaye 's Hammond organ and Chris Squire 's melodic bass , as heard on earlier releases , the new material also covered further styles including jazz piano , funk and acoustic music , with all band members contributing ideas , and tracks were extended in length to allow music to develop . Howe contributed a variety of guitar styles , including a Portuguese guitar , and recorded a solo acoustic guitar piece , " Clap " , live at the Lyceum Theatre , London . 
 The album was a critical success and a major commercial breakthrough for Yes , who had been at risk of being dropped by Atlantic Records due to the commercial failures of their first two albums . It reached # 4 in the UK and # 40 in the US , and was later certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for selling over one million copies . The album has been reissued on CD several times , and in 2014 was given a Blu @-@ ray release , remixed by Steven Wilson . 
 = = Background = = 
 Yes had already recorded two albums for Atlantic by mid @-@ 1970 , but neither had been commercially successful and the label was considering dropping them . They had replaced founding member Banks with Howe , who enjoyed playing a wider variety of styles , including folk and country music , and played a mix of electric and acoustic guitars . Singer Jon Anderson later said that Howe could " jump from one thing to the other , very fast , very talented . " After some warm @-@ up gigs with Howe , the band moved to a farm in South Molton , Devon , to write and rehearse new material . Howe in particular enjoyed working on the farm , and eventually bought it . Following rehearsals , the band booked Advision Studios in London with producer Eddie Offord and spent the autumn recording . The band enjoyed the sessions , and soon had enough material ready for an album . 
 In November 1970 , the group were involved in a car accident returning from a gig in Basingstoke . The band all suffered shock , and Kaye broke a foot . He had to do the next few gigs , and the album cover 's photo shoot , with it in plaster . 
 Howe mostly used a Gibson ES @-@ 175 semi @-@ acoustic guitar and a Martin OO @-@ 18 acoustic for recording , though he did attempt to play a variety of styles with the two instruments . Kaye 's main instruments were the Hammond organ and piano , including a solo on " A Venture " . Kaye had previously played the Hammond M @-@ 100 , but for this album used the B @-@ 3 , a move which he saw as " a turning point " . He was not interested in playing electronic keyboards , which had started to appear on the market . This proved to be a problem with the other members of the band , and Kaye thought his style conflicted too much with Howe 's . He left the group during rehearsals for the follow @-@ up album in mid @-@ 1971 , to be replaced by Rick Wakeman . 
 = = Songs = = 
 Yes had started their career being a covers band , performing radical re @-@ arrangements of hit songs , and their first two albums included covers in this vein . However , The Yes Album was the first to feature group @-@ written material in its entirety . Some familiar elements remained ; Anderson , Howe and Squire sang three @-@ part vocal harmony throughout the record , while Squire 's melodic bass and Bill Bruford 's spacious drumming made up their unique rhythm section . 
 " Yours Is No Disgrace " originated from some lyrics written by Anderson with his friend David Foster . This was combined with other short segments of music written by the band in rehearsals . Howe worked out the opening guitar riff on his own while the rest of the band took a day 's holiday . The backing track was recorded by the group in sections , then edited together to make up the final piece . 
 Howe 's solo acoustic tune , " Clap " ( wrongly written as " The Clap " in original album pressings ) , was influenced by Chet Atkins and Mason Williams ' " Classical Gas " . The piece was written to celebrate the birth of Howe 's son Dylan on 4 August 1969 . The version that appears on the album was recorded live at the Lyceum Theatre in London on 17 July 1970 . 
 The spacey , electronic @-@ sounding effect in " Starship Trooper " was achieved by running the guitar backing track through a flanger . Anderson wrote the bulk of the song , while Squire wrote the " <unk> " section in the middle . The closing section , " <unk> " is a continuous cadenza of chords ( G @-@ E ♭ -C ) played ad lib . It evolved from a song called " Nether Street " by Howe 's earlier group , <unk> . 
 " I 've Seen All Good People " is a suite of two tunes . Anderson wanted the piece to start quietly and develop , leading into a large church organ sound , before moving into the funky second movement . The band had difficulty recording the initial " Your Move " section , which was resolved by making a tape loop of bass and drums , over which Howe overdubbed a Portuguese 12 @-@ string guitar , <unk> it as a " <unk> " on the album 's credits . <unk> 's Colin Goldring played recorder on the track . 
 Anderson wrote " A Venture " in the studio , which was arranged by the rest of the band . Kaye played piano on the track , contributing a jazzy solo towards the end . Howe played a guitar solo on the original recording , but it was left off the final mix , which faded out just as it started . The song was never played live by the original group , but an arrangement was worked out when Yes decided to play the whole album live in 2013 . 
 The lyrics for " Perpetual Change " were inspired by the view of the countryside from the farm in South Molton . The middle of the track features a polyrhythmic structure , where two pieces of music in different time signatures are playing simultaneously . 
 = = Cover = = 
 The front cover was shot by Phil Franks the day after the Basingstoke gig accident . Franks had already taken some photos from the Lyceum gig , but felt he needed something more for the front cover . The band showed up late having been in hospital earlier that day , and only 30 minutes were available for a shoot . Unable to get a satisfactory photo in the studio , Franks took the band round to his flat , grabbed a polystyrene mannequin head from a bin , put a 1000 watt bulb in the kitchen light fitting , and improvised the shot . Franks credited the sleeve designer , Rolling Stone art director Jon Goodchild , for making the cover a success . When Yes performed a live version of " Yours is No Disgrace " for the German television series Beat @-@ Club in April 1971 , footage of the band was combined with that of another mannequin head spinning over a chair , mimicking the cover 's concept . 
 The inside of the album 's gatefold sleeve shows Kaye playing a Hammond organ , while the front cover showed his leg in plaster , following the accident . Anderson is credited as " John Anderson " on the album but he had dropped the " h " from his first name by the next album , Fragile . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Yes Album was released in the UK in February 1971 . It was a commercial success and was the band 's breakthrough album , reaching No. 4 in the UK. and number 40 in the US . It has been certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for selling over one million copies . 
 Squire later said a key reason for the success was that there was a postal strike which prevented chart returns being sent , and reducing the available ones to a few retailers in London . Yes had the largest fanbase in these stores , and that allowed a good chart position . By the time the strike had ended , the album had started to sell well due to its initial apparent success . 
 The 1971 Italian issue of the album differs from the original UK issue in two respects . The title on the front cover is " The Yes " instead of " The Yes Album " , although the spine bears the correct title ; and the track " The Clap " appears as the third track on the second side . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The album had a positive reception from critics . John <unk> , writing for Rolling Stone , praised the instrumental unity between Squire , Howe and Kaye , but missed the cover versions present in earlier releases . The album is one of three by Yes to appear in the book 1 @,@ 000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die . Author Tom Moon preferred the group unity that he felt was missing on later releases and gave a positive impression of Anderson 's vocals , saying the melodies in " I 've Seen All Good People " were " instantly singable and still somehow deep . " 
 Anderson was worried about the initial response to the album , but after about a month noticed that fans started singing along at concerts , and concluded that this musical style could be developed and still remain popular . Kaye concluded that overall it was " quite a simple album , considering where Yes went onto from there . " Rush singer and bassist Geddy Lee included The Yes Album among his favourite albums . Genesis keyboardist Tony Banks has said it his favourite Yes album and preferred the band when Kaye was a member . " It was the addition of Steve Howe 's guitar pyrotechnics that finally allowed Yes to find their true identity . The Yes Album is a giant leap forward , " wrote J.D. Considine in The New Rolling Stone Album Guide 
 = = = Reissues = = = 
 The Yes Album was remastered and reissued in 2003 by Rhino Records with several bonus tracks , including a studio version of " Clap " , entitled as Howe intended . In 2014 , Steven Wilson of Porcupine Tree created a new stereo mix and a 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mix , available as either a DVD or Blu @-@ ray Disc . It was released on 21 April with bonus tracks including the studio version of " Clap " , an extended version of " A Venture " , and an alternate version of the album with live tracks , single edits , and an extended mix . The Blu @-@ ray version also features an instrumental version of the album , a needle drop sample of the original vinyl release , and additional live tracks . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Yes 
 John Anderson – lead vocals , percussion 
 Chris Squire – bass guitar , vocals 
 Steve Howe – electric and acoustic guitars , <unk> , vocals 
 Tony Kaye – piano , organ , Moog 
 Bill Bruford – drums , percussion 
 Additional musicians 
 Colin Goldring – recorders on " Your Move " 
 Production 
 Yes and Eddie Offord – production 
 Eddie Offord – engineering 
 Brian Lane – co @-@ ordination 
 Phil Franks – photography 
 Barry <unk> – photography 
 Jon Goodchild – design 
 = Ethiopian Airlines = 
 Ethiopian Airlines ( Amharic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ̣ <unk> <unk> <unk> ) ; <unk> ( <unk> ̣ <unk> ) ? in short ) , formerly Ethiopian Air Lines ( EAL ) and often referred to as simply Ethiopian , is Ethiopia 's flag carrier and is wholly owned by the country 's government . EAL was founded on 21 December 1945 and commenced operations on 8 April 1946 , expanding to international flights in 1951 . The firm became a share company in 1965 , and changed its name from Ethiopian Air Lines to Ethiopian Airlines . The airline has been a member of the International Air Transport Association since 1959 , and of the African Airlines Association ( <unk> ) since 1968 . Ethiopian is a Star Alliance member , having joined in December 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 12 ) . 
 Its hub and headquarters are at Bole International Airport in Addis Ababa , from where it serves a network of 82 passenger destinations — 19 of them domestic — and 23 freighter ones . Ethiopian flies to more destinations in Africa than any other carrier . It is one of the fastest @-@ growing companies in the industry , and is among the largest on the African continent . It is also one of the few profitable airlines in the Sub @-@ Saharan region . The airline 's cargo division was awarded The African Cargo Airline of the Year in early 2011 . Recently , Ethiopian won the Best Regional Airline of the Year award at the 41st Annual Airline Industry Achievement Awards by Air Transport World ( <unk> ) , held in Washington , D.C. on 25 February 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The 1940s : early years = = = 
 After the liberation of Ethiopia , Emperor Haile Selassie I asked the United States , the United Kingdom , and France to help him to establish an airline as part of his modernisation effort . According to the BBC News it is possible that the Emperor intended the creation of a quality national airline to help dispel impressions of Ethiopian poverty . In 1945 , the Ethiopian government began negotiations with both Transcontinental Air Transport and Western Air Express ( later merged into TWA ) . On 8 September 1945 , TWA signed an agreement with the American historian and foreign affairs advisor to Ethiopia John H. Spencer to establish a commercial aviation company in Ethiopia . 
 The carrier , originally called Ethiopian Air Lines ( EAL ) , was founded on 21 December 1945 , with an initial investment of <unk> 2 @,@ 5 million , divided in 25 @,@ 000 shares that were entirely held by the government . The company was financed by the Ethiopian government but managed by TWA . At the beginning , it relied upon American pilots , technicians , administrators and accountants ; even its General Managers were from TWA . Minister of Works and Communications <unk> <unk> <unk> Mikael became EAL 's first president and chairman , whereas H. H. Holloway — who was American — was appointed by TWA as general manager . The board held the first meeting on 26 December 1945 ( 1945 @-@ 12 @-@ 26 ) , with a key point of the agenda being the deposit of E £ 75 @,@ 000 in a bank in Cairo for the acquisition of aircraft and spare parts . Shortly afterwards , the airline was in negotiations for landing rights with Aden , Egypt , French Somaliland , Saudi Arabia and Sudan , and five Douglas C @-@ 47s were bought ; these aircraft were flown to Addis Ababa in February 1946 ( 1946 @-@ 02 ) . 
 The new airline had its maiden flight to Nairobi carrying a shipment of East African currency equivalent to US $ 3 @.@ 7 million in February 1946 ( 1946 @-@ 02 ) , but it was on 8 April 1946 ( 1946 @-@ 04 @-@ 08 ) that the carrier had its first revenue scheduled service ; it travelled the Addis Ababa – Asmara – Cairo route using one of five Douglas C @-@ 47 Skytrains acquired from the US Government . This route later operated on a weekly basis . The Skytrains were initially intended for military use , although Ethiopian operated them in a mixed passenger @-@ cargo configuration . Soon afterwards , the carrier launched services to Aden and Djibouti , as well as a domestic flight to <unk> . The main five routes in the early years were Addis Ababa – Asmara , Addis Ababa – Djibouti – Aden , Addis Ababa – Khartoum , Addis Ababa – Cairo ( routed via Jeddah or Khartoum ) and Asmara – Khartoum . 
 Henry Bruce <unk> replaced Holloway as a general manager in June 1946 ( 1946 @-@ 06 ) . In July the same year , four more Skytrains were incorporated into the fleet . New scheduled services to Sheikh Othman and Nairobi were launched in July 1946 ( 1946 @-@ 07 ) and June 1947 ( 1947 @-@ 06 ) , respectively . In 1947 , Waldon Gene <unk> became the carrier 's general manager , and the company started operating charter flights to Jeddah during the Hajj season . That year in February , three more Douglas C @-@ 47s were acquired to operate new international routes . A service to <unk> was inaugurated in June 1947 ( 1947 @-@ 06 ) . In September , Port Sudan was added to the route network — it had been previously served as a technical landing on the route to Cairo — , Lydda was incorporated as a scheduled destination in October and charter flights to Bombay were launched in November . Services to Lydda and <unk> were discontinued in February and April 1948 ( 1948 @-@ 04 ) , respectively . In September , the route to Bombay started being flown on a scheduled basis in cooperation with BOAC , with EAL carrying passengers as far as Aden , and the British enterprise flying them on the Aden – Bombay sector . The route also included stops at <unk> Island in Oman and Karachi . For a brief period until April 1948 ( 1948 @-@ 04 ) , <unk> Island was used as a refuelling stop ; since then , services to French Somaliland and Aden started on a twice @-@ weekly basis . EAL was allowed to fly to Aden using Sheik ' Othman Airport , located 16 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) away from the city , whereas BOAC used the <unk> Airport facilities , just 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away from the city . Aden was under British rule at the time as also was Sudan , and the British <unk> denied EAL landing rights at Khartoum , forcing the airline to move the refuelling stop on the Aden route to Port Sudan . The carrier recorded a £ 40 @,@ 000 profit for 1949 . 
 = = = The 1950s : start of long @-@ haul routes = = = 
 Services to Bombay were withdrawn in July 1950 ( 1950 @-@ 07 ) . Also this year , a US $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 9 @,@ 835 @,@ 408 in 2015 ) loan granted from the Ex @-@ Im Bank enabled the carrier to incorporate Convair CV @-@ 240s , aimed at operating international routes . Two CV @-@ 240s , named ″ Eagle of Ethiopia ″ and ″ Haile Selassie I ″ , entered the fleet in December 1950 ( 1950 @-@ 12 ) ; starting January 1951 ( 1951 @-@ 01 ) , these aircraft were subsequently deployed on the Addis Ababa – Cairo , Addis Ababa – Nairobi , and Addis Ababa – Jeddah – Dhahran – Karachi routes , with Dhahran and Sharjah being incorporated to the route network on 20 February . In April 1952 ( 1952 @-@ 04 ) , the airline was appointed general sales agent for TWA in Kenya , <unk> , Uganda and Zanzibar , and by May the same year the fleet consisted of two Convair @-@ Liner 240s and nine Douglas DC @-@ 3s or their subtypes , operating a route network that was 7 @,@ 000 miles ( 11 @,@ 000 km ) long . Services to India and Sharjah were discontinued in 1953 . On 14 Jul , a new agreement with TWA that succeeded the original one was signed . Unlike other companies , the airline 's preamble stated that it was ″ the ultimate aim that EAL shall eventually be operated entirely by Ethiopian personnel ″ . 
 A new service to Athens via Khartoum and Wadi Halfa was launched on 3 April 1954 ( 1954 @-@ 04 @-@ 03 ) . A third Convair CV @-@ 240 ( ″ The Spiritual Power ″ ) was purchased from Sabena in 1955 for US $ 560 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 4 @,@ 946 @,@ 783 in 2015 ) . These aircraft were equipped with rocket @-@ assisted take @-@ off devices . This was a common practice for a small number of airlines in the World that EAL had abandoned by April 1956 ( 1956 @-@ 04 ) . Also in 1955 , Ethiopian inaugurated a self @-@ owned maintenance facility . That year , Vic Harrell succeeded Swede <unk> as general manager of the company . The carrier was in need of newer and larger aircraft , and three different aircraft types — two from the Lockheed Corporation , the Constellation and the Electra , and the Douglas DC @-@ 6 — were considered for the fleet renewal programme . Two Douglas DC @-@ 6Bs were eventually ordered in 1956 for US $ 4 million , including spares ; an option for a third machine was also taken . Another loan obtained from the Ex @-@ Im Bank , a GB £ 8 @,@ 5 million one dating back to 1955 , was partly used to finance the two purchased aircraft . 
 Benghazi was briefly served between 7 November 1956 ( 1956 @-@ 11 @-@ 07 ) and 15 January 1957 ( 1957 @-@ 01 @-@ 15 ) . During 1957 , a third DC @-@ 6B was purchased . Likewise , that year the airline had been asked to take a Lockheed L @-@ 749 that had been given as a gift to the Emperor , who declined it . Ethiopian paid US $ 1 @.@ 6 million for this airframe , and it was incorporated into the fleet on 4 June ; the aircraft was destroyed by fire on 10 Jul in an accident in Sudan . Two Yemeni cities , Hodeida and Taiz were first served on 1 September 1957 ( 1957 @-@ 09 @-@ 01 ) . On 23 May 1958 ( 1958 @-@ 05 @-@ 23 ) , flights to Wadi Halfa were terminated . The incorporation of three Douglas DC @-@ 6Bs took place between May and July , and EAL started a new link between Addis Ababa and Athens , via Cairo , using these recently delivered aircraft . On 21 Jun , the route was extended both to the north and to the south so that Frankfurt and Nairobi became linked by the same corridor , operated with DC @-@ 6Bs . By this time , the <unk> were redeployed to serve domestic and regional routes . Given that radio operators were no longer required as part of flight crews , they were assigned other tasks with the airline . Swissair handled the pilot training for the DC @-@ 6B aircraft at Zurich . The suspension of fifth freedom rights between Djibouti and Aden prompted the discontinuance of the route that linked them . EAL joined the International Air Transport Association ( IATA ) on 1 January 1959 ( 1959 @-@ 01 @-@ 01 ) . During the year , two Boeing <unk> were ordered and scheduled for delivery in December 1961 ( 1961 @-@ 12 ) , two more DC @-@ 6Bs entered the fleet , services to Nairobi were suspended once more and the airline 's list of domestic destinations saw the incorporation of <unk> , <unk> , Lalibela and <unk> . 
 = = = The 1960s and 1970s : the jet age = = = 
 Port Sudan was removed from the list of destinations on 1 March 1960 ( 1960 @-@ 03 @-@ 01 ) . The airline had its first fatal accident on 15 July when a DC @-@ 3 crashed en route from <unk> to <unk> , killing the pilot . A Convair 240 was sold to Allied Stores of Israel on 18 July . On 12 August , an order with Boeing for two Boeing 720B aircraft was placed . EAL 's general manager had already brought the idea of acquiring two jet aircraft for long @-@ haul operations up already in February , suggesting the Boeing 720B . The Sud SE @-@ 210 Caravelle , the de Havilland <unk> Comet 4 and the Boeing 720B were all taken into account . Hot and high condition of some EAL operations made the Caravelle inappropriate , whereas the Comet was considered obsolete . The first East – West link made by an African airline started on 8 November , when the Addis Ababa – Accra – Lagos – Monrovia route was launched using DC @-@ 6B equipment . 
 The second fatal accident took place on 5 September 1961 when another DC @-@ 3 crashed shortly after takeoff from <unk> ; a flight attendant and four passengers lost their lives in the accident . The event urged the Civil Aviation Department to investigate the accidents . It was found that the lack of infrastructure at many airfields , marginal even for DC @-@ 3 operations , was a major contribution . Landing sites at Gore , Mizan Teferi and Tippi were included in the list of airfields that would require closure . On 13 January 1962 , the crew and four passengers lost their lives in another accident involving a DC @-@ 3 — registration ET @-@ T @-@ 1 , EAL 's first aircraft of the type — , this time the crash taking place at Tippi while the aircraft was taking off . The event prompted the government to decide the closure of the airfields at both Mizan Teferi and Tippi . In March 1962 ( 1962 @-@ 03 ) , two more DC @-@ 3s were acquired , and registered ET @-@ ABE and ET @-@ <unk> . During the year , the ″ ET @-@ T- ″ registration would change to simply ″ <unk> ″ . Jack B. <unk> became general manager in April 1962 ( 1962 @-@ 04 ) . 
 It was also decided to build a new airport to replace the <unk> Airfield , unable to accommodate the Boeing 720 jetliner the company intended to acquire . This was the birth of Bole International Airport , where the company set its headquarters . In December 1962 ( 1962 @-@ 12 ) , the arrival of two Boeing 720s ordered directly from Boeing marked the carrier 's entrance into the jet age . These two aircraft were registered ET @-@ AAG and ET @-@ AAH and were named ″ Blue Nile ″ and ″ White Nile ″ , respectively . The first jet service took place on 15 January 1963 ( 1963 @-@ 01 @-@ 15 ) when one of these aircraft was deployed on the route to Nairobi . The following day , a new service to Madrid was flown using the new jet equipment , with Frankfurt joining the jet network soon afterwards . On 1 April , the Boeing 720 replaced the DC @-@ 6B on the Addis Ababa – Athens route ; during that month , the West African corridor also benefited from jet operations . The airline entered into a pool agreement with Aden Airways and Sudan Airways on the Khartoum – Asmara – Aden service . A new flight to Conakry was launched on 8 May 1963 ( 1963 @-@ 05 @-@ 08 ) . Kano , which had been served since 18 March 1962 ( 1962 @-@ 03 @-@ 18 ) , was removed from the list of destinations that day . On 30 November 1963 , the airline lost another DC @-@ 3 ( ET @-@ AAT ) in a test flight at Addis Ababa ; the crew of three suffered minor injuries . Rome became served for the first time on 5 June 1964 ( 1964 @-@ 06 @-@ 05 ) on a weekly basis ; the flight was routed via either Khartoum or Athens as part of a pool agreement with Alitalia . 
 Also in the early 1960s , the carrier provided some initial aviation support to the Ethiopia @-@ United States Mapping Mission in its operation to acquire topographic maps of Ethiopia . The firm changed from a corporation to a share company in 1965 , and changed its name from Ethiopian Air Lines to Ethiopian Airlines . By 1966 , the contractual relationship with TWA was adjusted to reflect the transfer of management with the appointment of an Ethiopian deputy general manager . Two Boeing 720s were in operation and a Boeing 707 @-@ 320C was due to be phased in by March 1968 ( 1968 @-@ 03 ) , when the carrier ordered a second <unk> . 
 In 1970 , the fifth renewal of the original 1945 contract changed TWA 's role from manager to adviser . On its 25th anniversary in 1971 , the company was ready to continue without foreign assistance . Since then , Ethiopian Airlines has been managed and staffed by Ethiopian personnel . The first Ethiopian General Manager was Col. <unk> <unk> , appointed in 1971 . 
 Two Boeing <unk> were acquired from Continental Airlines in 1973 . In 1975 , the carrier ordered five Dash 7s . By then , Ethiopian Airlines had ended its 30 @-@ year relationship with TWA . The airline became a new customer for the Boeing 727 in 1978 , ordering two . The 727s arrived in the late 1970s as a replacement for the oldest Boeing 720s . 
 = = = The 1980s and 1990s = = = 
 The DHC @-@ 5 Buffalo entered Ethiopian 's fleet in the early 1980s . In 1982 , Ethiopian became the first African carrier in ordering the Boeing 767 , as well as the first airline to order the Boeing 767 @-@ 200ER . On 1984 @-@ 6 @-@ 1 , the first of these aircraft set a new distance record for a twinjet , flying 7 @,@ 500 miles ( 12 @,@ 100 km ) non @-@ stop from Washington , D.C. to Addis Ababa , on delivery to the company . The Boeing 767 @-@ 200ERs came to replace the remaining Boeing 720s . ATR @-@ 42s and Twin Otters were incorporated into the fleet in the mid @-@ 1980s , with the first of six Twin Otters entering the fleet in early 1985 . The Boeing 737 @-@ 200 joined the fleet in late 1987 . 
 In 1990 , Ethiopian became the first passenger airline in taking delivery of the Boeing 757 Freighter , receiving the first of five Boeing 757 @-@ 200s a year later . By 1996 the airline was flying to Bangkok , Beijing , Durban and Johannesburg ; routes to Ivory Coast and Senegal were also being operated . Furthermore , the Fokker 50 entered the fleet to operate domestic routes ; actually , Ethiopian became the last company in taking delivery of this aircraft in 1997 , just after the collapse of Fokker due to financial problems . In the late 1990s the carrier saw the incorporation of Copenhagen and Maputo to its international network , as well as New York City and Washington as transatlantic destinations ; the frequent flyer programme , named " Sheba Miles " after the legendary Queen of Sheba , was launched too . In 1998 , the airline disrupted their flights to the Eritrean capital Asmara after a war erupted between the two countries . 
 = = = 2000 – onwards = = = 
 A fleet renewal started in the early 2000s , with the incorporation of the Boeing 737 – 700 and the Boeing 767 @-@ 300ER ; The airline discontinued its service to Newark in favour of serving Washington in 2004 . 
 In the late 2000s the airline announced it would be the launch customer of the Boeing 787 Dreamliner , and placed orders to acquire brand new Airbus A350 @-@ 900s , Boeing 777 @-@ <unk> and Bombardier equipment . 
 In late September 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 09 ) , Ethiopian Airlines was officially invited to join Star Alliance under the mentoring of Lufthansa . The carrier became a member of the alliance in December 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 12 ) , the third Africa @-@ based carrier in doing so — following EgyptAir and South African Airways — and the 28th member worldwide . 
 = = Corporate affairs = = 
 = = = Management and ownership = = = 
 As of July 2016 , the CEO of Ethiopian Airlines was <unk> <unk> ; he replaced <unk> Wake in 2011 . The airline , which is wholly owned by the Government of Ethiopia , has traditionally been unfettered by government intervention , even during times of significant turmoil and domestic hardship . Whereas many African state owned airlines were and remain often poorly run , with <unk> often serving nepotistic purposes , and business decisions being made on political grounds , Ethiopian Airlines remained professionally run and managed , leading the Christian Science Monitor to term it in 1988 a " capitalist success in Marxist Ethiopia " . 
 The Derg , after expanding the airline 's workforce , which had resulted in a decline in service quality and revenues , allowed the airline to be run on a " strictly commercial basis " . Captain Mohammed Ahmed was appointed CEO in 1980 , and slashed the workforce by 10 % . The airline continued the acquisition of Western , rather than Soviet aircraft , despite the links between the communist government and the Soviet Union , purchasing the Boeing 727 in 1979 and the Boeing 767 in 1984 . Despite famine , unfavorable exchange rates , and general economic disarray , the airline managed to retain its reputation , particularly in the provision of maintenance and training . The Financial Times noted that it managed to remain one of the most profitable airlines in Africa throughout the decade . 
 Despite the violent overthrow of the communist government by the Ethiopian People 's Revolutionary Democratic Front in 1991 , the airline managed to post a profit for the fiscal year . The market @-@ oriented policies of the new government meant that the airline would remain operationally independent , and under Captain <unk> <unk> the airline remained fiscally sound , despite disruptions caused by the Eritrean @-@ Ethiopian War . 
 = = = Head office = = = 
 Ethiopian Airlines currently has its head office at Bole International Airport , Addis Ababa , but intends to build a new head office facility . A contest for the design was held in 2009 , but none of those plans were proceeded with . On 16 February 2011 it held a second round , and in September 2011 it was announced that BET Architect Plc won the contest . The airline stated that the estimated <unk> million complex will be constructed on a 50 @,@ 000 m2 ( 540 @,@ 000 sq ft ) plot at Bole International Airport . The company that received 4th place in the competition 's second round has threatened to take legal action , accusing the airline of not giving due consideration to the proposed design . 
 = = = Business trends = = = 
 Performance figures for the government @-@ owned Ethiopian Airlines are available in Annual Accounts and occasional press reports . Available trends are ( as at year ending 30 June ) : 
 = = = Strategic ambitions and landmarks = = = 
 The airline was featured by The Economist as an example of excellence in late 1987 , and economist Paul B. Henze recognised it in 2000 as being " one of the most reliable and profitable airlines in the Third World " . In July 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 07 ) , Ethiopian was named Africa 's most profitable airline for the year 2010 by Air Transport World , and it has also been praised by <unk> for its sustained profitability over recent years . 
 As a long term company policy , in addition to the carrier 's main activities , revenues are also generated by providing aircraft maintenance to foreign airlines , and specialist training for both Ethiopian and foreign trainees . Every year , pilots and technicians graduate from both the Pilot School , inaugurated in 1964 , and the Aviation Maintenance Technician School , established in 1967 . The American Federal Aviation Administration accredited the airline 's maintenance division with license No . <unk> <unk> . 
 Ethiopian Airlines started “ Vision 2010 ” in 2005 , which aimed to increase passenger traffic to 3 million , revenue to US $ 1 billion and employees to 6 @,@ 000 by 2010 . By the year 2010 Ethiopian had exceeded all goals set in “ Vision 2010 ” , and the company 's net profit for the fiscal year ended 2010 @-@ 6 @-@ 30 was US $ 121 @.@ 4 million . The results were attributed in part to an aggressive marketing campaign and major cost cutting measures . 
 In 2010 Ethiopian adopted " Vision 2025 " , a 15 @-@ year development strategy , under which the airline anticipates increasing its fleet to 120 , the number of destinations to 90 , carrying more than 18 million passengers and 720 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 710 @,@ 000 long tons ; 790 @,@ 000 short tons ) of cargo , with 17 @,@ 000 employees . ″ Vision 2025 ″ also considers a fourfold expansion of the capacity building for trainees in the airline 's aviation academy . 
 Ethiopian signed in July 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 07 ) a deal for the acquisition of 49 % of the Malawian carrier Air Malawi . The new airline will be named Malawian Airlines . The remaining shareholding will be held by the government of Malawi and private Malawian investors . Malawian Airlines started operations in January 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 01 ) . For the operation year 2013 @-@ 14 , Ethiopian Airlines was ranked the most profitable airline in Africa and 18th most profitable airline in the world with a profit of $ 228 million . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 As of September 2014 , the passenger network comprises 83 international destinations and 20 domestic ones , including 49 cities in Africa ( excluding Ethiopia ) , 13 in Europe and the Americas and 21 in the Middle East and Asia ; the cargo network serves 24 destinations , including 15 in Africa , seven in the Middle East and Asia and two in Europe . Ethiopian serves more destinations in Africa than any other airline . As of April 2013 , the carrier 's five densest routes were Addis Ababa – Dubai , Addis Ababa – Johannesburg , Addis Ababa – Guangzhou , Addis Ababa – Nairobi and Addis Ababa – Beijing . 
 In late April 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 04 ) , the airline said it planned to start serving the Latin American market but no firm dates were disclosed . In August that year , Abuja , Accra , Douala , Dubai , Entebbe , Frankfurt , Johannesburg , Harare , Kilimanjaro , Lagos , Lomé , London , Luanda , Lusaka , <unk> , Maputo , Mombasa , Mumbai , Nairobi and Rome would be served on an rotational basis with the first Boeing 787 Dreamliner , and that upon delivery of the second aircraft of the type these would be assigned on fixed scheduled routes . 
 In February 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 02 ) , unofficial reports disclosed the carrier 's plans to launch new services to Ho Chi Minh City , Manila and Seoul starting in June the same year , as well as the company 's intention to start flying the 9 @,@ 899 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 18 @,@ 333 km ; 11 @,@ 392 mi ) -long São Paulo – Lomé – Addis Ababa – Guangzhou run in July 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 07 ) . In June 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 06 ) , unofficial sources reported that the launch of flights to both Ho Chi Minh City and Manila were cancelled , and that they will be replaced with a flight to Singapore starting in September 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 09 ) ; as announced , flights to Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo commenced in July the same year . Flights to Singapore were launched in December 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 12 ) . A new link to Shanghai was launched in March 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 03 ) , while new services to Vienna started in June 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 06 ) and to Doha in December the same year . 
 Tokyo @-@ Narita was added on 20 April 2015 . Other new destinations are Los Angeles ( the carrier 's fifth point to be served in the Americas ) and Dublin . A new service to Manila was launched in July 2015 ( 2015 @-@ 07 ) . The Addis Ababa – Lomé – Newark run is set to commence on 3 July 2016 ( 2016 @-@ 07 @-@ 03 ) . 
 = = = Alliances and codeshare agreements = = = 
 = = = = Alliances = = = = 
 In October 2007 ( 2007 @-@ 10 ) , Ethiopian Airlines ' frequent flyer programme <unk> and Lufthansa 's Miles & More entered into partnership , allowing members of each programme to earn and spend miles on both airlines ' networks . In July 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 07 ) , the carrier entered a strategic partnership with Lomé @-@ based start @-@ up airline <unk> Airlines , in which Ethiopian holds a 40 % stake . Ethiopian Airlines is responsible for aircraft maintenance and operational management . The plan is to turn Lomé into Ethiopian Airline 's regional hub for the West African market . <unk> started operations in January 2010 and became profitable after a few months . Ethiopian officially joined Star Alliance in December 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 12 ) . 
 = = = = Codeshare agreements = = = = 
 As of June 2014 , the Ethiopian Airlines has codeshare agreements with the following airlines : 
 = = Fleet = = 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 In February 2005 ( 2005 @-@ 02 ) , Ethiopian Airlines signed a preliminary agreement to buy up to ten Boeing 787 Dreamliner aircraft ( five firm orders plus five options ) , becoming the first African carrier to order this kind of equipment . On 31 May 2005 ( 2005 @-@ 05 @-@ 31 ) , Boeing announced that Ethiopian had exercised its purchase rights and confirmed a firm order for ten aircraft . The carrier also became the first African airline to order the Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR , and the first of these aircraft Ethiopian took possession of , in November 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 11 ) , was the 900th model of the type delivered by Boeing . Furthermore , upon delivery Ethiopian became the first African airline to operate the type . 
 The company ordered eight Bombardier Q400s for US $ 242 million in November 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 11 ) and took options on four additional aircraft of the type . During the 2009 Dubai Air Show , Ethiopian placed an order for 12 Airbus A350 @-@ 900s , initially scheduled for delivery between 2016 and 2019 . To date , this order is the largest placed by the airline , and it evidenced the company 's dissatisfaction with Boeing for the delays in the delivery of the Dreamliners , initially scheduled to enter the fleet in June 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 06 ) . In January 2010 ( 2010 @-@ 01 ) , Ethiopian Airlines announced a firm order for ten Boeing 737 – 800 Next Generation aircraft in a deal worth US $ 767 million . The first 78 @-@ seater Q400 entered the fleet in March ; in August , Ethiopian and the Ex @-@ Im Bank signed an agreement worth US $ 1 @.@ 6 billion for a loan to finance the acquisition of the ten Dreamliners — the first of them scheduled for delivery in mid @-@ August 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 08 ) — , and the five Boeing 777s the carrier already has in the fleet . 
 In October 2011 ( 2011 @-@ 10 ) , the company announced an order for four Boeing <unk> in a deal worth US $ 1 @.@ 1 billion ; the move positioned Ethiopian Airlines as the first African carrier in ordering the type . These four aircraft will join another two ones of the same type the airline will lease from GECAS . Ethiopian received the first of these aircraft in mid September 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 09 ) . 
 Five Q400 <unk> were ordered in February 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 02 ) for US $ 160 million at list prices , whereas in July 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 07 ) , an additional Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR was ordered in a deal worth US $ 276 million . In August 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 08 ) , the first Dreamliner was delivered to the company , which became the first airline outside Japan in operating the type on scheduled flights , after All Nippon Airways and Japan Airlines . Also in October 2012 ( 2012 @-@ 10 ) , the first Q400 <unk> was delivered , and in November the same year the airline confirmed that three additional Dreamliners will be leased from ILFC , the first of them entering service in 2015 . 
 In April 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 04 ) , Air Lease Corporation and Ethiopian Airlines announced the lease of two Boeing 777 @-@ 300ERs , with deliveries in May and June 2015 ( 2015 @-@ 06 ) . In early July the same year , it was informed that the Ex @-@ Im Bank approved around US $ 130 million for Boeing in order for this aircraft manufacturer to support the development of GE90 @-@ equipped long @-@ haul aircraft for Ethiopian Airlines . The airline took delivery of its first Boeing 777 @-@ 300ER in November 2013 ( 2013 @-@ 11 ) . That month , during the Dubai Air Show , Palma Holding signed a letter of intent with Bombardier for eight Q400s to be leased to Ethiopian ; the order was firmed up in February 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 02 ) . In September 2014 ( 2014 @-@ 09 ) the carrier announced a firm order for 20 Boeing 737 MAX 8s plus commitments for 15 more aircraft of the type . At January 2015 ( 2015 @-@ 01 ) , Ethiopian Airlines was the largest African carrier in terms of fleet size . In 2015 the airline planned to buy 15 to 20 of Boeing 's new 777X planes worth about $ 7 @.@ 4 billion at list prices . Although the airline had initially planned buying Airbus ' A350 @-@ 1000 planes , it switched to the Boeing 777X as the aircraft is more suitable for operations at their high @-@ altitude hub in Addis Ababa . It became the first airline in Africa to acquire a Boeing 787 full @-@ flight simulator . 
 The airline received its first Airbus A350 XWB in late June 2016 ( 2016 @-@ 06 ) . 
 = = = Current fleet = = = 
 As of June 2016 , the Ethiopian Airlines fleet consists of the following aircraft : 
 Aside from the equipment shown above , the airline uses a number of <unk> for training purposes . Ethiopian Airlines had the largest dedicated cargo fleet in Africa , as of December 2013 . 
 = = = Historic fleet = = = 
 Following is a list of equipment previously operated by Ethiopian . Helicopters and light aircraft were available for leasing to Government agencies as well as to be used on natural resources projects . 
 = = Services = = 
 Cloud Nine and Economy Class are the two classes available on most of Ethiopian Airlines ' flights , with the exception of those operated with Dash 8 equipment , for some of these aircraft are configured in an all @-@ economy layout . 
 = = = Food and drinks = = = 
 On all flights , passengers are provided with food and complimentary beverages on board , in both classes . The food service consists of hot meals , hot or cold snacks , or light refreshments , depending on the length of the flight and the time of the day . The choice of acquiring complementary drinks at an extra cost is available too . The airline also offers assorted menus for passengers having special meal requirements . 
 = = = In @-@ flight entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Cloud Nine = = = = 
 Ethiopian Airlines ' Business Class is named Cloud Nine . Passengers travelling in this class are provided with onboard amenities and a wide variety of reading material . On routes operated with Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR equipment passengers are provided with sleeper seats and on @-@ demand audio and video services , with 85 channels on 15 @.@ 4 inch IFE screens . 
 = = = = Economy Class = = = = 
 A variety of meals — ranging from light snacks to hot dishes — and amenities are provided to passengers flying on this class , both depending upon the length of the flight . Reclining seats and on @-@ demand audio and video , with 80 channels and 8 @.@ 9 @-@ inched screens , are available on Boeing 777 @-@ 200LR services . 
 = = = Lounges = = = 
 Ethiopian Airlines passengers are offered two lounges at Bole International Airport . Cloud Nine passengers can wait for the departure of flights at the Cloud Nine Lounge , where they are provided with a wide variety of amenities , as well as personal computers or wireless connection . Likewise , <unk> cardholders with Gold or Silver status can make use of the Sheba Miles Lounge facilities . Customer Service agents are available at both lounges in order to assist passengers with any query regarding their flights . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 According to the Aviation Safety Network , Ethiopian Airlines records 60 accident / incident events since 1965 , plus six more for Ethiopian Air Lines , the airline 's former name . As of January 2013 , the number of people that lost their lives in occurrences related to either carrier aircraft totals 337 . The company suffered several hijacking episodes throughout its history , with one of them ending up in the carrier 's deadliest accident , when the plane plunged into the Indian Ocean due to fuel starvation in 1996 . The second most deadly accident took place in 2010 , when an aircraft crashed into the Mediterranean Sea , shortly after it departed Beirut – Rafic Hariri International Airport , killing all 90 people on board . The crash of a Boeing 737 – 200 that took place in 1988 and led to 35 fatalities ranks as the third worst deadly accident experienced by the company . Despite this , Ethiopian Airlines has a good safety record , in contrast to other African airlines . 
 = New Jersey Route 64 = 
 Route 64 is a 0 @.@ 32 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 51 km ) long state highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It is a state @-@ maintained bridge over Amtrak and New Jersey Transit 's Northeast Corridor line in West Windsor . Route 64 begins at an intersection with County Route 526 and County Route 571 in West Windsor . It heads along the bridge to an intersection with County Route 615 , where Route 64 ends . County routes 526 and 571 , which are unofficially concurrent with Route 64 , continues to Hightstown . 
 Route 64 was designated originally as an alignment of Route 31A , a spur off of State Highway Route 31 ( currently U.S. Route 206 ) from Princeton eastward to Hightstown , where it met State Highway Route 33 . The state planned on turning the alignment into a full @-@ fledged expressway for several decades , including constructing the alignment that Route 64 currently uses in 1939 . The route was amended in 1941 , and was renumbered from Route 31A to Route 64 in the 1953 renumbering . Route 64 was proposed to become part of the Princeton – Hightstown Bypass ( later designated New Jersey Route 92 ) , but completion never occurred . Currently , the route remains the bridge over the Northeast Corridor . However , it is not currently planned that Route 64 will receive an extension of sorts from the proposed Penns Neck Bypass to U.S. Route 1 , a proposed realignment of County routes 526 and 571 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 64 begins at an intersection with County Route 526 , County Route 571 , and Mercer County Route 615 in the community of West Windsor . From this point , County Routes 526 and 571 continue along the right @-@ of @-@ way towards U.S. Route 130 . The route heads north crosses over the Amtrak and New Jersey Transit @-@ used Northeast Corridor Line and passes to the north of a local bus depot . Route 64 continues westward for a short distance , crossing through a local woodland and behind several local homes . The route makes a gradual curve to the west off the railroad bridge and passes behind a couple of homes before heading to the south slightly at an intersection . Route 64 reaches its northern terminus and County Route 526 and County Route 571 make a right turn to head northwest toward U.S. Route 1 and Princeton . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Route 31A and the original freeway = = = 
 In the late @-@ 1920s , the state proposed a bypass along the alignment . In 1938 , the New Jersey State Highway Department and New Jersey General Assembly put forth a proposal detailing that a highway from State Highway Route 31 ( co @-@ signed with U.S. Route 206 ) in the city of Princeton eastward through Mercer County onto current @-@ day County Route 571 . From there , it would follow an alignment of highway to the intersection with State Highway Route 33 in the community of Hightstown . The original proposal for the highway was to turn the road into a limited @-@ access freeway along its entirety . The route was designated as State Highway Route 31A , a suffixed spur of State Highway Route 31 that year . A portion of the highway was constructed in 1939 , when a bridge over the Pennsylvania Railroad was constructed from Washington Road 's former alignment to the current intersection with Route 615 . This new , 104 @.@ 00 feet ( 31 @.@ 70 m ) long bridge replaced the at @-@ grade crossing on Washington Road , which is now a dead @-@ end . The state highway law was amended just three years later , with the freeway option removed and the extensions remaining . 
 The new bridge remained in place along Route 31A , however , no new portions of the freeway were constructed in terms of creating the Route 31A Freeway , as proposed in 1938 . In 1950 , then @-@ governor of New Jersey , Alfred E. Driscoll , cited the need for the expressway as an important truck and passenger car highway from Trenton to the Jersey Shore . Route 31A itself was decommissioned in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , and replaced by the designation of Route 64 . The route was truncated from both ends toward Princeton and Hightstown , leaving just the bridge in West Windsor . Route 31A remained in the state highway statutes for several decades after decommissioning , with a bill in 1991 being proposed . The bill passed , and Route 31A was stripped from the statutes on January 18 , 1992 . 
 = = = Route 92 and future changes to CR 571 = = = 
 Route 64 , after designation in 1953 , remained a short bridge along the highway . However , the need for an expressway from Trenton to the Jersey Shore remained , and in the late 1950s , the State Highway Department brought about plans for the Princeton – Hightstown Bypass , a four @-@ lane freeway that would head for 14 miles ( 23 km ) from U.S. Route 206 in Montgomery Township to New Jersey Route 33 in Hightstown . In the length , the freeway was to interchange with U.S. Route 1 , U.S. Route 130 and New Jersey Route 27 . The route was re @-@ designated as Route 92 , and remained a high priority project for several decades . Even after changes in alignment , Route 64 was still an alternative . However , Route 92 was shelved on December 1 , 2006 in favor of widening the New Jersey Turnpike mainline , and only New Jersey Route 133 was constructed for the proposal . 
 As part of the proposed Penns Neck Bypass on U.S. Route 1 , the New Jersey Department of Transportation plans on realigning County Route 571 and Route 526 from the western terminus of Route 64 to a northerly route to Route 1 . Although Route 571 and Route 526 are proposed to be realigned onto the new alignment , there is no designated change proposed for Route 64 . On the contrary to this , one state figure shows Route 64 running along Washington Road , where the two county routes currently run . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in West Windsor , Mercer County . 
 = The Shape of Things to Come ( Lost ) = 
 " The Shape of Things to Come " is the 81st episode of the American Broadcasting Company 's Lost and is the ninth episode of the fourth season . It aired on April 24 , 2008 , on ABC in the United States and on CTV in Canada . The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer Drew Goddard and co @-@ producer Brian K. Vaughan in late February 2008 and directed by executive producer Jack Bender in mid @-@ March . The narrative centers on Ben Linus ( played by Michael Emerson ) as he and the Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 crash survivors at the Barracks come under attack in December 2004 , while flashforwards to late 2005 show him recruiting Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) as a hitman and confronting his enemy Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) . 
 " The Shape of Things to Come " is one of a few Lost episodes to contain footage filmed outside Hawaii . The episode aired as the first of the second batch of fourth season episodes that were originally planned to air uninterrupted by a hiatus with the rest of the season ; however , the 100 @-@ day 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike paused production and caused the writers to condense the second half of the season , which aired after a four @-@ week break . " The Shape of Things to Come " received positive critical reviews and the original broadcast was watched by 14 million Americans . Much praise was directed at Emerson 's acting skills , particularly in his reaction to the execution of his character 's daughter Alex ( Tania Raymonde ) . His performance in this specific episode received a nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards ; the episode was also nominated in the category of Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode is set on December 27 , 2004 , the survivors ' 97th day on the island . At the beach camp , the corpse of Ray ( Marc Vann ) , the freighter Kahana 's doctor , washes ashore . Daniel Faraday ( Jeremy Davies ) calls the freighter and asks what happened to Ray via morse code . Daniel lies about the response , saying that rescue helicopters will be sent soon ; however , Bernard Nadler ( Sam Anderson ) calls him on this and correctly interprets the freighter 's message : " What are you talking about ? The doctor is fine . " Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) , who suffers from stomach pains throughout the day , forces Daniel to reveal that it was never their intention to rescue the survivors . 
 Meanwhile , Alex is captured by Martin Keamy ( Kevin Durand ) and others from the freighter . As they take her to the Barracks , she sets off an alarm heralding the arrival of Ben 's enemies . Ben , John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , and Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) fortify Ben 's house , while James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) goes to retrieve the other survivors in the Barracks . He is partially successful , as he saves Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) from her exploded and burning house , but three survivors ( portrayed by extras ) are shot to death by the mercenaries . Keamy finds and frees Miles Straume ( Ken Leung ) , giving him a walkie @-@ talkie to take to Ben . Ben communicates with Keamy , who threatens to kill Alex if Ben does not surrender . Ben attempts to negotiate and is shocked when Keamy executes Alex . Locking himself in the house 's secret room , Ben enters a hidden chamber to summon the smoke monster . Ben emerges covered in soot and the monster attacks Keamy 's henchmen . The survivors flee for the forest , with Ben lingering briefly to grieve over Alex 's body . Afterward , Ben and Locke depart to locate Jacob for further instructions . Sawyer , Hurley , Claire and Aaron turn to return to the beach with Miles , but Locke holds them at gunpoint , successfully demanding that Hurley goes with him ( as he has found Jacob 's cabin before ) . 
 Flashforwards show Ben on three continents in autumn 2005 . Ben is startled when he wakes up in the Sahara Desert wearing a winter jacket and with a large cut on his upper arm ; challenged by two armed locals , he kills one of them ( Nick <unk> ) and knocks the other ( Sammy Sheik ) unconscious and travels on horseback to Tozeur , Tunisia on October 24 , 2005 . Ben journeys to Tikrit , Iraq , where the funeral of Sayid 's wife Nadia <unk> ( Andrea Gabriel ) is taking place . Ben tells Sayid that Widmore ordered Ishmael Bakir ( Faran Tahir ) to kill Nadia . Ben lures Bakir into a trap to be killed by Sayid , who shoots Bakir repeatedly . Ben recruits him to become his assassin , and leaves for London , England , where he breaks into Widmore 's penthouse ; although he cannot kill Widmore , he states that he is going to kill Widmore 's daughter Penelope ( Sonya Walger ) in retribution for Alex 's death . In their conversation , Widmore claims that the island is his and that he will take it back from Ben one day . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Writers Guild of America went on strike on November 4 , 2007 , by which time only eight of the planned sixteen episodes of Lost 's fourth season had been written . These episodes aired from January to March 2008 . After the strike ended on February 12 , 2008 , the writers found that there was only enough time to produce five episodes , although the fifth episode would later be expanded to two episodes — and they proceeded to compress most of the storylines of the planned eight episodes into six , with some carrying over into the fifth season . Executive producer / head writer Damon Lindelof stated that " we are going to execute our full story plan for season four . This simply requires a shift from high @-@ octane storytelling to <unk> @-@ octane storytelling . It requires no cramming , only a slightly heavier foot on the gas pedal ... so , hold on to your hats . Those of you waiting for the long @-@ anticipated [ Jin Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) ] and Hurley Ping @-@ Pong tournament , however , will be very disappointed . " The writers expressed interest to air the eighth episode with the second batch of episodes , but ABC did not comply and " The Shape of Things to Come " served as the mid @-@ season premiere . The writers realized some advantages to the strike : they were able to use actors whose shows had been canceled during the strike , and they were able to respond to confusion from the audience . They would later even conclude that the season was better as a result of the strike , as they were able to discard " languid , contemplative material " and felt " recharged [ with ] a real energy to attack [ the ] last six episodes " . The first three seasons were broadcast on Wednesdays in the United States and Canada ; the pre @-@ strike fourth season episodes aired on Thursdays at 9 : 00 p.m. , a time @-@ slot normally occupied by Grey 's Anatomy . " The Shape of Things to Come " and the following three episodes were broadcast on Thursdays at 10 : 00 p.m. after Grey 's Anatomy . 
 " The Shape of Things to Come " was written alongside " Something Nice Back Home " and " Cabin Fever " in February and March 2008 . Its title is derived from the 1933 science fiction novel of the same name by H.G. Wells . Co @-@ executive producer / writer Drew Goddard called the episode " maybe my favorite thing I 've done on Lost , and I 've been lucky with all the episodes I 've gotten so far " . Shooting began on March 10 and continued through March 25 , alongside filming of " Something Nice Back Home " . The scene where Ben confronts Widmore was actually filmed in London , England , because actor Alan Dale was unable to fly to Hawaii as he had been appearing in a production of the play Spamalot . Several crew members and Michael Emerson flew to London to film the scene . A scene in which Claire has a prophetic vision was produced ; however , it was cut due to runtime constraints . 
 A shoot @-@ out early in the episode sees the end of the three background survivors who joined Locke in his trip to the Barracks in the early fourth season . One of them , Doug , played by Sean Douglas Hoban received credit as a co @-@ star for the first time in his run on the show , having been cast in the pilot as " Passenger # 4 " . Hoban later also acted as a stunt double for Dominic Monaghan , who plays Charlie Pace , a major character in the first three seasons . Hoban has one line in " The Shape of Things to Come " and he had to audition for it against the other background actors . 
 The episode 's flashforwards commence with Ben waking up alarmed in the Sahara with a wounded right arm and vapor rising from him . The Dharma Initiative parka that he wears was codenamed " <unk> " by the writers . A couple Easter eggs are present in this scene : Ben 's parka has a name tag that indicates that it was formerly owned by Edgar <unk> ( François Chau ) and it displays the first appearance of the logo for a Dharma station called the " Orchid " that would not be seen until the episode titled " There 's No Place Like Home " . Another Easter egg is glimpsed in the next scene , when Ben reveals his forged Canadian passport previously seen in " The Economist " for his alias Dean Moriarty , which is also the name of the central character in the Jack Kerouac 's 1951 novel On the Road . Among the most frequent questions that the writers are asked is whether they have planned out future storylines , so the writers try to allude to future plot points , such as with the <unk> scene , that they can later call on as proof that they do know where the story is headed . Director Jack Bender described the scene , which was filmed in a Hawaiian rock quarry , as especially hard to shoot because the actors had to ride horses and use guns , the crew had to relocate due to rocks present that were unsuitable for the scene , and Bender walked head @-@ first into a crane . Emerson stated that the set is " definitely a no @-@ glamour zone ... I thought we would ease into things . Instead , I get this all @-@ Ben extravaganza : combat , riding horses , foreign languages . And piano playing ! All <unk> outside my comfort zone . How can you work two weeks and feel like you need a vacation already ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Shape of Things to Come " was viewed live or watched within five hours of broadcast by 12 @.@ 075 million Americans , ranking Lost as the fourteenth most watched program of the week . A total of 14 @.@ 067 million Americans watched the episode live or within seven days ; this number was factored into the season 's average . This was an improvement over the previous Lost episode that had aired six weeks earlier . Lost also improved its Canadian ratings with 1 @.@ 443 million viewers . In Australia , " The Shape of Things to Come " was watched by only 683 @,@ 000 viewers , but Lost was nominated in the same week for two Sun @-@ Herald Bogie Awards — a parody of the Australian Logie Awards — in the categories of " Most Underrated " series and " Most Jerked Around by the Networks " . 
 The Shape of Things to Come received critical acclaim . Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune gave " The Shape of Things to Come " an " A + . " Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly called " The Shape of Things to Come " " one of those deliciously dense episodes in which the nourishment of revelation is mixed with huge chunks of sugary intrigue " and speculated that the scene in which Alex is executed will be " sitting very high on this ranking of all @-@ time pivotal Lost moments " by the series ' May 2010 end . Before the season finale aired , Jensen ranked this as the second best moment of the season and put the scene in which the monster attacks the mercenaries in ninth place . Dan Kois and Lane Brown of New York magazine thought that this " episode didn 't exactly feel like the usual moderately paced , secret @-@ revealing drama Lost usually is ; it felt like an action movie ... it was like watching Die Hard on an island " . Chris Carabott of IGN gave the episode a 9 @.@ 3 / 10 , concluding that " if ' The Shape of Things to Come ' is any indication of the level of quality that [ the audience ] should expect from here on out then we are in for some incredible storytelling " and " Alex 's death will probably be remembered as one of the more pivotal scenes in the entire series [ because ] it is such a phenomenally shot , edited and acted moment ... it would be incredibly hard not to feel for [ Ben ] here . " Upon grading the best episodes of the first five seasons , the episode ranked second , beating episodes like " Through the Looking Glass " and " Pilot " and losing to " The Constant . " Erin Martell of AOL 's TV Squad summed up " The Shape of Things to Come " as " a brilliant episode ... [ with ] tons of action , several big revelations , and more questions to ponder " . Don Williams of BuddyTV decided that the episode was " worth waiting five weeks for " and " so jam packed that I need to give my brain time to rest " . Williams 's colleague Oscar Dahl ranked the scene in which Alex is killed as the fifth best moment of the season , noting that " it was perfectly paced ... and provided a huge shock ... and some of the best acting you 'll ever see " . Jay Glatfelter of The Huffington Post wrote that " ' The Shape of Things to Come ' was the perfect episode to get everyone back into the swing of Lost . It wasn 't a <unk> à la ' The Constant ' . It was an edge @-@ of @-@ your @-@ seat thrill ride , which to me matched the ' Pilot ' ' s bombastic grandeur " . 
 Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger wrote that the episode " was overflowing with manna from post @-@ strike heaven : lots of action , lots of intrigue [ and ] the odd answer or three " ; however , he criticized the deaths of the three 815 survivors played by extras and survival of main characters , saying that " that sequence with Sawyer dodging bullets was supposed to be tense and frightening ; instead , it was funny " . Kristin Dos Santos of E ! agreed with Sepinwall 's latter assessment . Although Jamie Poniewozik of Time worried about the show 's direction in which Widmore is suddenly the antagonist and Ben travels the globe to seek revenge . He said that it " looks a little too much like Alias " ; Poniewozik enjoyed the island drama . Daniel of TMZ called " The Shape of Things to Come " " another solid episode of Lost " , grading it as a " B " and claiming that " I enjoyed it the whole way through , even if it never gave me that ' OH MY GOD ! ! ! ! ' moment , though I loved the Alex execution scene . " 
 Before the episode began shooting , Michael Emerson had already decided to submit his performance in this episode for consideration in the drama supporting actor category of the Primetime Emmy Awards because of the script 's strength . He received his second consecutive Emmy nomination for this role ; however , he lost to Željko Ivanek of the FX series Damages . Emerson would win the next year for the episode " Dead is Dead " . Kevin Thompson of The Palm Beach Post wrote that " with those big ol ' eyes of his , [ Emerson ] could always say more with a lengthy stare than he could with twenty pages of dialogue .... [ He has ] , once again , proved why he has become Lost 's star as well as its heart and soul .... an Emmy should belong to [ him ] . " Jennifer Godwin of E ! wrote that " no one has ever done better work humanizing a supervillain . " Among those who also praised Emerson 's performance as Ben were Robert Bianco of USA Today , Matt Roush of TV Guide , Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy , who gave the episode a perfect rating of five stars , John Kubicek of BuddyTV and aforementioned critics from The Star @-@ Ledger , The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune , Time , Entertainment Weekly , IGN and TV Squad . 
 = Youngstown , Ohio = 
 Youngstown is a city in the U.S. state of Ohio and the county seat of Mahoning County . It also extends into Trumbull County . The municipality is on the Mahoning River , approximately 65 miles ( 105 km ) southeast of Cleveland and 61 miles ( 100 km ) northwest of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . Youngstown has its own metropolitan area , but is often included in commercial and cultural depictions of the Pittsburgh Tri @-@ State area and Greater Cleveland . Youngstown lies 10 miles ( 16 km ) west of the Pennsylvania state line , midway between New York City and Chicago via Interstate 80 . 
 The city was named for John Young , an early settler from <unk> , New York , who established the community 's first sawmill and gristmill . Youngstown is in a region of the United States that is often referred to as the Rust Belt . Traditionally known as a center of steel production , Youngstown was forced to redefine itself when the U.S. steel industry fell into decline in the 1970s , leaving communities throughout the region without major industry . Youngstown also falls within the Appalachian Ohio region , among the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains . The 2010 census showed that Youngstown had a total population of 66 @,@ 982 , making it Ohio 's ninth largest city . The city has experienced a decline of over 60 % of its population since 1959 . 
 According to the 2010 Census , the Youngstown @-@ Warren @-@ Boardman , OH @-@ PA Metropolitan Statistical Area ( MSA ) contains 565 @,@ 773 people and includes Mahoning and Trumbull counties in Ohio , and Mercer County in Pennsylvania . The Steel Valley area as a whole has 763 @,@ 207 residents . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Youngstown was named for New York native John Young , who surveyed the area in 1796 and settled there soon after . On February 9 , 1797 , Young purchased the township of 15 @,@ 560 acres ( 6 @,@ 300 ha ) from the Western Reserve Land Company for $ 16 @,@ 085 . The 1797 establishment of Youngstown was officially recorded on August 19 , 1802 . 
 The area constituting present @-@ day Youngstown was part of the Connecticut Western Reserve , a section of the Northwest Territory reserved for settlers from the state of Connecticut . While many of the area 's early settlers came from Connecticut , Youngstown attracted a significant number of Scots @-@ Irish settlers from neighboring Pennsylvania . The first European Americans to settle permanently in the area were Pittsburgh native James Hillman and wife Catherine Dougherty . By 1798 , Youngstown was the home of several families who were concentrated near the point where Mill Creek meets the Mahoning River . Boardman Township was founded in 1798 by Elijah Boardman who was a member of the Connecticut Land Company . Also founded in 1798 was Austintown by John McCollum who was a settler from New Jersey . 
 As the Western Reserve 's population grew , the need for administrative districts became apparent . In 1800 , territorial governor Arthur St. Clair established Trumbull County ( named in honor of Connecticut Governor Jonathan Trumbull ) , and designated the smaller settlement of Warren as its administrative center , or " county seat " . In 1813 , Trumbull County was divided into townships , with Youngstown Township comprising much of what became Mahoning County . The village of Youngstown was incorporated in 1848 , and in 1867 Youngstown was chartered as a city . It became the county seat in 1876 , when the administrative center of Mahoning County was moved from neighboring Canfield . Youngstown has been Mahoning County 's county seat to this day . 
 = = = Industrial age = = = 
 The discovery of coal by the community in the early 19th century paved the way for the Youngstown area 's inclusion on the network of the famed Erie Canal . The Pennsylvania and Ohio Canal Company was organized in 1835 , and the canal was completed in 1840 . Local industrialist David Tod , who was later Ohio governor during the Civil War , persuaded Lake Erie steamboat owners that coal mined in the Mahoning Valley could fuel their vessels if canal transportation were available between Youngstown and Cleveland . The arrival of the railroad in 1856 smoothed the path for further economic growth . 
 Youngstown 's industrial development changed the face of the Mahoning Valley . The community 's burgeoning coal industry drew hundreds of immigrants from Wales , Germany , and Ireland . With the establishment of steel mills in the late 19th century , Youngstown became a popular destination for immigrants from Eastern Europe , Italy , and Greece . In the early 20th century , the community saw an influx of immigrants from non @-@ European countries including what is modern day Lebanon , Palestine / Israel , and Syria . By the 1920s , this dramatic demographic shift produced a nativist backlash , and the Mahoning Valley became a center of Ku Klux Klan activity . The situation reached a climax in 1924 , when street clashes between Klan members and Italian and Irish Americans in neighboring Niles led Ohio Governor A. Victor <unk> to declare martial law . By 1928 the Klan was in steep decline ; and three years later , the organization sold its Canfield , Ohio , meeting area , <unk> Klub Field . 
 The growth of industry attracted people from within the borders of the United States , and from Latin America . By the late 19th century , African Americans were well represented in Youngstown , and the first local congregation of the African Methodist Episcopal Church was established in 1871 . In the 1880s , local attorney William R. Stewart was the second African American elected to the Ohio House of Representatives . A large influx of African Americans in the early 20th century owed much to developments in the industrial sector . During the national Steel Strike of 1919 , local industrialists recruited thousands of workers from the South , many of whom were Black . This move inflamed racist sentiment among local Whites , and for decades , African @-@ American steelworkers experienced discrimination in the workplace . Migration from the South rose dramatically in the 1940s , when the mechanization of southern agriculture brought an end to the exploitative sharecropping system , leading onetime farm laborers to seek industrial jobs . 
 The city 's population became more diverse after the end of World War II , when a seemingly robust steel industry attracted thousands of workers . In the 1950s , the Latino population grew significantly ; and by the 1970s , St. Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church and the First Spanish Baptist Church of Ohio were among the largest religious institutions for Spanish @-@ speaking residents in the Youngstown metropolitan area . While diversity is among the community 's enduring characteristics , the industrial economy that drew various groups to the area collapsed in the late 1970s . In response to subsequent challenges , the city has taken well @-@ publicized steps to diversify economically , while building on some traditional strengths . 
 = = = Redevelopment = = = 
 Downtown Youngstown has seen modest levels of new construction . Recent additions include the George Voinovich Government Center and state and federal courthouses : the Seventh District Court of Appeals and the Nathaniel R. Jones Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse . The latter features an award @-@ winning design by the architectural firm , Robert A. M. Stern Architects . 
 In 2005 , Federal Street , a major downtown thoroughfare that was closed off to create a pedestrian @-@ oriented plaza , was reopened to through traffic . The downtown area has seen the razing of structurally unsound buildings and the expansion or restoration of others . 
 In 2004 , construction began on a 60 @-@ home upscale development called Arlington Heights , and a grant from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development allowed for the demolition of Westlake Terrace , a sprawling and dilapidated public housing project . Today , the site features a blend of senior housing , rental townhouses and for @-@ sale single @-@ family homes . Low real @-@ estate prices and the efforts of the Youngstown Central Area Improvement Corporation ( CIC ) have contributed to the purchase of several long @-@ abandoned downtown buildings ( many by out @-@ of @-@ town investors ) and their restoration and conversion into specialty shops , restaurants , and eventually condominiums . Further , a nonprofit organization called Wick Neighbors is planning a $ 250 million New Urbanist revitalization of Smoky Hollow , a former ethnic neighborhood that borders the downtown and university campus . The neighborhood will eventually comprise about 400 residential units , university student housing , retail space , and a central park . Construction for the project began in 2006 . 
 New construction has dovetailed with efforts to cultivate business growth . One of the area 's more successful business ventures in recent years has been the Youngstown Business Incubator . This nonprofit organization , based in a former downtown department store building , fosters the growth of fledgling technology @-@ based companies . The incubator , which boasts more than a dozen business tenants , has recently completed construction on the Taft Technology Center , where some of its largest tenants will locate their offices . 
 In line with these efforts to change the community 's image , the city government , in partnership with Youngstown State University , has organized an ambitious urban renewal plan known as Youngstown 2010 . The stated goals of Youngstown 2010 include the creation of a " cleaner , greener , and better planned and organized Youngstown " . In January 2005 , the organization unveiled a master plan prepared by Urban Strategies Inc. of Toronto , which had taken shape during an extensive process of public consultation and meetings that gathered input from citizens . The plan , which included platforms such as the acceptance of a reduced population and an improved image and quality of life , received national attention and is consistent with efforts in other metropolitan areas to address the phenomenon of urban depopulation . Youngstown 2010 received an award for public outreach from the American Planning Association in 2007 . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 34 @.@ 60 square miles ( 89 @.@ 61 km2 ) , of which 33 @.@ 96 square miles ( 87 @.@ 96 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 64 square miles ( 1 @.@ 66 km2 ) is water . 
 Located in the Cleveland tri @-@ state area , Youngstown is in the Mahoning Valley on the Glaciated Allegheny Plateau . At the end of the last Ice Age , the glaciers left behind a uniform plain with valleys eroded by the Mahoning River crossing the plain . Lakes created by glaciers that dammed small streams were eventually drained , leaving behind fertile terrain . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Youngstown has a humid continental climate ( Köppen Dfb ) , typical of the Midwest , with four distinct seasons , and lies in USDA hardiness zone 6a . Winters are cold and dry but typically bring a mix of rain , sleet , and snow with occasional heavy snowfall and icing . January is the coldest month with an average mean temperature of 25 @.@ 8 ° F ( − 3 @.@ 4 ° C ) , with temperatures on average dropping to or below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) on 4 @.@ 1 days and staying at or below freezing on 43 days per year . Snowfall averages 62 @.@ 7 inches ( 159 cm ) per season , significantly less than the snowbelt areas closer to Lake Erie . The snowiest month on record was 53 @.@ 1 inches ( 135 cm ) in December 2010 , while winter snowfall amounts have ranged from 118 @.@ 7 in ( 301 cm ) in 2010 – 11 to 25 @.@ 2 in ( 64 cm ) in 1948 – 49 . Springs generally see a transition to fewer weather systems that produce heavier rainfall . Summers are typically very warm and humid with temperatures exceeding 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) on 7 @.@ 7 days per year on average ; the annual count has been as high as 40 days in 1943 , while the most recent year to not reach that mark is 2014 . July is the warmest month with an average mean temperature of 70 @.@ 5 ° F ( 21 ° C ) . Autumn is relatively dry with many clear warm days and cool nights . 
 The all @-@ time record high temperature in Youngstown of 103 ° F ( 39 ° C ) was established on July 10 , 1936 , which occurred during the Dust Bowl , and the all @-@ time record low temperature of − 22 ° F ( − 30 ° C ) was set on January 19 , 1994 . The first and last freezes of the season on average fall on October 10 and May 6 , respectively , allowing a growing season of 156 days ; freezing temperatures have been observed in every month except July . The normal annual mean temperature is 49 @.@ 0 ° F ( 9 @.@ 4 ° C ) . Normal yearly precipitation based on the 30 @-@ year average from 1981 – 2010 is 38 @.@ 91 inches ( 988 mm ) , falling on an average 160 days . Monthly precipitation has ranged from 10 @.@ 66 in ( 271 mm ) in June 1986 to 0 @.@ 16 in ( 4 @.@ 1 mm ) in October 1924 , while for annual precipitation the historical range is 54 @.@ 01 in ( 1 @,@ 372 mm ) in 2011 to 23 @.@ 79 in ( 604 mm ) in 1963 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The 2010 United States Census population estimate was 65 @,@ 062 people . The Steel Valley area as a whole has 763 @,@ 207 residents . 
 The United States Census Bureau 's 2011 American Community Survey estimated a median household income of $ 24 @,@ 006 . A 2007 report by CNNMoney.com stated that Youngstown has the lowest median income of any U.S. city with more than 65 @,@ 000 residents . Between 1960 and 2010 , the city 's population declined by over 60 % . Youngstown 's vacant @-@ housing rate is twenty times that of the national average . 
 = = = 2010 census = = = 
 According to the 2010 Census , Youngstown has 26 @,@ 839 households and 15 @,@ 150 families in the city . The population density is 755 @.@ 2 / km ² ( 1958 @.@ 5 / sq mi ) . There are 33 @,@ 123 housing units at an average density of 968 @.@ 5 per square mile ( 373 @.@ 4 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the city was 47 @.@ 0 % White , 45 @.@ 2 % African American , 0 @.@ 4 % Native American , 0 @.@ 4 % Asian , 0 @.@ 02 % Pacific Islander , 3 @.@ 3 % of some other race , and 3 @.@ 7 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 9 @.@ 3 % of the population . Among the White population , 10 @.@ 8 % were of Italian , 10 @.@ 8 % Irish , 10 @.@ 0 % German , and 4 @.@ 2 % English ancestries . Among the Hispanic population , 5 @.@ 7 % are Puerto Rican , 1 @.@ 9 % Mexican , 0 @.@ 1 % Cuban , and 0 @.@ 7 % some other Hispanic or Latino . 
 Records suggest that 28 @.@ 6 % of the households have children under the age of 18 . Of these , 25 @.@ 6 % are married couples living together , 24 @.@ 8 % have a female householder with no husband present , and 43 @.@ 6 % are non @-@ families . Meanwhile , 37 @.@ 8 % of all households comprise a single person , and 14 @.@ 5 % of households comprise a person over 65 years of age living alone . The average household size is 2 @.@ 28 and the average family size is 3 @.@ 02 . 
 The population is spread out with 22 @.@ 8 % under the age of 18 , 10 @.@ 8 % from 18 to 24 , 24 @.@ 3 % from 25 to 44 , 26 @.@ 2 % from 45 to 64 , and 15 @.@ 8 % who are 65 years of age or older . The median age is 38 years . For every 100 females there are 96 @.@ 9 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there are 95 males . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 Endowed with large deposits of coal and iron as well as " old growth " hardwood forests needed to produce charcoal , the Youngstown area eventually developed a thriving steel industry , starting with the area 's blast furnace in 1803 by James and Daniel Heaton . By the mid @-@ 19th century , Youngstown was the site of several iron industrial plants , and because of easy rail connections to adjacent states , the iron industry continued to expand in the 1890s despite the depletion of local natural resources . At the turn of the 20th century , local industrialists began to convert to steel manufacturing , amid a wave of industrial consolidations that placed much of the Mahoning Valley 's industry in the hands of national corporations . 
 In the late 1930s , the community 's steel sector gained national attention once again , when Youngstown became a site of the so @-@ called " Little Steel Strike " , an effort by the Steel Workers Organizing Committee , a precursor to United Steelworkers , to secure contract agreements with smaller steel companies . On June 21 , 1937 , strike @-@ related violence in Youngstown resulted in two deaths and 42 injuries . Despite the violence , historian William Lawson observed that the strike transformed industrial unions from " basically local and ineffective organizations into all @-@ encompassing , nationwide collective bargaining representatives of American workers " . 
 Between the 1920s and 1960s , the city was known as an important industrial hub that featured the massive furnaces and foundries of such companies as Republic Steel and U.S. Steel . At the same time , Youngstown never became economically diversified , as did larger industrial cities such as Chicago , Pittsburgh , Akron , or Cleveland . Hence , when economic changes forced the closure of plants throughout the 1970s , the city was left with few substantial economic alternatives . The September 19 , 1977 , announcement of the closure of a large portion of Youngstown Sheet and Tube , an event still referred to as " Black Monday " , is widely regarded as the death knell of the old area steel industry in Youngstown . In the wake of the steel plant shutdowns , the community lost an estimated 40 @,@ 000 manufacturing jobs , 400 satellite businesses , $ 414 million in personal income , and from 33 to 75 percent of the school tax revenues . The Youngstown area has yet to fully recover from the loss of jobs in the steel sector . 
 = = = Current economy = = = 
 Youngstown is the site of several steel and metalworking operations , though nothing on the scale seen during the " glory days " of the " Steel Valley " . The largest employer in the city is Youngstown State University ( YSU ) , an urban public campus that serves about 15 @,@ 000 students , located just north of downtown . 
 The blow dealt to the community 's industrial economy in the 1970s was slightly mitigated by the presence of auto production plants in the metropolitan area . In the late 1980s , the Avanti , an automobile with a fiberglass body originally designed by Studebaker to compete with the Corvette , was manufactured in an industrial complex on Youngstown 's Albert Street . This company moved away after just a few years . A mainstay of Youngstown 's industrial economy has long been the GM Lordstown plant . The General Motors ' Lordstown Assembly plant is the largest industrial employer in the area . One of the nation 's largest auto plants in terms of square feet , the Lordstown facility was home to production of the Chevrolet Impala , Vega , and Cavalier . It was recently expanded and retooled with a new paint facility . 
 The largest industrial employers within the Youngstown city limits are <unk> Star Steel Company ( formerly North Star Steel ) , in the Brier Hill district , and <unk> Corporation on Poland Avenue . The latter has recently expanded its operations . 
 Youngstown 's downtown , which once underscored the community 's economic difficulties , is a site of new business growth . The Youngstown Business Incubator ( YBI ) , in the heart of the downtown , houses several start @-@ up technology companies that have received office space , furnishings , and access to utilities . Some companies supported by the incubator have earned recognition , and a few are starting to outgrow their current space . One such company – Turning Technologies – has been rated by Inc . Magazine as the fastest @-@ growing privately held software company in the United States and 18th fastest @-@ growing privately held company overall . In an effort to keep such companies downtown , the YBI secured approval to demolish a row of vacant buildings nearby to clear space for expansion . The project will be funded by a $ 2 million federal grant awarded in 2006 . In 2014 , the YBI was ranked as the number 1 university associated business incubator in the world by the Swedish <unk> ( University Business Incubator Index ) . In 2015 , the YBI was the top University Associated Incubator in North America , and came in second to the Dublin Enterprise & Technology Centre , also known as the Guinness Enterprise Centre , in Dublin . 
 Extensive coverage of Youngstown 's economic challenges has overshadowed the city 's long entrepreneurial tradition . A number of products and enterprises introduced in Youngstown later became national household names . Among these is Youngstown @-@ based <unk> 's Bakery , which was established in neighboring Campbell in the 20th century . The company now distributes bread products nationally . In the 1920s , Youngstown was the birthplace of the Good Humor brand of ice cream novelties , and the popular franchise of Handel 's Homemade Ice Cream & Yogurt was established there in the 1940s . In the 1950s , Youngstown @-@ born developer Edward J. DeBartolo , Sr. established one of the country 's first modern shopping plazas in the suburb of Boardman . The fast @-@ food chain , Arby 's , opened the first of its restaurants in Boardman in 1964 , and Arthur Treacher 's Fish & Chips was headquartered in Youngstown in the late 1970s . More recently , the city 's downtown hosted the corporate headquarters of the now @-@ defunct pharmacy chain store Phar @-@ Mor , which had been established by Youngstown native Mickey <unk> . 
 = = Government = = 
 Youngstown is governed by a mayor who is elected every four years and limited to a maximum of two terms . Mayors are traditionally inaugurated on or around January 2 . The city has tended to elect Democratic mayors since the late 1920s because of the local unions ' support for Democratic candidates for office . Youngstown 's current mayor is John McNally IV . Jay Williams was the city 's first African @-@ American mayor and its first independent mayor since 1922 . Williams belonged to the Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition , a bi @-@ partisan group with the stated goal of " making the public safer by getting illegal guns off the streets " . He left his position in Youngstown to become President Barack Obama 's auto czar , directing the Presidential Task Force on the Auto Industry . 
 Residents elect an eight @-@ member city council composed of representatives of the city 's seven wards and a council president . The council , in turn , appoints a city clerk . The council traditionally meets every first and third Wednesday of the month . City council meetings are generally held from the third week in September to the third week in June . Meanwhile , the board of control oversees contracts for public projects within the municipal limits . The Youngstown Police Department and Youngstown Fire Department fall under the board 's supervision , as do the parks , civil service , community development , health , planning , and water departments . 
 Youngstown 's finance department oversees all municipal finances and supervises the departments of economic development and income tax . The city 's department of public works has sweeping supervisory responsibilities and oversees the departments of engineering , building inspection , building and grounds , signal and sign , demolition and housing , litter and recycling , street , and water waste treatment . The city 's law department represents the city on all legal issues , serving as counsel to all municipal departments . 
 = = Crime = = 
 Crime has been a lingering problem in many of the Rust Belt 's big and small urban communities , hampering economic recovery . In the late 1950s and early 1960s , Youngstown was nationally identified with gangland slayings that were often committed with car bombs . The town gained the nicknames " <unk> , USA " and " Bomb City , USA , " while the phrase " Youngstown tune @-@ up " became a nationally popular slang term for car @-@ bomb assassination . The image of Youngstown 's association with crime was reinforced by the construction of prisons inside the metropolitan area . As of 2012 , three adult correctional facilities continue to operate within city limits : the Mahoning County Justice Center the Northeast Ohio Correctional Center , and the Ohio State Penitentiary . 
 For decades , Youngstown was a haven for organized crime , and related corruption was ingrained into the fabric of its society . A 2000 publication in The New Republic listed a " chief of police , the outgoing prosecutor , the sheriff , the county engineer , members of the local police force , a city law director , several defense attorneys , politicians , judges , and a former assistant U.S. attorney " as controlled by the Mob . The city accelerated measures to limit the influence of organized crime upon all sectors of municipal life . The climax of this ongoing effort was the arrest , trial , and 2002 conviction of former U.S. Representative James A. <unk> , Jr . ( D ) , on bribery , tax fraud , and racketeering charges . Although this has since been cleaned up somewhat , in 2006 , Youngstown was ranked by Morgan Quitno Press , a Kansas @-@ based publishing and research company , as the 9th most dangerous city in the United States . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Primary and secondary = = = 
 The Youngstown City School District manages all public education within the city . As of 2007 , the school district was engaged in a process of reconfiguration , consolidating existing schools while building some new ones . District high schools once included South , North , Chaney , Rayen , East , Woodrow Wilson , Youngstown Early College , and <unk> Career and Technical Center . This roster has changed ; Chaney expanded , North , South , and the original East were closed , and Rayen and Wilson were closed to make way for a newly built and re @-@ opened East High School . Youngstown City School District participate in an " Early College " program , in cooperation with Youngstown State University . This program enables high school students to attend classes on campus and earn college credit . 
 The Diocese of Youngstown once oversaw more than 20 schools within the city limits . As a result of dwindling enrollment , only three Catholic schools continue to operate within Youngstown proper . These include one elementary school – St. Christine 's – and two secondary schools , Ursuline and Cardinal Mooney . ( The two high schools share a heated and longstanding rivalry in athletics . ) Several additional Catholic schools operate in Mahoning , Trumbull , Columbiana , Portage , Stark , and Ashtabula counties . 
 Youngstown hosts a small number of private schools . These include Valley Christian School , a <unk> K @-@ 12 school located on the south side of the city ; Akiva Academy , a progressive K @-@ 8 school located in the Jewish Community Center ; and the Montessori School of the Mahoning Valley , which offers alternative learning environments for students ranging from preschool to eighth grade . 
 Youngstown has a high school graduation rate of 65 % 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 Youngstown State University , the primary institution of higher learning in the Youngstown @-@ Warren metropolitan area , traces its origins to a local YMCA program that began offering college @-@ level courses in 1908 . YSU joined the Ohio system of higher education in 1967 . The university consists of six colleges : The College of Liberal Arts and Social Sciences ( CLASS ) ; The College of Science , Technology , Engineering and Math ( STEM ) ; The <unk> College of Business ; The <unk> College of Health and Human Services ; The College of Fine and Performing Arts ( FPA ) , and the College of Education . Once regarded as a commuter school , YSU serves about 13 @,@ 000 students , many from outside the Youngstown area . The campus is just north of the city 's downtown and south of Youngstown 's historic Fifth Avenue district , a neighborhood of <unk> , <unk> , and Spanish Colonial Revival @-@ style homes . 
 YSU offers tuition rates that are lower than the average of other public universities in Ohio , at $ 3 @,@ 856 per semester for undergraduates . The university 's assets include the Dana School of Music , an All @-@ Steinway school . The Dana School of Music is one of the six oldest continuously operating schools of music in the United States . Youngstown State 's Engineering programs are accredited through <unk> , making it one of the best Engineering Schools in the country , many graduates from the school have gone on to become the founders and heads for various Fortune 100 companies . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 In 2012 , <unk> ranked Youngstown , Ohio 4th among the best cities in the U.S. for raising a family . The article included the city 's schools , current low crime , cost @-@ of @-@ living , and property rates in its decision . 
 = = = Covelli Centre = = = 
 Despite the impact of regional economic decline , Youngstown offers an array of cultural and recreational resources . Moreover , the community 's range of attractions has increased in recent years . The newest addition is the Covelli Centre , a venue for Tier I Jr . A hockey games , concerts , " on ice " shows , and other forms of entertainment . 
 = = = Theater = = = 
 The community 's culture center is Powers Auditorium , a former Warner Brothers movie palace that serves as the area 's primary music hall while providing a home for the Youngstown Symphony Orchestra . This downtown landmark is one of five auditoriums within the city limits . Ford Recital Hall was built in 2006 as an addition to newly renovated Powers Auditorium . Imposing and neo @-@ classical Stambaugh Auditorium , on the city 's north side , has served for decades as a site of concerts and is often rented for private events . The facility also hosts the Stambaugh Youth Concert Band . Bruce Springsteen , who sang about the decline of Youngstown 's steel industry and its adverse effects on local workers in his ballad " Youngstown " , played at Stambaugh Auditorium on January 12 , 1996 , as part of his solo Ghost of Tom Joad Tour . 
 Oakland Center for the Arts , in the downtown area , is a venue for locally produced plays . This institution is complemented by the Youngstown Playhouse on the city 's south side . The Youngstown Playhouse , Mahoning County 's primary community theater , has served the area for more than 80 years , despite intermittent financial problems . Well known theatrical personalities from the Youngstown area include comedic actor Joe Flynn , screen actress Elizabeth Hartman , singer and Broadway performer Maureen McGovern , and television and screen actor Ed O 'Neill . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 The Butler Institute of American Art is on the northeastern edge of the Youngstown State University campus . This institution was established by industrialist Joseph G. Butler , Jr . , in 1919 as the first museum in the country dedicated to American art . Across the street from the Butler Institute stands the McDonough Museum of Art , YSU 's University Art Museum and the Mahoning Valley 's center for contemporary art . The McDonough , established in 1991 , features regular changing exhibitions by regional , national and international artists and provides public access to the work of students , faculty and alumni from the Department of Art . The Clarence R. Smith Mineral Museum , also on the YSU campus , is operated by the university 's geology department and housed in a campus building . 
 To the immediate north of YSU is the Arms Family Museum of Local History . The museum , housed in a 1905 Arts & Crafts style mansion on the main artery of Wick Avenue , is managed by the Mahoning Valley Historical Society . Once the estate of a local industrialist , the museum maintains period rooms that showcase the original contents of the household , including furnishings , art objects , and personal artifacts . The museum mounts rotating exhibits on topics related to local history . Recently , the museum opened the " Anne <unk> Christman Hands @-@ on History Room " . The <unk> Archival Library operates in the estate 's former carriage house , near the back of the site . 
 The Youngstown Historical Center of Industry and Labor sits south of the YSU campus on a grade overlooking the downtown area . This museum , owned and operated by the Ohio Historical Society , focuses on the Mahoning Valley 's history of steel production . Other museums include the Children 's Museum of the Valley , an interactive educational center in the downtown area , and the Davis Education and Recreation Center , a small museum that showcases the history of Youngstown 's Mill Creek Park . On the city 's north side the Youngstown Steel Heritage Foundation is constructing the Tod Engine Heritage Park , featuring a collection of steel industry equipment and artifacts . The main exhibit is a 1914 William Tod Co. rolling mill steam engine that was built in Youngstown and used at the Youngstown Sheet and Tube Brier Hill Works . The Tod Engine is one of three remaining rolling mill engines in the United States and is a Mechanical and Materials Engineering Landmark . 
 Youngstown 's most popular resource is Mill Creek Park , a five @-@ mile ( 8 km ) -long stretch of landscaped woodland reminiscent of Rock Creek Park in Washington , D.C. Mill Creek Park is the oldest park district in Ohio , established as a township park in 1891 . The park 's highlights include the restored 19th century Lanterman 's Mill , the rock formations of Bear 's Den , scores of nature trails , the Fellows Riverside Gardens and Education Center , the " Cinderella " iron link bridge , and two 18 hole Donald Ross golf courses . 
 Mill Creek Park encompasses approximately 2 @,@ 600 acres ( 1 @,@ 100 ha ) , 20 miles ( 32 km ) of drives and 15 miles ( 24 km ) of foot trails . Its attractions include gardens , streams , lakes , woodlands , meadows , and wildlife . 
 Fellows Riverside Gardens ' popular lookout point offers visitors contrasting views of the area . From the south side , the canopied woodlands overlooking Lake Glacier are visible ; from the north side , visitors are presented with a view of downtown Youngstown . The park features two 18 @-@ hole golf courses . The North Course is on rolling terrain , while the South Course features narrow , tree @-@ lined fairways . Other features include playgrounds , athletic fields , and picnic areas . 
 In 2005 , Mill Creek Park was placed on the National Register of Historic Places . A plaque commemorating this event is near a memorial statue of Volney Rogers , the Youngstown attorney who set aside land for the creation of Mill Creek Park . 
 A smaller recreational area called Wick Park is on the historic North side . Wick Park 's periphery is lined with early 20th @-@ century mansions built by the city 's industrialists , business leaders , and professionals during Youngstown 's " boom " years . Stambaugh Auditorium , a popular venue for concerts and other public events , is near the park 's southwestern edge . Another small recreational area called Crandall Park is also on the North side . Crandall Park offers well @-@ maintained and landscaped homes , tree @-@ lined streets , and walkable access to shopping and recreations . Several cemeteries ( notably historic Oak Hill Cemetery ) and small recreational spaces are scattered throughout the city . Some of those recreational spaces include Homestead Park , John White park , Lynn park , <unk> Pool , and the Northside Pool . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Youngstown has enjoyed a long tradition of professional and semi @-@ professional sports . In earlier decades , the city produced scores of minor league baseball teams , including the Youngstown Ohio Works , Youngstown Champs , Youngstown Indians , Youngstown <unk> , Youngstown Browns , Youngstown Gremlins , and Youngstown Athletics . Local enthusiasm for baseball was such that the community hosted championship games of the National Amateur Baseball Federation throughout the 1930s and 1940s . The area 's minor league baseball teams were supplemented by semi @-@ professional football teams , including the Youngstown Patricians , who won the 1915 championship of the informal " Ohio League " ( a direct predecessor to the National Football League ) , and the Youngstown <unk> , who competed in the Middle Atlantic Football League in the 1970s and early 1980s . For three seasons , Youngstown was home to the Mahoning Valley Thunder of the now @-@ defunct af2 , the minor league for the Arena Football League until 2009 when the franchise ceased operations . Local minor league basketball teams included the Youngstown Pride of the WBA from 1987 to 1992 ) , the Youngstown Hawks of the IBA in 1999 , and the Mahoning Valley Wildcats of the IBL in 2005 . Covelli Centre ( known then as the Chevrolet Centre ) was the home of the Youngstown <unk> hockey team that played in the Central Hockey League until May 2008 . 
 The community has a lengthy tradition of collegiate sports . The Youngstown State University Penguins , a major regional draw , compete in the Missouri Valley Football Conference . The Penguins , noted participants in FCS ( I @-@ AA ) football , play their games at Stambaugh Stadium and enjoy one of the more supportive fan bases . All other YSU athletic teams compete in the Horizon League . The Youngstown State men and women 's basketball teams hold their games at Youngstown State 's <unk> Center . The teams average about 2 @,@ 500 fans per game , a number that has been on the rise the past two seasons with a new style of play under Head Coach Jerry Slocum . In addition , the YSU baseball and softball teams have enjoyed local support and success . The baseball team reached the NCAA super @-@ regionals in 2005 , and the softball team did so in 2006 . 
 Youngstown has produced a significant number of boxing champions , including bantamweight Greg Richardson , lightweights Ray " Boom Boom " Mancini and Harry Arroyo , and middleweight Kelly Pavlik . 
 One of the city 's most recent sports @-@ related attractions is the Covelli Centre , which was funded primarily through a $ 26 million federal grant . Located on the site of an abandoned steel mill , the large , high @-@ tech facility opened in October 2005 . It was formerly called the Chevrolet Center , and during planning it was known as the Youngstown Convocation Center . The Centre 's main tenants are the Youngstown Phantoms , who play in the United States Hockey League . Previously , it was home to the Youngstown <unk> hockey team , who played in the CHL . The city plans to develop vacant land adjacent to the Centre for a park , a riverwalk ( the Mahoning River flows through the site ) , an amphitheater , or an athletic stadium for the city 's public and private high schools . 
 These investments reflect wide appreciation of Youngstown 's athletic tradition , which has produced noted figures in a variety of sports . Prominent athletes with connections to the city include former world boxing champions Greg Richardson , IBF lightweight champion Harry Arroyo , College Football Hall of Fame end Bob Dove , Hall of Fame umpire Billy Evans , major league pitcher Dave <unk> , NFL quarterback Bernie Kosar , IBF cruiserweight champion Jeff <unk> , WBA lightweight champion Ray " Boom Boom " Mancini , major league manager Jimmy McAleer , WBC and WBO middleweight champion Kelly Pavlik , legendary baseball trainer " <unk> " Reese , major league outfielder George <unk> , and Heisman Trophy recipient Frank <unk> . 
 = = Neighborhoods = = 
 = = Transportation = = 
 The Youngstown area is served by the Western Reserve Transit Authority ( WRTA ) bus system , which is supported through Mahoning County property and sales taxes . WRTA , whose main terminal is in the downtown area , provides service throughout the city and into surrounding Mahoning and Trumbull counties . The downtown terminal serves as the Youngstown area 's Greyhound terminal . 
 In the vicinity of the WRTA terminal is a former Baltimore and Ohio Railroad station . The historic terminal building has now been converted into a banquet hall , served Amtrak 's Three Rivers as a train station from 1995 to 2005 . The local railroads now serve freight trains exclusively . 
 The Youngstown @-@ Warren Regional Airport is currently served by three airlines ( Allegiant Air , Sun Country Airlines and Via Air , in order of market share ) , five rental car agencies Alamo , National , Enterprise , Budget , Avis , and has direct non @-@ stop flights to Orlando ( Allegiant ) , Fort Myers ( Allegiant ) , Tampa ( Allegiant ) , Atlantic City ( Via Air ) , Tunica ( Via Air , Sun Country ) , and Gulfport ( Sun Country ) . Additional seasonal service includes flights to Myrtle Beach , SC ( Allegiant ) . 
 On June 23 , 2016 , Uber launched its services in Youngstown , covering all of Mahoning County and most of Trumbull County . Before the launch , Youngstown had been the largest city in the United States that had never had Uber in some capacity . 
 = = Media = = 
 Youngstown features diverse media , including television , print and radio . Newspapers include The Buckeye Review ( bi @-@ monthly / African @-@ American ) , The Business Journal ( bi @-@ monthly / business ) , The Catholic Exponent ( bi @-@ monthly / religious ) , Daily Legal News ( daily / legal ) , The <unk> ( bi @-@ weekly / college ) , The Jewish Journal ( monthly / Jewish ) , The Metro Monthly ( monthly / news , features , calendar ) , Morning Journal ( daily / Columbiana County news ) , The Review ( weekly / news , features ) , Senior News ( monthly / seniors ) , The Journal ( weekly / Struthers , Campbell and <unk> ) , Parent Magazine ( monthly / children 's ) , Peace Action Youngstown ( quarterly / peace activism ) , The Town Crier ( weekly / suburban news ) , Record Courier ( daily / Portage County news ) , Akron Beacon Journal ( daily / regional news ) , The Plain Dealer ( daily / regional news ) , Pittsburgh Post Gazette ( daily / regional news ) , Warren Tribune Chronicle ( daily / regional news ) , and the The Vindicator ( daily / regional news ) , The News Outlet ( university based media collaborative ) 
 Youngstown is served by 10 television stations , three of which are repeaters of TV stations in other cities , and a fourth coming in the near future from Pittsburgh NBC affiliate WPXI in nearby New Castle , Pennsylvania , that would easily penetrate Youngstown pending FCC approval . This is unusual for a mid @-@ sized city near large metro areas such as Cleveland and Pittsburgh . Nearby Akron , with a larger population than Youngstown and Warren combined , has no local television stations and relies on Cleveland for its local news . The community 's 273 @,@ 480 television households make the Youngstown market the nation 's 106th largest , according to Nielsen Media Research . 
 The market is served by stations affiliated with major American networks including : <unk> @-@ TV ( channel 21 , NBC ) , WYTV ( channel 33 , ABC ) , <unk> @-@ LD ( channel 17 / 62 & 27 @.@ 2 on <unk> @-@ DT2 , Fox ) , <unk> @-@ TV ( channel 27 , CBS ) , MY @-@ YTV ( channel 33 @.@ 2 , <unk> ) , and <unk> ( channel 21 @.@ 2 , The CW ) . <unk> @-@ TV and its digital subchannel <unk> are both locally owned & operated by the <unk> family , owners of The Vindicator . The rest of Youngstown 's commercial television stations are either owned and operated by Media General or operated by MG through a shared services agreement . Western Reserve Public Media airs on channel 45 ( <unk> ) from Alliance , Ohio , and channel 49 ( <unk> ) from Akron is a member of PBS . 
 Youngstown is served by 37 different radio stations in the metropolitan area making it the 119th largest radio market in the United States . Stations include 17 on the AM band and 20 on the FM band . The majority of the most powerful and popular radio stations in the Youngstown @-@ Warren market are divided between two national media companies : Clear Channel and Cumulus Media . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 <unk> Nová Ves , Slovakia , since 1991 
 = 2015 Tirreno – Adriatico = 
 The 2015 Tirreno – Adriatico was the 50th edition of the Tirreno – Adriatico stage race . It took place from 11 to 17 March and was the third race of the 2015 UCI World Tour . The race is one of the most important races in the early part of the cycling season and is used by riders preparing both for the Grand Tours and for the classics season . 
 The route of the 2015 edition started and finished with individual time trials , one of which was rescheduled from a team time trial shortly before the race began . In between , the race consisted of two stages suitable for sprinters , one for puncheurs and two for climbers . The key stage of the race was stage 5 , which involved a summit finish on Monte Terminillo . The defending champion from the 2014 edition was Alberto Contador ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , who was expected to be challenged by three of the strongest stage racers in the world , Nairo Quintana ( Movistar Team ) , Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) and Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) . Froome , however , pulled out shortly before the race . 
 The first individual time trial was won by Adriano Malori ( Movistar Team ) , who kept the lead for the first two stages . Greg Van Avermaet ( BMC Racing Team ) and Wout Poels ( Team Sky ) won the next two stages , each taking the race lead for one day . The queen stage to Monte Terminillo was won by Quintana , who took the overall lead and was able to defend it to the end of the race . Bauke Mollema ( Trek Factory Racing ) finished second , 18 seconds behind Quintana , with Rigoberto Urán ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) third . 
 Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) won the points classification , after he won one stage and finished in the top ten on three others . The mountains classification was won by Carlos Quintero ( Colombia ) , while Nairo Quintana won the young riders classification as well as the overall race victory . 
 = = Teams = = 
 As Tirreno @-@ Adriatico is a UCI World Tour event , all 17 UCI WorldTeams were invited automatically and were obliged to send a squad . Five Professional Continental teams received wildcard invitations . 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 The key stages on the general classification were expected to be the time trials and the summit finish . The race was originally expected to be the first contest of the season between the four riders expected to contest the Tour de France : the 2014 Tirreno – Adriatico champion Alberto Contador ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , the 2013 Tirreno – Adriatico champion Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) , Nairo Quintana ( Movistar Team ) and Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) . Shortly before the race , however , Froome withdrew on account of a chest infection ( he had also withdrawn at the last minute in 2013 ) . Following Froome 's withdrawal , Contador was seen as the main favourite for the race ; he had demonstrated his form when he and Froome fought a close battle in the Vuelta a Andalucía a weeks earlier . Nibali , however , had not yet shown good form in the 2015 season , while Quintana had not raced for several weeks following a crash . Other riders considered to have a chance in the general classification included Rigoberto Urán ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) , Dan Martin ( Cannondale – Garmin ) and Thibault Pinot ( FDJ ) . 
 As well as losing Froome from the general classification battle , the race also lost one of the riders expected to challenge for stage wins . Marcel Kittel ( Giant – Alpecin ) withdrew from the race with a virus . The principal sprinters left in the race were Mark Cavendish ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , Elia Viviani ( Team Sky ) , Tyler Farrar ( MTN – Qhubeka ) and Sam Bennett ( Bora – Argon 18 ) . The race was also notable as the first time when Peter Sagan raced alongside Contador in the Tinkoff – Saxo team ; Sagan was expected to feature both on the sprint stages and on the uphill finish on stage 3 . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Tirreno – Adriatico is an important race in the early part of the road cycling season . It is the third UCI World Tour race of the year , running at the same time as Paris – Nice . The two races are sometimes seen as being in competition for prestige and for the best riders . Tirreno – Adriatico is an important test as part of riders ' preparations both for the Grand Tours and for the classics races , such as Milan – San Remo . The race generally takes the riders east across central Italy , from the Tyrrhenian Sea to the Adriatic Sea ; the race is therefore sometimes known as the " race of the two seas " and the Italian names of the seas give the name Tirreno – Adriatico . 
 The race was originally intended to begin with a 22 kilometres ( 13 @.@ 7 mi ) team time trial around Lido di Camaiore . This was expected to be a difficult test and to result in significant gaps in the general classification . Heavy wind and rain in the week before the race , however , forced the race organisers , RCS Sport , to change this stage . Though the start and finish lines were unchanged , the stage was shortened , first to 5 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) , then to 5 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) ; it was also changed to be an individual time trial . This was expected to result in smaller gaps ; it was a particular blow to the Orica – GreenEDGE team , who had based most of their squad around the team time trial . 
 Stage 2 was a fairly flat stage , expected to suit the sprinters preparing for Milan – San Remo . Stage 3 was also unlikely to change the general classification , though it included a steep uphill finish . The key stages , however , came on the weekend . Stage 4 was a difficult , mountainous stage with a downhill finish . The following day 's route had a summit finish on the 16 km ( 10 mi ) climb of Monte Terminillo . Stage 6 was another fairly flat stage and the race ended on the Adriatic coast with another individual time trial in San Benedetto del Tronto . 
 = = Stages = = 
 = = = Stage 1 = = = 
 11 March 2015 – Lido di Camaiore , 5 @.@ 4 km ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) ( ITT ) 
 Stage 1 was originally intended to be a 22 @.@ 7 @-@ kilometre ( 14 @.@ 1 mi ) team time trial , but bad weather ( high wind and torrential rain ) in the week leading up to the event made this impossible . The race organisers reduced the race to a 5 @.@ 7 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) individual time trial ; on the day of the race , this was shortened by a further 300 metres ( 980 ft ) . The course was based in the Lido di Camaiore holiday resort on the Tyrrhenian coast and was entirely flat . The out @-@ and @-@ back course meant that the riders had a tailwind on the first half of the course and a headwind on the second . 
 The early benchmark time was set by Daniel Oss ( BMC Racing Team ) , who completed the course in 6 ' 08 " . A good time was also set by Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , whose time was 6 ' 10 " and who was the best young rider in the prologue . Sagan did well to set such a good time , since he hit a pavement early in his ride and nearly fell . Oss kept the lead for a long time , but was eventually overtaken by Matthias Brändle ( IAM Cycling ) . Brändle , however , was immediately overtaken by Adriano Malori ( Movistar Team ) , the Italian national time trial champion , who had two previous stage wins in Tirreno – Adriatico time trials . Malori 's time was 6 ' 04 " . Maciej Bodnar ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , Steve Cummings ( MTN – Qhubeka ) and Greg Van Avermaet ( BMC Racing Team ) all came close to Malori 's time , but were unable to beat it . The principal favourite for the stage , former world time trial champion Fabian Cancellara ( Trek Factory Racing ) , finished one second behind Malori , who therefore won the stage , winning both the blue jersey of the overall leader of the race and the red jersey of the points classification leader . 
 Rigoberto Urán ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) was the fastest of the general classification contenders , finishing 19th on the stage , 10 " behind Malori . Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) was the first of the three major favourites for the race , one second behind Urán . Alberto Contador ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) and Nairo Quintana ( Movistar Team ) both lost time . 
 = = = Stage 2 = = = 
 12 March 2015 – Camaiore to Cascina , 153 km ( 95 @.@ 1 mi ) 
 The second stage of the race was a 153 @-@ kilometre ( 95 mi ) route from Camaiore , the location of stage 1 , to Cascina . The course started with one and a half laps of a circuit around Camaiore , including the only two categorised climbs of the day , before heading south @-@ east towards the city of Lucca . After leaving Lucca , the course turned west , then headed north to enter Cascina . In Cascina , the riders completed two laps of a 20 @.@ 7 @-@ kilometre ( 12 @.@ 9 mi ) finishing circuit . Although the final circuit was flat , there were three roundabouts , a sharp turn and a bridge in the final 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) . 
 An early breakaway was formed on the circuit around Camaiore . This was made up of seven riders : Edoardo Zardini ( Bardiani – CSF ) , Danilo Wyss ( BMC Racing Team ) , Cristiano Salerno and Patrick Konrad ( Bora – Argon 18 ) , Jorge Camilo <unk> , Carlos Quintero ( both Colombia ) and Martijn Keizer ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) . The breakaway built up a lead of over six minutes and took all the mountains classification points . Wyss won the first ahead of Quintero ; Quintero beat Wyss on the second climb . Danilo Wyss went on to take the jersey for the leader of the mountains classification thanks to his better general classification standing after the stage . The breakaway was carefully controlled by the sprinters ' teams − principally Etixx – Quick @-@ Step and Tinkoff – Saxo − and with 91 kilometres ( 57 mi ) remaining the breakaway had less than three minutes ' lead . The gap was reduced to less than 90 seconds as the peloton entered the finishing circuit with 41 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 25 @.@ 7 mi ) remaining . 
 About 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) later , Zardini attacked and was followed by Quintero and Salerno . These three riders continued alone ; they had less than a minute 's lead as they entered the final lap of the circuit with 20 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 12 @.@ 9 mi ) remaining and were caught soon afterwards . There was a crash in the peloton 11 kilometres ( 7 mi ) from the finish , which eliminated Matteo Pelucchi ( Lampre – Merida ) from contention , as well as causing some delay for Orica – GreenEDGE 's general classification rider Adam Yates . 
 Going into the final kilometres of the race , several teams were competing at the front of the peloton . MTN – Qhubeka , Tinkoff – Saxo and Etixx – Quick @-@ Step all tried to set up their sprinters , with Zdeněk Štybar particularly prominent . MTN – Qhubeka led the group under the flamme rouge with 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) remaining , as Edvald Boasson Hagen attempted to lead out his teammate Tyler Farrar . In the final few hundred metres , however , there was a large crash . Mark Cavendish ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) suddenly moved right , clashing wheels with Elia Viviani ( Team Sky ) . Cavendish was unable to continue sprinting , while Viviani was thrown from his bike while riding at over 70 km / h ( 43 mph ) . Several other riders were brought down in the incident , including Sacha Modolo ( Lampre – Merida ) and Luka <unk> ( Giant – Alpecin ) . This crash left a small group of 12 riders to contest the stage finish . Jens Debusschere ( Lotto – Soudal ) , riding in the colours of the Belgian national champion , outsprinted Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) on the line ; Sam Bennett ( Bora – Argon 18 ) finished third . 
 It was revealed after the stage that Cavendish 's sudden movement had been caused by his chain falling off the big <unk> . The loss of power caused him to swerve right and Viviani was unable to avoid him . Viviani suffered cuts and abrasions from the crash , though he avoided any broken bones and was able to complete the stage . Etixx – Quick @-@ Step were keen to investigate the incident , as Tom Boonen had suffered a similar problem in the Tour of Qatar . 
 Thanks to the time bonus he won for coming second , Sagan moved up into second place overall , on the same time as Malori . Debusschere , meanwhile , moved into the lead of the points classification . 
 = = = Stage 3 = = = 
 13 March 2015 – Cascina to Arezzo , 203 km ( 126 @.@ 1 mi ) 
 Stage 3 took the riders on a 203 @-@ kilometre ( 126 @.@ 1 mi ) route from Cascina to Arezzo . The route was very similar to stage 3 of the previous year 's race , with a long route east , including two categorised climbs , and a finishing circuit in Arezzo . In the 2015 edition , the riders did five laps of a 15 @-@ kilometre ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) circuit . The final 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) of the circuit was difficult : it was uphill , with one section of 11 % , there was a narrow gate and one section of road was cobbled . On the previous year 's stage , Peter Sagan had beaten Michał Kwiatkowski ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) in the sprint . 
 The early breakaway was formed by Nicola Boem ( Bardiani – CSF ) , Carlos Quintero ( Colombia ) , Chad Haga ( Giant – Alpecin ) , Danilo Wyss ( BMC Racing Team ) and Rick <unk> ( LottoNL – Jumbo ) . Wyss , the leader of the mountains classification , won both mountain sprints , with Quintero behind him both times . With 95 kilometres ( 59 mi ) left to race , the breakaway had a five @-@ minute lead . Sagan 's Tinkoff – Saxo team , however , controlled the race carefully : Matteo Tosatto and Christopher <unk> @-@ Jensen both put in long efforts on the front of the peloton to bring the group back . The lead was less than a minute with 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) left to race and the breakaway split . 18 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 11 @.@ 5 mi ) from the end , Boem and Haga were the last riders of the group to be caught . 
 Tinkoff – Saxo controlled the peloton in the following kilometres , with BMC Racing Team , Team Sky and IAM Cycling close behind . Sagan 's teammates , however , were quickly running out and , with 4 kilometres ( 2 mi ) remaining , he only had Maciej Bodnar left to support him . BMC , meanwhile , had several riders left to support Greg Van Avermaet . Van Avermaet was therefore perfectly positioned as the climb began and attacked towards the top . He won a small gap ahead of Zdeněk Štybar ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and was able to hold on to his lead to take the stage victory . Sagan was the quickest in the final metres , but he had started too far back ; although he was able to pass <unk> to finish second on the stage , he was unable to catch Van Avermaet . Sagan did , however , take the lead in the points classification . Van Avermaet took over the lead in the general classification thanks to the bonus seconds he won on the stage . 
 = = = Stage 4 = = = 
 14 March 2015 – <unk> ( Arezzo ) to Castelraimondo , 226 km ( 140 @.@ 4 mi ) 
 The fourth stage of the race was the longest stage of the race at 226 kilometres ( 140 @.@ 4 mi ) . The route took the riders from Arezzo east , with intermediate sprints in <unk> and Fabriano and two classified climbs . The riders then entered a 11 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) finishing circuit around the town of Castelraimondo . The riders did two laps of the circuit , each of which included the climb of the Crispiero , a 3 @.@ 0 @-@ kilometre ( 2 mi ) climb with an average gradient of over 9 % . Following the climb , there was a technical 6 @-@ kilometre ( 4 mi ) descent into the stage finish . 
 The early breakaway was formed by two riders from Orica – GreenEDGE , Mathew Hayman and Luke Durbridge . The two riders built up a lead of over seven minutes ahead of the main peloton , though it seemed that both riders had crashed at some point on the route , away from the view of the television cameras . Two separate chasing groups formed : one was made up of Nathan Haas ( Cannondale – Garmin ) and Carlos Quintero ( Colombia ) ; the other was formed by Walter Pedraza , Miguel Ángel <unk> ( both Colombia ) and Manuel Quinziato ( BMC Racing Team ) . Neither of the chase groups was successful , however , and the lead pair stayed clear until Durbridge tired with 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) remaining . Hayman was caught soon afterwards . 
 On the first climb of the Crispiero , Giovanni Visconti ( Movistar Team ) attacked along with Michele Scarponi ( Astana ) and Julián Arredondo ( Trek Factory Racing ) . Visconti was the first to cross the summit , with Daniel Moreno ( Team Katusha ) catching the group on the descent . The riders were caught , however , on the flat section between the two climbs , with approximately 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) still to race . The peloton was led at this point by Tinkoff – Saxo . 
 After the group was caught , AG2R La Mondiale came forwards in support of Domenico Pozzovivo . Alexis Vuillermoz led the peloton into the foot of the final climb , dropping Van Avermaet , the race leader , with about 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) left . Giampaolo Caruso ( Team Katusha ) was the next to attack . As he was approaching the summit and looking at the group behind , Wout Poels ( Team Sky ) attacked and came past on Caruso 's left . 
 Poels therefore entered the descent off the Crispiero alone , with several seconds lead over the main group . The main favourites for the general classification hesitated before taking up the chase , allowing Poels to build a lead . Eventually , Katusha attempted to chase him down , but Poels was able to make the most of the difficult descent and built a 20 @-@ second lead . Although this was reduced on the way to the finish , Poels held on to take the win , his first for Team Sky . He also moved into the overall lead of the race , with a 17 @-@ second advantage over Rigoberto Urán ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , who had won the sprint for second place in the group behind . 
 Poels , who was leading Sky in the absence of Chris Froome , expressed hope after the stage that he would be able to defend his race lead on the summit finish the following day . In the other classifications , Thibaut Pinot ( FDJ ) moved into the lead of the young riders competition , as he moved up to fourth place in the general classification . Carlos Quintero , having been part of the breakaway for the third day running , took enough mountain points on the stage to move into the lead of the mountains classification . 
 = = = Stage 5 = = = 
 15 March 2015 – <unk> to Monte Terminillo , 199 km ( 123 @.@ 7 mi ) 
 Stage 5 was the queen stage of the 2015 Tirreno − Adriatico and the only summit finish of the race . It took the riders on a 199 @-@ kilometre ( 123 @.@ 7 mi ) course from <unk> . The peloton first travelled south , crossing three significant climbs in the first 72 kilometres ( 45 mi ) . The middle of the stage was flat , as the riders travelled southwest towards Terni , but the final part of the stage was difficult . The route first passed through Rieti , then turned east towards the summit finish at a ski station on Monte Terminillo . The final climb was 16 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 0 mi ) in length , with an average gradient of 7 @.@ 3 % and a total ascent of 1 @,@ 175 metres ( 3 @,@ 855 ft ) . The steepest sections were in the first part of the climb ( one section had a gradient of 12 % ) ; the rest of the climb had a steady incline , except for the final few hundred metres of false flat . The stage took place in cold , difficult conditions with temperatures below 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) . There were rumours before the stage that it would have to be cancelled , but these were refuted by the race organisers and the stage took place as planned . 
 The day 's main breakaway was formed early on by Maxime Monfort ( Lotto – Soudal ) , Michele Scarponi , Andriy <unk> ( both Astana ) , Alessandro De Marchi ( BMC Racing Team ) , Matteo Montaguti ( AG2R La Mondiale ) , Paul Voss ( Bora – Argon 18 ) , Angel <unk> ( Team Katusha ) and Jesus Herrada ( Movistar Team ) . They built up a lead of over seven minutes after 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) of racing . <unk> won both mountain sprints early in the stage , with Scarponi second on both occasions . After the two climbs , the main peloton made an effort to reduce the breakaway 's lead and the gap was reduced to two minutes at the base of the final climb of the day . 
 The breakaway disintegrated on the final climb , with Scarponi , De Marchi and Monfort forming a lead group . In the peloton , Vasil Kiryienka ( Team Sky ) and Ivan Basso ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) were setting the pace . Scarponi pulled clear of De Marchi and Monfort to lead the race solo , as Roman Kreuziger and Alberto Contador ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) briefly pulled clear of the main pack . As the riders entered the final 5 kilometres ( 3 mi ) , snow began to fall . As Contador drifted back in the pack , Nairo Quintana ( Movistar Team ) attacked and immediately broke clear of the pack . Contador tried to respond but was unable to take Quintana 's wheel . Contador ended up in a group of about 15 riders chasing Quintana . Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) was dropped at this point , while Quintana quickly caught up to Scarponi . 
 Contador twice made attacks on the chasing group , but on both occasions was unable to break free , although the race leader , Wout Poels ( Team Sky ) was dropped . Rigoberto Urán ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) also made an unsuccessful attack . Finally , Bauke Mollema ( Trek Factory Racing ) put in a successful attack and dropped the group behind . Contador did most of the work in a group of five riders , including Urán , Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) , Thibaut Pinot ( FDJ ) and Adam Yates ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) . The group did not keep up a steady pace , however , and Quintana was able to reach the finish line with a lead of 41 seconds over Mollema and 55 seconds over Contador 's group . Quintana therefore moved into the lead of the overall classification , 39 seconds ahead of Mollema and over a minute ahead of Contador . Poels , meanwhile , finished 16th on the stage , 1 ' 37 " behind Quintana , and dropped to tenth in the general classification . 
 After the stage , several riders expressed displeasure with the extreme weather conditions . Fabian Cancellara ( Trek Factory Racing ) was prominent among them , as he had been in a dispute over hot weather at the 2015 Tour of Oman , with Filippo Pozzato ( Lampre – Merida ) and Luca Paolini ( Team Katusha ) expressing similar concerns . The conditions were particularly difficult for the riders in the gruppetto , as the conditions they faced in the final kilometres were significantly worse than those faced by the race leaders . Cancellara and other riders called for an extreme @-@ weather policy to govern racing in such conditions . 
 = = = Stage 6 = = = 
 16 March 2015 – Rieti to Porto Sant 'Elpidio , 210 km ( 130 @.@ 5 mi ) 
 The sixth stage was the final road stage of the race . It took the riders from the city of Rieti , at the foot of Monte Terminillo , northeast to finish on the Adriatic coast at Porto Sant 'Elpidio . The stage was 210 km ( 130 @.@ 5 mi ) in length . The first part was a 181 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 112 @.@ 6 mi ) route , which took the riders from the startline and across some medium mountains . The most difficult climb was at <unk> and came 78 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 49 @.@ 0 mi ) from the finish line . Once the riders had reached Porto Sant 'Elpidio , they entered a 14 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 9 mi ) finishing circuit . They first rode the final 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) of the circuit and crossed the finish line ; this was the final intermediate sprint of the day . They then completed two complete laps of the circuit . The final 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 0 mi ) were entirely straight . The stage took place in rainy conditions . 
 An early breakaway formed at 15 kilometres ( 9 mi ) , involving Yukiya Arashiro ( Team Europcar ) , Stijn Devolder ( Trek Factory Racing ) and Alessandro Vanotti ( Astana ) . They were caught , however , on the climb at <unk> , as Tinkoff – Saxo increased the pace in the peloton . Their team leader , Alberto Contador , was one of the riders to set the pace on behalf of Peter Sagan . On this climb , several of the race 's main sprinters were unable to stay with the peloton . These included Mark Cavendish ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and Luka <unk> ( Giant – Alpecin ) . The breakaway 's advantage had been reduced to 1 ' 30 " and , soon after the summit of the climb , <unk> sat up and was caught . Arashiro and Vanotti were caught soon after , with 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) still to race . 
 Vanotti , however , attacked again and built a 40 @-@ second gap to the peloton , which was still led by Tinkoff – Saxo . He was joined in the lead by Alexis Vuillermoz ( AG2R La Mondiale ) . The two riders rode together until there were 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) remaining , when Vuillermoz attacked . Tinkoff – Saxo were joined by Lotto – Soudal at the front of the pack and Vuillermoz was caught with 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) remaining . Throughout this time , the group containing the main sprinters in the race had been unable to reduce the advantage , which was 4 ' with 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) to race . Cavendish , along with his entire sprint train , pulled out of the race at they crossed the finish line for the first time in order to rest ahead of Milan – San Remo . 
 As the main peloton approached the finish line , it was led by MTN – Qhubeka , who still had several riders in the main pack . Tinkoff – Saxo had no riders left to support Sagan . He therefore positioned himself behind the final MTN – Qhubeka rider , Gerald Ciolek , who was being led out by Edvald Boasson Hagen . Sagan passed Ciolek in the final 150 metres ( 490 ft ) win the stage . Ciolek finished second , with Jens Debusschere ( Lotto – Soudal ) in third . This was Sagan 's first win in nine months , when he won a stage of the 2014 Tour de Suisse . 
