 The implication was that the authority to use nuclear weapons had been handed over to MacArthur . Truman was forced to issue a clarification that " only the President can authorize the use of the atom bomb , and no such authorization has been given . " Truman had touched upon one of the most sensitive issues in civil @-@ military relations in the post @-@ World War II period : civilian control of nuclear weapons , which was enshrined in the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 . 
 On 5 April 1951 , the Joint Chiefs of Staff drafted orders for MacArthur authorizing attacks on Manchuria and the Shantung Peninsula if the Chinese launched airstrikes against his forces originating from there . The next day Truman met with the chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission , Gordon Dean , and arranged for the transfer of nine Mark 4 nuclear bombs to military control . Dean was apprehensive about delegating the decision on how they should be used to MacArthur , who lacked expert technical knowledge of the weapons and their effects . The Joint Chiefs were not entirely comfortable about giving them to MacArthur either , for fear that he might prematurely carry out his orders . Instead , they decided that the nuclear strike force would report to the Strategic Air Command . 
 = = = Foreign pressure = = = 
 The British Prime Minister , Clement Attlee , was particularly disturbed by Truman 's gaffe about nuclear weapons , and sought to revive the wartime Quebec Agreement , under which the United States would not use nuclear weapons without Britain 's consent . The British were concerned that the United States was drifting into a war with China . In a visit to the United States in December 1950 , Attlee raised the fears of the British and other European governments that " General MacArthur was running the show . " As MacArthur 's views about the importance of Asia in world affairs were well known , it was feared that United States would shift its focus away from Europe . In this instance , MacArthur was defended by Bradley , whose <unk> dated back to World War II . 
 The British became alarmed in January 1951 when the Americans began talking of evacuating Korea . The British argued that to maintain European faith and unity it was vital to maintain some presence in Korea , even if it was nothing more than a toehold in the Pusan area . Once again , Bradley defended MacArthur , but it was clear that he had become an irritant in the relationship between the two countries . However , the alliance with Britain itself was unpopular in Congress . House Minority Leader Joseph William Martin , Jr. slammed Truman for following Attlee 's Britain to " slavery to government and crippling debt . " 
 = = = Public statements = = = 
 On 1 December 1950 , MacArthur was asked by a reporter if the restrictions on operations against Chinese forces on the far side of the Yalu River were " a handicap to effective military operations . " He replied that they were indeed " an enormous handicap , unprecedented in military history . " On 6 December , Truman issued a directive requiring all military officers and diplomatic officials to clear with the State Department all but routine statements before making them public , " and ... refrain from direct communications on military or foreign policy with newspapers , magazines , and other publicity media . " Major General Courtney Whitney gave MacArthur a legal opinion that this applied " solely to formal public statements and not to communiqués , correspondence or personal conversations . " MacArthur made similar remarks in press statements on 13 February and 7 March 1951 . 
 In February and March 1951 , the tide of war began to turn again , and MacArthur 's forces drove north . Seoul , which had fallen on 4 January , was recaptured on 17 March . This raised hopes in Washington that the Chinese and North Koreans might be amenable to a ceasefire agreement , and Truman prepared a statement to this effect . MacArthur was informed of it by the Joint Chiefs on 20 March , and he warned the new commander of the Eighth Army , Lieutenant General Matthew B. Ridgway , that political constraints might soon impose limits on his proposed operations . On 23 March , MacArthur issued a communiqué about offering a ceasefire to the Chinese : 
 Of even greater significance than our tactical successes has been the clear revelation that this new enemy , Red China , of such exaggerated and vaunted military power , lacks the industrial capability to provide adequately many critical items necessary to the conduct of modern war . He lacks the manufacturing base and those raw materials needed to produce , maintain and operate even moderate air and naval power , and he cannot provide the essentials for successful ground operations , such as tanks , heavy artillery and other refinements science has introduced into the conduct of military campaigns . Formerly his great numerical potential might well have filled this gap but with the development of existing methods of mass destruction numbers alone do not offset the vulnerability inherent in such deficiencies . Control of the seas and the air , which in turn means control over supplies , communications and transportation , are no less essential and decisive now than in the past . When this control exists , as in our case , and is coupled with an inferiority of ground firepower in the enemy 's case , the resulting disparity is such that it cannot be overcome by bravery , however fanatical , or the most gross indifference to human loss . 
 These military weaknesses have been clearly and definitely revealed since Red China entered upon its undeclared war in Korea . Even under the inhibitions which now restrict the activity of the United Nations forces and the corresponding military advantages which accrue to Red China , it has been shown its complete inability to accomplish by force of arms the conquest of Korea . The enemy , therefore must by now be painfully aware that a decision of the United Nations to depart from its tolerant effort to contain the war to the area of Korea , through an expansion of our military operations to its coastal areas and interior bases , would doom Red China to the risk of imminent military collapse . These basic facts being established , there should be no insuperable difficulty in arriving at decisions on the Korean problem if the issues are resolved on their own merits , without being burdened by extraneous matters not directly related to Korea , such as Formosa or China 's seat in the United Nations . 
 The next day , MacArthur authorized Ridgway to advance up to 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of the 38th Parallel . Truman would later report that " I was ready to kick him into the North China Sea ... I was never so put out in my life . " Truman felt that MacArthur 's communiqué , which had not been cleared in accordance with the December directive , had pre @-@ empted his own proposal . He later wrote : 
 This was a most extraordinary statement for a military commander of the United Nations to issue on his own responsibility . It was an act totally disregarding all directives to abstain from any declarations on foreign policy . It was in open defiance of my orders as President and as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . This was a challenge to the authority of the President under the Constitution . It also flouted the policy of the United Nations . By this act MacArthur left me no choice - I could no longer tolerate his insubordination . 
 For the moment , however , he did . There had been dramatic confrontations over policy before , the most notable of which was between President Abraham Lincoln and Major General George McClellan , in 1862 . Another example was President James Polk 's recall of Major General Winfield Scott after the Mexican @-@ American War . Before relieving MacArthur , Truman consulted history books on how Lincoln and Polk dealt with their generals . Truman later said that Polk was his favorite president because " he had the courage to tell Congress to go to Hell on foreign policy matters . " 
 There were genuine differences of opinion over policy between MacArthur and the Truman administration . One was MacArthur 's deep @-@ seated belief that it was not possible to separate the struggle against Communism in Europe from that going on in Asia . This was seen as the result of being stationed for too many years in the Orient , and of his perspective as a theater commander responsible only for part of the Far East . Another important policy difference was MacArthur 's belief that China was not , as Acheson maintained , " the Soviet Union 's largest and most important satellite , " but an independent state with its own agenda that , in MacArthur 's words , " for its own purposes is [ just temporarily ] allied with Soviet Russia . " If MacArthur 's thesis was accepted , then it followed that expanding the war with China would not provoke a conflict with the Soviet Union . The Joint Chiefs emphatically disagreed , although this contradicted their position that it was Europe and not Asia that was the prime concern of the Soviet Union . Even among Republicans , there was little support for MacArthur 's position . 
 On 5 April , Martin read the text of a letter he had received from MacArthur , dated 20 March , criticizing the Truman administration 's priorities on the floor of the House . In it , MacArthur had written : 
 It seems strangely difficult for some to realize that here in Asia is where the Communist conspirators have elected to make their play for global conquest , and that we have joined the issue thus raised on the battlefield ; that here we fight Europe ’ s war with arms while the diplomatic there still fight it with words ; that if we lose the war to communism in Asia the fall of Europe is inevitable ; win it and Europe most probably would avoid war and yet preserve freedom . As you pointed out , we must win . There is no substitute for victory . 
 MacArthur later wrote that Martin had released the letter " for some unexplained reason and without consulting me " , but it had not been marked as being confidential or off the record . 
 = = = Diplomatic dispatch intercepts = = = 
 The practice of intercepting and decrypting diplomatic messages of friend and foe alike was a closely held secret in the 1950s . In mid @-@ March 1951 , Truman learned through such intercepts that MacArthur had conversations with diplomats in Spain 's and Portugal 's Tokyo embassies . In these talks , MacArthur had expressed confidence that he would succeed in expanding the Korean War into a major conflict resulting in the permanent disposal of the " Chinese Communist question " and MacArthur did not want either country to be alarmed if this happened . The content of this particular intercept was known by only a very few of Truman 's closest advisers , two being Paul Nitze , Director of the Policy Planning Staff of the State Department and his associate , Charles Burton Marshall . Truman considered MacArthur 's conversations to be outright treachery and concluded that MacArthur had to be relieved , but was unable to act immediately because of MacArthur 's political support and to avoid wider knowledge of the existence of the electronic intercepts of diplomatic messages . 
 = = = <unk> China = = = 
 Ridgway had prepared an offensive known as Operation Rugged , and pressed MacArthur for permission to launch it . On 15 March 1951 , the day after Seoul had been recaptured a second time , Truman had responded to a reporter 's question about whether UN forces would again be allowed to move north of the 38th Parallel by saying that it would be " a tactical matter for the field commander " . MacArthur thereupon gave Ridgway permission to launch his attack , setting an objective line north of the 38th Parallel that would secure Seoul 's water supply . He did so without consulting with Washington until after the attack began on 5 April 1951 . It was making steady progress when MacArthur was relieved on 11 April . 
 Following the completion of flight operations the evening of 7 April 1951 , Task Force 77 , the Seventh Fleet 's fast carrier task force , with the carriers USS Boxer and USS Philippine Sea , departed Korean waters in the Sea of Japan bound for the Straits of Formosa ( Taiwan ) . At 11 : 00 on 11 April , Task Force 77 operating near the west coast of Taiwan , commenced an " aerial parade " along the east coast of mainland China . Concurrently , the destroyer USS John A. Bole arrived at its assigned station 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) offshore from the Chinese seaport of Swatow ( Shantou ) , provoking the Chinese to surround it with an armada of over 40 armed powered junks . Although Task Force 77 was conducting its aerial parade over the horizon to the west , nearly two hours passed before aircraft from the task force appeared over Swatow and made threatening passes at the Chinese vessels and the port city . MacArthur officially received notification of his dismissal shortly after 15 : 00 Tokyo time ( 14 : 00 on the China coast ) , although he had found out about it half an hour before . Two hours later , the Bole retired from its station without hostile action being initiated by either side . Author James Edwin Alexander expressed little doubt that the Bole and its crew were made " sitting ducks " by MacArthur trying to provoke the Chinese into attacking a U.S. warship in an attempt to expand the conflict . 
 = = Relief = = 
 On the morning of 6 April 1951 , Truman held a meeting in his office with Marshall , Bradley , Acheson and Harriman to discuss what would be done about MacArthur . Harriman was emphatically in favor of MacArthur 's relief , but Bradley opposed it . George Marshall asked for more time to consider the matter . Acheson was personally in favor of relieving MacArthur but did not disclose this . Instead , he warned Truman that it would be " the biggest fight of your administration . " At a second meeting the next day , Marshall and Bradley continued to oppose relief . On 8 April , the Joint Chiefs met with Marshall in his office . Each of the chiefs in turn expressed the opinion that MacArthur 's relief was desirable from a " military point of view , " but they recognized that military considerations were not paramount . They were concerned that " if MacArthur were not relieved , a large segment of our people would charge that civil authorities no longer controlled the military . " The four advisers met with Truman in his office again on 9 April . Bradley informed the President of the views of the Joint Chiefs , and Marshall added that he agreed with them . Truman wrote in his diary that " it is of unanimous opinion of all that MacArthur be relieved . All four so advise . " Later , before Congress , the Joint Chiefs would insist that they had only " concurred " with the relief , not " recommended " it . 
 On 11 April 1951 , President Truman drafted an order to MacArthur , which was issued under Bradley 's signature : 
 I deeply regret that it becomes my duty as President and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the United States military forces to replace you as Supreme Commander , Allied Powers ; Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , United Nations Command ; Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Far East ; and Commanding General , U.S. Army , Far East . 
 You will turn over your commands , effective at once , to Lt. Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway . You are authorized to have issued such orders as are necessary to complete desired travel to such place as you select . 
 My reasons for your replacement , will be made public concurrently with the delivery to you of the foregoing order , and are contained in the next following message . 
 In a 3 December 1973 article in Time magazine , Truman was quoted as saying in the early 1960s : 
 I fired him because he wouldn 't respect the authority of the President . I didn 't fire him because he was a dumb son of a bitch , although he was , but that 's not against the law for generals . If it was , half to three @-@ quarters of them would be in jail . 
 Although Truman and Acheson accused MacArthur of insubordination , the Joint Chiefs avoided any suggestion of this . MacArthur was not , in fact , relieved for insubordination . Insubordination was a military offense , and MacArthur could have requested a public court martial similar to that of Billy Mitchell in the 1920s . The outcome of such a trial was uncertain , and it might well have found him not guilty and ordered his reinstatement . The Joint Chiefs agreed that there was " little evidence that General MacArthur had ever failed to carry out a direct order of the Joint Chiefs , or acted in opposition to an order . " " In point of fact , " Bradley insisted , " MacArthur had stretched but not legally violated any JCS directives . He had violated the President 's 6 December directive , relayed to him by the JCS , but this did not constitute violation of a JCS order . " 
 The intention was that MacArthur would be personally notified of his relief by Secretary of the Army Frank Pace , who was touring the front in Korea , at 20 : 00 on 11 April ( Washington , D.C. time ) , which was 10 : 00 on 12 April ( Tokyo time ) . However , Pace did not receive the message due to a signals failure in Korea . Meanwhile , reporters began asking if rumors of MacArthur 's relief were true . Truman then " decided that we could not afford the courtesy of Secretary Pace 's personal delivery of the order , " and called a press conference at which he issued his statement to the press : 
 With deep regret I have concluded that General of the Army Douglas MacArthur is unable to give his wholehearted support to the policies of the United States Government and of the United Nations in matters pertaining to his official duties . In view of the specific responsibilities imposed upon me by the Constitution of the United States and the added responsibility which has been entrusted to me by the United Nations , I have decided that I must make a change of command in the Far East . I have , therefore , relieved General MacArthur of his commands and have designated Lt. Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway as his successor . 
 Full and vigorous debate on matters of national policy is a vital element in the constitutional system of our free democracy . It is fundamental , however , that military commanders must be governed by the policies and directives issued to them in the manner provided by our laws and Constitution . In time of crisis , this consideration is particularly compelling . 
 General MacArthur 's place in history as one of our greatest commanders is fully established . The Nation owes him a debt of gratitude for the distinguished and exceptional service which he has rendered his country in posts of great responsibility . For that reason I repeat my regret at the necessity for the action I feel compelled to take in his case . 
 In Tokyo , MacArthur and his wife were at a luncheon at the American embassy for Senator Warren Magnuson and William Stern , executive vice president of Northwest Airlines , when Colonel Sidney Huff , MacArthur 's aide and one of the " Bataan gang " who had escaped from Corregidor with the general in 1942 , heard about the relief from commercial radio broadcast . Huff promptly informed Mrs. MacArthur , who in turn told the general . Japanese radio stations soon picked up the story , but the official notice would not arrive for another half hour . 
 = = Issues = = 
 = = = Civilian control of the military = = = 
 Civilian control of the military is an American tradition dating back to the founding of the republic . In his 1956 memoirs , Truman wrote : 
 If there is one basic element in our Constitution , it is civilian control of the military . Policies are to be made by the elected political officials , not by generals or admirals . Yet time and again General MacArthur had shown that he was unwilling to accept the policies of the administration . By his repeated public statements he was not only confusing our allies as to the true course of our policies but , in fact , was also setting his policy against the President 's ... If I allowed him to defy the civil authorities in this manner , I myself would be violating my oath to uphold and defend the Constitution . 
 Following the relief , most of the avalanche of mail and messages sent to the White House by the public supported MacArthur . On issues like character , integrity , honor and service , they rated MacArthur as the better man . What support Truman garnered was largely based on the principle of civilian control . 
 " The United States Constitution " , wrote Samuel P. Huntington , " despite widespread belief to the contrary , does not provide for civilian control . " It drew no distinction between civil and military responsibilities , and provided for no subordination of the one to the other . By dividing responsibility for the military between the executive and the legislature , it made control more difficult . Any attempt by one branch to assert control would likely involve a clash with the other . Debates nominally about civilian control were usually , in practice , about which branch would exercise control rather than how control would be exercised . The framers of the constitution did not consider the issue of the management of a distinct and technically sophisticated military profession because no such thing existed at the time . It appeared in the 19th century as a result of social changes brought about by the French Revolution , and technological changes wrought by the industrial revolution . While the framers believed in civilian control of the military , they framed it in terms of a people 's militia in which civilian and military were one and the same . 
 = = = <unk> military = = = 
 Another American tradition is that of an apolitical military , although this custom was of more recent origin , dating back only to the period after the American Civil War . Few officers voted in the 19th century , but not so much from a lack of interest in politics as because frequently moving from state to state and living on Federal land effectively disenfranchised them under the laws of many states . Under General of the Army William T. Sherman , the Commanding General of the United States Army from 1869 to 1883 , who hated politics , this custom of an apolitical military became firmly established . 
 Nor , unlike their European counterparts , did American generals and admirals have influence on or involvement in foreign policy ; but mainly because in the frontier Army of MacArthur 's youth , there was no requirement to do so . This began to change after the Spanish @-@ American War , when American military forces started to be deployed overseas in the Pacific , Asia and the Caribbean for extended periods of time . 
 The concept of the theater of war developed during World War II . At such a senior level of command , military and political issues tended to merge . As theater commander in the Southwest Pacific , MacArthur had been accountable to the Australian government as well as his own , making him , in President Roosevelt 's words to him , " an ambassador as well as Supreme Commander . " MacArthur 's less than wholehearted support for the " Europe first " strategy was apt to cause annoyance in Washington when the chain of command was bypassed by MacArthur through the Prime Minister of Australia , John Curtin . 
 General Marshall expressed this conflict in his testimony before the Senate : 
 It arises from the inherent difference between the position of a commander whose mission is limited to a particular area and a particular antagonist , and the position of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , the Secretary of Defense and the President , who are responsible for the total security of the United States ... and must weigh the interests and objectives in one part of the world with those in others to attain balance ... There is nothing new in this divergence , in our military history ... What is new and what brought about the necessity for General MacArthur ’ s removal is the wholly unprecedented situation of a local Theater Commander publicly expressing his displeasure at , and his disagreement with , the foreign policy of the United States . [ He ] ... had grown so far out of sympathy with the established policies of the United States that there is grave doubt as to whether he could any longer be permitted to exercise the authority in making decisions that normal command functions would assign to a Theater Commander . 
 = = = Powers of the President = = = 
 In The Federalist Papers , Alexander Hamilton argued that : 
 The President is to be commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the army and navy of the United States . In this respect his authority would be nominally the same with that of the king of Great Britain , but in substance much inferior to it . It would amount to nothing more than the supreme command and direction of the military and naval forces , as first General and admiral of the Confederacy ; while that of the British king extends to the declaring of war and to the raising and regulating of fleets and armies , all which , by the Constitution under consideration , would appertain to the legislature . 
 But on 26 June 1950 , Truman sent the armed forces into Korea without any such Congressional mandate . The subsequent United Nations Security Council resolution authorized military assistance to South Korea , but the United Nations Participation Act laid down that : 
 The President shall not be deemed to require the authorization of the Congress to make available to the Security Council on its call in order to take action under article 42 of said Charter and pursuant to such special agreement or agreements the armed forces , facilities , or assistance provided for therein : Provided , That ... nothing herein contained shall be construed as an authorization to the President by the Congress to make available to the Security Council for such purpose armed forces , facilities , or assistance in addition to the forces , facilities , and assistance provided for in such special agreement or agreements . 
 The Congressional inquiry triggered by MacArthur 's relief ruled that Truman 's actions violated both constitutional and statutory requirements . While presidents had in the past used extra @-@ legal military force , this was in " fights with pirates , landings of small naval contingents on barbarous or semi @-@ barbarous coasts , the dispatch of small bodies of troops to chase bandits or cattle rustlers across the Mexican border , and the like . " Congressman Vito Marcantonio , who opposed the war in Korea , argued that " when we agreed to the United Nations Charter we never agreed to supplant our Constitution with the United Nations Charter . The power to declare and make war is vested in the representatives of the people , in the Congress of the United States . " 
 Senator William F. Knowland noted that : 
 Article I of the Constitution gives the power to declare war to the Congress and not to the Executive . We are apparently now drifting into a twilight constitutional zone where the executive can put us into war , the fourth largest in our history , without a Congressional declaration or a Congressional resolution recognizing that a state of war started by others already exists . When Congress acts under its constitutional power , every statement for or against the resolution is part of the Congressional Record , and the press and the public are fully informed . The roll @-@ call vote shows how each Member voted . This is responsible and accountable government . 
 If five or seven men can meet in a closed session in the Blair House or the White House , and put this nation into the fourth largest war from a casualty standpoint , in our history without their statements and recommendations being recorded or available , and without their positions on this matter being known , we have the war @-@ making power transferred from the Congress , operating in the open , to the Executive , operating en camera . That is not , I submit , either responsible or accountable government . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Responses to the relief = = = 
 The news of MacArthur 's relief was greeted with shock in Japan . The Diet of Japan passed a resolution of gratitude for MacArthur , and the Emperor Hirohito visited him at the embassy in person , the first time a Japanese Emperor had ever visited a foreigner with no standing . The Mainichi Shimbun said : 
 MacArthur 's dismissal is the greatest shock since the end of the war . He dealt with the Japanese people not as a conqueror but a great reformer . He was a noble political missionary . What he gave us was not material aid and democratic reform alone , but a new way of life , the freedom and dignity of the individual ... We shall continue to love and trust him as one of the Americans who best understood Japan 's position . 
 In the Chicago Tribune , Senator Robert A. Taft called for immediate impeachment proceedings against Truman : 
 President Truman must be impeached and convicted . His hasty and vindictive removal of General MacArthur is the culmination of series of acts which have shown that he is unfit , morally and mentally , for his high office . The American nation has never been in greater danger . It is led by a fool who is surrounded by knaves . 
 Newspapers like the Chicago Tribune and the Los Angeles Times opined that MacArthur 's " hasty and vindictive " relief was due to foreign pressure , particularly from the United Kingdom and the British socialists in Attlee 's government . The Republican Party whip , Senator Kenneth S. Wherry , charged that the relief was the result of pressure from " the Socialist Government of Great Britain . " 
 On April 17 , 1951 , MacArthur flew back to the United States , a country he had not seen in years . When he reached San Francisco he was greeted by the commander of the Sixth United States Army , Lieutenant General Albert C. Wedemeyer . MacArthur received a parade there that was attended by 500 @,@ 000 people . He was greeted on arrival at Washington National Airport on April 19 by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and General Jonathan Wainwright . Truman sent Vaughan as his <unk> which was seen as a slight , as Vaughan was despised by the public and professional soldiers alike as a corrupt crony . " It was a shameful thing to fire MacArthur , and even more shameful to send Vaughan , " one member of the public wrote to Truman . 
 MacArthur addressed a joint session of Congress where he delivered his famous " Old Soldiers Never Die " speech , in which he declared : 
 Efforts have been made to distort my position . It has been said in effect that I was a warmonger . Nothing could be further from the truth . I know war as few other men now living know it , and nothing to me — and nothing to me is more revolting . I have long advocated its complete abolition , as its very destructiveness on both friend and foe has rendered it useless as a means of settling international disputes ... But once war is forced upon us , there is no other alternative than to apply every available means to bring it to a swift end . War 's very object is victory , not prolonged indecision . In war there can be no substitute for victory . 
 In response , the Pentagon issued a press release noting that " the action taken by the President in relieving General MacArthur was based upon the unanimous recommendations of the President 's principal civilian and military advisers including the Joint Chiefs of Staff . " Afterwards , MacArthur flew to New York City where he received the largest ticker @-@ tape parade in history up to that time . He also visited Chicago and Milwaukee , where he addressed large rallies . 
 = = = Congressional inquiry = = = 
 In May and June 1951 , the Senate Armed Services Committee and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held " an inquiry into the military situation in the Far East and the facts surrounding the relief of General of the Army Douglas MacArthur . " The Senate thereby attempted to avoid a constitutional crisis . Because of the sensitive political and military topics being discussed , the inquiry was held in closed session , and only a heavily censored transcript was made public until 1973 . The two committees were jointly chaired by Senator Richard Russell , Jr . Fourteen witnesses were called : MacArthur , Marshall , Bradley , Collins , Vandenberg , Sherman , Adrian S. Fisher , Acheson , Wedemeyer , Johnson , Oscar C. Badger II , Patrick J. Hurley , and David C. Barr and O 'Donnell . 
 The testimony of Marshall and the Joint Chiefs rebutted many of MacArthur 's arguments . Marshall emphatically declared that there had been no disagreement between himself , the President , and the Joint Chiefs . However , it also exposed their own timidity in dealing with MacArthur , and that they had not always kept him fully informed . Vandenberg questioned whether the air force could be effective against targets in Manchuria , while Bradley noted that the Communists were also waging limited war in Korea , having not attacked UN airbases or ports , or their own " privileged sanctuary " in Japan . Their judgement was that it was not worth it to expand the war , although they conceded that they were prepared to do so if the Communists escalated the conflict , or if no willingness to negotiate was forthcoming . They also disagreed with MacArthur 's assessment of the effectiveness of the South Korean and Chinese Nationalist forces . Bradley said : 
 Red China is not the powerful nation seeking to dominate the world . Frankly , in the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , this strategy would involve us in the wrong war , at the wrong place , at the wrong time , and with the wrong enemy . 
 The committees concluded that " the removal of General MacArthur was within the constitutional powers of the President but the circumstances were a shock to national pride . " They also found that " there was no serious disagreement between General MacArthur and the Joint Chiefs of Staff as to military strategy . " They recommended that " the United States should never again become involved in war without the consent of the Congress . " 
 = = = Fallout = = = 
 Polls showed that the majority of the public still disapproved of Truman 's decision to relieve MacArthur , and were more inclined to agree with MacArthur than with Bradley or Marshall . Truman 's approval rating fell to 23 percent in mid @-@ 1951 , which was lower than Richard Nixon 's low of 25 percent during the Watergate Scandal in 1974 , and Lyndon Johnson 's of 28 percent at the height of the Vietnam War in 1968 . As of 2011 , it remains the lowest Gallup Poll approval rating recorded by any serving president . 
 The increasingly unpopular war in Korea dragged on , and the Truman administration was beset with a series of corruption scandals . He eventually decided not to run for re @-@ election . Adlai Stevenson , the Democratic candidate in the 1952 presidential election , attempted to distance himself from the President as much as possible . The election was won by the Republican candidate , General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower , whose administration ramped up the pressure on the Chinese in Korea with conventional bombing and renewed threats of using nuclear weapons . Coupled with a more favorable international political climate in the wake of the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953 , this led the Chinese and North Koreans to agree to terms . The belief that the threat of nuclear weapons played an important part in the outcome would lead to their threatened use against China on a number of occasions during the 1950s . 
 As a result of their support of Truman , the Joint Chiefs became viewed as politically tainted . Senator Taft regarded Bradley in particular with suspicion , due to Bradley 's focus on Europe at the expense of Asia . Taft urged Eisenhower to replace the chiefs as soon as possible . First to go was Vandenberg , who had terminal cancer and had already announced plans to retire . On 7 May 1953 , Eisenhower announced that he would be replaced by General Nathan Twining . Soon after it was announced that Bradley would be replaced by Admiral Arthur W. Radford , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the United States Pacific Command , Collins would be succeeded by Ridgway , and Admiral William Fechteler , who had become CNO on the death of Sherman in July 1951 , by Admiral Robert B. Carney . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The relief of MacArthur cast a long shadow over American civil @-@ military relations . When Lyndon Johnson met with General William Westmoreland in Honolulu in 1966 , he told him : " General , I have a lot riding on you . I hope you don 't pull a MacArthur on me . " For his part , Westmoreland and his senior colleagues were eager to avoid any hint of dissent or challenge to presidential authority . This came at a high price . In his 1998 book Dereliction of Duty : Lyndon Johnson , Robert McNamara , the Joint Chiefs of Staff , and the Lies That Led to Vietnam , then @-@ Lieutenant Colonel ( now Lieutenant General ) H. R. McMaster argued that the Joint Chiefs failed in their duty to provide the President , Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara or Congress with frank and fearless professional advice . This book was an influential one ; the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the time , General Hugh Shelton , gave copies to every four @-@ star officer in the military . 
 On the one hand , the relief of MacArthur established a precedent that generals and admirals could be fired for any public or private disagreement with government policy . In 1977 , Major General John K. <unk> publicly criticized proposed cuts in the size of American forces in South Korea , and was summarily relieved by President Jimmy Carter for making statements " inconsistent with announced national security policy . " During the Gulf War in 1990 , Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney relieved the Chief of Staff of the Air Force , General Michael Dugan , for showing " poor judgment at a very sensitive time " in making a series of statements to the media during a visit to Saudi Arabia . Three years later , Major General Harold N. Campbell was fined $ 7 @,@ 000 and forced to retire after describing President Bill Clinton disrespectfully as a " dope smoking , " " skirt chasing , " " draft dodging " President . General Stanley A. McChrystal was sacked by President Barack Obama in 2009 after McChrystal and his staff made disparaging remarks about senior civilian government officials in an article published in Rolling Stone magazine . This elicited comparisons with MacArthur , as the war in Afghanistan was not going well . 
 On the other hand , the relief " left a lasting current of popular sentiment that in matters of war and peace , the military really knows best , " a philosophy which became known as " <unk> . " In February 2012 , Lieutenant Colonel Daniel L. Davis published a report entitled " Dereliction of Duty II " in which he criticized senior military commanders for misleading Congress about the war in Afghanistan , especially General David Petraeus , noting that : 
 A message had been learned by the leading politicians of our country , by the vast majority of our uniformed Service Members , and the population at large : David Petraeus is a real war hero - maybe even on the same plane as Patton , MacArthur , and Eisenhower . But the most important lesson everyone learned : never , ever question General Petraeus or you 'll be made to look a fool . In the years following , the " Legend of Petraeus " spread and expanded , as these things often do , and he was given increasing credit for the success . 
 During the 1992 presidential election , Bill Clinton used endorsements from the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Admiral William J. Crowe , and 21 other retired generals and flag officers to counter doubts about his ability to serve as Commander in Chief . This became a feature of later presidential election campaigns . During the 2004 presidential election , twelve retired generals and admirals endorsed Senator John Kerry , including former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Admiral William Crowe , and the former Chief of Staff of the Air Force , General Merrill " Tony " McPeak , who also appeared in television advertisements defending Kerry against the Swift Boat Veterans for Truth . During this election campaign , one retired four star General , Tommy Franks , spoke at the Republican National Convention while another , John Shalikashvili , addressed the Democratic National Convention . 
 In early 2006 , in what was called the " Generals Revolt , " six retired generals , Major General John Batiste , Major General Paul D. Eaton , Lieutenant General Gregory Newbold , Major General John M. Riggs , Major General Charles H. Swannack Jr. and General Anthony C. <unk> , called for the resignation of Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld , accusing him of " abysmal " military planning and lack of strategic competence . The ethics of a system under which serving generals felt compelled to publicly support policies that they privately believed were potentially ruinous for the country and cost the lives of military personnel , did not escape critical public comment , and was mocked by political satirist Stephen Colbert at a dinner attended by President George W. Bush and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , General Peter Pace . Rumsfeld resigned in November 2006 . By 2008 , the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , Admiral Mike Mullen , felt obliged to pen an open letter in which he reminded all servicemen that " The U.S. military must remain apolitical at all times . " 
 = Alan Wiggins = 
 Alan Anthony Wiggins ( February 17 , 1958 – January 6 , 1991 ) was an American professional baseball player . He was a second baseman and outfielder in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the San Diego Padres and Baltimore Orioles between 1981 and 1987 . A speedy leadoff hitter , Wiggins established a Padres single @-@ season record for stolen bases in 1984 , when they won the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) and advanced to the World Series . 
 Wiggins grew up in California and attended Pasadena City College before being drafted by the California Angels ( known later as the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim ) in 1977 . He played in the minor league systems of the Angels and the Los Angeles Dodgers , setting a professional baseball single @-@ season record with 120 stolen bases in 1980 . He made his major league debut with the San Diego Padres in 1981 , and he became a regular player within two years . In 1983 , he set the Padres ' single @-@ season stolen base record , a mark which he extended the following season . His 1984 stolen bases total ( 70 ) is still a team record as of 2015 . 
 During his major league career , Wiggins struggled with drug addiction , which resulted in multiple arrests and suspensions from baseball . His drug problems prompted a 1985 trade from San Diego to Baltimore , where Wiggins spent three seasons . After leaving baseball , he was diagnosed with AIDS . He was the first MLB player known to die of AIDS . Long after his death , two of Wiggins ' children — Candice and Alan , Jr . — became professional basketball players . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wiggins was born in Los Angeles , California . His mother , Karla Wiggins , raised him as a single parent . He played baseball with his friends at a park across from the Rose Bowl . As a child , Wiggins was a fan of the Los Angeles Dodgers and he looked up to Maury Wills , a Dodgers player known for stealing bases . He graduated from John Muir High School in Pasadena , California ; the school was also the alma mater of baseball star Jackie Robinson . Gib Bodet , a scout for the Montreal Expos , noticed Wiggins in high school . Wiggins was 6 feet 2 inches ( 188 cm ) , taller than a typical infielder . He was only an average hitter and fielder , but his speed stood out to Bodet . 
 The California Angels selected Wiggins as the eighth overall pick of the January 1977 MLB amateur draft . In 1977 , Wiggins played junior college baseball at Pasadena City College , where he was teammates with future major leaguers Matt Young and Rod Booker . Bodet , who had moved to the Angels scouting staff just before the draft , joined other Angels staff members and worked out with Wiggins after they selected him . Angels coach Bob Clear told Wiggins that his excellent speed would help him to a high batting average even if his hitting skills were not that strong . " If you can hit .200 , you can run the other eighty points . And if you can hit .280 , you can lead off for anybody , " Clear said . Wiggins signed with the Angels in May for $ 2500 after what Bodet described as " a tough negotiation " . According to Bodet , Wiggins ' mother " did not trust easily " . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Wiggins played minor league baseball in 1977 for the Angels rookie @-@ league affiliate in Idaho Falls , where he hit .271 and had 25 stolen bases in 63 games . In 1978 , with the Class A Quad Cities Angels , Wiggins stole 26 bases in 49 games , but his batting average fell to .201 . However , he had a midseason fight with one of his coaches , and was released by the Angels organization in June 1978 . Wiggins feared that his career was near its end , but he reached out to Los Angeles Dodgers scout Gail Henley . After a workout in front of the Dodgers and manager Tommy Lasorda , Wiggins signed with the team before the 1979 season . 
 In 95 games for the Class A Clinton Dodgers , Wiggins hit .257 and had 43 steals . After having played exclusively at second base the prior two years , the Dodgers converted him primarily to shortstop that year , but he also appeared in the outfield and at all three of the other infield positions . Playing with the Class A Lodi Dodgers of the California League in 1980 , Wiggins batted .288 and scored 108 runs while stealing 120 bases in just 135 games . His steals established a then professional @-@ baseball single @-@ season record , surpassing the previous minor league mark of 116 set by Allan Lewis in 1966 , as well as Lou Brock 's major @-@ league record of 118 in 1974 . Wiggins caught the eye of San Diego Padres general manager Jack McKeon , who drafted him in the 1980 Rule 5 draft after the Dodgers decided to leave him unprotected . According to the Padres , Wiggins had been arrested for possession of marijuana while with the Dodgers . 
 = = = San Diego Padres = = = 
 After having spent most of his minor league career as an infielder , he was used almost exclusively as an outfielder with the Hawaii Islanders of the Pacific Coast League in 1981 . He batted .302 with 73 steals , and received a September call @-@ up to the major leagues . In his first stint with the Padres , he got five hits in 14 at bats . Wiggins began the following season with the Islanders , but he was called up again by the Padres in early May to replace injured outfielder Gene Richards . Wiggins was leading San Diego with 29 stolen bases in 59 games when he was arrested for possession of cocaine in July . He was issued a 30 @-@ day suspension from baseball , and spent a month in a substance abuse treatment facility . The Padres , who were one of the first sports teams to offer an employee assistance program to its players , paid for all of his treatment , and he returned to the team in September . By 1983 , Wiggins had become a regular in the Padres lineup . He batted in the leadoff spot , playing in the outfield for most of the season . Though he was exceptional on defense in left field , he was moved to first base for the last 45 games of the year after Steve Garvey suffered a broken thumb . He hit .276 and picked up 139 hits that year . His 66 stolen bases , good for second in the league , broke the Padres single @-@ season record of 61 set by Richards in 1980 . Wiggins was named the team 's most valuable player that season . 
 Wiggins was moved to second base in 1984 . That move made room for rookie Carmelo Martínez in the outfield . Until that season , Martínez had been a first baseman , but the Padres already had a strong player there with Garvey , and they wanted to get Martínez 's bat into the lineup to improve their outfield 's home run production . Wiggins retained the leadoff spot in the lineup , hitting ahead of Tony Gwynn . During a May game , Wiggins became the fifth 20th @-@ century MLB player to steal five bases in one game , tying an NL record . In an August game , Wiggins unwittingly became a party to a series of fights . Wiggins was hit with the first pitch of the game by Atlanta Braves pitcher Pascual Pérez . The teams retaliated against each other throughout the game with <unk> pitches and <unk> . The tension resulted in three fights and several ejections . 
 Wiggins finished second in the league in runs scored ( 106 ) , establishing a Padres single @-@ season record and helping the team to their first division championship . He finished the season with 70 steals , extending his team record from the previous season . Benefitting from the higher number of fastballs opposing pitchers threw in response to Wiggins ' speed , Gwynn batted above .400 when his speedy teammate was on base , and hit .351 overall for the first of his eight career batting titles . The duo was one of the biggest reasons behind San Diego 's success . They could score fast with Wiggins getting on first , stealing second , and Gwynn singling him home . Wiggins batted .316 in the 1984 NLCS against the Chicago Cubs , going two @-@ for @-@ three with two runs scored in the fifth and deciding game . In the 1984 World Series against the Detroit Tigers , Wiggins batted .364 and scored twice . His eight hits were the most of any Padres player in the series . The Tigers defeated the Padres in five games . According to manager Dick Williams , Wiggins was " absolutely the most valuable player in the National League in 1984 " . 
 Before the 1985 season , the Padres signed Wiggins to a four @-@ year contract extension worth nearly $ 3 million . His agent described him as one of the highest @-@ paid NL second basemen . Wiggins missed the last two weeks of spring training after injuring his knee during a double @-@ play attempt on defense when a baserunner slid into him . He was unavailable for the start of the season , but returned to the lineup after being out for five games . Wiggins was batting <unk> and without a stolen base two weeks into the season , when he was suspended by the Padres following a relapse into cocaine dependency . After Wiggins completed a drug rehabilitation program , the Padres did not want to reactivate him , but baseball 's joint review board cleared him to return to baseball . In June , Donald Fehr of the Major League Baseball Players Association ( MLBPA ) announced that he intended to file a grievance against the Padres if they did not promptly activate Wiggins . The Padres sought to trade Wiggins , and the Baltimore Orioles showed interest . As the trade deadline approached , however , the Orioles were reportedly only offering two minor league players in exchange for Wiggins . 
 On June 27 , 1985 , Wiggins was traded to the Orioles for pitchers Roy Lee Jackson and Richard Caldwell . Padres owner Joan Kroc said that the team had warned Wiggins that he would not remain with the team if he had further problems with drugs . She stated that it would have been self @-@ serving to keep Wiggins after his relapse when he could instead pursue a fresh start with another team . Nonetheless , Gwynn felt that Wiggins had been shortchanged by the Padres . 
 = = = Baltimore Orioles = = = 
 Wiggins spent a few days in the minor leagues before being called up to Baltimore . In his first game with the Orioles , he started at second base and was the team 's leadoff hitter , reaching base three times , driving in a run and scoring a run . After the game , Wiggins commented that he felt welcome on the team and did not feel like he was starting out with anything to prove . In 76 games for Baltimore that year , Wiggins hit .285 , scored 43 runs and finished eighth in the American League with 30 stolen bases . That year , he was sometimes criticized for perceived laziness . Wiggins later said that he had been depressed because he missed his wife and children , who were still living in San Diego . 
 In 1986 , Wiggins fell into disfavor with manager Earl Weaver . His contentious behavior had alienated many of his teammates . At the height of his difficulties , Wiggins was tagged out with the hidden ball trick . The next day , he made three errors , two of which occurred in the same inning . After the two @-@ error inning , Baltimore fans booed as portions of his picture were revealed on the scoreboard during a " Who Am I " feature at the ballpark . Wiggins was angered at the response of the fans because he had family members at the game that day . Weaver said that Wiggins " had more chances than anyone who ever wore an Orioles ' uniform " . He batted .251 with 21 stolen bases and 30 runs scored , played only 71 games , and was reassigned to the Triple @-@ A Rochester Red Wings at one point in the season . 
 The following season , Cal Ripken , Sr. , replaced Weaver as manager of the Orioles . Baltimore signed Rick Burleson to play second base and Ray Knight to play third base . The moves seemed to leave Wiggins battling for an outfield spot , but after he hit .413 during spring training , Ripken made comments that suggested he was thinking of using Wiggins as a utility player . Just before the season started , Wiggins was not happy with Ripken 's idea of using him in a utility role , feeling that his spring performance should have secured him a starting position . He believed that he could be an asset in the leadoff batting slot . 
 At the start of the 1987 regular season , Wiggins spent some time as a designated hitter ( DH ) and shared second base duties with Burleson . Rookie second baseman Billy Ripken joined the club on July 10 . Burleson was cut , but general manager Hank Peters said , " We 're not bringing [ Billy Ripken ] up here to sit on the bench . " Wiggins was hitting .242 on July 10 , and he played mostly DH after the rookie 's arrival . In early August , Wiggins received a three @-@ day suspension after he got into an altercation with teammate Jim Dwyer and grabbed the shirt of Ripken Sr. 
 On September 1 , MLB indefinitely suspended Wiggins for a behavior issue . An anonymous Orioles official told the media that the suspension resulted from a positive drug screen . Wiggins was released from the Orioles on September 29 . The Orioles had to pay him two @-@ thirds of his $ 800 @,@ 000 salary for 1988 . He was hitting .232 at the time of his release . MLBPA officials announced that they would not issue grievances related to Wiggins ' suspension or his subsequent release , noting that Wiggins wanted to be released by that point . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Though Wiggins did not give up hope for a return to baseball , he began to study the real @-@ estate market after his suspension from the game . In the late 1980s , Wiggins began to suffer from health difficulties related to AIDS , though the diagnosis was not publicly disclosed while he was alive . He was receiving deferred payments from his baseball career , and he began to make plans for the financial future of his children . He told one of his former teammates that he was getting into computer work . Gwynn said that he had seen Wiggins in the spring of 1990 and was struck by his visible weight loss . 
 In his final months , he sold his home in Poway , California , moving to Pasadena . Though he often stayed with friends , some of his longtime friends felt that he died in seclusion , embarrassed by what had happened with his life . In November 1990 , Wiggins was hospitalized with pneumonia and tuberculosis at Cedars @-@ Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles . After lapsing in and out of consciousness for a month , he died at the hospital on January 6 , 1991 . 
 Wiggins ' family initially attributed his death to lung cancer that had led to respiratory failure . Family members said that he had gotten sick with a cough and that his condition had worsened quickly . Wiggins weighed under 75 pounds at the time of his death . Several days later , a physician disclosed that Wiggins ' health problems were complications of AIDS . Wiggins stated that he had contracted the disease via intravenous drug use . He became the first baseball player known to have died from AIDS . 
 After Wiggins died , several well @-@ known baseball figures commented on his death . Longtime Oriole Frank Robinson said , " He was a very bright individual , and you could like the guy . But there was always something there to back you off . " Former Padres player Garry Templeton said that he might have been Wiggins ' closest friend , but he said that he did not know that Wiggins had been ill . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wiggins met his wife Angela when they were in junior high school , and they both graduated from John Muir High School . Two of Wiggins ' three children became professional basketball players . Candice was an All @-@ American at Stanford University and joined the Los Angeles Sparks as the third overall pick in the 2008 WNBA Draft . She has served as a spokesperson for the Greater Than AIDS campaign . Alan , Jr . , played college basketball at the University of San Francisco and has played professionally in several countries . His oldest daughter , Cassandra , played basketball in college as well at New York University . 
 The Los Angeles Times reported that Wiggins had experienced marital strife , but that he would not entertain the thought of divorce ; he wanted to ensure that his children did not grow up in a single @-@ parent household like he did . Wiggins and his mother were very close , and her 1983 Alzheimer 's disease diagnosis may have contributed to his drug problems . He was devastated that she would not be able to enjoy his success in the major leagues . In the last few years of Wiggins ' life , he enjoyed a closer relationship with his father , Albert , and he often took his children on visits to see their grandfather . Wiggins had a very difficult time with his father 's death in May 1990 . 
 Wiggins enjoyed stubbornly engaging in debates with his teammates , particularly Padres teammate Eric Show , just to provoke reactions from them . Tony Gwynn suggested that Wiggins was sometimes misunderstood . " To not like Alan Wiggins , is to not know Alan Wiggins , " Gwynn said . Wiggins ' agent , Tony Attanasio , said that Wiggins became deeply depressed in Baltimore . He had always been reserved and had a difficult time trusting other people . Attanasio said that Orioles players often actively avoided Wiggins . While Wiggins enjoyed reading books and newspapers , Attanasio said that teammates were turned off by his intellect . The Orioles once gave an IQ test , and Wiggins scored higher than everyone except for Weaver . According to Attanasio , players in Baltimore also resented Wiggins because he replaced Rich Dauer , who had been a well @-@ liked member of the team . Lee Lacy was one of his only friends in Baltimore . 
 = Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fällt , BWV 18 = 
 Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fällt ( Just as the rain and snow fall from heaven ) , BWV 18 , is an early church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Weimar for the Sunday <unk> , the second Sunday before Lent , likely by 1713 . 
 The cantata is based on a text by Erdmann Neumeister published in 1711 . It is one of Bach cantata texts of the Weimar period not written by the court poet Salomon Franck . The text cites Isaiah , related to the gospel , the parable of the Sower . The third movement is in the style of a sermon , combined with a litany by Martin Luther . The closing chorale is the eighth stanza of Lazarus Spengler 's hymn " Durch Adams Fall ist ganz <unk> " . 
 The cantata falls relatively early in Bach 's chronology of cantata compositions . It was possibly composed for 24 February 1715 , but more likely a year or even two earlier . Bach structured the work in five movements , a sinfonia , a recitative , a recitative with chorale , an aria and a closing chorale . He scored it for three vocal soloists , a four @-@ <unk> only in the chorale , and an unusual Baroque instrumental ensemble of four violas , cello , bassoon and basso continuo . When he performed the work again as Thomaskantor in Leipzig , he added two recorders to double viola I and II an octave higher . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach worked for the court in Weimar from 1708 . On 2 March 1714 Bach was appointed concertmaster of the Weimar court capelle of the co @-@ reigning dukes Wilhelm Ernst and Ernst August of Saxe @-@ Weimar . As concertmaster , he assumed the principal responsibility for composing new works , specifically cantatas for the Schlosskirche ( palace church ) , on a monthly schedule . Bach composed this cantata for the second Sunday before Ash Wednesday , called Sexagesima . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were taken from the Second Epistle to the Corinthians , " God 's power is mighty in the weak " ( 2 Corinthians 11 : 19 – 12 : 9 ) , and from the Gospel of Luke , the parable of the Sower ( Luke 8 : 4 – 15 ) . 
 The cantata is based on a text by Erdmann Neumeister written for the Eisenach court and published in Gotha in 1711 in the collection <unk> <unk> und <unk> ( Sacred singing and playing ) , which had been set to music by Georg Philipp Telemann . It is one of few texts set to music in Weimar which were not written not by the court poet Salomon Franck . The text cites Isaiah in the second movement , " For as the rain cometh down , and the snow from heaven , … So shall my word be ... " ( Isaiah 55 : 10 – 11 ) , related to the Gospel about God 's word compared to seed . In the third movement , the poet combines warnings of the dangers to God 's word in the style of a sermon with four lines of prayer from a litany by Martin Luther . The closing chorale is the eighth stanza of Lazarus Spengler 's hymn " Durch Adams Fall ist ganz <unk> " ( 1524 ) . 
 The cantata falls relatively early in Bach 's chronology of cantata compositions . It was possibly composed for 24 February 1715 , but more likely a year or two earlier . The Bach scholar Christoph Wolff states : " The original performing material has survived and allows us to date the work to 1713 " . Bach performed the cantata again when he was Thomaskantor in Leipzig in 1724 , with an expanded scoring in a different key . It was then probably performed in the same service as the newly composed <unk> <unk> , BWV 181 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in five movements , an instrumental sinfonia , a recitative , a recitative with chorale , an aria and a closing chorale . He scored the work , like other cantatas written in Weimar , for a small ensemble of three vocal soloists ( soprano ( S ) , tenor ( T ) , bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir only in the chorales , and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of four violas ( Va ) , cello ( Vc ) , bassoon ( Fg ) and basso continuo . The setting for four violas is unusual . In a similar orchestration , the Brandenburg Concerto No. 6 also omits violins . 
 The second version of this cantata for a performance in Leipzig adds two recorders , which double viola I and II an octave higher . John Eliot Gardiner compares the effect to a four @-@ foot stop on a pipe organ . The cantata begins in G minor in the Weimar version , in A minor in the Leipzig version . In the following table of the movements , the scoring and keys follow the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe for the Leipzig version . The time signatures are taken from the book on all cantatas by the Bach scholar Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , played throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 The keys in this section refer to the Weimar version , although the recording by Masaaki Suzuki , with commentary by Klaus Hofmann , uses the Leipzig keys . Hofmann notes the work 's " Lutheran character " , quoting Luther 's litany inserted in the third movement , and sees it as a " recitative study " , exploring the secco recitative of the Italian opera , introduced by Erdmann Neumeister , and also the accompagnato with rich instrumental accompaniment . Gardiner finds all three cantatas for the occasion , dealing with God 's word , " characterised by his vivid pictorial imagination , an arresting sense of drama , and by music of freshness and power that lodges in the memory " . 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The cantata opens with a sinfonia in G minor , which illustrates falling rain and snow in descending phrases . In da capo form , is reminiscent both of a chaconne and a concerto . The four violas and continuo , with bassoon and cello parts specified , create an unusual sound , termed " magically dark @-@ hued sonority " by Gardiner . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The quotation from Isaiah , " Gleichwie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel fällt und nicht <unk> dahin <unk> " ( ust as the rain and snow fall from heaven and do not return again to it ) , is sung by the bass , the vox Christi ( voice of Christ ) , in a secco recitative . This is Bach 's first adaptation of recitative in a church cantata , not following operatic patterns , but " a lucid presentation of the text in a dignified , highly personal style " . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The central movement , " Mein Gott , hier wird mein Herze sein " ( My soul ’ s treasure is God ’ s word ) , is unique in Bach 's cantatas , the choir soprano interrupts the prayer of the male soloists four times , followed by a conclusion of the full choir " <unk> uns , lieber Herre Gott ! " ( Hear us , dear Lord God ! ) . The recitatives are marked adagio in E @-@ flat major , while the interspersed litany is presented dramatically ( allegro in C minor ) . Gardiner compares the imagery of the recitatives : " all adds up to a vivid , Brueghel @-@ like portrayal of rural society at work – the sower , the glutton , the lurking devil , as well as those pantomime villains , the Turks and the Papists . He compares the movement to Telemann 's setting of the same text and states : 
 On the other hand here is Bach , seeming to relish the contrast between archaic litany and his new ' modern ' recitative style in which he empowers his two male soloists to voice personal pleas for faith and resolution in the face of multiple provocation [ s ] and devilish guile , with increasingly virtuosic displays of coloratura , ever @-@ wider modulations and extravagant word @-@ painting on ' <unk> ' ( to rob ) , ' <unk> ' ( persecution ) and ' <unk> ' ( to wander off course ) . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The only aria , " Mein <unk> ist Gottes Wort " ( My soul ’ s treasure is God ’ s word ) , is set for soprano , accompanied by the four violas in unison . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The cantata closes with a four @-@ part setting of Spengler 's hymn stanza , " Ich <unk> , o Herr , aus Herzens Grund " ( I pray , o Lord , from the bottom of my heart ) , It is Bach 's first of many to come as the typical conclusion of his cantatas . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The selection is taken from the listing provided on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs are roughly marked as large by red background to one voice per part ( OVPP ) by green background , orchestras from large ( red ) to period instruments in historically informed performances ( green ) . 
 = Interstate 70 in Maryland = 
 Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) is a part of the Interstate Highway System that runs from Cove Fort , Utah to Baltimore , Maryland . In Maryland , the Interstate Highway runs 93 @.@ 62 miles ( 150 @.@ 67 km ) from the Pennsylvania state line in Hancock east to the Interstate 's eastern terminus near its junction with I @-@ 695 at a park and ride in Baltimore . I @-@ 70 is the primary east – west Interstate in Maryland ; the Interstate Highway connects Baltimore — and Washington via I @-@ 270 — with Western Maryland . The Interstate serves Frederick and Hagerstown directly and provides access to Cumberland via its junction with I @-@ 68 at Hancock . I @-@ 70 runs concurrently with its predecessor highway , U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) , from Hancock to Indian Springs in Washington County and from Frederick to West Friendship in Howard County . 
 I @-@ 70 's route from Frederick to West Friendship was constructed as a divided highway relocation of US 40 in the early to mid @-@ 1950s and a freeway bypass of Frederick in the late 1950s . The first section of the Interstate to be marked as I @-@ 70 was an upgrade of US 40 near Hancock in the early 1960s . The remainder of the Interstate highway in Maryland west of Frederick was built on a new alignment in the mid- to late 1960s . I @-@ 70 was constructed from West Friendship to its present terminus in Baltimore in the late 1960s . The highway from Bartonsville in Frederick County to West Friendship was upgraded to Interstate standards in the mid @-@ 1970s . The final non @-@ limited access portion of I @-@ 70 between Frederick and Bartonsville was eliminated in the mid @-@ 1980s . The Interstate has been upgraded through Frederick in a series of projects that began in the late 1990s . 
 I @-@ 70 was intended to enter Baltimore as an east – west freeway that had been proposed since the 1940s . Around 1960 , I @-@ 70 was planned passing through a pair of parks and several neighborhoods in West Baltimore to end at an interchange with I @-@ 95 and I @-@ 83 at the Inner Harbor in Downtown Baltimore . A subsequent proposal based on a review of the 1960 plan moved I @-@ 70 to a new alignment that triggered community opposition , which resulted in a new design process in the late 1960s . A new plan was introduced around 1970 that would have moved I @-@ 70 's eastern terminus to Southwest Baltimore . However , community opposition to the Interstate 's planned route through the city parks resulted in I @-@ 70 being removed from city plans in the early 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 70 has several official designations along its course through Maryland . The Interstate Highway is designated Eisenhower Memorial Highway from the Pennsylvania state line east to I @-@ 270 in Frederick . The highway received this designation from a 1973 act of Congress commemorating the route of the 1919 U.S. Army convoy from Washington to San Francisco in which President Dwight D. Eisenhower participated , an ordeal that served as one of his inspirations for the Interstate Highway System . All of I @-@ 70 in Frederick County was designated the Korean War Veterans Memorial Highway by the Maryland General Assembly in 2002 . Large stone markers featuring reliefs of the Korean Peninsula were erected in the median of I @-@ 70 in Myersville and Mount Airy in 2004 . Along its concurrency with US 40 from I @-@ 270 in Frederick to east of West Friendship , I @-@ 70 is known as Baltimore National Pike . The Interstate is unnamed from US 40 near West Friendship to its eastern terminus in Baltimore . Like all mainline Interstates , I @-@ 70 is a part of the National Highway System for its entire length . 
 = = = Hancock to Hagerstown = = = 
 I @-@ 70 enters Washington County , Maryland concurrent with US 522 from Fulton County , Pennsylvania north of the town of Hancock . Just south of the state line , the four @-@ lane freeway has a full Y interchange with I @-@ 68 and US 40 , which head west toward Cumberland as the National Freeway . US 40 begins to run concurrently with I @-@ 70 just as US 522 leaves I @-@ 70 at another full Y interchange through which I @-@ 70 curves to the east . US 522 heads south , providing access to downtown Hancock before crossing the Potomac River into West Virginia . I @-@ 70 heads east and gains a lane in each direction to climb a ridge that separates the interchanges from the valley of Tonoloway Creek . The third lane eastbound ends at the top of the ridge and the third lane westbound begins just west of the Interstate 's partial interchange with MD 144 ( Main Street ) , which lacks a ramp from MD 144 to westbound I @-@ 70 . 
 East of MD 144 , I @-@ 70 parallels the Western Maryland Rail Trail , Chesapeake and Ohio Canal , and the Potomac River while heading east along a narrow corridor between the river and several north – south ridges . Within this corridor , the freeway has a pair of partial interchanges with MD 615 ( Millstone Road ) . West of Indian Springs , the valley opens up and US 40 leaves the Interstate at a partial interchange just west of Licking Creek . I @-@ 70 continues to parallel the canal and rail trail at a distance until its diamond interchange with MD 56 ( Big Pool Road ) at Big Pool , where the freeway curves away from the Potomac River and passes to the south of Stone Quarry Ridge and Boyd Mountain . Just south of Clear Spring , I @-@ 70 crosses Toms Run within its diamond interchange with MD 68 ( Clear Spring Road ) . Signs on westbound I @-@ 70 prior to the MD 68 interchange remind motorists they should remain on I @-@ 70 to access I @-@ 68 . 
 I @-@ 70 continues east through the Hagerstown Valley , where the highway crosses over Little Conococheague Creek , Meadow Brook Creek , and Conococheague Creek before reaching a diamond interchange with MD 63 ( Greencastle Pike ) south of <unk> . As the Interstate approaches Hagerstown , it crosses a branch of Conococheague Creek and CSX 's Lurgan Subdivision ahead of its cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 81 ( Maryland Veterans Memorial Highway ) . I @-@ 70 heads southeast through the interchange , which has collector @-@ distributor lanes in both directions that separate the individual ramps from the main roadways of both Interstates . The freeway traverses US 11 ( Virginia Avenue ) and the Winchester and Western Railroad before it curves to the east again . The Interstate has partial cloverleaf interchanges with MD 632 ( Downsville Pike ) and MD 65 ( Sharpsburg Pike ) around a crossing of Norfolk Southern Railway 's Hagerstown District rail line . I @-@ 70 crosses over Antietam Creek and US 40 Alternate ( Boonsboro Pike ) south of Funkstown . 
 = = = Hagerstown to Mount Airy = = = 
 I @-@ 70 meets US 40 ( National Pike ) at a cloverleaf interchange as the two highways leave the suburban area surrounding Hagerstown . The Interstate curves to the southeast and has a diamond interchange with MD 66 ( <unk> Road ) near Beaver Creek . I @-@ 70 crosses Beaver Creek and Black Rock Creek and gains an eastbound climbing lane as the highway ascends South Mountain and passes through Greenbrier State Park . At the top of the mountain , the Interstate passes under US 40 and the Appalachian Trail and enters Frederick County . I @-@ 70 has a pair of rest areas on the east side of the mountain , one per direction . The westbound rest area is where the Beltway snipers , John Allen Muhammad and Lee Boyd Malvo , were apprehended by police in October 2002 . 
 I @-@ 70 's eastbound climbing lane disappears and the Interstate has a westbound climbing lane from the top of the mountain southeast to a diamond interchange with MD 17 ( Myersville Middletown Road ) south of Myersville , where the freeway enters the Middletown Valley . Within the valley , the Interstate crosses Catoctin Creek and Little Catoctin Creek . I @-@ 70 gains an eastbound climbing lane as it climbs Braddock Mountain , on top of which the freeway passes under a concrete arch bridge carrying Ridge Road . Westbound I @-@ 70 has a climbing lane as the highway descends Braddock Mountain and has partial interchanges with US 40 ( National Pike ) and US 40 Alternate ( Old National Pike ) . The first interchange is a pair of flyover ramps from eastbound I @-@ 70 to eastbound US 40 and from westbound US 40 to westbound I @-@ 70 . The second interchange is a half diamond interchange with an exit ramp from westbound I @-@ 70 to US 40 Alternate , and an entrance ramp to eastbound I @-@ 70 . 
 After entering the Frederick Valley , I @-@ 70 's speed limit drops from 65 to 55 mph ( 105 to 90 km / h ) . The Interstate passes under MD 180 ( Jefferson Pike ) and has a partial interchange with Jefferson National Pike , a freeway that carries US 15 and US 340 ; eastbound I @-@ 70 has ramps to both eastbound and westbound US 15 / US 340 , while westbound I @-@ 70 has only a flyover ramp to westbound Jefferson National Pike . Eastbound I @-@ 70 receives a ramp from MD 180 and Ballenger Creek Pike and crosses over the state highway before reaching a directional interchange with I @-@ 270 and US 40 . I @-@ 270 heads south toward Washington as Eisenhower Memorial Highway , taking over the name from I @-@ 70 , while US 40 ( Frederick Freeway ) exits to the north and joins I @-@ 70 in a concurrency . I @-@ 70 heads east as a six @-@ lane freeway and meets MD 85 ( Buckeystown Pike ) at a single @-@ point urban interchange south of downtown Frederick . MD 85 is used to access MD 355 ( Urbana Pike ) . The Interstate reduces to four lanes before it crosses over the Frederick Branch of CSX 's Old Main Line Subdivision . On the east side of Frederick , I @-@ 70 has a four @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf interchange with South Street and a partial diamond interchange with MD 144 ( Patrick Street ) . 
 I @-@ 70 heads east from the Frederick area as a six @-@ lane freeway with a speed limit of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . The Interstate crosses over the Monocacy River and Long Spring Branch ahead of a partial interchange with MD 144 ( Old National Pike ) , which includes ramps from westbound I @-@ 70 to westbound MD 144 and eastbound MD 144 to eastbound I @-@ 70 . County @-@ maintained Old National Pike parallels the north side of the Interstate east to Mount Airy via New Market , where I @-@ 70 has a diamond interchange with MD 75 ( Green Valley Road ) . East of New Market , the freeway is also paralleled by the Old Main Line Subdivision as the highways and rail line follow the valley of Bush Creek to just west of Mount Airy . I @-@ 70 veers southeast for its partial cloverleaf interchange with MD 27 ( Ridge Road ) at the top of Parr 's Ridge on the Frederick – Carroll county line . 
 = = = Mount Airy to Baltimore = = = 
 I @-@ 70 is closely paralleled by MD 144 ( Frederick Road ) on its eastbound side as the freeway briefly passes through Carroll County . The Interstate enters Howard County when it traverses the South Branch of the Patapsco River near its headwaters . MD 144 leaves the vicinity of I @-@ 70 , which meets MD 94 ( Woodbine Road ) at a diamond interchange in Lisbon and MD 97 ( Roxbury Mills Road ) at another diamond interchange near Cooksville . East of their diamond interchange with MD 32 ( Sykesville Road ) , I @-@ 70 and US 40 split at a partial interchange . I @-@ 70 heads east as a four @-@ lane freeway toward Baltimore while US 40 heads east as four @-@ lane Baltimore National Pike to serve Ellicott City . Just east of the US 40 split , the Interstate has a partial interchange with <unk> Road that allows westbound I @-@ 70 to access US 40 . 
 North of Ellicott City , I @-@ 70 has a cloverleaf interchange with US 29 ( Columbia Pike ) just south of the U.S. highway 's northern terminus at MD 99 ( Old Frederick Road ) and Rogers Avenue , which heads south toward the Ellicott City Historic District . The interchange includes a flyover ramp from westbound I @-@ 70 to southbound US 29 . The Interstate continues east as a six @-@ lane freeway through Patapsco Valley State Park , where the highway crosses the Patapsco River and the Old Main Line Subdivision again and enters Baltimore County . As the freeway approaches the suburb of Woodlawn , the speed limit decreases to 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) . The westbound direction has a mileage sign with approximate values for Columbus , St. Louis , Denver , and the small town of Cove Fort , Utah at the opposite end of I @-@ 70 . This sign , which was intended as a test of Clearview typeface , was installed in 2004 . 
 A sign on eastbound I @-@ 70 correctly informs motorists that I @-@ 70 ends at its four @-@ level stack interchange with I @-@ 695 ( Baltimore Beltway ) . West of the interchange , the freeway has an average annual daily traffic value of 94 @,@ 221 vehicles . East of the interchange , I @-@ 70 formally continued as a four @-@ lane highway for local traffic that averaged 25 @,@ 300 vehicles per day . The Interstate 's speed limit reduces to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and then 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) as it passes through its final interchange , a partial cloverleaf junction with MD 122 ( Security Boulevard ) , which continues southeast into Baltimore as Cooks Lane . Just east of the interchange , I @-@ 70 entered the city of Baltimore and the freeway 's median expands into a park and ride facility that was accessed at the Interstate 's eastern terminus at a U @-@ turn adjacent to Leakin Park . Eastbound I @-@ 70 traffic that wished to access Cooks Lane had to make a U @-@ turn at the terminus and exit from a westbound loop ramp . Westbound access to I @-@ 70 is done via a single entrance ramp off Ingleside Avenue , which is considered part of the MD 122 interchange . The very short section of I @-@ 70 in the city of Baltimore is maintained by the Baltimore City Department of Transportation instead of the Maryland State Highway Administration ( MDSHA ) . The 1 @.@ 95 @-@ mile extension beyond I @-@ 695 to the I @-@ 70 Park and Ride facility was formally dropped from the Interstate system at the AASHTO Spring 2014 meeting . 
 = = History = = 
 I @-@ 70 was planned to follow the US 40 corridor from Hancock east to Frederick , where the Interstate Highway designation split . I @-@ 70N would continue following US 40 east to Baltimore while I @-@ 70S would follow US 240 southeast toward Washington . In 1974 , the suffixed designations were eliminated ; I @-@ 70N became an eastward extension of I @-@ 70 while I @-@ 70S was designated I @-@ 270 . 
 = = = Baltimore National Pike and Frederick Freeway = = = 
 The first section of I @-@ 70 in Maryland was constructed as Baltimore National Pike , a four @-@ lane divided highway relocation and reconstruction of US 40 from the Pine Orchard community west of Ellicott City west to the east end of Patrick Street in Frederick . US 40 was constructed from Pine Orchard to MD 32 in West Friendship between 1949 and 1951 . An overpass of MD 32 and two @-@ way ramp connection between the two highways were constructed in 1951 and 1952 . An overpass and connecting ramp were also constructed at MD 97 , which was included in the portion of US 40 constructed from West Friendship to Morgan Station Road west of Cooksville between 1950 and 1952 . The third section of Baltimore National Pike was built from Morgan Station Road into Carroll County just west of the Patapsco River in 1952 and 1953 . The next section of relocated US 40 , from west of the Patapsco River through the Ridgeville section of Mount Airy into Frederick County 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) west of MD 27 , broke ground in 1953 and was completed by 1955 . An interchange with MD 27 in Ridgeville was constructed in 1953 and 1954 . 
 The remainder of Baltimore National Pike from Ridgeville to the Monocacy River was constructed in four sections simultaneously starting in 1953 . The first three sections were from 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) west of the Carroll – Frederick county line to the highway 's crossing of the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad 's main line at a site called Plane No. 4 , from there to New Market , and between New Market and <unk> Road in Bartonsville . The fourth section was constructed to closely parallel the existing alignment of US 40 from <unk> Road in Bartonsville to just east of the Monocacy River . All four sections opened as a divided highway with a macadam surface in 1955 . The following year , Baltimore National Pike from Ridgeville to the Monocacy River was completed with an asphalt surface . The final section of Baltimore National Pike , from east of the Monocacy River to the east end of Patrick Street near modern Exit 56 , was expanded to a divided highway in 1953 with the exception of the Monocacy River crossing . Engineering work on a second bridge across the Monocacy River began in 1954 . The new bridge , which would complement the existing bridge that had been constructed in 1944 to replace the historic Jug Bridge , opened in 1956 , completing the Baltimore National Pike . 
 The western end of Baltimore National Pike was planned to tie into both Patrick Street and the eastern end of the Frederick Freeway , which would serve as a US 40 freeway bypass of downtown Frederick between its two interchanges with Patrick Street . Construction on the east – west US 40 portion of the Frederick Freeway began in 1954 and was completed by 1958 . Old US 40 through downtown Frederick later became part of MD 144 . The freeway 's original interchanges along what is now I @-@ 70 included a partial interchange with Patrick Street east of Frederick , the present interchange at South Street , folded diamond interchanges at MD 355 and New Design Road , and a partial interchange with Washington National Pike ( now I @-@ 270 ) , where the Frederick Freeway curved north to cloverleaf interchanges with US 340 and the western end of Patrick Street . The north – south portion of the Frederick Freeway was completed in 1959 and became part of US 15 . The Frederick Freeway was marked with exit numbers in 1963 ; the portion that is part of I @-@ 70 started from Exit 1 at MD 144 east of Frederick and went to Exit 4 at New Design Road . 
 = = = Interstate construction and upgrades = = = 
 The next section of US 40 and future I @-@ 70 to be upgraded was east of Hancock . US 40 was reconstructed as a divided highway from Tonoloway Creek at the eastern end of Hancock parallel to the Potomac River to the community of Millstone at what is now the southern terminus of MD 615 in 1961 . This piece of highway became the first completed section of highway in Maryland to be marked as I @-@ 70 in 1962 . In 1964 , construction began on I @-@ 70 from the western end of the existing highway to the Pennsylvania state line . This project happened concurrently with the construction of what is now I @-@ 68 west from I @-@ 70 to MD 144 west of Hancock ; both projects were completed in 1966 . Construction of I @-@ 70 from Hancock to Frederick was fully underway in an eastward direction by 1965 . The Interstate opened from MD 615 to MD 56 in 1965 ; from MD 56 to MD 68 in 1966 ; from MD 68 to I @-@ 81 in 1967 ; from I @-@ 81 to US 40 east of Hagerstown in 1968 ; and from US 40 to the Frederick Freeway in 1969 . When the interchange between the Frederick Freeway and Washington National Pike was reconstructed to add I @-@ 70 toward Hagerstown in 1969 , the freeway 's interchange with New Design Road was removed . Exit numbers were added to I @-@ 70 from Hancock to Frederick in 1974 . 
 I @-@ 70 was constructed on a new alignment from east of West Friendship to Baltimore . The Interstate opened in 1967 from US 29 to I @-@ 695 , concurrent with US 29 's northward extension from US 40 to MD 99 . I @-@ 70 opened from US 40 in West Friendship to US 29 and from I @-@ 695 to Security Boulevard just west of the Baltimore city line in 1969 . I @-@ 70 was upgraded to Interstate standards from Bartonsville to West Friendship around 1974 . Diamond interchanges were constructed to replace at @-@ grade intersections with MD 94 and MD 75 ; for the latter interchange , MD 75 was relocated east of New Market . The existing interchanges at MD 32 and MD 97 were converted from two @-@ way connector ramps to diamond interchanges . I @-@ 70 's interchange with MD 27 was expanded from a four @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf to a six @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf in 1977 . Exit numbers were added east of Frederick in 1978 ; however , these exit numbers were each 2 less than the present numbers , which were marked in 1983 . I @-@ 70 was relocated away from the original alignment of US 40 between its junctions with MD 144 in Frederick and Bartonsville around 1987 ; the old highway became an eastern extension of MD 144 . Outside of the reconstruction of the Interstate through Frederick beginning in the 1990s , there have been two interchanges revised or added , both near Hagerstown . A direct ramp was added from eastbound I @-@ 70 to southbound MD 65 in 1995 ; this interchange had four ramps , including two loop ramps with eastbound I @-@ 70 , from at least 1968 . I @-@ 70 's interchange with MD 632 opened in 1999 . 
 = = = Reconstruction through Frederick = = = 
 In 1984 , MDSHA completed the I @-@ 70 Corridor Planning Study , which examined the 5 @.@ 3 miles ( 8 @.@ 5 km ) segment of I @-@ 70 from the Mount Philip Road overpass between Braddock Mountain and Frederick to just east of MD 144 at the western end of the project underway to relocate the Interstate through Bartonsville . The study proposed a series of projects to upgrade I @-@ 70 through Frederick , much of which had been constructed as the Frederick Freeway in the late 1950s , to Interstate standards . The four @-@ lane freeway was plagued with closely spaced interchanges with substandard acceleration and deceleration lanes and curve radii . Many of the interchanges were missing important movements between highways . For instance , travellers aiming to move from southbound US 15 to westbound I @-@ 70 needed to use US 40 through Frederick 's heavily commercialized Golden Mile to join I @-@ 70 at Exit 48 . 
 The first project involved I @-@ 70 's interchange with US 15 and US 340 , which was constructed with two ramps , one from westbound I @-@ 70 to southbound US 15 and one from northbound US 15 to eastbound I @-@ 70 , in 1969 . In this project completed in 1997 , two ramps were added from eastbound I @-@ 70 to both directions of US 15 ; a long ramp was added that started from northbound US 15 and eastbound US 40 at their interchange to provide access to westbound I @-@ 70 ; and a loop ramp from MD 180 and MD 351 ( Ballenger Creek Pike ) to eastbound I @-@ 70 between I @-@ 70 's interchanges with US 15 and I @-@ 270 . The second project filled in a pair of missing connections to the I @-@ 70 – I @-@ 270 interchange last updated in 1969 . Ramps were added from westbound I @-@ 70 to southbound I @-@ 270 and from northbound I @-@ 270 to eastbound I @-@ 70 ; in addition , New Design Road received a new bridge over I @-@ 70 and I @-@ 270 . After the second project was completed in 2002 , traffic between I @-@ 70 from the east and I @-@ 270 from the south no longer needed to use MD 355 and MD 85 to make the connections . 
 The third project was the replacement of I @-@ 70 's interchange with MD 355 , a four @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf interchange constructed in 1956 . In 2001 , westbound I @-@ 70 's ramps with MD 355 were closed and replaced with temporary ramps to and from Stadium Drive , which connected the freeway with the state highway . In 2005 , as part of a related project , the MD 85 – MD 355 intersection was reconstructed and MD 85 was extended to a temporary terminus east of MD 355 at a pair of ramps with eastbound I @-@ 70 . Eastbound I @-@ 70 's existing ramps at MD 355 were closed . As part of the project , East Street was extended south from downtown Frederick to I @-@ 70 's single @-@ point urban interchange with MD 85 , which was completed in 2009 . Once the new interchange opened , the temporary ramps between westbound I @-@ 70 and Stadium Drive were removed . 
 The fourth project to upgrade I @-@ 70 through Frederick , which will upgrade the interchanges at South Street and MD 144 built in 1956 , began in autumn 2010 . Eastbound I @-@ 70 's ramps with Reichs Ford Road , which leads to South Street , will be reconstructed . The westbound ramps serving South Street will be removed . The missing movements on the eastern end of Frederick will be provided by reconstruction of westbound I @-@ 70 's ramps with MD 144 . A ramp from MD 144 to westbound I @-@ 70 will be added ; both that ramp and the exit ramp from westbound I @-@ 70 will meet MD 144 at a roundabout . Once the interchanges are reconstructed , I @-@ 70 will be expanded to six lanes from east of MD 144 to I @-@ 270 . The fifth and final project to upgrade I @-@ 70 through Frederick will expand I @-@ 70 to six lanes between Mount Philip Road and I @-@ 270 . 
 = = = Future projects = = = 
 There are two other projects planned for I @-@ 70 and two studies that may lead to projects on the Interstate in the future . In Washington County , MDSHA will reconstruct and widen I @-@ 70 's bridges over Conococheague Creek starting in summer 2012 . In Howard County , as part of the upgrade of MD 32 to a freeway from MD 108 to I @-@ 70 , the state highway 's junction with I @-@ 70 will be reconstructed from a diamond interchange to a partial cloverleaf design that will allow free @-@ flowing traffic from both directions of MD 32 onto I @-@ 70 . In Howard County , a study is underway concerning improvements to the portion of I @-@ 70 between MD 32 and US 29 ; between the US 40 split and US 29 , I @-@ 70 is only four lanes . The study will look at widening the Interstate to six or eight lanes as well as possible improvements on US 29 and <unk> Road at their respective interchanges with I @-@ 70 . Finally , in Frederick County , MDSHA will study whether to upgrade I @-@ 70 's partial interchange with MD 144 in Bartonsville , which now only has ramps from westbound I @-@ 70 to westbound MD 144 and from eastbound MD 144 to eastbound I @-@ 70 . 
 = = Interstate 70 in Baltimore = = 
 = = = Early freeway plans for Baltimore = = = 
 Nine plans for a Baltimore city freeway system were put together by Baltimore city planners between 1942 and 1957 . The most influential of these plans was portrayed in the Smith Report of 1945 , which heavily influenced future proposals , including the proposal that would be included in the General Location of National System of Interstate Highways , also known as the Yellow Book , in 1955 . None of the plans gained traction due to either decision makers figuring the freeways were not needed or opposition to the east – west freeway passing straight through the central business district or immediately to the north of the central business district . For instance , a 1957 proposal had the east – west freeway following Biddle Street through the northern part of downtown Baltimore . However , by the late 1950s , Baltimore was starting to suffer from the flight of its commercial and industrial concerns and residents to the suburbs in response to the easy access provided by the developing Baltimore Beltway . 
 In response to the new sense of urgency , the head of Baltimore 's Department of Planning , Philip Darling , put together a 1960 report titled A Study for an East – West Expressway . Darling proposed I @-@ 70N pass through Leakin Park and Gwynns Falls Park , pass through the Rosemont neighborhood , and head east between Franklin Street and Mulberry Street . The East – West Expressway would turn south near Pine Street and turn east again to follow an elevated highway just south of Pratt Street , between the central business district and the Inner Harbor . At the east end of the Inner Harbor , at approximately the modern intersection of President Street and Eastern Avenue , I @-@ 70N would reach its terminus at a four @-@ way interchange with I @-@ 83 ( Jones Falls Expressway ) and I @-@ 95 ( Southwestern Expressway ) . I @-@ 95 would cross the Inner Harbor on a 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) high bridge immediately to the southwest of the interchange . 
 = = = The 10 @-@ D and 3 @-@ A systems = = = 
 Darling 's outreach with various civic groups meant there was little opposition to the proposed route of the East – West Expressway . The last obstacle before the freeway could receive federal funding was a review by independent consultants . A group of three consulting firms that came together as Expressway Consultants reviewed Darling 's plan and made major changes without consulting the civic groups Darling had engaged . As a result , when the consultants released their 10 @-@ D System in 1962 , the plan faced widespread opposition . In the 10 @-@ D System , I @-@ 70N would follow roughly the same route as in the Darling Plan east to Fremont Avenue . There , the freeway would follow Fremont Avenue south to a junction with I @-@ 95 at Hamburg Street . The route of the East – West Expressway in the 10 @-@ D System would require condemning a greater number of properties compared to Darling 's plan due to I @-@ 70N and I @-@ 95 passing through several residential neighborhoods south of the central business district . Several of the civic groups with which Darling had compromised opposed Expressway Consultants 's uncompromising position toward their route through Leakin Park . 
 Despite the major opposition , the initiation of federal funding allowed the city to start acquiring property in the Franklin – Mulberry corridor in 1966 to clear the way for construction of the stretch of freeway that did get built between Pulaski Street and Martin Luther King Jr . Boulevard . That same year , the city of Baltimore decided to resolve the deadlock on the 10 @-@ D System by forming another consulting group , Urban Design Concept Associates , to work with various experts and stakeholders to come up with a new , less disruptive freeway system proposal for Baltimore . In 1969 , the city adopted the group 's proposal for the 3 @-@ A System . I @-@ 70N would pass through Leakin Park and Gwynns Falls Park , then follow Gwynns Falls south to an interchange with the modern alignment of I @-@ 95 east of Caton Avenue . Another freeway , later designated I @-@ 170 , would be constructed in the Franklin – Mulberry corridor to connect I @-@ 70 with the west side of the central business district . 
 However , many of the civic groups still opposed I @-@ 70 passing through Leakin Park ; the groups used litigation and political will to indefinitely delay the construction of I @-@ 70 through the park . In 1981 , the city cancelled the portion of I @-@ 70 from its current eastern terminus through Leakin and Gwynns Falls parks to the Interstate 's interchange with I @-@ 170 . I @-@ 170 and the portion of proposed freeway south to I @-@ 95 remained part of plans with a new designation for the L @-@ shaped freeway , I @-@ 595 . However , in 1983 , I @-@ 595 was cancelled as well due to escalating costs ; saving funds for the original I @-@ 595 freeway would detract from more pressing needs like maintenance of city streets and rapid transit . I @-@ 595 was later used as an unsigned designation for the upgrade of US 50 between the Capital Beltway and Annapolis . With the abandonment of I @-@ 70 's extension further into the city , the Baltimore City Department of Transportation converted the Interstate 's stub end east of Security Boulevard into a park and ride facility that opened in September 1985 . 
 = = = Route description of I @-@ 70 in the 3 @-@ A System = = = 
 Had I @-@ 70 been constructed as planned in the 3 @-@ A System , I @-@ 70 would have continued east from its present terminus just west of the Baltimore city limits near Security Boulevard . The Interstate would curve to the northeast and traverse Dead Run and <unk> Road , then pass through a short tunnel underneath a hill in Leakin Park . I @-@ 70 would curve east through Gwynns Falls Park , where the freeway would cross over Dead Run and <unk> Road again just south of the stream 's confluence with Gwynns Falls . The Interstate would parallel Gwynns Falls southeast to an interchange with Hilton Parkway , a four @-@ lane divided highway that connects the portions of Hilton Street on either side of the Gwynns Falls valley . The Directional T interchange would provide access from both directions of I @-@ 70 to northbound Hilton Parkway and from southbound Hilton Parkway to I @-@ 70 . I @-@ 70 would continue south while paralleling Hilton Parkway on the east until the freeway 's underpass of US 40 ( Edmondson Avenue ) . 
 I @-@ 70 would have continued southeast along Gwynns Falls and what is now CSX 's Hanover Subdivision . The Interstate would have met the western end of I @-@ 170 at a directional T interchange where Baltimore Street and the Amtrak Northeast Corridor cross over Gwynns Falls . I @-@ 170 would have headed northeast closely paralleling the Amtrak Northeast Corridor before veering east at the West Baltimore station on MARC 's Penn Line to join the constructed portion of I @-@ 170 , which is now part of US 40 . I @-@ 70 would have continued southeast to a partial interchange with MD 144 ( Frederick Avenue ) that would have allowed access to and from the direction of I @-@ 95 . The Interstate would have passed under US 1 ( Wilkens Avenue ) before reaching its terminus at I @-@ 95 . I @-@ 70 's junction with I @-@ 95 would have been a directional T interchange constructed over a rail yard on the Mount Clare Branch of CSX 's Baltimore Terminal Subdivision . When I @-@ 95 was completed from Caton Avenue to Russell Street in February 1978 , the highway was paralleled by extended ramps east from the Caton Avenue interchange that would have allowed connections between I @-@ 70 and Caton Avenue ( US 1 Alternate ) and segregated I @-@ 70 and Caton Avenue traffic from the partial interchange with Washington Boulevard just to the east . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 I @-@ 70 has two auxiliary Interstate Highways in Maryland . 
 = = = Interstate 270 = = = 
 I @-@ 270 is a 34 @.@ 70 @-@ mile ( 55 @.@ 84 km ) auxiliary Interstate Highway in the U.S. state of Maryland that travels between I @-@ 495 ( Capital Beltway ) just north of Bethesda in Montgomery County and I @-@ 70 in the city of Frederick in Frederick County . It consists of the 32 @.@ 60 @-@ mile ( 52 @.@ 46 km ) mainline as well as a 2 @.@ 10 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 38 km ) spur that provides access to and from southbound I @-@ 495 . I @-@ 270 is known as the Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Highway as well as the Washington National Pike . Most of the southern part of the route in Montgomery County passes through suburban areas around Rockville and Gaithersburg that are home to many biotech firms . This portion of I @-@ 270 is up to twelve lanes wide and consists of a local @-@ express lane configuration as well as high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes that are in operation during peak travel times . North of the Gaithersburg area , the road continues through the northern part of Montgomery County , passing Germantown and Clarksburg as a six- to eight @-@ lane highway with a HOV lane in the northbound direction only . North of here , I @-@ 270 continues through rural areas into Frederick County and toward the city of Frederick as a four @-@ lane freeway . 
 = = = Interstate 370 = = = 
 I @-@ 370 is a 2 @.@ 54 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 09 km ) Interstate Highway spur route off I @-@ 270 in Gaithersburg to the western end of MD 200 ( Intercounty Connector ) at an interchange that provides access to the park and ride lot at the Shady Grove station on the Red Line of the Washington Metro . Despite the number , I @-@ 370 does not connect to I @-@ 70 itself . The road continues to the west of I @-@ 270 as Sam Eig Highway , a surface road . Along the way , I @-@ 370 has an interchanges with MD 355 and Shady Grove Road . The freeway was completed in the late 1980s to connect I @-@ 270 to the Shady Grove Metro station . I @-@ 370 was part of the larger Intercounty Connector , but was the only segment to be built at the time . MD 200 east of I @-@ 370 to MD 28 ( Norbeck Road ) opened on February 23 , 2011 , resulting in the truncation of I @-@ 370 to the interchange with MD 200 and the redesignation of the road leading into the Shady Grove Metro station as MD 200A . 
 = Kroger Babb = 
 Howard W. " Kroger " Babb ( December 30 , 1906 – January 28 , 1980 ) was an American film and television producer and showman . His marketing techniques were similar to a travelling salesman 's , with roots in the medicine @-@ show tradition . Self @-@ described as " America 's Fearless Young Showman , " he is best known for his presentation of the 1945 exploitation film Mom and Dad , which was added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress in 2005 . 
 Babb was involved in the production and marketing of many films and television shows , promoting each according to his favorite marketing motto : " You gotta tell ' em to sell ' em . " His films ranged from sex education @-@ style dramas to " documentaries " on foreign cultures , intended to titillate audiences rather than to educate them , maximizing profits via marketing gimmicks . 
 = = Youth = = 
 Babb was born in 1906 in Lees Creek , Ohio , USA ( near Wilmington ) . He earned the nickname " Kroger " either from his childhood job at the grocer of the same name or from his father 's preference for B.H. Kroger coffee . Babb held a number of jobs during his youth , gaining a mention in Ripley 's Believe It Or Not for refereeing a record number of youth sports games . He started out with jobs in sportswriting and reporting at a local newspaper in his 20s , and even showed signs of his later work while showcasing " Digger " O 'Dell , the " living corpse , " but first achieved success after his promotion to publicity manager for the <unk> @-@ Warners movie theaters , where he would create different kinds of stunts to lure audiences — for example , a drawing to award two bags of groceries to one ticket holder at selected theaters . Another gimmick was to find a furniture store window where a bedroom suite was on display , and there Babb would place a large sign reading " Win a bedroom suit ( theatre location & date listed ) " . This always ensured a packed house , and the " lucky " winner was awarded with a pair of pajamas . These experiences led him to the exploitation film business . 
 In the early 1940s Babb joined Cox and Underwood , a company that obtained the rights to poorly made or otherwise unmarketable films of subjects that were potentially controversial or shocking . It would often remove entire sections of these films and add material such as medical reels that lent itself to sensational promotion . Babb went on the road with a Cox and Underwood concoction titled Dust to Dust , a reworking of High School Girl with a childbirth scene added to the end . Its profits allowed Cox and Underwood to retire from the business , leaving Babb to start his own company , Hygienic Productions . He opened it near his childhood home in Wilmington , Ohio , and hired booking agents and advance salesmen along with out @-@ of @-@ work actors and comedians to present repackaged films and new features . 
 = = Film promotion = = 
 Babb is best known for his presentation of exploitation films , a term many in the business would embrace . According to The Hollywood Reporter , his success came from picking topics that would be easily sensationalized , such as religion and sex . His expenses were estimated at 5 % for selling , and his distribution overhead near 7 % , resulting in some of the largest per @-@ dollar returns in the film industry . 
 Babb 's biggest success was Mom and Dad , which he conceived and produced and which William Beaudine directed in six days . Babb headed the promotion of this film following its premiere in early 1945 , often going on the road with it himself . The film , a morality tale about a young girl who becomes pregnant and struggles to find someone to turn to , cost $ 62 @,@ 000 and over 300 prints were struck and sent to theaters all over the country , with a " presenter " — later known as an advance man — and the presenter would stir up his own controversy in the weeks preceding the film 's arrival by writing protest letters to local churches and newspapers and fabricating letters from the mayors of nearby cities relating tales of young women encouraged by the film to discuss similar predicaments . 
 The third highest grossing film of its decade , Mom and Dad was claimed by Babb to have made $ 63 @,@ 000 for every $ 1 @,@ 000 the original investors contributed , and the Los Angeles Times estimated that it grossed anywhere from $ 40 million to $ 100 million . Its success spawned a number of imitations , such as Street Corner and The Story of Bob and Sally , that eventually flooded the market , but it was still being shown around the world decades later and ultimately was added to the National Film Registry in 2005 . 
 The success of Mom and Dad was mostly due to Babb 's marketing strategy of overwhelming a small town with ads and generating controversy . Eric Schaefer explains : 
 Acknowledging that his films were unknown quantities , Babb advocated a " 100 % saturation campaign . " In his sample <unk> Deadwood Theater in Movie @-@ hater , Missouri , with a potential audience base of twenty @-@ four <unk> suggested sending tabloid heralds to all seven thousand homes in the area at a cost of $ 196 , spending $ 65 for newspaper ads , $ 50 on radio , plus an additional $ 65 for three hundred window cards , hand @-@ out teaser cards , pennants , and posters . The total came to almost $ 400 , or the same amount the theater owner would normally spend on advertising in the course of an entire month . Babb always claimed that with his formula the profit would outweigh the investment ... 
 The film became so ubiquitous that Time said its presentation " left only the livestock unaware of the chance to learn the facts of life . " Babb also made sure that each showing of the film followed a similar format : adults @-@ only screenings segregated by gender , and live lectures by " Fearless Hygiene Commentator Elliot Forbes " during an intermission . At any one time , hundreds of Elliot Forbeses would be giving a lecture at the same time in a variety of locations . ( in some predominantly African @-@ American areas , Olympic gold medalist Jesse Owens appeared instead , a trend he 'd continue with films like " She Shoulda Said ' No ' ! " ) According to entertainer Card <unk> , an Elliot Forbes in the 1940s who later purchased the Australian and New Zealand rights for Mom and Dad , the Forbeses were " mostly local men ( from Wilmington , Ohio ) who were trained to give the lecture . . . [ I ] t was a cross @-@ section of the male population , mostly clean @-@ cut young guys . . . The whole concept would have never worked with a trashy look . " 
 During the intermission and after the showing , books relevant to the subject of the film were sold . Mom and Dad 's distributor Modern Film Distributors sold over 45 @,@ 000 copies of Man and Boy and Woman and Girl , written by Babb 's wife , netting an estimated $ 31 @,@ 000 . According to Babb , these cost about eight cents to produce , and were sold for $ 1 apiece . While Modern Film was able to sell 45 @,@ 000 on its own , Babb estimates sales of 40 million , citing " IRS figures . " This sort of companion selling would become common practice for Babb : with the religious film The Lawton Story ( AKA @-@ Prince of Peace ) , he would sell Bibles and other spiritual literature ; and with his fidelity film Why Men Leave Home books featuring beauty tips . 
 With other films , Babb would try different approaches . For She Shoulda Said No ! , an anti @-@ marijuana film of the 1950s , he highlighted the sexual scenes and arranged " one @-@ time @-@ only " midnight showings , claiming that his company was working with the United States Treasury Department to release the film " in as many towns and cities as possible in the shortest possible length of time " as a public service . David F. Friedman , another successful exploitation filmmaker of the era , has attributed the " one @-@ time @-@ only " distribution to a quality so low that Babb wanted to cash in and move to his next stop as fast as possible . At each showing of a film , a singing of " The Star Spangled Banner " was also required . 
 As well as being at the forefront of the battles over censorship and the motion picture censorship system , the exploitation genre faced numerous challenges during the 1940s and 1950s . It was estimated that Babb was sued over 400 times just for Mom and Dad ( Babb himself claimed 428 ) . He would often use the supposed educational value of the films as a defense , also recommending it to theater owners ; in his pressbook for Karamoja , he wrote , " When a stupid jerk tries to outsmart proven facts , he should be in an asylum , not a theater . " 
 Despite the criticism that Babb drew for Mom and Dad , in 1951 he received the first annual Sid Grauman Showmanship Award , presented by the Hollywood Rotary Club in honor of his accomplishments over the years . 
 = = Later films = = 
 Following the success of Mom and Dad , Babb renamed his company Hallmark Productions , continuing the marketing approaches of Hygienic Productions while going beyond health and sex education films . He would later set up a larger distribution company , named Hallmark 's Big @-@ 6 . 
 Babb cheaply acquired the rights to what would become " She Shoulda Said No ! " shortly after Robert Mitchum and Lila Leeds were arrested for marijuana use . Its original producer had struggled to get it distributed as Wild Weed , and Babb quickly presented it as The Story of Lila Leeds and Her Exposé of the Marijuana Racket , hoping that the title would draw audiences . When it failed to stir up much interest , Babb instead focused on the one scene of female nudity , using a photo of Leeds in a showgirl outfit , and retitled it " She Shoulda Said ' No ' ! " , with taglines such as " How Bad Can a Good Girl Get . . . without losing her virtue or respect ? ? ? " According to Friedman , Babb 's midnight presentation of the film twice a week made more money than any other film at the same theater would earn over a full run ; Friedman proceeded to use the film in his own roadshow double features . 
 Babb 's associates agreed with his belief that " Nothing 's hopeless if it 's advertised right " , stating that he " could take any piece of junk and sell it . " One film Babb presented in the 1950s was centered on an annual passion play and the story behind putting it on , filmed in 1948 in Lawton , Oklahoma . Initially called The Lawton Story and filmed in <unk> , the film was so cheaply , shoddily and quickly made that telephone poles could be seen behind the crucifix . Its cast consisted of local non @-@ professionals whose Oklahoma twangs were so thick that all of their lines had to re @-@ recorded by professional voice @-@ over actors ; upon release , one reviewer described it as " the only film that had to be dubbed from English to English . " In addition to re @-@ dubbing it , Babb re @-@ edited and re @-@ titled it The Prince of Peace ; it was so successful that the New York Daily News called it " the Miracle of Broadway . " 
 Another film , Karamoja , was marketed as a shocking portrayal of a tribe from Uganda who wore " only the wind and live [ d ] on blood and beer . " Scenes included " the bleeding of cattle and drinking of the warm blood , and self @-@ mutilation as a form of ornamentation , " as well as a full @-@ color circumcision scene . Karamoja proved less controversial than many of Babb 's other films and grossed less . 
 Babb never repeated the overwhelming success of Mom and Dad , and he followed much of the exploitation industry in turning to burlesque features in an attempt to make more money . One notorious attempt was his acquisition of the American theatrical rights for Ingmar Bergman 's <unk> med Monika ( Summer with Monika ) . About one @-@ third of the film was cut , and the remaining 62 minutes emphasized nudity by retaining a skinny @-@ dipping scene ; the result was titled Monika , the Story of a Bad Girl . <unk> advertising art , including promotional postcards , portrayed the nude rear of Harriet Andersson . 
 Babb 's final film was his presentation of a European version of Harriet Beecher Stowe 's book Uncle Tom 's Cabin . This was described by Friedman as one of the most " unintentionally funny exploitation films ever made , " filled with " second @-@ rate Italian actors who could barely speak English . " 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 After the success of Mom and Dad , Babb talked of an " unrealized " project called Father Bingo , which he advertised in BoxOffice magazine as " An Expose of Gambling in the Parish Halls " and described as a comedy with an anti @-@ gambling message about a corrupt priest who runs a " controlled " bingo night at his parish . Babb called it " the best ' snow @-@ job ' of my life , " and it has been speculated that he never intended to make it , despite the trade ads that appeared for years . 
 Babb was involved with many film production companies along with his own , including Southwestern Productions . On the strength of his past successes , Babb joined John Miller 's film production company , Miller @-@ Consolidated Pictures , as vice president and general manager in 1959 . Babb advocated the use of the hard @-@ selling technique he had perfected as a presenter : " selling the sizzle instead of the steak " , according to an interview . He wrote a column for BoxOffice at the same time . His personal anecdotes provided advice for selling films , such as writing off expenses as tax deductions , and using women 's clubs to expand advertising and revenues cheaply . He noted that there were " over 30 @,@ 000 women 's clubs , " and that " practically every women 's club has a 16mm projector . " 
 In 1963 Babb formed another distribution company , Studio 10 @,@ 001 . Operating in Beverly Hills ( and claiming representation in Canada , Japan , Australia , and New Zealand ) , it used similar roadshow techniques to market television programs such as The Ern Westmore Show . Babb also acted as a showman for hire , promoting others ' films when not working on his own . Among them was a nudie @-@ cutie picture titled Kipling 's Women , a peep show , and Five Minutes to Love , a reworking of a Rue McClanahan film . 
 Babb began creating promotion kits entitled " Who 's Got the Ball ? " in an attempt to teach his craft to would @-@ be presenters . Marketing himself as " MR. <unk> " ( " showmanship " backwards ) , he advertised in BoxOffice . He also dabbled in other areas , writing tirades against pay television and creating a pyramid scheme titled " The Idea Factory . " One of his schemes was the " Astounding Swedish Ice Cream Diet " : overweight throughout his life , Babb claimed to have eaten ice cream three times a day , yet to have lost 100 pounds in 45 days . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Babb met Mildred Horn in 1944 during a showing of Dust to Dust in Indianapolis , where she was working as a movie critic ; her review of the film called it a " cheap , mislabeled morality play , " but the two struck up a conversation about it . They stayed together in a common @-@ law marriage ; Horn wrote a number of Babb 's screenplays , including Mom and Dad , as well as companion books . 
 In November 1953 Babb was arrested on a drunk @-@ driving charge after running a red traffic light and refusing a sobriety test . His $ 250 bail was continued , and he was not convicted , although this mishap to the recent creator of the anti @-@ alcohol film One Too Many was widely covered in the press . 
 Babb had tax troubles in the years after his success with Mom and Dad . He suggested to the Press @-@ Enterprise that his operation was so diffuse that sales of his one @-@ dollar sex education pamphlets were too difficult to track accurately . Babb eventually sold the rights to Mom and Dad and his stake in Modern Film Distributors to Erwin Joseph and Floyd Lewis — former partners in Modern Film who would continue to showcase Mom and Dad across the United States . 
 Babb suffered from various ailments toward the end of his life , including a stroke . He retired in 1977 , at 70 , and died of heart failure ( due to complications from diabetes ) on January 29 , 1980 , in Palm Springs , California . He was survived by his wife , a son and five grandchildren . Babb is buried in the Centerville Cemetery in Lees Creek , Ohio . His gravestone reads , " His many trips around and all over the world began in Centerville and end here in Lees Creek . " 
 = = Works = = 
 Babb worked in various areas of the entertainment industry , in both traditional and exploitation genres . He claimed to have made twenty films , and produced for television , radio , and even the stage . This is an incomplete collection of works owing to the nature of the exploitation genre . The titles are as they were finally presented by Babb , with earlier titles noted in parentheses . 
 = = = As film producer = = = 
 Dust to Dust ( previously Child Bride ) ( 1938 ) 
 Mom and Dad ( previously A Family Story ) ( 1945 ) 
 The Prince of Peace ( previously The Lawton Story ) ( 1949 ) 
 One Too Many ( previously Mixed @-@ Up Women , Killer With a Label , The Important Story of Alcoholism ) ( 1950 ) 
 Why Men Leave Home ( previously Secrets of Beauty ) ( 1951 ) 
 Halfway to Hell ( 1954 ) 
 Walk the Walk ( 1970 ) 
 = = = As film writer = = = 
 One Too Many 
 = = = As film distributor = = = 
 " She Shoulda Said ' No ' ! " ( previously Marijuana , the Devil 's Weed , The Devil 's Weed , Wild Weed , The Story of Lila Leeds and Her Exposé of the Marijuana Racket ) ( 1949 ) 
 Monika , the Story of a Bad Girl ( original title <unk> med Monika , later re @-@ issued by others in full as Summer with Monika ) ( 1949 ) 
 Delinquent Angels ( 1951 ) 
 The Best is Yet to Come ( 1951 ) 
 Halfway to Hell ( 1954 ) 
 Karamoja ( 1954 ) 
 Kipling 's Women ( 1961 ) 
 <unk> ( 1961 ) 
 Five Minutes to Love ( previously The Rotten Apple , It Only Takes Five Minutes ) ( 1963 ) 
 Uncle Tom 's Cabin ( 1970 ) originally released in Europe in 1965 
 Redheads vs. Blondes ( undated ) 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The Ern Westmore Hollywood Glamour Show , producer ( 1953 ) 
 Your Show of Shows , producer ( 1963 ) 
 = = = Stage = = = 
 French Follies 
 = Washington State Route 409 = 
 State Route 409 ( SR 409 ) is a short Washington state highway in Wahkiakum County . The highway runs north from the Wahkiakum County Ferry on Puget Island to SR 4 in the county seat of Cathlamet over a distance of 3 @.@ 84 miles ( 6 @.@ 18 km ) . The route connects Westport , Oregon , which is served by the county ferry , and Cathlamet . The highway was referred to as Secondary State Highway 12F ( SSH 12F ) from 1943 until 1964 . 
 SR 409 crosses the Cathlamet Channel on the Julia Butler Hansen Bridge , completed in August 1939 . The bridge is named after former U.S. representative Julia Butler Hansen , who served from 1960 until 1974 representing the third congressional district including Wahkiakum County . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 409 goes on a 3 @.@ 84 miles ( 6 @.@ 18 km ) route north from the northern ferry dock of the Wahkiakum County Ferry on Puget Island , to SR 4 , also referred to as the Ocean Beach Highway , in the county seat of Cathlamet . The route connects Westport , Oregon , which is served by the county ferry , and Cathlamet . The Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) found in 2007 that , on average , more than 2 @,@ 800 motorists utilize the road daily south of the northern terminus in Cathlamet , making the highway the second busiest state route in the county , after SR 4 at <unk> Road , which more than 4 @,@ 100 motorists utilize daily . 
 SR 409 originates at the ferry dock on Puget Island which serves as the northern end of the Wahkiakum County Ferry . From the dock , the road travels north past the island 's interior , before turning northwest to parallel the Cathlamet Channel . After intersecting Little Island Road , the highway immediately turns onto the Julia Butler Hansen Bridge spanning over the Cathlamet Channel . Once SR 409 exits off the bridge in Cathlamet , it becomes Front Street . Later , after intersecting River Street and Columbia Street , the highway becomes Main Street , the designation used from the intersection point to SR 4 . 
 = = = Ferry = = = 
 The year @-@ round Wahkiakum County Ferry , designated Wahkiakum , runs from Westport , Oregon to the southern terminus of SR 409 at Puget Island . The ferry connects SR 409 to a road that connects to U.S. Route 30 , which runs 477 @.@ 02 miles ( 767 @.@ 69 km ) across Oregon ; Wahkiakum County began running the ferry in 1962 , on a route from Westport to Puget Island . The ferry travels more than eighteen trips per day , and runs from 5 : 00 am to 10 : 15 pm and holds up to nine vehicles . The ferry costs 50 ¢ for foot passengers , $ 1 for bicycles , $ 2 for motorcycles , and $ 3 for passenger cars and other vehicles under 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . Vehicles over 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) cannot travel on the ferry ; motorhomes , large trucks and trailers are allowed on the ferry for a fare determined by length . Frequent Traveler Tickets can be purchased for $ 40 ( 22 trips ) and $ 75 ( 44 trips ) for vehicles under 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . The first ferry launched in June 1925 , when Walter Coates bought two ferries and began to operate them on two different routes , including the current one and a route from Puget Island to Cathlamet . The county later replaced the Puget Island – Cathlamet route with the Puget Island – Cathlamet Bridge in 1939 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Bridge ( 1925 – 1939 ) = = = 
 In June 1925 , Walter Coates began a ferry service across the Cathlamet Channel , from Puget Island to Cathlamet . The original ferry was later replaced by the Cathlamet , which could load cars . In 1932 , Coates sold the ferry service , fearing that the newly completed Ocean Beach Highway , soon to be SR 4 , would press drivers to the competing Astoria – Megler Ferry . In 1939 , the year the Julia Butler Hansen Bridge opened , ferry service ceased on the Puget Island – Cathlamet run . 
 The Julia Butler Hansen Bridge , which currently carries the route of SR 409 , which will be designated in 1964 , from Puget Island to Cathlamet , opened in August 1939 . The bridge , initially named the Puget Island – Cathlamet Bridge , was later renamed to honor Julia Butler Hansen , who served in the Washington House of Representatives from 1939 until 1960 , and U.S. representative for the third congressional district from 1960 until 1974 . 
 Lacey V. Murrow , R. W. Finke and Clark H. Eldridge designed the bridge , which spanned 2 @,@ 433 feet ( 742 m ) and consisted of four steel spans when first constructed . Steel comprises the majority of the truss bridge 's structure . President Franklin D. Roosevelt commenced the five @-@ day celebration of the bridge 's opening with a ribbon cutting , remotely controlled from the White House via telegraph . 
 = = = Designation ( 1943 – present ) = = = 
 After a reconstruction of the Primary and Secondary Highways in 1943 , the road that later became SR 409 was established as Secondary State Highway 12F ( SSH 12F ) . SSH 12F became SR 409 in 1964 during the 1964 highway renumbering , in which the WSDOT replaced the previous system of Primary and Secondary Highways with a new system called State Routes , which is still in use today . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Wahkiakum County . 
 = SMS Blitz = 
 SMS Blitz was an aviso of the Imperial German Navy , the lead ship of her class . She had one sister ship , SMS Pfeil . Blitz was built at the Norddeutscher Schiffbau dockyard ; she was laid down in 1881 , was launched in August 1882 , and was commissioned in March 1883 . The ship 's career was uneventful ; she served as a flotilla leader for torpedo boats until 1900 . In 1903 , she became a fleet tender . She was briefly mobilized at the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but she returned to fleet tender duties in 1915 , where she remained for the duration of the conflict . She was stricken from the naval register in March 1921 and was broken up for scrap later that year . 
 = = Design = = 
 Blitz was 78 @.@ 43 meters ( 257 @.@ 3 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 9 @.@ 9 m ( 32 ft ) and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 07 m ( 13 @.@ 4 ft ) forward . She displaced 1 @,@ 486 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 463 long tons ; 1 @,@ 638 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two horizontal 2 @-@ cylinder double expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by eight coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 15 @.@ 7 kn ( 29 @.@ 1 km / h ; 18 @.@ 1 mph ) and a range of approximately 2 @,@ 440 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 520 km ; 2 @,@ 810 mi ) at 9 kn ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . Blitz had a crew of 7 officers and 127 enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with one 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) K L / 23 gun placed in a pivot mount . The gun was supplied with 100 rounds of ammunition . The ship was also equipped with four 8 @.@ 7 cm K L / 23 guns in single mounts and one 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tube mounted in the bow . In 1891 – 1892 , the ship was rearmed with six 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts and three 35 cm torpedo tubes , one in the bow and one on each broadside , all submerged in the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Blitz was laid down at the Norddeutscher Schiffbau in Kiel in 1881 . She was launched on 26 August 1882 and commissioned into the German fleet on 28 March 1883 . Blitz served as the flotilla leader for I Torpedo Boat Flotilla after her commissioning . In the 1885 summer maneuvers in August and September , she led her torpedo boats with an armored warship division composed of Bayern , Friedrich Carl , and Hansa , and an unarmored division that comprised three old sail corvettes and Pfeil . At the time , Alfred von Tirpitz , the future architect of the High Seas Fleet , commanded Blitz and the torpedo boat flotilla . Starting in March 1886 , Tirpitz led the flotilla on training exercises that lasted until July . Thereafter , Blitz and her accompanying torpedo boats joined the annual fleet maneuvers as the III Division . In May , Blitz joined the Training Squadron as a torpedo boat leader during training exercises with the Maneuver Squadron in the Baltic . 
 In 1887 , Blitz , again with Tirpitz aboard , led the torpedo boat flotilla to Britain to participate in the Cowes Regatta ; the delegation was headed by Prince Heinrich . Then @-@ prince Wilhelm — the future Kaiser Wilhelm II — was also present for the cruise , aboard Blitz . The flotilla was back in German waters for the annual August – September maneuvers , where it formed the IV Division . By 1888 , Blitz had been transferred to the III Flotilla . In July , Blitz joined a squadron of ships to take the newly crowned Kaiser Wilhelm II for a tour of Baltic ports , which included a visit to Tsar Alexander III of Russia . During the August – September fleet maneuvers , she led the fourteen torpedo boats of the III Flotilla as part of a squadron defending Wilhelmshaven from a simulated hostile squadron . During the maneuvers , Blitz and the torpedo boats led a mock attack against the main fleet . 
 In the fleet maneuvers in late 1890 , Blitz and her flotilla were the only German force , and Blitz was given the task of defending Germany 's Baltic coast against a simulated Russian blockade . Blitz also took part in the 1891 and 1892 training exercises . During the 1894 maneuvers , which postulated a two @-@ front war against France and Russia , Blitz remained in the Baltic to defend against the simulated Russian attack . She also participated in the summer 1897 exercises in the simulated hostile squadron , along with her sister Pfeil . In August – September 1900 , she participated in the annual summer fleet maneuvers ; during the exercises , she was assigned to the simulated German squadron , tasked with defending against a simulated enemy fleet in the North Sea . After the conclusion of the maneuvers , Blitz was withdrawn from active service . In 1903 , she was used as a tender for the fleet . 
 In 1912 , she was assigned as the tender for the new dreadnought battleships of the I Battle Squadron . While in the II Squadron , she wore a white identification band on her funnel , to distinguish her from her sister Pfeil , which wore a yellow identification stripe . At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she was mobilized as a coastal defense ship , though this duty lasted only until 1915 . That year , she returned to her fleet tender duties ; she served in this capacity for the remainder of the war . She was stricken from the naval register on 8 March 1921 , and sold for 520 @,@ 000 marks . She was broken up for scrap later that year in Wilhelmshaven . 
 = M @-@ 183 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 183 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It serves Fayette State Park as an access route from US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) . The highway runs through rural farmlands of the Garden Peninsula and next to Big Bay de Noc , a bay of Lake Michigan . The community at Fayette dates back to the 1860s . It has been a state park since the late 1950s , and the connecting road has been a state highway since the 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 183 lies on the Garden Peninsula in Delta County . Running along the east shore of Big Bay de Noc , the highway starts at the gate to Fayette State Park . South of entrance to the park , the roadway continues under local jurisdiction as Delta County Road 483 ( CR 483 ) . From there north , it is a rural two @-@ lane road that runs northeasterly through woodland . The trunkline turns north along LI Road through farmland , and then east along 16th Road near Puffy Bay . South of Garden , the highway turns north through the village on State Street . M @-@ 183 continues north of town running through the farms of the Garden Peninsula along Big Bay de Noc through the Lake Superior State Forest to the northern terminus at US 2 in Garden Corners . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) maintains the highway like all other state trunkline highways under its jurisdiction . As a part of these responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic along its highways . These surveys are expressed using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a calculation of the traffic counts for a segment of roadway on any average day of the year . In 2009 , MDOT determined that 692 vehicles a day used the segment near the state park . Through the middle section in Garden , the peak volume was 892 vehicles daily which dropped to 878 at the US junction . The commercial AADT was 54 trucks for the entire highway . M @-@ 183 has not been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 Fayette State Park encompasses an historical iron smelting town site from the 1800s . Now a ghost town , the Jackson Iron Company operations lasted here from 1867 – 1891 . The town was used as a location to produce charcoal iron , a purified form of the iron ore mined in the UP . After the furnaces shut down , the town operated as a resort community until the park was created . The Michigan Conservation Department created the park in 1959 after it traded land to obtain the 90 acres ( 36 ha ) from the Escanaba Paper Company and the 71 acres ( 29 ha ) from Cleveland @-@ Cliffs Iron Company . The Delta County Commission had been requesting state assistance for improving the road since 1975 . In February 1985 , MDOT took control of the road from the county road commission and designated it M @-@ 183 . The number was chosen to reflect the CR 483 designation it once bore . After the transfer , the state resurfaced the road as part of a program of improvements to benefit park visitors . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Delta County . 
 = Ilyushin Il @-@ 32 = 
 The Ilyushin Il @-@ 32 was a Soviet heavy military glider developed after World War II to deliver 7 @,@ 000 kg ( 15 @,@ 000 lb ) of cargo . To facilitate loading and unloading the glider 's nose and tail sections were hinged to swing sideways . The Il @-@ 32 required a four @-@ engined aircraft to tow it safely ; it was canceled when it became clear that no such tug was going to be available after the Tupolev Tu @-@ 75 and Ilyushin Il @-@ 18 programs were both canceled because of shortages of their intended Shvetsov ASh @-@ 73 engines . 
 = = Development = = 
 After the end of World War II the Soviets devoted a considerable amount of effort to developing heavy transport gliders to deliver troops during an airborne assault . As part of this effort the Council of Ministers ordered the Ilyushin design bureau on 20 September 1947 to begin work on a glider capable of carrying 7 @,@ 000 kg ( 15 @,@ 000 lb ) of cargo , including 60 troops or a 122 mm ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) cannon with its prime mover , ammunition and crew . Its intended tug was the Tupolev Tu @-@ 75 , a four @-@ engined transport derived from the Tupolev Tu @-@ 4 . 
 The Il @-@ 32 was an aluminum @-@ bodied , high @-@ wing cantilever monoplane with a fixed tricycle undercarriage whose fuselage was square in cross @-@ section to fit as much cargo as possible . The two @-@ spar wings had a moderate aspect ratio . It was regarded as expendable and was built very simply to facilitate large @-@ scale manufacture . The nose and tail sections swung up to 95 ° to starboard to facilitate loading . 
 The Il @-@ 32 made its first flight on 20 August 1948 , towed by a twin @-@ engined Ilyushin Il @-@ 12 , but the Il @-@ 12 wasn 't powerful enough to tow a fully loaded glider and the four @-@ engined Il @-@ 18 airliner prototype was adapted to tow it from 20 September . During these flight tests it reached a cruising speed of 323 km / h ( 201 mph ) at an altitude of 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) and a weight of 16 @,@ 000 kg ( 35 @,@ 000 lb ) . The flight tests were satisfactory and preparations were made to begin series production , but the lack of suitable tugs was a problem . None of the Soviet four @-@ engined aircraft that could be used were either in production or available . Both the Tupolev Tu @-@ 70 and Il @-@ 18 airliners had been canceled , as had the Tu @-@ 75 transport , and the Tu @-@ 4 was dedicated to the strategic bombing mission . Experiments were made with a pair of Il @-@ 12s towing the Il @-@ 32 , but this was both difficult and risky for all involved . The Il @-@ 32 was therefore canceled for lack of a proper tug . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from OKB Ilyushin : A History of the Design Bureau and its Aircraft 
 General characteristics 
 Capacity : 60 troops or 7 @,@ 000 kg ( 15 @,@ 000 lb ) of cargo 
 Length : 24 @.@ 84 m ( 81 ft 6 in ) 
 Wingspan : 35 @.@ 8 m ( 117 ft 5 in ) 
 Wing area : 159 @.@ 5 m2 ( 1716 @.@ 84 ft2 ) 
 Empty weight : 9600 kg ( 21 @,@ 164 lb ) 
 Gross weight : 16 @,@ 600 kg ( 36 @,@ 597 lb ) each each 
 Performance 
 Cruising speed : 327 km / h ( 203 mph ) 
 Service ceiling : 4000 m ( 13 @,@ 100 ft ) 
 = Dougherty Valley High School = 
 Dougherty Valley High School ( commonly Dougherty , Dougherty Valley , Dougherty Valley High , <unk> , or DV High ) is a public high school located in the Windemere development of San Ramon , California , United States . Dougherty is one of four high schools in the San Ramon Valley Unified School District ( SRVUSD ) , along with California High School , San Ramon Valley High School , and Monte Vista High School . Constructed by Shapell Industries of California and Windemere Ranch Partners BLC , Dougherty was the first developer @-@ built school in the SRVUSD . The school opened its doors in 2007 . 
 Dougherty 's nickname is the wildcats , and its school colors are navy , Columbia blue , and silver . Dougherty is known for its state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art campus , which features a performing arts center and aquatics center in a joint @-@ use agreement with the city . Dougherty is the top school in the district based on Academic Performance Index and is developing as an athletic force . The school is also home to over 120 various clubs . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Conception ( 1988 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Dougherty Valley High School was built by Shapell Industries of California and Windemere Ranch Partners BLC , which were also the two main developers of the Dougherty Valley area in general . Shapell was obligated through a December 1988 agreement with the SRVUSD to " contribute its fair share of the cost of additional high school space needed to serve students generated by the project , " with the project mentioned being the construction of 11 @,@ 000 houses in the area . Dougherty is the first developer @-@ built high school in the SRVUSD , in contrast with the typical method of a developer and the state funding the school district for construction of any necessary schools . The district and developers began further negotiations regarding the school 's construction in 2001 . 
 The school 's name was chosen from more than 150 suggestions submitted to an online survey , although the name , school colors , and mascot had to be approved by the Board of Education . The school logo was designed in 2006 by Jennifer Wong , at the time a senior at Monte Vista High School , after winning a student logo design contest with 12 other entries . Wong received $ 500 for her design and was honored alongside the contest 's runners @-@ up at a school board meeting . Denise Hibbard , who had been an assistant principal at California High School for six years , was chosen as Dougherty 's first principal . 
 = = = Construction ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = 
 An official groundbreaking at the school was held on September 23 , 2005 , with school board members Nancy <unk> , Greg Marvel , and San Ramon Mayor H. Abram Wilson in attendance . The construction of the school was divided into two phases . The first phase , which involved site grading , utilities , and paving , commenced in May 2005 and was completed by January 2006 ; the second phase , which involved constructing buildings , landscaping and creation of ball fields , commenced in February 2006 and was completed by August 2007 . In a December 2006 meeting , the City Council of the City of San Ramon approved the construction of a performing arts center and aquatics center for joint @-@ use between the city and the SRVUSD . Total construction took 16 months , five months less than predicted . 
 The construction of the school cost approximately $ 128 million , and the total cost , including inspections and management , was about $ 150 million . The costs of the performing arts center , to which the city contributed $ 4 million , and the aquatics center , to which the city contributed $ 9 @.@ 2 million , were expected to exceed revenues by $ 400 @,@ 000 each . According to City Councilmember Scott Perkins , " Other cities have stand @-@ alone [ aquatic ] facilities that cost $ 35 million . Were getting 90 percent of that use for a quarter of the price . " In addition , the city approved the $ 4 million construction of an independent study school on Dougherty 's campus , to replace the area 's older independent study school built in the 1970s . The expenses of construction were shared between Windemere BLC , Shapell , the school district , and the City of San Ramon . 
 = = = Inauguration and beyond ( 2007 – present ) = = = 
 The SRVUSD opened both Dougherty and Live Oak Elementary School on August 25 , 2007 . Dougherty began its inaugural school year on August 27 , 2007 , becoming the first high school in 34 years to open in the SRVUSD . History teacher James Corcoran noted that working at the first year school was an opportunity to develop its community , saying " You oftentimes will go into a school as a teacher , or even a principal , and it 's ' This is the way we do it around here . ' It 's hard to change that once it 's been set . " Elaine O 'Hanlon , founding president of the Dougherty Parent @-@ Teacher Association , said that parent volunteering would be encouraged at the new school . 
 In 2009 , the SRVUSD was affected by a major statewide school budget crisis . 236 layoff notices were sent to teachers within the district , more than half of whom worked at Dougherty . All permanent teachers were rehired with the help of a $ 144 per @-@ parcel tax measure passed in May 2009 , expected to raise $ 6 @.@ 7 million yearly . During the 2009 flu pandemic in the United States , one tenth grade student at Dougherty was known to have been infected with the Influenza A / H1N1 virus ; however , closure of the school did not occur , as it was found to be unnecessary and inconvenient . According to Principal Hibbard , " We just have to make sure we educate parents " , and the school administration reacted to the outbreak by sending out an email to parents with advice from the Center for Disease Control . 
 In the summer of 2011 , SunPower began construction and installation of solar panels in the school parking lot . The school district used federal funds from low @-@ interest qualified school construction bond as part of government stimulus from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 for the project . When completed , the panels will reportedly provide the school with between two @-@ thirds to 80 percent of its energy needs . 
 = = Enrollment = = 
 In the 2008 @-@ 2009 year , 1 @,@ 001 students were enrolled in Dougherty . Admission is based primarily on the location of students ' residency , although birth date documentation and immunization records are also required from new students . The school opened in 2007 with 570 students , fitting the initial prediction of between 450 and 600 students . 95 of these students had transferred to Dougherty from another school in the district , and the majority of the freshmen came from Windemere Ranch Middle School . The school started with only ninth grade freshmen and tenth grade sophomores in 2007 , and in each successive school year another grade was added until the standard ninth to twelfth grade range was reached in 2009 . 
 In 2007 , Dougherty had 277 female students , representing approximately 48 @.@ 6 % of the total student population , and 293 male students , representing approximately 51 @.@ 4 % of the total student population . Nestled in the culturally integrated Windemere development , Dougherty consists of students from many different backgrounds and is the most diverse in the district . Because of its diversity , San Ramon parks and community services division manager John <unk> said in 2007 that " We know that with the new high school ( Dougherty Valley High School ) and all the new schools , it 's important to stay on top of race issues . With the mixture of middle- and low- income housing in newer neighborhoods , that could be an issue as well . " Dougherty 's 2007 enrollment included a large population of Asian students , accounting for 41 @.@ 2 % of the student body . 32 @.@ 5 % of the school identified themselves as White , 6 @.@ 5 % as Filipino , 6 @.@ 1 % as African American , 4 @.@ 9 % as Hispanic or Latino , 0 @.@ 7 % as Pacific Islander , 0 @.@ 2 % as American Indian or Alaska Native , and 7 @.@ 9 % with more than one ethnicity or no response . 
 = = Academics = = 
 <unk> awarded the school a perfect ten out of ten score , based on a comparison between the school 's standardized test scores and those statewide ; it is one of the few schools in California to be distinguished as such . In 2009 , Dougherty had an Academic Performance Index rank of 905 out of a possible 1000 , growing from the 2008 base score of 891 . The school was the highest ranked high school in the SRVUSD , the 27th highest high school in the state , and the 744th highest school in the country by API score . In 2011 , Dougherty Valley improved by 12 points the previous year with an API score of 921 , making them the 3rd highest high school in Contra Costa County as well as the 1st highest high school in SRVUSD . Dougherty Valley also further improved with an API score of 937 in 2012 . 
 In 2013 , the school was awarded a gold medal , and ranked amongst the top 500 schools in the country by U.S. News . 
 = = School facilities = = 
 Dougherty occupies approximately 54 acres ( 220 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land and can accommodate up to 2 @,@ 200 students . Space has been left open to potentially expand the campus in the future , which would allow for 200 more students to attend . Considered to be state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art , the campus received the award for Best of California in the K @-@ 12 category for Northern California from California Construction magazine . There are 11 major buildings on campus , including four two @-@ story classroom buildings , a career tech facility , a library , a commons building , an administration building , and two gymnasiums . The school has 80 classrooms . For athletic purposes , the school has a 2 @,@ 800 @-@ seat stadium with lights , a press box , and a track . Also at Dougherty are two baseball fields , two softball fields and eight tennis courts . The campus is also home to the area 's 11 @,@ 222 square feet ( 1 @,@ 042 @.@ 6 m2 ) Venture Independent Study School . 
 Dougherty also shares a performance arts center and aquatics center with the city of San Ramon under a joint @-@ use agreement . The performing arts center includes a 600 @-@ seat proscenium theater , a 3 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 330 m2 ) rehearsal room , a box office , lobby , dressing rooms , rooms for vocal and instrumental music , and city offices . In addition to school productions and concerts , alternative rock band Gin Blossoms , stand @-@ up comedian Caroline Rhea , and others have put on shows at the performing arts center . The purpose of the performing arts center in relation to the school is twofold : students are able " to work with some of the professional artists in mentoring and master class programs " , and , according to Principal Hibbard , it allows for " larger presentations that can serve all our schools in the area " . The aquatics center features a 50 @-@ meter Olympic @-@ size swimming pool and locker rooms . 
 = = Extracurricular activities = = 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 The Dougherty Valley Athletic Department offers several sports , including cross country , football , golf , tennis , water polo , volleyball , cheerleading , basketball , soccer , wrestling , baseball , lacrosse , softball , swimming , diving , badminton , and track and field . Most of the sports have separate men 's and women 's teams , and golf and tennis for men occur in a later season than for women . Current coaches include former Major League Baseball player Darren Lewis for the varsity baseball team . 
 The school was part of the East Bay Athletic League ( <unk> ) for its first year , but has since moved to the Diablo Foothill Athletic League ( <unk> ) . Dougherty 's main rival is considered to be Dublin High School , due to the close proximity of the two schools and past controversy between the schools ' respective coaches . 
 = = = Wildcat Tribune = = = 
 The Wildcat Tribune was Dougherty 's official student newspaper before being dissolved by the school 's administration in 2009 . Published online and in print , the Tribune featured sections on news , editorials , opinions , features , entertainment , and sports . The first attempt to create a newspaper club occurred in the inaugural school year , although it fell through because the teacher supporting the club was unable to receive approval from the school 's administration . The newspaper club was founded by five students during the 08 @-@ 09 school year . The newspaper had several positions , including editor in chief , front page editor , editors for each section of the paper , and webmaster . 
 The Wildcat Tribune was the first print publication to interview Chesley Sullenberger after the pilot 's emergency water landing of US Airways Flight 1549 , in a February 2009 special edition of the Tribune with an article titled " Heroism & Humility on the Hudson " . Sullenberger and his wife , both residents of San Ramon , decided with CBS to grant his first interview to a student journalist , and Dougherty is attended by one of their daughters . Sullenberger met with the principal and <unk> <unk> prior to the interview , and all preparation was done in secrecy . <unk> conducted the interview at Sullenberger 's home hours before Katie Couric interviewed Sullenberger for 60 Minutes . An additional interview with Couric , about her career and the state of journalism , was also published in the Tribune . Alex Clemens , a representative of the Sullenberger family , said " The Sullenberger family is grateful to CBS for actively demonstrating <unk> to student journalism . " 
 The Wildcat Tribune was reinstated in 2011 and continues to issue publications every month . 
 = New Orleans Mint = 
 The New Orleans Mint ( French : Monnaie de La Nouvelle @-@ Orléans ) operated in New Orleans , Louisiana , as a branch mint of the United States Mint from 1838 to 1861 and from 1879 to 1909 . During its years of operation , it produced over 427 million gold and silver coins of nearly every American denomination , with a total face value of over US $ 307 million . It was closed during most of the American Civil War and Reconstruction . 
 After it was decommissioned as a mint , the building has served a variety of purposes , including as an assay office , a United States Coast Guard storage facility , and a fallout shelter . 
 Since 1981 it has served as a branch of the Louisiana State Museum . Damaged by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , after over two years of repairs and renovations , the museum reopened in October 2007 . 
 As of April 2015 , the museum 's music exhibits include instruments used by some of New Orleans ' notable jazz musicians , photographs , and posters , and are planned to open as the Louisiana Music Museum . The site is also a performance venue for jazz concerts , in partnership with the New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park and the private " Music at the Mint " organization . 
 The Louisiana Historical Center is located on the third floor of the building . The center includes collections of colonial @-@ era manuscripts and maps , and primary and secondary source materials in a wide range of media . It is open to anyone with an interest in Louisiana history and culture . 
 The New Orleans Mint has been designated a National Historic Landmark , and it is the oldest extant structure to have served as a U.S. Mint . Along with the Charlotte Mint , it is one of two former mint facilities in the U.S. to house an art gallery . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antebellum period , 1835 – 1861 = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 The rapidly growing United States in the early 1830s experienced a shortage of coins . It is estimated that in 1830 there was one small silver coin ( quarter , dime or half dime ) per person . Also , production of silver dollars was suspended in 1804 because they were being exchanged for underweight Spanish coins in the West Indies . That left the half @-@ dollar as the largest denomination of circulating coin being minted in the U. S. Foreign coins were being circulated in the U. S. to alleviate the shortage . The Philadelphia Mint had been the only U. S. mint until 1838 , when operations began at the first branch mints . 
 In 1832 President Andrew Jackson had vetoed a rechartering of the Second Bank of the United States , an institution which he felt extended credit to northeastern commercial tycoons at the expense of the ordinary frontiersmen of the Old Southwest , a region with which Jackson , a Tennessean , strongly identified . In 1836 Jackson had issued an executive order called the Specie Circular which demanded that all land transactions in the United States be conducted in cash . Both of these actions , combined with the economic depression following the Panic of 1837 ( caused partly by Jackson 's fiscal policies ) increased the domestic need for minted money . 
 As a result , in 1835 the U.S. Federal Government established three branch mints : the Charlotte Mint in North Carolina , the Dahlonega Mint in Georgia and the New Orleans Mint . Dahlonega and Charlotte were in gold mining regions and these mints produced only gold coins . New Orleans was selected because of the city 's strategic location along the Mississippi River which made it a vitally important center for commercial activity , including the export of cotton from the area 's plantations . Large quantities of gold from Mexico also passed through its port annually . 
 In the early 19th century , New Orleans , which was the fifth @-@ largest city in the United States until the Civil War , conducted more foreign trade than any other city in the nation . It was also located relatively near to gold deposits recently discovered in Alabama . While the Philadelphia Mint produced a substantial quantity of coinage , in the early 19th century it could not disperse the money swiftly to the far regions of the new nation , particularly the South and West . In contrast to the other two Southern branch mints , which only minted gold coinage , the New Orleans Mint produced both gold and silver coins , and in much greater quantities and total value , which marked it as the most important branch mint in the country until the San Francisco Mint began minting a large monetary value of gold coins in the mid 1850s . 
 The Mint 's location occupies a prominent place in civic history . It sits at one of the two River corners of the French Quarter , which had been the entire city , or Vieux Carré , of New Orleans . Under French and Spanish rule this location was home to one of the city 's defensive fortifications . In 1792 the Spanish governor , Francisco Luis Héctor de Carondelet , erected Fort San Carlos ( later Fort St. Charles ) here . The fort was demolished in 1821 ; and the nearby area was later named Jackson Square in honor of Andrew Jackson . As a general in the United States Army , Jackson 's leadership had saved the city from invading British forces during December 1814 and through January 8 , 1815 , the date of the famous Battle of New Orleans , the last significant battle of the War of 1812 . 
 = = = = Architectural history = = = = 
 = = = = = Design and construction = = = = = 
 The Mint building , which was constructed in red brick , was designed by architect William Strickland in the Greek Revival style , like most 19th @-@ century public buildings in the United States . Strickland was a student of the architect Benjamin Latrobe , a disciple of Neoclassicism who had helped design the United States Capitol building in Washington , D.C. Strickland himself , based in Philadelphia , had already designed the Philadelphia Mint building and the Second Bank of the United States , and would design the Charlotte and Dahlonega facilities , making him the architect of the first four U.S. mint buildings . Martin Gordon supervised the building 's construction , which was undertaken by Benjamin F. Fox , the master carpenter and joiner , and John Mitchell , the master stonemason and builder . 
 On the north façade the mint building features a central projecting Ionic portico , supported by four monumental columns that are flanked at the ends by square pillars . The top of the portico contains a simple entablature , crowned by a flat roof in front of a simple , unadorned pediment . This entrance , which sits on top of a basement story , fronts the rectangular central core of the facility and is flanked by two large wings of multiple bays of rectangular windows . These wings wrap around the central rectangular core to form a " W " -shaped structure with two square courtyards at the rear . Balconies framed by iron railings and posts adorn the sections of the building 's south façade that adjoin the courtyards . Architectural historian Talbot Hamlin described it thus : " it has those graceful , original proportions so characteristic of Strickland 's work . Even today [ 1944 ] , condemned to a use so different from that for which it was designed , it remains one of the most distinguished of the earlier buildings of New Orleans . " 
 On the interior , Strickland placed the grand staircase that connects the three levels immediately behind the portico in the central core of the structure . The floor system is composed of fired @-@ clay jack arches supported on steel I @-@ beams , a common feature of warehouses and other long @-@ span structures . On the second floor , many of the larger rooms , which were used for coining and melting , contain ceilings with beautiful high arches supported by the walls and freestanding piers . The smaller rectangular rooms on the second level ( and the basement ) , such as the former superintendent 's office , also contain these arched ceilings with a single groin vault . The basement formerly contained the boilers inside a brick cage , but now contain museum exhibits devoted to the minting processes as well as the Coin Vault at the Mint , a coin shop . 
 = = = = = Structural problems and repairs = = = = = 
 Strickland did not take into account the swampy lowland and high water table that characterizes the terrain around New Orleans , and so during its career the New Orleans Mint building has encountered numerous structural problems from the shifting soil beneath its foundation . In the 1840s the building was reinforced with iron rods inserted between the floors . In 1854 , the federal government hired West Point engineering graduate ( and Louisiana native ) Pierre Gustave Toutant Beauregard to fireproof the building , rebuild the arches supporting the basement ceiling and install masonry flooring . Beauregard completed the work in conjunction with Captain Johnson K. Duncan by 1859 . During this period , the Mint 's heavy machinery was converted to steam power so a smokestack ( since demolished ) was built at the rear of the structure to carry away the fumes . 
 Less than two years later , Beauregard would rise to national fame as the Confederate general who ordered the April 1861 assault on Fort Sumter in Charleston harbor , South Carolina , thus beginning the American Civil War . It was during the war that Beauregard would secure his place in American history as one of the Confederacy 's most capable generals . 
 = = = = Early coining operations = = = = 
 Like any other mint the New Orleans Mint was a factory to make coins . Operations at the New Orleans Mint began on March 8 , 1838 , with the deposit of the first Mexican gold bullion . The first coins , 30 dimes , were struck on May 7 . Until it was taken over by the Confederacy in 1861 it produced many different denominations , all of which were either silver or gold : silver three @-@ cent pieces ( 1851 only ) , half dimes , dimes , quarters , half dollars , silver dollars , gold dollars , $ 2 @.@ 50 quarter eagles , three @-@ dollar pieces , $ 5 half @-@ eagles , $ 10 eagles , and $ 20 double eagles . 
 Many interesting characters served at the Mint during the early years of operation . One was John Leonard Riddell , who served as melter and refiner at the Mint from 1839 to 1848 , and , outside of his job , pursued interests in botany , medicine , chemistry , geology , and physics . He invented the binocular microscope . He also wrote on numismatics , publishing in 1845 a book entitled Monograph of the Silver Dollar , Good and Bad , Illustrated With Facsimile Figures , and two years later an article by him appeared in DeBow 's Review called " The Mint at New Orleans — Processes Pursued of Working the Precious Metals — Statistics of Coinage , etc . " Riddell was not held in high esteem by everyone , however : his conflicts with other Mint employees were well @-@ documented , and at one point he was accused of being unable to properly conduct a gold melt . 
 Throughout the 19th century the New Orleans Mint was frequently featured in magazines , newspapers and other print publications . Articles discussing and images picturing the Mint , in addition to the one by Riddell noted above , were featured in Ballou 's Pictorial Drawing @-@ Room Companion , published in Boston , and the widely circulated Harper 's Weekly . 
 = = = Civil War and recommissioning , 1861 – 79 = = = 
 = = = = Secession and Confederate seizure = = = = 
 The New Orleans Mint operated continuously from 1838 until January 26 , 1861 , when Louisiana seceded from the United States . On January 29 , the Secession Convention reconvened at New Orleans ( it had earlier met in Baton Rouge ) and passed an ordinance that allowed Federal employees to remain in their posts , but as employees of the state of Louisiana . On February 5 , 1861 , during the proceedings of the Convention of the State of Louisiana in New Orleans , the committee appointed by the Convention to take an inventory on February 1 , 1861 , of public property in the hands of the officers of ' the late ' Federal government reported that the Sub @-@ Treasurer 's vault at the mint contained $ 483 @,@ 983 in gold and silver coins . The National Archives records in Rockville , Maryland , indicate the $ 483 @,@ 983 consisted of $ 308 @,@ 771 in gold coins and $ 175 @,@ 212 @.@ 08 in silver coins . The only gold coin produced in January , 1861 was the $ 20 gold double @-@ eagle . This means 15 @,@ 438 $ 20 gold coins were minted by the New Orleans Mint during January , 1861 . Mint coinage records for the $ 20 1861 @-@ O gold double @-@ eagle indicate only 5 @,@ 000 $ 20 gold pieces were minted by the Federal Government in January , 1861 . This discrepancy is explained in a Numismatist Journal article . 
 In March 1861 , Louisiana accepted the Confederate States Constitution and the Confederate government retained all the mint officers . They used it briefly as their own coinage facility . The Confederates struck 962 @,@ 633 of the 2 @,@ 532 @,@ 633 New Orleans half @-@ dollar coins dated 1861 . Research suggests that 1861 @-@ O half dollars bearing a bisected date die crack ( " WB @-@ 103 " ) and 1861 @-@ O half @-@ dollars with a " speared olive bud " anomaly ( " WB @-@ 104 " ) on the reverse had been minted under authority of the Confederacy . Confederate officials designed alternate reverse dies which they used to strike their own half @-@ dollars in New Orleans ( see image ) . The exact number of the half @-@ dollar coins struck by the Confederate mint with the alternate reverse is unknown ; but only four are known to exist today . One of them , which was sold at auction for a large sum , had once been owned by Jefferson Davis , the only President of the C.S.A. 
 Confederate minting operations continued from April 1 until the bullion ran out later that month . The staff remained on duty until May 31 , 1861 . After that the mint was used for quartering Confederate troops , until it was recaptured along with the rest of the city the following year , largely by Union naval forces under the command of Admiral David Farragut . 
 = = = = Occupation by Union forces = = = = 
 For many Southern sympathizers , the Mint soon became a symbol of their hatred for the Union occupation . After U.S. Marines under Farragut had raised the U.S. flag on the roof of the Mint in April 1862 , a professional steamboat gambler named William Bruce Mumford ascended the roof and tore the flag down . He ripped the banner into shreds , and defiantly stuffed pieces of it into his shirt to wear as souvenirs . Union General Benjamin Franklin Butler , the military governor of New Orleans ( who was soon to be derisively nicknamed " <unk> " for allegedly pocketing the silverware of New Orleans citizens arrested for treason against the United States ) , ordered Mumford executed in retaliation . And so , Mumford was hanged from a flagstaff projecting horizontally from the building on June 7 , 1862 . Mumford 's hanging made national headlines . Jefferson Davis demanded that Butler immediately be executed if captured . The event stuck in the minds of many New Orleanians : eleven years later , in 1873 , a visitor to the city named Edward King mentioned it in his description of the structure . 
 The mint reopened as an assay office in 1876 . Its machinery was evidently damaged during the war , but because of its importance , unlike the mints at Charlotte and Dahlonega , in 1877 U.S. Mint agent James R. Snowden asked the superintendent of the office , Dr. M. F. <unk> , to report on the condition of the facility for minting . Upon receipt of <unk> 's report , new minting equipment was shipped to New Orleans . The building was refurbished and put back into active minting service in 1879 , producing mainly silver coinage , including the famed Morgan silver dollar from 1879 to 1904 . 
 = = = A second chance , 1879 – 1909 = = = 
 = = = = New Orleans coinage = = = = 
 The refurbishment and recommissioning of the New Orleans Mint was due partly to the fact that in 1878 the Federal government in Washington , D.C. had passed the Bland – Allison Act , which mandated the purchase and coining of a large quantity of silver yearly . The Treasury Department needed additional facilities to do so . It reopened the New Orleans facility primarily to coin large quantities of silver dollars , most of which were simply stored in the building instead of circulated . President Rutherford B. Hayes appointed former Mississippi Senator and governor Henry S. Foote the new superintendent of the mint . 
 During this second period of operation , the Mint also struck dimes , quarters , half dollars , $ 5 half eagles , $ 10 eagles and , in 1879 only , 2 @,@ 325 double eagles . It should also be noted that the New Orleans Mint was used by the Federal authorities in 1907 to coin over five and a half million silver twenty @-@ centavo pieces for the Mexican government as part of the American government 's program of producing foreign coinage . The New Orleans Mint , whose coins can be identified by the " O " mint mark found on the reverse of its coinage , earned a reputation for producing coins of a mediocre quality ; their luster is usually not as brilliant as those of other mints , and center areas tend to be flattened and not sharply struck . Thus , well @-@ struck New <unk> coinage is prized in the numismatic world today . 
 = = = = Social history = = = = 
 Men made up the majority of the workers at the mint . They worked such jobs as coiners , <unk> , <unk> , cutters , and rollers . The mint was overseen by a superintendent , who was always male . He was a political appointee whose term usually did not last much longer than the party which held the presidency remained in power . 
 But it was also during the mint 's second tour of duty that women began to find work at the New Orleans Mint . Several women workers were sent from the Philadelphia Mint to teach those in New Orleans how to adjust money . About this time , the mint employed forty @-@ four women . Thirty @-@ nine worked as adjusters – employees who weighed the <unk> coin planchets to make sure they were the proper weight before coining . These women would sit at long narrow tables , filing the planchets down to the proper weight , wearing special aprons with pouches attached to the sleeves and the waist to catch the excess dust . Five women served as counters and packers before the coins were shipped to Washington , D.C. Some women were eventually employed at the coining presses . 
 The women worked from 8 : 30 a.m. to 3 : 30 p.m. daily – not long hours – but the working conditions were probably unbearable by modern standards . New Orleans has a warm , wet climate . The process of adjusting , however , required the utmost attention to the scales ' balance , and the slightest draft could upset it . The draft could also carry off the silver dust from the coin planchets the women would file . For these reasons the windows and doors were almost always kept shut , resulting in a very hot working environment . Workers relied on water coolers to provide relief from the heat and avoid dehydration . The women mint employees were judged to enjoy better working conditions than many other American women workers in the late nineteenth century . 
 = = = The mint in the 20th & 21st centuries = = = 
 = = = = Closure = = = = 
 By the early twentieth century , the U.S. Treasury had mints operating in New Orleans , Denver , San Francisco , and the main center in Philadelphia , which more than met the demand for minted money . In 1904 , the government ceased the minting of the silver dollar , which accounted for the bulk of the coinage the New Orleans branch had been producing since 1879 . In 1909 Treasury officials declined to appropriate funds for the mint 's operation , effectively halting subsequent minting activity in New Orleans . In 1911 , the New Orleans Mint was formally decommissioned and the machinery was transferred to the main U. S. Mint facility in Philadelphia , . 
 Twenty years later , in 1930 , Governor Huey Long would rail against this loss when he ran for the office of U.S. Senator against incumbent Joseph E. <unk> . In a circular distributed by his campaign to the citizens of New Orleans , Long listed the loss of the Mint as the very first of many complaints against <unk> 's lengthy service record in the Senate . Long went on to win the election , although he did not take office until his term as governor expired in 1932 . At some point , however , the original New Orleans machinery was lost , and , at present , has not been located . 
 = = = = Transformation = = = = 
 After the mint closed , it performed a variety of functions for the Federal government . It was first downgraded to an assay office for the U.S. Treasury as it had been from 1876 to 1879 . Then , in 1932 , the assay office closed and the building was converted into a Federal prison , in which capacity it served until 1943 . The Coast Guard then took over the building as a nominal storage facility , though in truth the structure was largely abandoned and left to decay until it was transferred to the state of Louisiana in 1965 . During the Cold War , when many believed there to be a high risk of nuclear war , the old Mint was considered to be the best fallout shelter in the city . 
 The state agreed to save the structure from demolition on the condition that it be renovated and converted to some new purpose within fifteen years . Between 1978 and 1980 this goal was met . Since 1981 , the Mint building has functioned as a museum of its coin production history . Additional exhibitions housed in the facility have been devoted to New Orleans Mardi Gras ( since moved to the <unk> building on Jackson Square ) , jazz music ( a large exhibit and research materials previously in the New Orleans Jazz Museum – donated by the N.O. Jazz Club ) , and Newcomb Pottery . All three phenomena have contributed to New Orleans ' fame . 
 On the third floor , the Mint houses an archive of maps and documents , including French and Spanish colonial records . Along with the Cabildo , the <unk> , the 1850 House , and Madame John 's Legacy , this facility is one of five branches of the Louisiana State Museum in the French Quarter . 
 The Mint building is located at 400 Esplanade Avenue , not far from the Mississippi River . 
 = = = = Katrina aftermath = = = = 
 The mint building suffered significant roof damage from the hurricane . Water entered the building and came into contact with approximately 3 % of the New Orleans Jazz collection , portions of which were removed and cared for at Louisiana State University , the University of Louisiana at Lafayette , and the Louisiana State Archives . 
 = = Coinage produced = = 
 = = = Silver coins = = = 
 = = = Gold coins = = = 
 = Mega Man 3 = 
 Mega Man 3 , known as Rockman 3 : Dr. Wily no Saigo ! ? ( <unk> <unk> ! ? , lit . " Rockman 3 : The End of Dr. Wily ! ? " ) in Japan , is a action @-@ platform video game developed and published by Capcom for the Nintendo Entertainment System . It is the third game of the original Mega Man series and was originally released in Japan on September 28 , 1990 . The game localized in North America later in 1990 and in European regions in 1992 . Taking place after the events of Mega Man 2 , the plot follows the titular hero as he helps his creator , Dr. Light , and a former villain , Dr. Wily , collect parts for a peace @-@ keeping robot by defeating several Robot Masters that have gone haywire . 
 A platform @-@ action game , Mega Man 3 follows the same format set forth by its two predecessors . The player , as Mega Man , must complete a series of stages in any order . Defeating a stage 's boss will earn the player its special weapon , which can be selected and used at will throughout the rest of the game . Mega Man 3 introduces new gameplay elements such as Mega Man 's canine sidekick Rush and the ability to slide along the ground . Unlike with the first two installments of the series , artist and designer Keiji Inafune has considered the creation of Mega Man 3 to be very stressful due to time constraints and his own increased responsibilities during its development . 
 Following the success of Mega Man 2 released two years earlier , Mega Man 3 has sold over one million copies and has been positively received in critical reviews . Its presentation and gameplay has been especially praised , although many sources found the game to be too difficult . Like other titles in the series , Mega Man 3 has been re @-@ released several times on other gaming platforms , on mobile phones , and as part of various Mega Man franchise compilations . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mega Man 3 takes place during an unspecified year during the 21st century ( 200X ) . The mad scientist Dr. Wily , having twice had plans for world domination dashed , claims to have reformed and begins work with Dr. Light on a project to build a peace @-@ keeping robot named " Gamma " . Robot Masters in charge of a set of " mining worlds " , however , go berserk and make off with Gamma 's eight power crystals . Mega Man is called into action , this time with a canine companion named Rush , to retrieve the crystals from the sites . Throughout his mission , the protagonist continuously encounters and spars with Break Man , a masked foe who has abilities comparable to Mega Man 's own . After Mega Man destroys the eight Robot Masters , he then revisits four of the mining sites to face off against eight " Doc Robots " , who possess the abilities of the Robot Masters from Mega Man 's previous mission . Once the crystals are retrieved , Wily reverts to his evil ways , steals Gamma , and retreats to his new fortress . To stop Wily 's newest plan to conquer the world , Mega Man destroys Gamma and defeats Wily in a final confrontation . As the fortress begins to crumble , Break Man appears in enough time to save Mega Man , but is too late to save Wily , who is seen being crushed under the rubble . When Mega Man regains consciousness in Dr. Light 's lab , his creator informs him that he must have been rescued by Proto Man , and his notes reveal that Proto Man is in fact Mega Man 's older brother . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mega Man 3 retains the platforming and action game elements established by the two Mega Man games released before it . The player controls the protagonist Mega Man as he traverses eight selectable stages . The player 's primary blaster weapon is used to fend off the game 's numerous enemies . Several power @-@ ups can be picked up in each stage , including life energy , special weapon ammunition , extra lives , and " E @-@ Tanks " , which are stored and can be selected to completely refill the player 's life energy . At the end of every stage the player must defeat a Robot Master boss : Magnet Man , Hard Man , Top Man , Shadow Man , Spark Man , Snake Man , Gemini Man , or Needle Man . Each Robot Master features a unique weapon and stage related to the weapon 's power . After defeating a boss , their signature weapon is added to Mega Man 's arsenal . The Robot Masters are weak to the weapons of certain other Robot Masters , allowing the player to ease the boss battles by clearing some stages before others . 
 Mega Man 3 is the first Mega Man game to feature the slide maneuver , which lets the player slip under enemy attacks and low @-@ level barriers . After completing certain stages , Mega Man can access new abilities in his robot dog companion Rush . Rush 's transformations include the " Rush Coil " for jumping higher , the " Rush Jet " for flying around the screen , and the " Rush Marine " for traveling underwater . Throughout the various stages the player encounters Proto Man ( as Break Man ) , a mini @-@ boss who , once defeated , will open passageways for the player to advance . Mega Man 3 also expands upon the two preceding games by having additional stages set between the initial eight Robot Masters and the linear stages of Dr. Wily 's fortress . A password system can be used to return to the game with most of the stages completed . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development on Mega Man 3 began at Capcom over a year after the release of Mega Man 2 . Akira Kitamura , the lead supervisor for the first two games quit his job at the company during that gap of time . Artist Keiji Inafune , credited as " Inafking " , considered Mega Man 3 as one of his least favorite entries in the series due to " [ ... ] what went into the game and what was behind the release of the game . " He had " preset notions " about successful development because of the team 's good experience with Mega Man 2 and found that his new superior " didn 't really understand Mega Man the way his predecessor did " . During the game 's production , the developers lost the main planner , so Inafune had to take over that job for its completion . Inafune recalled the final two months of development as particularly turbulent , when he had to take responsibility for assessing and dividing up tasks among the team members who were not meeting deadlines . The team was forced to put Mega Man 3 on the market before they thought it was ready . Inafune concluded , " I knew that if we had more time to polish it , we could do a lot of things better , make it a better game , but the company said that we needed to release it . The whole environment behind what went into the production of the game is what I least favored . Numbers one and two – I really wanted to make the games ; I was so excited about them . Number three – it just turned very different . " 
 Mega Man 3 brought new characters and gameplay mechanics to the franchise . Though Inafune considers the gameplay to have lost some of its simplicity , he felt Mega Man 's slide ability was successfully implemented to enhance the player 's control while battling enemies . Mega Man 's sidekick dog Rush was designed by combining the functionality of three support tools from Mega Man 2 , which would ease the player 's navigation of stages . In addition to the Marine and Coil modes , Rush was originally intended to have a " drill " mode that would allow Mega Man to tunnel underground . Another new character , Proto Man , was introduced in a way that the player would be unable to tell if he was an ally or an enemy to Mega Man . His design was influenced by anime , and he was given both a scarf and shield to make him appear " tougher " than Mega Man . The design team wanted Proto Man to sport uncovered hair , but they instead opted for an open @-@ faced helmet illustration for both the television commercials and instruction manual . Proto Man 's original Japanese name , Blues , was changed by Capcom 's North American division despite Inafune 's protests . Capcom did this not only to be consistent with Rockman 's English name , but because they thought that the name Blues made no sense . Inafune attempted to defend it due to the name 's musical connotation to character names in the series . Though Rush and Proto Man were created solely by the developer , Capcom sought ideas from fans for the creation of the game 's Robot Masters as they had done with Mega Man 2 . The team received around 50 @,@ 000 design submissions for Mega Man 3 , only eight of which were used in the game . The soundtrack for Mega Man 3 was created by Capcom composer <unk> Fujita , also known as " Bun Bun " . His co @-@ worker Harumi Fujita , credited as " Mrs. Tarumi " , was the initial composer of the game , but she only completed two songs before giving birth and having to drop off the project . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mega Man 3 has enjoyed a positive reception from print and online sources . Lucas M. Thomas of IGN , Christian Nutt and Justin Speer of GameSpot , Hartley , Patricia , and Kirk Lesser ( " The Lessers " ) of Dragon , Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer , Edward J. Semrad of The Milwaukee Journal and Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) , and the staff of Nintendo Power all mutually found the game to have impressive graphics , enjoyable music , and challenging gameplay . Nutt and Speer summarized Mega Man 3 as a " top @-@ notch game " and Capcom 's " pinnacle of NES effort " . IGN 's Colin Moriarty argued the game as a major improvement over the original Mega Man and that it even surpasses the critically acclaimed Mega Man 2 in quality . Moriarty justified this claim with the third installment 's attempt at better storytelling , its longer length than any other classic Mega Man game , and its inclusion of all eight Mega Man 2 Robot Masters in addition to its own . Brett Alan Weiss ( AllGame ) described it as doing what " a great sequel is supposed to do by recapturing the fun , spirit and excitement of its predecessors while adding new levels , characters and challenges . " 
 Some critics have judged Mega Man 3 to be excessively difficult . GamePro contributor McKinley Noble comically stated that actions such as " pulling teeth , lifting a car over your head or performing open @-@ heart surgery " are all significantly easier than beating Mega Man 3 . Whitehead noted , " Leaps must be precise , enemies must be dispatched rapidly and accurately , and there 's a constant state of delicious near @-@ panic as you wait to see what vicious demands the next room will place on your platforming skills . " The Lessers additionally saw considerable flicker when too many sprites appear onscreen at once . The writers mentioned that it detracted from the normally crisp graphics the few times it was noticed . 
 Since its 1990 release , Mega Man 3 has sold over one million copies worldwide , making it the 48th best @-@ selling Capcom game . EGM listed Mega Man 3 as " The Best Sequel to an Existing Game " in its 1991 Video Game Buyer 's Guide . The readers of Nintendo Power voted it the third @-@ best game of 1990 in the magazine 's " Nintendo Power Awards " for that year . The publication listed Mega Man 3 as the 11th best NES video game in their 20th anniversary issue in 2008 . IGN included it at number 16 on its " Top 100 NES Games of All Time " . Finally , GamePro ranked Mega Man 3 as the third @-@ greatest 8 @-@ bit video game of all time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mega Man 3 has seen releases on many consoles and other devices since its 1990 debut on the NES . In the United States , it was made into a stripped @-@ down , handheld LCD game by Tiger Electronics and was included as part of Nintendo 's PlayChoice @-@ 10 arcade systems . Mega Man 3 was remade in 1994 for the Sega Genesis game Mega Man : The Wily Wars , featuring updated graphics and sound . Mega Man 3 was released on the Sony PlayStation in the Rockman Complete Works line in Japan in 1999 . This version has arranged music , artwork galleries , and a " navi " mode for beginner players . The NES edition of the game was also part of a North American compilation of ten titles in the series called Mega Man Anniversary Collection , which was released for the PlayStation 2 and Nintendo GameCube in 2004 , and the Xbox in 2005 . Also in 2005 , Mega Man 3 was bundled alongside other Capcom games as part of a Plug It In & Play TV Games peripheral by Jakks Pacific . Mega Man 3 was released by Capcom on mobile phones in Japan in 2005 and in North America in 2008 . The NES version made its way to the Nintendo Wii 's Virtual Console service worldwide in 2008 . Finally , the Complete Works version was released on the PlayStation Network ( downloadable on PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable ) in Japan in 2010 and in North America in 2011 . Mega Man 3 was made available for download on the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console in Japan on September 26 , 2012 . 
 Many of the features introduced in Mega Man 3 have been carried on by the series . These include the characters Protoman and Rush , the player 's ability to slide , and extra stages set between the initial eight Robot Masters and Dr. Wily 's fortress . With the release of Mega Man 9 in 2008 , however , some of these elements and others implemented in the third through eighth installments were forgone in favor of the more basic aspects of Mega Man and Mega Man 2 . The producers of Mega Man 9 have referred to the ninth game as " the new Mega Man 3 " because they wanted to surpass what they accomplished in Mega Man 2 . 
 The game was adapted into the Archie Comics Mega Man series over an extended period , with Gamma being introduced and having its power source stolen in the " Redemption " arc while the full adaptation takes place in " Legends of the Blue Bomber " and " The Ultimate Betrayal . " One of the biggest differences was that Super Adventure Rockman was adapted into the continuity prior to this game ; as such , the Mega Man 3 Robot Masters debut in that adaptation . This also results in Shadow Man 's ruins of origin being made the <unk> Ruins of Super Adventure Rockman and connecting his history to that of Ra Moon ; a flashback featured in the " Legends of the Blue Bomber " arc reveals that his history is also connected with the mysterious robot who fights Duo in the beginning of Mega Man 8 . Additionally , there is but a single " DOC Robot " featured in the game , equipped with the weapons and personality data of the Mega Man 2 Robot Masters . 
 = Holby City ( series 1 ) = 
 The first series of the British medical drama television series Holby City commenced airing in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 12 January 1999 , and concluded on 9 March 1999 . The show was created by Mal Young and Tony McHale as a spin – off from the BBC medical drama Casualty , intended to follow the treatment of patients from Casualty as they were transferred onto the hospital 's surgical wards . McHale served as the programme 's lead writer throughout the first series , which ran for nine episodes . Young cast actors who were already established names in the acting industry , particularly from a soap opera background . Several cast members shadowed real surgeons and nurses in preparation for their roles to increase the show 's realism . The series received mixed reviews from critics . It was compared favourably with Casualty , but received negative reviews in which it was contrasted poorly with the American medical drama ER . The series première attracted 10 @.@ 72 million viewers , falling to 8 @.@ 51 million by the series finale . 
 The series focuses on the hospital 's <unk> ward , Darwin . Department heads and consultant surgeons Anton Meyer ( George Irving ) and Muriel McKendrick ( Phyllis Logan ) clash frequently over patient care and division of beds . Tension arises between nurses Julie Fitzjohn ( Nicola Stephenson ) and Jasmine Hopkins ( Angela Griffin ) over the position of Darwin ward sister . Registrar Nick Jordan ( Michael French ) clashes professionally with his estranged wife Karen Newburn ( Sarah Preston ) , and pursues relationships with registrar Kirstie Collins ( Dawn McDaniel ) and theatre sister Ellie Sharpe ( Julie Saunders ) . Ward clerk Paul Ripley ( Luke Mably ) resigns after being caught kissing a comatose patient , and senior house officer Victoria Merrick ( Lisa Faulkner ) begins taking amphetamines to cope with the pressures of work . In the series finale , Jasmine is stabbed by thieves , and Nick endeavours to save her life in theatre . 
 = = Production = = 
 Holby City was created by Tony McHale and Mal Young as a spin – off from the long – running BBC medical drama Casualty . Young wanted to explore what happened to patients treated in Casualty once they were taken away to the hospital 's surgical wards . While Casualty 's scope is limited to " accident of the week " storylines about patients entering hospital , Holby City allowed the possibility of storylines about long – term care , rather than immediate life and death decisions . 
 Although both shows are set in the same hospital , the Casualty set in Bristol was not large enough to encompass the surgical ward and operating theatre required for Holby City , so the series was produced at the BBC 's Elstree Studios in north London . As a result , some crossover scenes had to be shot twice , first on the Casualty set and then again at Elstree , with cast members travelling between the two locations . McHale wrote the series ' first episode , and served as the show 's lead writer . Holby City premiered on 12 January 1999 on BBC One . Its first series ran for nine episodes of 50 minutes in length , which were broadcast first in the 8 @.@ 10 pm , then 8 pm timeslot on Tuesdays . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The first series of Holby City featured an ensemble cast of characters in the medical profession , who worked on the hospital 's Darwin Ward . Phyllis Logan and George Irving played consultants Muriel McKendrick and Anton Meyer . Michael French and Dawn McDaniel appeared as registrars Nick Jordan and Kirstie Collins , while Lisa Faulkner played senior house officer Victoria Merrick . Sarah Preston and Angela Griffin played ward sisters Karen Newburn and Jasmine Hopkins . Nicola Stephenson appeared as nurse Julie Fitzjohn , and Ian Curtis played senior staff nurse Ray Sykes . Julie Saunders played theatre sister Ellie Sharpe , and Luke Mably appeared as ward clerk Paul Ripley . Logan , Saunders and Mably all departed from Holby City during the course of the series . The series also included walk – on performances by Casualty cast members , including Derek Thompson as nurse Charlie Fairhead , and guest appearances by characters first seen in Casualty , whose treatment was continued on Holby City . 
 In casting the first series of Holby City , Young — who had previously worked on the soap operas Brookside and Family Affairs — selected actors who were already established names in the acting industry , particularly from a soap opera background . French had starred in the BBC 's EastEnders , while Stephenson and Faulkner had starred in Brookside . Griffin had also appeared in ITV 's Coronation Street . Young explained : " Some of the best performances on screen have come out of soaps in the past few years . There is a fantastic amount of talent on those shows . " 
 Cast members observed the staff at real hospitals in preparation for their roles . Stephenson and Griffin spent time at Watford Hospital , where they underwent a crash course in nursing basics , including handling bed pans and learning to make beds with hospital corners . Irving observed coronary artery bypass surgery performed at Papworth and Middlesex Hospital , while French shadowed a consultant and registrar at Papworth Hospital , observing a heart bypass and lung biopsy procedure . Young explained that viewers believe in Casualty and trust the show to be realistic , and that he wanted Holby City to be the same in that regard . 
 = = = Regular cast = = = 
 Phyllis Logan as Mrs. Muriel McKendrick , Cardiology Consultant , Darwin 
 George Irving as Mr. Anton Meyer , Cardiothoracic Consultant , Darwin 
 Michael French as Mr. Nick Jordan , Cardiovascular Surgical Registrar , Darwin 
 Dawn McDaniel as Ms. Kristie Collins , Cardiothoracic Surgical Registrar , Darwin 
 Lisa Faulkner as Dr. Victoria Merrick , Senior House Officer , Cardiothoracic Surgery , Darwin 
 Angela Griffin as Jasmine Hopkins , Ward Sister , Darwin 
 Sarah Preston as Karen Newburn , Ward Sister , Darwin 
 Nicola Stephenson as Julie Fitzjohn , Staff Nurse , Darwin 
 Julie Saunders as Ellie Sharpe , Theatre Sister , Darwin 
 Luke Mably as Paul Ripley , Ward Clerk , Darwin 
 Ian Curtis as Ray Sykes , Senior Staff Nurse , Darwin 
 = = Reception = = 
 The series received mixed reviews from critics . Graham Keal of the Birmingham Post wrote of the first episode : " Heretical as it might seem , I liked Holby City more than Casualty , not least because the formula is so much more flexible and unpredictable . " Peter Paterson of the Daily Mail praised the series for breaking away from the " dreary sameness " of Casualty , and for presenting " a less hopeless view of the NHS . " His only concern about the series was its continuation of patient storylines from Casualty , writing : " if that happens too often , the new programme will soon lose its freshness and sparkle . " The Mirror 's Charlie Catchpole wrote that he was " sick of the sensitive , hand – wringing , non – judgmental do – gooders who mope around the A & E department in Casualty " , praising in comparison the " pushy , ambitious , cynical and generally thoroughly unpleasant surgeons " in Holby City . 
 Sam Wollaston of The Guardian received the series positively , writing : " Holby City has everything you want from a hospital drama : good – looking staff , a bit of love interest , a dishy doc , the odd current issue ( no beds , badly – paid nurses ) and bits where you have to look away " , deeming it : " Pretty good , really . " Stan Hey of The Mail on Sunday observed that on the strength of the opening episode , the series ' success seemed " fairly assured " . He noted that : " characters are only skin – deep as yet , being subsidiary to the plot , but a successful graft should be achieved during the series . " Kathleen Morgan of the Daily Record praised the casting of French and Griffin , writing : " It will take a couple of episodes before both actors shake off their soapy history , but with some decent plots and good lines , they should make the grade . " Morgan deemed Irving the star of the show , and commented : " With Irving in the driving seat , Holby City looks like it is on the right track . " 
 Andrew Billen of the New Statesman also found Irving as Meyer the series ' " most compelling character " , though deemed Holby City mediocre and its storylines " safely unoriginal " . Billen compared Holby City negatively to the American medical drama ER , opining that the former show has a meandering pace in comparison to the latter 's briskness , and that ER has a higher calibre of actors . The Sunday Herald also compared the series unfavourably to ER , writing that Holby City served to highlight ER 's " true sophistication " . Morgan refuted these negative comparisons , however , writing that : " The sign of great drama is when a scriptwriter and director can make a symphony out of a few notes and Holby City 's creators have done that . It doesn 't have the budget of ER , but it is proving just as compelling . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 " Episode # " refers to the episode 's number in the overall series , whereas " Series # " refers to the episode 's number in this particular series . 
 = Black Cherry ( Goldfrapp album ) = 
 Black Cherry is the second studio album by English electronic music duo Goldfrapp , released in the United Kingdom on 28 April 2003 by Mute Records to generally positive reviews . Many critics complimented its blend of retro and modern electropop music , which was a departure from the ambient sound of their début album . Black Cherry was a top twenty album in Goldfrapp 's native United Kingdom , and its second single " Strict Machine " was a top twenty single . It earned the band a nomination for Best British Dance Act at the 2004 BRIT Awards . The album was supported by the 2003 – 04 Black Cherry Tour . 
 The album represented a change in Goldfrapp 's musical style , featuring glam rock and synthpop music ; inspirations were Spanish disco group Baccara and Swedish techno artist Håkan <unk> . In August 2005 , the album was certified platinum in the UK , and had sold nearly 500 @,@ 000 copies worldwide as of May 2005 . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The duo wrote three songs while touring in support of their début album Felt Mountain but decided to take their work in a different direction with more rhythmic music . Goldfrapp chose to record in a studio in a Bohemian area of Bath , England because they needed somewhere to put their equipment and start working . The band began working on the album in January 2002 with a list of songs they wanted to try to record , such as a disco song with only string instruments . The studio 's walls were covered in neon lights and Alison Goldfrapp used them to write down her song ideas . They recorded early demos and worked on pre @-@ production using a Yamaha 02R digital mixing console . Goldfrapp held jam sessions with Mark <unk> and Adrian Utley and , after they built momentum writing the album , decided not to move to another studio . 
 The album cover is a collage made by Mat Maitland of photographs taken by Polly Borland featuring Alison Goldfrapp with two wolves . Artwork in the liner notes also has a wolf motif , including women with wolf heads . Goldfrapp explained that the wolves are a representation of might and mysticism and that she was " interested in the idea of metamorphosis and humans wanting to be like animals and animals wanting to be like humans . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 After touring in support of Felt Mountain , Alison Goldfrapp stated that she felt performing slow torch songs " really claustrophobic " . During their jam sessions , improvisation became a major part of the group 's approach to recording Black Cherry . The album focuses more heavily on dance music and glam rock @-@ inspired synthesisers than its predecessor , and is influenced by Spanish disco group Baccara and Swedish techno artist Håkan <unk> . Goldfrapp commented that the album differs from Felt Mountain because the band " wanted to put more kind of ' oomph ' in it . " She stated that the lyrics are " a lot more direct and … less ambiguous . " The songs on Black Cherry are more forthright in describing sexuality than those on Felt Mountain . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Black Cherry received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 , based on 22 reviews , which indicates " generally [ favourable ] reviews " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian called it " a laudable , challenging and immensely enjoyable album . " However , Michael <unk> referred to Goldfrapp as " ambulance chasers " in his review for Pitchfork Media , criticising the band 's switch to electro music , while describing Black Cherry as " a soundtrack to excruciatingly banal seduction " . Rolling Stone 's Pat Blashill disagreed , arguing that " [ t ] ons of bands imitate the sounds of the early Eighties , but Goldfrapp use New Wave as a way to evoke a long history of shiny Euro @-@ lounge music . " In a review for Blender magazine , Dorian Lynskey wrote that on Black Cherry , " Goldfrapp sound right at home . " Heather Phares of Allmusic commended Goldfrapp for their " artistic risk @-@ taking " , but noted that the album " sounds unbalanced , swinging between delicate , deceptively icy ballads and heavier , dance @-@ inspired numbers without finding much of a happy medium between them . " Andy Hermann of PopMatters viewed Black Cherry as " a weird , edgy album , the work of two doggedly maverick talents chasing their muses wherever they take them " . Wes May of About.com called it a " rare electronica album of warmth and depth " and wrote that it was " the ultimate chillout pleasure " . 
 PopMatters included the album on its list of the Top 50 Albums of 2003 , ranking it at number forty @-@ six . It was listed at number twenty @-@ three on Drowned in Sound 's list of the Top 75 Albums of 2003 . Black Cherry earned Goldfrapp a nomination for Best British Dance Act at the 2004 BRIT Awards , but they lost to Basement Jaxx . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Black Cherry débuted on the UK Albums Chart on 10 May 2003 at number nineteen . The album remained on the chart for twenty @-@ six weeks and had sold 256 @,@ 703 copies as of August 2005 . Later that month , on 26 August 2005 , Black Cherry was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry , denoting shipments in excess of 300 @,@ 000 copies within the UK . The album reached the top thirty in Germany , Ireland , Norway and Portugal , and the top fifty in Belgium , France and Switzerland . Black Cherry became Goldfrapp 's first album to chart in the United States , reaching number four on the Top Electronic Albums chart and number twenty @-@ seven on the Top Independent Albums chart . The album has sold 52 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of August 2006 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Alison Goldfrapp and Will Gregory , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Black Cherry album liner notes . 
 Alison Goldfrapp – vocals , producer , synthesiser , engineer , arranger ( all tracks ) ; mixing ( 2 , 3 , 5 , 9 , 10 ) ; art direction , design 
 Will Gregory – producer , synthesiser , engineer , arranger ( all tracks ) ; mixing ( 2 , 3 , 5 , 9 , 10 ) 
 David Bascombe – mixing ( 6 , 8 ) 
 Nick Batt – co @-@ producer , synthesiser , engineer , additional programming 
 Big Active – art direction , design 
 Polly Borland – photography 
 Andy Davis – guitar ( 10 ) 
 Bruno Ellingham – Pro Tools 
 Tom Elmhirst – mixing 
 Nick Ingman – string conductor , string orchestration 
 Charlie Jones – bass ( 8 ) 
 Mark <unk> – Casio ( 2 ) 
 Mike Marsh – mastering 
 Rowan Oliver – drums , percussion ( 2 ) ; additional drum programming ( 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 ) 
 Steve Orchard – string engineer , string <unk> 
 Damon Reece – drums ( 8 ) 
 Adrian Utley – bass , guitar ( 2 ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Saturday Night ! – The Album = 
 Saturday Night ! – The Album is the second studio album by hip hop artist Jesse Weaver under the alias of Schoolly D. The album was recorded at INS Studios in New York where Weaver created an album of seven tracks that included rapping and instrumentals that were both inspired and sampled various funk musicians from the 1970s . The album was released independently in 1986 . Singles from the album included the tracks " Saturday Night " and " Dedication to All B @-@ Boys " . 
 Saturday Night ! – The Album was re @-@ issued by Jive Records in 1987 with several extra tracks that were originally intended for Weaver 's follow @-@ up album Smoke Some Kill . The album charted on the Billboard 's Black Albums chart and the UK Top Indie Singles chart on its release . The album content was described by AllMusic as putting Weaver " in hot water with many critics and community leaders . " Critical reception on its release was mixed with the album being referred to as " artless " by the Washington Post while other critics such as Robert Christgau gave a positive review . The NME placed it on their list of the top albums of 1987 . 
 = = Production = = 
 Weaver began recording Saturday Night ! – The Album in 1986 . He was being barred from the studio where he originally recorded his single for " <unk> What Does It Mean ? " and went to INS Studios in New York . To compose the music , Weaver first started working on the drums , stating that " by 1985 I had mastered the [ Roland <unk> ] 909 . " After completing the drums , Weaver worked on lyrics and vocals when he " smoked and drank until we got silly enough . At that point , the first thing that hit my mind @-@ that was the song " . Some songs were performed with live musicians such as " B @-@ Boy Rhyme and Riddle " which had a live drummer brought in by engineer Joe Nicolo . The music on " Saturday Night " was the result of DJ Codemoney forgetting a plug for the 909 . Weaver used the drum machine at the studio to record the song without the 909 on hand and accidentally pushed a button that sent the kick and snare to go to the timbales sound . This new sound was used for the song " Saturday Night " . 
 Weaver signed with Jive Records to " pay a lot of bills " as the distributors of his previous work were not paying him for the records that were sold . Saturday Night ! – The Album was re @-@ released by Jive in 1987 with extra tracks including " Parkside 5 @-@ 2 " , " Housing the Joint " and " Get N ' Paid " . These three tracks were originally intended for Weaver 's next album Smoke Some Kill . Weaver was upset after finding these new tracks added to the album , stating that " it was a total scam to reissue Saturday Night like they did , with those tracks , because it had already sold hundreds of thousands of copies . " and that if these tracks were released on Smoke Some Kill , his follow @-@ up album would have " been an even better record " . 
 = = Style = = 
 Brian Coleman , author of Check the Technique described Saturday Night ! – The Album as " what everything that Schoolly D was all about : funk , loose rhymes and attitude . " " We Get Ill " was reviewed by Spin , who called it " a seamy celebration of bad habits and bad language . The track was inspired by Bootsy Collins and initially was going to be an instrumental . " Do It , Do It " was developed in DJ Codemoney 's basement when he was working on a break involving Funkadelic 's song " You 'll Like It Too " . The song samples the nursery rhyme " Who 's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf ? " taken from a children 's record . " Dedication to All B @-@ Boys " was inspired by the group The Commodores . The track features a Weaver 's disc jockey , DJ Codemoney , performing a long break at the end . Weaver explained this part of the song by stating that in " rock and funk groups , everybody who was part of the band got to do their thing . And Code was part of the band . " 
 AllMusic writer David Jeffries noted songs such as " Saturday Night " , stating it as " the kind of sleazy tale of misogyny that put Schoolly in hot water with many critics and community leaders . " When asked about his lyrics commanding a woman to " do it doggy style " in his song " Do It Do It " , Weaver stated that the lyrics are a reflection of his background and audience , and not necessarily how he feels about others . Weaver reflected on the song " Saturday Night " as being about " my 17 year old Saturday night " which consisted of going down to the Parkside Inn , drinking , and " watching the bitches on the corner " and that the song was not meant to be taken literally , but that he " did come home once with a girl and I forgot my key and my mom was pissed off , but she didn 't pull a gun ; she 's never owned a gun in her life " . 
 " Housing the Joint " was influenced by a trip to California when he heard the song " Thank You ( Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin ) " by Sly and the Family Stone . Upon hearing it , Weaver booked studio time and recorded the song in a day . The track 's lyrics involve a conflict Weaver had with rapper <unk> Gee and his song " That 's My Style " where he claims that Weaver was appropriating his technique . Weaver has since performed with <unk> Gee on stage and later stated he " never felt comfortable " performing this track in concert . 
 = = Release = = 
 Saturday Night ! – The Album was first released on Schooly @-@ D Records in 1986 . On the album 's Jive Records re @-@ release , it charted on Billboard 's Top Black Albums for ten weeks peaking at number 59 . In the United Kingdom , the album was released by Mute Records affiliate called Rhythm King where it charted on the UK Indie Charts for 10 weeks peaking at number four . Singles for the album included " Saturday Night " and " Dedication to All B @-@ Boys " released on Schooly @-@ D Records and Flame Records . Both " Saturday Night " and " Dedication to All B @-@ Boys " appeared on the UK Indie Charts . " On its release , Philadelphia 's city officials had the album removed from store shelves after public outrage over the violent content in the songs . 
 Saturday Night ! – The Album was released for the first time on compact disc by Funky Town Grooves on July 21 , 2014 . The CD release included radio edits , remixes and instrumentals of songs from the album as bonus tracks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 From contemporary reviews , The Washington Post gave the album a mixed review , stating that " even by rap standards , [ Schooly D 's ] work is artless . " The review compared the album negatively to other rappers , noting that they " construct complex hip @-@ hop concertos for voice , beat @-@ box and borrowed sounds , Schooly 's best @-@ known work is little more than a beat accompanying his foul @-@ mouthed , ill @-@ tempered rants " . The review also found that " there 's no denying that his harsh communiqués crackle with a mean @-@ streets vitality as fascinating as his confrontational world view is disturbing . " Robert Christgau gave the Jive reissue of the album a B , stating " What other rapper would write a rhyme about the night his mother pulled a gun on <unk> make it so clear that , just like in West Side Story , he 's depraved on account of he 's deprived . This doesn 't speak too well of white critics , obviously , but it also doesn 't take away his raps , his rips , or his <unk> groove . " Spin stated that it " can 't sustain an album with just reverb and a cowbell . Even if it is killer reverb and a way funky cowbell . " The NME placed Saturday Night ! – The Album at number 20 on their list of the top albums of 1987 . The single " Saturday Night " was also listed at number 28 on their list of Top 50 tracks of the year . 
 Spin Alternative Record Guide ( 1995 ) gave the original release an eight out of ten and the Jive re @-@ release a nine out of ten . The review concluded that Jive 's release was superior as it included " some of Schoolly 's best cuts ( " Housing the Joint , " " Park @-@ side 5 @-@ 2 " ) " AllMusic gave the album a four star rating , finding it better than Weaver 's previous album Schooly D due to " higher production values and more direct songs . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs are written and produced by Schooly D ( J.B. Weaver Jr . ) . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = = Original Schooly @-@ D Records release = = = 
 Schooly D – music , words , writer , producer , artwork 
 Joe " The Butcher " – engineer 
 Credits adapted from Saturday Night ! – The Album front and back cover and vinyl sticker . 
 = = = Jive Records release = = = 
 Schooly D – music , words , writer , producer , artwork 
 Joe " The Butcher " – engineer 
 Arthur Mann – executive producer 
 Rick Cohn – executive producer 
 Credits adapted from Jive 's Saturday Night ! – The Album front cover , back cover and vinyl sticker . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Glina massacres = 
 The Glina massacres were killings of Serb peasants in the town of Glina in the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) that occurred between May and August 1941 , during World War II . The first wave of massacres in the town began on 11 or 12 May 1941 , when a band of Ustaše led by Mirko Puk murdered a group of Serb men and boys in a Serbian Orthodox church before setting it on fire . The following day , approximately 100 Serb males were murdered by the Ustaše in the nearby village of <unk> . Estimates of the overall number of Serbs killed from 11 – 13 May range from 260 to 417 . Further killings in Glina occurred between 30 July and 3 August of that same year , when 700 – 2 @,@ 000 Serbs were massacred by a group of Ustaše led by Vjekoslav Luburić . Ljubo Jednak , the only survivor of these killings , went on to testify at the trials of the several prominent figures in the NDH after the war . Puk was captured by British forces in 1945 while attempting to flee to Austria and was extradited to Yugoslavia the following year , where he committed suicide . Luburić escaped Yugoslavia after the war and moved to fascist Spain , where he was killed by a person generally assumed to be an agent of the Yugoslav State Security Service . 
 An estimated 2 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 400 people were killed in the Glina massacres . In 1969 , a monument was erected and a memorial museum was built to commemorate the victims of the killings . Following the independence of Croatia from Yugoslavia , the monument was removed by Croatian authorities in the town . After the Croatian War of Independence , the local authorities failed to restore it and dismantled it instead . The memorial museum was converted into a generic cultural institution , to the dismay of the local Serbian population . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 6 April 1941 , Axis forces invaded Yugoslavia . Poorly equipped and poorly trained , the Royal Yugoslav Army was quickly defeated . The country was then dismembered and the extreme Croat nationalist and fascist Ante Pavelić , who had been in exile in Benito Mussolini 's Italy , was appointed Poglavnik ( leader ) of an Ustaše @-@ led Croatian state – the Independent State of Croatia ( often called the NDH , from the Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska ) . The NDH combined almost all of modern @-@ day Croatia , all of modern @-@ day Bosnia and Herzegovina and parts of modern @-@ day Serbia into an " Italian @-@ German quasi @-@ protectorate " . NDH authorities , led by the Ustaše militia , subsequently implemented genocidal policies against the Serb , Jewish and Romani population living within the borders of the new state . Ethnic Serbs were persecuted the most because Pavelić and the Ustaše considered them " potential turncoats " in what they wanted to be an ethnically pure state composed solely of Croats . Racist and antisemitic laws were passed , and ethnic Serbs , representing about thirty percent of the NDH 's population of 6 @.@ 3 million , became targets of large @-@ scale massacres perpetrated by the Ustaše . By the middle of 1941 , these killings reached degrees of brutality that shocked even some Germans . The Cyrillic script was subsequently banned by Croatian authorities , Orthodox Christian church schools were closed , and Serbs were ordered to wear identifying armbands . Mile Budak , the Croatian Minister of Education , is reported to have said that one @-@ third of Serbs in the NDH were to be killed , one @-@ third were to be expelled , and one @-@ third were to be converted to Roman Catholicism . The Ustaše then established numerous concentration camps where thousands of Serbs were mistreated , starved , and murdered . 
 Glina is a small market town in the Banovina region of Croatia located about 55 kilometers ( 34 miles ) south of Zagreb . In 1931 , the town itself had a population of 2 @,@ 315 people and was inhabited mostly by Serbs , Croats , and Jews . Shortly after the Ustaše took power , the Croatian Minister of Justice , Mirko Puk , established a base in the town . 
 = = Massacres = = 
 = = = May 1941 = = = 
 On 11 or 12 May 1941 , a band of Ustaše led by Puk seized a group of Serb males from Glina and detained them regardless of occupation or class . The Ustaše then herded the group into an Orthodox Church and demanded that they be given documents proving the Serbs had all converted to Catholicism . Two Serbs produced the required documents and were released . The Ustaše then locked inside and massacred those who did not possess conversion certificates , including priest Bogdan Opačić . The bodies were then left to burn as the Ustaše set the church on fire and waited outside to shoot any survivors attempting to escape the flames . On 13 May , a further 100 Serb males were executed by the Ustaše in the nearby village of <unk> . 
 Estimates of the number of Serbs killed on 11 – 13 May vary . Historians Jozo Tomasevich and Ivo Goldstein put the number at 260 . Historians Sabrina P. Ramet and Marko Attila Hoare estimate that about 300 Serbs were massacred while historian Davide <unk> puts the number at 417 killed . On 14 May , the Archbishop of Zagreb , Aloysius Stepinac , sent a letter of protest to Pavelić after receiving news of the killings . He failed to condemn the atrocity publicly . The next day , Pavelić visited Rome and was granted a private audience with Pope Pius XII , who offered de facto recognition of the NDH on behalf of the Holy See . Although he was aware that Pavelić was a totalitarian dictator , there is no evidence that he had knowledge of the first Glina massacre at the time . 
 = = = July – August 1941 = = = 
 On the night of 30 July 1941 , a massacre similar to the one in May again occurred in Glina . That summer , the Ustaše had offered amnesty for all Serbs in the NDH who would convert from Eastern Orthodoxy to Roman Catholicism . Many Serbs responded positively , and one group turned up at a Serbian Orthodox church in Glina where a conversion ceremony was to take place . The Serbs who had gathered , thinking they were to undergo a conversion ceremony , were greeted by six members of the Ustaše under the direct command of Vjekoslav Luburić . When all were inside , the doors to the church were sealed . The Serbs were then forced to lie on the ground as the six Ustaše struck them one by one on the head with spiked clubs . More Ustaše then appeared and the killings continued . Victims were killed by having their throats cut or by having their heads smashed in with rifle butts . Only one of the victims , Ljubo Jednak , survived after playing dead and later described what had happened : 
 They started with one huge husky peasant who began singing an old historical heroic song of the Serbs . They put his head on the table and as he continued to sing they slit his throat and then the next squad moved in to smash his skull . I was paralyzed . " This is what you are getting , " an Ustaša screamed . Ustaše surrounded us . There was absolutely no escape . Then the slaughter began . One group stabbed with knives , the other followed , smashing heads to make certain everyone was dead . Within a matter of minutes we stood in a lake of blood . Screams and wails , bodies dropping right and left . 
 The bodies were then put into trucks and were taken to a large burial pit , where they were left unattended long enough for Jednak to escape . It is estimated that 200 Serbs were killed that evening . Killings continued on 3 August , when the Ustaše murdered the inhabitants of Serb villages in the vicinity of the church . About one month later , the church was burned down by the Ustaše . Estimates of the number of Serbs killed from 30 July to 3 August vary widely . Sociologist Damir Mirković and historian Paul Mojzes state that 700 Serbs were killed . Journalist Tim Judah puts the number at 1 @,@ 200 , and historian Iván T. Berend writes that the Ustaše killed 1 @,@ 800 people . Hoare writes that as many as 2 @,@ 000 Serbs were murdered . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the massacres , many Serbs from Glina and its surroundings fled to Serbia or were deported to Ustaše @-@ controlled concentration camps . The NDH collapsed in May 1945 , and the following year the Nuremberg trials judged that the persecution experienced by Serbs in the country was a crime of genocide . Local Serbs returned to Glina after the war , partly out of a desire to remain near the graves of their deceased family members , and lived peacefully alongside their Croat neighbours until the outbreak of the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s . 
 Puk , the organizer of the first massacre , was captured by British forces while attempting to flee to Austria in May 1945 and was extradited to Yugoslavia several months later , where he committed suicide by slitting his wrists with a razor blade . Luburić , the organizer of the second massacre , escaped Yugoslavia after the war and moved to fascist Spain , where he was assassinated by a person generally assumed to have been an agent of the Yugoslav State Security Service ( <unk> ) . Pavelić survived the war and died in Spain in 1959 . Stepinac , who failed to publicly condemn the atrocities in Glina , was accused of collaborating with the Ustaše by Yugoslavia 's new Communist government and was tried in 1946 , where Jednak testified against him . He was subsequently sentenced to sixteen years imprisonment and died while under house arrest in 1960 . In 1986 , Jednak testified against the Ustaše government 's Minister of the Interior , Andrija <unk> , at his trial in Croatia . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 From an estimated 300 @,@ 000 Croatian Serbs that were murdered by the Ustaše from 1941 to 1945 , more than 18 @,@ 000 were from Glina at its surroundings . According to historians Hannes <unk> and Christian <unk> , the massacres that occurred in the town in 1941 took the lives of approximately 2 @,@ 000 Serbs . Professor Mark Levene estimates that 2 @,@ 400 people lost their lives over the course of five mass killings that occurred in Glina during 1941 . Sometimes called pogroms , the killings have been described by Judah as being one of the most infamous of the early atrocities perpetrated by the Ustaše . Professor Manus I. <unk> has noted that the burning of victims inside a church during the May killings " foreshadowed the later German massing of Jews inside their wooden synagogues in Poland ... [ and ] setting fire to the buildings as the congregants inside burned alive . " 
 The poem Requiem ( Serbian : <unk> , <unk> ) by poet Ivan V. Lalić is dedicated to the victims of the massacres in Glina . After the war , Yugoslav authorities removed the physical remnants where the church which had been burned down on 30 July had stood . In 1969 , a monument by Antun Augustinčić and a museum ( Croatian : <unk> @-@ dom , lit . " Memorial home " ) were erected on the site and were dedicated to the victims of the massacres . 
 Following the independence of Croatia from Yugoslavia , the monument , a marble tablet bearing the names of Serbs killed in the massacres , was removed by Croatian authorities in the town . The memorial museum was heavily damaged in 1991 , during the Croatian War of Independence . In August 1995 , the Augustinčić monument was damaged and removed again after it had been restored by Croatian Serb authorities following its initial removal in 1991 . Croatian authorities began working on the conversion of the museum into a general @-@ purpose cultural institution named the " Croatian Home " ( Croatian : Hrvatski dom ) . The move was met with indignation by the Serbian community , who complained to the local authorities , to the Ministry of Culture , and to the Prime Minister of Croatia . They were publicly supported by writer Slavko Goldstein , but local Croatian Peasant Party politicians rejected their pleas . 
 = = = Newspapers = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Kiger Mustang = 
 The Kiger Mustang is a strain of Mustang horse located in the southeastern part of the U.S. state of Oregon . Originally feral horses with specific conformation traits discovered in 1977 , the name also applies to their bred @-@ in @-@ captivity progeny . The Bureau of Land Management ( BLM ) administers two herd management areas for Kiger Mustangs in the Burns District — Kiger and Riddle Mountain , in the Steens Mountain area . DNA testing has shown that Kiger Mustangs are descended largely from Spanish horses brought to North America in the 17th century , a bloodline thought to have largely disappeared from <unk> herds before the Kiger horses were found . 
 Kiger Mustangs are most often dun in color , although they are found in other solid colors . Compact and well @-@ muscled in appearance , their coloration and phenotype make them some of the most desired by private buyers when horses are removed from the feral herds . The BLM rounds up the horses from the two herd management areas every three to four years , and auctions excess horses to the public , returning horses to public lands that meet the desired coloration and phenotype and sometimes exchanging horses between the two herds to maintain genetic diversity . Horses in private ownership may be registered in several breed associations , the largest and oldest being the Kiger Mesteño Association , established in 1988 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kiger Mustangs are most commonly dun in color , although the breed registry also allows bay , black and roan horses to be registered . There are numerous shades of dun , all variations on a tan base , and many shades have their own names . The Kiger Mesteño Association separates dun shades into four categories : dun , red dun , <unk> , and <unk> . " Dun " as used by the Kiger registry covers dun horses with black points , and adds the terms zebra dun , dusty dun , smutty dun or coyote dun , depending on the exact shade of body color . Red dun , or the variation " apricot dun " , covers horses with points that are red , brown or flaxen . <unk> covers horses with blueish , mousy or slate @-@ colored bodies and black points , and these horses may also be called <unk> duns , olive grullas , silver grullas or smutty grullas . <unk> , another variation of red dun , describes Kiger horses who have golden body coats with red or orange tints and darker red points . Dun horses may have primitive markings , which include any of the following : a dorsal stripe , lightened outer guard hairs on the manes and / or tails , zebra @-@ like stripes on the upper legs , transverse striping over the upper shoulders , dark color around the muzzle , and ears with dark outlines and lighter interiors . 
 Kiger Mustangs generally stand 13 @.@ 2 to 15 @.@ 2 hands ( 54 to 62 inches , 137 to 157 cm ) high . They are compact , well @-@ muscled horses with deep chests and short backs . In general , they are agile and intelligent , with the stamina and sure @-@ footedness seen in many feral horse breeds . They are generally bold but gentle and calm . They are used for pleasure riding as well as endurance riding , assorted performance competition under saddle , driving , and many other situations where an athletic horse is desired . 
 = = History = = 
 Horses have been present in the American West since the 1500s , when they arrived with Spanish explorers . Many escaped , were released by the Spanish or stolen by Native Americans . Their descendents crossed with horses who escaped from or were released by other European settlers , including draft breeds brought by farmers and <unk> and lighter riding horses brought by the United States Cavalry . Horses of French descent also moved across the border from Canada to contribute to the herds . The mixture of these breeds created the Mustang present in the western portion of the US today . By the early 1970s , it was assumed that due to crossbreeding , the original Spanish stock had been eliminated from feral herds . In 1971 , the Wild and Free @-@ Roaming Horse and Burro Act was passed , giving the Bureau of Land Management ( BLM ) the authority to manage the feral horse populations in the American West . 
 Discovery of the Kiger Mustang was the result of a BLM Mustang roundup in the <unk> Butte area in Harney County in 1977 . During the roundup , it was noticed that among the horses collected from the area , there was a group with similar color and markings . DNA testing by the University of Kentucky showed close relation to the Spanish horses brought to the Americas in the 17th century . These distinct horses were separated from the other horses and the BLM placed two groups in separate areas of Steens Mountain to preserve the breed . Seven horses were placed in the Riddle Mountain Herd Management Area ( HMA ) and twenty in the Kiger HMA . 
 In 2001 , the Kiger Mustang was proposed as the state horse of Oregon . State Senator Steve Harper proposed Senate Joint Resolution 10 after being encouraged to do so by the Kiger Mesteño Association . The resolution , however , failed to pass . Kiger Mustangs have been used as models for model horses and animated films . The original herd stallion Mesteño was used as the model for a series of Breyer Horses , showing the horse at several ages from foal to old age . It was the first time the company had made a series of models showing the same horse . The artist 's model for the title horse of the animated film Spirit : Stallion of the Cimarron was a Kiger Mustang named Donner , also known as " Spirit " , who lives at the Return to Freedom American Wild Horse Sanctuary . 
 = = BLM management and private ownership = = 
 The Kiger HMA , 45 miles ( 72 km ) southeast of Burns , Oregon and 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Diamond , Oregon , covers 36 @,@ 618 acres ( 148 @.@ 19 km2 ) and hosts a population that ranges between 51 and 83 horses . The Riddle Mountain HMA , 50 miles ( 80 km ) southeast of Burns , covers 28 @,@ 000 acres ( 110 km2 ) and contains between 33 and 56 horses . Horses are sometimes exchanged between the herds to maintain the highest possible level of genetic diversity . After roundups , horses with the desired physical characteristics ( including phenotype and coloration ) are returned to the herds to maintain a high quality of breeding stock . The herds are rounded up every three to four years , and excess horses are auctioned to the public . At two of the more recent auctions , in 2007 and 2011 , over 100 horses were auctioned at each event . The 2007 event resulted in 106 horses being adopted to homes in 14 states for a total of $ 100 @,@ 206 . The two horses with the highest bids went for $ 7 @,@ 800 and $ 7 @,@ 400 . This is much higher than the adoption fees paid for other mustangs ; horses removed from other herds in Oregon can be adopted for a walk @-@ up fee of $ 125 . 
 Genetic testing has shown that Kiger Mustang is a descendant of the Spanish horse . Many of today 's Kiger Mustangs can be traced back to a single stallion named Mesteño , captured with the original herd in 1977 and released back to the Kiger HMA . Several organizations exist which inspect and register Kiger Mustangs ; each has their own standards for entry into the stud book . In 1988 , the Kiger Mustang Association ( now the Kiger Mesteño Association ) was formed as the original registry for the herd . By 2013 , the organization had registered around 800 horses , and annually inspects between 75 and 100 new horses . Two other associations are the Steens Mountain Kiger Registry , established in 1993 , and the Kiger Horse Association and Registry . The Kiger Mustangs of the Riddle Mountain and Kiger HMAs are the best known herds of Mustangs in Oregon , despite making up only a small portion of the population . As of 2013 , the state had a total estimated BLM @-@ managed feral horse population of almost 2 @,@ 600 , roaming over 17 HMAs and a Wild Horse Territory co @-@ managed with the US Forest Service . A census taken in April 2010 found 60 Kiger Mustangs in the Riddle Mountain HMA and 81 in the Kiger HMA ; estimates made in February 2013 list 40 horses in Riddle Mountain and 61 in Kiger . 
 = The Stakeout ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " The Stakeout " is the second episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the eighth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on September 24 , 2009 . In the episode , Leslie conducts surveillance on a community garden in an attempt to find out who planted marijuana there . 
 The episode was written by Rachel Axler and directed by Seth Gordon . It marked the first in a series of guest appearances by stand @-@ up comedian Louis C.K. as Dave Sanderson , a Pawnee police officer who develops a romantic interest in Leslie . A scene in which Sanderson arrests Tom Haverford in his own van mirrors the real @-@ life controversial 2009 arrest of Henry Louis Gates . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 4 @.@ 22 million households , an 800 @,@ 000 @-@ household drop from the previous week 's season premiere , " Pawnee Zoo " . " The Stakeout " received generally positive reviews , with several commentators saying it marked a continued improvement over the first Parks and Recreation season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , who is preparing for her first date with Mark ( Paul Schneider ) , worriedly asks Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) if she has any reservations , since Leslie previously had feelings for him . Leslie insists she is fine . Later , Leslie and Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) visit a community garden in the Pawnee pit , where they find what appears to be marijuana . 
 That night , Leslie and Tom don black and watch the pit from a van . Leslie eventually spots Ann and Mark leaving for their date , and starts snapping photos of them . Later , Leslie and Tom see Ann 's ex @-@ boyfriend Andy ( Chris Pratt ) in the pit . They assume he is the kingpin , but he insists he is actually living in the pit and eating the vegetables from the garden . 
 Back at city hall , Ron ( Nick Offerman ) remains immobile in his chair all day due to a hernia which causes excruciating pain if he moves . Ron remains immobile in his seat well into the night , until the janitors turn the lights off on him . The intern , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , returns to check on him , and wheels Ron out to the car on his office chair to bring him to the hospital . 
 Leslie and Andy walk off to get fast food . Back at the pit , Tom is locked out of his van and tries to break back in . Ann and Mark return from their date and call the police after they see him , assuming him to be a prowler . Officer Dave Sanderson ( Louis C.K. ) arrives and confronts Tom , who mouths off at Dave until he places him under arrest . 
 Leslie goes to the police station . Initially angry , she eventually confesses about the marijuana . Dave releases Tom , who thanks Leslie for sticking up for him . The next day , Leslie and Dave go to the garden , but he finds no marijuana . Tom tells Leslie that Mark is an idiot , and she can do better . Dave guesses Leslie orchestrated the whole thing to spy on Ann and Mark . Later , Dave privately admits he is attracted to Leslie . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Stakeout " was written by Rachel Axler and directed by Seth Gordon . It marked the first in a series of guest appearances by stand @-@ up comedian Louis C.K. He played Dave Sanderson , a Pawnee police officer who develops a romantic interest in Leslie , and speaks about intimate feelings in a deadpan , technical tone of voice . C.K. improvised the line , " I was attracted to her in a sexual manner that was appropriate " during his discussion about Leslie near the end of the episode . 
 During a scene in the van , Tom Haverford tells Leslie he changed his name because his original name was too foreign sounding for a career in politics . When Leslie points about U.S. President Barack Obama has a foreign @-@ sounding name , Tom gets upset . The reference to Obama 's name was originally featured in a scene that was cut from Parks and Recreation pilot episode . Offerman , who barely moves and is often quiet throughout the episode , said he learned to use humor amid silence while serving as an altar boy and lector at his church . Offerman said , " I had a cousin in the congregation , and I would speak with the utmost , august stoicism , and everyone would think I was a very effective speaker . But he knew I was being facetious . He 'd get in trouble for cracking up . " 
 Within a week of the episode 's original broadcast , three deleted scenes from " The Stakeout " were made available on the official Parks and Recreation website . In the first 75 @-@ second clip , a panicked Leslie asks Tom whether the marijuana plant could be a " non @-@ marijuana weed " . In the second 80 @-@ second clip , Dave says he hates arresting people because he " never wants to go " . He also discusses his strategies for calming people down , including using a soft voice , eye contact and <unk> them . In the third minute @-@ long clip , Ron tries unsuccessfully to eat his lunch and throw away the garbage without moving . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The confrontation between Tom Haverford and Dave Sanderson before Tom 's arrest in his own van mirrored the real life arrest of Henry Louis Gates , a black Harvard University professor who was arrested after police mistakenly thought he was breaking into his own home in Cambridge , Massachusetts . The arrest received national attention . When a police officer asked Gates to step outside , he replied , " I 'll speak to your mama outside , " which was parodied in " The Stakeout " when Dave asked Tom to step out of the van and he responded , " I 'll step out of your mama 's van ! " 
 During the opening scene , Tom pretends to know the names of all the plants in a community garden and assigns them all fake names based on real @-@ life rappers . He refers to one plant as <unk> <unk> , a reference to the performer Soulja Boy Tell ' Em , and another as <unk> , a reference to rapper Ludacris . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on September 24 , 2009 , " The Stakeout " was seen by 4 @.@ 22 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research . It constituted a nearly 800 @,@ 000 @-@ household drop from the previous week 's season premiere , " Pawnee Zoo " . The episode received a 1 @.@ 8 rating / 5 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , the lowest rating for Season Two so far . The Star @-@ Ledger television columnist Alan Sepinwall said although the quality of Parks and Recreations was improving , season two was struggling in the ratings based on the lower quality of the season one episodes . Sepinwall said , " There 's a school of thought in the TV business that it 's harder to get back viewers who watched and left than it is to start small and attract new viewers over time . " " The Stakeout " received generally positive reviews . Sepinwall said the episode was funny , but also notable because it developed a stronger personal connection between Leslie and Tom , and because it featured more references to topical events like the Henry Gates controversy . 
 Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club said " The Stakeout " was " the best Parks & Recreation episode by a long shot " . He said Poehler seemed more at ease with the Leslie character , and thought " the intersection of business and personal stress " served the episode well . He also praised the supporting cast and particularly the Ron Swanson subplot . Matt Fowler of IGN said with " The Stakeout " , the second season of Parks and Recreation continued to be " significantly funnier " than the first season . Fowler said he thought the pairing between Leslie and Tom helped ground both characters , and said he was interested to see Leslie dealt with the growing romance between Ann and Mark . Entertainment Weekly writer Henning Fog said " The Stakeout " showed growth improvement for the series , and praised the guest performance of Louis C.K. Fog said the disparate pairing of Leslie and Tom , Mark and Ann , and Ron and April , created a sense that the characters " really knew each other [ and ] had lives outside of Leslie 's immediate orbit " . Chicago Tribune columnist Maureen Ryan particularly praised the performance of Offerman , of whom she said , " His pained reactions and stoic silence are hilarious . " 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " The Stakeout " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = Homie the Clown = 
 " Homie the Clown " is the 14th episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 12 , 1995 . When Krusty the Clown opens a clown college to deal with his debt , Homer Simpson enrolls and ends up impersonating Krusty at public events . Mistaking him for the real clown , the Springfield Mafia kidnaps Homer , demanding their money . Joe Mantegna returned as Fat Tony , while Dick Cavett and Johnny Unitas guest starred as themselves . 
 The episode was conceived and written by John Swartzwelder and directed by David Silverman . Swartzwelder 's script required very little rewriting and Silverman considers this one of the best episodes he has directed . He later used it to help him when directing The Simpsons Movie . One dropped storyline for The Simpsons saw Krusty being revealed as Homer 's secret identity and this episode allowed writers to comment upon the similarity of the two characters ' design . The episode features references to Close Encounters of the Third Kind , The Godfather and The Maltese Falcon . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Krusty 's massive gambling debts and extravagant personal life land him in deep trouble with the Springfield Mafia and only a month away from bankruptcy . To make money , he launches a training college for clowns . Homer sees an advertisement about the college and at first says that it had no effect on him , but then becomes obsessed with it , eventually announcing to his startled family that he is going to enroll . After graduating , he impersonates Krusty at private and public events that the real Krusty deems unworthy of his personal appearance . 
 At first , the stress of impersonating Krusty makes Homer consider quitting . However , he discovers that he receives all sorts of benefits from authority figures and businesses that mistake him for Krusty due to their uncanny resemblance . The impersonation goes too far when Homer is kidnapped by the mafia , who mistake him for the real clown that owes them money . Mob boss Don Vittorio DiMaggio tells Homer he will kill him unless he performs a loop @-@ de @-@ loop on a tiny bicycle , the only trick Homer never learned to do . He fails , but the real Krusty arrives and the confused Don instead forces them to perform the trick together . The trick is a success and their lives are spared , but Krusty still has to pay off his debt to the mob — a total of $ 48 . Krusty pays them with a $ 50 bill , and gets his change back . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by David Silverman . Swartzwelder came up with the idea and his script required very little rewriting . The episode is one of Silverman 's favorites and he was pleased to direct it , after enjoying Swartzwelder 's script . Silverman felt he himself " brought a lot to the party on [ this ] one , " and although " people didn 't like [ Swartzwelder 's script ] at the read @-@ through , " Silverman thought " the script was really funny , and I had an idea for the opening and presented it with a lot of circus music that inspired the music they used for it . It was great fun . " He used it , along with " Three Men and a Comic Book " , to help him when directing The Simpsons Movie . 
 Brad Bird also helped Silverman , particularly with Krusty 's design . An early idea for The Simpsons saw Krusty the Clown being revealed as Homer Simpson 's secret stage identity . This storyline never developed , but this episode allowed writers to comment upon the design similarity of the two characters . Krusty 's appearance and design is just that of Homer 's , with clown make @-@ up . Silverman enhanced the lines under Krusty 's eyes , and reshaped his beard line in order to make a clearer distinction between the two characters . 
 Homer beating up the Estonian dwarf ( who first appeared in " Burns ' Heir " ) was a joke Matt Groening " had trouble with " . David Mirkin wanted the scene to be violent , but Silverman stated that he thought he had animated the finished product to be too realistic . However , nothing was changed . Fox objected to the mafia buying ammunition from a Big 5 Sporting Goods until Mirkin pointed out that Big 5 sold ammunition . The second act break was , up until the animatic , after Fat Tony 's line " cancel the world search " . 
 Joe Mantegna returned as Fat Tony . Mirkin said Mantegna is a joy to direct and that Mantegna loves the role so much , he wishes to voice him " even if he only coughs " . Dick Cavett guest starred as himself . Mirkin commented that Cavett 's part was probably the " meanest " they had ever been to a guest star . Cavett often told stories involving himself and other famous people and Mirkin decided to make light of that . Cavett did not have any objections . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title is reference to the character Homey the Clown from the sketch comedy show In Living Color . Krusty lights a cigarette with an issue of Action Comics # 1 , the first appearance of Superman , and one of the rarest comic books of all @-@ time , while Homer forms his mashed potatoes into a circus tent in a parody of Richard Dreyfuss ' character forming his potatoes into a replica of Devils Tower in the 1977 film Close Encounters of the Third Kind . The episode contains several references to films related to organized crime , such as the notes played on the wine glasses during Homer and Krusty 's bicycle trick forming those of the theme from the film The Godfather . Additionally , Silverman inserted a low @-@ angle shot of Fat Tony sitting in a chair as a tribute to a similar shot of Sydney Greenstreet 's character in The Maltese Falcon , while Don Vittorio is based on actors William Hickey and Don Ameche . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Homie the Clown " finished 59th ( tied with Behind Closed Doors II ) in the ratings for the week of February 5 to February 12 , 1995 , helping Fox to an overall Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 9 . The episode was the fifth highest rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 Mike Brantley of The Mobile Register named " Homie the Clown " the 48th greatest television episode of all @-@ time . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , stated the episode was " notable for its scenes of Homer on trying to emulate Krusty 's mini @-@ trike loop the loops . " Ryan Keefer of DVD Verdict felt it " features one of the more amusing stunts to cap an episode " , giving it an A. Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide said in a review of the sixth season DVD that the episode " offers a truly terrific show , " and also praised the " clever Close Encounters reference , and the ways that it ties together Krusty 's mob connection with Homer , " concluding " it 's a real winner . " 
 = Antarctica = 
 Antarctica ( US English / <unk> / , UK English / <unk> / or / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is Earth 's southernmost continent , containing the geographic South Pole . It is situated in the Antarctic region of the Southern Hemisphere , almost entirely south of the Antarctic Circle , and is surrounded by the Southern Ocean . At 14 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 5 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 square miles ) , it is the fifth @-@ largest continent in area after Asia , Africa , North America , and South America . For comparison , Antarctica is nearly twice the size of Australia . About 98 % of Antarctica is covered by ice that averages 1 @.@ 9 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ; 6 @,@ 200 ft ) in thickness , which extends to all but the northernmost reaches of the Antarctic Peninsula . 
 Antarctica , on average , is the coldest , driest , and windiest continent , and has the highest average elevation of all the continents . Antarctica is a desert , with annual precipitation of only 200 mm ( 8 in ) along the coast and far less inland . The temperature in Antarctica has reached − 89 @.@ 2 ° C ( − 128 @.@ 6 ° F ) , though the average for the third quarter ( the coldest part of the year ) is − 63 ° C ( − 81 ° F ) . As of 2016 , there are about 135 permanent human residents , but anywhere from 1 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 000 people reside throughout the year at the research stations scattered across the continent . Organisms native to Antarctica include many types of algae , bacteria , fungi , plants , <unk> , and certain animals , such as mites , nematodes , penguins , seals and tardigrades . Vegetation , where it occurs , is tundra . 
 Although myths and speculation about a Terra Australis ( " Southern Land " ) date back to antiquity , Antarctica was only first sighted in 1820 , by the Russian expedition of Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen and Mikhail Lazarev on Vostok and <unk> , who sighted the Fimbul ice shelf . The continent , however , remained largely neglected for the rest of the 19th century because of its hostile environment , lack of resources , and isolation . 
 Antarctica is a de facto condominium , governed by parties to the Antarctic Treaty System that have consulting status . Twelve countries signed the Antarctic Treaty in 1959 , and thirty @-@ eight have signed it since then . The treaty prohibits military activities and mineral mining , prohibits nuclear explosions and nuclear waste disposal , supports scientific research , and protects the continent 's ecozone . Ongoing experiments are conducted by more than 4 @,@ 000 scientists from many nations . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Antarctica is the romanized version of the Greek compound word <unk> ( <unk> ) , feminine of <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " opposite to the Arctic " , " opposite to the north " . 
 Aristotle wrote in his book Meteorology about an Antarctic region in c . 350 B.C. Marinus of Tyre reportedly used the name in his unpreserved world map from the 2nd century A.D. The Roman authors Hyginus and Apuleius ( 1 – 2 centuries A.D. ) used for the South Pole the romanized Greek name <unk> antarcticus , from which derived the Old French pole <unk> ( modern <unk> <unk> ) attested in 1270 , and from there the Middle English pol <unk> in a 1391 technical treatise by Geoffrey Chaucer ( modern Antarctic Pole ) . 
 Before acquiring its present geographical connotations , the term was used for other locations that could be defined as " opposite to the north " . For example , the short @-@ lived French colony established in Brazil in the 16th century was called " France <unk> " . 
 The first formal use of the name " Antarctica " as a continental name in the 1890s is attributed to the Scottish cartographer John George Bartholomew . 
 = = History of exploration = = 
 Antarctica has no indigenous population and there is no evidence that it was seen by humans until the 19th century . However , belief in the existence of a Terra Australis — a vast continent in the far south of the globe to " balance " the northern lands of Europe , Asia and North Africa — had existed since the times of Ptolemy ( 1st century AD ) , who suggested the idea to preserve the symmetry of all known landmasses in the world . Even in the late 17th century , after explorers had found that South America and Australia were not part of the fabled " Antarctica " , geographers believed that the continent was much larger than its actual size . 
 Integral to the story of the origin of the name " Antarctica " is how it was not named Terra Australis — this name was given to Australia instead , and it was because of a mistake made by people who decided that a significant landmass would not be found farther south than Australia . Explorer Matthew Flinders , in particular , has been credited with popularizing the transfer of the name Terra Australis to Australia . He justified the titling of his book A Voyage to Terra Australis ( 1814 ) by writing in the introduction : 
 There is no probability , that any other detached body of land , of nearly equal extent , will ever be found in a more southern latitude ; the name Terra Australis will , therefore , remain descriptive of the geographical importance of this country and of its situation on the globe : it has antiquity to recommend it ; and , having no reference to either of the two claiming nations , appears to be less objectionable than any other which could have been selected . 
 European maps continued to show this hypothesized land until Captain James Cook 's ships , HMS Resolution and Adventure , crossed the Antarctic Circle on 17 January 1773 , in December 1773 and again in January 1774 . Cook came within about 120 km ( 75 mi ) of the Antarctic coast before retreating in the face of field ice in January 1773 . The first confirmed sighting of Antarctica can be narrowed down to the crews of ships captained by three individuals . According to various organizations ( the National Science Foundation , NASA , the University of California , San Diego , and other sources ) , ships captained by three men sighted Antarctica or its ice shelf in 1820 : von Bellingshausen ( a captain in the Imperial Russian Navy ) , Edward Bransfield ( a captain in the Royal Navy ) , and Nathaniel Palmer ( a sealer out of Stonington , Connecticut ) . The expedition led by von Bellingshausen and Lazarev on the ships Vostok and <unk> reached a point within 32 km ( 20 mi ) from Queen Maud 's Land and recorded the sight of an ice shelf at 69 ° 21 ′ 28 ″ S 2 ° 14 ′ 50 ″ W , which became known as the Fimbul ice shelf . This happened three days before Bransfield sighted land , and ten months before Palmer did so in November 1820 . The first documented landing on Antarctica was by the American sealer John Davis , apparently at Hughes Bay , near Cape Charles , in West Antarctica on 7 February 1821 , although some historians dispute this claim . The first recorded and confirmed landing was at Cape Adair in 1895 . 
 On 22 January 1840 , two days after the discovery of the coast west of the Balleny Islands , some members of the crew of the 1837 – 40 expedition of Jules Dumont d 'Urville disembarked on the highest islet of a group of rocky islands about 4 km from Cape <unk> on the coast of Adélie Land where they took some mineral , algae and animal samples . 
 In December 1839 , as part of the United States Exploring Expedition of 1838 – 42 conducted by the United States Navy ( sometimes called the " Ex . Ex . " , or " the Wilkes Expedition " ) , an expedition sailed from Sydney , Australia , into the Antarctic Ocean , as it was then known , and reported the discovery " of an Antarctic continent west of the Balleny Islands " on 25 January 1840 . That part of Antarctica was later named " Wilkes Land " , a name it retains to this day . 
 Explorer James Clark Ross passed through what is now known as the Ross Sea and discovered Ross Island ( both of which were named after him ) in 1841 . He sailed along a huge wall of ice that was later named the Ross Ice Shelf . Mount Erebus and Mount Terror are named after two ships from his expedition : HMS Erebus and Terror . Mercator Cooper landed in East Antarctica on 26 January 1853 . 
 During the Nimrod Expedition led by Ernest Shackleton in 1907 , parties led by Edgeworth David became the first to climb Mount Erebus and to reach the South Magnetic Pole . Douglas Mawson , who assumed the leadership of the Magnetic Pole party on their perilous return , went on to lead several expeditions until retiring in 1931 . In addition , Shackleton himself and three other members of his expedition made several firsts in December 1908 – February 1909 : they were the first humans to traverse the Ross Ice Shelf , the first to traverse the Transantarctic Mountains ( via the Beardmore Glacier ) , and the first to set foot on the South Polar Plateau . An expedition led by Norwegian polar explorer Roald Amundsen from the ship Fram became the first to reach the geographic South Pole on 14 December 1911 , using a route from the Bay of Whales and up the Axel Heiberg Glacier . One month later , the doomed Scott Expedition reached the pole . 
 Richard E. Byrd led several voyages to the Antarctic by plane in the 1930s and 1940s . He is credited with implementing mechanised land transport on the continent and conducting extensive geological and biological research . However , it was not until 31 October 1956 that anyone set foot on the South Pole again ; on that day a U.S. Navy group led by Rear Admiral George J. Dufek successfully landed an aircraft there . 
 The first person to sail single @-@ handed to Antarctica was the New Zealander David Henry Lewis , in 1972 , in the 10 @-@ metre steel sloop Ice Bird . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Positioned asymmetrically around the South Pole and largely south of the Antarctic Circle , Antarctica is the southernmost continent and is surrounded by the Southern Ocean ; alternatively , it may be considered to be surrounded by the southern Pacific , Atlantic , and Indian Oceans , or by the southern waters of the World Ocean . There are a number of rivers and lakes in antarctica , the longest river being the Onyx . The largest lake , Vostok , is one of the largest sub @-@ glacial lakes in the world . Antarctica covers more than 14 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km2 ( 5 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 sq mi ) , making it the fifth @-@ largest continent , about 1 @.@ 3 times as large as Europe . The coastline measures 17 @,@ 968 km ( 11 @,@ 165 mi ) and is mostly characterized by ice formations , as the following table shows : 
 Antarctica is divided in two by the Transantarctic Mountains close to the neck between the Ross Sea and the Weddell Sea . The portion west of the Weddell Sea and east of the Ross Sea is called West Antarctica and the remainder East Antarctica , because they roughly correspond to the Western and Eastern Hemispheres relative to the Greenwich meridian . 
 About 98 % of Antarctica is covered by the Antarctic ice sheet , a sheet of ice averaging at least 1 @.@ 6 km ( 1 @.@ 0 mi ) thick . The continent has about 90 % of the world 's ice ( and thereby about 70 % of the world 's fresh water ) . If all of this ice were melted , sea levels would rise about 60 m ( 200 ft ) . In most of the interior of the continent , precipitation is very low , down to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) per year ; in a few " blue ice " areas precipitation is lower than mass loss by sublimation and so the local mass balance is negative . In the dry valleys , the same effect occurs over a rock base , leading to a desiccated landscape . 
 West Antarctica is covered by the West Antarctic Ice Sheet . The sheet has been of recent concern because of the real , if small , possibility of its collapse . If the sheet were to break down , ocean levels would rise by several metres in a relatively geologically short period of time , perhaps a matter of centuries . Several Antarctic ice streams , which account for about 10 % of the ice sheet , flow to one of the many Antarctic ice shelves : see ice @-@ sheet dynamics . 
 East Antarctica lies on the Indian Ocean side of the Transantarctic Mountains and comprises Coats Land , Queen Maud Land , Enderby Land , Mac . Robertson Land , Wilkes Land , and Victoria Land . All but a small portion of this region lies within the Eastern Hemisphere . East Antarctica is largely covered by the East Antarctic Ice Sheet . 
 Vinson Massif , the highest peak in Antarctica at 4 @,@ 892 m ( 16 @,@ 050 ft ) , is located in the Ellsworth Mountains . Antarctica contains many other mountains , on both the main continent and the surrounding islands . Mount Erebus on Ross Island is the world 's southernmost active volcano . Another well @-@ known volcano is found on Deception Island , which is famous for a giant eruption in 1970 . Minor eruptions are frequent and lava flow has been observed in recent years . Other dormant volcanoes may potentially be active . In 2004 , a potentially active underwater volcano was found in the Antarctic Peninsula by American and Canadian researchers . 
 Antarctica is home to more than 70 lakes that lie at the base of the continental ice sheet . Lake Vostok , discovered beneath Russia 's Vostok Station in 1996 , is the largest of these subglacial lakes . It was once believed that the lake had been sealed off for 500 @,@ 000 to one million years but a recent survey suggests that , every so often , there are large flows of water from one lake to another . 
 There is some evidence , in the form of ice cores drilled to about 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) above the water line , that Lake Vostok 's waters may contain microbial life . The frozen surface of the lake shares similarities with Jupiter 's moon , Europa . If life is discovered in Lake Vostok , it would strengthen the argument for the possibility of life on Europa . On 7 February 2008 , a NASA team embarked on a mission to Lake Untersee , searching for extremophiles in its highly alkaline waters . If found , these resilient creatures could further bolster the argument for extraterrestrial life in extremely cold , methane @-@ rich environments . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Geological history and paleontology = = = 
 More than 170 million years ago , Antarctica was part of the supercontinent Gondwana . Over time , Gondwana gradually broke apart and Antarctica as we know it today was formed around 25 million years ago . Antarctica was not always cold , dry , and covered in ice sheets . At a number of points in its long history , it was farther north , experienced a tropical or temperate climate , was covered in forests , and inhabited by various ancient life forms . 
 = = = = Palaeozoic era ( 540 – 250 Ma ) = = = = 
 During the Cambrian period , Gondwana had a mild climate . West Antarctica was partially in the Northern Hemisphere , and during this period large amounts of sandstones , limestones and shales were deposited . East Antarctica was at the equator , where sea floor invertebrates and trilobites flourished in the tropical seas . By the start of the Devonian period ( 416 Ma ) , Gondwana was in more southern latitudes and the climate was cooler , though fossils of land plants are known from this time . Sand and silts were laid down in what is now the Ellsworth , Horlick and Pensacola Mountains . Glaciation began at the end of the Devonian period ( 360 Ma ) , as Gondwana became centered on the South Pole and the climate cooled , though flora remained . During the Permian period , the land became dominated by seed plants such as <unk> , a <unk> which grew in swamps . Over time these swamps became deposits of coal in the Transantarctic Mountains . Towards the end of the Permian period , continued warming led to a dry , hot climate over much of Gondwana . 
 = = = = Mesozoic era ( 250 – 66 Ma ) = = = = 
 As a result of continued warming , the polar ice caps melted and much of Gondwana became a desert . In Eastern Antarctica , seed ferns or <unk> became abundant and large amounts of sandstone and shale were laid down at this time . <unk> , commonly known as " mammal @-@ like reptiles " , were common in Antarctica during the Early Triassic and included forms such as Lystrosaurus . The Antarctic Peninsula began to form during the Jurassic period ( 206 – 146 Ma ) , and islands gradually rose out of the ocean . Ginkgo trees , conifers , <unk> , horsetails , ferns and cycads were plentiful during this period . In West Antarctica , coniferous forests dominated through the entire Cretaceous period ( 146 – 66 Ma ) , though southern beech became more prominent towards the end of this period . Ammonites were common in the seas around Antarctica , and dinosaurs were also present , though only three Antarctic dinosaur genera ( Cryolophosaurus and Glacialisaurus , from the Hanson Formation , and Antarctopelta ) have been described to date . It was during this era that Gondwana began to break up . 
