 However , there is some evidence of <unk> marine glaciation during the Cretaceous period . 
 = = = = Gondwana breakup ( 160 – 23 Ma ) = = = = 
 The cooling of Antarctica occurred stepwise , as the continental spread changed the oceanic currents from longitudinal equator @-@ to @-@ pole temperature @-@ equalizing currents to latitudinal currents that preserved and accentuated latitude temperature differences . 
 Africa separated from Antarctica in the Jurassic , around 160 Ma , followed by the Indian subcontinent in the early Cretaceous ( about 125 Ma ) . By the end of the Cretaceous , about 66 Ma , Antarctica ( then connected to Australia ) still had a subtropical climate and flora , complete with a marsupial fauna . In the Eocene epoch , about 40 Ma Australia @-@ New Guinea separated from Antarctica , so that latitudinal currents could isolate Antarctica from Australia , and the first ice began to appear . During the Eocene – Oligocene extinction event about 34 million years ago , CO2 levels have been found to be about 760 ppm and had been decreasing from earlier levels in the thousands of ppm . 
 Around 23 Ma , the Drake Passage opened between Antarctica and South America , resulting in the Antarctic Circumpolar Current that completely isolated the continent . Models of the changes suggest that declining CO2 levels became more important . The ice began to spread , replacing the forests that then covered the continent . 
 = = = = Neogene Period ( 23 – 0 @.@ 05 Ma ) = = = = 
 Since about 15 Ma , the continent has been mostly covered with ice . 
 = = = = Meyer Desert Formation biota = = = = 
 Fossil Nothofagus leaves in the Meyer Desert Formation of the Sirius Group show that intermittent warm periods allowed Nothofagus shrubs to cling to the Dominion Range as late as 3 – 4 Ma ( mid @-@ late Pliocene ) . After that the Pleistocene ice age covered the whole continent and destroyed all major plant life on it . 
 = = = Geology of present @-@ day Antarctica = = = 
 The geological study of Antarctica has been greatly hindered by nearly all of the continent being permanently covered with a thick layer of ice . However , new techniques such as remote sensing , ground @-@ penetrating radar and satellite imagery have begun to reveal the structures beneath the ice . 
 Geologically , West Antarctica closely resembles the Andes mountain range of South America . The Antarctic Peninsula was formed by uplift and metamorphism of sea bed sediments during the late Paleozoic and the early Mesozoic eras . This sediment uplift was accompanied by igneous intrusions and volcanism . The most common rocks in West Antarctica are andesite and rhyolite volcanics formed during the Jurassic period . There is also evidence of volcanic activity , even after the ice sheet had formed , in Marie Byrd Land and Alexander Island . The only anomalous area of West Antarctica is the Ellsworth Mountains region , where the stratigraphy is more similar to East Antarctica . 
 East Antarctica is geologically varied , dating from the Precambrian era , with some rocks formed more than 3 billion years ago . It is composed of a metamorphic and igneous platform which is the basis of the continental shield . On top of this base are various modern rocks , such as sandstones , limestones , coal and shales laid down during the Devonian and Jurassic periods to form the Transantarctic Mountains . In coastal areas such as Shackleton Range and Victoria Land some faulting has occurred . 
 The main mineral resource known on the continent is coal . It was first recorded near the Beardmore Glacier by Frank Wild on the Nimrod Expedition , and now low @-@ grade coal is known across many parts of the Transantarctic Mountains . The Prince Charles Mountains contain significant deposits of iron ore . The most valuable resources of Antarctica lie offshore , namely the oil and natural gas fields found in the Ross Sea in 1973 . Exploitation of all mineral resources is banned until 2048 by the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Antarctica is the coldest of Earth 's continents . The coldest natural temperature ever recorded on Earth was − 89 @.@ 2 ° C ( − 128 @.@ 6 ° F ) at the Soviet ( now Russian ) Vostok Station in Antarctica on 21 July 1983 . For comparison , this is 10 @.@ 7 ° C ( 20 ° F ) colder than <unk> dry ice at one atmosphere of partial pressure , but since CO2 only makes up 0 @.@ 039 % of air , temperatures of less than − 150 ° C ( − 238 ° F ) would be needed to produce dry ice snow in Antarctica . Antarctica is a frozen desert with little precipitation ; the South Pole itself receives less than 10 cm ( 4 in ) per year , on average . Temperatures reach a minimum of between − 80 ° C ( − 112 ° F ) and − 89 @.@ 2 ° C ( − 128 @.@ 6 ° F ) in the interior in winter and reach a maximum of between 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) and 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) near the coast in summer . Sunburn is often a health issue as the snow surface reflects almost all of the ultraviolet light falling on it . Given the latitude , long periods of constant darkness or constant sunlight create climates unfamiliar to human beings in much of the rest of the world . 
 East Antarctica is colder than its western counterpart because of its higher elevation . Weather fronts rarely penetrate far into the continent , leaving the centre cold and dry . Despite the lack of precipitation over the central portion of the continent , ice there lasts for extended periods . Heavy snowfalls are common on the coastal portion of the continent , where snowfalls of up to 1 @.@ 22 metres ( 48 in ) in 48 hours have been recorded . 
 At the edge of the continent , strong katabatic winds off the polar plateau often blow at storm force . In the interior , wind speeds are typically moderate . During clear days in summer , more solar radiation reaches the surface at the South Pole than at the equator because of the 24 hours of sunlight each day at the Pole . 
 Antarctica is colder than the Arctic for three reasons . First , much of the continent is more than 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) above sea level , and temperature decreases with elevation in the troposphere . Second , the Arctic Ocean covers the north polar zone : the ocean 's relative warmth is transferred through the <unk> and prevents temperatures in the Arctic regions from reaching the extremes typical of the land surface of Antarctica . Third , the Earth is at aphelion in July ( i.e. , the Earth is farthest from the Sun in the Antarctic winter ) , and the Earth is at perihelion in January ( i.e. , the Earth is closest to the Sun in the Antarctic summer ) . The orbital distance contributes to a colder Antarctic winter ( and a warmer Antarctic summer ) but the first two effects have more impact . 
 The aurora australis , commonly known as the southern lights , is a glow observed in the night sky near the South Pole created by the plasma @-@ full solar winds that pass by the Earth . Another unique spectacle is diamond dust , a ground @-@ level cloud composed of tiny ice crystals . It generally forms under otherwise clear or nearly clear skies , so people sometimes also refer to it as clear @-@ sky precipitation . A sun dog , a frequent atmospheric optical phenomenon , is a bright " spot " beside the true sun . 
 = = Population = = 
 Several governments maintain permanent manned research stations on the continent . The number of people conducting and supporting scientific research and other work on the continent and its nearby islands varies from about 1 @,@ 000 in winter to about 5 @,@ 000 in the summer , giving it a population density between 70 and 350 inhabitants per million square kilometres ( 180 and 900 per million square miles ) at these times . Many of the stations are staffed year @-@ round , the winter @-@ over personnel typically arriving from their home countries for a one @-@ year assignment . An Orthodox church — Trinity Church , opened in 2004 at the Russian Bellingshausen Station — is manned year @-@ round by one or two priests , who are similarly rotated every year . 
 The first semi @-@ permanent inhabitants of regions near Antarctica ( areas situated south of the Antarctic Convergence ) were British and American sealers who used to spend a year or more on South Georgia , from 1786 onward . During the whaling era , which lasted until 1966 , the population of that island varied from over 1 @,@ 000 in the summer ( over 2 @,@ 000 in some years ) to some 200 in the winter . Most of the whalers were Norwegian , with an increasing proportion of Britons . The settlements included Grytviken , Leith Harbour , King Edward Point , Stromness , Husvik , Prince Olav Harbour , Ocean Harbour and <unk> . Managers and other senior officers of the whaling stations often lived together with their families . Among them was the founder of Grytviken , Captain Carl Anton Larsen , a prominent Norwegian whaler and explorer who , along with his family , adopted British citizenship in 1910 . 
 The first child born in the southern polar region was Norwegian girl Solveig <unk> Jacobsen , born in Grytviken on 8 October 1913 , and her birth was registered by the resident British Magistrate of South Georgia . She was a daughter of <unk> Jacobsen , the assistant manager of the whaling station , and Klara <unk> Jacobsen . Jacobsen arrived on the island in 1904 and became the manager of Grytviken , serving from 1914 to 1921 ; two of his children were born on the island . 
 Emilio Marcos Palma was the first person born south of the 60th parallel south ( the continental limit according to the Antarctic Treaty ) , as well as the first one born on the Antarctic mainland , in 1978 at Base Esperanza , on the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula ; his parents were sent there along with seven other families by the Argentine government to determine if the continent was suitable for family life . In 1984 , Juan Pablo Camacho was born at the Frei Montalva Station , becoming the first Chilean born in Antarctica . Several bases are now home to families with children attending schools at the station . As of 2009 , eleven children were born in Antarctica ( south of the 60th parallel south ) : eight at the Argentine Esperanza Base and three at the Chilean Frei Montalva Station . 
 = = Biodiversity = = 
 = = = Animals = = = 
 Few terrestrial vertebrates live in Antarctica . Invertebrate life includes microscopic mites like the <unk> antarcticus , lice , nematodes , tardigrades , rotifers , krill and springtails . The flightless midge Belgica antarctica , up to 6 mm ( 1 ⁄ 4 in ) in size , is the largest purely terrestrial animal in Antarctica . The snow petrel is one of only three birds that breed exclusively in Antarctica . 
 Some species of marine animals exist and rely , directly or indirectly , on the phytoplankton . Antarctic sea life includes penguins , blue whales , orcas , colossal squids and fur seals . The emperor penguin is the only penguin that breeds during the winter in Antarctica , while the Adélie penguin breeds farther south than any other penguin . The rockhopper penguin has distinctive feathers around the eyes , giving the appearance of elaborate eyelashes . King penguins , chinstrap penguins , and gentoo penguins also breed in the Antarctic . 
 The Antarctic fur seal was very heavily hunted in the 18th and 19th centuries for its pelt by sealers from the United States and the United Kingdom . The Weddell seal , a " true seal " , is named after Sir James Weddell , commander of British sealing expeditions in the Weddell Sea . Antarctic krill , which congregate in large schools , is the keystone species of the ecosystem of the Southern Ocean , and is an important food organism for whales , seals , leopard seals , fur seals , squid , <unk> , penguins , albatrosses and many other birds . 
 A census of sea life carried out during the International Polar Year and which involved some 500 researchers was released in 2010 . The research is part of the global Census of Marine Life ( <unk> ) and has disclosed some remarkable findings . More than 235 marine organisms live in both polar regions , having bridged the gap of 12 @,@ 000 km ( 7 @,@ 456 mi ) . Large animals such as some cetaceans and birds make the round trip annually . More surprising are small forms of life such as <unk> , sea cucumbers and free @-@ swimming snails found in both polar oceans . Various factors may aid in their distribution – fairly uniform temperatures of the deep ocean at the poles and the equator which differ by no more than 5 ° C , and the major current systems or marine conveyor belt which transport eggs and larval stages . 
 = = = Fungi = = = 
 About 1150 species of fungi have been recorded from Antarctica , of which about 750 are non @-@ lichen @-@ forming and 400 are lichen @-@ forming . Some of these species are <unk> as a result of evolution under extreme conditions , and have significantly contributed to shaping the impressive rock formations of the McMurdo Dry Valleys and surrounding mountain ridges . The apparently simple morphology , scarcely differentiated structures , metabolic systems and enzymes still active at very low temperatures , and reduced life cycles shown by such fungi make them particularly suited to harsh environments such as the McMurdo Dry Valleys . In particular , their thick @-@ walled and strongly <unk> cells make them resistant to UV light . Those features can also be observed in algae and cyanobacteria , suggesting that these are adaptations to the conditions prevailing in Antarctica . This has led to speculation that , if life ever occurred on Mars , it might have looked similar to Antarctic fungi such as <unk> <unk> . Some of these fungi are also apparently endemic to Antarctica . Endemic Antarctic fungi also include certain dung @-@ inhabiting species which have had to evolve in response to the double challenge of extreme cold while growing on dung , and the need to survive passage through the gut of warm @-@ blooded animals . 
 = = = Plants = = = 
 The climate of Antarctica does not allow extensive vegetation to form . A combination of freezing temperatures , poor soil quality , lack of moisture , and lack of sunlight inhibit plant growth . As a result , the diversity of plant life is very low and limited in distribution . The flora of the continent largely consists of bryophytes . There are about 100 species of mosses and 25 species of liverworts , but only three species of flowering plants , all of which are found in the Antarctic Peninsula : Deschampsia antarctica ( Antarctic hair grass ) , <unk> <unk> ( Antarctic pearlwort ) and the non @-@ native Poa annua ( annual bluegrass ) . Growth is restricted to a few weeks in the summer . 
 = = = Other organisms = = = 
 Seven hundred species of algae exist , most of which are phytoplankton . <unk> snow algae and diatoms are especially abundant in the coastal regions during the summer . Bacteria have been found living in the cold and dark as deep as 800 m ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ; 2 @,@ 600 ft ) under the ice . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty ( also known as the Environmental Protocol or Madrid Protocol ) came into force in 1998 , and is the main instrument concerned with conservation and management of biodiversity in Antarctica . The Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting is advised on environmental and conservation issues in Antarctica by the Committee for Environmental Protection . A major concern within this committee is the risk to Antarctica from unintentional introduction of non @-@ native species from outside the region . 
 The passing of the Antarctic Conservation Act ( 1978 ) in the U.S. brought several restrictions to U.S. activity on Antarctica . The introduction of alien plants or animals can bring a criminal penalty , as can the extraction of any indigenous species . The overfishing of krill , which plays a large role in the Antarctic ecosystem , led officials to enact regulations on fishing . The Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources ( <unk> ) , a treaty that came into force in 1980 , requires that regulations managing all Southern Ocean fisheries consider potential effects on the entire Antarctic ecosystem . Despite these new acts , unregulated and illegal fishing , particularly of Patagonian toothfish ( marketed as Chilean Sea Bass in the U.S. ) , remains a serious problem . The illegal fishing of toothfish has been increasing , with estimates of 32 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 35 @,@ 300 short tons ) in 2000 . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Several countries claim sovereignty in certain regions . While a few of these countries have mutually recognized each other 's claims , the validity of these claims is not recognized universally . 
 New claims on Antarctica have been suspended since 1959 although Norway in 2015 formally defined Queen Maud Land as including the unclaimed area between it and the South Pole . Antarctica 's status is regulated by the 1959 Antarctic Treaty and other related agreements , collectively called the Antarctic Treaty System . Antarctica is defined as all land and ice shelves south of 60 ° S for the purposes of the Treaty System . The treaty was signed by twelve countries including the Soviet Union ( and later Russia ) , the United Kingdom , Argentina , Chile , Australia , and the United States . It set aside Antarctica as a scientific preserve , established freedom of scientific investigation and environmental protection , and banned military activity on Antarctica . This was the first arms control agreement established during the Cold War . 
 In 1983 , the Antarctic Treaty Parties began negotiations on a convention to regulate mining in Antarctica . A coalition of international organizations launched a public pressure campaign to prevent any minerals development in the region , led largely by Greenpeace International , which operated its own scientific station — World Park Base — in the Ross Sea region from 1987 until 1991 and conducted annual expeditions to document environmental effects of humans on Antarctica . In 1988 , the Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resources ( <unk> ) was adopted . The following year , however , Australia and France announced that they would not ratify the convention , rendering it dead for all intents and purposes . They proposed instead that a comprehensive regime to protect the Antarctic environment be negotiated in its place . The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty ( the " Madrid Protocol " ) was negotiated as other countries followed suit and on 14 January 1998 it entered into force . The Madrid Protocol bans all mining in Antarctica , designating Antarctica a " natural reserve devoted to peace and science " . 
 The Antarctic Treaty prohibits any military activity in Antarctica , including the establishment of military bases and fortifications , military manoeuvres , and weapons testing . Military personnel or equipment are permitted only for scientific research or other peaceful purposes . The only documented military land manoeuvre was Operation <unk> by the Argentine military . 
 The United States military issues the Antarctica Service Medal to military members or civilians who serve in Antarctica . The medal includes a " wintered over " bar issued to those who remain on Antarctica over winter . 
 = = = Antarctic territories = = = 
 The Argentine , British and Chilean claims all overlap , and have caused friction . On 18 December 2012 , the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office named a previously unnamed area Queen Elizabeth Land in tribute to Queen Elizabeth II 's Diamond Jubilee . On 22 December 2012 , the UK ambassador to Argentina , John Freeman , was summoned to the Argentine government as protest against the claim . Argentine – UK relations had previously been damaged throughout 2012 due to disputes over the sovereignty of the nearby Falkland Islands , and the 30th anniversary of the Falklands War . 
 The areas shown as Australia 's and New Zealand 's claims were British territory until they were handed over following the countries ' independence . Australia currently claims the largest area . The claims of Britain , Australia , New Zealand , France and Norway are all recognised by each other . 
 Other countries participating as members of the Antarctic Treaty have a territorial interest in Antarctica , but the provisions of the Treaty do not allow them to make their claims while it is in force . 
 Brazil has a designated " zone of interest " that is not an actual claim . 
 Peru has formally reserved its right to make a claim . 
 Russia has inherited the Soviet Union 's right to claim territory under the original Antarctic Treaty . 
 South Africa has formally reserved its right to make a claim . 
 United States reserved its right to make a claim in the original Antarctic Treaty . 
 = = Economy = = 
 There is no economic activity in Antarctica at present , except for fishing off the coast and small @-@ scale tourism , both based outside Antarctica . 
 Although coal , hydrocarbons , iron ore , platinum , copper , chromium , nickel , gold and other minerals have been found , they have not been in large enough quantities to exploit . The 1991 Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty also restricts a struggle for resources . In 1998 , a compromise agreement was reached to place an indefinite ban on mining , to be reviewed in 2048 , further limiting economic development and exploitation . The primary economic activity is the capture and offshore trading of fish . Antarctic fisheries in 2000 – 01 reported landing 112 @,@ 934 tonnes . 
 Small @-@ scale " expedition tourism " has existed since 1957 and is currently subject to Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol provisions , but in effect self @-@ regulated by the International Association of Antarctica Tour Operators ( IAATO ) . Not all vessels associated with Antarctic tourism are members of IAATO , but IAATO members account for 95 % of the tourist activity . Travel is largely by small or medium ship , focusing on specific scenic locations with accessible concentrations of iconic wildlife . A total of 37 @,@ 506 tourists visited during the 2006 – 07 Austral summer with nearly all of them coming from commercial ships . The number was predicted to increase to over 80 @,@ 000 by 2010 . 
 There has been some concern over the potential adverse environmental and ecosystem effects caused by the influx of visitors . Some environmentalists and scientists have made a call for stricter regulations for ships and a tourism quota . The primary response by Antarctic Treaty Parties has been to develop , through their Committee for Environmental Protection and in partnership with IAATO , " site use guidelines " setting landing limits and closed or restricted zones on the more frequently visited sites . Antarctic sightseeing flights ( which did not land ) operated out of Australia and New Zealand until the fatal crash of Air New Zealand Flight 901 in 1979 on Mount Erebus , which killed all 257 aboard . Qantas resumed commercial overflights to Antarctica from Australia in the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 Antarctic fisheries in 1998 – 99 ( 1 July – 30 June ) reported landing 119 @,@ 898 tonnes . Unregulated fishing landed five to six times more than the regulated fishery , and allegedly illegal fishing in Antarctic waters in 1998 resulted in the seizure ( by France and Australia ) of at least eight fishing ships . See Ocean fisheries § Southern Ocean . 
 About thirty countries maintain about seventy research stations ( 40 year @-@ round or permanent , and 30 summer @-@ only ) in Antarctica , with an approximate population of 4000 in summer and 1000 in winter . 
 The ISO 3166 @-@ 1 alpha @-@ 2 " AQ " is assigned to the entire continent regardless of jurisdiction . Different country calling codes and currencies are used for different settlements , depending on the administrating country . The <unk> dollar , a souvenir item sold in the United States and Canada , is not legal tender . 
 = = Research = = 
 Each year , scientists from 28 different nations conduct experiments not reproducible in any other place in the world . In the summer more than 4 @,@ 000 scientists operate research stations ; this number decreases to just over 1 @,@ 000 in the winter . McMurdo Station , which is the largest research station in Antarctica , is capable of housing more than 1 @,@ 000 scientists , visitors , and tourists . 
 Researchers include biologists , geologists , oceanographers , physicists , astronomers , glaciologists , and meteorologists . Geologists tend to study plate tectonics , meteorites from outer space , and resources from the breakup of the supercontinent Gondwana . Glaciologists in Antarctica are concerned with the study of the history and dynamics of floating ice , seasonal snow , glaciers , and ice sheets . Biologists , in addition to examining the wildlife , are interested in how harsh temperatures and the presence of people affect adaptation and survival strategies in a wide variety of organisms . Medical physicians have made discoveries concerning the spreading of viruses and the body 's response to extreme seasonal temperatures . <unk> at Amundsen – Scott South Pole Station study the celestial dome and cosmic microwave background radiation . Many astronomical observations are better made from the interior of Antarctica than from most surface locations because of the high elevation , which results in a thin atmosphere ; low temperature , which minimizes the amount of water vapour in the atmosphere ; and absence of light pollution , thus allowing for a view of space clearer than anywhere else on Earth . Antarctic ice serves as both the shield and the detection medium for the largest neutrino telescope in the world , built 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) below Amundsen – Scott station . 
 Since the 1970s , an important focus of study has been the ozone layer in the atmosphere above Antarctica . In 1985 , three British scientists working on data they had gathered at Halley Station on the Brunt Ice Shelf discovered the existence of a hole in this layer . It was eventually determined that the destruction of the ozone was caused by chlorofluorocarbons ( CFCs ) emitted by human products . With the ban of CFCs in the Montreal Protocol of 1989 , climate projections indicate that the ozone layer will return to 1980 levels between 2050 and 2070 . 
 In September 2006 , NASA satellite data revealed that the Antarctic ozone hole was larger than at any other time on record , at 2 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 km2 ( 1 @,@ 060 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . The impacts of the depleted ozone layer on climate changes occurring in Antarctica are not well understood . 
 In 2007 , The Polar Geospatial Center was founded . The Polar Geospatial Center uses geospatial and remote sensing technology to provide mapping services to American federally funded research teams . Currently , the Polar Geospatial Center can image all of Antarctica at 50 cm resolution every 45 days . 
 On 6 September 2007 , Belgian @-@ based International Polar Foundation unveiled the Princess Elisabeth station , the world 's first zero @-@ emissions polar science station in Antarctica to research climate change . Costing $ 16 @.@ 3 million , the prefabricated station , which is part of the International Polar Year , was shipped to the South Pole from Belgium by the end of 2008 to monitor the health of the polar regions . Belgian polar explorer Alain Hubert stated : " This base will be the first of its kind to produce zero emissions , making it a unique model of how energy should be used in the Antarctic . " Johan <unk> is the leader of the station design team and manager of the project which conducts research in climatology , glaciology and microbiology . 
 In January 2008 , British Antarctic Survey ( BAS ) scientists , led by Hugh Corr and David Vaughan , reported ( in the journal Nature Geoscience ) that 2 @,@ 200 years ago , a volcano erupted under Antarctica 's ice sheet ( based on airborne survey with radar images ) . The biggest eruption in Antarctica in the last 10 @,@ 000 years , the volcanic ash was found deposited on the ice surface under the Hudson Mountains , close to Pine Island Glacier . 
 A study from 2014 estimated that during the Pleistocene , the East Antarctic Ice Sheet ( EAIS ) thinned by at least 500 m ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) , and that thinning since the Last Glacial Maximum for the EAIS area is less than 50 m ( 160 ft ) and probably started after c . 14 ka . 
 = = = Meteorites = = = 
 Meteorites from Antarctica are an important area of study of material formed early in the solar system ; most are thought to come from asteroids , but some may have originated on larger planets . The first meteorite was found in 1912 , and named the Adelie Land meteorite . In 1969 , a Japanese expedition discovered nine meteorites . Most of these meteorites have fallen onto the ice sheet in the last million years . Motion of the ice sheet tends to concentrate the meteorites at blocking locations such as mountain ranges , with wind erosion bringing them to the surface after centuries beneath accumulated snowfall . Compared with meteorites collected in more temperate regions on Earth , the Antarctic meteorites are well @-@ preserved . 
 This large collection of meteorites allows a better understanding of the abundance of meteorite types in the solar system and how meteorites relate to asteroids and comets . New types of meteorites and rare meteorites have been found . Among these are pieces blasted off the Moon , and probably Mars , by impacts . These specimens , particularly <unk> discovered by <unk> , are at the center of the controversy about possible evidence of microbial life on Mars . Because meteorites in space absorb and record cosmic radiation , the time elapsed since the meteorite hit the Earth can be determined from laboratory studies . The elapsed time since fall , or terrestrial residence age , of a meteorite represents more information that might be useful in environmental studies of Antarctic ice sheets . 
 In 2006 , a team of researchers from Ohio State University used gravity measurements by NASA 's <unk> satellites to discover the 500 @-@ kilometre @-@ wide ( 300 mi ) Wilkes Land crater , which probably formed about 250 million years ago . 
 In January 2013 , an 18 kg ( 40 lb ) meteorite was discovered frozen in ice on the Nansen ice field by a Search for Antarctic Meteorites , Belgian Approach ( <unk> ) mission . 
 In January 2015 , reports emerged of a 2 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) circular structure , supposedly a meteorite crater , on the surface snow of King Baudouin Ice Shelf . Satellite images from 25 years ago seemingly show it . 
 = = Ice mass and global sea level = = 
 Due to its location at the South Pole , Antarctica receives relatively little solar radiation . This means that it is a very cold continent where water is mostly in the form of ice . Precipitation is low ( most of Antarctica is a desert ) and almost always in the form of snow , which accumulates and forms a giant ice sheet which covers the land . Parts of this ice sheet form moving glaciers known as ice streams , which flow towards the edges of the continent . Next to the continental shore are many ice shelves . These are floating extensions of <unk> glaciers from the continental ice mass . Offshore , temperatures are also low enough that ice is formed from seawater through most of the year . It is important to understand the various types of Antarctic ice to understand possible effects on sea levels and the implications of global cooling . 
 Sea ice extent expands annually in the Antarctic winter and most of this ice melts in the summer . This ice is formed from the ocean water and floats in the same water and thus does not contribute to rise in sea level . The extent of sea ice around Antarctica has remained roughly constant in recent decades , although the thickness changes are unclear . 
 Melting of floating ice shelves ( ice that originated on the land ) does not in itself contribute much to sea @-@ level rise ( since the ice displaces only its own mass of water ) . However it is the outflow of the ice from the land to form the ice shelf which causes a rise in global sea level . This effect is offset by snow falling back onto the continent . Recent decades have witnessed several dramatic collapses of large ice shelves around the coast of Antarctica , especially along the Antarctic Peninsula . Concerns have been raised that disruption of ice shelves may result in increased glacial outflow from the continental ice mass . 
 On the continent itself , the large volume of ice present stores around 70 % of the world 's fresh water . This ice sheet is constantly gaining ice from snowfall and losing ice through outflow to the sea . Overall , the net change is slightly positive at approximately 82 gigatonnes ( Gt ) per year ( with significant regional variation ) , reducing global sea @-@ level rise by 0 @.@ 23 mm per year . 
 East Antarctica is a cold region with a ground base above sea level and occupies most of the continent . This area is dominated by small accumulations of snowfall which becomes ice and thus eventually seaward glacial flows . The mass balance of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet as a whole is thought to be slightly positive ( lowering sea level ) or near to balance . However , increased ice outflow has been suggested in some regions . 
 = = Effects of global warming = = 
 Some of Antarctica has been warming up ; particularly strong warming has been noted on the Antarctic Peninsula . A study by Eric Steig published in 2009 noted for the first time that the continent @-@ wide average surface temperature trend of Antarctica is slightly positive at > 0 @.@ 05 ° C ( 0 @.@ 09 ° F ) per decade from 1957 to 2006 . This study also noted that West Antarctica has warmed by more than 0 @.@ 1 ° C ( 0 @.@ 2 ° F ) per decade in the last 50 years , and this warming is strongest in winter and spring . This is partly offset by autumn cooling in East Antarctica . There is evidence from one study that Antarctica is warming as a result of human carbon dioxide emissions , but this remains ambiguous . The amount of surface warming in West Antarctica , while large , has not led to appreciable melting at the surface , and is not directly affecting the West Antarctic Ice Sheet 's contribution to sea level . Instead the recent increases in glacier outflow are believed to be due to an inflow of warm water from the deep ocean , just off the continental shelf . The net contribution to sea level from the Antarctic Peninsula is more likely to be a direct result of the much greater atmospheric warming there . 
 In 2002 the Antarctic Peninsula 's Larsen @-@ B ice shelf collapsed . Between 28 February and 8 March 2008 , about 570 km2 ( 220 sq mi ) of ice from the Wilkins Ice Shelf on the southwest part of the peninsula collapsed , putting the remaining 15 @,@ 000 km2 ( 5 @,@ 800 sq mi ) of the ice shelf at risk . The ice was being held back by a " thread " of ice about 6 km ( 4 mi ) wide , prior to its collapse on 5 April 2009 . According to NASA , the most widespread Antarctic surface melting of the past 30 years occurred in 2005 , when an area of ice comparable in size to California briefly melted and <unk> ; this may have resulted from temperatures rising to as high as 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) . 
 A study published in Nature Geoscience in 2013 ( online in December 2012 ) identified central West Antarctica as one of the fastest @-@ warming regions on Earth . The researchers present a complete temperature record from Antarctica 's Byrd Station and assert that it " reveals a linear increase in annual temperature between 1958 and 2010 by 2 @.@ 4 ± 1 @.@ 2 ° C " . 
 = = Ozone depletion = = 
 There is a large area of low ozone concentration or " ozone hole " over Antarctica . This hole covers almost the whole continent and was at its largest in September 2008 , when the longest lasting hole on record remained until the end of December . The hole was detected by scientists in 1985 and has tended to increase over the years of observation . The ozone hole is attributed to the emission of chlorofluorocarbons or CFCs into the atmosphere , which decompose the ozone into other gases . 
 Some scientific studies suggest that ozone depletion may have a dominant role in governing climatic change in Antarctica ( and a wider area of the Southern Hemisphere ) . Ozone absorbs large amounts of ultraviolet radiation in the stratosphere . Ozone depletion over Antarctica can cause a cooling of around 6 ° C in the local stratosphere . This cooling has the effect of intensifying the westerly winds which flow around the continent ( the polar vortex ) and thus prevents outflow of the cold air near the South Pole . As a result , the continental mass of the East Antarctic ice sheet is held at lower temperatures , and the peripheral areas of Antarctica , especially the Antarctic Peninsula , are subject to higher temperatures , which promote accelerated melting . Models also suggest that the ozone depletion / enhanced polar vortex effect also accounts for the recent increase in sea ice just offshore of the continent . 
 = Sindy = 
 Sindy is a British fashion doll created by Pedigree Dolls & Toys in 1963 . A rival to Barbie , Sindy 's wholesome look and range of fashions and accessories made it the best selling toy in the United Kingdom in 1968 and 1970 . After Marx Toys ' unsuccessful attempt to introduce Sindy in the United States in the late 1970s , Hasbro bought the rights to Sindy and remodelled the doll to look more American . As a result , the doll 's popularity declined and Barbie manufacturer Mattel filed a lawsuit for copyright infringement , which was settled when Hasbro agreed to remodel Sindy 's face . During the 1990s , Barbie 's share of the doll market continued to grow while Sindy 's diminished , which led to Sindy being delisted from major retailers in 1997 . Hasbro returned the doll 's licence to Pedigree , and the doll was relaunched in 1999 , manufactured by Vivid Imaginations . Sindy 's 40th anniversary in 2003 saw a new manufacturer , New Moons , and another relaunch and redesign . 
 = = Development and launch = = 
 After 20 years of producing dolls , Pedigree Dolls & Toys , a British company located in Exeter , sought to expand its product range to include a trendy fashion doll . American toy manufacturer Mattel offered Pedigree a licence to produce Barbie , which Pedigree declined due to market research showing Barbie was unpopular with British buyers . Instead Pedigree manufactured its own doll based on another American doll , Tammy . With permission from Tammy 's manufacturer , the Ideal Toy Company , Pedigree also borrowed Tammy 's slogan , " The doll you love to dress " . The name " Sindy " was chosen after a street poll where young girls were shown a photo of the doll and asked to choose their favourite name from a list of four . The most popular choice was " Cindy " , and the spelling was made more distinctive for trademarking . 
 The Sindy doll was launched in September 1963 , and London retailers were sent a promotional 45rpm gramophone record to introduce the doll , which included Pedigree 's marketing text below . 
 Sindy is the free , swinging girl that every little girl longs to be . Sindy has sports clothes , glamour clothes , everyday clothes — a dog , skates , a gramophone — everything ... Every genuine Sindy outfit is a child 's dream come true . Each one is designed for today 's fashionable young women by today 's leading women designers . They are authentic miniature replicas of the latest adult clothes . 
 = = Brand and doll evolution = = 
 = = = Developing accessories and American release = = = 
 Pedigree Toys ' market research was correct – Sindy 's " girl next door " look made her more popular than Barbie in Britain . Sindy 's boyfriend Paul was released in 1965 , and her younger sister Patch in 1966 . Sindy 's friends Vicki and Mitzi , and Patch 's friends <unk> and Betsy debuted in 1968 . Sindy was the best selling toy in Britain in 1968 and 1970 . Sindy 's success in the 1960s was partly due to the increasing range of accessories , with up to 70 % of Sindy 's turnover from sales of accessories . Mattel did not greatly expand Barbie 's accessories until the 1980s , and this was a significant difference between the dolls . 
 During the 1970s , Pedigree focused on developing more Sindy products and neglected advertising and market research , risking Sindy 's " girl next door " image becoming old @-@ fashioned . In 1978 , Sindy was introduced to the United States market by Marx Toys . Child star Susan Olsen , who played Cindy Brady on the popular family sitcom The Brady Bunch , was featured in a U.S. produced commercial for the doll . Most of Sindy 's accessories and fashions were similar to those sold in the United Kingdom , except for the addition of a friend , Gayle , and a McDonald 's @-@ themed Sindy . Marx Toys went into receivership in 1980 and Sindy was withdrawn from the US market . 
 = = = Focus on relaunches , fashion and advertising = = = 
 During the 1980s , Pedigree 's new marketing director David Brown made several changes , including increasing advertising and market research , and consulting often with fashion experts to ensure the doll 's image was kept up to date . Pedigree produced a number of evening dresses designed by The <unk> , famous for designing Princess Diana 's wedding gown , shortly after Mattel released gowns for Barbie designed by Oscar de la Renta . Due to its success , a second collection of designs was released the next year , including a bubble dress and lingerie . An older @-@ looking Sindy doll was released in 1985 , with male and female companions Mark and Marie . The advertising campaign was worth £ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 In 1986 , Sindy manufacturers took advantage of new colour @-@ changing technology and released Magic Moments Sindy , a doll whose hair and swimming costume changed colour when immersed in warm water . Sindy 's senior designer Jane Braithwaite travelled to Paris each month to research fashion trends for Sindy 's clothing in an attempt to reverse declining sales . As an example of Sindy 's continually updated fashions , during this period the doll 's footwear included kitten heels , sandals , knee @-@ high boots , ankle boots , trainers , slippers , court shoes and <unk> . 
 In 1987 , Sindy 's product manager Edward Machin announced that Sindy would reclaim the lead over Barbie within two years . Hasbro redesigned Sindy and spent approximately £ 1 @.@ 5 m on advertising . A Sindy magazine was also launched in this period to challenge the fortnightly Barbie magazine . A £ 1 million advertising campaign was introduced in 1991 with five advertisements highlighting Sindy 's collection of beach and pool wear . The advertisement showed footage of Sindy combined with live action sequences from a look @-@ alike . 
 In 1993 , Sindy was featured in a £ 500 @,@ 000 advertising campaign for the fashion company Alexon Group . Sindy was used to contrast her childish fashion with the sophistication of Alexon 's fashion range . Each double page spread showed Sindy in a typical outfit superimposed on a real @-@ life setting . The opposite page showed a real woman dressed in Alexon 's clothes above the line ' Dressing up for grown ups ' . 
 = = = Brand decline and lawsuits = = = 
 Hasbro introduced Sindy in France and continental Europe in 1994 after minor facial modifications to reduce her resemblance to Barbie . A Neilsen study suggested Sindy could obtain 20 % of the ₣ 500 @-@ 600 m market in France alone . The chief executive of Hasbro France , Paul Audouy , said recent innovations such as the ability for Sindy to swim and walk a small dog would strengthen her market position . Hasbro invested ₣ 5 million in the first week of her advertising launch . A new black friend for Sindy was released in 1995 , named Imani , 30 years after Sindy 's American friend Gayle was withdrawn after low sales . Hasbro released the new doll in response to " overwhelming demand " . 
 Hasbro withdrew its £ 5 @.@ 5 m advertising support for the Sindy doll in 1997 amid rumours that major retailers were planning to delist the doll . The editor of UK Toy News , Jon Salisbury , said , " This is Hasbro taking Sindy out of its main range . But she is running so far behind Barbie it is almost a non @-@ issue . If delisted by bigger retailers , which seems to be happening , then the brand will lose momentum " . In 1994 , Sindy had a seven percent share of the £ 70 m doll market , and Barbie held 16 % . By 1996 , Barbie 's share had increased to 30 % , estimated by Mattel to be worth £ 100 m per year including licensing deals , and Sindy 's share had only climbed to eight percent . Sindy 's popularity had also been overtaken during that period by Polly Pocket . One explanation for the large variation in market share is the unpopular Americanisation of the Sindy doll in the mid @-@ 1980s . The Sindy doll was still available to retailers during this period , but had to be ordered in bulk from the Hong Kong manufacturer . 
 = = = Return to Pedigree Toys and further doll makeovers = = = 
 Sindy and Barbie went head @-@ to @-@ head in August 1999 , when both manufacturers created large advertising campaigns for the dolls and Sindy was relaunched . The manufacturers updated the dolls ' images and revamped them with a " millennium look " . Sindy was transformed into a younger @-@ looking doll with " new themes , new friends and a new family , fitting today 's environment and in tune with the street @-@ cred concerns of today 's young girls " , according to Vivid Imaginations ' marketing director , Paul Weston , from the company then producing Sindy . Pedigree , which owns the rights to Sindy , licensed the doll to Vivid Imaginations after Hasbro ceased production of the doll . The doll market in the United Kingdom during this time was worth £ 77 million , with Barbie holding a share of over 75 % . 
 The Sindy doll entered the digital world in 2000 when Pedigree Toys introduced an official website . Monitor Media , the website design company , said , " <unk> brings Sindy to life for six @-@ year @-@ old girls just getting to grips with computers while sitting on their Mum 's knee . They can dress her up , paint her bedroom in different colours , read her secret diary , chat with other Sindy fans and send her e @-@ mails " . 
 In 40 years , nearly 100 million Sindy dolls were sold in Britain alone , and in 2003 , Sindy was relaunched for her 40th birthday . Her figure was changed to more closely resemble the girls the doll is marketed towards . Denise Deane , the head of design and development at New Moons , the new Sindy manufacturer , said , " She 's lost the big breasts and very long legs , and we 've completely changed her face . She 's totally unrecognisable . Sindy 's still very popular , but she has been neglected over the last few years , and we don 't think people are identifying with that look . She 's going to look like a 15 @-@ year @-@ old , and we 've designed her to wear trainers . " The doll was released in two versions : six @-@ inch and full @-@ size . 
 Sindy was relaunched again in 2006 , this time resembling a 12- to 14 @-@ year @-@ old . Jerry Reynolds , chief executive officer of Pedigree Toys explained , " If you take the Sindy of <unk> @-@ year she was between 12 and 14 years while Barbie was twenty @-@ something . She got too close to Barbie in the ' 80s and ' 90s and has now effectively returned to that younger positioning . " The doll was again released in two sizes , with the standard @-@ size Sindy a Woolworths exclusive , after Woolworths had not stocked a Sindy doll for four years . The 2006 Sindy was aimed at three- to five @-@ year @-@ old girls , younger than the audience targeted by Bratz dolls , and mothers who wanted a more innocent @-@ looking doll for their daughters than Barbie or Bratz dolls . 
 = = Controversies and lawsuits = = 
 The January 1989 redesign made Sindy look more similar to her rival Barbie . In response , Mattel sought and won an injunction against Hasbro after claiming the new Sindy doll was easily confused with their product . After a French court decided that the Sindy doll infringed on Mattel 's copyright in early 1992 , the case was settled in December when Hasbro agreed to alter Sindy 's face . Mattel and Hasbro released the following joint statement , " Hasbro has remodeled the head of Sindy in a way which Mattel and Hasbro have agreed is acceptable . As a result , Mattel has agreed to drop all outstanding lawsuits relating to Sindy and Barbie around the world . Each party will be responsible for its own costs " . The case was previously ruled in Hasbro 's favour in Spain and Greece . 
 Similar to many fashion dolls , including Barbie , Sindy has been criticised by feminist groups who said her figure set an unrealistic standard for young girls . After Hasbro returned the brand to Pedigree Toys , Pedigree responded to the backlash against " cosmetically enhanced bimbo " dolls by making Sindy more wholesome and less shapely . 
 A minor controversy occurred in 1998 when Hasbro expressed a desire to make a Sindy doll that looked like Princess Diana , shortly after former prime minister John Major recommended sensitivity when making commercial deals to honour the late princess . The Princess ' Memorial Fund denied Hasbro 's request , but did not rule out the possibility of a future doll , " if it met the requirements of the trustees and was judged acceptable to the public " . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 The Sindy doll is popular among collectors , and websites provide advice on how to re @-@ root the doll 's hair and replace parts . Mint condition dolls are the most sought after . Many collectors shunned the " American look " Sindy developed by Hasbro , while the value of the Pedigree dolls increased . In 2003 , a first @-@ edition Sindy , complete with original Foale and <unk> " <unk> " outfit ( jeans and a striped sweatshirt ) , box and fashion booklet was worth approximately £ 160 @-@ 200 . Sindy 's rarer friends Gayle ( a doll made for the American market in 1975 ) was worth up to £ 400 , and Mitzi ( her French friend from 1968 ) up to £ 500 . 
 December 2006 saw the launch of a collectible version of the original Sindy , one called " Classic Sindy " and manufactured in porcelain . Created by Anne Zielinski @-@ Old , distributed by the Danbury Mint and still licensed by Pedigree Dolls & Toys , the " Weekender " was the first in a series . 
 With Sindy doll 's 50th birthday approaching in 2013 , Pedigree toys are designing a new range of merchandise . This will include laptop covers , notepaper , mobile phone cases , gift tags , shoes and accessories aimed at teenagers . A new doll has been reported to be in the design stages . Pedigree Toys say an announcement will follow . 
 = 2008 German Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 German Grand Prix ( formally the <unk> Großer Preis Santander von Deutschland ) was a Formula One motor race held on 20 July 2008 at the Hockenheimring , Hockenheim , Germany . It was the 10th race of the 2008 Formula One season and was contested over 67 laps . It was won by Lewis Hamilton for the McLaren team after starting from pole position . Nelson Piquet Jr. finished second for Renault , with Felipe Massa third for Ferrari . 
 Hamilton maintained his startline advantage and led until he made his first pit stop on lap 18 . As other cars made their pit stops , Hamilton regained the lead on lap 22 . On lap 36 , Timo Glock crashed , and the race was neutralized by the deployment of the safety car . Hamilton , on a two @-@ stop strategy , did not stop to get more fuel during this period , while all the cars around him did . Thus , when he did eventually stop on lap 50 , he rejoined the race in fifth position . In the closing stages of the race , Hamilton first overtook his teammate Heikki Kovalainen , then Massa , and finally Piquet , whilst also gaining a position due to Nick Heidfeld 's late pit stop . This allowed him to take the lead again on lap 60 , which he maintained to win the race . 
 The victory was Hamilton 's second consecutive win , having won the preceding British Grand Prix at Silverstone . The win also put him ahead of his two main rivals in the Drivers ' Championship , Kimi Räikkönen ( who finished sixth ) and Massa , who were on equal points with him before the race . After the race he was four points ahead of Massa , and seven ahead of Räikkönen . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren drew closer to the two teams ahead of them , BMW Sauber and Ferrari . Ferrari still led by 15 points from McLaren , and 12 from BMW , whose drivers – Nick Heidfeld and Robert Kubica – finished fourth and seventh respectively . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by 20 drivers , in ten teams of two . The teams , also known as " constructors " , were Ferrari , McLaren @-@ Mercedes , Renault , BMW Sauber , Honda , Force India , Toyota , Red Bull Racing , Williams and Toro Rosso . Prior to the race , Lewis Hamilton , Kimi Räikkönen , and Felipe Massa led the Drivers ' Championship jointly , all with 48 points . Behind them was Robert Kubica in fourth with 46 points for BMW Sauber , and his teammate Nick Heidfeld in fifth with 36 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading with 96 points , 14 points ahead of BMW Sauber , who at this stage were ahead of McLaren , despite Hamilton tying for the lead of the Drivers ' World Championship . This was due to Heikki Kovalainen 's low point score of 24 . Toyota were fourth , with 25 points , ahead of Red Bull by one point , who in turn were one further point ahead of Renault . 
 Hamilton had won the preceding British Grand Prix by 68 seconds from Heidfeld and Honda 's Rubens Barrichello . Of his championship rivals , Räikkönen had finished fourth , Kubica had retired , and Massa had had a nightmare of a race , spinning five times and finishing 13th . In the run @-@ up to the German Grand Prix , Hamilton had tested the McLaren MP4 @-@ 23 's new front wing – introduced at the British Grand Prix – extensively in the team 's simulator , and then during a pre @-@ race test session at the Hockenheim circuit . Having honed the car 's setup to his liking after initially finding the handling difficult , he used it in the race . Kovalainen was not as comfortable with the car 's handling and ran a greater front wing angle to produce more downforce , at the expense of having to run larger radiators due to the reduced airflow produced over the car . This led to a slight reduction in his car 's overall performance . In other technical developments , Ferrari introduced revised bargeboards , exhaust exits and an altered windscreen for its <unk> car . BMW Sauber added turning vanes to the top of its <unk> 's nose , while Toyota removed some bodywork from its <unk> 's exhaust exits . Honda also introduced new bargeboards for its <unk> chassis . All of these changes were carried out with the aim of improving each car 's aerodynamic performance . 
 = = = Practice and Qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race – two on Friday , and a third on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted 90 minutes . The third session was held on Saturday morning and lasted an hour . During the first practice session the track was wet following early @-@ morning rain , and shortly after the session started , further precipitation made the track even wetter , although it did begin to dry out as the session progressed . Hamilton was fastest in this session ahead of his teammate Kovalainen . The Ferraris of Massa and Räikkönen came third and fifth respectively , with Renault 's Fernando Alonso sandwiched between them in fourth place . Kubica spun off the track and Sébastien Bourdais had a mechanical problem with his flywheel sensor towards the end of the session . Both ended up at the bottom of the timesheets as a result of these problems . Friday 's second session was held in dry conditions . Hamilton again set the fastest time . Massa and Räikkönen improved to second and third positions , pushing Kovalainen down to fourth . Mark Webber set the fifth @-@ fastest time , after earlier having electrical and clutch problems with the car . Alonso , Nico Rosberg , Kubica , Heidfeld and David Coulthard made up the rest of the top ten . 
 In the final practice session on Saturday – which was held in dry conditions – Kovalainen was fastest , ahead of Massa and teammate Hamilton . Alonso continued his strong practice form , finishing fourth , with Toro Rosso 's Sebastian Vettel making it to fifth position . Kubica once again was at the bottom of the table , this time due to a transmission problem . The qualifying session on Saturday afternoon was split into three parts . The first part ran for 20 minutes , and cars that finished the session 16th or lower were eliminated from qualifying . The second part of qualifying lasted 15 minutes and eliminated cars that finished in positions 11 to 15 . The final part of qualifying determined the positions from first to tenth , and decided pole position . Cars which failed to make the final session could refuel before the race , so ran lighter in those sessions . Cars which competed in the final session of qualifying were not allowed to refuel before the race , and as such carried more fuel than in the previous sessions . 
 Hamilton took pole position for the ninth time in his career with a lap time of 1 : 15 @.@ 666 , having beaten Massa by two @-@ tenths of a second in his final lap of the third session . Kovalainen , coming back after an error during his first run , qualified third , with Jarno Trulli taking fourth position . Alonso and Räikkönen were close together in fifth and sixth positions , with just 0 @.@ 006 seconds separating them . Kubica took a comfortable seventh , half a second quicker in the third session than eighth @-@ placed Webber . Vettel and Coulthard completed the top ten . Timo Glock took 11th place on the grid for Toyota , seven places behind his teammate Trulli . He was immediately in front of compatriots Heidfeld and Rosberg . Jenson Button and Bourdais took 14th and 15th positions respectively . Both Heidfeld and Button later said that they suffered from tyre problems during the session . 
 Completing the field , Kazuki Nakajima was 16th , Nelson Piquet Jr . 17th , Rubens Barrichello 18th , whilst the Force Indias of Adrian Sutil and Giancarlo Fisichella brought up the rear of the grid in 19th and 20th positions . Piquet later complained that he was blocked during his first @-@ session run by Vettel : " During my lap , Vettel was in front of me , which unsettled me a little , although the FIA felt that he did not impede me . " Kovalainen was , however , penalized by the stewards and fined € 5 @,@ 000 for using a refuelling system during qualifying which had not been approved by the FIA . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 At the start , Hamilton , Massa and Kovalainen all maintained their grid positions . Hamilton quickly began to pull away from the other cars , at the rate of about half a second per lap . Behind the leading trio , Kubica passed Räikkönen off the grid , and went on to pass both Alonso and Trulli at the hairpin ( turn 4 ) , when Alonso 's own attempted pass on Trulli delayed both drivers . The fight for fourth position continued in the early stages of the race . Kubica ran wide at the final corner on lap four , impeding Trulli and therefore allowing Alonso to attempt an overtaking manoeuvre on the Toyota down the main straight . However , Trulli held on to his position , and Alonso was instead passed by Räikkönen , moving him down to sixth position . At the back of the field , Nakajima spun his Williams but recovered back onto the track and continued in the race . 
 At the first round of pit stops , Hamilton had a lead of nearly 20 seconds over Massa , and fuelled longer than all the other drivers in the points @-@ scoring positions when he pitted on lap 18 . Coming out of the pits , Hamilton made an error and was passed by Trulli . The two drivers then nearly collided at the hairpin , with Hamilton holding back for the rest of the lap waiting for Trulli to pit . Trulli 's teammate Glock stayed out on the track longer than all of the other drivers except Barrichello and Piquet , meaning that when he pitted , he was actually in third position and rejoined the race in eighth . Hamilton regained the lead by lap 22 after Massa , Kovalainen , Trulli and Räikkönen made their pit stops , and had in the region of an 11 second lead over Massa at the half @-@ way stage of the race . Behind the leaders , fourth @-@ placed Kubica was beginning to catch Kovalainen in third , while Trulli , Räikkönen , Alonso and Vettel battled over the final four point @-@ scoring places . 
 On the 36th lap , Glock 's right @-@ rear suspension failed coming out of the final corner . He spun through 180 degrees before hitting the pit wall with a strong rearward impact , with debris flying across the track . The car , pointing the wrong way , rolled to a stop on the grass . A dazed Glock extracted himself before being treated at the medical centre . The safety car was deployed after the accident . When the pit lane opened on lap 38 , most drivers headed in , including all of the leaders except Hamilton . McLaren believed that Hamilton had enough fuel to stay out , the plan being for him to then rapidly pull away from his heavily @-@ fuelled rivals , after the safety car went in . Hamilton needed to build up enough of a lead to rejoin still in first position , following his final pit stop . This would prove to be very risky , as Massa rejoined in fourth position , fuelled to the finish . 
 Piquet , on a one @-@ stop strategy after his poor qualifying performance , had fortuitously pitted immediately prior to the safety car 's deployment and was also fuelled to the end of the race . Promoted to third place from 14th beforehand following the pit stops , he was set to take the lead once Hamilton and Heidfeld ( who also had not pitted under the safety car conditions ) pitted for their final stops . Further back , Vettel squeezed past Alonso at the pit exit , pushing him over the white line separating the pit lane exit from the track . Alonso complained over his radio but no action was taken against either driver . Meanwhile , Räikkönen dropped several places to 11th , having had to queue behind Massa at the second pit stops . 
 When the safety car came in on lap 42 , Hamilton led , while Heidfeld and Piquet were running second and third . Behind them were Massa , Kubica , Kovalainen , Trulli , Vettel , Alonso , Webber , Rosberg and Räikkönen . Webber 's Red Bull had been dripping oil for a couple of laps after picking up debris from Glock 's crash , and on lap 40 he pulled out of the race . Räikkönen quickly passed Rosberg , and then overtook the squabbling Vettel and Alonso on the way down to the hairpin , while Hamilton desperately tried to pull away at the front . Räikkönen passed Trulli two laps later , while Kovalainen overtook Kubica for fifth place . Coulthard and Barrichello collided on the 48th lap with both cars pitting for repairs . Barrichello retired three laps later due to damage sustained as a result of the incident . Hamilton pitted on lap 50 , coming out behind Heidfeld , Piquet , Massa and Kovalainen . Kovalainen let his teammate past at the hairpin one lap later , meaning that Hamilton was now fourth . On lap 52 , Heidfeld set a new fastest lap time of 1 : 15 @.@ 987 . He was the only driver to go under one minute 16 seconds during the Grand Prix . At the end of the following lap , Heidfeld entered the pits with a sizeable gap over Piquet , returning to the field comfortably ahead of Kovalainen , but behind Hamilton . 
 Hamilton 's speed allowed him to quickly catch Massa in second position , with Piquet in the lead by a further three seconds . On lap 57 , Hamilton passed Massa at the hairpin . Massa appeared to have the inside line covered , but he was not fully committed to the line into the braking zone , giving Hamilton the chance to take second position . Three laps later , he used a similar overtaking move to overtake Piquet , although the Renault driver put up a greater fight than Massa had . Hamilton led easily to the finish , although Piquet kept within six seconds of him . Heidfeld threatened a slowing Massa in the last laps , while Räikkönen was able to pass Kubica for sixth place on lap 60 . 
 Hamilton took the chequered flag first , while Piquet enthusiastically celebrated his drive from 17th to second , just 5 @.@ 5 seconds behind . Massa held on to take third ahead of Heidfeld , Kovalainen , Räikkönen , and Kubica . Vettel secured eighth – the last points @-@ scoring position – for Toro Rosso , ahead of Trulli in ninth , and Rosberg in 10th . Alonso finished 11th , ahead of Bourdais . Coulthard was 13th , Fisichella 14th , Nakajima 15th , Sutil 16th and Button was last of the classified finishers in 17th . A record of sixteen drivers finished on the lead lap , beating the previous highest number of fourteen at the 1999 Belgian Grand Prix . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Following the podium ceremony , in which two Brazilian drivers participated for the first time since the 1991 Belgian Grand Prix , the top three finishers appeared in the obligatory press conference . Hamilton said that the decision to not make a pit stop during the safety car period was the team 's decision : " We had two very comfortable , two very decent stints and the team opted for me to stay out . I guess they thought I could pull out a gap but it was a 23 second gap I needed and I only had seven laps or something , so I don 't know how that worked out . " Hamilton added that he felt that things looked good for the rest of the season , stating that " if we [ McLaren ] can continue with this momentum we have got we are looking very good " . 
 Ron Dennis , McLaren 's team principal , also commented on the pit stop decision : 
 The deployment of the Safety Car presented us with a difficult decision : should we or should we not bring Lewis in for a pitstop ? We decided that , since he still had quite a lot of fuel on board , we would leave him out until lap 50 . We 'd expected the track to be cleared of debris a little faster than it was , which would have allowed the Safety Car to come in a bit earlier . As a result , Lewis was unable to rejoin the race in the lead . 
 Piquet was delighted with his drive to second after qualifying 17th , saying : 
 I am obviously very happy ! After qualifying yesterday I was thinking that my weekend was over , but we opted for an aggressive strategy in the race and the team made some great decisions when the safety car came out . Then I had to concentrate to keep my pace up and look after my tyres as much as possible towards the end of the race . I knew that Lewis was much faster than me , so I did not want to take any pointless risks . This second place today is a great reward for the whole team . 
 Although Piquet 's result was fortuitous , Renault Engineering Director , Pat Symonds , subsequently praised him for stepping up to the job of staying with the leaders in the final stint of the race . Meanwhile , Massa commented that his car was not in good order during the race : " It was just slow with difficult stability and also on braking I think I had a little problem as well and lost a lot of performance . I didn ’ t have the car to fight . I tried but it was not possible . " Teammate Räikkönen also struggled with low grip and hot brakes for the duration of the race , while Kovalainen and Kubica had problems with their tyres . 
 Fisichella was penalised 25 seconds for <unk> lead cars during the safety car period , which dropped him from 14th to 16th position . The stewards issued the following statement about the decision : " While the safety car was deployed , the driver of car 21 [ Fisichella ] chose to enter the pits before ' <unk> cars may now overtake ' was shown on the timing monitors . Having done so the driver of car 21 on leaving the pitlane should then not have <unk> himself . " 
 The treatment of Glock after his crash caused Toyota some concern . Toyota did not think that normal FIA procedure had been followed . After crashes , drivers are normally taken out of the car in their seat , whereas Glock was <unk> and then hauled out by the marshals . Glock stayed in hospital overnight for observation , but was released the next day with no injuries . Toyota subsequently confirmed that the failed suspension component had already completed a full race distance at the previous Grand Prix , and resolved to adjust its checking procedures . 
 The new gap between Hamilton and Massa in the Drivers ' Championship after the race stood at four points in Hamilton 's favour . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren somewhat caught up on Ferrari , although the gap between the two teams was still sizeable at 19 points . McLaren were ten points behind BMW coming into the race and the deficit was reduced to three due to the race result . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Health issues in American football = 
 Health issues in American football comprise a large number of health risks associated with participating in the sport . Injuries are relatively common in American football , due to its nature as a full @-@ contact game . Injuries occur during both practice and games . Several factors can affect the frequency of injuries : epidemiological studies have shown older players can be at a greater risk , while equipment and experienced coaches can reduce the risk of injury . Common injuries include strains , sprains , fractures , dislocations , and concussions . Concussions have become a concern , as they increase the risk of mental illnesses like dementia and chronic traumatic encephalopathy ( CTE ) . In individual leagues like the National Football League ( NFL ) and National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) , a public injury report is published containing all injured players on a team , their injury and the game @-@ day status of each player . 
 Catastrophic injuries — defined as serious injury to the spine , spinal cord , or brain — and fatalities are uncommon in football ; both have become less common since the 1970s , although a small number of them still occur each year . Both concussions and catastrophic injuries can be caused by helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet collisions as well as impact against the ground or other players ' knees ; in other cases , they can be caused by players who have sustained a head injury returning to play , which can place the player at risk of sustaining a severe injury . Despite the downturn in catastrophic injuries , a greater number of players at the NFL level reported major injuries and shortened careers from the 1970s onwards , in part due to the increasing size and speed of players and the use of artificial turf . 
 In many cases , injuries sustained while playing can cause long @-@ term damage . In addition to neurological damage caused by hits to the head , injuries to the mid and lower body can force players to retire or lead to nagging ailments in later life . Various methods have been used to reduce injuries in football , including rule changes such as the abolition of large wedge formations ; a sharp decline in cervical spine injuries since the 1970s has been attributed to rule changes that altered blocking and tackling techniques . More recently , rule changes to protect players from head injuries have been instituted . Equipment like the football helmet and pads are used to give players a level of protection from injuries , while other factors such as cleat size are used to minimize the risk of injuries due to field condition . 
 = = Injuries = = 
 Because American football is a full @-@ contact sport , head injuries are relatively common . According to the San Francisco Spine Institute at Seton Medical Center in Daly City , California , up to 1 @.@ 5 million young men participate in football annually , and there are an estimated 1 @.@ 2 million football @-@ related injuries per year . An estimated 51 % of injuries occur during training sessions , while 49 % occur elsewhere . Injuries are nearly 5 times more likely to happen during contact training sessions than in controlled , non @-@ contact sessions . Older players are at the most risk for injuries , while teams with experienced coaches and more assistant coaches are less likely to experience injuries . Fifty percent of injuries occur in the lower extremities ( with knee injuries alone counting for roughly 36 % of all injuries ) and 30 % occur in the upper extremities . 
 The most common types of injuries are strains , sprains , bruises , fractures , dislocations , and concussions . According to the NFL Physicians Society , the most common injuries in football are " concussions , blunt injuries to the chest such as cardiac contusions , pulmonary contusions , broken ribs , abdominal injuries , <unk> lacerations and kidney injuries . " Orthopedic injuries to the knee , foot , ankle , shoulder , neck and back are also common , as are muscle strains to the hamstrings , quads , calves and the abdomen . 
 Concussions are particularly concerning , as repeated concussions may increase a person 's risk in later life for chronic traumatic encephalopathy ( CTE ) and mental health issues such as dementia , Parkinson 's disease , and depression . Concussions are often caused by helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet collisions , impact against the ground or other players ' knees , and upper @-@ body contact between opposing players . However , helmets have prevented more serious injuries such as skull fractures . Cervical spine injuries can be catastrophic , but have sharply declined since the mid @-@ 1970s due to rule changes and improved workout regimes , equipment , and coaching . 
 Performance @-@ enhancing drugs ( PEDs ) are an issue in both high @-@ school and professional @-@ level football . Steroid use has been linked to an increased risk for musculoskeletal injuries among players . Human growth hormone ( HGH ) is used by some players to improve performance , recover from injuries , decrease aging , and to lose weight . Although none of these uses are scientifically proven or legal , HGH places users at risk for adverse side effects such as onset of diabetes and negatively impacting joints and organs such as the heart . However , there have been no studies of HGH use or the baseline levels of the hormone in NFL athletes . NFL players are routinely subject to drug tests in accordance with the NFL 's two substance policies . Players found using performance @-@ enhancing drugs , including anabolic steroids , can face suspension and other penalties . As of 2014 , the league does not test for HGH use among players . 
 = = = National Football League = = = 
 An injury report section is common in the sports sections of American newspapers , detailing injuries for each team and the amount of time each injured player is expected to be out . The injury report was created to prevent gamblers from gaining inside information about injuries from players , and as a result , NFL teams must report on the status of injured players on a set schedule during the season . The standard severity descriptions are " out " ( will not play in the upcoming game ) ; " doubtful " ( 25 % chance of playing ) ; " questionable " ( 50 % chance of playing ) ; or " probable " ( 75 % chance of playing ) . Teams have been known to downplay , exaggerate or overly detail their teams ' injuries in an attempt to confuse or mislead upcoming opponents . Injured players may be placed on one of several injured lists , including the Physically Unable to Perform ( <unk> ) list . If a player is injured in an event outside of a game or team practice , or during collegiate practice prior to being drafted , he is eligible for the <unk> Injury list . Players who have sustained major injuries and are not expected to play for the rest of the season may be placed on the Injured Reserve ( IR ) list . These players do not count towards the teams ' roster limit . 
 = = = College and high school football = = = 
 According to the College Football Assistance Fund , over 20 @,@ 000 injuries occur from college football each year . The National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) maintains an injury list similar to that used by the NFL – injured players are listed as " Out " , " Doubtful " , " Questionable " , or " Probable " , but suspended players are also included on the list . College players are limited to four years of eligibility , but can receive a medical redshirt that lets them play another year if they have suffered a season @-@ ending injury and have not played in more than 30 % of the season 's games . 
 = = = Brain injury = = = 
 In 1994 , the NFL established the Mild Traumatic Brain Injury Committee ( MTBI ) , which was later replaced by the Head , Neck and Spine Committee , to study concussions and brain injuries in professional football players . The committee and its leadership , including Dr. Ira Casson and Dr. Elliot <unk> , were criticized by former players for stating that there is not enough research to determine if concussions lead to permanent brain injury . <unk> , who served as chairman of the committee from 1994 to 2007 , was met with a large amount of criticism because he did not have a background in neurology and the research he published on brain injuries disagreed with the findings of independent scientists . In 2009 , a NFL @-@ commissioned report showed increased incidence of diagnosis of memory loss and dementia among retired professional football players when compared to the general population . The study also indicated that these symptoms were related to the effects of concussions . However , the NFL and the report 's own researchers questioned the reliability of some of the data @-@ gathering methods employed by the study , including the fact that the study was conducted by phone . The same year , the committee acknowledged for the first time that concussions can lead to long @-@ term brain injuries . A Congressional hearing in October 2009 , as well as pressure from the National Football League Players Association ( NFLPA ) , led to an overhaul of the concussion policy in November and December of that year . 
 NFL commissioner Roger Goodell addressed the issue of head injuries in professional football during a talk held on November 15 , 2012 at the Harvard School of Public Health . In the talk , he highlighted the NFL 's efforts to reduce head injuries by enacting measures such as penalizing hits to the head , better assessing concussions on the sideline , and removing players from the game after they have been diagnosed or suspected of having sustained a concussion . He also discussed the need for increased research on brain injuries and long @-@ term disorders , and called for a culture change in the league , saying that players need to be more willing to acknowledge their injuries to medical staff . In September 2012 the league pledged a $ 30 million donation to the National Institutes of Health to research the connection between brain injuries and long @-@ term mental health issues . Beginning in 2012 the NFL was the subject of several lawsuits initiated by former players who alleged that the league withheld information and misled players about the potential long @-@ term impacts of head injuries . Six of the lawsuits were approved to be tried together . In August 2013 the NFL reached a settlement with more than 4 @,@ 500 former players , agreeing to pay $ 765 million to be used to pay for medical examinations for former NFL players and for research and education purposes . Additionally , the funds will also be used to compensate former players who are determined to have significant cognitive impairment . 
 Concussions are also an issue outside of professional football . In a 2010 study by Purdue University and Indiana University , an estimated 43 @,@ 000 to 67 @,@ 000 football players suffer a concussion every season . However , because many injuries go unreported , the true number may exceed 100 @,@ 000 . The study , " Functionally @-@ Detected Cognitive Impairment in High School Football Players Without Clinically Diagnosed Concussion " , was published in 2013 in the Journal of <unk> and observed 21 high school players throughout a season ; it determined that even players who would not be diagnosed with a concussion based on their symptoms can display notable impairments via MRIs and verbal or cognitive testing , indicating that the current tests used on the sideline to assess concussions may not be adequate . A 2013 study by the National Academy of Sciences found that concussion rates in college football exceed those in any other sport , and that high school players have twice the risk of sustaining a concussion as collegiate players . The study found that , as reported by athletic trainers , college football players sustain 6 @.@ 3 concussions for every 10 @,@ 000 athletic exposures ( meaning an individual practice or game ) , and the rate for high school football players is 11 @.@ 2 . The high school concussion figure is nearly double that of the next @-@ highest sport , lacrosse . The study , funded by the a $ 75 @,@ 000 donation from the NFL to the Centers for Disease Control Foundation , also found that there is no evidence that newer helmet technology decreases the risk for concussions . 
 = = = Catastrophic injuries and fatalities = = = 
 Catastrophic injuries are not common in American football . According to the National Center for Catastrophic Sport Injury Research , there were 468 non @-@ fatal injuries resulting in permanent neurological damage across all high school sports in the United States from 1982 to 2011 . In football , catastrophic injuries are rare but are devastating when they occur . The rate of catastrophic head injuries has remained low since the introduction of the modern football helmet in the 1970s , but rates of injury are much higher at the high school level than the college level . A 2007 study found that , in high school and college football , there are an average of 7 @.@ 23 catastrophic head injuries per year : there were 0 @.@ 67 injuries per 100 @,@ 000 high school players and 0 @.@ 21 injuries per 100 @,@ 000 college players . Over a 13 @-@ year period from September 1989 to June 2002 , there were 94 players who sustained catastrophic head injuries — 8 of these players died as a result of the injury , 46 sustained permanent neurological damage , and 36 made a full recovery . Fifty @-@ nine percent of these players had a history of head injuries , 71 % of them occurring in the same season as their catastrophic injury , and most of the catastrophic injuries resulted from being tackled or making a tackle . The study recommended that players exhibiting neurological symptoms should be strongly discouraged from returning to play . 
 The medical costs for catastrophic injuries can be extremely high — a 2011 estimate from the National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center notes that first @-@ year costs of someone who has high tetraplegia , an injury that causes partial or full loss of use in all limbs , is USD $ 1 @,@ 044 @,@ 097 , with subsequent years costing $ 181 @,@ 328 . Many high schools across the United States require students to have an insurance policy , while others offer supplementary insurance to help offset the cost ; some schools also request that boosters help families pay for these policies . 
 Catastrophic injuries have been on a steady decline since the 1960s , due in part to rules banning dangerous forms of contact such as spearing , face tackling and butt blocking . However , catastrophic injuries are still caused by helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet collisions , as well when players hit their heads against an opposing player 's knee or the ground . Returning to play after sustaining a head injury earlier in the game also places players at risk for an even more severe injury . Many states are requiring teams to prevent players who have shown any signs of a concussion from returning to a game , while other steps such as more aggressive enforcement of safety rules and better condition of the neck muscles have been suggested . Additionally , coaches are being urged to train players to block with their shoulders instead of their heads . 
 Fatalities in football are rare . A 2013 study of high school and college football players split fatalities into two types : direct fatalities , defined as those caused by " trauma from participation in a sport resulting in a brain injury , cervical fracture , or intra @-@ abdominal injury " and indirect fatalities , defined as those resulting from external factors such as " cardiac failure , heat illness , sickle cell trait [ SCT ] , asthma , or pulmonary embolism " . The study found that , on average , there are 4 direct fatalities and 8 @.@ 2 indirect fatalities among high school and college players per year , making indirect fatalities more than twice as common as direct fatalities . 
 = = Effects on post @-@ career life = = 
 In addition to immediate health effects , some injuries sustained during a player 's career can have effects that extend to their post @-@ career life . A cohort mortality study by researchers at the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) examined 3 @,@ 349 NFL players who played at least five full seasons from 1959 to 1988 . The findings from this study suggest that , in comparison to the typical American male , NFL players live longer on average but have around three times the risk of death associated with neurodegenerative disorders . In particular , the risk of death from Alzheimer 's disease and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) was roughly four times higher among former players than the average American male . The study also compared mortality risks from speed players ( quarterbacks , running backs , fullbacks , wide receivers , tight ends , linebackers , cornerbacks , and safeties ) and <unk> players ( offensive and defensive linemen ) , with findings indicating that a greater number of deaths were attributable to neurodegenerative disorders in speed players than <unk> players . This may be due to the increased momentum of collisions from speed players . 
 Outside of neurodegenerative disorders , physical injuries sustained during a career can have an adverse effect on post @-@ career life . A 1990 survey conducted jointly between the NFLPA and Ball State University found that 65 % of surveyed players had suffered a major injury ( defined as one that caused them to miss at least eight games ) : among players that played before 1959 this number was 42 % , but it jumps to 72 % among those who played in the 1980s . Additionally , roughly 50 % of players who had played in the 1970s and 1980s reported that they retired due to injury , compared to only 32 % among those who played prior to 1959 . Two @-@ thirds of players reported that injuries they had sustained limited their ability to engage in recreational activity and sports in retirement , while half said their injuries decreased their ability to perform manual labor . A follow @-@ up survey in 1994 found that 47 % of recipients reported having arthritis . These reports have been attributed to several factors , including the increase in the use of artificial turf as well as the increasing size and speed of players . Dr. James Andrews , a noted orthopedic surgeon , said that " athletes are bigger , stronger and running faster , and they 're tearing up knees from cutting , changing direction on a dime " . Andrews also noted the increase in the number of non @-@ contact anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ) injuries , which he attributed to the size of modern players . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Injuries have always been an extremely big part of American Football , and various methods have been used historically and in modern times to prevent them . One method that has been used to prevent injuries is changing the rules of the sport . An early example of this is the elimination of mass formations like the flying wedge in the early 1900s , due to the large number of severe injuries the formations caused . Smaller wedges consisting of three , four , or five players were frequently used on kickoff returns before wedges were limited to two or fewer players in 2009 by the NFL ; a similar rule was adopted by the NCAA a year later . The sharp decrease in the number of catastrophic cervical spine injuries since the mid @-@ 1970s has been partially credited to rule changes that modified tackling and blocking techniques . With the increasing awareness of the long @-@ term effects of concussions , the NFL has passed rules prohibiting the targeting of " defenseless " players over @-@ the @-@ shoulder , requiring plays to be blown dead when the runner loses his helmet , and placing more stringent limits to the ability of players who have sustained a concussion to return to play . 
 Similarly , modern equipment was developed to reduce injuries . The football helmet , although a scapegoat for concussions , serves as effective protection against more dangerous injuries like skull fractures . The modern helmet traces its roots back to the leather helmets used by football players in the early 1900s to protect themselves from head injuries . Helmets later evolved to be made of hard plastic , and a facemask was added to protect players from sustaining facial injuries . Many players also wear mouthguards to prevent injuries to their teeth and tongues ; at some levels , such as the NCAA , the use of a mouthguard is mandatory . Football players wear a number of pads to protect themselves – shoulder pads are the most important pads , protecting the shoulder and sternum , but thigh pads , hip pads , tail pads , and knee pads are also used . Many quarterbacks wear flak jackets to protect their ribcage . <unk> come in a number of lengths , with players choosing which cleat to use based on the playing field – on artificial turf , for example , players prefer a shorter cleat to prevent their feet from digging into the ground and risking injury , while longer cleats are generally used on fields that are wet or slippery to provide better traction . Athletic cups are not typically used at the professional level , because athletic cups tend to make it harder to move and there is an unwritten code among players not to target the groin area . Additionally , studies have shown that proper conditioning techniques , fitness routines and exercise routines , as well as high @-@ quality equipment and coaching , can reduce the risk of injury among players . 
 = United States Special Operations Command = 
 The United States Special Operations Command ( USSOCOM or SOCOM ) is the Unified Combatant Command charged with overseeing the various Special Operations Component Commands of the Army , Marine Corps , Navy , and Air Force of the United States Armed Forces . The command is part of the Department of Defense and is the only Unified Combatant Command legislated into being by the U.S. Congress . USSOCOM is headquartered at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa , Florida . 
 The idea of a unified special operations command had its origins in the aftermath of Operation Eagle Claw , the disastrous attempted rescue of hostages at the American embassy in Iran in 1980 . The ensuing investigation , chaired by Admiral James L. Holloway III , the retired Chief of Naval Operations , cited lack of command and control and inter @-@ service coordination as significant factors in the failure of the mission . Since its activation on 16 April 1987 , U.S. Special Operations Command has participated in many operations , from the 1989 invasion of Panama to the ongoing Global War on Terrorism . 
 USSOCOM conducts several covert and clandestine missions , such as direct action , special reconnaissance , counter @-@ terrorism , foreign internal defense , unconventional warfare , psychological warfare , civil affairs , and counter @-@ narcotics operations . Each branch has a Special Operations Command that is unique and capable of running its own operations , but when the different special operations forces need to work together for an operation , USSOCOM becomes the joint component command of the operation , instead of a SOC of a specific branch . 
 = = History = = 
 The unworkable command and control structure of separate U.S. military special operations forces ( SOF ) , which led to the failure of Operation Eagle Claw in 1980 , highlighted the need within the Department of Defense for reform and reorganization . Since the incident , the Army Chief of Staff , General Edward C. " Shy " Meyer , called for a further restructuring of special operations capabilities , eventually helping to create the U.S. Delta Force . Although unsuccessful at the joint level , Meyer nevertheless went on to consolidate Army SOF units under the new 1st Special Operations Command in 1982 , a significant step to improve the U.S. Army 's SOF . 
 By 1983 , there was a small but growing sense in the Congress for the need for military reforms . In June , the Senate Armed Services Committee ( SASC ) began a two @-@ year @-@ long study of the Defense Department , which included an examination of SOF spearheaded by Senator Barry Goldwater ( R @-@ AZ ) . With concern mounting on Capitol Hill , the Department of Defense created the Joint Special Operations Agency on 1 January 1984 ; this agency , however , had neither operational nor command authority over any SOF . The Joint Special Operations Agency thus did little to improve SOF readiness , capabilities , or policies , and therefore was insufficient . Within the Defense Department , there were a few staunch SOF supporters . Noel Koch , Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs , and his deputy , Lynn <unk> , both advocated SOF reforms . 
 At the same time , a few on Capitol Hill were determined to overhaul United States Special Operations Forces . They included Senators Sam Nunn ( D @-@ GA ) and William Cohen ( R @-@ ME ) , both members of the Armed Services Committee , and Representative Dan Daniel ( D @-@ VA ) , the chairman of the United States House Armed Services Subcommittee on Readiness . Congressman Daniel had become convinced that the U.S. military establishment was not interested in special operations , that the country 's capability in this area was second rate , and that SOF operational command and control was an endemic problem . Senators Nunn and Cohen also felt strongly that the Department of Defense was not preparing adequately for future threats . Senator Cohen agreed that the U.S. needed a clearer organizational focus and chain of command for special operations to deal with low @-@ intensity conflicts . 
 In October 1985 , the Senate Armed Services Committee published the results of its two @-@ year review of the U.S. military structure , entitled " Defense Organization : The Need For Change . " Mr. James R. Locher III , the principal author of this study , also examined past special operations and speculated on the most likely future threats . This influential document led to the Goldwater @-@ Nichols Defense Reorganization Act of 1986 . By spring 1986 , SOF advocates had introduced reform bills in both houses of Congress . On 15 May , Senator Cohen introduced the Senate bill , co @-@ sponsored by Senator Nunn and others , which called for a joint military organization for SOF and the establishment of an office in the Defense Department to ensure adequate funding and policy emphasis for low @-@ intensity conflict and special operations . Representative Daniel 's proposal went even further — he wanted a national special operations agency headed by a civilian who would bypass the Joint Chiefs and report directly to the Secretary of Defense ; this would keep Joint Chiefs and the Services out of the SOF budget process . 
 Congress held hearings on the two bills in the summer of 1986 . Admiral William J. Crowe Jr . , Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , led the Pentagon 's opposition to the bills . He proposed , as an alternative , a new Special Operations Forces command led by a three @-@ star general . This proposal was not well received on Capitol Hill — Congress wanted a four @-@ star general in charge to give SOF more clout . A number of retired military officers and others testified in favor of the need for reform . By most accounts , retired Army Major General Richard Scholtes gave the most compelling reasons for change . Scholtes , who commanded the joint special operations task force in Grenada , explained how conventional force leaders misused SOF during the operation , not allowing them to use their unique capabilities , which resulted in high SOF casualties . After his formal testimony , Scholtes met privately with a small number of Senators to elaborate on the problems that he had encountered in Grenada . 
 Both the House and Senate passed SOF reform bills , and these went to a conference committee for reconciliation . Senate and House <unk> forged a compromise . The bill called for a unified combatant command headed by a four @-@ star general for all SOF , an Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low @-@ Intensity Conflict , a coordinating board for low @-@ intensity conflict within the National Security Council , and a new Major Force Program ( MFP @-@ 11 ) for SOF ( the so @-@ called " SOF checkbook " ) . The final bill , attached as a rider to the 1987 Defense Authorization Act , amended the Goldwater @-@ Nichols Act and was signed into law in October 1986 . Congress clearly intended to force DOD and the Administration to face up to the realities of past failures and emerging threats . DOD and the Administration were responsible for implementing the law , and Congress subsequently had to pass two additional bills to ensure proper implementation . The legislation promised to improve SOF in several respects . Once implemented , MFP @-@ 11 provided SOF with control over its own resources , better enabling it to modernize the force . Additionally , the law fostered interservice cooperation : a single commander for all SOF promoted interoperability among the forces assigned to the same command . The establishment of a four @-@ star Commander in Chief and an Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low Intensity Conflict eventually gave SOF a voice in the highest councils of the Defense Department . 
 Implementing the provisions and mandates of the Nunn @-@ Cohen Act , however , was neither rapid nor smooth . One of the first issues to surface was appointing an ASD ( SO / LIC ) , whose principal duties included <unk> of special operations activities and low @-@ intensity conflict activities of the Department of Defense . The Congress even increased the number of assistant secretaries of defense from 11 to 12 , but the Department of Defense still did not fill this new billet . In December 1987 , the Congress directed Secretary of the Army John O. Marsh to carry out the ASD ( SO / LIC ) duties until a suitable replacement was approved by the Senate . Not until 18 months after the legislation passed did Ambassador Charles Whitehouse assume the duties of ASD ( SO / LIC ) . 
 Meanwhile , the establishment of USSOCOM provided its own measure of excitement . A quick solution to manning and basing a brand new unified command was to abolish an existing command . United States Readiness Command ( <unk> ) , with an often misunderstood mission , did not appear to have a viable mission in the post Goldwater @-@ Nichols era , and its Commander in Chief , General James Lindsay , had had some special operations experience . On 23 January 1987 , the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended to the Secretary of Defense that <unk> be disestablished to provide billets and facilities for USSOCOM . President Ronald Reagan approved the establishment of the new command on 13 April 1987 . The Department of Defense activated USSOCOM on 16 April 1987 and nominated General Lindsay to be the first Commander in Chief Special Operations Command ( <unk> ) . The Senate accepted him without debate . 
 = = = Operation Earnest Will = = = 
 USSOCOM 's first tactical operation involved 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment ( Airborne ) ( " Night Stalkers " ) aviators , SEALs , and Special Boat Teams ( SBT ) working together during Operation Earnest Will in September 1987 . During Operation Earnest Will , the United States ensured that neutral oil tankers and other merchant ships could safely transit the Persian Gulf during the Iran – Iraq War . Iranian attacks on tankers prompted Kuwait to ask the United States in December 1986 to register 11 Kuwaiti tankers as American ships so that they could be escorted by the U.S. Navy . President Reagan agreed to the Kuwaiti request on 10 March 1987 , hoping it would deter Iranian attacks . The protection offered by U.S. naval vessels , however , did not stop Iran , which used mines and small boats to harass the convoys steaming to and from Kuwait . In late July 1987 , Rear Admiral Harold J. Bernsen , commander of the Middle East Force , requested NSW assets . Special Boat Teams deployed with six Mark III Patrol Boats and two SEAL platoons in August . The Middle East Force decided to convert two oil servicing barges , Hercules and <unk> VII , into mobile sea bases . The mobile sea bases allowed SOF in the northern Persian Gulf to thwart clandestine Iranian mining and small boat attacks . 
 On 21 September , <unk> flying MH @-@ 60 and Little Birds took off from the frigate USS Jarrett to track an Iranian ship , Iran Ajr . The <unk> observed Iran Ajr turn off her lights and begin laying mines . After receiving permission to attack , the helicopters fired guns and rockets , stopping the ship . As Iran Ajr 's crew began to push mines over the side , the helicopters resumed firing until the crew abandoned ship . Special Boat Teams provided security while a SEAL team boarded the vessel at first light and discovered nine mines on the vessel 's deck , as well as a logbook revealing areas where previous mines had been laid . The logbook implicated Iran in mining international waters . 
 Within a few days , the Special Operations forces had determined the Iranian pattern of activity ; the Iranians hid during the day near oil and gas platforms in Iranian waters and at night they headed toward the Middle Shoals Buoy , a navigation aid for tankers . With this knowledge , SOF launched three Little Bird helicopters and two patrol craft to the buoy . The Little Bird helicopters arrived first and were fired upon by three Iranian boats anchored near the buoy . After a short but intense firefight , the helicopters sank all three boats . Three days later , in mid @-@ October , an Iranian Silkworm missile hit the tanker Sea Isle City near the oil terminal outside Kuwait City . Seventeen crewmen and the American captain were injured in the missile attack . During Operation Nimble Archer , four destroyers shelled two oil platforms in the Rostam oil field . After the shelling , a SEAL platoon and a demolition unit planted explosives on one of the platforms to destroy it . The SEALs next boarded and searched a third platform 2 miles ( 3 km ) away . Documents and radios were taken for intelligence purposes . 
 On 14 April 1988 , 65 miles ( 100 km ) east of Bahrain , the frigate USS Samuel B. Roberts ( FFG @-@ 58 ) hit a mine , blowing an immense hole in its hull . Ten sailors were injured . During Operation Praying Mantis the U.S. retaliated fiercely , attacking the Iranian frigate <unk> and oil platforms in the Sirri and <unk> oil fields . After U.S. warships bombarded the Sirri platform and set it ablaze , a UH @-@ 60 with a SEAL platoon flew toward the platform but was unable to get close enough because of the roaring fire . Secondary explosions soon wrecked the platform . Thereafter , Iranian attacks on neutral ships dropped drastically . On 18 July , Iran accepted the United Nations cease fire ; on 20 August 1988 , the Iran – Iraq War ended . The remaining SEALs , patrol boats , and helicopters then returned to the United States . Special operations forces provided critical skills necessary to help CENTCOM gain control of the northern Persian Gulf and balk Iran 's small boats and minelayers . The ability to work at night proved vital , because Iranian units used darkness to conceal their actions . Additionally , because of Earnest Will operational requirements , USSOCOM would acquire new weapons systems — the patrol coastal ships and the Mark V Special Operations Craft . 
 = = = Somalia = = = 
 Special Operations Command first became involved in Somalia in 1992 as part of Operation Provide Relief . C @-@ 130s circled over Somali airstrips during delivery of relief supplies . Special Forces medics accompanied many relief flights into the airstrips throughout southern Somalia to assess the area . They were the first U.S. soldiers in Somalia , arriving before U.S. forces who supported the expanded relief operations of Restore Hope . The first teams into Somalia were CIA Special Activities Division paramilitary officers with elements of JSOC . They conducted very high risk advanced force operations prior to the entry of the follow on forces . The first casualty of the conflict came from this team and was a Paramilitary officer and former Delta Force operator name Larry Freedman . Freedman was awarded the Intelligence Star for " extraordinary heroism " for his actions . 
 The earliest missions during Operation Restore Hope were conducted by Navy SEALs . The SEALs performed several hydro @-@ graphic reconnaissance missions to find suitable landing sites for Marines . On 7 December , the SEALs swam into Mogadishu Harbor , where they found suitable landing sites , assessed the area for threats , and concluded that the port could support offloading ships . This was a tough mission because the SEALs swam against a strong current which left many of them overheated and exhausted . Furthermore , they swam through raw sewage in the harbor , which made them sick . When the first SEALs hit the shore the following night , they were surprised to meet members of the news media . The first Marines came ashore soon thereafter , and the press redirected their attention to them . Later , the SEALs provided personal security for President George Bush during a visit to Somalia . In December 1992 , Special Forces assets in Kenya moved to Somalia and joined Operation Restore Hope . January 1993 , a Special Forces command element deployed to Mogadishu as the Joint Special Operations Forces @-@ Somalia ( JSOFOR ) that would command and control all special operations for Restore Hope . JSOFOR 's mission was to make initial contact with indigenous factions and leaders ; provide information for force protection ; and provide reports on the area for future relief and security operations . Before redeploying in April , JSOFOR elements drove over 26 @,@ 000 miles ( 42 @,@ 000 km ) , captured 277 weapons , and destroyed over 45 @,@ 320 pounds ( 20 @,@ 560 kg ) of explosives . 
 In August 1993 , Secretary of Defense Les Aspin directed the deployment of a Joint Special Operations Task Force ( <unk> ) to Somalia in response to attacks made by General Mohamed Farrah Aidid 's supporters upon U.S. and UN forces . The <unk> , named Task Force ( TF ) Ranger , was charged with a mission named Operation Gothic Serpent to capture Aidid . This was an especially arduous mission , for Aidid had gone underground , after several Lockheed AC @-@ 130 air raids and UN assaults on his strongholds . 
 While Marines from the 24th MEU provided an interim QRF ( Force Recon Det and helicopters from HMM @-@ 263 ) , the task force arrived in the country , and began training exercises . The Marines were asked to take on the Aidid snatch mission , but having the advantage of being in the area for more than two months , decided after mission analysis that the mission was a " no @-@ go " due to several factors , centered around the inability to rescue the crew of a downed helicopter ( re : the indigenous forces technique of using RPGs against helicopters and blocking the narrow streets in order to restrict the movement of a ground rescue force ) . This knowledge was not passed on to the Rangers , due to the Marines operating from the USS Wasp and the Rangers remaining on land . TF Ranger was made up of operators from Delta Force , 75th Ranger Regiment , 160th SOAR , SEALs from the Naval Special Warfare Development Group , and Air Force special tactics units . During August and September 1993 , the task force conducted six missions into Mogadishu , all of which were successes . Although Aidid remained free , the effect of these missions seriously limited his movements . 
 On 3 October , TF Ranger launched its seventh mission , this time into Aidid 's stronghold the <unk> Market to capture two of his key lieutenants . The mission was expected to take only one or two hours . Helicopters carried an assault and a ground convoy of security teams launched in the late afternoon from the TF Ranger compound at Mogadishu airport . The TF came under increasingly heavy fire , more intense than during previous missions . The assault team captured 24 Somalis including Aidid 's lieutenants and were loading them onto the convoy trucks when a MH @-@ 60 Blackhawk was hit by a rocket @-@ propelled grenade ( RPG ) . A small element from the security force , as well as an MH @-@ 6 assault helicopter and an MH @-@ 60 carrying a fifteen @-@ man combat search and rescue ( CSAR ) team , rushed to the crash site . The battle became increasingly worse . An RPG struck another MH @-@ 60 , crashing less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the south of the first downed helicopter . The task force faced overwhelming Somali mobs that overran the crash sites , causing a dire situation . A Somali mob overran the second site and , despite a heroic defense , killed everyone except the pilot , whom they took prisoner . Two defenders of this crash site , Master Sergeant Gary Gordon and Sergeant First Class Randall <unk> , were posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor . About this time , the mission 's quick reaction force ( QRF ) also tried to reach the second crash site . This force too was pinned by Somali fire and required the fire support of two AH @-@ 6 helicopters before it could break contact and make its way back to the base . 
 The assault and security elements moved on foot towards the first crash area , passing through heavy fire , and occupied buildings south and southwest of the downed helicopter . They fought to establish defensive positions so as not to be pinned down by very heavy enemy fire , while treating their wounded , and worked to free the pilot 's body from the downed helicopter . With the detainees loaded on trucks , the ground convoy force attempted to reach the first crash site . Unable to find it amongst the narrow , winding alleyways , the convoy came under devastating small arms and RPG fire . The convoy had to return to base after suffering numerous casualties , and sustaining substantial damage to their vehicles . 
 Reinforcements , consisting of elements from the QRF , 10th Mountain Division soldiers , Rangers , SEALs , Pakistan Army tanks and Malaysian armored personnel carriers , finally arrived at 1 : 55 am on 4 October . The combined force worked until dawn to free the pilot 's body , receiving RPG and small arms fire throughout the night . All the casualties were loaded onto the armored personnel carriers , and the remainder of the force was left behind and had no choice but to move out on foot . AH @-@ 6 gunships raked the streets with fire to support the movement . The main force of the convoy arrived at the Pakistani Stadium @-@ compound for the QRF @-@ at 6 : 30 am , thus concluding one of the bloodiest and fiercest urban firefights since the Vietnam War . Task Force Ranger experienced a total of 17 killed in action and 106 wounded . Various estimates placed Somali casualties above 1 @,@ 000 . Although Task Force Ranger 's few missions were successes , the overall outcome of Operation Gothic Serpent was deemed a failure because of the Task Force 's failure to complete their stated mission , capturing Mohamed Farrah Aidid . Most U.S. forces pulled out of Somalia by March 1994 . The withdrawal from Somalia , was completed on March 1995 . Even though Operation Gothic Serpent failed , USSOCOM still made significant contributions to operations in Somalia . SOF performed reconnaissance and surveillance missions , assisted with humanitarian relief , protected American forces and conducted riverine patrols . Additionally , they ensured the safe landing of the Marines and safeguarded the arrival of merchant ships carrying food . 
 = = = Iraq = = = 
 USSOCOM 's 10th Special Forces Group , elements of JSOC and CIA / SAD Paramilitary Officers linked up again and were the first to enter Iraq prior to the invasion . Their efforts organized the Kurdish Peshmerga to defeat Ansar Al Islam in Northern Iraq before the invasion . This battle was for control of a territory in Northeastern Iraq that was completely occupied by Ansar Al Islam , an ally of Al Qaeda . This was a very significant battle and led to the termination of a substantial number of terrorists and the uncovering of a chemical weapons facility at <unk> . These terrorists would have been in the subsequent insurgency had they not been eliminated during this battle . <unk> was the only facility of its type discovered in the Iraq war . This battle may have been the Tora Bora of Iraq , but it was a sound defeat for Al Qaeda and their ally Ansar Al Islam . This combined team then led the Peshmerga against Saddam 's northern Army . This effort kept Saddam 's forces in the north and denied the ability to redeploy to contest the invasion force coming from the south . This effort may have saved the lives of hundreds if not thousands of coalition service men and women . 
 At the launch of the Iraq War dozens of 12 @-@ member Special Forces teams infiltrated southern and western Iraq to hunt for Scud missiles and pinpoint bombing targets . Scores of Navy SEALs seized oil terminals and pumping stations on the southern coast . Air Force combat controllers flew combat missions in MC @-@ 130H Combat Talon IIs and established austere desert airstrips to begin the flow of soldiers and supplies deep into Iraq . It was a far cry from the Persian Gulf war of 1991 , where Special Operations forces were kept largely on the sidelines . But it would not be a replay of Afghanistan , where Army Special Forces and Navy SEALs led the fighting . After their star turn in Afghanistan , many special operators were disappointed to play a supporting role in Iraq . Many special operators felt restricted by cautious commanders . From that point , USSOCOM has since killed or captured hundreds of insurgents and Al @-@ Qaeda terrorists . It has conducted several foreign internal defense missions successfully training the Iraqi security forces . 
 = = Current role = = 
 United States Special Operations Command played a pivotal role in fighting the former Taliban government in Afghanistan in 2001 and toppling it thereafter , as well as combating the insurgency and capturing Saddam Hussein in Iraq . USSOCOM in 2004 was developing plans to have an expanded and more complex role in the global campaign against terrorism , and that role continued to emerge before and after the killing of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan in 2011 . In 2010 , " of about 13 @,@ 000 Special Operations forces deployed overseas , about 9 @,@ 000 [ were ] evenly divided between Iraq and Afghanistan . " 
 = = = War in Afghanistan = = = 
 In the initial stages of the War in Afghanistan , USSOCOM forces linked up with CIA Paramilitary Officers from Special Activities Division to defeat the Taliban without the need for large @-@ scale conventional forces . This was one of the biggest successes of the global War on Terrorism . These units linked up several times during this war and engaged in several furious battles with the enemy . One such battle happened during Operation Anaconda the mission to squeeze life out of a Taliban and Al @-@ Qaeda stronghold dug deep into the Shah @-@ i @-@ Kot mountains of eastern Afghanistan . The operation was seen as one of the heaviest and bloodiest fights in the War in Afghanistan . The battle on an Afghan mountaintop called <unk> Ghar featured special operations forces from all 4 services and the CIA . Navy SEALs , Army Rangers , Air Force Combat Controllers , and Pararescuemen fought against entrenched Al @-@ Qaeda fighters atop a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) mountain . Subsequently , the entrenched Taliban became targets of every asset in the sky . According to an executive summary , the battle of <unk> Ghar was the most intense firefight American special operators have been involved in since 18 U.S. Army Rangers were killed in Mogadishu , Somalia , in 1993 . During Operation Red Wings on 28 June 2005 , four Navy SEALs , pinned down in a firefight , radioed for help . A Chinook helicopter , carrying 16 service members , responded but was shot down . All members of the rescue team and three of four SEALs on the ground died . It was the worst loss of life in Afghanistan since the invasion in 2001 . The Navy SEAL Marcus Luttrell alone survived . Team leader Michael P. Murphy was awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions in the battle . 
 = = = Global presence = = = 
 SOC chief Olson said in 2011 that SOCOM " is a microcosm of the Department of Defense , with ground , air , and maritime components , a global presence , and authorities and responsibilities that mirror the Military Departments , Military Services , and Defense Agencies . " In 2010 , special operations forces were deployed in 75 countries , compared with about 60 at the beginning of 2009 . In 2011 , SOC spokesman Colonel Tim Nye ( Army ) was reported to have said that the number of countries with SOC presence will likely reach 120 and that joint training exercises will have been carried out in most or all of those countries during the year . One study identified joint @-@ training exercises in Belize , Brazil , Bulgaria , Burkina Faso , Germany , Indonesia , Mali , Norway , Panama , and Poland in 2010 and also , through mid @-@ year 2011 , in the Dominican Republic , Jordan , Romania , Senegal , South Korea , and Thailand , among other nations . In addition , SOC forces executed the high profile killing of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan in 2011 . 
 In November 2009 The Nation reported on a covert JSOC / Blackwater anti @-@ terrorist operation in Pakistan . 
 In 2010 , White House counterterrorism director John O. Brennan said that the United States " will not merely respond after the fact " of a terrorist attack but will " take the fight to al @-@ Qaeda and its extremist affiliates whether they plot and train in Afghanistan , Pakistan , Yemen , Somalia and beyond . " Olson said , " In some places , in deference to host @-@ country sensitivities , we are lower in profile . In every place , Special Operations forces activities are coordinated with the U.S. ambassador and are under the operational control of the four @-@ star regional commander . " 
 The conduct of actions by SOC forces outside of Iraq and Afghan war zones has been the subject of internal U.S. debate , including between representatives of the Bush administration such as John B. Bellinger III , on one hand , and the Obama administration on another . The United Nations in 2010 also " questioned the administration 's authority under international law to conduct such raids , particularly when they kill innocent civilians . One possible legal justification – the permission of the country in question – is complicated in places such as Pakistan and Yemen , where the governments privately agree but do not publicly acknowledge approving the attacks , " as one report put it . 
 = = Subordinate Commands = = 
 = = = Joint Special Operations Command = = = 
 Joint Special Operations Command is a component command of the USSOCOM and is charged to study special operations requirements and techniques to ensure interoperability and equipment standardization , plan and conduct special operations exercises and training , and develop Joint Special Operations Tactics . It was established in 1980 on recommendation of Col. Charlie Beckwith , in the aftermath of the failure of Operation Eagle Claw . 
 Units 
 The U.S. Army 's 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment @-@ Delta , popularly known as Delta Force , is the first of the two primary counter @-@ terrorist units of JSOC and SOCOM . Modeled after the British Special Air Service , Delta Force is regarded as one of the premier special operations forces in the world . This is because of Delta 's stringent training and selection process . Delta recruits primarily from the most talented and highly skilled operators in the Army Special Forces and the 75th Ranger Regiment although Delta will take anyone and everyone that can pass their screening . Recruits must pass a rigid selection course before beginning training . Delta has received training from numerous U.S. government agencies and other tier one SOF and has created a curriculum based on this training and techniques that it has developed . Delta conducts clandestine and covert special operations all over the world . It has the capability to conduct myriad special operations missions but specializes in counter @-@ terrorism and hostage rescue operations . 
 The Intelligence Support Activity ( ISA , The Activity ) is the support branch of JSOC and USSOCOM . Its primary missions are to provide Human Intelligence ( <unk> ) and Signal Intelligence ( SIGINT ) mainly for Delta and DEVGRU 's operations . Before the establishing of the Strategic Support Branch in 2001 , the ISA needed the permission of the CIA to conduct its operations , which sometimes caused it to be less effective in its support of JSOC 's primary units . 
 The Naval Special Warfare Development Group ( DEVGRU , SEAL Team Six ) is the second of the two primary counter @-@ terrorist units of JSOC and SOCOM . DEVGRU is Naval Special Warfare 's counterpart to Delta . Like Delta , DEVGRU recruits the best operators from the best units in its branch , the Navy SEALs . DEVGRU is capable of performing any type of special operations mission , but trains especially for counter @-@ terrorist and hostage rescue operations . 
 The Air Force 24th Special Tactics Squadron ( 24th STS ) is the AFSOC component of JSOC . The 24th STS usually operates with Delta and DEVGRU because of the convenience of 24th STS ability to synchronize and control the different elements of air power and enhance air operations deep in enemy territory . 
 Portions of JSOC units have made up the constantly changing special operations task force , operating in the U.S. Central Command area of operations . The Task Force 11 , Task Force 121 , Task Force 6 @-@ 26 and Task Force 145 are creations of the Pentagon 's post @-@ 11 September campaign against terrorism , and it quickly became the model for how the military would gain intelligence and battle insurgents in the future . Originally known as Task Force 121 , it was formed in the summer of 2003 , when the military merged two existing Special Operations units , one hunting Osama bin Laden in and around Afghanistan , and the other tracking <unk> Hussein in Iraq . 
 = = = Special Operations Command – Joint Capabilities = = = 
 Special Operations Command – Joint Capabilities ( SOC @-@ JC ) was transferred to USSOCOM from the soon to be disestablished United States Joint Forces Command in 2011 . Its primary mission was to train conventional and SOF commanders and their staffs , supports USSOCOM international engagement training requirements , and supports implementation of capability solutions in order to improve strategic and operational Warfighting readiness and joint interoperability . SOC @-@ JC must also be prepared to support deployed Special Operations Joint Task Force ( <unk> ) Headquarters ( HQ ) . 
 The Government Accountability Office wrote that SOC @-@ JC was disestablished in 2013 , and positions were to be zeroed out in 2014 . 
 = = = Army = = = 
 On 1 December 1989 the United States Army Special Operations Command ( USASOC ) activated as the 16th major Army command . These special operations forces have been America 's spearhead for unconventional warfare for more than 40 years . USASOC commands such units as the well known Special Forces ( SF , or the " Green Berets " ) and Rangers , and such relatively unknown units as the Psychological Operations Group ( PSYOP ) and Civil Affairs Brigade ( CA ) . These are one of the USSOCOM 's main weapons for waging unconventional warfare and counter @-@ insurgency . The significance of these units is emphasized as conventional conflicts are becoming less prevalent as insurgent and guerrilla warfare increases . 
 Units 
 The 75th Ranger Regiment ( U.S. Army Rangers ) is the premier light @-@ infantry unit of the United States Army and is headquartered at Fort Benning , Georgia . The 75th Ranger Regiment 's mission is to plan and conduct special missions in support of U.S. policy and objectives . The Rangers are a flexible and rapid @-@ deployable force . Each battalion can deploy anywhere in the world within 18 hours notice . The Army places much importance on the 75th Ranger Regiment and its training ; it possesses the capabilities to conduct conventional and most special operations missions . Rangers are capable of infiltrating by land , sea , or air and direct action operations such as conducting raids or assaulting buildings or airfields . 
 United States Army Special Forces ( SF ) aka Green Berets perform several doctrinal missions : unconventional warfare , foreign internal defense , special reconnaissance , direct action and counter @-@ terrorism . These missions make Special Forces unique in the U.S. military , because they are employed throughout the three stages of the operational continuum : peacetime , conflict and war . Foreign internal defense operations , SF 's main peacetime mission , are designed to help friendly developing nations by working with their military and police forces to improve their technical skills , understanding of human rights issues , and to help with humanitarian and civic action projects . Special Forces unconventional warfare capabilities provide a viable military option for a variety of operational <unk> that are inappropriate or infeasible for conventional forces . Special Forces are the U.S. military 's premier unconventional warfare force . Foreign internal defense and unconventional warfare missions are the bread and butter of Special Forces soldiers . For this reason SF candidates are trained extensively in weapons , engineering , communications and medicine . SF soldiers are taught to be warriors first and teachers second because they must be able to train their team and be able to train their allies during a FID or UW mission . Often SF units are required to perform additional , or collateral , activities outside their primary missions . These collateral activities are coalition warfare / support , combat search and rescue , security assistance , peacekeeping , humanitarian assistance , humanitarian de @-@ mining and counter @-@ drug operations . 
 The 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment ( Night Stalkers ) headquartered at Fort Campbell , Kentucky provides aviation support to units within USSOCOM . The Regiment consists of MH @-@ 6 and AH @-@ 6 light helicopters , MH @-@ 60 helicopters and MH @-@ 47 heavy assault helicopters . The capabilities of the 160th SOAR ( A ) have been evolving since the early 1980s . Its focus on night operations resulted in the nickname , the " Night Stalkers . " The primary mission of the Night Stalkers is to conduct overt or covert infiltration , exfiltration , and resupply of special operations forces across a wide range of environmental conditions . 
 4th Military Information Support Group ( Airborne ) and 8th Military Information Support Group ( Airborne ) Soldiers use persuasion to influence perceptions and encourage desired behavior . PSYOP soldiers supports national objectives at the tactical , operational and strategic levels of operations . Strategic psychological operations advance broad or long @-@ term objectives ; global in nature , they may be directed toward large audiences or at key communicators . Operational psychological operations are conducted on a smaller scale . 4th PSYOP Gp is employed by theater commanders to target groups within the theater of operations . 4th PSYOP Gp purpose can range from gaining support for U.S. operations to preparing the battlefield for combat . Tactical psychological operations are more limited , used by commanders to secure immediate and near @-@ term goals . In this environment , these force @-@ enhancing activities serve as a means to lower the morale and efficiency of enemy forces . 
 95th Civil Affairs Brigade ( Airborne ) specialists identify critical requirements needed by local citizens in war or disaster situations . They also locate civilian resources to support military operations , help minimize civilian interference with operations , support national assistance activities , plan and execute noncombatant evacuation , support counter @-@ drug operations and establish and maintain liaison with civilian aid agencies and other nongovernmental organizations . In support of special operations , these culturally oriented , linguistically capable Soldiers may also be tasked to provide functional expertise for foreign internal defense operations , unconventional warfare operations and direct action missions . 
 Sustainment Brigade ( Special Operations ) ( Airborne ) ( <unk> ( A ) ) has a difficult mission supporting USASOC . In their respective fields , signal and support soldiers provide supplies , maintenance , equipment and expertise allowing Special Operation Forces to " shoot , move and communicate " on a continuous basis . Because USASOC often uses Special Operations Forces @-@ unique items , soldiers assigned to these units are taught to operate and maintain a vast array of specialized equipment not normally used by their conventional counterparts . <unk> ( A ) also provides the USASOC with centralized and integrated material management of property , equipment maintenance , logistical automation and repair parts and supplies . 
 John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center ( <unk> ) trains USSOCOM and Army Special Operations Forces through development and evaluation of special operations concepts , doctrines and trainings . 
 = = = Marine Corps = = = 
 In October 2005 , the Secretary of Defense directed the formation of United States Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command , the Marine component of United States Special Operations Command . It was determined that the Marine Corps would initially form a unit of approximately 2500 to serve with USSOCOM . On February 24 , 2006 MARSOC activated at Camp Lejeune , North Carolina . MARSOC initially consisted of a small staff and the Foreign Military Training Unit ( <unk> ) , which had been formed to conduct foreign internal defense . <unk> is now designated as the Marine Special Operations Advisor Group ( <unk> ) . 
 As a service component of USSOCOM , MARSOC is tasked by the Commander USSOCOM to train , organize , equip , and deploy responsive U.S. Marine Corps special operations forces worldwide , in support of combatant commanders and other agencies . MARSOC has been directed to conduct foreign internal defense , direct action and special reconnaissance . MARSOC has also been directed to develop a capability in unconventional warfare , counter @-@ terrorism , and information operations . MARSOC deployed its first units in August 2006 , six months after the group 's initial activation . MARSOC reached full operational capability in October 2008 . 
 Units 
 Marine Raider Regiment ( Marine Raiders ) consists of a Headquarters Company and three Marine Raider Battalions , the 1st , 2nd and 3rd . The Regiment provides tailored military combat @-@ skills training and advisor support for identified foreign forces in order to enhance their tactical capabilities and to prepare the environment as directed by USSOCOM as well as the capability to form the nucleus of a Joint Special Operations Task Force . Marines and Sailors of the MRR train , advise and assist friendly host nation forces – including naval and maritime military and paramilitary forces – to enable them to support their governments ' internal security and stability , to counter subversion and to reduce the risk of violence from internal and external threats . MRR deployments are coordinated by MARSOC , through USSOCOM , in accordance with engagement priorities for Overseas Contingency Operations . 
 Marine Intelligence Battalion ( MIB ) trains , sustains , maintains combat readiness , and provides intelligence support at all operational levels in order to support <unk> training and operations worldwide with mission @-@ specific intelligence capability . 
 Marine Special Operations Support Group ( <unk> ) trains , equips , structures , and provides specially qualified Marine forces , including , operational logistics , intelligence , Military Working Dogs , Firepower Control Teams , and communications support in order to sustain worldwide special operations missions as directed by Commander , U.S. Marine Corps Forces Special Operations Command ( <unk> ) . 
 The Marine Special Operations School ( <unk> ) performs the screening , recruiting , training , assessment and doctrinal development functions for MARSOC . It includes two subordinate Special Missions Training Branches ( <unk> ) , one on each coast . 
 The Special Mission Training Branch — East provide special operations training in tactics , techniques and procedures , and evaluation and certification of MARSOC forces to specified conditions and standards for SOF . The Marines of <unk> are operators with the training , experience and mature judgment to plan , coordinate , instruct and supervise development of SOF special reconnaissance and direct action skills . 
 = = = Navy = = = 
 The United States Naval Special Warfare Command ( <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> ) was commissioned April 16 , 1987 , at Naval Amphibious Base Coronado in San Diego as the Naval component to the United States Special Operations Command . Naval Special Warfare Command provides vision , leadership , doctrinal guidance , resources and oversight to ensure component special operations forces are ready to meet the operational requirements of combatant commanders . Today , SEAL Teams and Special Boat Teams comprise the elite combat units of Naval Special Warfare . These teams are organized , trained , and equipped to conduct a variety of missions to include direct action , special reconnaissance , counter @-@ terrorism , foreign internal defense , unconventional warfare and support psychological and civil affairs operations . Their highly trained operators are deployed worldwide in support of National Command Authority objectives , conducting operations with other conventional and special operations forces . 
 Units 
 United States Navy SEALs have distinguished themselves as an individually reliable , collectively disciplined and highly skilled special operations force . The most important trait that distinguishes Navy SEALs from all other military forces is that SEALs are maritime special operations , as they strike from and return to the sea . SEALs ( <unk> , Air , Land ) take their name from the elements in and from which they operate . SEALs are experts in direct action and special reconnaissance missions . Their stealth and clandestine methods of operation allow them to conduct multiple missions against targets that larger forces cannot approach undetected . Because of the dangers inherent in their missions , prospective SEALs go through what is considered by many military experts to be the toughest training regime in the world . 
 Naval Special Warfare Development Group ( DEVGRU ) , referred to as SEAL Team Six , the name of its predecessor which was officially disbanded in 1987 . 
 SEAL Delivery Vehicle Teams are SEAL teams with an added underwater delivery capability who use the SDV MK VIII and the Advanced SEAL Delivery System ( <unk> ) , submersibles that provides NSW with an unprecedented capability that combines the attributes of clandestine underwater mobility and the combat swimmer . 
 Special Warfare Combatant @-@ craft Crewmen ( SWCC ) operate and maintain state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art surface craft to conduct coastal patrol and interdiction and support special operations missions . Focusing on infiltration and exfiltration of SEALs and other SOF , <unk> provide dedicated rapid mobility in shallow water areas where larger ships cannot operate . They also bring to the table a unique SOF capability : Maritime Combatant Craft Aerial Delivery System — the ability to deliver combat craft via parachute drop . Like SEALs , <unk> must have excellent physical fitness , highly motivated , combat @-@ focused and responsive in high stress situations . 
 = = = Air Force = = = 
 Air Force Special Operations Command was established May 22 , 1990 , with headquarters at Hurlburt Field , Florida . AFSOC is one of the 10 Air Force Major Commands or <unk> , and the Air Force component of United States Special Operations Command . It holds operational and administrative oversight of subordinate special operations wings and groups in the regular Air Force , Air Force Reserve Command and the Air National Guard . 
 AFSOC provides Air Force special operations forces for worldwide deployment and assignment to regional unified commands . The command 's SOF are composed of highly trained , rapidly deployable airmen , conducting global special operations missions ranging from precision application of firepower via airstrikes or close air support , to infiltration , exfiltration , resupply and refueling of SOF operational elements . AFSOC 's unique capabilities include airborne radio and television broadcast for psychological operations , as well as aviation foreign internal defense instructors to provide other governments military expertise for their internal development . 
 The command 's core missions include battlefield air operations ; agile combat support ; aviation foreign internal defense ; information operations ; precision aerospace fires ; psychological operations ; specialized air mobility ; specialized refueling ; and intelligence , surveillance and reconnaissance . 
 Units 
 Combat Controllers ( CCT ) are ground combat forces specialized in a traditional pathfinder role while having a heavy emphasis on simultaneous air traffic control , fire support ( via airstrikes , close air support and command , control , and communications in covert or austere environments . 
 Pararescuemen ( PJ ) are the only Department of Defense specialty specifically trained and equipped to conduct conventional and unconventional personnel recovery operations . A PJ 's primary function is as a personnel recovery specialist with emergency trauma medical capabilities in humanitarian and combat environments . 
 Special Operations Weather Technicians ( <unk> ) gather , assess , and interpret weather and environmental intelligence from forward deployed locations , working alongside special operations forces . 
 Organization 
 The 1st Special Operations Wing ( 1 SOW ) is located at Hurlburt Field , Florida . Its mission focus is unconventional warfare : counter @-@ terrorism , combat search and rescue , personnel recovery , psychological operations , aviation assistance to developing nations , " deep battlefield " resupply , interdiction and close air support . The wing 's core missions include aerospace surface interface , agile combat support , combat aviation advisory operations , information operations , personnel recovery / recovery operations , precision aerospace fires , psychological operations dissemination , specialized aerospace mobility and specialized aerial refueling . Among its aircraft is the MC @-@ 130 Combat Talon II , a low @-@ level terrain following special missions transport that can evade radar detection and slip into enemy territory at a 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) altitude for infiltration / exfiltration missions , even in zero visibility , dropping off or recovering men or supplies with pinpoint accuracy . It also operates the AC @-@ 130 Spooky and Spectre gunships that provide highly accurate airborne gunfire for close air support of conventional and special operations forces on the ground . 
 The 24th Special Operations Wing ( 24 SOW ) is located at Hurlburt Field , Florida . It 's composed of the 720th Special Tactics Group , 724th Special Tactics Group , Special Tactics Training Squadron and 16 recruiting locations across the United States . The Special Tactics Squadrons , under the 720th STG and 724th STG , are made up of Special Tactics Officers , Combat Controllers , Combat Rescue Officers , Pararescuemen , Special Operations Weather Officers and Airmen , Air Liaison Officers , Tactical Air Control Party operators , and a number of combat support airmen which comprise 58 Air Force specialties . 
 The 27th Special Operations Wing ( 27 SOW ) is located at Cannon AFB , New Mexico . Its primary mission includes infiltration , exfiltration and re @-@ supply of special operations forces ; air refueling of special operations rotary wing and tiltrotor aircraft ; and precision fire support . These capabilities support a variety of special operations missions including direct action , unconventional warfare , special reconnaissance , counter @-@ terrorism , personnel recovery , psychological operations and information operations . 
 The <unk> Special Operations Wing ( 193 SOW ) is an Air National Guard ( ANG ) unit , operationally gained by AFSOC , and located at Harrisburg International Airport / Air National Guard Station ( former Olmsted Air Force Base ) , Pennsylvania . Under Title 32 USC , the 193 SOW performs state missions for the Governor of Pennsylvania as part of the Pennsylvania Air National Guard . Under Title 10 USC , the 193 SOW is part of the Air Reserve Component ( ARC ) of the United States Air Force . Its primary wartime and contingency operations mission as an AFSOC @-@ gained unit is psychological operations ( PSYOP ) . The 193 SOW is unique in that it is the only unit in the U.S. Air Force to fly and maintain the Lockheed EC @-@ 130J Commando Solo aircraft . 
 The 919th Special Operations Wing ( 919 SOW ) is an Air Force Reserve Command ( AFRC ) unit , operationally gained by AFSOC , and located at Eglin AFB Auxiliary Field # 3 / Duke Field , Florida . The 919 SOW flies and maintains the MC @-@ 130E Combat Talon I and MC @-@ <unk> Combat Shadow special operations aircraft designed for covert operations . 
 The <unk> Special Operations Wing ( 352 SOW ) at RAF Mildenhall , United Kingdom serves as the core to United States European Command 's standing Joint Special Operations Air Component headquarters . The squadron provides support for three flying squadrons , one special tactics squadron and one maintenance squadron for exercise , logistics , and war planning ; aircrew training ; communications ; aerial delivery ; medical ; intelligence ; security and force protection ; weather ; information technologies and transformation support and current operations . 
 The <unk> Special Operations Group ( 353 SOG ) is the focal point for all U.S. Air Force special operations activities throughout the United States Pacific Command ( <unk> ) theater . Headquartered at Kadena AB , Okinawa , Japan the group is prepared to conduct a variety of high @-@ priority , low @-@ visibility missions . Its mission is air support of joint and allied special operations forces in the Pacific . It maintains a worldwide mobility commitment , participates in Pacific theater exercises as directed and supports humanitarian and relief operations . 
 The United States Air Force Special Operations School ( <unk> ) at Hurlburt Field , Florida is a primary support unit of the Air Force Special Operations Command . The <unk> prepares special operations Airmen to successfully plan , organize , and execute global special operations by providing indoctrination and education for AFSOC , other USSOCOM components , and joint / interagency / coalition partners . 
 = = List of USSOCOM Combatant Commanders = = 
 = = USSOCOM medal = = 
 The United States Special Operations Command Medal was introduced in 1994 to recognize individuals for outstanding contributions to , and in support of , special operations . Since it was created , there have been more than 50 recipients , four of which are not American . Some of which includes : Generał broni Włodzimierz <unk> ( Poland , 2010 , posthumously ) , <unk> Gunnar <unk> ( Norway , 2008 ) , Generał <unk> Jerzy Gut ( Poland , June 2014 ) and Generał <unk> Piotr <unk> ( Poland , October 2014 ) . 
 = Sherman Minton = 
 Sherman " Shay " Minton ( October 20 , 1890 – April 9 , 1965 ) was a Democratic United States Senator from Indiana and an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States . 
 After attending college and law school , he served as a captain in World War I , following which he launched a legal and political career . In 1930 , after multiple failed election attempts , and serving as a regional leader in the American Legion , he became a utility commissioner under the administration of Indiana Governor Paul V. McNutt . Four years later , Minton was elected to the United States Senate . During the campaign , he defended New Deal legislation in a series of addresses in which he suggested it was not necessary to uphold the Constitution during the Great Depression crisis . Minton 's campaign was denounced by his political opponents , and he received more widespread criticism for an address that became known as the " You Cannot Eat the Constitution " speech . As part of the New Deal Coalition , the fiercely partisan Minton championed President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's unsuccessful court packing plans in the Senate and became one of his top Senate allies . 
 After Minton failed in his 1940 Senate re @-@ election bid , Roosevelt appointed him as a judge to the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit . After Roosevelt 's death , President Harry Truman , who had developed a close friendship with Minton during their time together in the Senate , nominated him to the Supreme Court . He was confirmed by the Senate on 4 Oct 1949 , by a vote of 48 to 16 , 15 Republicans and one Democrat ( Harry Flood Byrd of Virginia ) voting against him . He served on the Supreme Court for seven years . An advocate of judicial restraint , Minton was a regular supporter of the majority opinions during his early years on the Court ; he became a regular dissenter after President Dwight Eisenhower 's appointees altered the Bench 's composition . In 1956 , poor health forced Minton 's retirement , after which he traveled and lectured until his death in 1965 . 
 Historians note the unusual contrast between his role as a partisan liberal Senator and his role as a conservative jurist . They attribute his shift in position as a reaction to the relationship between the New Deal senators and the conservative 1930s Court , which ruled much of the New Deal legislation unconstitutional . When Minton became a Supreme Court Justice , the Senate had become more conservative and the Court more activist , causing him to support conservative minority positions . As a Justice , Minton frequently played the role of peace @-@ maker and consensus builder during a period when the Court was riven with feuds . He generally ruled in favor of order over freedom as a result of his broad interpretation of governmental powers . These rulings and their limited impact lead some historians to have a negative opinion of his judicial record . Other historians point out Minton 's strong commitment to his judicial principles as a valuable attribute . In 1962 , the Sherman Minton Bridge in southern Indiana and the Minton @-@ Capehart Federal Building in Indianapolis were named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and background = = = 
 Sherman Minton was born on October 20 , 1890 , to John Evan and Emma Livers Minton , in their Georgetown , Indiana , home . He was the third of the family 's five children and was nicknamed Shay because of his younger brother 's inability to properly pronounce " Sherman " . Minton 's paternal grandfather , Jonathan Minton , was killed during the American Civil War and his father grew up on his own . Minton 's parents married in 1883 . 
 Minton received his basic education in a two @-@ room schoolhouse in Georgetown , which he attended through eighth grade . He was exposed to politics from an early age ; his father took him to several political rallies , including an 1895 speech by Democratic Party leader William Jennings Bryan . His father was a day laborer for the New Albany and St. Louis Air Line Railway . In 1898 , he became disabled when he suffered heat stroke while working . His condition meant he could not work ; the family became impoverished and had to subsist on the limited yield of their small farm . Minton 's mother developed breast cancer in 1899 . A traveling doctor attempted to remove her tumors in April 1900 , performing the operation with her laid on the family dinner table , but she died during the procedure . The death was an emotional blow to Minton ; thereafter , he refused to attend church and spoke against God , whom he blamed for his mother 's death . Minton 's father married Sarah Montague on December 3 , 1901 . 
 As Minton grew older , he was frequently in trouble with the people in his neighborhood . In 1904 , he was arrested for disregarding a town ordinance forbidding bicyclists to ride on the sidewalk . He was taken before a justice of the peace and fined three dollars , an incident he later credited with changing his outlook on life and sparking his desire to become a lawyer . To accomplish that goal , and continue supporting his family , he traveled with his older brother Herbert to Fort Worth , Texas , to take a job at the Swift and Company meat packing plant . His father and younger siblings soon joined him in Texas after the two brothers ' income was able to cover their expenses . After saving enough money to help establish the family in a new home , Minton returned to Indiana to attend high school , leaving his family in Texas . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Minton started at Edwardsville High School in 1905 , aged fourteen . The following year the school was consolidated with nearby New Albany High School . There , he participated in the football , baseball , and track teams . He founded the school 's first debate club , the Wranglers , which won several awards . He worked in a local arcade , and during summer vacations returned to Fort Worth to work at the Swift plant . He was briefly expelled from school after committing a prank in February 1908 . The school was under the guidance of the innovative Superintendent Charles Allen Prosser , who only let Minton return after he formally apologized before the entire school a week later . Minton began dating Gertrude Gurtz in his senior year , and the two remained in regular correspondence after he left for college . He graduated high school at the top of his class in 1910 . 
 Minton was intent on attending college ; during the summer of 1910 , he took a job as a Swift Company salesman in the Fort Worth area to help pay his way . He returned to Indiana and enrolled at Indiana University in September 1911 , taking enough classes to complete his first three years of courses in two years . Despite the heavy workload , he joined the school 's baseball and debate teams , and participated in the campus ' Jackson Club , an organization for Democrats . His college years were formative and had significant influence on his future political career . He became friends with future Governor of Indiana Paul V. McNutt , future presidential candidate Wendell L. Willkie , and several other men who later became influential in the state . During his second year he ran out of money , but could not return to Texas to earn more because of his class schedule . He lodged in the Phi Delta Theta ( <unk> ) international fraternity house and subsisted mostly on wild berries , leftover bread from the cafeteria and free milk . He completed undergraduate school at the top of his class in 1913 . In 1915 , he graduated from the Indiana University School of Law in Bloomington , at what is now known as the Indiana University Maurer School of Law . During law school , he played end and fullback for the Indiana University football team . 
 Minton ranked first in his class . This placement entitled him to serve as librarian at the legal college . The position paid a fair salary and allowed him to live more comfortably for his last two years of school . He graduated from law school in 1915 , again at the top of his class , and won a one @-@ year scholarship to take post @-@ graduate courses at Yale Law School . There , he focused on studying constitutional law and attended the regular lectures of former President of the United States and future Chief Justice of the United States William Howard Taft . Taft remarked that Minton 's post @-@ graduate thesis was among the best he had ever read . Minton continued to improve his oratory skills and continued debating at Yale ; he won the Wayland Club prize for extemporaneous public speaking , and helped organize the university 's legal aid society . He earned a post @-@ graduate master 's degree from Yale Law School in 1916 . 
 = = = Legal career and World War I = = = 
 In May 1916 , Minton returned to New Albany , where he opened a law practice and renewed his relationship with Gurtz . He took several cases and gained experience working pro bono to assist the local county prosecutor . He joined the Chautauqua lecture circuit , and traveled to several cities to give speeches . During one lecture circuit , he met William Jennings Bryan . The three @-@ time Presidential candidate advised the young Hoosier about politics , inspiring him to consider a career in public life . 
 In 1917 , just after the United States declared war on Germany and entered World War I , Minton enlisted in the United States Army . He took an officers training course at Fort Benjamin Harrison in hope of earning a commission , but was not among the those chosen to become an officer . In August he was granted a brief leave of absence ; he returned to New Albany , where he married Gurtz on August 11 . He returned to camp in September and requested to repeat his training course , still hoping to receive a commission ; after finishing the training he was commissioned as a captain . The American Expeditionary Forces , Eighty @-@ fourth Division , to which Minton belonged , was dispatched to France in July 1918 . Minton and his unit served on the Western Front at Verdun , Soissons , and later protecting supply lines in Belgium . During most of his time in the war , his unit was responsible for scouting roads to ensure safe transport of men and supplies to the front lines . He saw no combat . 
 When President Woodrow Wilson came to Paris in 1919 , Minton was in charge of a security detail guarding the negotiation hall and was able to meet Wilson . When the war ended , Minton remained briefly with the Army of Occupation in Germany before being discharged in August 1919 . He chose to remain in Paris for several months to study Roman law , international law , civil law and jurisprudence at the University of Paris . He returned home in March 1920 . The first of Minton 's three children , Sherman Jr . , was born while he was away . Minton 's daughter Mary @-@ Anne was born in 1923 , and his second son , John , in 1925 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 When Minton returned home he reopened his law practice and decided to enter politics . He ran for office in Indiana 's 3rd congressional district , but lost the Democratic primary , despite significant campaigning and his war record . He lost to John Ewing , 6 @,@ 502 votes to 3 @,@ 170 , second place in a field of five candidates . After the loss , he briefly joined the Indiana law firm of <unk> and Weathers , two politically active lawyers , before moving to Miami , Florida , where he joined another firm , <unk> & Bowen . In January 1928 , he left the Miami practice and returned to <unk> and Weathers . He attempted to secure the Democratic nomination to run for Congress in 1930 , but was again defeated , this time by the former state party chairman Eugene B. Crowe . 
 The following year , Minton became a local commander of the American Legion . The group had a large and active membership in the state at the time , and he used his position to encourage support of Democratic Party agenda . Paul McNutt was the national commander , and the two men became political allies . When McNutt became governor in 1930 , he offered Minton a position at the head of a new utility regulation commission . As commissioner , Minton successfully imposed regulations that reduced state telephone bills by a combined total of $ 525 @,@ 000 . The cuts received widespread media coverage , and Minton was credited in the reports with the success . 
 = = = Senate campaign = = = 
 Becoming popular among the party leadership during his two years as commissioner , Minton was encouraged by party leaders to run for the United States Senate in 1934 . At the state Democratic Party Convention he ran against Earl Peters , a former chairman of the state party . With the support of McNutt , Minton won the nomination on the third ballot with 827 votes to Peters ' 586 . 
 Minton launched a statewide campaign in August 1934 and began delivering speeches in defense of the New Deal . He blamed Republicans for the conditions of the Great Depression . His opponent , incumbent Republican Senator Arthur R. Robinson , accused Minton of playing " Santa Claus " by trying to give everyone " presents " . He also criticized Minton 's support of the New Deal , which Robinson and Republicans called unconstitutional . Minton 's initial campaign slogan was " You can 't offer a hungry man the Constitution " , a slogan he unveiled in a debate with Robinson in Corydon on August 11 . He continued using the slogan , and on September 11 , Minton delivered his infamous " You Cannot Eat the Constitution " speech , in which he concluded the urgent needs of the masses outweighed the need to uphold the constitution . The speech backfired wildly and papers and opponents across the state called Minton 's remarks traitorous . Minton stopped using the slogan and explained his position again using new terms , but his opponents continued to dog him over the issue . The Republicans also faulted popular governor McNutt and his reorganization of the government , and McNutt became more personally involved in the election . With the state party 's more direct involvement , Minton won the election with 52 percent of the vote . 
 = = = Lobby Investigation Committee = = = 
 Minton took his Senate seat in January 1935 . As a freshman , he sat in the back row of the chamber next to fellow freshman Harry Truman , and the pair quickly became friends . Minton was made a member of a special Lobby Investigation Committee chaired by Senator Hugo Black , that was set up to look into questionable lobbyist groups . According to professor of political science Linda C. Gugin , a Minton biographer , in practice the committee 's investigations were politically motivated and directed against groups that were challenging New Deal legislation . 
 William Randolph Hearst , a prominent and wealthy media magnate , began using his newspapers to deride the committee 's " reckless attacks on freedom " . Minton led the effort to counter Hearst and delivered a speech criticizing his support of the Republican Party . In 1937 , Senator Black was appointed to the Supreme Court and left the Senate , and Minton secured his post as chair of the committee . Minton immediately began a full @-@ scale investigation of the media conglomerate controlled by Frank E. Gannett , accusing him of publishing Republican Party propaganda . For several weeks , Minton delivered speeches against Gannett in the Senate , and Gannett responded in kind in his newspapers . Minton finally introduced legislation that would have made it " illegal to publish information known to be false " . Gannett , and a large number of allies in newspapers and on radio , immediately began to charge Minton and the Democratic Party with an assault on the freedom of the press . Minton 's allies in Congress asked him to withdraw the bill because of its political repercussions , and he dropped the matter . 
 Minton tried again to expose what he believed to be Republican control of the media . He led the committee to target a newspaper with national circulation , Rural Progress . Minton accused the publishers of improperly accepting large sums of money from corporations and the editors of undue influence from this money . The owner of the paper , <unk> V. Renolds , was summoned before the committee for a hearing , where Minton demanded to know why he was accepting money from corporations . When Renolds asked his manager , Dr. Glen Frank , to help him answer the questions , Minton and fellow Democratic senators began to shout Dr. Frank down . As he was saying that the money from the corporations was for advertising in the magazine , Minton beat his gavel and yelled , " This committee doesn 't intend to permit you to use this as a forum to air your Republican views . " 
 Minton did not realize that Frank was also president of the University of Wisconsin , and soon suffered retaliation for the way he had treated Frank . Frank went on NBC radio stations around the country and lambasted Minton for his rudeness . He made lengthy arguments accusing Minton of attempting to violate the Bill of Rights . Minton was outraged , but the arguments had an effect among voters in Indiana . In 1938 , he sought funding to launch a massive nationwide investigation of media conglomerates for proof of Republican interference in the press . Democratic Senator Edward R. Burke led an effort to defeat the measure and privately accused Minton of damaging the Democrats ' cause , which led Minton to leave the Lobby Investigation Committee . 
 Minton was a fierce partisan during his time in the Senate , and regularly abused his opponents verbally . Democratic Senator Huey Long became one of Minton 's favorite targets because of Long 's often @-@ threatened filibusters . During one of the filibusters , Long threatened to join the Republican Party . After most senators had left the chamber , Minton remained for several hours to periodically taunt Long . After tiring of the taunts , Long launched a rebuttal from the podium , calling Minton a vicious politician whose positions would cost Minton re @-@ election . The exchange was unusual for its tone and later made national news . 
 Minton was involved in many such exchanges , including a particularly fierce one with Republican Senator Lester J. Dickinson in March 1936 . Dickinson delivered a speech in the Senate castigating President Franklin D. Roosevelt for carrying out what he termed illegal and unconstitutional acts . Minton responded with a range of accusations , some personal , against Dickinson and his " political naivety " . 
 = = = Court packing = = = 
 In 1936 , the United States Supreme Court ruled the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933 unconstitutional . For the first time , Minton gave speeches criticizing the court for overriding the will of Congress . He accused the court of allowing itself to be influenced by political motives rather than the law . In response to the court ruling , Minton began drafting a bill which would allow the Supreme Court to declare a law unconstitutional only if seven out the nine justices supported the decision . In February 1937 , before Minton introduced his bill , President Roosevelt introduced a plan of his own to deal with the Supreme Court . Roosevelt proposed adding more justices to the court and creating a mandatory retirement age ; the changes would allow him to appoint an overwhelming majority to the court , more sympathetic to his agenda , ensuring the safety of legislation passed by his party . 
 Minton was pleased with Roosevelt 's bill and quickly became its leading supporter in the Senate . The measure was placed in an omnibus bill designed to reform judicial salaries and districting , among many other measures . Republicans quickly discovered the court @-@ packing provision and targeted the bill . Democrats had overwhelming super @-@ majorities in Congress , and passage of the bill at first seemed assured . Minton 's support of the bill helped him earn the position of Senate majority whip , allowing him to more effectively push for its passage . Minton delivered six radio addresses on behalf of his party in support of the bill , but public opinion could not be swayed in the Democrats ' favor . 
 Minton received a death threat in the form of an envelope containing a shotgun shell and a message advising him to not vote for the court packing plan . Many Democrats , fearing their re @-@ election prospects , joined with Republicans and defeated the bill . Minton was unhappy with the loss and it cost him considerable support among his voters , but as a result of his close connection with the bill and the leaders of his party , he gained more influence with the Democrats . 
 Although Minton supported the Roosevelt Administration and became a regular guest at the White House , Minton opposed the president on some measures . He voted to override a presidential veto of a grant of $ 2 @.@ 5 ( $ 43 billion in 2015 dollars ) in bonus pay for World War I soldiers ( Bonus Army ) . He supported the Dyer Anti @-@ Lynching Bill , which Roosevelt feared would cost the party support in the southern states . He also supported an extension of the Hatch Act of 1939 , a law that prevented federal employees from being forced to take part in state election campaigns , effectively lessening the influence of federal patronage . 
 As World War II neared , Minton took a cautious position on United States involvement . When the Soviet Union invaded Finland , Minton voted against granting a loan to Finland to help finance its defense efforts . He also opposed selling munitions and weapons to the Allies or the Axis powers . He advocated and supported expanding the American military and believed that American entry into the war was inevitable , but should be delayed as long as possible . He voted in favor of the Smith Act , which made it a crime to advocate the overthrow of the government , a law specifically targeted at communists and fascists in the United States . In his final year in office , there was considerable speculation in the press that Minton would be named to higher office by Roosevelt , including cabinet positions and the Supreme Court , but neither happened . 
 = = = Re @-@ election campaign = = = 
 Minton ran for re @-@ election to his Senate seat in 1940 . McNutt was challenging Roosevelt for the Presidential nomination , forcing Minton to choose between the administration and his allies in the state party . Minton sided with Roosevelt , which cost him McNutt 's and the Indiana Democratic Party machine 's support in his re @-@ election bid . 
 The Republican presidential candidate , Wendell Willkie was also a native of Indiana , and Minton faced a difficult challenge to win re @-@ election . He referred to Willkie as a " sycophant for the rich and famous " . Willkie never responded to Minton 's taunts , leaving Minton 's opponent in the Senate race , Raymond E. Willis , to respond to Minton 's charges . Willis had run for the Senate two years earlier but was defeated by Democrat Frederick Van Nuys . Willis faulted Minton on a range of topics but focused on the legislation Minton supported while in the Senate . Willis claimed that much of the legislation was unconstitutional and Minton 's positions were detrimental to the nation . Minton responded by pointing out Willis 's connections to wealthy corporations and accused him of not caring for the people . Minton 's campaign focused on the achievements of the New Deal programs . He claimed farm income in Indiana had doubled since 1932 , and highlighted the passage of the Old Age Pension laws . His support for conscription and military preparedness for the coming war proved unpopular with voters and cost him considerable support , but according to historian William Radcliff it was Wilkie 's favorite son status , which led many Hoosiers to vote Republican , that proved to be the election 's deciding factor . Despite Minton 's heavy campaigning , he lost the close election to Willis by 5 @,@ 179 votes out of over 1 @.@ 5 million cast . 
 Roosevelt won the 1940 presidential election . After Minton left office in January 1941 , he was given a position in the Roosevelt administration as a reward for his loyalty during the court packing failure . He served as one of the president 's advisers and a liaison between the White House and Congress . The extent of his duties is not fully known ; Linda Gugin has speculated that he may have managed Roosevelt 's patronage system . Minton was responsible for getting several officials appointed to high offices in the federal bureaucracy and numerous others appointed to lower ranking positions . He also convinced Roosevelt to support the creation of a Senate defense committee chaired by Truman , a position that brought Truman into the national spotlight and helped him gain the vice presidency . 
 = = Seventh Circuit = = 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 On May 7 , 1941 , Roosevelt announced Minton 's nomination to the Chicago @-@ based Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals . Minton was confirmed unanimously by the Senate on May 12 . Minton resigned from his post in the administration , but even after he began working on the court , Minton remained active in Democratic politics behind the scenes and was in regular correspondence with Roosevelt to make patronage suggestions . 
 Minton was sworn in on May 29 , but the court was in recess at the time . He took his seat when it returned to session on October 7 . The court had the highest court load of all the appellate courts in the nation at that time , averaging 40 cases per judge annually . The men on the court were close friends , and Minton developed a particularly close friendship with Judge J. Earl Major ; Major offered Minton financial assistance during his later illnesses . Major had been on the court for several years and held a judicial philosophy similar to Minton 's . The two men regularly attended baseball games and were frequent guests in each other 's homes . 
 World War II broke out shortly after Minton joined the court , creating a flood of cases in which legal precedent provided little guidance , including challenges to wartime measures , selective service laws , price controls , rationing and civil liberties . In the majority of these cases , the court affirmed the decisions of the district courts , but in several the court was required to establish a precedent . Minton stated on several occasions his personal preference to affirm the decisions of the lower courts . He believed that the court that heard the case and pronounced judgment was generally able to make a decision that was superior to appellate courts ' decisions . He believed the appellate process should be reserved for the more serious cases and cases where the lower court had clearly made a mistake . 
 = = = Jurisprudence = = = 
 Minton was described by William Radcliff as a " faithful disciple of judicial restraint , " an unexpected development when compared to his overtly partisan political career . Radcliff attributed Minton 's conservative position to the distaste he developed for the courts when they overturned legislation passed while he was in the Senate . The courts actions led him to strongly believe in the limited exercise of judicial power when evaluating the constitutionality of governmental conduct . Much of the recently passed New Deal legislation was being tried in the courts for constitutionality and enforcement , putting Minton in the uncommon position of adjudicating cases depending on legislation he had helped write . 
 During his time on the Seventh Circuit , Minton authored 253 of the court 's opinions , including twelve dissenting opinions . Some of his opinions won praise ; the editors of Tax Magazine commented favorably on Minton 's opinions on tax law , calling them " direct Hoosier logic " . Other court reporting papers made similar comments , applauding the manner in which he turned complex issues to simple questions that could easily be understood . 
 In the case of Sunkist v. Sunkist and Quaker Oats Co. v. General Mills , the court created a long @-@ standing precedent in their decision making it possible for different companies to use the same brand and product name as long as they produced dissimilar products . In another case , the court set a short @-@ lived precedent allowing companies to artificially raise prices in local markets if the purpose was to artificially lower prices in another market to remain competitive . After Minton joined the U.S. Supreme Court , the decision was appealed to that body ; Minton recused himself from the case , which the court decided to overturn . In another decision , Minton was in the majority that ruled under the Sherman Antitrust Act that the New York Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company was a monopoly , ordering the company to break up its grocery business . Minton was also in the majority in several cases filed to enforce decisions made by the National Labor Relations Board , usually to end worker strikes . 
 In the case of United States v. <unk> , the government was denying the wife of a United States citizen entry into the country because of her possible ties to Nazism . In a much criticized majority opinion which Minton co @-@ authored with Judge Major , he stated that the " alien did not have any legal right — [ her ] status was a political decision to be made by officials in government . " Many liberals condemned the court at the time of the decision . The case ruling was upheld by the Supreme Court in a 1946 appeal . 
 One of Minton 's favorite cases was that of <unk> Candies , Inc. v. Federal Trade Commission . The candy company produced a one @-@ cent gumball dispenser in which almost all the gumballs were the same color . A few different @-@ colored gumballs were included which , when dispensed , entitled the purchaser to a prize from the merchant who owned the machine . The FTC had an injunction put in place barring the company from producing the machines because they claimed it violated anti @-@ gambling laws . Minton wrote the majority opinion and sided with the majority to keep the injunction in place , but dryly mocked the counsel for the defense and the gambling law , stating : 
 Counsel for the petitioner discussed at great length from a sociological point of view , of the age @-@ old problem of the gambling instinct in the human being . According to his analysis , gambling pervades our entire economic system ; thus insurance contracts are a gamble , stock and grain exchange transactions are gambles , and the farmer 's dependence on weather is a gamble . Counsel 's attempt to apply this analysis to the present case left us cold and unimpressed . He even reminded us that our great idol , Mr. Chief Justice John Marshall , in his day attended the horse races and wagered with his clergyman . In fact , they ran a book . As indicating how times have changed and how even our coarse nature has yielded to the protecting care of governmental policy , we confess we do not even know a bookmaker , clerical or otherwise , and our passes to the beautiful race tracks around Chicago lie in our desk unused . 
 Minton often lamented that he was required to " pronounce the law as it was written , but on no occasion [ c ] <unk> he make the law . " 
 = = = Clemency board and failing health = = = 
 After Roosevelt 's death and Truman 's succession to the Presidency , Minton continued offering advice to the new administration on a range of topics , including patronage and political maneuvering . Truman appointed Minton as head of the War Department Clemency Board , a panel of judges charged with overseeing reviews of decisions made by the courts @-@ martial . The panel met every two weeks which , along with his responsibilities on the circuit court , kept Minton very busy and afforded him little rest , leading to a deterioration in his health . While yachting with President Truman on Memorial Day in 1945 , Truman asked Minton to accept an appointment to the position of Solicitor General of the United States . Minton declined because of his health , but he told Truman he would be interested in a seat on the Supreme Court . 
 In September 1945 , Minton suffered a heart attack while in Washington ; he was hospitalized for three months at Walter Reed Hospital . After returning to work , he was forced to rest regularly due to gradually worsening anemia , and he sought to lessen his workload . To further complicate his health , on August 5 , 1949 , Minton tripped over a stone in his yard and broke his leg . The injury forced him to walk with a cane for the remainder of his life . 
 = = Supreme Court = = 
 = = = Nomination and confirmation = = = 
 At a September 15 , 1949 , news conference , Truman announced Minton 's nomination to the Supreme Court , succeeding the deceased Justice Wiley Rutledge . Minton had already privately accepted the nomination several days earlier after a telephone conversation with Truman . Truman touted Minton 's extensive law education and his years of experience on the circuit courts as the reason for his nomination . 
 News of Minton 's appointment received mixed reviews nationally . The New York Times said that Truman had allowed personal and political friendship to influence his choice . The New Republic said " the President is again reverting to his deplorable habit of choosing men for high post because they happen to be his friends ... " . The Washington Post raised questions about Minton 's ability to be confirmed by the Senate due to the power many of his foes held in the body . The Indianapolis Star offered a more sympathetic opinion , pointing out Minton 's qualifications and the pride Indiana could take in having a native on the Supreme Court . The article noted that he would be the most educated justice on the court , should he be confirmed . 
 Indiana Senator William E. Jenner led opponents of Minton 's nomination , including some of Minton 's old foes , in an attempt to bring him before the body for hearings . Minton wrote a letter to the Senate Judicial Committee answering several of their questions , but refused to submit himself to a hearing . He mentioned his broken leg and hinted in his letter that it could be detrimental to his health to travel in his condition . He also stated that , as a sitting judge and former member of the Senate , it would be improper for him submit to a hearing . Although hearings had occurred irregularly in the past , it was not customary at that time to have a hearing on a nominee . During an absence of Jenners , Minton 's allies worked to have the hearing request dropped and the Judicial Committee sent the measure to the full Senate in a vote of 9 to 2 . Senator Homer Ferguson attempted to have the nomination returned to committee but the motion failed , 45 – 21 . The long debate over Minton 's appointment focused on his partisanship , support of the court packing plan during his time in the Senate , and poor health . His opponents launched numerous delaying tactics ; the Senate session before the vote to confirm Minton lasted until midnight . His confirmation was approved 48 – 16 on October 3 . To date , Minton remains the last member of Congress , sitting or former , to be appointed to the United States Supreme Court , and he is the only native of Indiana to be appointed to the court . 
 = = = Judicial restraint = = = 
 Minton 's central judicial philosophy was to ascertain and uphold the original intent of legislation . He continued to take a broad view of governmental powers , demonstrated in his dissenting opinion in the case of Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer , which ruled unconstitutional President Truman 's wartime seizure of several steel mills to avert a workers ' strike . Of all the cases in which Minton was involved , he disagreed most with the Youngstown decision and " went into a tirade " during the conference where the decision was made . He argued that there " could be no vacant spot in power when the security of the nation is at stake . " Despite his strong protest , he could not influence the Court to permit the president to seize the plants without congressional approval . Minton joined with Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson and Justice Stanley Forman Reed in the dissenting opinion that the President had the authority through the war powers clause of the constitution . 
 Minton abhorred racial segregation and provided a solid vote to strike down the school segregation practices at issue in 1954 's landmark case of Brown v. Board of Education ; it was among the few decisions in which he sided against the government . According to William Radcliff , the majority opinion authored by Minton in the 1953 case Barrows v. Jackson was his most skillfully written opinion . He framed the complex question of the case as : " Can a racially restrictive covenant be enforced at law by a suit for damages against a co @-@ <unk> who allegedly broke the covenant ? " The Court decided the answer in the negative . 
 In the area of civil liberties , Minton adhered to the doctrine of " fundamental fairness " , a test established by the Supreme Court in 1937 . In one decision , Minton stated that the right of free speech was not an absolute right , and could be regulated so as not to violate the rights of others . In United States v. Rabinowitz , Minton wrote the Court 's opinion upholding a lower court ruling which allowed police to search automobiles without a warrant , provided there was probable cause to justify the search . 
 Minton voted to uphold anticommunist legislation during the period of the " red scare " , siding with the majority in 1951 's Dennis v. United States , which upheld the conviction of the leader of the US Communist Party . During the same period , the Court was split over the legality of governmental loyalty tests . Many agencies had programs in place to ensure that members of the government were not communists . Minton 's vote proved to be the deciding factor in cases regarding loyalty tests . In the case of Bailey v. Richardson , Minton 's vote upheld the legality of the loyalty tests , while in the decision he authored in the case of Joint Anti @-@ Fascist Refugee Committee v. McGrath , he voted to uphold the plaintiff 's position that he had been terminated illegally because of his support of fascist ideology . Minton 's position gradually shifted to allowing the loyalty tests to take place , and in Adler v. Board of Ed. of City of New York he wrote the majority opinion allowing the tests and upholding New York 's Feinberg Law . This proved to be the most important vote as it allowed the tests to be given with only minimal suspicion of a person 's disloyalty to the government . 
 Because of Minton 's previous Congressional partisanship , many liberals believed he would support their positions when on the Court . Throughout his tenure , Minton regularly disappointed them , leading many to rail against him . A lawyer writing for the New Jersey Law Journal labeled Minton a " spokesman against freedom " , calling him " a man of conspicuous judicial shortcomings , whose votes against civil liberties exceeded those of any other man on the Court , and who wrote comparatively few opinions of other kinds . " Linda Gugin pointed out that Minton was a disappointment to liberals because he consistently chose order over freedom . Gugin also concludes that Minton had the strongest commitment to judicial restraint and ideological neutrality of any justice , past or present . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Although Minton was on the Supreme Court , he remained casually involved in Democratic internal politics . He wrote Truman several letters criticizing Justices Robert H. Jackson and Hugo Black , referring to Black as a demagogue . He also offered advice on dealing with Republican opposition in the Senate . In a 1954 letter , after Truman left office , he urged Truman to help focus public attention on the economy and away from communism , a threat he claimed the Republicans were exaggerating to avoid confronting their own problems . 
 After Truman 's withdrawal from the 1952 presidential campaign , Minton made remarks indicating he had advised Truman to stay out of the contested New Hampshire primary election to begin with . In August 1956 , a reporter asked Minton about his preferred candidate in the upcoming presidential election . Minton answered , " I have great confidence in Adlai Stevenson . " He also remarked that Dwight D. Eisenhower was politically handicapped . Minton was lambasted in the media for his endorsement , which he attempted to retract a few days later after being advised to do so by other members of the Court . 
 = = = Regular dissenter = = = 
 Truman 's other appointees to the Court provided consistent conservative votes , and during Minton 's first years on the Court it was returned to the conservatism of the William Howard Taft era . While on the Court , Minton transformed from a New Deal senator into an almost reactionary judge as an ally of Justice Felix Frankfurter . Empirical coding of votes shows that Minton was the most conservative justice on the Court during his first year , and remained in the conservative half of the court for the duration of his career . 
 Minton did not enjoy the limited influence of his judicial role in the later years of his term , when he was more frequently in the minority in voting on cases . After the deaths of Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson and Justice Robert Jackson , Minton found himself with little support for many of his opinions , which led him to begin considering retirement . 
 The shifting position of the Court led to personal animosity between members of its two wings . Despite his disappointment over the Court 's positions on some issues , Minton remained popular among his colleagues on the Court as he didn 't take sides in their personal disagreements ; he proved a soothing presence during a period marked by bitter personal feuds between strong personalities such as William O. Douglas and Felix Frankfurter . 
 Minton informed Eisenhower of his intention to retire in a letter on September 7 , 1956 , in which he dryly stated his retirement was authorized by law . Eisenhower responded with a brief note wishing him a happy retirement . Although he did not tell the president , Minton informed the members of the Court that his duties were too taxing on his health . His anemia had steadily worsened , slowing him physically and mentally . Minton served as a Justice until October 15 , 1956 , retiring after 7 years and 3 days of service . He was succeeded by William J. Brennan , Jr . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Announcing his departure , Minton remarked , " There will be more interest in who will succeed me than in my passing . I 'm an echo . " Despite the health difficulties , Minton regretted his decision almost immediately . 
 Minton returned to his New Albany home , where he took a much lighter workload . He gave occasional lectures at Indiana University and continued to give public speeches from time to time . For several years after retiring from the Supreme Court , Minton occasionally accepted assignments to serve temporarily on one of the lower federal courts . He received an honorary doctorate degree from the University of Louisville . He took many trips around the United States , and two trips to Europe . In England , he received an honorary doctorate from Oxford University in 1956 . 
 Despite his failing health , Minton remained active in the Democratic Party . He was most concerned with President Eisenhower , who he believed was incompetent . He remained in regular correspondence with Truman , and the two met on several occasions at Democratic Party functions . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 In late March 1965 , Minton was admitted to Floyd Memorial Hospital in New Albany , where it was found he was suffering internal bleeding . He died in his sleep early in the morning of April 9 . Minton 's wife was Catholic ; his funeral was held at Holy Trinity Catholic Church and was attended by many dignitaries , including several sitting members of the Supreme Court , the governors of Indiana and Kentucky , and several members of Congress . He was buried in the Holy Trinity Cemetery . Minton himself was nominally Catholic and had shunned Christianity for most of his life ; he only began to occasionally attend mass following his retirement . He left most of his personal papers and judicial records to the Truman Presidential Library . 
 Minton is the eponym of the Sherman Minton Bridge , which carries Interstate 64 across the Ohio River , connecting western Louisville , Kentucky with New Albany , Indiana . Minton attended the dedication of the bridge at a 1962 ceremony . He is also the namesake of the annual Sherman Minton Moot Court Competition , held at the Indiana University Maurer School of Law . He is also honored ( with Indiana Senator Homer E. Capehart ) — in the " Brutalist " style designed by Woollen , <unk> and Partners and with architectural art by Milton Glaser — in the centrally located Minton @-@ Capehart Federal Building on Indiana World War Memorial Plaza in Indianapolis . A bronze bust of Minton was created and put on display in the Indiana Statehouse . 
 While some writers like Linda Gugin and legal historian William Radcliff have given high praise to Minton 's logic in his written opinions , they point out that his positions had little long @-@ term impact . Other legal historians , like Bernard Schwartz , have more negative opinion of Minton 's judicial career . Schwartz wrote that Minton " was below mediocrity as a Justice . His opinions , relatively few for his tenure , are less than third rate , characterized by their cavalier approach to complicated issues . " Schwartz went on to say , " he ranks near the bottom of any list of Justices . " Most of the precedents Minton helped establish were overturned by the Warren Court in the years immediately following his retirement . In total he wrote sixty @-@ seven majority opinions along with several of the dissenting opinions . Gugin authored a work in rebuttal to Schwartz 's harsh critique , saying that Minton 's rulings were " predictable based on the principles of deference , precedent , and strict interpretation " ; she attributed his poor ranking to the bias of reviewers in favor of judicial activism . 
 Minton 's time on the court marked the end of a transitory period in the judiciary . Since Minton , justices have tended to serve increasingly longer terms on the court , which has had strong political science implications on the Supreme Court . The growing concept of judicial non @-@ partisanship became the norm in American politics after Minton — he was the last member of Congress of be appointed to the court . Linda Gugin and Professor James St. Clair have noted that the federal courts have lost a valuable point of view by not having experienced legislators among their ranks . 
 Minton played an important role behind the scenes of the Court as a peacemaker between its two opposing factions . These attempts to keep the peace led Justice Frankfurter to remark that while Minton would never be remembered as a great justice , he would be remembered as a great colleague by his fellow justices . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = Tom Crean ( explorer ) = 
 Thomas " Tom " Crean ( Irish : Tomás Ó <unk> ; 25 February 1877 – 27 July 1938 ) , was an Irish seaman and Antarctic explorer from Annascaul in County Kerry . He was a member of three major expeditions to Antarctica during the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration , including Captain Scott 's 1911 – 13 Terra Nova Expedition . This saw the race to reach the South Pole lost to Roald Amundsen and ended in the deaths of Scott and his polar party . During this expedition , Crean 's 35 statute miles ( 56 km ) solo walk across the Ross Ice Shelf to save the life of Edward Evans led to him receiving the Albert Medal for Lifesaving . 
 Crean had left the family farm near Annascaul to enlist in the Royal Navy at the age of 15 . In 1901 , while serving on Ringarooma in New Zealand , he volunteered to join Scott 's 1901 – 04 Discovery Expedition to Antarctica , thus beginning his exploring career . After his Terra Nova experience , Crean 's third and final Antarctic venture was as second officer on Ernest Shackleton 's Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , on Endurance . After Endurance became beset in the pack ice and sank , Crean and the ship 's company spent months drifting on the ice before a journey in boats to Elephant Island . He was a member of the crew which made an open boat journey of 800 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) from Elephant Island to South Georgia , to seek aid for the stranded party . 
 Crean 's contributions to these expeditions sealed his reputation as a polar explorer , and earned him a total of three Polar medals . After the Endurance expedition , he returned to the navy ; when his naval career ended in 1920 he moved back to County Kerry . In his home town of Annascaul , Crean and his wife Ellen opened a pub called The South Pole Inn , where he lived quietly and unobtrusively until his death in 1938 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Thomas Crean ( generally known as Tom Crean ) was born on 25 Feb 1877 , in the farming area of <unk> near the village of Annascaul on <unk> <unk> in County Kerry , Ireland , to Patrick Crean and Catherine , née Courtney . One of ten children , he attended the local <unk> Catholic school , leaving at the age of 12 to help on the family farm . At the age of 15 , Crean enlisted in the Royal Navy at the naval station in nearby Minard Inlet , possibly after an argument with his father . His enlistment as a boy second class is recorded in Royal Navy records on 10 July 1893 , 10 days before his 16th birthday ; lacking his parents ' consent , he probably lied about his age . 
 Crean 's initial naval apprenticeship was aboard the training ship Impregnable at Devonport . In November 1894 , he was transferred to Devastation . By his 18th birthday , in 1895 , Crean was serving in Royal Arthur , and rated ordinary seaman . Less than a year later , he was in Wild Swan as an able seaman , and later joined the Navy 's torpedo school ship , Defiance . By 1899 , Crean had advanced to the rate of petty officer , second class and was serving in Vivid . 
 In February 1900 , Crean was posted to the torpedo vessel Ringarooma , which was part of the Royal Navy 's New Zealand Squadron based in the South Island . On 18 December 1901 , he was demoted from petty officer to able seaman for an unspecified misdemeanour . In December 1901 , the Ringarooma was ordered to assist Robert Falcon Scott 's ship Discovery when it was docked at Lyttelton Harbour awaiting to departure to Antarctica . When an able seaman of Scott 's ship deserted after striking a petty officer , a replacement was required ; Crean volunteered , and was accepted . 
 = = Discovery Expedition , 1901 – 1904 = = 
 Discovery sailed for the Antarctic on 21 December 1901 , and seven weeks later , on 8 February 1902 , arrived in McMurdo Sound , where she anchored at a spot which was later designated " Hut Point " . Here the men established the base from which they would launch scientific and exploratory sledging journeys . Crean proved to be one of the most efficient man @-@ haulers in the party ; over the expedition as a whole , only seven of the 48 @-@ member party logged more time in harness than Crean 's 149 days . Crean had a good sense of humour and was well liked by his companions . Scott 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Albert Armitage , wrote in his book Two Years in the Antarctic that " Crean was an Irishman with a fund of wit and an even temper which nothing disturbed . " 
 Crean accompanied Lieutenant Michael Barne on three sledging trips across the Ross Ice Shelf , then known as the " Great Ice Barrier " . These included the 12 @-@ man party led by Barne which set out on 30 October 1902 to lay depots in support of the main southern journey undertaken by Scott , Shackleton and Edward Wilson . On 11 November the Barne party passed the previous furthest south mark , set by Carsten Borchgrevink in 1900 at 78 ° 50'S , a record which they held briefly until the southern party itself passed it on its way to an eventual 82 ° 17'S . 
 During the Antarctic winter of 1902 Discovery became locked in the ice . Efforts to free her during the summer of 1902 – 03 failed , and although some of the expedition 's members ( including Ernest Shackleton ) left in a relief ship , Crean and the majority of the party remained in the Antarctic until the ship was finally freed in February 1904 . After returning to regular naval duty , Crean was promoted to petty officer , first class , on Scott 's recommendation . 
 = = Between expeditions , 1904 – 10 = = 
 Crean came back to regular duty at the naval base at Chatham , Kent , serving first in Pembroke in 1904 and later transferring to the torpedo school on Vernon . Crean had caught Captain Scott 's attention with his attitude and work ethic on the Discovery Expedition , and in 1906 Scott requested that Crean join him on Victorious . Over the next few years Crean followed Scott successively to Albemarle , Essex and Bulwark . By 1907 , Scott was planning his second expedition to the Antarctic . Meanwhile , Ernest Shackleton 's Nimrod Expedition , 1907 – 09 , despite reaching a new furthest south record of 88 ° <unk> , had failed to reach the South Pole . Scott was with Crean when the news of Shackleton 's near miss became public ; it is recorded that Scott observed to Crean : " I think we 'd better have a shot next . " 
 = = Terra Nova Expedition , 1910 – 13 = = 
 Scott held Crean in high regard , so he was among the first people recruited for the Terra Nova Expedition , which set out for the Antarctic in June 1910 , and one of the few men in the party with previous polar experience . After the expedition 's arrival in McMurdo Sound in January 1911 , Crean was as part of the 13 @-@ man team who established " One Ton Depot " , 130 statute miles ( 210 km ) from Hut <unk> so named because of the large amount of food and equipment cached there on the projected route to the South Pole . Returning from the depot to base camp at Cape Evans , Crean , accompanied by Apsley Cherry @-@ Garrard and Henry " Birdie " Bowers , experienced near @-@ disaster when camping on unstable sea ice . During the night the ice broke up , leaving the men adrift on an ice floe and separated from their sledges . Crean probably saved the group 's lives , by leaping from floe to floe until he reached the Barrier edge and was able to summon help . 
 Crean departed with Scott in November 1911 , for the attempt at the South Pole . This journey had three stages : 400 statute miles ( 640 km ) across the Barrier , 120 statute miles ( 190 km ) up the heavily crevassed Beardmore Glacier to an altitude of 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) above sea level , and then another 350 statute miles ( 560 km ) to the Pole . At regular intervals , supporting parties returned to base ; Crean was in the final group of eight men that marched on to the polar plateau and reached 87 ° <unk> , 168 statute miles ( 270 km ) from the pole . Here , on 4 January 1912 , Scott selected his final polar party : Crean , William Lashly and Edward Evans were ordered to return to base , while Scott , Edgar Evans , Edward Wilson , Bowers and Lawrence Oates continued to the pole . Crean 's biographer Michael Smith suggests that Crean would have been a better choice for the polar party than Edgar Evans , who was weakened by a recent hand injury ( of which Scott was unaware ) . Crean , considered one of the toughest men in the expedition , had led a pony across the Barrier and had thus been saved much of the hard labour of man @-@ hauling . Scott 's critical biographer Roland Huntford records that the surgeon Edward L Atkinson , who had accompanied the southern party to the top of the Beardmore , had recommended either Lashly or Crean for the polar party rather than Edgar Evans . Scott in his diary recorded that Crean wept with disappointment at the prospect of having to turn back , so close to the goal . 
 Soon after heading north on the 700 @-@ statute @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) journey back to base camp , Crean 's party lost the trail back to the Beardmore Glacier , and were faced with a long detour around a large icefall . With food supplies short , and needing to reach their next supply depot , the group made the decision to slide on their sledge , uncontrolled , down the icefall . The three men slid 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 600 m ) , dodging crevasses up to 200 feet ( 61 m ) wide , and ending their descent by overturning on an ice ridge . Evans later wrote : " How we ever escaped entirely uninjured is beyond me to explain " . 
 The gamble at the icefall succeeded , and the men reached their depot two days later . However , they had great difficulty navigating down the glacier . Lashly wrote : " I cannot describe the maze we got into and the <unk> escapes we have had to pass through . " In his attempts to find the way down , Evans removed his goggles and subsequently suffered agonies of snow blindness that made him into a passenger . When the party was finally free of the glacier and on the level surface of the Barrier , Evans began to display the first symptoms of scurvy . By early February he was in great pain , his joints were swollen and discoloured , and he was passing blood . Through the efforts of Crean and Lashly the group struggled towards One Ton Depot , which they reached on 11 February . At this point Evans collapsed ; Crean thought he had died and , according to Evans 's account , " his hot tears fell on my face " . 
 With over 100 statute miles ( 160 km ) still to travel before the relative safety of Hut Point , Crean and Lashly began hauling Evans on the sledge , " eking out his life with the last few drops of brandy that they still had with them " . On 18 February they arrived at Corner Camp , still 35 statute miles ( 56 km ) from Hut Point , with only one or two days ' food rations left and still four or five days ' man @-@ hauling to do . They then decided that Crean should go on alone , to fetch help . With only a little chocolate and three biscuits to sustain him , without a tent or survival equipment , Crean walked the distance to Hut Point in 18 hours , arriving in a state of collapse to find Atkinson there , with the dog driver <unk> Gerov . Crean reached safety just ahead of a fierce blizzard , which probably would have killed him , and which delayed the rescue party by a day and a half . Atkinson led a successful rescue , and Lashly and Evans were both brought to base camp alive . Crean modestly played down the significance of his feat of endurance . In a rare written account , he wrote in a letter : " So it fell to my lot to do the 30 miles for help , and only a couple of biscuits and a stick of chocolate to do it . Well , sir , I was very weak when I reached the hut . " 
 Scott 's party failed to return . The winter of 1912 at Cape Evans was a sombre one , with the knowledge that the polar party had undoubtedly perished . Frank Debenham wrote that " in the winter it was once again Crean who was the mainstay for cheerfulness in the now depleted mess deck part of the hut . " In November 1912 , Crean was one of the 11 @-@ man search party that found the remains of the polar party . On 12 November they spotted a cairn of snow , which proved to be a tent against which the drift had piled up . It contained the bodies of Scott , Wilson , and Bowers . Crean later wrote , referring to Scott in understated fashion , that he had " lost a good friend " . 
 On 12 February 1913 Crean and the remaining crew of the Terra Nova arrived in Lyttelton , New Zealand , and shortly after returned to England . At Buckingham Palace the surviving members of the expedition were awarded Polar Medals by King George and Prince Louis of Battenberg , the First Sea Lord . Crean and Lashly were both awarded the Albert Medal , 2nd Class for saving Evans 's life , these were presented by the King at Buckingham Palace on 26 July 1913 . Crean was promoted to the rank of chief petty officer , retroactive to 9 September 1910 . 
 = = Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition ( Endurance Expedition ) , 1914 – 17 = = 
 Ernest Shackleton knew Crean well from the Discovery Expedition , and also knew of his exploits on Scott 's last expedition . Like Scott , Shackleton trusted Crean : he was worth , in Shackleton 's own word , " trumps " . Crean joined Shackleton 's Imperial Transantarctic Expedition on 25 May 1914 , as second officer , with a varied range of duties . In the absence of a Canadian dog @-@ handling expert who was hired but never appeared , Crean took charge of one of the dog @-@ handling teams , and was later involved in the care and nurture of the pups born to one of his dogs , Sally , early in the expedition . 
 On 19 January 1915 the expedition 's ship , the Endurance , was beset in the Weddell Sea pack ice . In the early efforts to free her , Crean narrowly escaped being crushed by a sudden movement in the ice . The ship drifted in the ice for months , eventually sinking on 21 November . Shackleton informed the men that they would drag the food , gear , and three lifeboats across the pack ice , to Snow Hill or Robertson Island , 200 statute miles ( 320 km ) away . Because of uneven ice conditions , pressure ridges , and the danger of ice breakup which could separate the men , they soon abandoned this plan : the men pitched camp and decided to wait . They hoped that the clockwise drift of the pack would carry them 400 statute miles ( 640 km ) to Paulet Island where they knew there was a hut with emergency supplies . But the pack ice held firm as it carried the men well past Paulet Island , and did not break up until 9 April . The crew then had to sail and row the three ill @-@ equipped lifeboats through the pack ice to Elephant Island , a trip which lasted five days . Crean and Hubert Hudson , the navigating officer of the Endurance , piloted their lifeboat with Crean effectively in charge as Hudson appeared to have suffered a breakdown . 
 On reaching Elephant Island , Crean was one of the " four fittest men " detailed by Shackleton to find a safe camping @-@ ground . Shackleton decided that , rather than waiting for a rescue ship that would probably never arrive , one of the lifeboats should be strengthened so that a crew could sail it to South Georgia and arrange a rescue . After the party was settled on a penguin rookery above the high @-@ water mark , a group of men led by ship 's carpenter Harry McNish began modifying one of the lifeboats — the James Caird — in preparation for this journey , which Shackleton would lead . Frank Wild , who would be in command of the party remaining on Elephant Island , wanted the dependable Crean to stay with him ; Shackleton initially agreed , but changed his mind after Crean begged to be included in the boat 's crew of six . The 800 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) boat journey to South Georgia , described by polar historian Caroline Alexander as one of the most extraordinary feats of seamanship and navigation in recorded history , took 17 days through gales and snow squalls , in seas which the navigator , Frank Worsley , described as a " mountainous westerly swell " . After setting off on 24 April 1916 with just the barest navigational equipment , they reached South Georgia on 10 May 1916 . Shackleton , in his later account of the journey , recalled Crean 's tuneless singing at the tiller : " He always sang when he was steering , and nobody ever discovered what the song was ... but somehow it was cheerful " . 
 The party made its South Georgia landfall on the uninhabited southern coast , having decided that the risk of aiming directly for the whaling stations on the north side was too great ; if they missed the island to the north they would be swept out into the Atlantic Ocean . The original plan was to work the James Caird around the coast , but the boat 's rudder had broken off after their initial landing , and some of the party were , in Shackleton 's view , unfit for further travel . The three fittest men — Shackleton , Crean , and Worsley — were decided to trek 30 statute miles ( 48 km ) across the island 's glaciated surface , in a hazardous 36 @-@ hour journey to the nearest manned whaling station . This trek was the first recorded crossing of the mountainous island , completed without tents , sleeping bags , or map — their only mountaineering equipment was a carpenter 's adze , a length of alpine rope , and screws from the James Caird hammered through their boots to serve as crampons . They arrived at the whaling station at Stromness , tired and dirty , hair long and matted , faces blackened by months of cooking by blubber stoves — " the world 's dirtiest men " , according to Worsley . They quickly organized a boat to pick up the three on the other side of South Georgia , but thereafter it took Shackleton three months and four attempts by ship to rescue the other 22 men still on Elephant Island . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After returning to Britain in November 1916 , Crean resumed naval duties . On 15 December 1916 he was promoted to the rank of warrant officer ( as a boatswain ) , in recognition of his service on the Endurance , and was awarded his third Polar Medal . On 5 September 1917 Crean married Ellen Herlihy of Annascaul . 
 In early 1920 , Shackleton was organising another Antarctic expedition , later to be known as the Shackleton @-@ Rowett Expedition . He invited Crean to join him , along with other officers from the Endurance . By this time , however , Crean 's second daughter had arrived , and he had plans to open a business following his naval career . He turned down Shackleton 's invitation . 
 On his last naval assignment , with Hecla , Crean suffered a bad fall which caused lasting effects to his vision . As a result , he was retired on medical grounds on 24 March 1920 . He and Ellen opened a small public house in Annascaul , which he called The South Pole Inn . The couple had three daughters , Mary , Kate , and Eileen , although Kate died when she was four years old . 
 Throughout his life , Crean remained an extremely modest man . When he returned to Kerry , he put all of his medals away and never again spoke about his experiences in the Antarctic . Indeed , there is no reliable evidence of Crean giving any interviews to the press . It has been speculated that this may have been because Kerry had long been a centre for Irish republicanism , and it would have been inappropriate for an Irishman to speak of his achievements on polar expeditions organised by a once occupying power . In fact , Crean and his family were once the victims of a Black and Tan raid during the War of Independence . The raiders ransacked his property and the <unk> felt threatened until the Black and Tans happened across a framed photo of Crean in Royal Navy dress uniform and medals . They then left his inn . 
 Crean 's older brother was Cornelius Crean , a sergeant in the Royal Irish Constabulary ( RIC ) . Cornelius was based in West Cork , where he served with the RIC during the War of Independence . Sgt. Crean was killed during an IRA ambush near Upton in West Cork on 25 April 1920 . 
 In 1938 Crean became ill with a burst appendix . He was taken to the nearest hospital in Tralee , but as no surgeon was available to operate , he was transferred to the Bon Secours Hospital in Cork where his appendix was removed . Because the operation had been delayed , an infection developed , and after a week in the hospital he died on 27 July 1938 , shortly after his sixty @-@ first birthday . He was buried in his family 's tomb at the cemetery in <unk> . 
 Crean is commemorated in at least two place names : Mount Crean 8 @,@ 630 feet ( 2 @,@ 630 m ) in Victoria Land , and the Crean Glacier on South Georgia . A one @-@ man play , Tom Crean – Antarctic Explorer , has been widely performed since 2001 by its author Aidan Dooley , including a special showing at the South Pole Inn , Annascaul , in October 2001 . Present were Crean 's daughters , Eileen and Mary , both in their 80s . Apparently he never told them his stories ; according to Eileen : " He put his medals and his sword in a box ... and that was that . He was a very humble man " . 
 In July 2003 , a bronze statue of Crean was unveiled across from his pub in Annascaul . It depicts him leaning against a crate whilst holding a pair of hiking poles in one hand and two of " his " beloved sled dog pups in the other . 
 = FIFA World Cup = 
 The FIFA World Cup , often simply called the World Cup , is an international association football competition contested by the senior men 's national teams of the members of Fédération Internationale de Football Association ( FIFA ) , the sport 's global governing body . The championship has been awarded every four years since the inaugural tournament in 1930 , except in 1942 and 1946 when it was not held because of the Second World War . The current champion is Germany , which won its fourth title at the 2014 tournament in Brazil . 
 The current format of the competition involves a qualification phase , which currently takes place over the preceding three years , to determine which teams qualify for the tournament phase , which is often called the World Cup Finals . 32 teams , including the automatically qualifying host nation ( s ) , compete in the tournament phase for the title at venues within the host nation ( s ) over a period of about a month . 
 The 20 World Cup tournaments have been won by eight different national teams . Brazil have won five times , and they are the only team to have played in every tournament . The other World Cup winners are Germany and Italy , with four titles each ; Argentina and inaugural winners Uruguay , with two titles each ; and England , France and Spain , with one title each . 
 The World Cup is the most widely viewed and followed sporting event in the world , exceeding even the Olympic Games ; the cumulative audience of all matches of the 2006 FIFA World Cup was estimated to be 26 @.@ 29 billion with an estimated 715 @.@ 1 million people watching the final match , a ninth of the entire population of the planet . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous international competitions = = = 
 The world 's first international football match was a challenge match played in Glasgow in 1872 between Scotland and England , which ended in a 0 – 0 draw . The first international tournament , the inaugural edition of the British Home Championship , took place in 1884 . As football grew in popularity in other parts of the world at the turn of the 20th century , it was held as a demonstration sport with no medals awarded at the 1900 and 1904 Summer Olympics ( however , the IOC has retroactively upgraded their status to official events ) , and at the 1906 Intercalated Games . 
 After FIFA was founded in 1904 , it tried to arrange an international football tournament between nations outside the Olympic framework in Switzerland in 1906 . These were very early days for international football , and the official history of FIFA describes the competition as having been a failure . 
 At the 1908 Summer Olympics in London , football became an official competition . Planned by The Football Association ( FA ) , England 's football governing body , the event was for amateur players only and was regarded suspiciously as a show rather than a competition . Great Britain ( represented by the England national amateur football team ) won the gold medals . They repeated the feat in 1912 in Stockholm . 
 With the Olympic event continuing to be contested only between amateur teams , Sir Thomas Lipton organised the Sir Thomas Lipton Trophy tournament in Turin in 1909 . The Lipton tournament was a championship between individual clubs ( not national teams ) from different nations , each one of which represented an entire nation . The competition is sometimes described as The First World Cup , and featured the most prestigious professional club sides from Italy , Germany and Switzerland , but the FA of England refused to be associated with the competition and declined the offer to send a professional team . Lipton invited West Auckland , an amateur side from County Durham , to represent England instead . West Auckland won the tournament and returned in 1911 to successfully defend their title . 
 In 1914 , FIFA agreed to recognise the Olympic tournament as a " world football championship for amateurs " , and took responsibility for managing the event . This paved the way for the world 's first intercontinental football competition , at the 1920 Summer Olympics , contested by Egypt and 13 European teams , and won by Belgium . Uruguay won the next two Olympic football tournaments in 1924 and 1928 . Those were also the first two open world championships , as 1924 was the start of FIFA 's professional era . 
 = = = World Cups before World War II = = = 
 Due to the success of the Olympic football tournaments , FIFA , with President Jules Rimet as the driving force , again started looking at staging its own international tournament outside of the Olympics . On 28 May 1928 , the FIFA Congress in Amsterdam decided to stage a world championship itself . With Uruguay now two @-@ time official football world champions and to celebrate their centenary of independence in 1930 , FIFA named Uruguay as the host country of the inaugural World Cup tournament . 
 The national associations of selected nations were invited to send a team , but the choice of Uruguay as a venue for the competition meant a long and costly trip across the Atlantic Ocean for European sides . Indeed , no European country pledged to send a team until two months before the start of the competition . Rimet eventually persuaded teams from Belgium , France , Romania , and Yugoslavia to make the trip . In total , 13 nations took part : seven from South America , four from Europe and two from North America . 
 The first two World Cup matches took place simultaneously on 13 July 1930 , and were won by France and USA , who defeated Mexico 4 – 1 and Belgium 3 – 0 respectively . The first goal in World Cup history was scored by Lucien Laurent of France . In the final , Uruguay defeated Argentina 4 – 2 in front of a crowd of 93 @,@ 000 people in Montevideo , and in doing so became the first nation to win the World Cup . 
 After the creation of the World Cup , the 1932 Summer Olympics , held in Los Angeles , did not plan to include football as part of the schedule due to the low popularity of the sport in the United States , as American football had been growing in popularity . FIFA and the IOC also disagreed over the status of amateur players , and so football was dropped from the Games . Olympic football returned at the 1936 Summer Olympics , but was now overshadowed by the more prestigious World Cup . 
 The issues facing the early World Cup tournaments were the difficulties of intercontinental travel , and war . Few South American teams were willing to travel to Europe for the 1934 and 1938 tournaments , with Brazil the only South American team to compete in both . The 1942 and 1946 competitions , which Nazi Germany and Brazil sought to host , were cancelled due to World War II and its aftermath . 
 = = = World Cups after World War II = = = 
 The 1950 World Cup , held in Brazil , was the first to include British participants . British teams withdrew from FIFA in 1920 , partly out of unwillingness to play against the countries they had been at war with , and partly as a protest against foreign influence on football , but rejoined in 1946 following FIFA 's invitation . The tournament also saw the return of 1930 champions Uruguay , who had boycotted the previous two World Cups . Uruguay won the tournament again after defeating the host nation Brazil , in the match called " Maracanazo " ( Portuguese : Maracanaço ) . 
 In the tournaments between 1934 and 1978 , 16 teams competed in each tournament , except in 1938 , when Austria was absorbed into Germany after qualifying , leaving the tournament with 15 teams , and in 1950 , when India , Scotland , and Turkey withdrew , leaving the tournament with 13 teams . Most of the participating nations were from Europe and South America , with a small minority from North America , Africa , Asia , and Oceania . These teams were usually defeated easily by the European and South American teams . Until 1982 , the only teams from outside Europe and South America to advance out of the first round were : USA , semi @-@ finalists in 1930 ; Cuba , quarter @-@ finalists in 1938 ; North Korea , quarter @-@ finalists in 1966 ; and Mexico , quarter @-@ finalists in 1970 . 
 = = = Expansion to 32 teams = = = 
 The tournament was expanded to 24 teams in 1982 , and then to 32 in 1998 , also allowing more teams from Africa , Asia and North America to take part . Since then , teams from these regions have enjoyed more success , with several having reached the quarter @-@ finals : Mexico , quarter @-@ finalists in 1986 ; Cameroon , quarter @-@ finalists in 1990 ; South Korea , finishing in fourth place in 2002 ; Senegal , along with USA , both quarter @-@ finalists in 2002 ; Ghana , quarter @-@ finalists in 2010 ; and Costa Rica , quarter @-@ finalists in 2014 . Nevertheless , European and South American teams continue to dominate , e.g. , the quarter @-@ finalists in 1994 , 1998 , and 2006 were all from Europe or South America and so were the finalists of all tournaments so far . 
 Two hundred teams entered the 2002 FIFA World Cup qualification rounds ; 198 nations attempted to qualify for the 2006 FIFA World Cup , while a record 204 countries entered qualification for the 2010 FIFA World Cup . 
 = = = Possible expansion to 40 teams = = = 
 In October 2013 , Sepp Blatter spoke of guaranteeing the Caribbean Football Union 's region a position in the World Cup . In the 25 October 2013 edition of the FIFA Weekly Blatter wrote that : " From a purely sporting perspective , I would like to see globalisation finally taken seriously , and the African and Asian national associations accorded the status they deserve at the FIFA World Cup . It cannot be that the European and South American confederations lay claim to the majority of the berths at the World Cup . " Those two remarks suggested to commentators that Blatter could be putting himself forward for re @-@ election to the FIFA Presidency . 
 Following the magazine 's publication , Blatter 's would @-@ be opponent for the FIFA Presidency , UEFA President Michel Platini responded that he intended to extend the World Cup to 40 national associations , increasing the number of participants by eight . Platini said that he would allocate an additional berth to UEFA , two to Asia Football Confederation and Confederation of African Football , two shared between CONCACAF and CONMEBOL , and a guaranteed place for the Oceania Football Confederation . Platini was clear about why he wanted to expand the World Cup . He said : " [ The World Cup is ] not based on the quality of the teams because you don 't have the best 32 at the World Cup ... but it 's a good compromise . ... It 's a political matter so why not have more Africans ? The competition is to bring all the people of all the world . If you don 't give the possibility to participate , they don 't improve . " 
 In 2016 FIFA president Gianni Infantino stated his support for a 40 @-@ team World Cup in 2026 . 
 = = = 2015 FIFA corruption case = = = 
 By May 2015 , the games were under a particularly dark cloud because of the 2015 FIFA corruption case , allegations and criminal charges of bribery , fraud and money laundering to corrupt the issuing of media and marketing rights ( rigged bids ) for FIFA games , with FIFA officials accused of taking bribes totaling more than $ 150 million over 24 years . In late May , the U.S. Justice Department announced a 47 @-@ count indictment with charges of racketeering , wire fraud and money laundering conspiracy against 14 people . Arrests of over a dozen FIFA officials were made since that time , particularly on May 29 and December 3 . 
 By the end of May 2015 , a total of nine FIFA officials and five executives of sports and broadcasting markets had already been charged on corruption . At the time , FIFA president Sepp Blatter announced he would relinquish his position in February 2016 . 
 On 4 June 2015 Chuck Blazer while co @-@ operating with the FBI and the Swiss authorities admitted that he and the other members of FIFA 's executive committee were bribed in order to promote the South African , 1998 and 2010 World Cups . 
 On 10 June 2015 Swiss authorities seized computer data from the offices of Sepp Blatter . 
 Also , on 10 June 2015 FIFA postponed the bidding process for the 2026 FIFA World Cup in light of the allegations surrounding bribery in the awarding of the 2018 and 2022 tournaments . Then @-@ secretary general Jérôme Valcke stated , " Due to the situation , I think it 's nonsense to start any bidding process for the time being . " 
 On 28 October 2015 , Blatter and FIFA VP Michel Platini , a potential candidate for presidency , were suspended for 90 days ; both maintained their innocence in statements made to the news media . 
 On 3 December 2015 two FIFA vice @-@ presidents were arrested on suspicion of bribery in the same Zurich hotel where seven FIFA officials had been arrested in May . An additional 16 indictments by the U.S. Department of Justice were announced on the same day . 
 = = = Other FIFA tournaments = = = 
 An equivalent tournament for women 's football , the FIFA Women 's World Cup , was first held in 1991 in China . The women 's tournament is smaller in scale and profile than the men 's , but is growing ; the number of entrants for the 2007 tournament was 120 , more than double that of 1991 . 
 Football has been included in every Summer Olympic Games except 1896 and 1932 . Unlike many other sports , the men 's football tournament at the Olympics is not a top @-@ level tournament , and since 1992 , an under @-@ 23 tournament with each team allowed three over @-@ age players . Women 's football made its Olympic debut in 1996 , and is contested between full national sides with no age restrictions . 
 The FIFA Confederations Cup is a tournament held one year before the World Cup at the World Cup host nation ( s ) as a dress rehearsal for the upcoming World Cup . It is contested by the winners of each of the six FIFA confederation championships , along with the FIFA World Cup champion and the host country . 
 FIFA also organises international tournaments for youth football ( FIFA U @-@ 20 World Cup , FIFA U @-@ 17 World Cup , FIFA U @-@ 20 Women 's World Cup , FIFA U @-@ 17 Women 's World Cup ) , club football ( FIFA Club World Cup ) , and football variants such as futsal ( FIFA Futsal World Cup ) and beach soccer ( FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup ) . The latter three do not have a women 's version , although a FIFA Women 's Club World Cup is planned for 2017 . 
 When the U @-@ 20 Women 's World Cup is held the year before the Women 's World Cup , both tournaments are awarded in a single bidding process . The U @-@ 20 tournament serves as a dress rehearsal for the larger competition , the same role as the Confederations Cup plays in the men 's game . 
 = = Trophy = = 
 From 1930 to 1970 , the Jules Rimet Trophy was awarded to the World Cup winning team . It was originally simply known as the World Cup or Coupe du Monde , but in 1946 it was renamed after the FIFA president Jules Rimet who set up the first tournament . In 1970 , Brazil 's third victory in the tournament entitled them to keep the trophy permanently . However , the trophy was stolen in 1983 and has never been recovered , apparently melted down by the thieves . 
 After 1970 , a new trophy , known as the FIFA World Cup Trophy , was designed . The experts of FIFA , coming from seven countries , evaluated the 53 presented models , finally opting for the work of the Italian designer Silvio Gazzaniga . The new trophy is 36 cm ( 14 @.@ 2 in ) high , made of solid 18 carat ( 75 % ) gold and weighs 6 @.@ 175 kg ( 13 @.@ 6 lb ) . The base contains two layers of semi @-@ precious malachite while the bottom side of the trophy bears the engraved year and name of each FIFA World Cup winner since 1974 . The description of the trophy by Gazzaniga was : " The lines spring out from the base , rising in spirals , stretching out to receive the world . From the remarkable dynamic tensions of the compact body of the sculpture rise the figures of two athletes at the stirring moment of victory . " 
 This new trophy is not awarded to the winning nation permanently . World Cup winners retain the trophy only until the post @-@ match celebration is finished . They are awarded a gold @-@ plated replica rather than the solid gold original immediately afterwards . 
 Currently , all members ( players , coaches , and managers ) of the top three teams receive medals with an insignia of the World Cup Trophy ; winners ' ( gold ) , runners @-@ up ' ( silver ) , and third @-@ place ( bronze ) . In the 2002 edition , fourth @-@ place medals were awarded to hosts South Korea . Before the 1978 tournament , medals were only awarded to the eleven players on the pitch at the end of the final and the third @-@ place match . In November 2007 , FIFA announced that all members of World Cup @-@ winning squads between 1930 and 1974 were to be retroactively awarded winners ' medals . 
 = = Format = = 
 = = = Qualification = = = 
 Since the second World Cup in 1934 , qualifying tournaments have been held to thin the field for the final tournament . They are held within the six FIFA continental zones ( Africa , Asia , North and Central America and Caribbean , South America , Oceania , and Europe ) , overseen by their respective confederations . For each tournament , FIFA decides the number of places awarded to each of the continental zones beforehand , generally based on the relative strength of the confederations ' teams . 
 The qualification process can start as early as almost three years before the final tournament and last over a two @-@ year period . The formats of the qualification tournaments differ between confederations . Usually , one or two places are awarded to winners of intercontinental play @-@ offs . For example , the winner of the Oceanian zone and the fifth @-@ placed team from the Asian zone entered a play @-@ off for a spot in the 2010 World Cup . From the 1938 World Cup onwards , host nations receive automatic qualification to the final tournament . This right was also granted to the defending champions between 1938 and 2002 , but was withdrawn from the 2006 FIFA World Cup onward , requiring the champions to qualify . Brazil , winners in 2002 , were the first defending champions to play qualifying matches . 
 = = = Final tournament = = = 
 The current final tournament has been used since 1998 and features 32 national teams competing over the course of a month in the host nation ( s ) . There are two stages : the group stage followed by the knockout stage . 
 In the group stage , teams compete within eight groups of four teams each . Eight teams are seeded , including the hosts , with the other seeded teams selected using a formula based on the FIFA World Rankings and / or performances in recent World Cups , and drawn to separate groups . The other teams are assigned to different " pots " , usually based on geographical criteria , and teams in each pot are drawn at random to the eight groups . Since 1998 , constraints have been applied to the draw to ensure that no group contains more than two European teams or more than one team from any other confederation . 
 Each group plays a round @-@ robin tournament , in which each team is scheduled for three matches against other teams in the same group . This means that a total of six matches are played within a group . The last round of matches of each group is scheduled at the same time to preserve fairness among all four teams . The top two teams from each group advance to the knockout stage . Points are used to rank the teams within a group . Since 1994 , three points have been awarded for a win , one for a draw and none for a loss ( before , winners received two points ) . 
 If one considers all possible outcomes ( win , draw , loss ) for all six matches in a group , there are 729 ( = 36 ) different outcome combinations possible . However a certain number ( 207 ) of these combinations lead to ties between the second and third places . In such case , the ranking among these teams is determined as follows : 
 Greatest combined goal difference in all group matches 
 Greatest combined number of goals scored in all group matches 
 If more than one team remain level after applying the above criteria , their ranking will be determined as follows : 
 Greatest number of points in head @-@ to @-@ head matches among those teams 
 Greatest goal difference in head @-@ to @-@ head matches among those teams 
 Greatest number of goals scored in head @-@ to @-@ head matches among those teams 
 If any of the teams above remain level after applying the above criteria , their ranking will be determined by the drawing of lots 
 The knockout stage is a single @-@ elimination tournament in which teams play each other in one @-@ off matches , with extra time and penalty shootouts used to decide the winner if necessary . It begins with the round of 16 ( or the second round ) in which the winner of each group plays against the runner @-@ up of another group . This is followed by the quarter @-@ finals , the semi @-@ finals , the third @-@ place match ( contested by the losing semi @-@ finalists ) , and the final . 
 = = Hosts = = 
 = = = Selection process = = = 
 Early World Cups were given to countries at meetings of FIFA 's congress . The locations were controversial because South America and Europe were by far the two centres of strength in football and travel between them required three weeks by boat . The decision to hold the first World Cup in Uruguay , for example , led to only four European nations competing . The next two World Cups were both held in Europe . The decision to hold the second of these in France was disputed , as the South American countries understood that the location would alternate between the two continents . Both Argentina and Uruguay thus boycotted the 1938 FIFA World Cup . 
 Since the 1958 FIFA World Cup , to avoid future boycotts or controversy , FIFA began a pattern of alternating the hosts between the Americas and Europe , which continued until the 1998 FIFA World Cup . The 2002 FIFA World Cup , hosted jointly by South Korea and Japan , was the first one held in Asia , and the only tournament with multiple hosts . South Africa became the first African nation to host the World Cup in 2010 . The 2014 FIFA World Cup is hosted by Brazil , the first held in South America since Argentina 1978 , and is the first occasion where consecutive World Cups are held outside Europe . 
 The host country is now chosen in a vote by FIFA 's Executive Committee . This is done under an exhaustive ballot system . The national football association of a country desiring to host the event receives a " Hosting Agreement " from FIFA , which explains the steps and requirements that are expected from a strong bid . The bidding association also receives a form , the submission of which represents the official confirmation of the candidacy . After this , a FIFA designated group of inspectors visit the country to identify that the country meets the requirements needed to host the event and a report on the country is produced . The decision on who will host the World Cup is usually made six or seven years in advance of the tournament . However , there have been occasions where the hosts of multiple future tournaments were announced at the same time , as was the case for the 2018 and 2022 World Cups , which were awarded to Russia and Qatar respectively . 
 For the 2010 and 2014 World Cups , the final tournament is rotated between confederations , allowing only countries from the chosen confederation ( Africa in 2010 , South America in 2014 ) to bid to host the tournament . The rotation policy was introduced after the controversy surrounding Germany 's victory over South Africa in the vote to host the 2006 tournament . However , the policy of continental rotation will not continue beyond 2014 , so any country , except those belonging to confederations that hosted the two preceding tournaments , can apply as hosts for World Cups starting from 2018 . This is partly to avoid a similar scenario to the bidding process for the 2014 tournament , where Brazil was the only official bidder . 
 = = Performances = = 
 Six of the eight champions have won one of their titles while playing in their own homeland , the exceptions being Brazil , who finished as runners @-@ up after losing the deciding match on home soil in 1950 and lost their semifinal against Germany in 2014 , and Spain , which reached the second round on home soil in 1982 . England ( 1966 ) and France ( 1998 ) won their only titles while playing as host nations . Uruguay ( 1930 ) , Italy ( 1934 ) and Argentina ( 1978 ) won their first titles as host nations but have gone on to win again , while Germany ( 1974 ) won their second title on home soil . 
 Other nations have also been successful when hosting the tournament . Switzerland ( quarter @-@ finals 1954 ) , Sweden ( runners @-@ up in 1958 ) , Chile ( third place in 1962 ) , South Korea ( fourth place in 2002 ) , and Mexico ( quarter @-@ finals in 1970 and 1986 ) all have their best results when serving as hosts . So far , South Africa ( 2010 ) has been the only host nation to fail to advance beyond the first round . 
 = = Attendance = = 
 • QF 
 = Quarter @-@ Finals ( top 8 ) ; Group = 
 did not advance beyond first round ( group play ) 
 [ Solna borders Stockholm , Pasadena borders Los Angeles and Saint @-@ Denis is a suburb of Paris . ] 
 The best @-@ attended single match , shown in the last two columns , has been the final in only about half of the twenty World Cup series so far . Another match or matches drew more attendance than the final in 1938 , 1954 , 1966 – 1982 , 1990 and 2006 . 
 Source : FIFA 
 = = Broadcasting and promotion = = 
 The World Cup was first televised in 1954 and is now the most widely viewed and followed sporting event in the world . The cumulative audience of all matches of the 2006 World Cup is estimated to be 26 @.@ 29 billion . 715 @.@ 1 million individuals watched the final match of this tournament ( a ninth of the entire population of the planet ) . The 2006 World Cup draw , which decided the distribution of teams into groups , was watched by 300 million viewers . The World Cup attracts many sponsors such as Coca @-@ Cola , McDonald 's and Adidas . For these companies and many more , being a sponsor strongly impacts their global brands . Host countries typically experience a multimillion @-@ dollar revenue increase from the month @-@ long event . It is predicted that Brazil will bring in more than $ 11 billion in revenue for the 2014 World Cup . 
 Each FIFA World Cup since 1966 has its own mascot or logo . World Cup Willie , the mascot for the 1966 competition , was the first World Cup mascot . Recent World Cups have also featured official match balls specially designed for each World Cup . 
 The World Cup even has a statistically significant effect on birth rates , the male / female sex ratio of newborns , and heart attacks in nations whose national teams are competing . Hosting the World Cup or a home team 's win tends to increase male births and total birth rate , and heart attacks are more common when home teams are on the field . 
 = = Results = = 
 <unk> : after extra time 
 p : after penalty shoot @-@ out 
 Notes 
 In all , 77 nations have played in at least one World Cup . Of these , eight national teams have won the World Cup , and they have added stars to their badges , with each star representing a World Cup victory . ( Uruguay , however , choose to display four stars on their badge , representing their two gold medals at the 1924 and 1928 Summer Olympics and their two World Cup titles in 1930 and 1950 . ) 
 With five titles , Brazil are the most successful World Cup team and also the only nation to have played in every World Cup ( 20 ) to date . Italy ( 1934 and 1938 ) and Brazil ( 1958 and 1962 ) are the only nations to have won consecutive titles . West Germany ( 1982 – 1990 ) and Brazil ( 1994 – 2002 ) are the only nations to appear in three consecutive World Cup finals . Germany has made the most top @-@ four finishes ( 13 ) , medals ( 12 ) , as well as the most finals ( 8 ) . 
 = = = Teams reaching the top four = = = 
 = = = Best performances by continental zones = = = 
 To date , the final of the World Cup has only been contested by teams from the UEFA ( Europe ) and CONMEBOL ( South America ) confederations . European nations have won eleven titles , while South American have won nine . Only two teams from outside these two continents have ever reached the semi @-@ finals of the competition : USA ( North , Central America and Caribbean ) in 1930 and South Korea ( Asia ) in 2002 . The best result of an African team is reaching the quarter @-@ finals : Cameroon in 1990 , Senegal in 2002 and Ghana in 2010 . Only one Oceanian qualifier , Australia in 2006 , has advanced to the second round . 
 Brazil , Argentina , Spain and Germany are the only teams to win a World Cup outside their continental confederation ; Brazil came out victorious in Europe ( 1958 ) , North America ( 1970 and 1994 ) and Asia ( 2002 ) , Argentina won a North American World Cup in 1986 , while Spain won an Africa in 2010 . Germany was the first European team to win in South America in 2014 . Only on four occasions have consecutive World Cups been won by teams from the same continent , and currently it is the first time with three champions in a row from the same continental confederation . Italy and Brazil successfully defended their titles in 1938 and 1962 respectively , while Italy 's triumph in 2006 has been followed by Spain 's in 2010 and Germany 's in 2014 . Currently , it is also the first time that one of the currently winning continents ( Europe ) is ahead of the other ( South America ) with two championships . 
 = = Awards = = 
 At the end of each World Cup , awards are presented to the players and teams for accomplishments other than their final team positions in the tournament . There are currently six awards : 
 The Golden Ball for the best player , determined by a vote of media members ( first awarded in 1982 ) ; the Silver Ball and the Bronze Ball are awarded to the players finishing second and third in the voting respectively ; 
 The Golden Boot ( sometimes called the Golden Shoe ) for the top goalscorer ( first awarded in 1982 , but retrospectively applied to all tournaments from 1930 ) ; most recently , the Silver Boot and the Bronze Boot have been awarded to the second and third top goalscorers respectively ; 
 The Golden Glove Award ( formerly the Yashin Award ) for the best goalkeeper , decided by the FIFA Technical Study Group ( first awarded in 1994 ) ; 
 The Best Young Player Award for the best player aged 21 or younger at the start of the calendar year , decided by the FIFA Technical Study Group ( first awarded in 2006 ) ; 
 The FIFA Fair Play Trophy for the team with the best record of fair play , according to the points system and criteria established by the FIFA Fair Play Committee ( first awarded in 1978 ) ; 
 The Most Entertaining Team for the team that has entertained the public the most during the World Cup , determined by a poll of the general public ( first awarded in 1994 ) ; 
 An All @-@ Star Team consisting of the best players of the tournament has also been announced for each tournament since 1998 . 
 = = Records and statistics = = 
 Two players share the record for playing in the most World Cups ; Mexico 's Antonio Carbajal ( 1950 – 1966 ) and Germany 's Lothar Matthäus ( 1982 – 1998 ) both played in five tournaments . Matthäus has played the most World Cup matches overall , with 25 appearances . Brazil 's <unk> Santos ( 1954 – 1962 ) , West Germany 's Franz Beckenbauer ( 1966 – 1974 ) and Germany 's Philipp Lahm ( 2006 – 2014 ) are the only players to be named to three Finals All @-@ Star Teams . 
 Miroslav Klose of Germany ( 2002 – 2014 ) is the all @-@ time top scorer at the finals , with 16 goals . He broke Ronaldo of Brazil 's record of 15 goals ( 1998 – 2006 ) during 2014 semi @-@ final match against Brazil . West Germany 's Gerd Müller ( 1970 – 1974 ) is third , with 14 goals . The fourth placed goalscorer , France 's Just Fontaine , holds the record for the most goals scored in a single World Cup ; all his 13 goals were scored in the 1958 tournament . 
 In November 2007 , FIFA announced that all members of World Cup @-@ winning squads between 1930 and 1974 were to be retroactively awarded winners ' medals . This made Brazil 's Pelé the only player to have won three World Cup winners ' medals ( 1958 , 1962 , and 1970 , although he did not play in the 1962 final due to injury ) , with 20 other players who have won two winners ' medals . Seven players have collected all three types of World Cup medals ( winners ' , <unk> ups ' , and third @-@ place ) ; five players were from West Germany 's squad of 1966 – 1974 including Franz Beckenbauer , Jürgen Grabowski , Horst @-@ Dieter <unk> , Sepp Maier and Wolfgang <unk> ( 1966 – 1974 ) , Italy 's Franco <unk> ( 1982 , 1990 , 1994 ) and the most recent has been Miroslav Klose of Germany ( 2002 – 2014 ) with four consecutive medals . 
 Brazil 's Mário <unk> and West Germany 's Franz Beckenbauer are the only people to date to win the World Cup as both player and head coach . <unk> won in 1958 and 1962 as a player and in 1970 as head coach . Beckenbauer won in 1974 as captain and in 1990 as head coach . Italy 's Vittorio Pozzo is the only head coach to ever win two World Cups ( 1934 and 1938 ) . All World Cup winning head coaches were natives of the country they coached to victory . 
 Among the national teams , Germany has played the most World Cup matches ( 106 ) and appeared in the most finals ( 8 ) , semi @-@ finals ( 13 ) , quarter @-@ finals ( 16 ) as well as scoring the most World Cup goals ( 224 ) , while Brazil has appeared in the most World Cups ( 20 ) . The two teams have played each other twice in the World Cup , in the 2002 final and in the 2014 semi @-@ final . 
 = = = Top goalscorers = = = 
 = = = All @-@ time table for champions = = = 
 = Typhoon Brian ( 1989 ) = 
 Typhoon Brian was the first in a series of tropical cyclones to impact southern China and northern Vietnam in October 1989 . Originating from an area of low pressure associated with a monsoon trough in late @-@ September , Brian quickly organized into a tropical storm over the South China Sea on September 30 . Tracking along a general west @-@ southwest to westerly course , the storm attained typhoon status on October 1 before making landfall along the southern coast of Hainan Island the following day . Slight weakening occurred during Brian 's brief passage of Hainan Island before the system entered the Gulf of Tonkin . The storm ultimately struck Vietnam on October 3 before dissipating the next day over Laos . 
 Across Hainan Island , Brian caused extensive damage to property and infrastructure . Nearly 185 @,@ 000 homes were damaged or destroyed by the storm 's high winds or flash flooding . Communications were severely disrupted as 2 @,@ 800 km ( 1 @,@ 700 mi ) of power and telephone lines were downed . Brian killed 40 people and inflicted 837 million Renminbi ( US $ 222 million ) in damage throughout Hainan before impacting Vietnam and causing further damage . Significant losses were reported in Vietnam as well ; however , the rapid succession of Brian and two other typhoons made it difficult to differentiate the losses caused by each storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late September 1989 , an active monsoon trough over the South China Sea spawned a tropical disturbance near northern Luzon . By September 28 , a broad band of convection associated with a weak area of low pressure developed within the trough . Later that day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) began monitoring the system as a tropical depression . Aided by a well @-@ defined anticyclone , the low quickly organized , prompting the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) to issue a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . Initially steered westward by a subtropical ridge , the depression became quasi @-@ stationary on September 30 about 360 km ( 225 mi ) southeast of Hong Kong as the ridge weakened . Shortly after the system stalled , the JTWC also began warning on it as a tropical depression . 
 Following a reintensification of the ridge later on September 30 , the depression resumed a west @-@ southwesterly track . During this time , the depression attained tropical storm status and was given the name Brian by the JTWC . Over the following 24 hours , Brian continued to intensify and ultimately reached typhoon strength late on October 1 . After developing a large eye , Brian reached its peak intensity on October 2 with winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ; one @-@ minute sustained ) . The JMA also classified Brian as a typhoon around this time , estimating the storm to have attained peak ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) as well as a minimum pressure of 970 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 64 inHg ) . Now tracking due west , the typhoon moved towards Hainan Island and ultimately made landfall along the southeastern coast of the island around 1500 UTC . 
 Only slight weakening took place as the typhoon skirted along the southern coast of Hainan Island . By October 3 , Brian had entered the Gulf of Tonkin and struck Vietnam later that day near Vinh with winds of 140 km / h ( 85 km / h ) . Rapid dissipation ensued once onshore and Brian eventually dissipated on October 4 over the mountainous terrain of Laos . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Striking Hainan Island as a strong typhoon , Brian caused widespread wind damage in the region . Approximately 700 km ( 430 mi ) of power lines and 2 @,@ 100 km ( 1 @,@ 300 mi ) of telephone lines were downed by the storm , severely disrupting communications . Many homes in southern areas of Hainan either collapsed or lost their roofs amidst hurricane @-@ force winds . About 15 @,@ 900 homes collapsed throughout the island and another 169 @,@ 000 were damaged . Over 25 million lumber and rubber trees were snapped or uprooted by the typhoon . Heavy rains accompanying the storm triggered significant flash flooding . Many rivers across the island overtopped their banks and inundated surrounding areas , including an estimated 194 @,@ 000 acres of rice paddies . Across Hainan , 40 people were killed and 529 others were injured by the storm . Losses throughout the region reached 837 million Renminbi ( US $ 222 million ) . 
 Although Hong Kong was not in the direct path of the storm , the Hong Kong Observatory issued storm signals on September 30 as high winds associated with the typhoon were expected to impact the city . On October 2 , the storm passed 270 km ( 170 mi ) south of the city . Wind gusts associated with the storm reached 124 km / h ( 77 mph ) on Waglan Island ; however , no damage was reported . Along the coast , a storm surge of 0 @.@ 62 m ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) occurred on Waglan . 
 Due to the severe damage caused by Typhoon Brian , the provincial flood control headquarters urged the Chinese Government to organize relief efforts at all levels . By October 8 , the Government of Hainan Island deployed two relief teams to the hardest hit areas . Additionally , 5 million Renminbi in aid was supplied to the region . 
 In Vietnam , heavy rains produced by the typhoon caused widespread flooding in northern provinces . Early assessments from the Vietnamese flood control committee indicated that 60 @,@ 000 hectares ( 148 @,@ 000 acres ) of rice fields were submerged and 6 @,@ 700 metric tons ( 7 @,@ 400 short tons ) of grain were soaked . High winds also caused extensive damage . At least 29 @,@ 000 homes collapsed and 119 @,@ 000 others were left roofless . Additionally , 572 hospitals or clinics were damaged . Several fatalities were reported in the region ; however , they had yet to be verified by October 12 . Within two weeks of Brian 's passage , Typhoons Angela and Dan struck the country , causing further damage and loss of life . Due to the rapid succession of storms , losses resulting from the three typhoons are difficult to differentiate . Because of the widespread damage caused by the storms , the Vietnamese Government appealed for international assistance . 
 = Nyala = 
 The nyala ( Tragelaphus angasii ) , also called <unk> , is a spiral @-@ horned antelope native to southern Africa . It is a species of the family Bovidae and genus Nyala , also considered to be in the genus Tragelaphus . It was first described in 1849 by George French Angas . The body length is 135 – 195 cm ( 53 – 77 in ) , and it weighs 55 – 140 kg ( 121 – 309 lb ) . The coat is rusty or rufous brown in females and juveniles , but grows a dark brown or slate grey , often tinged with blue , in adult males . Females and young males have ten or more white stripes on their sides . Only males have horns , 60 – 83 cm ( 24 – 33 in ) long and yellow @-@ tipped . It exhibits the highest sexual dimorphism among the spiral @-@ horned antelopes . 
 The nyala is mainly active in the early morning and the late afternoon . It generally browses during the day if temperatures are 20 – 30 ° C ( 68 – 86 ° F ) and during the night in the rainy season . As a herbivore , the nyala feeds upon foliage , fruits and grasses , with sufficient fresh water . A shy animal , it prefers water holes rather than open spaces . The nyala does not show signs of territoriality , and individuals areas can overlap each others . They are very cautious creatures . Old males live alone , but single sex or mixed family groups of up to 10 individuals can be found . These inhabit thickets within dense and dry savanna woodlands . The main predators of the nyala are lion , leopard and Cape hunting dog , while baboons and raptorial birds hunt for the juveniles . Mating peaks during spring and autumn . Males and females are sexually mature at 18 and 11 – 12 months of age respectively , though they are socially immature until five years old . After a gestational period of seven months , a single calf is born . 
 The nyala 's range includes Malawi , Mozambique , South Africa , Swaziland , and Zimbabwe . It has been introduced to Botswana and Namibia , and reintroduced to Swaziland , where it had been extinct since the 1950s . Its population is stable and it has been listed as of Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . The principal threats to the species are poaching and habitat loss resulting from human settlement . The males are highly prized as game animals in Africa . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The nyala was first described by George French Angas , an English naturalist , in 1849 . The scientific name of nyala is Tragelaphus angasii . The name angasii is attributed to Angas , who said that Mr. Gray had named this species after Angas ' father , George Fife Angas , Esq. of South Australia . But , according to Article 50 @.@ 1 @.@ 1 of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature and International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature , this is insufficient to state Gray as the author . The name " nyala " is the Swahili name for this antelope , which itself comes from the Zulu " <unk> " . Its first known use was in 1899 . The word has a Bantu origin , similar to the Venda word <unk> @-@ <unk> ( nyala buck ) . 
 The nyala is the second taxon to branch off from the <unk> family tree just after the lesser kudu . As the nyala line has remained separate for a considerable amount of time ( over 5 million years ) , it has now been placed in its own monotypic genus Nyala . Nyala was proposed in 1912 by American zoologist Edmund Heller , the one who had also proposed Ammelaphus ( lesser kudu ) . but not widely recognized , and was only re @-@ established as a valid genus in 2011 by Peter Grubb and Colin Groves . While Nyala is the accepted genus , it is still considered as a species of Tragelaphus . 
 In 2005 , Sandi Willows @-@ Munro ( of the University of KwaZulu @-@ Natal ) and colleagues carried out a mitochondrial analysis of the nine Tragelaphus species. mtDNA and nDNA data were compared . The results showed that the tribe Tragelaphini is monophyletic with the lesser kudu ( T. imberbis ) basal in the phylogeny , followed by the nyala . On the basis of mitochondrial data , studies have estimated that the lesser kudu separated from its sister clade around 13 @.@ 7 million years ago . On the other hand , the nuclear data shows that lesser kudu and nyala form a clade , and collectively separated from the sister clade 13 @.@ 8 million years ago . 
 = = = Genetics and evolution = = = 
 The nyala has 55 male chromosomes and 56 female chromosomes . The Y chromosome has been translocated onto the 14th chromosome , as in other <unk> , but no inversion of the Y chromosome occurs . Cranial studies have shown that the mountain nyala and nyala , though sharing a common name , are actually distant relatives . 
 Fossil evidence suggests that the nyala has been a separate species since the end of the Miocene ( 5 @.@ 8 million years ago ) . Genetic evidence suggests that the proto @-@ nyala had some early hybridization with the proto @-@ lesser kudu , but the two have remained separate long after this crossing . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The nyala is a spiral @-@ horned and middle @-@ sized antelope , between a bushbuck and a kudu . It is considered the most sexually dimorphic antelope . The nyala is typically between 135 – 195 cm ( 53 – 77 in ) in head @-@ and @-@ body length . The male stands up to 110 cm ( 43 in ) , the female is up to 90 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) tall . Males weigh 98 – 125 kg ( 216 – 276 lb ) , while females weigh 55 – 68 kg ( 121 – 150 lb ) . Life expectancy of the nyala is about 19 years . 
 The coat is rusty or rufous brown in females and juveniles . But it grows a dark brown or slate grey in adult males , often with a bluish tinge . Females and young males have ten or more white vertical stripes on their sides . Other markings are visible on the face , throat , flanks and thighs . Stripes are very reduced or absent in older males . Both males and females have a white chevron between their eyes , and a 40 – 55 cm ( 16 – 22 in ) long bushy tail white underside . Both sexes have a dorsal crest of hair running right from the back of the head to the end of the tail . Males have another line of hair along the midline of their chest and belly . 
 Only the males have horns . Horns are 60 – 83 cm ( 24 – 33 in ) long and yellow @-@ tipped . There are one or two twists . The spoor is similar to that of the bushbuck , but larger . It is 5 – 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long . The feces resemble round to spherical pellets . The nyala has hairy glands on its feet , which leave their scent wherever it walks . 
 The condition of the nyala often varies between the sexes . According to a study , this can be attributed to the differences in their body sizes . It was noted that during nutritional stress , old adults died in more numbers , of which most were males . During an attempt of blood sampling in the nyala , it was found that Vitamin E levels varied during stress . 
 = = Parasites = = 
 A study of the helminths from 77 nyalas from four game reserves in Natal revealed the presence of ten nematode species and four nematode genera , a trematode species and <unk> ( members of superfamily <unk> ) , and two cestode genera . The research discovered new parasites that the nyala was host of - namely a Cooperia rotundispiculum race , <unk> <unk> , a <unk> species , Haemonchus <unk> , <unk> tuberculata , an <unk> species , a Setaria species , Trichostrongylus <unk> , Trichostrongylus <unk> , the larval stage of a Taenia species , a <unk> species and Schistosoma <unk> . <unk> <unk> and C. rotundispiculum were the most dominant nematodes in the antelope . 
 Another study of 97 blood samples of South African nyalas revealed the presence of tick @-@ borne <unk> ( blood parasites ) . The methods used were polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) and reverse line blot ( <unk> ) hybridization . The dominant parasites were Theileria species , T. <unk> , T. bicornis , Ehrlichia species , <unk> <unk> and A. bovis . Ten tick species , two louse species and a louse fly species were recovered in a study of 73 nyalas at Umfolozi , <unk> and <unk> Game Reserves in northeastern KwaZulu @-@ Natal in 1983 and 1984 and an additional six individuals in 1994 . It was found that nyalas were hosts to all stages of development in Boophilus decoloratus , Rhipicephalus appendiculatus and R. <unk> and the immature stages of Amblyomma <unk> and Rhipicephalus maculatus . Adult males served hosts to more number of ticks and lice than adult females did . Also , a trypanosome was isolated from a nyala , wild @-@ caught in Mozambique , which was diagnosed and found as akin to Trypanosoma vivax , based on biological , morphological and molecular data . 
 = = Diseases = = 
 The nyala can also suffer from myopathy . In between January 1973 and June 1981 , 21 nyalas succumbed to the disease . The main symptoms were stiffness , inability to rise , and failure to suckle in newborns . Necrosis ( that is , the premature death of cells in a living tissue ) and mineralization were found in the skeletal muscle after a histological analysis . In the juveniles there was acute necrosis of the cardiac muscle . In adults , there was interstitial fibrosis of the cardiac muscle , along with arteriosclerosis . 
 In a report published in 1994 entitled " Epidemiological observations on spongiform encephalopathies in captive wild animals in the British Isles " it was noted that spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE ) had been diagnosed in one nyala captive in a zoo . The nyala was formerly affected by the disease rinderpest , although the viral disease is considered eradicated now . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The nyala is active mainly in the early morning and late afternoon . It browses during the day if temperatures are 20 – 30 ° C ( 68 – 86 ° F ) and during the night in rainy season . These antelopes rest in thick bushes during the hot hours of the day . The nyala is very shy and cautious in nature , and like remaining hidden rather than coming out in the open . Most sightings of the nyala in the wild are at water holes . But now @-@ a @-@ days they are becoming less shy and often come out in the sight of tourists . 
 Nyala groups are according to sex or mixed . Herds usually browse and drink water together . Each group consists of two to ten individuals . A study in <unk> National Park at Mozambique showed that 67 % of the observations were of groups of one to three nyalas , and the rest of the herds consisted of up to 30 nyalas . It was also seen that herds often broke up and formed again . Generally adult males remain alone . Females often remain near their mothers when they have their offspring , so the relationships in female herds may be considered relatively closer than that of males . 
 Alert and wary in nature , the nyala use a sharp , high , dog @-@ like bark to warn others in a group about danger . This feature is mainly used by females . They also react to the alarm calls of impala , baboon and kudu . The impala has been found to react to the calls of the nyala too . The main predators of nyala are lion , leopard and Cape hunting dog , while baboons and raptorial birds are the predators of juveniles . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 As a herbivore , the nyala 's diet consists of foliage , fruits , flowers and twigs . During the rainy season they feed upon the fresh grass . They need a regular intake of water , and thus choose places with a water source nearby . However , they are adapted to live in areas with only a seasonal availability of water . A study in Zululand showed that the nyala fed mainly in the early morning and the late afternoon . They feed at night during the rainy season . 
 A study made in <unk> Game Reserve and <unk> Game Reserve in Natal , focused on the dietary habits of the impala and the nyala , showed that the amount of dicotyledons in their diets varied seasonally . In the diet of nyala its content was 83 @.@ 2 % and impala 's diet contained a lesser figure of 52 % dicotyledons . The diet grew richer in fiber content and dietary proteins were less . The reverse occurred in the rainy season . As the rainy season arrived , both the species took to a diet of mainly monocotyledons , and the impala consumed more of them . The diet contained more proteins than fibers . 
 Another study was done to find whether the sexual dimorphism in the nyala influenced its foraging habits . Vegetation surveys were conducted with the end of each feeding bout . It was found that females spent equal periods of time foraging in all the three habitats , but males preferred sand forest more . More differences were noted , as males ate woody species at a greater average height whereas females fed from the low herbaceous layer . It was concluded that the differences resulted from varying nutritional and energetic demands according to their diverse body sizes and differing reproductive strategies . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The nyala breeds throughout the year , but mating peaks in spring and autumn . The reason for this is still unknown , but attributed to the photoperiod and the feeding habits of the animal . Females reach sexual maturity at 11 to 12 months of age and males at 18 months ( though they are socially immature until five years old ) . Once sexually mature , a male 's seminiferous tubules begin spermatogenesis , that is , the generation of sperm . In a study , males over 14 months old showed active spermatogenesis . 
 Before ovulation , the <unk> follicles reach a length of at least 6 @.@ 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) . A female 's estrus cycle is about 19 days long . Males mate with the female for two days of the cycle , but she allows it for only six hours per cycle . When the male enters a females ' herd during mating , he makes a display by raising his white dorsal crest , lowering his horns and moving stiffly . As in many other animals , the males fight over dominance during mating . 
 In a study , the Kidney Fat Indices ( KFIs ) of <unk> and nyalas were studied to understand the influence of social class and reproduction on them . Kidney Fat Index is a technique in which the kidney is removed and weighed with the fat and once again excluding the fat . The resultant difference is the amount of fat on the kidney . The more the fat , the healthier the animal . In rut , the male nyalas had less KFIs , that did not vary much with the season . Pregnant females , both the antelopes nyala and impala , had higher KFIs than the non @-@ pregnant ones . 
 There is a significant increase in corpus luteum in the last third of gestation . Gestation is of seven months . A single calf is born , weighing 5 kg ( 11 lb ) . Birth takes place generally away from the sight of predators , in places such as a thicket . The calf remains hidden for up to 18 days , and the mother nurses it at regular intervals . The calf remains with its mother until the birth of the next calf , during which males in rut drive it away from the mother . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The nyala inhabits dense lowland woodlands and thickets , mainly in southern Malawi , Mozambique , Zimbabwe , and eastern South Africa . It chooses places with good quality grasslands as well as provision of fresh water . They also inhabit lush green river country . The nyala 's natural range stretches across southeast Africa from the Lower Shire Valley in Malawi through Mozambique and Zimbabwe to eastern South Africa and Swaziland . 
 The geographic distribution of the nyala may be based on the genetic variation . According to a study of the nyala in South Africa , Mozambique , Malawi and Zimbabwe , a great difference was marked among the gene frequencies at three microsatellite loci . Mitochondrial DNA analysis revealed the presence of a unique haplotype in individuals from each location . The conclusions were that the geographic variation in the nyala may be due to a distribution pattern based on the habitat specificity . 
 Today the nyala are found in South African protected areas in the KwaZulu @-@ Natal Game Reserves of <unk> Game Reserve , <unk> Game Reserve and Hluhluwe @-@ Umfolozi Game Reserve , and in Kruger National Park . According to statistics of 1999 , 10 @-@ 15 % of the nyala occur on private land . Currently efforts are being made to retain the populations of nyala in <unk> National Park and <unk> National Park in Mozambique . The nyala also thrive in <unk> National Park in Malawi . 
 The nyala have never been observed showing signs of territoriality . Territories overlap extensively , let it be of any sex . The home ranges of males are approximately equal to that of females , about 10 <unk> in area . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The major threats to the population of the nyala are poaching , habitat loss , agriculture and cattle grazing . Rinderpest outbreaks have also contributed in population loss . This species is currently of Least Concern , and the population is considered stable by both the IUCN and CITES . As of 1999 , the total population of the nyala was around 32 @,@ 000 individuals . More recent estimates show that South Africa has at least 30 @,@ 000 nyalas , with 25 @,@ 000 in KwaZulu @-@ Natal . There are now more than 1 @,@ 000 on protected areas and ranches in Swaziland . In Mozambique there are not more than 3 @,@ 000 , in Zimbabwe there are over 1 @,@ 000 while numbers in Malawi have fallen from 3 @,@ 000 to about 1 @,@ 500 . Namibia has the least population , about 250 . 
 Today over 80 % of the total population is protected in national parks and sanctuaries , mostly in South African protected areas . These are the <unk> Game Reserve , <unk> Game Reserve and Hluhluwe @-@ Umfolozi Game Reserve and Kruger National Park . 10 to 15 % occur on private land . They mostly occur in South Africa due to the high demand for adult males as game trophies . 
 = Richard Dawkins = 
 Clinton Richard Dawkins FRS FRSL ( born 26 March 1941 ) is an English ethologist , evolutionary biologist and author . He is an emeritus fellow of New College , Oxford , and was the University of Oxford 's Professor for Public Understanding of Science from 1995 until 2008 . 
 Dawkins first came to prominence with his 1976 book The Selfish Gene , which popularised the gene @-@ centred view of evolution and introduced the term meme . With his book The Extended Phenotype , published in 1982 , he introduced into evolutionary biology the influential concept that the phenotypic effects of a gene are not necessarily limited to an organism 's body , but can stretch far into the environment . In 2006 , he founded the Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science . 
 Dawkins is an atheist , and is well known for his criticism of creationism and intelligent design . In his most popular book , The God Delusion , published in 2006 , Dawkins contends that a supernatural creator almost certainly does not exist and that religious faith is a delusion . In his 1986 book The Blind Watchmaker , he argues against the watchmaker analogy , an argument for the existence of a supernatural creator based upon the complexity of living organisms . Instead , he describes evolutionary processes as analogous to a blind watchmaker in that reproduction , mutation , and selection are unguided by any designer . He is an opponent of creationism being taught in schools . He has been awarded many prestigious academic and writing awards and he makes regular television , radio and Internet appearances , predominantly discussing his books , his atheism and his ideas and opinions as a public intellectual . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Dawkins was born in Nairobi , British Kenya , on 26 March 1941 . He is the son of Jean Mary Vyvyan ( née <unk> ) and Clinton John Dawkins ( 1915 – 2010 ) , who was an agricultural civil servant in the British Colonial Service in Nyasaland ( now Malawi ) . His father was called up into the King 's African Rifles during the Second World War and returned to England in 1949 , when Dawkins was eight . His father had inherited a country estate , Over Norton Park in Oxfordshire , which he farmed commercially . Dawkins considers himself English and lives in Oxford , England . Dawkins has a younger sister . 
 Both his parents were interested in natural sciences , and they answered Dawkins 's questions in scientific terms . Dawkins describes his childhood as " a normal Anglican upbringing " . He embraced Christianity until halfway through his teenage years , at which point he concluded that the theory of evolution was a better explanation for life 's complexity , and ceased believing in a god . Dawkins states : " the main residual reason why I was religious was from being so impressed with the complexity of life and feeling that it had to have a designer , and I think it was when I realised that Darwinism was a far superior explanation that pulled the rug out from under the argument of design . And that left me with nothing . " 
 = = = Education = = = 
 From 1954 to 1959 Dawkins attended Oundle School in Northamptonshire , an English public school with a distinct Church of England flavour , where he was in <unk> house . While at Oundle Dawkins read Bertrand Russell 's Why I Am Not a Christian for the first time . He studied zoology at Balliol College , Oxford , graduating in 1962 ; while there , he was tutored by Nobel Prize @-@ winning ethologist Nikolaas Tinbergen . He continued as a research student under Tinbergen 's supervision , receiving his MA and DPhil degrees by 1966 , and remained a research assistant for another year . Tinbergen was a pioneer in the study of animal behaviour , particularly in the areas of instinct , learning and choice ; Dawkins 's research in this period concerned models of animal decision @-@ making . 
 = = = Teaching = = = 
 From 1967 to 1969 , he was an assistant professor of zoology at the University of California , Berkeley . During this period , the students and faculty at UC Berkeley were largely opposed to the ongoing Vietnam War , and Dawkins became involved in the anti @-@ war demonstrations and activities . He returned to the University of Oxford in 1970 as a lecturer . In 1990 , he became a reader in zoology . In 1995 , he was appointed Simonyi Professor for the Public Understanding of Science at Oxford , a position that had been endowed by Charles Simonyi with the express intention that the holder " be expected to make important contributions to the public understanding of some scientific field " , and that its first holder should be Richard Dawkins . He held that professorship from 1995 until 2008 . 
 Since 1970 , he has been a fellow of New College , Oxford and he is now an emeritus fellow . He has delivered many lectures , including the Henry Sidgwick Memorial Lecture ( 1989 ) , the first Erasmus Darwin Memorial Lecture ( 1990 ) , the Michael Faraday Lecture ( 1991 ) , the T. H. Huxley Memorial Lecture ( 1992 ) , the Irvine Memorial Lecture ( 1997 ) , the Sheldon Doyle Lecture ( 1999 ) , the Tinbergen Lecture ( 2004 ) and the Tanner Lectures ( 2003 ) . In 1991 , he gave the Royal Institution Christmas Lectures for Children on Growing Up in the Universe . He has also edited several journals , and has acted as editorial advisor to the <unk> Encyclopedia and the Encyclopedia of Evolution . He is listed as a senior editor and a columnist of the Council for Secular Humanism 's Free Inquiry magazine , and has been a member of the editorial board of Skeptic magazine since its foundation . 
 He has sat on judging panels for awards as diverse as the Royal Society 's Faraday Award and the British Academy Television Awards , and has been president of the Biological Sciences section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science . In 2004 , Balliol College , Oxford , instituted the Dawkins Prize , awarded for " outstanding research into the ecology and behaviour of animals whose welfare and survival may be endangered by human activities " . In September 2008 , he retired from his professorship , announcing plans to " write a book aimed at youngsters in which he will warn them against believing in ' anti @-@ scientific ' fairytales . " 
 In 2011 , Dawkins joined the <unk> of the New College of the Humanities , a new private university in London , established by A. C. Grayling , which opened in September 2012 . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Evolutionary biology = = = 
 In his scientific work in evolutionary biology , Dawkins is best known for his popularisation of the gene as the principal unit of selection in evolution ; this view is most clearly set out in his books : 
 The Selfish Gene ( 1976 ) , in which he notes that " all life evolves by the differential survival of replicating entities " . 
 The Extended Phenotype ( 1982 ) , in which he describes natural selection as " the process whereby replicators out @-@ propagate each other " . He introduces to a wider audience the influential concept he presented in 1977 that the phenotypic effects of a gene are not necessarily limited to an organism 's body , but can stretch far into the environment , including the bodies of other organisms . Dawkins regarded the extended phenotype as his single most important contribution to evolutionary biology and he considered niche construction to be a special case of extended phenotype . The concept of extended phenotype helps explain evolution , but it does not actually help predict specific outcomes . 
 Dawkins has consistently been sceptical about non @-@ adaptive processes in evolution ( such as spandrels , described by Gould and Lewontin ) and about selection at levels " above " that of the gene . He is particularly sceptical about the practical possibility or importance of group selection as a basis for understanding altruism . This behaviour appears at first to be an evolutionary paradox , since helping others costs precious resources and decreases one 's own fitness . Previously , many had interpreted this as an aspect of group selection : individuals are doing what is best for the survival of the population or species as a whole . British evolutionary biologist W. D. Hamilton used gene @-@ frequency analysis in his inclusive fitness theory to show how hereditary altruistic traits can evolve if there is sufficient genetic correlation between actors and recipients of such altruism ( including close relatives ) . Hamilton 's inclusive fitness has since been successfully applied to a wide range of organisms , including humans . Similarly , Robert Trivers , thinking in terms of the gene @-@ centred model , developed the theory of reciprocal altruism , whereby one organism provides a benefit to another in the expectation of future reciprocation . Dawkins popularised these ideas in The Selfish Gene , and developed them in his own work . In June 2012 Dawkins was highly critical of fellow biologist E.O. Wilson 's 2012 book The Social Conquest of Earth as misunderstanding Hamilton 's theory of kin selection . Dawkins has also been strongly critical of the Gaia hypothesis of the independent scientist James Lovelock . 
 Critics of Dawkins 's biological approach suggest that taking the gene as the unit of selection ( a single event in which an individual either succeeds or fails to reproduce ) is misleading ; the gene could be better described , they say , as a unit of evolution ( the long @-@ term changes in allele frequencies in a population ) . In The Selfish Gene , Dawkins explains that he is using George C. Williams 's definition of the gene as " that which segregates and recombines with appreciable frequency . " Another common objection is that a gene cannot survive alone , but must cooperate with other genes to build an individual , and therefore a gene cannot be an independent " unit " . In The Extended Phenotype , Dawkins suggests that from an individual gene 's viewpoint , all other genes are part of the environment to which it is adapted . 
 Advocates for higher levels of selection ( such as Richard Lewontin , David Sloan Wilson , and Elliott Sober ) suggest that there are many phenomena ( including altruism ) that gene @-@ based selection cannot satisfactorily explain . The philosopher Mary Midgley , with whom Dawkins clashed in print concerning The Selfish Gene , has criticised gene selection , <unk> , and sociobiology as being excessively reductionist ; she has suggested that the popularity of Dawkins 's work is due to factors in the Zeitgeist such as the increased individualism of the Thatcher / Reagan decades . 
 In a set of controversies over the mechanisms and interpretation of evolution ( what has been called ' The Darwin Wars ' ) , one faction is often named after Dawkins , while the other faction is named after the American palaeontologist Stephen Jay Gould , reflecting the pre @-@ eminence of each as a populariser of the pertinent ideas . In particular , Dawkins and Gould have been prominent commentators in the controversy over sociobiology and evolutionary psychology , with Dawkins generally approving and Gould generally being critical . A typical example of Dawkins 's position is his scathing review of Not in Our Genes by Steven Rose , Leon J. Kamin , and Richard C. Lewontin . Two other thinkers who are often considered to be allied with Dawkins on the subject are Steven Pinker and Daniel Dennett ; Dennett has promoted a gene @-@ centred view of evolution and defended reductionism in biology . Despite their academic disagreements , Dawkins and Gould did not have a hostile personal relationship , and Dawkins dedicated a large portion of his 2003 book A Devil 's Chaplain posthumously to Gould , who had died the previous year . 
 When asked if Darwinism informs his everyday apprehension of life , Dawkins says , " in one way it does . My eyes are constantly wide open to the extraordinary fact of existence . Not just human existence but the existence of life and how this breathtakingly powerful process , which is natural selection , has managed to take the very simple facts of physics and chemistry and build them up to redwood trees and humans . That 's never far from my thoughts , that sense of amazement . On the other hand I certainly don 't allow Darwinism to influence my feelings about human social life , " implying that he feels that individual human beings can opt out of the survival machine of Darwinism since they are freed by the consciousness of self . 
 = = = <unk> the meme = = = 
 In his book The Selfish Gene , Dawkins coined the word meme ( the behavioural equivalent of a gene ) as a way to encourage readers to think about how Darwinian principles might be extended beyond the realm of genes . It was intended as an extension of his " replicators " argument , but it took on a life of its own in the hands of other authors such as Daniel Dennett and Susan Blackmore . These <unk> then led to the emergence of <unk> , a field from which Dawkins has distanced himself . 
 Dawkins 's meme refers to any cultural entity that an observer might consider a replicator of a certain idea or set of ideas . He hypothesised that people could view many cultural entities as capable of such replication , generally through communication and contact with humans , who have evolved as efficient ( although not perfect ) copiers of information and behaviour . Because memes are not always copied perfectly , they might become refined , combined , or otherwise modified with other ideas ; this results in new memes , which may themselves prove more or less efficient replicators than their predecessors , thus providing a framework for a hypothesis of cultural evolution based on memes , a notion that is analogous to the theory of biological evolution based on genes . 
 Although Dawkins invented the term meme , he has not claimed that the idea was entirely novel , and there have been other expressions for similar ideas in the past . For instance , John Laurent has suggested that the term may have derived from the work of the little @-@ known German biologist Richard Semon . In 1904 , Semon published Die <unk> ( which appeared in English in 1924 as The <unk> ) . This book discusses the cultural transmission of experiences , with insights parallel to those of Dawkins . Laurent also found the term <unk> used in Maurice Maeterlinck 's The Life of the White Ant ( 1926 ) , and has highlighted the similarities to Dawkins 's concept . James Gleick describes Dawkins 's concept of the meme as " his most famous memorable invention , far more influential than his selfish genes or his later proselytising against religiosity " . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 In 2006 , Dawkins founded the Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science ( <unk> ) , a non @-@ profit organisation . <unk> financed research on the psychology of belief and religion , financed scientific education programs and materials , and publicised and supported charitable organisations that are secular in nature . In January 2016 , it was announced that the foundation is merging with the Center for Inquiry with Dawkins becoming a member of the new organization ’ s board of directors . 
 = = = Criticism of religion = = = 
 Dawkins is an outspoken atheist and a supporter of various atheist , secular , and humanistic organisations . He is a patron of the British Humanist Association , and a supporter of the <unk> movement . He was confirmed into the Church of England at the age of thirteen , but began to grow sceptical of the beliefs . After learning about Darwinism and the real scientific reason why living things look as though they have been designed , Dawkins lost the remainder of his religious faith . He said that his understanding of science and evolutionary processes led him to question how adults in positions of leadership in a civilized world could still be so uneducated in biology , and is puzzled by how belief in God could remain among individuals who are sophisticated in science . Dawkins notes that some physicists use ' God ' as a metaphor for the general awe @-@ inspiring mysteries of the universe , which causes confusion and misunderstanding among people who incorrectly think they are talking about a mystical being which forgives sins , <unk> wine , or makes people live after they die . He disagrees with Stephen Jay Gould 's principle of nonoverlapping magisteria ( NOMA ) and suggests that the existence of God should be treated as a scientific hypothesis like any other . 
 On his spectrum of theistic probability , which has seven levels between 1 ( 100 % belief in a God ) and 7 ( 100 % belief that gods do not exist ) , Dawkins has said he 's a 6 @.@ 9 , which represents a " de facto atheist " who thinks " I cannot know for certain but I think God is very improbable , and I live my life on the assumption that he is not there . " When asked about his slight uncertainty , Dawkins quips , " I am agnostic to the extent that I am agnostic about fairies at the bottom of the garden . " In May 2014 , at the Hay Festival in Wales , Dawkins explained that while he does not believe in the supernatural elements of the Christian faith , he still has nostalgia for the ceremonial side of religion . 
 Dawkins became a prominent critic of religion and has stated his opposition to religion as twofold : religion is both a source of conflict and a justification for belief without evidence . He considers faith — belief that is not based on evidence — as " one of the world 's great evils " . He rose to prominence in public debates relating science and religion since the publication of his most popular book The God Delusion in 2006 , which became an international best seller . As of 2015 , more than three million copies were sold and the book has been translated into over 30 languages . Its success has been seen by many as indicative of a change in the contemporary cultural zeitgeist and has also been identified with the rise of New Atheism . In the book , Dawkins contends that a supernatural creator almost certainly does not exist and that religious faith is a delusion — " a fixed false belief " . In his February 2002 TED talk entitled " Militant atheism " , Dawkins urged all atheists to openly state their position and to fight the incursion of the church into politics and science . On September 30 , 2007 , Dawkins , Christopher Hitchens , Sam Harris , and Daniel Dennett met at Hitchens ' residence for a private , <unk> discussion that lasted two hours . The event was videotaped and titled " The Four Horsemen " . Dawkins has since been associated with the notion . 
 Dawkins sees education and consciousness @-@ raising as the primary tools in opposing what he considers to be religious dogma and indoctrination . These tools include the fight against certain stereotypes , and he has adopted the term bright as a way of associating positive public connotations with those who possess a naturalistic worldview . He has given support to the idea of a free thinking school , which would not indoctrinate children in atheism or in any religion but would instead teach children to be critical and open @-@ minded . Inspired by the consciousness @-@ raising successes of feminists in arousing widespread embarrassment at the routine use of " he " instead of " she " , Dawkins similarly suggests that phrases such as " Catholic child " and " Muslim child " should be considered as socially absurd as , for instance , " Marxist child " , as he believes that children should not be classified based on their parents ' ideological or religious beliefs . 
 Dawkins suggests that atheists should be proud , not apologetic , stressing that atheism is evidence of a healthy , independent mind . He hopes that the more atheists identify themselves , the more the public will become aware of just how many people actually hold these views , thereby reducing the negative opinion of atheism among the religious majority . Inspired by the gay rights movement , he endorsed the Out Campaign to encourage atheists worldwide to declare their stance publicly . He supported the UK 's first atheist advertising initiative , the Atheist Bus Campaign in 2008 , which aimed to raise funds to place atheist advertisements on buses in the London area . 
 While some critics , such as writer Christopher Hitchens , psychologist Steven Pinker and Nobel laureates Sir Harold Kroto , James D. Watson and Steven Weinberg have defended Dawkins 's stance towards religion and praised his work , others , including Nobel Prize @-@ winning theoretical physicist Peter Higgs , astrophysicist Martin Rees , philosopher of science Michael Ruse , literary critic Terry Eagleton , and theologian Alister McGrath , have criticised Dawkins on various grounds , including the assertion that his work simply serves as an atheist counterpart to religious fundamentalism rather than a productive critique of it , and that he has fundamentally <unk> the foundations of the theological positions he claims to refute . Rees and Higgs , in particular , have both rejected Dawkins 's confrontational stance towards religion as narrow and " embarrassing " , with Higgs going as far as to equate Dawkins with the religious fundamentalists he criticises . Atheist philosopher John Gray has denounced Dawkins as an " anti @-@ religious missionary " whose assertions are " in no sense novel or original , " suggesting that , " transfixed in wonderment at the workings of his own mind , Dawkins misses much that is of importance in human beings . " Gray has also criticised Dawkins 's perceived allegiance to Darwin , stating that if " science , for Darwin , was a method of inquiry that enabled him to edge tentatively and humbly toward the truth , for Dawkins , science is an unquestioned view of the world . " In response to his critics , Dawkins maintains that theologians are no better than scientists in addressing deep cosmological questions and that he himself is not a fundamentalist as he is willing to change his mind in the face of new evidence . 
 = = = = Criticism of creationism = = = = 
 Dawkins is a prominent critic of creationism , a religious belief that humanity , life , and the universe were created by a deity without recourse to evolution . He has described the Young Earth creationist view that the Earth is only a few thousand years old as " a preposterous , mind @-@ shrinking falsehood " ; and his 1986 book , The Blind Watchmaker , contains a sustained critique of the argument from design , an important creationist argument . In the book , Dawkins argues against the watchmaker analogy made famous by the 18th @-@ century English theologian William Paley via his book Natural Theology , in which Paley argues that just as a watch is too complicated and too functional to have sprung into existence merely by accident , so too must all living things — with their far greater complexity — be purposefully designed . Dawkins shares the view generally held by scientists that natural selection is sufficient to explain the apparent functionality and non @-@ random complexity of the biological world , and can be said to play the role of watchmaker in nature , albeit as an automatic , unguided by any designer , <unk> , blind watchmaker . 
 In 1986 , Dawkins and biologist John Maynard Smith participated in an Oxford Union debate against A. E. Wilder @-@ Smith ( a Young Earth creationist ) and Edgar Andrews ( president of the Biblical Creation Society ) . In general , however , Dawkins has followed the advice of his late colleague Stephen Jay Gould and refused to participate in formal debates with creationists because " what they seek is the oxygen of respectability " , and doing so would " give them this oxygen by the mere act of engaging with them at all " . He suggests that creationists " don 't mind being beaten in an argument . What matters is that we give them recognition by bothering to argue with them in public . " In a December 2004 interview with American journalist Bill Moyers , Dawkins said that " among the things that science does know , evolution is about as certain as anything we know . " When Moyers questioned him on the use of the word theory , Dawkins stated that " evolution has been observed . It 's just that it hasn 't been observed while it 's happening . " He added that " it is rather like a detective coming on a murder after the scene ... the detective hasn 't actually seen the murder take place , of course . But what you do see is a massive clue ... Huge quantities of circumstantial evidence . It might as well be spelled out in words of English . " 
 Dawkins has opposed the inclusion of intelligent design in science education , describing it as " not a scientific argument at all , but a religious one " . He has been referred to in the media as " Darwin 's Rottweiler " , a reference to English biologist T. H. Huxley , who was known as " Darwin 's Bulldog " for his advocacy of Charles Darwin 's evolutionary ideas . ( The contrasting sobriquet of " God 's Rottweiler " was given to Pope Benedict XVI while he was a cardinal working for the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith . ) He has been a strong critic of the British organisation Truth in Science , which promotes the teaching of creationism in state schools , and he plans through the Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science to subsidise schools with the delivery of books , DVDs , and pamphlets that counteract their ( Truth in Science 's ) work , which Dawkins has described as an " educational scandal " . 
 = = = Other fields = = = 
 In his role as professor for public understanding of science , Dawkins has been a critic of pseudoscience and alternative medicine . His 1998 book Unweaving the Rainbow considers John Keats 's accusation that by explaining the rainbow , Isaac Newton diminished its beauty ; Dawkins argues for the opposite conclusion . He suggests that deep space , the billions of years of life 's evolution , and the microscopic workings of biology and heredity contain more beauty and wonder than do " myths " and " pseudoscience " . For John Diamond 's posthumously published Snake Oil , a book devoted to debunking alternative medicine , Dawkins wrote a foreword in which he asserts that alternative medicine is harmful , if only because it distracts patients from more successful conventional treatments and gives people false hopes . Dawkins states that " there is no alternative medicine . There is only medicine that works and medicine that doesn 't work . " In his 2007 Channel 4 TV film The Enemies of Reason , Dawkins concluded that Britain is gripped by " an epidemic of superstitious thinking " . 
 Dawkins has expressed concern about the growth of the planet 's human population and about the matter of overpopulation . In The Selfish Gene , he briefly mentions population growth , giving the example of Latin America , whose population , at the time the book was written , was doubling every 40 years . He is critical of Roman Catholic attitudes to family planning and population control , stating that leaders who forbid contraception and " express a preference for ' natural ' methods of population limitation " will get just such a method in the form of starvation . 
 As a supporter of the Great Ape Project — a movement to extend certain moral and legal rights to all great apes — Dawkins contributed the article " Gaps in the Mind " to the Great Ape Project book edited by Paola Cavalieri and Peter Singer . In this essay , he criticises contemporary society 's moral attitudes as being based on a " discontinuous , <unk> imperative " . 
 Dawkins also regularly comments in newspapers and blogs on contemporary political questions and is a frequent contributor to the online science and culture digest 3 Quarks Daily . His opinions include opposition to the 2003 invasion of Iraq , the British nuclear deterrent , the actions of then @-@ US President George W. Bush , and the ethics of designer babies . Several such articles were included in A Devil 's Chaplain , an anthology of writings about science , religion , and politics . He is also a supporter of Republic 's campaign to replace the British monarchy with a democratically elected president . Dawkins has described himself as a Labour voter in the 1970s and voter for the Liberal Democrats since the party 's creation . In 2009 , he spoke at the party 's conference in opposition to blasphemy laws , alternative medicine , and faith schools . In the UK general election of 2010 , Dawkins officially endorsed the Liberal Democrats , in support of their campaign for electoral reform and for their " refusal to pander to ' faith ' . " 
 In 1998 , Dawkins expressed his appreciation for two books connected with the Sokal affair , Higher Superstition : The Academic Left and Its Quarrels with Science by Paul R. Gross and Norman Levitt and Intellectual <unk> by Sokal and Jean <unk> . These books are famous for their criticism of postmodernism in US universities ( namely in the departments of literary studies , anthropology , and other cultural studies ) . He identifies as a feminist . 
 Continuing a long @-@ standing partnership with Channel 4 , Dawkins participated in a five @-@ part television series Genius of Britain , along with fellow scientists Stephen Hawking , James Dyson , Paul Nurse , and Jim Al @-@ Khalili . The series was first broadcast in June 2010 . The series focuses on major British scientific achievements throughout history . 
 In 2014 he joined the global awareness movement Asteroid Day as a " <unk> <unk> " . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 Dawkins was awarded a Doctor of Science degree by the University of Oxford in 1989 . He holds honorary doctorates in science from the University of Huddersfield , University of Westminster , Durham University , the University of Hull , the University of Antwerp , and the University of Oslo , and honorary doctorates from the University of Aberdeen , Open University , the Vrije Universiteit Brussel , and the University of Valencia . He also holds honorary doctorates of letters from the University of St Andrews and the Australian National University ( <unk> , 1996 ) , and was elected Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1997 and a Fellow of the Royal Society ( FRS ) in 2001 . He is one of the patrons of the Oxford University Scientific Society . 
 In 1987 , Dawkins received a Royal Society of Literature award and a Los Angeles Times Literary Prize for his book The Blind Watchmaker . In the same year , he received a Sci . Tech Prize for Best Television Documentary Science Programme of the Year for his work on the BBC 's Horizon episode The Blind Watchmaker . 
 His other awards include the Zoological Society of London 's Silver Medal ( 1989 ) , the Finlay Innovation Award ( 1990 ) , the Michael Faraday Award ( 1990 ) , the Nakayama Prize ( 1994 ) , the American Humanist Association 's Humanist of the Year Award ( 1996 ) , the fifth International Cosmos Prize ( 1997 ) , the <unk> Prize ( 2001 ) , the Medal of the Presidency of the Italian Republic ( 2001 ) , the 2001 and 2012 Emperor Has No Clothes Award from the Freedom From Religion Foundation , the Bicentennial Kelvin Medal of The Royal Philosophical Society of Glasgow ( 2002 ) , and the Nierenberg Prize for Science in the Public Interest ( 2009 ) . 
 Dawkins topped Prospect magazine 's 2004 list of the top 100 public British intellectuals , as decided by the readers , receiving twice as many votes as the runner @-@ up . He was short @-@ listed as a candidate in their 2008 follow @-@ up poll . In 2005 , the Hamburg @-@ based Alfred <unk> Foundation awarded him its Shakespeare Prize in recognition of his " concise and accessible presentation of scientific knowledge " . He won the Lewis Thomas Prize for Writing about Science for 2006 , as well as the Galaxy British Book Awards 's Author of the Year Award for 2007 . In the same year , he was listed by Time magazine as one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2007 , and he was ranked 20th in The Daily Telegraph 's 2007 list of 100 greatest living geniuses . He was awarded the Deschner Award , named after German anti @-@ clerical author Karlheinz Deschner . 
 Since 2003 , the Atheist Alliance International has awarded a prize during its annual conference , honouring an outstanding atheist whose work has done the most to raise public awareness of atheism during that year ; it is known as the Richard Dawkins Award , in honour of Dawkins 's own efforts . 
 In February 2010 , Dawkins was named to the Freedom From Religion Foundation 's Honorary Board of distinguished achievers . 
 In 2012 , ichthyologists in Sri Lanka honored Dawkins by creating <unk> as a new genus name ( members of this genus were formerly members of the genus <unk> ) . Explaining the reasoning behind the genus name , lead researcher Rohan <unk> was quoted as stating that " Richard Dawkins has , through his writings , helped us understand that the universe is far more beautiful and awe @-@ inspiring than any religion has imagined [ ... ] . We hope that <unk> will serve as a reminder of the elegance and simplicity of evolution , the only rational explanation there is for the unimaginable diversity of life on Earth . " 
 In a poll held by Prospect magazine in 2013 , Dawkins was voted the world 's top thinker based on 65 names chosen by a largely <unk> and UK @-@ based expert panel . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Dawkins has been married three times , and has one daughter . On 19 August 1967 , Dawkins married fellow ethologist Marian Stamp in <unk> , County Waterford , Ireland ; they divorced in 1984 . On 1 June 1984 , he married Eve Barham ( 19 August 1951 – 28 February 1999 ) in Oxford . They had a daughter , Juliet Emma Dawkins ( born 1984 , Oxford ) . Dawkins and Barham also divorced . In 1992 , he married actress Lalla Ward in Kensington and Chelsea , London . Dawkins met her through their mutual friend Douglas Adams , who had worked with her on the BBC 's Doctor Who . The couple announced an " entirely amicable " separation in July 2016 . 
 On 6 February 2016 , Dawkins suffered a minor hemorrhagic stroke while at home . Dawkins reported on his Foundation website in early April that he is experiencing some minor disabilities in his physical coordination but that he expects to make a full recovery . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Selected publications = = = 
 The Selfish Gene . Oxford : Oxford University Press . 1976 . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 The Extended Phenotype . Oxford : Oxford University Press . 1982 . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 The Blind Watchmaker . New York : W. W. Norton & Company . 1986 . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 River Out of Eden . New York : Basic Books . 1995 . ISBN 0 @-@ 465 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Climbing Mount Improbable . New York : W. W. Norton & Company . 1996 . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Unweaving the Rainbow . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . 1998 . ISBN 0 @-@ 618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 A Devil 's Chaplain . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . 2003 . ISBN 0 @-@ 618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 The Ancestor 's Tale . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . 2004 . ISBN 0 @-@ 618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 The God Delusion . Boston : Houghton Mifflin . 2006 . ISBN 0 @-@ 618 @-@ 68000 @-@ 4 . 
 The Greatest Show on Earth : The Evidence for Evolution . Free Press ( United States ) , Transworld ( United Kingdom and Commonwealth ) . 2009 . ISBN 0 @-@ 593 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 The Magic of Reality : How We Know What 's Really True . Free Press ( United States ) , Bantam Press ( United Kingdom ) . 2011 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4391 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . OCLC <unk> . 
 An Appetite for Wonder : The Making of a Scientist . Ecco Press ( United Kingdom and United States ) . 2013 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Brief Candle in the Dark : My Life in Science . Ecco Press ( United States and United Kingdom ) . 2015 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Documentary films = = = 
 Nice Guys Finish First ( 1986 ) 
 The Blind Watchmaker ( 1987 ) 
 Growing Up in the Universe ( 1991 ) 
 Break the Science Barrier ( 1996 ) 
 The Atheism Tapes ( 2004 ) 
 The Big Question ( 2005 ) - Part 3 of the TV series , titled " Why Are We Here ? " 
 The Root of All Evil ? ( 2006 ) 
 The Enemies of Reason ( 2007 ) 
 The Genius of Charles Darwin ( 2008 ) 
 The Purpose of Purpose ( 2009 ) – Lecture tour among American universities 
 Faith School Menace ? ( 2010 ) 
 Beautiful Minds ( April 2012 ) – <unk> documentary 
 Sex , Death and the Meaning of Life ( 2012 ) 
 The Unbelievers ( 2013 ) 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Dawkins has made many television appearances on news shows providing his political and especially his opinions as an atheist . He has been interviewed on the radio , often as part of his book tours . He has debated many religious figures . He has made many university speaking appearances , again often in coordination with his book tours . As of 2016 , he has over 60 credits in the Internet Movie Database where he appeared as himself . 
 Expelled : No Intelligence Allowed ( 2008 ) – as himself , presented as a leading scientific opponent of intelligent design in a film that contends that the mainstream science establishment suppresses academics who believe they see evidence of intelligent design in nature and who criticise evidence supporting Darwinian evolution 
 Doctor Who : " The Stolen Earth " ( 2008 ) – as himself 
 The Simpsons : " Black Eyed , Please " ( 2013 ) – appears in Ned Flanders ' dream of Hell ; provided voice as a demon version of himself 
 Endless Forms Most Beautiful ( 2015 ) - by Nightwish : Finnish symphonic metal band Nightwish had Dawkins as a guest star on their 2015 album 
 When the Professor Got Stuck in the Snow ( 2015 ) - A fictional Richard Dawkins is the central character in Dan Rhodes ' 2014 parody novel 
 = M @-@ 132 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 132 was the designation of a former state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan near Ann Arbor . The highway , commissioned in 1929 , connected Ann Arbor and Dexter to the northwest along present @-@ day Dexter – Ann Arbor Road . The roadway was turned back to local control around 1960 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Beginning at the intersection of Main Street and Baker Road in downtown Dexter , M @-@ 132 ran southeasterly along Main Street through town . Upon reaching the city limits , the highway became Dexter – Ann Arbor Road . It ran southeast across rural Washtenaw County through fields before entering Ann Arbor where it followed Dexter Avenue and terminated at US Highway 12 ( US 12 , Huron Street / Jackson Avenue ) . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 132 was commissioned in 1929 between Dexter and Ann Arbor ; at the time it was created , it was fully paved . It remained in the same configuration until it was removed from the state trunkline system around 1960 , after the freeway carrying Interstate 94 and US 12 was completed near Ann Arbor . After removal from the state highway system , the roadway is now simply known as Dexter – Ann Arbor Road ; it is two lanes wide throughout . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway was in Washtenaw County . 
