 ^ 1 – Will Stevens was classified because he completed over 90 % of the race distance . 
 ^ 2 – Daniil Kvyat had ten seconds added to his time for exceeding track limits . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Dirty Picture = 
 " Dirty Picture " is a song by British R & B singer Taio Cruz , released from his second studio album , Rokstarr ( 2009 ) . The song was written and produced by Cruz alongside Fraser T Smith , and later released as the album 's third single on 5 April 2010 . Originally , Cruz wanted the female vocals to be done by Lady Gaga but opted to switch to Kesha due to heavy influence by Dr. Luke and for finding her voice unique . It was released as the third single from Rokstarr on 5 April 2010 and was later re @-@ recorded as an album bonus track for Kesha 's debut album , Animal , dubbed the " Kesha edit " . Lyrically , the song 's message is about being able to send your significant other that you 're missing a dirty picture . 
 Critical reception of the song was generally positive . Kesha and Cruz 's collaboration and vocal work together on the track was generally praised although some critics noted that Kesha overtook the track , outshining Cruz . The song 's simple but effective lyrics were also positively received by music critics . Commercially , " Dirty Picture " fared well on the charts . The song peaked at number six on the UK Singles Chart , and number ten in the Republic of Ireland . The song also reached the top forty in Europe and Australia . The song 's accompanying music video was filmed in Los Angeles and in London and its concept is intended to be presented as a party . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Dirty Picture " was written and produced by Taio Cruz , in collaboration with Fraser T Smith . While creating the track Cruz stated that he originally had wanted American singer Lady Gaga to feature on the track alongside himself . Following a meeting with Dr. Luke , Cruz agreed to switch to then upcoming singer Kesha . Luke had been working with Kesha and Cruz found Kesha 's voice to be distinctive and opted to switch to her featuring on the track . Cruz commented on his decision , stating : " I was thinking about Lady Gaga at first , then I went to a meeting with Dr. Luke and he was telling me about this new girl he was working with . She hadn 't done ' Tik Tok ' or anything like that at that point . But I just thought she sounded really cool . A very unique @-@ sounding voice . I like that with artists , that as soon as you hear them on a song on the radio , you know immediately who that is without having to be told . She looked really sexy , and I just thought she was talented . Her voice was awesome . It had this — I hope she won 't mind me saying this , but her voice has this kind of <unk> quality to it , the way that she does things and the way that she ends words . I just loved that quality about it . " 
 " Dirty Picture " is song composed in the dance genre , that encompasses a techno beat infused in its backing , as well as synthesizers . The song features auto @-@ tuned vocals by Kesha . According to Robert Cospey of Digital Spy , the song 's chorus contains " trancey " elements and is reminiscent of Benny Benassi 's song , " Satisfaction " . Lyrically , Cruz explained the song 's message saying , " the song is actually about sending sexy pictures to your significant other , if you miss each other and you can 't see each other , you 're far away from each other , you send pictures to remind each other of how sexy you are . " According to sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , " Dirty Picture " is written in the time signature of common time , with a moderate beat rate of 125 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of F Minor ; Cruz ' vocal range spans from the note of Eb4 to the note of F5 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Dirty Picture " received generally positive reviews from music critics upon its release . Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly compared the song to Cruz ' prior single " Break Your Heart " , noting that Cruz had " struck gold " with the song and that " Dirty Picture " was the only song on the album with " equal caliber . " In a review of the album , Mike Diver of BBC wrote that the song was " the kind of track Sugababes should be patching up their every difference ever for . " In a separate publication from BBC , Fraser McAlpine wrote that although the song 's lyrics were dumb , silly and crude , " none of [ these ] are bad things in themselves . " McAlpine complimented the overall sound of Kesha and Cruz 's vocal work together on the song commenting that " the jarring clash between Taio 's <unk> soul @-@ gentleman image and Kesha 's sloppy drunken nonsense is genuinely fascinating . The song actually transforms from one kind of a thing to another , depending who has their hand on the microphone . " 
 The Guardian 's Caroline Sullivan first criticized Cruz for his evident " <unk> " in his music while reviewing his album ; she , however , wrote that the song " saves the day " and wrote that it exemplified " British humour by impersonating a camera ( ' Snap , snap , click ! ' ) . " Sara Anderson from AOL Radio was positive in her review of the song . Anderson wrote , " Building from strobing , techno back beats , Taio melodically , and bluntly , asks his muse to take a few , er , risque pictures for him , before transitioning into speaking voice with the help of party queen Kesha . " David Jeffries of Allmusic listed the song as one of the album 's three best tracks , alongside " Break Your Heart " and " Take You Back . " Melanie Bertoldi of Billboard praised Cruz ' vocal delivery , calling it the " most impressive " on the album . 
 Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave the single three out of a possible five stars . Copsey wasn 't convinced with Cruz 's vocal work on the song commenting that Kesha takes over the track , " Cruz 's vocals soar over the verses , his delicate tones fails to dent that deliciously trashy chorus . Luckily , guest star Kesha more than steps up to the mark [ ... ] it 's a bit of a shame that it 's not her version of the song " . Ken Capobianco from The Boston Globe was negative in his review of the song . Capobianco called the song " salacious " , writing that it " features that notorious no @-@ talent , Ke $ ha , but with its galloping percussion it makes for salacious nonsense . " Ash Dosanjh from NME wrote that Cruz ' downfall on his album was when he acted as the " player " , citing " Dirty Picture " as an example . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " Dirty Picture " entered at number 20 on the UK Singles Chart on 18 April 2010 ― for the week ending dated 24 April 2010 . After weeks of steadily ascending the charts , the single reached an eventual peak of number 6 on the chart on 9 May 2010 ― for the week ending dated 15 May 2010 . The single also peaked at number 3 on the UK R & B Chart . 
 In Australia , " Dirty Picture " entered at number 31 on the ARIA Singles Chart . On the song 's third week on the chart it reached its peak position of 16 , where it remained for three weeks . It has since been certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of 35 @,@ 000 units . 
 In New Zealand the single entered at number 38 on the New Zealand Singles Chart . The following week , it rose to position 21 and then proceeded to fall off the charts . The song re @-@ entered the charts on the week titled 14 June 2010 at 12 ; the single reached its peak the following week at position 11 . It has since been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for sales of 7 @,@ 500 units . In the United States , " Dirty Picture " entered and peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 at position 96 , the same week Rokstarr was released . 
 In Canada , the song similarly reached its peak on its first week ― number 49 on the Canadian Hot 100 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Dirty Picture " was directed by Alex Herron and it premiered online on 24 May 2010 . Recording of the video was done in both Los Angeles and in London . Cruz explain the video 's simplistic theme and recording saying , " It was shot in this really cool basement in LA . We wanted it to look like a party scene , but not in a typical club , and it was really good fun . Kesha 's shots were recorded in London because our schedules were all over the place , and then I shot the rest in LA . " 
 The video opens with Cruz driving a car speeding through the desert . It then cuts to a new scene where Cruz is at a house party where everyone is drinking and sending dirty text messages . Throughout the scenes Cruz is seen taking pictures with different women and singing karaoke . Kesha 's vocals cut in and she is seen standing in a bathroom stall standing on top of a toilet " asking that her man do the same [ and send a dirty picture ] . " Once again the video then cuts to scenes of Cruz standing next to his car in the desert singing his verses . The video then cuts back to the party where all of the party goers are seen " sexting , kissing , touching and bumping and grinding as the flashes flash . " Kesha 's vocals once again cut in and this time she is seen laying on top of the bathroom sink singing her verses . The video ends with Cruz and Kesha standing next to each other telling their loved ones to " click , click , snap " that dirty picture their way . 
 = = Kesha version = = 
 Kesha re @-@ recorded " Dirty Picture " for her debut studio album , Animal . The song was selective in its release only being sold as an album bonus track in United Kingdom and Ireland , and was dubbed " Kesha edit " or " Dirty Picture , Pt . 2 " . The song is similar to the original recording of the song with the only noticeable change being that Kesha now sings the song 's first verse . While being interviewed by Digital Spy Cruz explained how the cover initially came about and his view on the cover , " she asked me if she could do a version of the song where she sang the first verse and I thought that was a really cool idea . I really like both versions , and it 's good that there are these two different versions out there , because fans of me get more of me on mine and [ Kesha ] fans get more of her on hers . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Taio Cruz , Fraser T Smith 
 Production – Taio Cruz , Fraser T Smith 
 Engineering – Beatriz <unk> 
 Mixing – Fraser T Smith , Neil Tucker 
 Mastering – Tom Coyne 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Rokstarr , via Photo Finish Records . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hurricane Charley = 
 Hurricane Charley was the third named storm , the second hurricane , and the second major hurricane of the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season . Charley lasted from August 9 to August 15 , and at its peak intensity it attained 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) winds , making it a strong Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . It made landfall in southwestern Florida at maximum strength , making it the strongest hurricane to hit the United States since Hurricane Andrew struck Florida in 1992 . 
 After moving slowly through the Caribbean Sea , Charley crossed Cuba on Friday , August 13 as a Category 3 hurricane , causing heavy damage and four deaths . That same day , it crossed over the Dry Tortugas , just 22 hours after Tropical Storm Bonnie had struck northwestern Florida . It was the first time in history that two tropical cyclones struck the same state in a 24 @-@ hour period . At its peak intensity of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , Hurricane Charley struck the northern tip of Captiva Island and the southern tip of North Captiva Island , causing severe damage in both areas . Charley , the strongest hurricane to hit southwest Florida since Hurricane Donna in 1960 , then continued to produce severe damage as it made landfall on the peninsula near Port Charlotte . It continued to the north @-@ northeast along the Peace River corridor , devastating Punta Gorda , Port Charlotte , Cleveland , Fort Ogden , <unk> , Arcadia , <unk> Springs , Sebring , and Wauchula . <unk> Springs was isolated for nearly two days as masses of large trees , power poles , power lines , transformers , and debris filled the streets . Wauchula sustained gusts to 147 mph ( 236 km / h ) ; buildings in the downtown areas caved onto Main Street . Ultimately , the storm passed through the central and eastern parts of the Orlando metropolitan area , still carrying winds gusting up to 106 mph ( 171 km / h ) . The city of Winter Park , north of Orlando , also sustained considerable damage since its many old , large oak trees had not experienced high winds . Falling trees tore down power utilities and smashed cars , and their huge roots lifted underground water and sewer utilities . The storm slowed as it exited the state over New Smyrna Beach and Ponce Inlet , just south of Daytona Beach . The storm was ultimately absorbed by a front in the Atlantic Ocean shortly after sunrise on August 15 , near southeastern Massachusetts . 
 Damage in the state totaled to over $ 13 billion ( 2004 USD ) . Charley initially was expected to hit further north in Tampa , and caught many Floridians off @-@ guard due to a sudden change in the storm 's track as it approached the state . Throughout the United States , Charley caused 10 deaths and $ 15 @.@ 4 billion in damage , making it the second costliest hurricane in United States history at the time ( it has since dropped to 8th ) . Charley was a compact , fast @-@ moving storm , which limited the scope and severity of the damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Charley began as a tropical wave that moved off the west coast of Africa on August 4 . It moved quickly westward and steadily organized over the open Atlantic Ocean , with convection developing in curved bands . The wave continued to develop as it approached the Lesser Antilles , and became Tropical Depression Three on August 9 while 115 mi ( 185 km ) south @-@ southeast of Barbados , near the island of Grenada , however , the threat to Barbados was short @-@ lived . Low upper @-@ level wind shear and well @-@ defined outflow contributed to further intensification , and the depression strengthened on August 10 , despite being located in the eastern Caribbean Sea , which is an area not particularly suited to tropical cyclogenesis . At this time , the National Hurricane Center in Miami designated the name " Charley . " 
 A strong ridge of high pressure to the system 's north forced Charley to change track quickly to the west @-@ northwest . It continued to strengthen and became a Category 1 hurricane on August 11 , while 90 mi ( 150 km ) south of Kingston , Jamaica . The storm was being steered around the periphery of the high pressure area , and as a result , Charley changed direction toward the northwest . The following day , the core passed 40 mi ( 65 km ) southwest of Jamaica , affecting the island on August 11 and 12 . The storm then passed 15 mi ( 25 km ) northeast of Grand Cayman , reaching Category 2 status just after passing the island . The hurricane continued to strengthen as it turned to the northwest and rounded the southwest portion of the subtropical ridge , becoming a major hurricane — a storm classified as a Category 3 hurricane or higher — just before making landfall on southern Cuba . Charley came ashore near Punta <unk> with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and gusts of up to 133 mph ( 215 km / h ) , at about 0430 UTC on August 13 . It weakened while crossing the island , passing about 15 mi ( 25 km ) west of downtown Havana before weakening to 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . 
 After crossing Cuba near <unk> Mora , Hurricane Charley accelerated to the north @-@ northeast , toward the southwest coast of Florida in response to the approach of an unseasonal mid @-@ tropospheric trough . Charley passed over the Dry Tortugas at 1200 UTC on August 13 , with maximum winds of about 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) . The strike occurred only 22 hours after Tropical Storm Bonnie made landfall on St. Vincent Island , marking the first time two tropical cyclones hit the same state within a 24 @-@ hour period . Then Charley rapidly intensified , strengthening from a 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) hurricane with a minimum central barometric pressure of 965 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 50 inHg ) to a 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) hurricane with a pressure of 947 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 64 inHg ) in just three hours . It continued to strengthen as it turned more to the northeast , and made landfall near the island of Cayo Costa , Florida as a 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane with a pressure of 941 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 49 inHg ) at approximately 1945 UTC on August 13 . An hour later , the hurricane struck Punta Gorda as a 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) storm . However , the eye had shrunk before landfall , limiting the most powerful winds to an area within 7 mi ( 10 km ) of the center . 
 Charley weakened considerably due to its passage over land , but still retained sustained winds of about 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) as it passed directly over Orlando between 0020 and <unk> UTC August 14 ; gusts of up to 106 mph ( 171 km / h ) were recorded at Orlando International Airport . It cut a swath of destruction across Florida , also passing near Kissimmee . The hurricane reemerged into the Atlantic Ocean after crossing directly over New Smyrna Beach as a Category 1 hurricane , but restrengthened slightly over open waters . Continuing to move rapidly to the north @-@ northeast , Charley struck near Cape Romain , South Carolina as an 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) hurricane , moved offshore briefly , and made its final landfall near North Myrtle Beach as a minimal hurricane , with winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Charley then began interacting with an approaching frontal boundary , becoming a tropical storm over southeastern North Carolina . After moving back into the Atlantic Ocean near Virginia Beach on August 15 , the storm became extratropical and became embedded in the frontal zone . The extratropical storm continued to move rapidly to the northeast , and was completely absorbed by the front shortly after sunrise on August 15 , near southeastern Massachusetts . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On August 10 , two days before the hurricane passed near the island , Jamaican officials issued a tropical storm warning , which was upgraded to a hurricane warning a day later . In Jamaica , the threat of the storm forced the country 's two airports to close , and also forced two cruise ships to reroute . The Cayman Islands issued a hurricane warning on August 11 , a day before the hurricane passed near the archipelago . 
 Cuban government officials issued a hurricane watch for the southern coastline on August 11 , two days before the hurricane struck the island . This was upgraded to a hurricane warning on the 12th , 13 ½ hours before Charley made landfall . Because of the threat , the government issued a mandatory evacuation for 235 @,@ 000 citizens and 159 @,@ 000 animals in the area of the expected impact . An additional 3 @,@ 800 residents were evacuated from offshore islands , while 47 @,@ 000 in Havana were transported from old , unsafe buildings to safer areas . The people were transported to shelters provisioned with supplies . In addition , the power grid in southern Cuba was turned off to avoid accidents . 
 On August 11 , Florida governor Jeb Bush issued a state of emergency declaration due to the impending threat Charley presented to the state while the storm was still located south of Jamaica . The National Hurricane Center issued hurricane warnings for the Florida Keys and from Cape Sable to the mouth of the Suwannee River a day prior to Charley 's passage through the state , while tropical storm warnings were issued elsewhere throughout Florida . Because of the threat , 1 @.@ 9 million people along the Florida west coast were urged to evacuate , including 380 @,@ 000 residents in the Tampa Bay area , and 11 @,@ 000 in the Florida Keys . It was the largest evacuation order for Pinellas County history , and the largest evacuation request in Florida since Hurricane Floyd five years before . Many Floridians remained despite the evacuation order , as authorities estimated that up to a million people would not go to shelters ; instead , these residents boarded up their homes and bought supplies to ride out the storm . However , about 1 @.@ 42 million people evacuated their homes in Florida , and approximately 50 @,@ 000 residents were placed in shelters throughout the state . Power companies mobilized workers to prepare for the expected widespread power outages . MacDill Air Force Base , home of U.S. Central Command ( <unk> ) and the U.S. military center for the Iraq War , severely limited its staff on base , shifting most of its operations to its forward headquarters in Doha , Qatar . Similarly , Kennedy Space Center , which usually counts with 13 @,@ 000 on @-@ site personnel , reduced its staff to only 200 people in preparation for the hurricane , and secured all Space Shuttles by sealing them in their hangars . Many amusement parks in the Orlando area closed early , and Walt Disney World 's Animal Kingdom remained closed . This was only the second time in history that a Disney park was closed due to a hurricane , with the other occurrence being after Hurricane Floyd . The approaching hurricane also forced several cruise ships to reroute their paths , and forced rail service between Miami and New York to shut down . 
 The rapid strengthening of Charley in the eastern Gulf of Mexico caught many by surprise . Around five hours before its Florida landfall , Charley was a strong Category 2 hurricane predicted to strengthen its strongest winds to 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) upon its landfall in the Tampa @-@ Saint Petersburg area . About two hours before landfall , the National Hurricane Center issued a special advisory , notifying the public that Charley had become a 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane , with a predicted landfall location in the Port Charlotte area . As a result of this change in forecast , numerous people in the Charlotte County area were unprepared for the hurricane , despite the fact that the new track prediction was well within the previous forecast 's margin of error . National Hurricane Center forecasting intern Robbie Berg publicly blamed the media for misleading residents into believing that a Tampa landfall was inevitable . In addition , he also stated that residents of Port Charlotte had ample warning , as a hurricane warning had been issued for the landfall area 23 hours before , and a hurricane watch had existed for 35 hours . 
 Several local meteorologists , however , did break with national news predictions of a Tampa Bay landfall as early as the morning of August 13 . Jim Farrell of <unk> , Robert Van Winkle <unk> , Steve <unk> of <unk> in Tampa , Jim Reif of <unk> in Fort Myers , and Tom Terry of <unk> in Orlando , all broke with their national news forecasts and stated at around 1500 UTC that Charley was going to turn early , striking around Charlotte Harbor and traveling over Orlando , as would prove to be the case . 
 Following the Florida landfall , Georgia Governor Sonny Perdue declared a state of emergency as a precaution against a 4 – 7 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 1 m ) storm surge and price gouging . In South Carolina , Governor Mark Sanford declared a state of emergency as Charley approached its final landfall . Two coastal counties were forced to evacuate , with state troopers redirecting traffic further inland from Myrtle Beach . In all , 138 @,@ 000 evacuated from the Grand Strand area . 
 = = Impact = = 
 One death in Jamaica , four deaths in Cuba , and ten deaths in the United States were directly attributed to Charley . Numerous injuries were reported , as well as twenty indirect deaths in the U.S. 
 Property damage from Charley in the United States was estimated by the NHC to be $ 15 @.@ 0 billion . At the time , this figure made Charley the second costliest hurricane in United States history , behind 1992 's Hurricane Andrew 's $ 43 @.@ 7 billion . However , Charley has since dropped to eighth costliest , due to the damage caused by Hurricane Ivan later in the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season , Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Wilma in 2005 , Hurricane Ike in 2008 , Hurricane Irene in 2011 and Hurricane Sandy in 2012 . 
 = = = Caribbean Sea = = = 
 On Jamaica , strong winds caused moderate damage to the agricultural sector , with crop and livestock damage totaling to $ 1 @.@ 44 million . As the storm traveled along the southwest coast of Jamaica , it caused heavy wind and rain damage . Damage was heaviest in Saint Elizabeth Parish , where 100 people had to be housed in six shelters . Strong winds downed trees and power lines , causing power outages and blocking roads . Throughout the country , Charley caused $ 4 @.@ 1 million in damage and one fatality . In spite of the close approach that Charley made on the Cayman Islands , the islands were mostly spared , and were subjected to little damage . Rainfall was light , peaking at 0 @.@ 9 in ( 23 mm ) in Grand Cayman , while Cayman Brac reported tropical storm force winds . 
 Operationally , forecasters estimated that Charley struck southern Cuba as a 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . In post @-@ hurricane @-@ season analysis , Charley was determined to have struck southern Cuba as a 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) hurricane ; the original estimate was revised based on a report of a 118 mph ( 190 km / h ) sustained wind measurement in Playa Baracoa , and meant that Charley was a major hurricane at landfall . The hurricane produced a storm surge of up to 13 @.@ 1 ft ( 4 m ) in Playa <unk> ; on the other hand , Charley 's quick passage caused precipitation amounts to be small , with the largest total , 5 @.@ 87 in ( 149 mm ) occurring in Mariel . 
 Strong wind gusts downed nearly 1 @,@ 500 power lines and knocked over 28 large high tension wire towers at a power plant in Mariel . As a result , more than half of the electricity customers in Havana Province were left without power for 12 days after the storm , and all of Pinar del Río Province was without power for over 11 days . Blackouts continued in areas where power returned . The power outages resulted in lack of drinking water for numerous people , including no potable water in the city of Havana for four days . As a result , the Cuban government sent water tanks to satisfy the short term need . Similarly , there was a lack of gas for cooking for over a week . However , one Cuban government official stated that it could take up to two months for basic utilities to be returned to many isolated villages . 
 Near its landfall location , Charley destroyed 290 of the 300 houses in the village , while over 70 @,@ 000 homes in Havana were either damaged or destroyed . Numerous hotels reported damage , potentially impacting the important tourism industry in the country . Agricultural damage was heavy , with the hurricane damaging more than 3 @,@ 000 agricultural institutions . Citrus officials estimated a loss of 15 @,@ 000 metric tons of grapefruit on the Isle of Youth , while strong winds ruined 66 @,@ 000 metric tons of citrus trees in the Havana area . Charley also destroyed around 57 @,@ 000 acres ( 230 km ² ) of fruit trees in the Havana area . Approximately 95 % of the sugar cane , bean , and banana crops were affected in Cuban territory . In all , Charley was directly responsible for four deaths in Cuba , and was responsible for $ 923 million in property damage , primarily from agricultural losses . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Hurricane Charley severely affected the state of Florida . There were nine direct fatalities , 20 indirect fatalities , and numerous injuries attributed to the storm . Property damage was estimated at $ 5 @.@ 4 billion , and approximately $ 285 million in agricultural damage . However , due to Charley 's speed ( it crossed the Florida peninsula in approximately seven hours ) and small size , rainfall along the eyewall was mostly limited to 4 – 6 inches ( 10 – 15 cm ) . 
 While moving northward to the west of the Florida Keys , Charley produced moderate winds of 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) with gusts to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) in Key West . The winds toppled a few trees , power lines , and unreinforced signs . A boat , knocked loose by strong waves , struck a power transmission line , causing widespread power outages from Marathon to Key West . On Fort Jefferson in the Dry Tortugas , the hurricane produced an estimated storm surge of up to 6 ft ( 2 m ) . The surge , combined with incoming waves , caused extensive flooding in the park and damaged numerous docks . In spite of this , property damage was minimal in the area , totaling $ 160 @,@ 000 . 
 Hurricane Charley passed directly over Captiva Island near Cayo Costa with peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . The Category 4 hurricane produced an estimated storm surge of up to 6 @.@ 5 ft ( 2 m ) on the island , which is lower than expected for a storm of its intensity . The decrease in the height of the surge was due to the hurricane 's small size and its rapid intensification just prior to landfall . Furthermore , the storm surge , combined with the strong pressure gradient , produced a ¼ mi ( 450 m ) inlet on North Captiva Island , known as Charley 's Cut . Strong waves and storm surge caused severe beach erosion and dune damage at various locations . The storm severely damaged five houses , lightly damaged many others , and downed many trees on Gasparilla Island . At least half of the 300 homes on North Captiva Island were substantially damaged , including ten that were destroyed . On Captiva Island , the strong winds severely damaged most houses , as well as several recreational buildings . 
 The city of Arcadia in DeSoto County saw extreme damage , in spite of being relatively further inland . About 95 % of the buildings in the downtown area saw some sort of damage . The only shelter in the town had its roof torn open by the wind , leaving 3 @,@ 500 evacuees inside unprotected from the onslaught of the storm . 
 Hardee County saw property damage estimated at $ 750 million , along with six injuries , but no deaths were reported . Charley caused blackouts in the entire county , as well as damage to 3 @,@ 600 homes and the destruction of 1 @,@ 400 . A radio tower near Sebring was toppled , along with numerous trees and power poles along the north and east side of Highlands County . Additionally , there were several reports of severely damaged homes in Polk County near Babson Park and Avon Park . In Lake Wales , Florida , a sand mine lake encroached into State Road 60 due to wave action and swallowed a car . Additionally , Lake Wales saw 23 @,@ 000 buildings damaged , as well as the destruction of 739 structures . Seven deaths were reported in the county , one of them determined to be direct . 
 Throughout the rest of the islands in Sarasota , Charlotte , Lee , and Collier counties , strong winds from Hurricane Charley caused severe damage to hundreds of buildings and trees . Lee County also endured an 8 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) storm surge . These counties were exposed to Charley 's eyewall , so they saw the most damage . Due to its small size , the area of most intense damage was located within a 10 @-@ mi ( 16 @-@ km ) band centered on Charley 's track , with additional heavy damage forming an outer band extending 7 @.@ 5 mi ( 12 km ) to each side of the inner swath of damage . In Charlotte County , 80 % of buildings were damaged . 
 On mainland Florida , Charley produced a peak storm surge of 10 – 13 feet ( 3 – 4 m ) at Vanderbilt Beach near Naples , along with a much lower surge at its Punta Gorda landfall . The hurricane dropped generally light rainfall across Florida , with the maximum amount of 9 @.@ 88 in ( 251 mm ) occurring in Bud Slough in Sarasota County . In Punta Gorda 's airport , where the hurricane made landfall , wind speeds of up to 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) were measured , alongside gusts of up to 111 mph ( 180 km / h ) , before the instrument was blown apart , along with most of the planes and the airport itself . The Charlotte Regional Medical Center recorded an unofficial peak wind gust of 172 mph ( 277 km / h ) . Port Charlotte 's Saint Joseph 's Hospital had its roof blown away by Charley 's strong winds . Due to the compact nature of the hurricane , the storm 's radius of maximum sustained winds only extended a short distance from its center . In comparison , Fort Myers , which is only 25 mi ( 38 km ) from where Charley made landfall , experienced sustained winds of only 61 mph ( 98 km / h ) with gusts of 78 mph ( 125 km / h ) . In South Florida , Charley spawned several tornadoes , including a long @-@ lived F2 that struck Clewiston , and five weak tornadoes near the point where the hurricane made landfall . 
 The most severe damage from Hurricane Charley occurred in Charlotte County . In Boca Grande , numerous houses sustained extensive roof damage , while thousands of trees and power lines were uprooted or snapped . In Port Charlotte and Punta Gorda , many buildings , RVs , and mobile homes were completely destroyed , while other buildings were <unk> due to the powerful winds . 
 Charley devastated Southwest Florida , causing $ 14 @.@ 6 billion in property damage on the peninsula of Florida alone . Many towns such as Punta Gorda and Port Charlotte were leveled by the hurricane . Trees were downed and trailer parks were obliterated as far as Ormond Beach . 
 Charley also caused considerable damage in the central and eastern parts of the state . Several possible tornadoes occurred , with severe thunderstorms during the duration of the storm . Winds were estimated to be at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) sustained near , and to the north of Okeechobee , while winds at Orlando International Airport topped out at 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) in a gust . The storm caused 2 million customers to lose electricity in Florida . In some areas , power was not restored for weeks : 136 @,@ 000 residents had no electricity a week after Charley 's landfall , and 22 @,@ 000 customers , primarily from cooperatives , were still waiting for their service to be restored on August 26 . Citizens in Daytona Beach , New Smyrna Beach , and Port Orange in Southeastern Volusia County also dealt with storm surge from the St. Johns River and Halifax River , and Intracoastal Waterway as Charley passed over before re @-@ emerging into the Atlantic Ocean . Further inland , Seminole County experienced some of the highest winds ever recorded from a hurricane in the area , with a gust of 97 mph ( 156 km / h ) in Longwood at <unk> UTC on August 14 and 101 mph ( 163 km / h ) in <unk> Springs . Power was out in these areas for up to 12 days after the storm in some locations . 
 Public schools in some counties in the path of the hurricane were scheduled to be closed for two weeks . In some areas this was necessary because the school buildings were damaged or destroyed : all 59 of Osceola County 's schools were damaged , and one @-@ third of Charlotte County 's were destroyed by Charley 's impact . DeSoto County schools saw $ 6 million in damage , while Orange County Public Schools saw $ 9 million in damage to their educational infrastructure . 
 Agricultural losses were heavy . In Florida , the second @-@ largest producer of oranges in the world , damage to the citrus crop was estimated at $ 200 million , and caused a 50 % increase in the price of grapefruit juice . Charley , along with the other storms that hit Florida during 2004 , caused a total agricultural loss of $ 2 @.@ 2 billion . Other crops , nurseries , buildings , and agricultural equipment also suffered . 
 = = = Rest of United States = = = 
 Upon making landfall on northeastern South Carolina , Charley produced a storm tide that was unofficially measured to up to 7 @.@ 19 ft ( 2 @.@ 19 m ) in Myrtle Beach . Wind gusts were moderate , peaking at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) in North Myrtle Beach , though there were several unofficial records of hurricane @-@ force gusts . Charley produced moderate rainfall along its path , peaking at over 7 in ( 178 mm ) . Moderate winds knocked down numerous trees . Flash flooding occurred in Charleston County , causing drainage problems . Damage in South Carolina totaled to $ 20 million . 
 In North Carolina , Charley produced an estimated storm surge of 2 – 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 5 – 1 m ) , along with waves of up to 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) in height . This produced minor beach erosion along the coastline . Winds gusted from 60 to 70 mph ( 95 to 110 km / h ) , causing minor wind damage . Rainfall amounts in the state were moderate , ranging from 4 to 6 in ( 100 to 150 mm ) , but still caused flooding across seven North Carolina counties . The hurricane spawned five weak tornadoes across the state , including an F1 in Nags Head that damaged twenty structures . Charley destroyed 40 houses and damaged 2 @,@ 231 , 231 severely , including 221 damaged beach homes in Sunset Beach . Damage was the greatest in Brunswick County , where wind gusts peaked at 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) . Crop damage was also heavy in Brunswick County , with 50 % of the tobacco crop lost and 30 % of the corn and vegetable fields destroyed . Strong winds downed trees and power lines , leaving 65 @,@ 000 without power . Damage in North Carolina totaled to $ 25 million . 
 Tropical Storm Charley produced wind gusts of up to 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) at Chesapeake Light in Virginia , causing scattered power outages . Rainfall was light , ranging from 2 to 3 @.@ 7 in ( 50 to 94 mm ) . Charley produced one tornado in Chesapeake and one in Virginia Beach . In Rhode Island , one man drowned in a rip current . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 President George W. Bush declared Florida a federal disaster area . He later reflected on the government response to Charley : 
 U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson released $ 11 million in additional aid and other assistance to Florida , with $ 10 million to be earmarked to Head Start facilities that need repair or new supplies , another $ 1 million was provided to the DeSoto Memorial Hospital in Arcadia and Osceola Regional Medical Center in Kissimmee , and $ 200 @,@ 000 would be spent to provide services to senior citizens . Across Florida , 114 food service operations and eight comfort stations were set up . FEMA opened four disaster recovery centers . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Because of its effects in the United States , the name Charley was retired from the rotating lists of tropical cyclone names in the spring of 2005 by the World Meteorological Organization . As a result , the name will never again be used for a North Atlantic hurricane . The name was replaced with Colin for the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = Invasion of Martinique ( 1809 ) = 
 The invasion of Martinique of 1809 was a successful British amphibious operation against the French West Indian island of Martinique that took place between 30 January and 24 February 1809 during the West Indies Campaign 1804 – 1810 of the Napoleonic Wars . Martinique , like nearby Guadeloupe , was a major threat to British trade in the Caribbean , providing a sheltered base from which privateers and French Navy warships could raid British shipping and disrupt the trade routes that maintained the British economy . The islands also provided a focus for larger scale French operations in the region and in the autumn of 1808 , following the Spanish alliance with Britain , the Admiralty decided to order a British squadron to neutralise the threat , beginning with Martinique . 
 The British mustered an overwhelming force under Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane and Lieutenant @-@ General George Beckwith , who collected 29 ships and 10 @,@ 000 men – almost four times the number of French regular forces garrisoning Martinique . Landing in force on both the southern and northern coasts of the island , British troops pushed inland , defeating French regulars in the central highlands and routing local militia units in the south of the island . By 9 February , the entire island was in British hands except Fort Desaix , a powerful position intended to protect the capital Fort @-@ de @-@ France , which had been bypassed during the British advance . In a siege lasting 15 days the Fort was constantly bombarded , the French suffering 200 casualties before finally surrendering . 
 The capture of the island was a significant blow to French power in the region , eliminating an important naval base and denying safe harbours to French shipping in the region . The consequences of losing Martinique were so severe , that the French Navy sent a battle squadron to reinforce the garrison during the invasion . Arriving much too late to affect the outcome , these reinforcements were intercepted off the islands and scattered during the Action of 14 – 17 April 1809 : half the force failed to return to France . With Martinique defeated , British attention in the region turned against Guadeloupe , which was captured the following year . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , the British Royal Navy was charged with limiting the passage and operations of the French Navy , French merchant ships and French privateers . To achieve this objective , the Royal Navy imposed a system of blockades on French ports , especially the major naval bases at Toulon and Brest . This stranglehold on French movement off their own coastline seriously affected the French colonies , including those in the West Indies , as their produce could not reach France and supplies and reinforcements could not reach them without the risk of British interception and seizure . These islands provided excellent bases for French ships to raid the British trade routes through the Caribbean Sea : in previous conflicts , the British had countered the threat posed by French West Indian colonies by seizing them through force , such as Martinique , which had been previously captured by armed invasion in 1762 and 1794 . An attempt in 1780 was defeated by a French battle squadron at the Battle of Martinique . By 1808 there were no French squadrons at sea : any that left port were eliminated or driven back in a series of battles , culminating at the disastrous defeat at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 . The fleet that was destroyed at Trafalgar had visited Martinique the year before and was the last full scale French fleet to visit the Caribbean for the rest of the war . 
 With the bulk of the French Navy confined to port , the British were able to strike directly at French colonies , although their reach was limited by the significant resources required in blockading the French coast and so the size and quality of operations varied widely . In 1804 , Haiti fell to a nationalist uprising supported by the Royal Navy , and in 1806 British forces secured most of the northern coast of South America from its Dutch owners . In 1807 the Danish West Indies were invaded and in 1808 Spain changed sides and allied with Britain , while Cayenne fell to an improvised force under Captain James Lucas Yeo in January 1809 . The damage done to the Martinique economy during this period was severe , as British frigates raided coastal towns and shipping , and merchant vessels were prevented from trading Martinique 's produce with France or allied islands . <unk> grew on the island , especially among the recently emancipated black majority , and during the summer of 1808 the island 's governor , Vice @-@ Admiral Louis Thomas Villaret de Joyeuse , sent urgent messages back to France requesting supplies and reinforcements . Some of these messages were intercepted by British ships and the low morale on Martinique was brought to the attention of the Admiralty , who ordered their commander on the West Indian Station , Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane , to raise an expeditionary force from the ships and garrisons available to him and invade the island . 
 During the winter of 1808 – 1809 , Cochrane gathered his forces off Carlisle Bay , Barbados , accumulating 29 ships and 10 @,@ 000 soldiers under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General George Beckwith . Landings were planned on the island 's southern and northern coasts , with the forces ordered to converge on the capital Fort @-@ de @-@ France . The soldiers would be supported and supplied by the Royal Navy force , which would shadow their advance offshore . Beckwith 's army was more than twice the size of the French garrison , half of which was composed of an untrained and irregular black militia which could not be relied on in combat . News of the poor state of Martinique 's defences also reached France during the autumn of 1808 . Attempts were made to despatch reinforcements and urgently needed food supplies , but on 30 October 1808 Circe captured the 16 @-@ gun French <unk> class brig <unk> . The British then captured the frigate Thétis in the Bay of Biscay at the Action of 10 November 1808 . Another relief attempt was destroyed in December off the Leeward Islands and HMS Aimable captured the corvette Iris , carrying flour to Martinique , off the Dutch coast on 2 January 1809 . Only the frigate Amphitrite , whose stores and reinforcements were insignificant compared to the forces under Cochrane and Beckwith , managed to reach Martinique . 
 = = Invasion = = 
 Cochrane 's fleet sailed from Carlisle Bay on 28 January , arriving off Martinique early on 30 January . The force was then divided , one squadron anchoring off Sainte @-@ Luce on the southern coast and another off Le Robert on the northern . The invasion began the same morning , 3 @,@ 000 soldiers going ashore at Sainte @-@ Luce under the command of Major @-@ General Frederick Maitland , supervised by Captain William Charles Fahie , while 6 @,@ 500 landed at Le Robert under Major @-@ General Sir George Prevost , supervised by Captain Philip Beaver . Beckwith remained on Cochrane 's flagship HMS Neptune , to direct the campaign from offshore . A third force , under a Major Henderson and consisting entirely of 600 soldiers from the Royal York Rangers , landed at Cape Salomon near Les <unk> @-@ d <unk> on the southwestern peninsula to secure the entrance to Fort @-@ de @-@ France Bay . 
 During the first day of the invasion , the two main forces made rapid progress inland , the militia troops sent against them retreating and deserting without offering resistance . Serious opposition to the British advance did not begin until 1 February , when French defenders on the heights of Desfourneaux and <unk> were attacked by Prevost 's troops , under the direct command of Brigadier @-@ General Daniel Hoghton . Fighting was fierce throughout the next two days , as the outnumbered French used the fortified high ground to hold back a series of frontal assaults . The British lost 84 killed and 334 wounded to French losses of over 700 casualties , and by 3 February the French had been forced back , withdrawing to Fort Desaix near the capital . Progress was also made at Cape Salomon , where the appearance of British troops panicked the French defenders into burning the naval brig Carnation and retreating to the small island , <unk> aux <unk> , offshore . Henderson 's men , assisted by a naval brigade under Captain George Cockburn , set up batteries on the coast and by 4 February had bombarded the island into surrender , opening the principal harbour of Martinique to naval attack . 
 A small naval squadron , consisting of HMS Aeolus , HMS Cleopatra and the brig HMS Recruit , advanced into Fort @-@ de @-@ France Bay on 5 February . This advance spread panic among the French militia defending the bay and Amphitrite and the other shipping anchored there were set on fire and destroyed , while the forts in the southern part of the island were abandoned . On 8 February , Maitland 's force , which had not yet fired a shot , arrived on the western side of Fort Desaix and laid siege to it . Minor detachments spread across the remainder of the island : Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Edward Barnes captured Saint @-@ Pierre and another force occupied Fort @-@ de @-@ France and seized the corvette Diligente in the harbour . By 10 February , when Prevost 's force linked up with Maitland 's , Fort Desaix was the only remaining point of resistance . 
 For nine days , the British soldiers and sailors of the expeditionary force constructed gun batteries and trenches around the fort , bringing ashore large quantities of supplies and equipment in readiness for a lengthy siege . At 16 : 30 on 19 February the preparations were complete and the bombardment began , 14 heavy cannon and 28 mortars beginning a continuous attack on the fort which lasted for the next four days . French casualties in the overcrowded fort were severe , with 200 men killed or wounded . British casualties were minimal , with five killed and 11 wounded , principally in an explosion in an ammunition tent manned by sailors from HMS <unk> . At 12 : 00 on 23 February , Villaret de Joyeuse 's trumpeter was sent to the British camp with a message proposing surrender terms . These were unacceptable to Beckwith and the bombardment resumed at 22 : 00 , continuing until 09 : 00 the following morning when three white flags were raised over the fort and the French admiral surrendered unconditionally . The bombardment had cracked the roof of the fort 's magazine , and there were fears that further shelling might have ignited the gunpowder and destroyed the building completely . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With the surrender of Fort Desaix , British forces solidified their occupation of the island of Martinique . The remaining shipping and military supplies were seized and the regular soldiers of the garrison taken as prisoners of war . The militia were disbanded and Martinique became a British colony , remaining under British command until the restoration of the French monarchy in 1814 , when it was returned to French control . British losses in the campaign were heavy , with 97 killed , 365 wounded and 18 missing . French total losses are uncertain but the garrison suffered at least 900 casualties , principally in the fighting in the central highlands on 1 and 2 February and during the siege of Fort Desaix . Upon his return to France , Villaret 's conduct was condemned by an inquiry council ; he requested in vain a Court @-@ martial to clear his name , and lived in disgrace for two years . 
 In Britain , both Houses of Parliament voted their thanks to Cochrane and Beckwith , who immediately began planning the invasion of Guadeloupe , executed in January 1810 . Financial and professional rewards were provided for the junior officers and enlisted men and in 1816 the battle honour Martinique was awarded to the ships and regiments involved , with the date 1809 added in 1909 to distinguish the campaign from the earlier operations of 1762 and 1794 . Four decades later the operation was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal and the Military General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . In France , the defeat was the subject of a court martial in December 1809 , at which Villaret de Joyeuse and a number of his subordinates were stripped of their commissions , honours , and ranks for inadequately preparing for invasion , in particular for failing properly to strengthen and disperse the magazine at Fort Desaix . 
 There was a subsequent French effort to reach Martinique , launched in February 1809 before news of the British invasion had reached Europe . Three ships of the line and two disarmed frigates were sent with soldiers and supplies towards the island , but learned of Villaret de Joyeuse 's surrender in late March and instead took shelter in the Îles des Saintes , blockaded by Cochrane 's squadron . On 14 April , Cochrane seized the Saintes and the French fled , the three ships of the line drawing away Cochrane 's forces so that the frigates could slip away and reach Guadeloupe . During the ensuing Action of 14 – 17 April 1809 , the French flagship Hautpoult was chased down and captured , but two escaped and the frigates reached Guadeloupe , although neither would ever return to France . 
 = = British order of battle = = 
 = Rachel Nichols ( actress ) = 
 Rachel Emily Nichols ( born January 8 , 1980 ) is an American actress and model . Nichols began modeling while attending Columbia University in New York City in the late 1990s . She transitioned into television and film acting in the early 2000s ; she had a part in the romantic drama film Autumn in New York ( 2000 ) and a one @-@ episode role in Season 4 of the show Sex and the City ( 2002 ) . 
 Her first major role was in the comedy film Dumb and Dumberer : When Harry Met Lloyd ( 2003 ) . She had the main role in the crime drama television series The Inside ( 2005 ) , though it was cancelled after one season . Nichols gained recognition playing Rachel Gibson in the final season of the serial action television series Alias ( 2005 – 06 ) and for her role in the horror film The Amityville Horror ( 2005 ) . 
 Nichols ' first starring film role was in the horror @-@ thriller P2 ( 2007 ) . She had a supporting role in the coming @-@ of @-@ age film The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants 2 ( 2008 ) and appeared in Star Trek ( 2009 ) . She starred in the action film G.I. Joe : The Rise of Cobra ( 2009 ) and also in the sword and sorcery film Conan the Barbarian ( 2011 ) . She played lead roles in the television series Criminal Minds ( 2010 – 11 ) and Continuum ( 2012 – 15 ) . 
 = = Early life and modeling = = 
 Rachel Nichols was born January 8 , 1980 in Augusta , Maine , to Jim , a schoolteacher , and Alison Nichols . She attended <unk> High School , where she competed in the high jump . Nichols said in an interview that she was not the hot chick in high school and her mother would euphemistically refer to her as ' a late bloomer ' , " which meant that I had uncontrollable arms and legs , I had very long appendages . I took several years of very highly structured dance classes for me to be able to control myself . " 
 Upon graduating in 1998 , she enrolled at Columbia University in New York City , aiming for a career as a Wall Street analyst . She was noticed by a modeling agent during lunch one day and was invited to work in Paris ; she eventually paid her tuition with the proceeds from her modeling work . She worked on advertising campaigns for Abercrombie & Fitch , Guess , and L 'Oréal ; she also hosted several MTV specials . Nichols studied economics and psychology , as well as drama , graduating from Columbia in 2003 with a double major in math and economics . Nichols said in September 2008 that " the modeling shoes have been hung up . " 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = 2000 – 04 : Early acting credits = = = 
 Nichols had done commercial work and had a bit part as a model in the romantic drama film Autumn in New York ( 2000 ) when her modeling agent helped her get a one @-@ episode role in the fourth season of Sex and the City ( 2002 ) . She later said she had " never really done a proper audition before " , and added that " I had such fun [ filming on set ] , that day actually made me want to pursue [ acting ] more seriously . " Later that year she was cast in her first major film role as Jessica , a dogged student newspaper reporter , in Dumb and Dumberer : When Harry Met Lloyd ( 2003 ) . Although the film was panned by critics , making it was a learning experience for Nichols . She said , " I was a sponge for the entire time I was in Atlanta [ during filming ] and freely admitted that I had no idea what was going on . I had never done a big film before , I had never been the lead in a film before and any advice anyone wanted to give me , I was more than willing to take . " The following year , Nichols played a member of a high school debate team in the independent film Debating Robert Lee ( 2004 ) and had a two @-@ episode role in the crime drama television series Line of Fire ( 2004 ) , which was cancelled after 11 of 13 produced episodes were broadcast . By August 2004 , she was cast in supporting roles in the horror films The Amityville Horror ( 2005 ) and The Woods ( 2006 ) . 
 In late February 2004 , Nichols was cast in a starring role in a then @-@ untitled drama pilot for the Fox Broadcasting Company ( Fox ) . According to Variety , her character was to be " a DEA agent who goes undercover at a high school " . Todd and Glenn Kessler were developing the series , ultimately titled The Inside . The pilot they produced did not satisfy studio executives , however , and Tim Minear was brought in to create a new pilot for the series in late September 2004 , replacing the Kesslers as executive producer and showrunner . The Inside was originally supposed to air midseason , but the new pilot itself was reshot and the series was pushed back . The new concept made Nichols ' character a rookie FBI agent assigned to the FBI 's Los Angeles Violent Crimes Unit . The series premiered in June 2005 and critical reception was mixed ; it had been scheduled opposite the popular Dancing with the Stars on ABC , and due to low ratings six of the 13 produced episodes were aired . It was not picked up for further episodes . 
 = = = 2005 – 09 : Breakthrough = = = 
 Following The Inside , Nichols found work on the fifth season of the serial action series Alias in 2005 , being cast that July . Nichols starred as Rachel Gibson , a computer expert who thought she was working for the CIA when in fact she was working for a dangerous terrorist organization — a situation similar to that of the series ' main character Sydney Bristow ( Jennifer Garner ) the first season . Discovering the truth , Gibson joins the real CIA and becomes Bristow 's protégé . Of working on Alias , Nichols said that " to say it 's the nicest set on the planet is an understatement " . Her role involved multiple fight sequences , as did Garner 's . Nichols worked with Garner 's personal trainer ; she said she " already knew that [ Garner 's ] job was extremely hard . But I didn 't know how difficult it was until I started training for just one fight . " Nichols was being groomed to replace Garner as the main character due to the latter 's pregnancy , which had been written into the storyline . But Alias was cancelled in November 2005 , making its fifth season its final . " I think everybody knew that the show wouldn 't work without Jennifer " , Nichols said , " But still , they were grooming me , so it was heartbreaking when it happened . " 
 She had a small role in the 2005 romantic drama <unk> and played the babysitter of George and Kathy Lutz 's children in The Amityville Horror ( 2005 ) . For the latter role she was nominated for the Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Scream Scene and the MTV Movie Award for Best Frightened Performance . She later revealed that she almost did not audition for the film due to her fear of dogs . " [ Producer ] Michael Bay has these gigantic [ dogs ] . [ ... ] And , when I went to audition for The Amityville Horror , I went into his offices and literally these three huge dogs were there , and I almost turned around . I was like , ' No , I 'm not going to read for this film . ' I actually used the dogs in my audition to think of what would scare me the most . " The Amityville Horror received generally negative reception from critics , but was a commercial success . 
 The Woods , which had been shelved for some 18 months , was released directly @-@ to @-@ video in October 2006 . The film opened to favorable reviews and critics acclaimed the individual performances of the actors . Nichols had a small part in the drama film Resurrecting the Champ ( 2007 ) , in which she played the assistant to a sportswriter ( Josh Hartnett ) who believes he has found a former boxing legend ( Samuel L. Jackson ) living homeless on the streets . Also that year , Nichols had a bit part in the fact @-@ based political drama Charlie Wilson 's War ( 2007 ) and was cast in a new science fiction drama television series Them , which was ultimately not picked up by Fox . 
 Her first starring film role was in the 2007 horror – thriller P2 , in which she played a businesswoman who becomes trapped inside a public parking garage with a deranged security guard . About the dress her character wears for much of the film , Nichols said , " When I read the script originally , it wasn 't a dress , it was a small nightgown with no bra or underwear . Then I read the first scene where she gets wet , and I went : ' OK , this has got to be altered ! ' " Nichols said in an interview that among the rules established in her contract were : " I will not get wet and show nipples " in addition to no nudity . A bra was sewn into the " Marilyn Monroe dress " she wore in the film . She said , " I wasn 't going to run around for two months without a bra , I thought that was inappropriate . But in place of the nipples there 's clearly a lot of cleavage . So we made a compromise . " P2 was generally disliked by critics . Reviewer James Berardinelli said that her performance was " admirable , although one wonders whether she was cast more for her physical assets than her acting ability . " John Anderson of Variety wrote that " Nichols is in territory well trod over the years by everyone from Fay Wray and Grace Kelly to Heather <unk> , the terrified but gutsy heroine , who in this case has been chloroformed and put into a sheer white evening dress by her abductor — who must have anticipated that his captive would try to escape in an elevator , which he could then fill with water . ( Nichols ' considerable physical attributes , henceforth , seem to occupy most of the screen . ) She 's sympathetic , hysterical when required and likeable . " 
 Nichols had a supporting role in The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants 2 ( 2008 ) , playing a jealous friend of America Ferrera 's character . Overall , the film was well received by critics . Roger Ebert commented that Nichols as her character Julia " proves a principle that should be in the Little Movie Glossary : If a short , curvy , sun @-@ kissed heroine [ Ferrera ] has a tall , thin blond as a roommate , that blond is destined to be a bitch . No way around it . " Stephen Holden , writing for The New York Times , similarly said , " It falls to Ms. Nichols to play the movie 's designated blond baddie , a cold , arrogant vixen who tries to undermine [ Ferrera 's character 's ] triumphs in romance and onstage . " Nichols was cast in Star Trek ( 2009 ) in November 2007 , but due to the project 's secrecy her role was initially unknown even to her ; she said that month she did not even know her character 's name . It was speculated that she would play Janice Rand , but she would actually play an Orion cadet at Starfleet Academy , as revealed by <unk> the following month . 
 Nichols was cast as Shana " Scarlett " O 'Hara in the live @-@ action film adaptation of the G.I. Joe franchise G.I. Joe : The Rise of Cobra ( 2009 ) in late 2007 . She later said that she accepted director Stephen Sommers ' offer for the role without having read the actual script . " I 'd heard from other people that the script was quite good . And then when I finally got to read it myself ... I really , really liked it ... I liked that there were two kick @-@ ass female roles . And I liked the fact that it wasn 't just a big action movie ... And there was comedy in it . I was genuinely really happily surprised when I read the script . " She put on approximately 15 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 kg ) of muscle for the role and trained in mixed martial arts with co @-@ star Sienna Miller for some of the film 's action sequences . Nichols was burned by a flame during the filming of a fight scene with Miller . Like The Amityville Horror , G.I. Joe : The Rise of Cobra was not well received by most critics , but performed well at the box office . Richard Corliss of Time wrote that Nichols had " an appealing manner and comely biceps " as Scarlett O 'Hara and took notice of her " savory girl fight with Sienna Miller , as the mostly villainous Baroness . " After G.I. Joe , Nichols ' next project was the horror film For Sale by Owner , where she played Anna Farrier . Going straight @-@ to @-@ video on October 27 , 2009 , the movie went largely unnoticed by critics and audiences alike . 
 = = = 2010 – present : Criminal Minds and Continuum = = = 
 She starred as Leslie Spencer in the indie crime @-@ drama <unk> , which premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival and had no domestic distributor as of April 2010 . However , the film received a limited release on December 3 , 2010 in the United States . Nichols was cast in the 3 @-@ D sword and sorcery movie Conan the Barbarian in March 2010 , as the character of Tamara , a master of martial arts , a priestess , and also the potential Conan 's love interest . The film , released on August 19 , 2011 , was a reimagining of the 1982 film of the same name which starred Arnold Schwarzenegger . It received mostly poor reviews , and was a box office bomb . 
 Nichols guest starred in three episodes of CBS 's Criminal Minds , and was then promoted as a series regular . Her role was Ashley Seaver , an FBI cadet assigned to the <unk> . The casting choice came amid uproar from the series ' fanbase as she was bought in to replace exiting actresses A.J. Cook and Paget Brewster ; she told Parade magazine that the show ' fans at first " hated " her , with many sending her hate messages through Twitter , because " [ ... ] they were very angry about [ the Paget and A.J. ] situation . " However , as the season went on , viewers eventually gave her character a warm reception . " It just kind of worked . It was a long process , " she said . It was later informed that Nichols had been let go from the show . Nichols next starred in the indie drama @-@ romance feature A Bird of the Air ( formerly known as The Loop ) , where she played Fiona " a librarian who joins a highway patrolman to uncover the mysteries behind the cryptic sayings spoken by an ancient parrot . " She described the film as a " quirky , edgy love story " and felt that playing her role " was great for me , because [ Fiona ] is a departure from some of the roles I 've been offered " . It was released in selected theaters on September 23 , 2011 , to mixed reviews ; while The New York Times remarked that the actress " is consistently appealing in the kind of role Zooey Deschanel has pretty much cornered " , Village Voice felt her character was " a grating twit " in her hands . 
 On May 27 , 2012 , Continuum , a Canadian science fiction series starring Nichols , premiered on Showcase . The show centres on the conflict between a police officer and a group of rebels from the year 2077 who time @-@ travel to Vancouver , BC in the year 2012 . The pilot brought 900 @,@ 000 viewers , becoming the highest @-@ rated single episode ever on the network . A ratings success in its four seasons , Continuum also earned Nichols a Constellation Award and two Saturn Award nominations for Best Actress on Television . Also in 2012 , she appeared in the action film Alex Cross , which garnered negative reviews and premiered with a disappointing $ 11 @.@ 4 million opening weekend gross . 
 Her next movie appearance was in the exploitation film Raze , where she played a character named Jamie . Directed by Josh C. Waller , the movie co @-@ starred Zoë Bell as a woman forced to fight against various other women for the twisted entertainment of the wealthy elite . It was released on April 21 , 2013 at the Tribeca Film Festival and then received a very limited release in New York City and Los Angeles in early 2014 . She was cast opposite Nicolas Cage in the action @-@ crime feature Rage , which focused on a reformed criminal seeking his own brand of justice after his daughter gets kidnapped . The film premiered through selected theaters and video @-@ on @-@ demand in the U.S. between June and July 2014 . The same year , she guest starred in one episode of the Lifetime series Witches of East End and debuted as a recurring character in the short @-@ lived USA Network show Rush . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nichols married film producer Scott Stuber on July 26 , 2008 , in Aspen , Colorado . Nichols allowed her hair to return to its natural blond color for the ceremony , as it had been dyed red for her consecutive roles in Star Trek and G.I. Joe : The Rise of Cobra . They were working on building a home in Cabo San Lucas shortly after their honeymoon . Seven months later , in February 2009 , Nichols and Stuber separated due to irreconcilable differences . 
 On December 30 , 2013 , Nichols confirmed her engagement to Michael Kershaw , a real estate developer . They married in September 2014 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Bronwyn Oliver = 
 Bronwyn Joy Oliver ( née Gooda , 22 February 1959 – 11 July 2006 ) was an Australian sculptor who worked primarily in metal . Raised in rural New South Wales , she trained at Sydney 's College of Fine Arts and London 's Chelsea School of Art . She had early successes , winning a New South Wales Travelling Art Scholarship in 1981 and the Moet & Chandon Australian Art Fellowship in 1984 . Oliver settled in Sydney , where she practised and taught until her death by suicide in 2006 . 
 Oliver 's sculptures are admired for their tactile nature , their aesthetics , and the technical skills demonstrated in their production . In her later career , most of her pieces were commissions , both public and private . Her major works include Vine , a 16 @.@ 5 @-@ metre @-@ high sculpture in the Sydney Hilton , Magnolia and Palm , in the Sydney Botanical Gardens , and Big Feathers in Brisbane 's Queen Street Mall . Recognition of her work included selection as a finalist in the inaugural Helen Lempriere National Sculpture Award in 2000 , inclusion in the National Gallery of Australia 's 2002 National Sculpture Prize exhibition , and being shortlisted for the 2006 Clemenger Contemporary Art Award . Her works are held in major Australian collections , including the National Gallery of Australia , the National Gallery of Victoria and the Art Gallery of New South Wales . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Oliver was born Bronwyn Gooda on 22 February 1959 , in Gum Flat , west of Inverell in New South Wales . Her parents were Milton , a farmer turned <unk> , and Wendy , who worked in a pharmacy . Her creativity was nurtured from a young age . Aged just eight , Oliver attended weekend art classes in Inverell run by Ian Howard , who went on to become dean of the college in Sydney where she would later study . As she was dux of her school , her parents expected her to go on to university . However , Oliver wished to pursue a creative career . When she told her parents of her plans , her mother replied , " Darling , your father and I are very pleased you 're going to art school , but if you 'd been a son , I think we 'd be a little disappointed . " A rift subsequently developed between her and her family that resulted in her having no contact with them for 25 years . 
 After leaving school , Oliver studied and worked in Sydney . She had intended to enrol in painting classes , but a computer error placed her in the sculpture course : she later said " I knew straight away I was in the right place " . 
 She graduated from the Alexander Mackie College of Advanced Education , now the University of New South Wales College of Fine Arts , in 1980 . Winning a New South Wales Travelling Art Scholarship in 1983 , she then completed a master 's degree at Chelsea School of Art in 1984 . Her work was influenced by Richard Deacon , Antony Gormley and Martin <unk> under whom she studied while in England . Upon returning from the United Kingdom , she immediately met with further success , when in 1984 she won a Moet & Chandon Australian Art Fellowship . In 1988 she was granted a period as artist @-@ in @-@ residence in the city of Brest on the coast of Brittany , where she studied Celtic metalworking techniques . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In her early twenties , Bronwyn Gooda married Leslie Oliver , taking his surname and later retaining it " despite a distressing divorce " . The artist lived in the inner @-@ western Sydney suburb of Haberfield , where she also had her studio . For 19 years up until her death , she taught art to primary school @-@ age children at Sydney 's Cranbrook School in Bellevue Hill . She was a friend of Roslyn Oxley , at whose eponymous gallery Oliver exhibited her works . Her long @-@ term de facto partner was wine writer Huon Hooke . 
 = = Works and exhibitions = = 
 Biographer Hannah Fink estimated that Oliver produced 290 works over a career of 22 years . Of these , public art works are Oliver 's best known sculptures . These include Eyrie , created for Adelaide 's Hyatt Hotel in 1993 , and Magnolia and Palm , commissioned in 1999 by the Sydney Botanical Gardens , as part of the Sydney Sculpture Walk . That same year , Big Feathers was commissioned for the Queen Street Mall in Brisbane . It comprises two large feather @-@ shaped forms suspended above the pedestrian precinct , representing " Queen Street 's history of parades as well as the mall 's connection between earth and sky " . 
 In 2000 , Oliver 's piece <unk> was a finalist in the inaugural Helen Lempriere National Sculpture Award , while in the following year , Oliver won the University of New South Wales inaugural sculpture commission competition , with her three @-@ metre @-@ high Globe . Other success followed , when Trace was selected for the National Gallery of Australia 's 2002 National Sculpture Prize exhibition . In August 2002 she was one of five artists shortlisted by the Australian Government for a project to produce a public artwork celebrating the centenary of women 's suffrage in Australia . 
 By the 2000s most of Oliver 's output constituted commissioned pieces , whether public or private . The most substantial of these is Vine , a 16 @.@ 5 metre high sculpture installed as part of the $ 400 million refurbishment of the Sydney Hilton . Taking twelve months to create and requiring a budget of up to half million dollars , the work was completed in 2005 . The sculpture was fabricated from 380 kilograms of aluminium , and assembled by a team of eight Croatian welders . 
 By 2006 , Oliver had held 18 solo exhibitions of her work , half of them at Roslyn <unk> Gallery , which represented her throughout her career as a sculptor . Only one of those solo exhibitions was held outside Australia : a 1992 exhibition at Auckland City Gallery . However , Oliver was represented in numerous international group shows , including five during the period 1983 to 1984 , around the time she completed her master 's degree in London . Four of the group shows at that time were in the United Kingdom ; the fifth was at the Museum of Traditional Industries in Kyoto . Subsequent international group shows included ' Five Australian Artists ' at Brest 's Centre <unk> in 1988 , the year she undertook an artist 's residency in that city . Later group shows of which Oliver was part included ' Prospect ' 93 ' at the Frankfurter <unk> , ' Systems End : Contemporary Art in Australia ' , which exhibited in several east Asian galleries in 1996 , and the Beijing International Biennale in 2003 . 
 = = Technique = = 
 A sculptor for her entire artistic career , Oliver used paper , cane or fibreglass for her early works . However , she found " fibreglass hazardous and paper too impermanent " , and for most of her career she worked in metal . The metals used for her creations varied : the monumental Vine was fabricated in aluminium , as was the Brisbane sculpture Big Feathers ; however most , such as Palm and the 2002 sculpture Lock , were crafted in copper . All 25 works included in the 1995 publication , Bronwyn Oliver : mnemonic chords , were made in copper , though a handful also utilised other materials such as bronze , lead or , in one case , fibreglass . 
 Oliver was always preoccupied with " what materials will do " . Fink observed that " [ f ] rom the beginning , Oliver has been interested in things that are made from the inside out , and her works often give cryptic evidence of their manufacture " . That evidence of manufacture was not confined to the works themselves : friends and art critics observed the injuries and marks she carried as a result of working with such unforgiving material . 
 Ideas were often first sketched by Oliver , before she moved to construction in three dimensions . When preparing commissions , she would draw on the ideas of clients or the nature of the site . For large works she created maquettes ( or models ) , sometimes in plasticine , on other occasions using copper wire or , in the case of her 2002 sculpture Globe , wood and metal . Oliver would produce the more delicate works herself . Many were created by crafting and joining wire to create abstract forms . These were built around moulds , twisting the metal into place with pliers , before severing it with <unk> . Joins were soldered or brazed ( though in some pieces , the wire was woven ) . In Web ( 2002 ) , copper pieces were sewn together using wire . 
 Major pieces were created at Crawfords Casting foundry in Enfield in Sydney 's inner western suburbs . Although the foundry would fabricate the elements of the sculptures , Oliver would still undertake the initial stages , training foundry staff and supervising their activity . Some of the pieces assembled to create the sculptures were made using copper rod , while others were formed using the lost @-@ wax casting technique . Individual pieces would take up to two months to complete . 
 = = Themes and critical reception = = 
 Oliver was not one to <unk> her creativity : she preferred to talk about the process of creating her artworks rather than their meanings . Asked about how she approached her art , she stated : 
 My work is about structure and order . It is a pursuit of a kind of logic : a formal , sculptural logic and poetic logic . It is a conceptual and physical process of building and taking away at the same time . I set out to strip the ideas and associations down to ( physically and metaphorically ) just the bones , exposing the life still held inside . 
 While Oliver was reluctant to discuss meaning in her works , critics have identified recurring themes . Hannah Fink , like art critic John McDonald , noted that there is a pattern to the shapes and structures in Oliver 's work . Fink described this as " a consistent vocabulary of elemental forms – the spiral , meander , loop and sphere – in a repertoire of signature archetypes " , while McDonald referred to them as organisms , or their remains . Despite their organic appearance , Oliver 's own view was that her work was not grounded in nature 's structures . Nevertheless , critics have identified the lifelike qualities of early pieces that resembled shells , claws or tails , or commented on the apparent similarities to biological forms . Both major reviews of Oliver 's work ( Fenner 's 1995 essay and Fink 's 2002 journal article ) draw attention to dualism and contradiction in the sculptures : Fenner describes them as " delicate and ephemeral , [ yet ] structurally robust and durable " ; Fink sees them as " ethereal but solid , fluid yet rigid , open but closed " . 
 Oliver 's sculptures are admired for their tactile nature , their aesthetics , and the technical skills demonstrated in their production . Particular works have been singled out for praise . A writer reviewing Vine in the Sydney Hilton admired how it " curls like a fairytale <unk> up towards the ceiling as though empowered by the sunlight streaming in from a large open space adjacent " . Journalist Catherine Keenan 's 2005 description of how the towering sculpture demonstrated both aesthetic and production values are typical of comments about Oliver 's work : 
 It has the delicate , adamantine beauty that characterises many of her pieces , but is also an engineering marvel : 380 kilograms of metal that was delivered on the back of an oversized truck and now hangs from a single specially manufactured rod fixed to the ceiling . 
 The Sydney Morning Herald 's art writer , John McDonald , said of her work " It often seems to me she 's only got one tune , but it 's a pretty good tune " . He later elaborated : 
 It is a cliche that every artist keeps making the same work , but in Oliver 's case , while some forms resemble sea creatures and others the buds of plants , the family ties between even the most diverse pieces are very strong ... nothing was dashed off or thrown together . Every piece feels as if it has been minutely considered , with each strand of copper wire being brazed into exactly the right spot ... All the things that have recently been said about Oliver – that she was beautiful , intelligent , charming – could also be said about the work . 
 Despite this consistency in her output and the coherent themes of her oeuvre , variety was also present . Critic Bruce James considered her 2002 exhibition , and in particular one small work titled <unk> , to demonstrate a broader artistic range : " <unk> is ... formally surprising , evidence that Oliver is not content to rely on a winning recipe of convolution for her concepts . Whole new areas of physical and artistic exploration lay open before her " . Hannah Fink , reflecting on Oliver 's last sculptures , wrote : 
 The mastery of her last works seems to defy imagining – one can only marvel at the ingenuity of their construction and the perfection of their realisation . The utter variety of her posthumous exhibition ... put paid to any suggestion she had reached a natural end to her work : almost every work was different , and full of innovation . 
 In 2000 , Oliver was included by Australian Art Collector in its list of Australia 's 50 " most collectable artists " . In 2005 , her work was identified by auction dealers as amongst those of greatest interest in the secondary art market . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Oliver was sometimes characterised as reclusive in both the artistic and social worlds . Her teacher and long @-@ time associate Professor Ian Howard described her as having " an underlying and at times painful distrust of the relationships that are part of our everyday lives " . Close friend and gallerist , Roslyn Oxley , observed that she was " very private . She stopped people entering her world a lot of the time . " Oliver 's sister , Helen , had described her as a " powerful and fragile person " while biographer Fink observed " [ a ] deeply asocial person , [ who ] nonetheless maintained longstanding friendships with a small coterie of people whom she trusted " . The final period of Oliver 's personal life was the subject of contradictory accounts . Oxley said that Oliver in 2006 experienced the end of a 20 @-@ year @-@ long relationship , and obituarist Joyce Morgan , who spoke to Huon Hooke after Oliver 's death , described Hooke as Oliver 's " former " <unk> though others writing shortly after her death did not indicate that the relationship with Hooke had ended , including an obituary by Howard , one written by art critic John McDonald , and tributes by her two biographers , Felicity Fenner and Hannah Fink . Some years later , author Katrina Strickland interviewed people close to Oliver , and reported they had noticed a gradual deterioration in her personality over a period of years ; she became " reclusive , obsessive , anxious " as well as " difficult and impatient , and completely obsessed with her diet . " Under the circumstances , Hooke had felt he " just wanted to be somewhere else " and left the relationship in late May 2006 . At that point , Strickland recounted , " Oliver fell to pieces " . 
 Her friend Roslyn Oxley subsequently concluded that , at some point , Oliver made plans to take her own life . Journalist Sunanda Creagh interviewed Oxley , as the gallerist prepared the last exhibition of her friend 's work : 
 Oliver made meticulous arrangements for her final show , says Oxley . " She named everything and she wrote a note saying she wanted the show to go ahead . It was very clear . She finished all the work she said she would finish . She never let anyone down , ever . To be under that tension and obviously to have suicide on your mind , but to complete all the obligations before you did it ... " Oxley 's sentence trails off . 
 Oliver committed suicide on 11 July 2006 . McDonald recounts that , some weeks after her death , Hooke indicated in an interview that Oliver was " a very troubled person " , but none of the sources offered anything definitive about why she took her own life ; McDonald himself concluded " we will never know " . In 2013 , it was reported that analysis of a sample of Oxley 's hair contained a very high level of copper , nearly 8 times normal . The debilitating effects of high copper levels , which are associated with some mental illnesses , may have been exacerbated by an imbalance created by low zinc levels in her diet , which was devoid of red meat . 
 Just before her death , Oliver had been shortlisted for the 2006 Clemenger Contemporary Art Award . In the year following , Oliver was amongst 60 artists profiled in Sonia <unk> ' book Untitled : Portraits of Australian Artists , while in 2008 her final works were included in the Adelaide Biennale of Australian Art . The secondary art market , meanwhile , was returning six @-@ figure sums for her works at auction ; in 2007 a record for Oliver 's work was set when <unk> ( 2004 ) went under the hammer for $ 192 @,@ 000 . By 2010 , Sydney Biennale chairman Luca <unk> @-@ <unk> was reported to have paid $ 300 @,@ 000 for one of Oliver 's sculptures , titled Tracery . In 2011 , Sydney 's College of Fine Arts announced that its new sculpture studio would be named after Oliver . 
 Works by Oliver are held in most major Australian art collections , including the National Gallery of Australia , the Art Gallery of New South Wales , the National Gallery of Victoria , Queensland Art Gallery , the Art Gallery of South Australia , the Auckland Art Gallery , the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery , Wollongong City Gallery , Orange Regional Gallery , and the Australian government 's collection Artbank . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = 1967 Football League Cup Final = 
 The 1967 Football League Cup Final was an association football match between Queens Park Rangers ( QPR ) and West Bromwich Albion on 4 March 1967 at Wembley Stadium , London . It was the final match of the 1966 – 67 Football League Cup , the seventh season of the Football League Cup , a football competition for the teams in The Football League . This was the first final to be decided over a single game ; the six previous finals were contested over two legs . QPR were appearing in their first final , while Albion were appearing in their second after winning the previous final in 1966 . 
 As QPR were in the Third Division they played one more round than Albion who received a bye in the first round . Therefore , QPR progressed through six rounds to reach the final , whereas Albion progressed through five . Matches up to the semi @-@ final were contested on a one @-@ off basis with the exception of the semi @-@ finals which were contested over two @-@ legs , with a match at each team 's home ground . QPR 's matches were generally close affairs , they only won by a three two goal margin or more in three of their matches . Albion 's matches were almost all comfortable victories . Their biggest margin of victory was five goals when they beat Aston Villa 6 – 1 . While the only match did not win was the second leg of the semi @-@ final against West Ham United , which was drawn 2 – 2 . 
 Watched by a crowd of 97 @,@ 952 , Albion took the lead in the first half when Clive Clark scored in the 7th minute . He scored again later in the half to give Albion a 2 – 0 lead at half @-@ time . QPR reduced the deficit in the 63rd minute when Roger Morgan scored and then levelled the match 12 minutes later courtesy of a goal by Rodney Marsh . Mark Lazarus scored a third goal for QPR in the 81st minute , as QPR won the match 3 – 2 to win the League Cup for the first time . 
 QPR 's victory caused a problem for the Football Association as typically the League Cup winner would qualify for the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , but one of the criteria for that competition was that the team must come from the highest tier of that country 's league system . QPR was replaced in the following season 's European competition by a First Division side . 
 = = Road to Wembley = = 
 = = = Queens Park Rangers = = = 
 On the first day of the 1966 – 67 Football League Cup on 23 August 1966 , QPR played Colchester United at their home ground of Loftus Road , winning 5 – 0 . In the third round , they defeated Welsh team Swansea City on 2 – 1 . They were drawn against Leicester City in the following round . Three goals in the second half saw QPR come back from being 2 – 1 down to win the match by 4 – 2 . The first of these goals was a rebound off Leicester goalkeeper Gordon Banks after a shot by Rodney Marsh , then a shot by Les Allen went through a Leicester goalmouth packed with defenders , and the final goal came from Mark Lazarus in similar circumstances to the Allen goal . QPR were put under pressure in their match against Carlisle United , but Marsh scored twice more for Rangers to give them the 2 – 1 victory . 
 Until the first leg of the semi @-@ final against Birmingham City , QPR had not won an away match during their League Cup campaign . They were one goal down at half time , and again were forced to recover the deficit during the second half . In the 55th minute , Marsh scored his 34th goal of the season , he headed the ball into the goal after a corner kick from Allen . Marsh was involved again in QPR 's second and third goal as he set up Roger Morgan for the second , and then back heeled the ball through to Lazarus for the third . QPR 's fourth and final goal saw Marsh hit a header direct from a free kick to Allen who scored . The second leg secured QPR 's first trip to Wembley , and marked the first time that a team from the Third Division had reached any Wembley final . They won the game 3 – 1 , but they did not score until the last twelve minutes of the match . 
 = = = West Bromwich Albion = = = 
 Bobby Hope led Albion to a victory at the start of their League Cup campaign , having received a bye past the first round , scoring a hat @-@ trick as the team went on to defeat Aston Villa 6 – 0 . Albion played Manchester City on 5 October 1966 in the third round , and although they won the game 4 – 2 , they were pressed hard for the victory . Albion went a goal down after nine minutes against Northampton Town , but came back to win 3 – 1 . 
 Their semi @-@ final was a rematch of the 1966 Football League Cup Final , with West Ham United the opposition over two legs . Albion took a commanding lead in the first leg with a 4 – 0 victory , a goal from Dennis Clarke and a hat @-@ trick from Jeff Astle . West Ham captain Bobby Moore urged his team to push Albion hard in the second leg , even in the closing stages of the match when they still had all four goals from the first leg to catch up with . Goals from Geoff Hurst and Johnny Byrne for West Ham were cancelled out by goals from Stanley Jones and Clarke by the 60th minute . The match finished with 2 – 2 , thus Albion progressed due to a 6 – 2 aggregate victory . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 It was decided at a Football Association Council meeting on 26 September 1966 to host the League Cup at Wembley Stadium for the first time . The final had previously been decided over two legs , but the move to Wembley coincided with a change in format to a single leg final . Albion were the defending champions and were aiming to become the first team to retain the Cup . The winner of the League Cup typically went on to play in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup . Albion were still in the competition at the time of the final , although they had recently lost 3 – 0 to Bologna in the first leg of the third round . 
 Queens Park Rangers 's strip for the final was all @-@ white , instead of their normal white and blue hoops . West <unk> Albion wore their away strip , which was all @-@ red . Each team 's supporters did not have a limit on the number of tickets they were allowed to purchase . This was despite a limit of 15 @,@ 000 for FA Cup finals which were also held at Wembley . A crowd of nearly 100 @,@ 000 was expected to be inside the stadium , although only highlights were to be shown on television . 
 = = = First @-@ half = = = 
 Rangers started the slower of the two sides , with Albion passing the ball with some considerable pace . Any QPR attack stagnated once someone attempted to pass the ball through to Rodney Marsh or Les Allen , who were overwhelmed by the numbers of Albion defensive players . Albion 's first goal came in the seventh minute as the ball was worked down the left hand side of the pitch by Tony Brown , Bobby Hope and finally Doug Fraser , before Clive Clark 's shot went through a gap in QPR 's defence . The Albion supporters began provocatively chanting " easy " , although QPR were immediately on the attack with Albion goalkeeper Dick Sheppard saving a shot from Frank Sibley . 
 QPR continued to be outplayed for the most part by their First Division opponents . In the twenty fifth minute , Clark once again ran with the ball down the left hand side of the pitch , outrunning QPR 's Ron Hunt , before crossing it into the path of Jeff Astle . His subsequent shot was saved by QPR goalkeeper Peter Springett , who managed to push the ball around the post . QPR briefly had a chance for a counterattack as Mark Lazarus found himself on the halfway line with the ball , before taking it around Ian Collard and found the Albion defence out of position , leaving him with a clear path to goal . But the opposition players were gaining on him as he approached the penalty area , with the attack falling apart shortly afterwards . Nine minutes before half time , QPR found themselves under attack by Albion again with some cross pitch passing resulting in Clark 's second goal of the game . QPR had a corner just before half time which fell to the feet of club captain Mike Keen , but his shot went of the post . The game went into half time at 2 – 0 to Albion . 
 = = = Second @-@ half = = = 
 The teams came out for the second half , and Rangers began an attack almost immediately . A series of short , quick passes from Marsh and Roger Morgan released Allen but he was not quick enough to make something of the chance . A high pass from Keen followed , striking defender Clarke in the back , from which the Albion defence were forced to clear . The attacks continued to come from Rangers as Lazarus passed the ball through to Marsh who took the ball around two defenders , but his shot went over the bar . QPR were rewarded for their perseverance in the sixty @-@ third minute as Lazarus took the ball around Albion captain Graham Williams , crossing the ball in for Morgan , who scored with a header to reduce the deficit to a single goal . 
 Albion 's sole goalscoring opportunity of the second half came afterwards ; Clark took the ball on a lengthy run before crossing it into the box , across an open goal with no Albion player there to tap the ball in and put the game beyond QPR 's reach . Fifteen minutes from the end of the match QPR equalised , Marsh 's shot with his right foot went in off the post . A corner followed for QPR who were now dominating Albion with their style of play . Allen crossed it in to Lazarus , but the Albion goalkeeper saved the shot with his legs . With eight minutes to go , one of Albion defenders mis @-@ kicked the ball in their own penalty area . Hunt rushed in for the chance but Sheppard once again saved the game for Albion . The ball ran free to Mike Lazarus who tapped the ball into the back of an empty net to increase the scoreline to 3 – 2 in QPR 's favour . A final attack from QPR came in the closing moments of the game as Lazarus took the ball past two defenders and into the box , his subsequent shot hit the outside of the post and went wide . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 Match rules 
 90 minutes . 
 30 minutes of extra @-@ time if necessary . 
 Replay if scores still level . 
 One named substitute . 
 Sources : 
 = = Post match = = 
 QPR 's victory was the first occasion a team from the Third Division had won a major trophy in England . Both teams received £ 18 @,@ 000 as their share of the gate receipts . QPR 's victory created a problem for the Football League management committee . On previous occasions , one of the three nominations for the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup was the winner of the League Cup . However , the Fairs Cup committee required that only teams from the highest tier of a nation 's league system could enter . In the end , Nottingham Forest , Leeds United and Liverpool qualified for the following season 's competition . 
 QPR paraded the trophy in front of the crowd in their following home match at Loftus Road , where they defeated Bournemouth 4 – 0 . The 1966 – 67 season saw QPR do a double , winning the Third Division title as well . The season is considered to be the most successful season in the club 's history . Albion reached the final again in 1970 , where they were once again runners @-@ up , this time to Manchester City . QPR did not reach the final until 1986 when they lost against Oxford United . 
 Before the match against Sheffield Wednesday on 11 March 2007 , the 1967 cup winning team were paraded at half time at Loftus Road to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the win . In the 2002 – 03 Second Division play @-@ off final QPR wore an all @-@ white strip in reference to their Football League Cup victory . As of 2015 , QPR 's victory in the 1967 Football League Cup remains the only major trophy the club has won . 
 = Carlson 's patrol = 
 Carlson 's patrol , also known as The Long Patrol or Carlson 's long patrol , was an operation by the 2nd Marine Raider Battalion under the command of Evans Carlson during the Guadalcanal Campaign against the Imperial Japanese Army from 6 November to 4 December 1942 . In the operation , the 2nd Raiders attacked forces under the command of Toshinari Shōji , which were escaping from an attempted encirclement in the Koli Point area on Guadalcanal and attempting to rejoin other Japanese army units on the opposite side of the U.S. Lunga perimeter . 
 In a series of small unit engagements over 29 days , the 2nd Raiders killed almost 500 Japanese soldiers while suffering only 16 killed , although many were afflicted by disease . The raiders also captured a Japanese field gun that was delivering harassing fire on Henderson Field , the Allied airfield at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Guadalcanal campaign = = = 
 On 7 August 1942 , Allied forces ( primarily U.S. Marines ) landed on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands . Their mission was to deny the Japanese use of the islands as bases for threatening the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and to secure the islands as starting points for a campaign to isolate the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign . The landings initiated the six @-@ month @-@ long Guadalcanal Campaign . 
 The Japanese were taken by surprise , and by nightfall on 8 August the 11 @,@ 000 Allied troops — under the command of Lieutenant General Alexander Vandegrift — secured Tulagi and nearby small islands as well as an airfield under construction at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal . The Allies later renamed the airfield Henderson Field . To protect the airfield , the U.S. Marines established a perimeter defense around Lunga Point . Additional reinforcements over the next two months later increased the number of U.S. troops at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal to more than 20 @,@ 000 . 
 In response to the Allied landings on Guadalcanal , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's 17th Army — a corps @-@ sized command based at Rabaul and under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Harukichi Hyakutake — with the task of retaking Guadalcanal . Units of the 17th Army began to arrive on Guadalcanal on 19 August to drive Allied forces from the island . 
 The first Japanese attempt to recapture Henderson Field failed when a 917 @-@ man force was defeated on 21 August in the Battle of the Tenaru . The next attempt took place from 12 – 14 September , ending in the defeat of the 6 @,@ 000 soldiers under the command of Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi at the Battle of Edson 's Ridge . Kawaguchi and the surviving Japanese troops then regrouped west of the Matanikau River on Guadalcanal . 
 = = = Battle for Henderson Field = = = 
 Between 1 and 17 October , the Japanese delivered 15 @,@ 000 troops to Guadalcanal , giving Hyakutake 20 @,@ 000 total troops to employ for his planned offensive . After his staff officers observed the American defenses around Lunga Point , Hyakutake decided that the main thrust of his planned attack would be from south of Henderson Field . His 2nd Division ( augmented by troops from the 38th Division ) , under Lieutenant General Masao Maruyama was ordered to march through the jungle and attack the American defenses from the south near the east bank of the Lunga River . The 7000 @-@ member 2nd Division was split into three units ; the Left Wing Unit under Major General Yumio Nasu containing the 29th Infantry Regiment , the Right Wing Unit under Kawaguchi consisting of troops from the 230th Infantry Regiment ( from the 38th Infantry Division ) , and the division reserve led by Maruyama comprising the 16th Infantry Regiment . 
 On 23 October , Maruyama 's forces struggled through the jungle to reach the American lines . Kawaguchi — on his own initiative — began to shift his right wing unit to the east , believing that the American defenses were weaker in that area . Maruyama , through one of his staff officers , ordered Kawaguchi to keep to the original attack plan . When he refused , Kawaguchi was relieved of command and replaced by Colonel Toshinari Shōji , commander of the 230th Infantry Regiment . That evening , after learning that the left and right wing forces were still struggling to reach the American lines , Hyakutake postponed the attack to 19 : 00 on 24 October . The Americans remained completely unaware of the approach of Maruyama 's forces . 
 Finally , late on 24 October , Maruyama 's forces reached the U.S. Lunga perimeter . Over two consecutive nights Maruyama 's forces conducted numerous unsuccessful frontal assaults on positions defended by troops of the 1st Battalion , 7th Marines ( 1 / 7 ) under Lieutenant Colonel Chesty Puller and the U.S. Army 's 3rd Battalion , 164th Infantry Regiment , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Robert Hall . U.S. Marine and Army rifle , machine gun , mortar , artillery and direct canister fire from 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) anti @-@ tank guns " wrought terrible carnage " on the Japanese . More than 1 @,@ 500 of Maruyama 's troops were killed in the attacks while the Americans lost about 60 killed . Shōji 's right wing units did not participate in the attacks , choosing to remain in place to cover Nasu 's right flank against a possible attack in that area by U.S. forces that never materialized . 
 At 08 : 00 on 26 October , Hyakutake called off further attacks and ordered his forces to retreat . Maruyama 's left wing and division reserve survivors were ordered to retreat back to the Matanikau River area while the right wing unit under Shōji was told to head for Koli Point , 13 mi ( 21 km ) east of the Lunga River . Shōji and his troops began arriving at Koli Point on November 3 . 
 = = = Aola Bay and the Koli Point action = = = 
 At 05 : 30 on 4 November , two companies from the 2nd Marine Raider Battalion — commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Evans Carlson , landed by boat at Aola Bay , 40 mi ( 64 km ) east of Lunga Point . Carlson 's raiders — along with troops from the U.S. Army 's 147th Infantry Regiment — were to provide security for 500 Seabees as they attempted to construct an airfield . The Aola Bay airfield construction effort had been approved by William Halsey , Jr . — commander of Allied forces in the south Pacific area — acting on a recommendation by Rear Admiral Richmond K. Turner , U.S. naval commander of amphibious forces for the south Pacific . 
 The 2nd Marine Raider Battalion was a unique unit in the Marine Corps . The battalion 's original organization and tactics were based around Communist Chinese precepts Carlson had witnessed while serving as an observer with the Communists during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War in 1937 @-@ 1938 . These precepts included promoting equality between officers and enlisted men and making decisions through collective consensus . Unlike the 1st Marine Raider Battalion , which focused on commando tactics , the 2nd Battalion trained to operate as a guerrilla force . The training included an emphasis on infiltration tactics and often involved tactical exercises conducted at night . The battalion was organized into six self @-@ contained rifle companies and a headquarters company . Before landing at Guadalcanal elements of the battalion had seen action as part of the garrison of Midway Atoll during the Battle of Midway in May 1942 and the near disastrous Makin Island raid in August . 
 In early November , Vandegrift , fearing that the Japanese were planning an assault on the Lunga perimeter from the east using Shōji 's forces plus additional reinforcements , launched an operation against the Japanese units at Koli Point . Beginning on 4 November , two battalions of U.S. Marines and two battalions of U.S. Army troops attacked and attempted to encircle Shōji 's men at Gavaga Creek near the village of Tetere in the Koli Point area . 
 As the American troops were attempting to destroy Shōji 's force , Vandegrift ordered Carlson 's raiders to march overland from Aola Bay toward Koli Point to cut off any of Shōji 's forces that escaped the encirclement attempt . On 5 November , two transport ships headed for Espiritu Santo to pick up three companies from Carlson 's battalion while Carlson prepared his two companies already on Guadalcanal to march overland towards Koli Point . Carlson arranged for rear echelon personnel at Aola to resupply his patrol with rations every four days at a prearranged point on the coast . A patrol with native carriers would meet the boat and <unk> the supplies inland to Carlson 's patrol base . 
 = = Patrol = = 
 = = = Initial actions = = = 
 At first light on 6 November , Carlson and his command group , two of his companies , and a group of native scouts and carriers commanded by Major John Mather of the Australian Army and Sergeant Major Jacob C. <unk> of the Solomon Islands Police Force set out from Aola on the patrol . The group marched along a jungle trail northwest to the Reko River , arriving on 7 November . At the Reko , Carlson learned that the local Christian mission had recently been raided by Japanese troops who had killed two of the missionaries before moving west . Pushing across the river with one platoon of troops , Carlson encountered a small group of Japanese who shot and severely wounded the native scout leading the Marine column . Returning fire , the Marines killed two Japanese soldiers and drove off another three or four . Carlson 's main body then arrived and the column bivouacked for the night . 
 On 8 November , the column continued through the jungle to the northwest , striking the coast at the Kena River , and made camp at the village of Tasimboko , 15 mi ( 24 km ) from Aola Bay . The next day they crossed the <unk> and <unk> rivers and reached the village of Binu — 10 mi ( 16 km ) southwest of Tasimboko — in the afternoon . At Binu , about 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of Koli Point , Carlson established his base camp and prepared to block the movement of any Japanese forces from Koli to the east and south . 
 The other three raider companies arrived at Aola on 8 November . On 9 November , they moved by landing craft to Tasimboko and , on 10 November marched overland — guided by native scouts — toward Binu . On the way , the raiders encountered a small group of Japanese soldiers and killed three of them before arriving at Binu in the afternoon of the same day . 
 In the meantime , Hyakutake ordered Shōji to abandon his positions at Koli and rejoin Japanese forces at Kokumbona in the Matanikau area . Although American forces had almost completely encircled Shōji 's troops along Gavaga Creek at Koli , a gap existed by way of a swampy creek in the southern side of the American lines . Taking advantage of this route , Shōji 's men began to escape . The Americans closed the gap in their lines on 11 November , but by then Shōji and between 2 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 of his men had escaped into the jungle to the south . 
 On 11 November , Carlson sent four of his battalion 's companies — " C " , " D " , " E " , and " F " — to fan out and patrol the area to the north and west of Binu . The remaining company , " B " , stayed behind to provide security for the Binu base camp . At 10 : 00 , Company C , which had marched directly west toward the village of Asamana , encountered a large body of Shōji 's troops camped near the Metapona River and were quickly pinned down by rifle , machinegun , and mortar fire . Carlson responded by directing Companies D and E to come to C 's aid , attacking the Japanese forces from two different directions . 
 As Companies D and E moved in C 's direction , both encountered large concentrations of Shōji 's soldiers and , by 12 : 30 , were involved in intense firefights . At 15 : 00 , Company D commander Captain Charles McAuliffe — with nine of his men — unexpectedly marched into the Binu base camp . McAuliffe reported to Carlson that soon after he had made contact with the Japanese forces , he and one of his squads had become cut off from the rest of his company . After extricating themselves with difficulty , McAuliffe and the men with him had decided to retreat back to the base camp . McAuliffe reported that , as far as he knew , the rest of his company had been annihilated . A short time later , however , the rest of D Company arrived at the base camp , led by Gunnery Sergeant George <unk> , after successfully disengaging from the firefight . Carlson summarily relieved McAuliffe for what he later described as " total ineptitude for leadership in battle " and placed Captain Joe Griffith in command of Company D. 
 Along with Company F , which had returned to the base camp , Carlson proceeded to the area where Company C was engaged , arriving at 16 : 30 . Carlson ordered Company F to attack the Japanese positions facing Company C at 17 : 15 . In the meantime , the Japanese troops departed the area , which Company F soon confirmed . Leaving Company F at the scene , Carlson returned to Binu with Company C , arriving at 22 : 00 . Company E arrived at Binu about the same time and reported that they had caught a Japanese company crossing a river in the open and killed many of them before withdrawing . Carlson then took Company B and returned to the area that Company F was guarding , arriving at daybreak on 12 November . The Marines had suffered 10 killed in the day 's actions and estimated that they had killed 120 Japanese soldiers . 
 Carlson and the two companies , with Company B leading , marched west towards the village of Asamana on the Metapona River . While crossing the river , the Marines captured two Japanese soldiers and killed a third who happened by in a native boat , then attacked and occupied Asamana , surprising and killing several Japanese soldiers in the village . Signs in Japanese in the village indicated that it was being used as a rallying location for Shōji 's forces . Occupying defensive positions around the village and river crossing , the raiders killed 25 Japanese soldiers that approached the village during the remainder of the day . 
 The next day , when a company @-@ sized column of Japanese soldiers approached Asamana , the raiders called in 75 mm ( 2 @.@ 95 in ) artillery fire from the 1st Battalion , 10th Marine Regiment , killing many of the Japanese and causing the rest to scatter and retreat away from the village . Carlson and the Marines with him returned to Binu on 14 November to rest and reprovision . In the same day , a patrol from the raiders Company F wiped out a 15 @-@ man Japanese encampment discovered by the native scouts . 
 On 15 November , Carlson 's battalion changed their base camp from Binu to Asamana . By this time , however , Shōji 's units were no longer in the area , having continued their march deep into the interior of Guadalcanal en route to the Matanikau . Raider patrols around Asamana over the next two days found and killed a few scattered Japanese stragglers . 
 = = = New mission = = = 
 Carlson 's battalion was ordered to move to the upper Tenaru River and patrol around the Lunga River — south of the Lunga perimeter — to locate the trail the Japanese had used to position their men and materiel for their assaults during the Battle for Henderson Field . Carlson 's raiders were also to seek out and destroy several Japanese artillery pieces that had been delivering harassing fire against Henderson Field for several weeks . The raiders set up the new base camp about 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southeast of the Lunga perimeter on 20 November and rested and replenished until 24 November . 
 On 25 November , Carlson 's Company A arrived from Espiritu Santo and joined the raiders . On 27 November , the battalion relocated 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) further up the Tenaru River and established two auxiliary patrol bases 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) upstream and downstream , respectively . 
 On 28 November , Companies B and D patrolled across the Lunga River and bivouacked in the Mount Austen area , southwest of the Lunga perimeter . The same day , Companies A and F patrolled further south between the Lunga and the Tenaru . On 30 November , the raiders found a Japanese 75 mm mountain gun and 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) anti @-@ tank gun emplaced on a ridge about 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) south of the Lunga perimeter . As one squad of six Marines from Company F patrolled near where the guns were discovered , they entered a hidden Japanese camp and found themselves among about 100 Japanese soldiers resting under shelters with their weapons stacked around trees in the center of the camp . In the resulting melee , the raider squad killed about 75 of the Japanese . The rest escaped . 
 The raiders rested on 1 December and received some provisions by airdrop . On 2 December , Carlson fanned out his patrols around the Lunga River . Company B discovered 10 Japanese camped by the river and killed all of them . None of the other companies encountered any Japanese , but one discovered another 75 mm mountain gun . Late in the day , Carlson received orders to terminate the patrol and take his troops into the Lunga perimeter the next day . 
 On 3 December , Carlson sent Companies C , D , and E east towards the Tenaru river while Companies A , B , and F headed west towards Mount Austen . Companies C , D , and E reached the lower Tenaru and entered friendly lines at Lunga Point without incident . Companies A , B , and F , however , encountered a Japanese patrol near the summit of Mount Austen . In a close @-@ quarters fight in the jungle , 25 Japanese were killed and four Marines were seriously wounded , one of whom died later . 
 The next day , Companies A , B , and F set out with the intention of entering the Lunga perimeter near the Matanikau River . Along the way , the Marine column was ambushed by a Japanese machinegun team that killed four raiders . Seven Japanese were killed in this skirmish . The patrol encountered no further opposition and entered friendly lines at Lunga Point by mid @-@ afternoon . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 As Carlson 's battalion was ending its patrol , Shōji and his surviving troops were reaching friendly positions west of the Matanikau . In addition to the losses sustained from attacks by Carlson 's raiders , a lack of food and tropical diseases felled many more of Shōji 's men . By the time Shōji 's forces reached the Lunga River in mid @-@ November , about halfway to the Matanikau , only 1 @,@ 300 men remained with the main body . When Shōji reached the 17th Army positions west of the Matanikau , only 700 @-@ 800 survivors were still with him . Survivors from Shōji 's force later participated in the Battle of Mount Austen , the Galloping Horse , and the Sea Horse in December 1942 and January 1943 . 
 During the 29 days of the patrol , Carlson 's raiders hiked approximately 150 mi ( 240 km ) to cover a straight @-@ line distance of about 40 mi ( 64 km ) from Aola Bay to the Matanikau River . Carlson claimed that his troops killed 488 Japanese soldiers and captured or destroyed large amounts of equipment , including two howitzers and various small arms and ammunition . 
 The 2nd Raiders suffered 16 killed and 17 wounded ( plus 2 wounded native guides ) . Non @-@ battle casualties totaled 225 , of which 125 suffered from malaria , 29 from dysentery , and 71 from ringworm or jungle rot . Most of the remaining raiders were also suffering some type of physical ailment . On 17 December , the raiders departed Guadalcanal by ship and arrived back at their home camp on Espiritu Santo on 20 December . At Espiritu Santo , the unit continued to be affected by the lingering tropical diseases many had contracted during the Guadalcanal patrol . In the second week of March 1943 , the 2nd Raiders were declared unfit for combat duty , although this finding was never announced in an official document . The 2nd Marine Raiders did not participate as a unit in a combat operation until the Bougainville campaign beginning on 1 November 1943 . In spite of the high fallout from disease , Carlson 's troops generally felt that they had performed well as a unit during the patrol and had accomplished their mission . Cleland E. Early — a lieutenant in Carlson 's Company E — described the long Guadalcanal patrol and the effect on his unit : " Enduring the living conditions was worse than the combat . My platoon went in with 30 men , one corpsman and one officer . When we came out we had one officer , one corpsman , and 18 enlisted , all of whom had malaria , worms , diarrhea , jungle rot and high morale . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Dull , Paul S. ( 1978 ) . A Battle History of the Imperial Japanese Navy , 1941 @-@ 1945 . Naval Institute Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 87021 @-@ 097 @-@ 1 . 
 Frank , Richard ( 1990 ) . Guadalcanal : The Definitive Account of the Landmark Battle . New York : Random House . ISBN 0 @-@ 394 @-@ 58875 @-@ 4 . 
 Griffith , Samuel B. ( 1963 ) . The Battle for Guadalcanal . Champaign , Illinois , USA : University of Illinois Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 252 @-@ 06891 @-@ 2 . 
 Jersey , Stanley Coleman ( 2008 ) . Hell 's Islands : The Untold Story of Guadalcanal . College Station , Texas : Texas A & M University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 58544 @-@ 616 @-@ 5 . 
 Morison , Samuel Eliot ( 1958 ) . The Struggle for Guadalcanal , August 1942 – February 1943 , vol . 5 of History of United States Naval Operations in World War II . Boston : Little , Brown and Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 316 @-@ 58305 @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Oscar F. ( 1995 ) . John P. McCarthy ; John <unk> , eds . Bless ' em All : The Raider Marines of World War II . Review . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 6 . 
 Rottman , Gordon L. ( 2005 ) . Japanese Army in World War II : The South Pacific and New Guinea , 1942 – 43 . Dr. Duncan Anderson ( consultant editor ) . Oxford and New York : Osprey . ISBN 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 870 @-@ 7 . 
 Rottman , Gordon ( 2005 ) . US Special Warfare Units in the Pacific Theatre 1941 @-@ 45 . Dr. Duncan Anderson ( consultant editor ) . Oxford : Osprey . ISBN 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 707 @-@ 7 . 
 Smith , George W. ( 2003 ) . Carlson 's Raid : The Daring Marine Assault on Makin . Berkley Trade . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 425 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 Hoffman , Jon T. ( 1995 ) . " The Long Patrol " ( brochure ) . From Makin to Bougainville : Marine Raiders in the Pacific War . Marine Corps Historical Center . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 11 @-@ 21 . 
 Hough , Frank O. ; Ludwig , Verle E. ; Shaw , Henry I. , Jr . " Pearl Harbor to Guadalcanal " . History of U.S. Marine Corps Operations in World War II . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 05 @-@ 16 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Miller , John Jr . ( 1949 ) . " Guadalcanal : The First Offensive " . United States Army in World War II . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 . 
 Shaw , Henry I. ( 1992 ) . " First Offensive : The Marine Campaign For Guadalcanal " . Marines in World War II Commemorative Series . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 25 . 
 Zimmerman , John L. ( 1949 ) . " The Guadalcanal Campaign " . Marines in World War II Historical Monograph . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 . 
 = Tropical Storm Barry ( 2001 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Barry was a strong tropical storm that made landfall on the Florida Panhandle during August 2001 . The third tropical cyclone and second named storm of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season , Barry developed from a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on July 24 . The wave entered the Caribbean on July 29 and spawned a low @-@ pressure area , which organized into Tropical Storm Barry on August 3 . After fluctuations in intensity and track , the storm attained peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) over the Gulf of Mexico . Barry headed northward and moved ashore along the Gulf Coast before dissipating on August 7 . 
 Unlike the devastating Tropical Storm Allison earlier in the season , Barry 's effects were moderate . Nine deaths occurred : six in Cuba and three in Florida . As a tropical cyclone , Barry produced heavy rainfall that peaked at 8 @.@ 9 in ( 230 mm ) at Tallahassee . Gusts in the area reached 79 mph ( 127 km / h ) , which was the highest wind speed recording for the storm . The precursor tropical wave to Barry dropped large amounts of rain on southern Florida , leading to significant flooding and structural damage . Moderate flooding and wind damage occurred throughout the Florida Panhandle . As the storm 's remnants tracked inland , parts of the Mississippi Valley received light precipitation . Barry caused an estimated $ 30 million ( 2001 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On July 24 , 2001 , a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa , and tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean . Little cyclonic development occurred until July 28 , when convection began to increase along the wave . The wave moved into the eastern Caribbean on July 29 , and its convection continued to increase while it tracked west @-@ northwest over the subsequent few days . The disturbance emerged into the Gulf of Mexico on August 1 , with rainfall noted over southern Florida and the western tip of Cuba . That same day , a broad low @-@ pressure system developed along the wave near the Dry Tortugas at the end of the Florida Keys , which began to intensify as it moved northwestward . At around 1800 UTC on August 2 , an Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunter aircraft investigating the system discovered that the low had organized into a tropical storm , which received the name Barry . Post @-@ hurricane season reanalysis , however , revealed that the low had become a tropical depression six hours earlier . There is uncertainty as to whether Barry actually held tropical characteristics at the time of designation , because of an upper @-@ level low that was situated over the cyclone 's surface center . 
 When Barry became a tropical cyclone , its convection wrapped around roughly half of the center . Outflow in the eastern semicircle was good , although due to upper @-@ level wind shear , it was restricted to southeast of the circulation . The cyclone became embedded within a mid- to @-@ upper @-@ level trough between the ridge over the central U.S. and the ridge over the northwestern Caribbean . A strong , upper @-@ level cyclonic shear axis extended from just south of Cape Hatteras to near Brownsville , Texas , which prevented Barry from accelerating in forward speed . The ridge over the United States weakened , thus collapsing the steering pattern ; this resulted in a west @-@ southwestward drifting motion of the tropical storm by around August 3 . Early on August 3 , strong westerly winds prevailed , and separated the center of circulation from what limited convection remained . The storm quickly regained some convection , although maximum sustained winds remained weak , at about 40 mph ( 60 km / h ) . Despite a slight drop in barometric pressure , post @-@ season analysis revealed Barry weakened into a tropical depression early on August 4 due to the persistent wind shear and falling external pressure . 
 At 1800 UTC on August 4 , the cyclone re @-@ intensified slightly , and was upgraded to a tropical storm as the shear decreased . Early on August 5 , a strengthening period began as deep convection ignited over and near the low @-@ level center . Prior to landfall , banding features developed on the eastern half of the circulation , despite some residual westerly shear . Within seven hours , the barometric pressure dropped from 1004 mb to 990 mb and overall satellite presentation had begun to improve . Barry reached its peak intensity at 1800 UTC on August 5 with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , just shy of hurricane status . An eye formed at around the same time . At 0500 UTC on August 6 , Barry increased in forward speed and made landfall at Santa Rosa Beach , Florida with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Moving inland , the system weakened rapidly to a tropical depression ; the National Hurricane Center issued its last advisory on the storm early on August 6 . By the evening hours , maximum sustained winds near the center were around 5 mph ( 8 @.@ 0 km / h ) to 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) as the system slowed significantly and drifted northwest at about 7 mph ( 11 km / h ) . The depression turned northwestward , and steadily weakened to a remnant low near Memphis , Tennessee on August 7 , and the low dissipated on August 8 over southeastern Missouri . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In advance of the storm , the National Hurricane Center issued tropical storm watches and warnings for much of the U.S. Gulf Coast . They were upgraded to a hurricane warning when the storm was predicted to reach hurricane intensity . Because that strengthening failed to occur , the hurricane warning was downgraded to a tropical storm warning shortly before landfall . Westward , the warnings for Louisiana and Mississippi were discontinued . After Tropical Storm Barry made landfall , all tropical storm warnings for the Florida Panhandle were discontinued . Flood warnings were issued for parts of Leon and Wakulla counties , while a flash flood watch was in effect for parts of southern Georgia . A tornado watch was issued for the eastern Florida Panhandle , southern Georgia , as well as portions of central and eastern Alabama . 
 As Barry approached the Florida Panhandle , voluntary evacuations took place in eight counties . Shelters opened in six counties , though most were placed on standby . In parts of Franklin County , mandatory evacuations were ordered , and in Okaloosa County , tolls on the Mid @-@ Bay Bridge were suspended . Forty C @-@ 130 cargo aircraft and about 300 personnel from Hurlburt Field were moved to the Little Rock Air Force Base in Arkansas to flee the storm 's projected path . In Tallahassee , county officials filled sandbags in areas vulnerable to flooding . At Grand Isle State Park , Park Rangers moved picnic tables out of tidal range and closed the camping grounds for a period of time . Additionally , the storm forced NASA to delay a shuttle launch in southern Florida . Elsewhere , thousands of personnel were evacuated from several offshore oil platforms . The city of New Orleans closed 60 of its 72 floodgates to avoid possible flooding . Throughout southeastern Louisiana , including New Orleans , roughly 500 Red Cross volunteers and staff members were on standby . The threat of the storm forced the cancellation of an ' N Sync concert at Pro Player Stadium . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Cuba and Florida = = = 
 The precursor tropical wave to Barry dropped widespread rainfall in western Cuba , but no damage was reported . Offshore , high seas sank a Cuban refugee boat , drowning 6 of its 28 passengers . 
 Three people in Florida were killed by the storm , and total damage is estimated at around 30 million ( 2001 USD ) . In southern Florida , the precursor to Barry produced 3 in ( 75 mm ) to 8 in ( 200 mm ) , with rainfall peaking at 13 in ( 330 mm ) . The rain helped relieve persistent drought conditions ; however , it caused significant flooding in Martin County on August 2 , where a total of 300 homes received water damage . About 63 structures and 6 mobile homes in the county sustained major damage . In the Treasure Coast , catfish reportedly swam through flooded streets . Winds downed a 60 ft ( 18 m ) radio tower , striking a house . 
 Due to the initial slow movement of the storm , outer rainbands began affecting the Florida Panhandle on August 4 , with the heaviest rainfall observed on August 5 – 6 . The storm dropped 5 in ( 125 mm ) to 9 in ( 225 mm ) ; the highest official report was 8 @.@ 9 in ( 230 mm ) at Tallahassee , though unofficial reports ranged as high as 11 in ( 175 mm ) . The rainfall inundated several structures in Bay County due to roof damage . Flooding occurred in Leon County and parts of Apalachicola National Forest , where torrential rains flowed into the Cascade Lakes , Lake Bradford and Munson Slough ; the Munson Slough rose to its highest level since 1994 . Numerous county and secondary roads were closed by floodwater in Walton , Washington , and Bay counties , as well as in the Tallahassee area . In and around Tallahassee , 100 vehicles were stalled by flood waters and towed , while four residents of an apartment complex on Allen Road were forced to evacuate due to rising waters . Sporadic flooding also occurred in Franklin County and Wakulla County . An indirect death occurred from a traffic accident due to heavy rain in Jackson County . 
 Wind gusts peaked at 79 mph ( 127 km / h ) at the Eglin Air Force Base Range Station C @-@ 72 . Light to moderate winds were widespread , causing damage throughout Walton , Washington , Bay , Calhoun , Gulf and Okaloosa counties . Trees were downed or damaged , and several structures suffered light wind damage . Window damage was reported at a high @-@ rise condominium building in Destin , while nearby , the Mid @-@ Bay Bridge was closed due to high winds . The Freeport Elementary School in Walton County sustained minor roof damage . Storm surge was generally light , ranging from 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) to 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) , with only minor beach erosion as a result . As a tropical system , Barry spawned a few weak tornadoes that caused minor damage . In an outer rain band , a lightning strike in Jacksonville killed one person . Another death is blamed on a rip current off of Sanibel Island . In total , the storm left 34 @,@ 000 customers in the state without power . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Tropical Storm Barry dropped light to moderate rainfall across Alabama , peaking at 4 @.@ 57 in ( 116 mm ) near the town of Evergreen . About 2 in ( 50 mm ) fell over the state 's peanut @-@ growing region , helping to alleviate drought conditions . Heavy showers were also reported in the Birmingham area . Despite moderate rainfall totals inland , coastal locations received very little precipitation . Minor street flooding occurred in Geneva , Enterprise and New Brockton . Wind gusts peaked at 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) at Montgomery , although damage was light , mostly from downed trees . Damage to awnings and small structures was reported in <unk> . Barry 's remnants produced light rainfall across Mississippi and Georgia , though no damage was reported . As the storm continued to track inland , it dropped up to 3 in ( 75 mm ) of rain throughout Arkansas , Missouri and western Tennessee . 
 = Survivor Series ( 1994 ) = 
 Survivor Series ( 1994 ) was the eighth annual Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view professional wrestling event produced by the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . It took place on Thanksgiving Eve , November 23 , 1994 at the Freeman Coliseum in San Antonio , Texas . It was also the last Survivor Series to take place on the traditional Thanksgiving / Thanksgiving Eve date the show had always occupied since its inception ; the following Survivor Series and all subsequent shows have taken place on Sunday nights . 
 Two main event matches were held ; in the first , Bob Backlund won the WWF World Heavyweight Championship from Bret Hart in a submission match after Bret 's brother Owen convinced their mother to throw in a towel to end the match . In the other main event , The Undertaker defeated Yokozuna in a casket match with Chuck Norris as the special guest ring enforcer . 
 The event also featured three elimination matches and two singles matches . Razor Ramon led The Bad Guys against Diesel 's team of The Teamsters . Ramon won the match for his team after all members of the other team were counted out . Doink the Clown teamed with three midgets to form Clowns R ' Us in a match against The Royal Family , composed of Jerry Lawler and three midgets . The Royal Family won the match , but all seven other competitors attacked Lawler after the match . Lex Luger led Guts and Glory against the Million Dollar Corporation team , which was managed by Ted DiBiase . DiBiase 's team won after Luger , the last wrestler from his team , was pinned . 
 Shawn Michaels and Diesel , the WWF Tag Team Champions going in to the event , began feuding after Michaels accidentally kicked Diesel during the match . They vacated their title and began a feud that led to a match at WrestleMania XI . Three days after Survivor Series , Diesel won the WWF World Heavyweight Championship by defeating Backlund . The rivalry between Backlund and Bret Hart continued , and they also faced each other at WrestleMania XI . 
 = = Background = = 
 Several storylines formed the background for the opening match , which saw the fan favorite team of The Bad Guys ( Razor Ramon , the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid , Davey Boy Smith and The Headshrinkers ) square off against the villainous team of The Teamsters ( Shawn Michaels , Diesel , Jeff Jarrett , Owen Hart and Jim Neidhart ) . Razor Ramon had been feuding with Shawn Michaels since September 1993 when Ramon won the WWF Intercontinental Championship . Michaels , the former champion , had been stripped of the belt . WWF President Jack Tunney scheduled a battle royal , in which Ramon and Rick Martel were the final participants remaining . They faced each other on Monday Night Raw , and Ramon won the match and was awarded the title . Michaels claimed that he was the rightful holder of the belt and refused to acknowledge Ramon as the champion . Diesel was serving as Michaels ' bodyguard but soon became an active wrestler and carried on Michaels ' feud with Ramon . In the months leading up to Survivor Series , Ramon had also developed a feud with Jeff Jarrett , and the two faced each other several times with the Intercontinental Championship on the line . Ramon 's friend , the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid , took Ramon 's side in these feuds , and the two formed an occasional tag team . The Headshrinkers had also been feuding with Michaels and Diesel since dropping the WWF Tag Team Championship to them on August 28 . The Headshrinkers had several rematches but were unable to regain the belts . Finally , Davey Boy Smith was involved in a feud with his real @-@ life brother @-@ in @-@ law Owen Hart and Hart 's other brother @-@ in @-@ law , Jim Neidhart . Owen Hart had turned on his brother Bret at the 1994 Royal Rumble , after which Smith got involved on Bret 's side and Neidhart took Owen 's side . 
 Although Jerry Lawler and Doink the Clown had a storyline rivalry that dated back to when Doink turned on Lawler by dumping a bucket of water on him following SummerSlam 1993 , the feud had rarely been mentioned since then . On the September 10 , 1994 episode of WWF Superstars of Wrestling , however , Lawler provoked Doink by popping balloons carried by Doink 's midget sidekick Dink . The rivalry soon led to Lawler introducing a midget named Queasy , who dressed like Lawler . Doink and Lawler then introduced several more midgets over the following weeks . An elimination match was booked for Survivor Series , with Lawler , Queasy , Sleazy and Cheesy facing Doink , Dink , Wink and Pink . 
 Bret Hart 's feud with Bob Backlund dated back to the July 30 , 1994 episode of WWF Superstars of Wrestling . Backlund believed that he had won the match and the WWF World Heavyweight Championship by defeating Hart . The match had not ended , however , and Hart pinned Backlund . When Hart tried to shake Backlund 's hand after the match , Backlund slapped him in the face and locked him in a crossface chickenwing . After that Backlund began acting in a completely different manner than he had before , demanding respect from his fellow wrestlers insisting that they call him " Mr. Backlund " and using the crossface chickenwing , a hold he said was unbreakable , on them if they did not adhere to his wishes . He claimed that he had never truly been beaten for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship on December 26 , 1983 , as the match ended when his manager , Arnold <unk> , threw a towel into the ring rather than allowing Backlund to submit to The Iron Sheik 's camel clutch . Playing off of this , a rematch between Hart and Backlund was signed for Survivor Series . The match was signed as a submission match , but with the stipulation that the only way for a wrestler to win was to have the other person throw in a towel . Since this required a wrestler to have a cornerman , each of the participants chose one . The challenger chose Owen Hart , while the champion went with Davey Boy Smith . 
 The central feud in the match between Guts & Glory and The Million Dollar Team was between Lex Luger and Ted DiBiase 's Million Dollar Corporation . During 1994 , DiBiase had " purchased " the contracts of several wrestlers to form a heel stable . Among the members to join were Bam Bam Bigelow and King Kong Bundy . Prior to SummerSlam 1994 , DiBiase claimed to have added Luger to the group . Luger denied having joined , despite Tatanka claiming that he had evidence that Luger had " sold out " to DiBiase . Luger and Tatanka faced each other at SummerSlam , where it was revealed that the storyline was a swerve , as Tatanka turned on Luger to join the Million Dollar Corporation . Bigelow and Adam Bomb had also been feuding since the September 10 , 1994 episode of Superstars of Wrestling . Bigelow attacked his opponent , a jobber , before the match . DiBiase then claimed that the company was not providing suitable competition , and he challenged any wrestler to face Bigelow . Bomb responded , and the two brawled briefly . Leading up to Survivor Series , Bomb and Bigelow faced each other at several house shows . The Heavenly Bodies were not members of DiBiase 's stable , but they competed on behalf of the group . At the time , they were involved in a feud with The Smokin ' Gunns as a result of a match on the September 3 episode of Superstars of Wrestling . The Heavenly Bodies attacked the Gunns prior to the match and stole the Gunns ' cowboy hats . They put on the hats to mock the Gunns and then threw them on the ground and stomped on them . To get revenge , the Gunns stole The Heavenly Bodies ' ring robes and tore the wings off them . 
 The feud between The Undertaker and Yokozuna began at Survivor Series 1993 . During an elimination match , Yokozuna was unable to injure The Undertaker , despite slamming The Undertaker 's head into the ring steps and performing the Banzai drop on him . A match was booked for Royal Rumble 1994 , in which The Undertaker would challenge WWF World Heavyweight Champion Yokozuna for the title in a Casket match . During the match , which featured a no @-@ disqualification clause , Mr. Fuji , Yokozuna 's manager , hired nine other wrestlers to interfere on Yokozuna 's behalf . Yokozuna won the match after opening The Undertaker 's urn , which , according to the storyline , contained the secret to The Undertaker 's powers . After the match , The Undertaker appeared on the video screen and vowed to return to the World Wrestling Federation one day . He was not seen for several months , although , in reality , he was taking time off wrestling to allow injuries to heal . The Undertaker returned at SummerSlam 1994 , defeating an Undertaker look @-@ alike . A rematch against Yokozuna was scheduled for Survivor Series . This was also to be a Casket match , but Chuck Norris was brought in as a special outside referee to prevent interference . 
 = = Event = = 
 The first match of the event saw The Bad Guys , which consisted of Razor Ramon , the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid , the Davey Boy Smith , and The Headshrinkers ( Sione and Fatu ) versus The Teamsters , composed of Diesel , Shawn Michaels , Jeff Jarrett , Owen Hart , and Jim Neidhart . The opening minutes of the match featured brothers @-@ in @-@ law Hart and Smith trading moves as well as Jarrett and Ramon brawling . Fatu became the first wrestler eliminated after Diesel performed a Jackknife powerbomb on him . Diesel eliminated the 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid forty @-@ two seconds later after another Jackknife powerbomb . Sione followed thirty @-@ one seconds later after being pinned by Diesel . Davey Boy Smith entered the ring , but Diesel soon knocked him between the ropes to the arena floor . Hart and Neidhart prevented Smith from getting back in the ring , and Smith was eliminated after the referee counted him out . Razor Ramon was left as the only member of his team to face the five members of The Teamsters . He fought with Diesel for several minutes , but Diesel then performed the Jackknife powerbomb on him and prepared to pin him for the victory . Michaels insisted on having Diesel hold Ramon while Michaels performed a superkick on their opponent . Ramon dodged the kick , and Michaels kicked Diesel in the face . Diesel became angry at Michaels , particularly because the same mistake had cost Diesel the Intercontinental Championship at SummerSlam . He and Michaels argued outside the ring while the rest of the team attempted to calm them down . The referee counted all five wrestlers out of the ring and declared Razor Ramon the winner of the match . Shawn Michaels was shown backstage after the match , and he stated that he was disbanding his tag team with Diesel and vacating the Tag Team Championship . He then got into a car and drove away from the arena . 
 The match between Jerry Lawler 's team , known as The Royal Family ( with Queasy , Sleazy , and Cheesy ) , and Doink 's Clowns R ' Us team ( with Dink , Wink , and Pink ) consisted of comedic action for much of the first ten minutes . Eventually , Doink attempted a crossbody , but Lawler reversed the move . He was able to pin Doink and eliminate him from the match . Lawler remained involved in the match and played a role in the elimination of two more members of Doink 's team . When Wink attempted a monkey flip against Queasy , Lawler blocked the move and helped Queasy to pin Wink . Later in the match , Lawler threw Cheesy on top of Pink , which enabled Cheesy to eliminate another of Doink 's teammates . After Wink and Pink were eliminated , however , they hid under the ring rather than returning backstage . The final member of Clowns R ' Us was eliminated after Sleazy and Dink fought in the ring . Dink performed a crossbody on Sleazy and attempted to pin him . Queasy rolled the wrestlers over so that Sleazy was on top , however , and the referee made the three count and awarded the match to The Royal Family . As Queasy , Sleazy and Cheesy celebrated after the match , Lawler criticized them for taking credit for the victory . All six midgets turned against Lawler and chased him away from the ring . As Lawler tried to escape , Doink returned and hit him in the face with a pie . 
 The next match was the submission match between champion Bret Hart and challenger Bob Backlund , with the aforementioned stipulation being that the only way to win the match was to have the opposing cornerman ( either Owen Hart or Davey Boy Smith ) throw in the towel . Bret got the early advantage and wore down Backlund using head locks , but Backlund broke free and attempted a crossface chickenwing on Bret . Bret escaped , but Backlund maintained the advantage by attacking Bret 's arm and attempting another crossface chickenwing . Bret used a figure four leglock on Backlund , but Backlund got out of the hold . Bret then applied the Sharpshooter , his signature hold , on Backlund . Owen entered the ring and clotheslined Bret from behind , causing him to break the hold , and exited the ring . Smith then chased Owen around the ring , but fell and was kayfabe knocked unconscious on the ring steps . While Bret was distracted , Backlund applied the crossface chickenwing . Owen looked on in disbelief at what was happening to Bret and went to the ringside area , where their parents Stu and Helen Hart were sitting . Owen begged them to throw Bret 's towel in to the ring to save him as Backlund kept the hold locked in for what would eventually total nine and a half minutes . Stu refused to do so , not trusting Owen 's motives , but Helen overruled him and tossed the towel into the ring . Owen then ran into the ring and showed the referee Bret 's towel , and the match and championship were awarded to Backlund as Owen took off backstage holding the towel over his head triumphantly , saying later that this Thanksgiving would be the best ever due to him having finally cost Bret the WWF World Heavyweight Championship after trying and failing to do so himself . 
 The team of Guts and Glory , consisting of Lex Luger , Adam Bomb , Mabel , and The Smoking Gunns ( Billy and Bart Gunn ) , faced The Million Dollar Team , made up of Tatanka , Bam Bam Bigelow , King Kong Bundy , and The Heavenly Bodies ( Tom Prichard and Jimmy Del Ray ) in the next match . Guts and Glory took the early lead when Mabel pinned Prichard after performing a crossbody from the second rope . Mabel fought Bundy and Bigelow , but he was counted out after clotheslining Bigelow out of the ring . Bigelow then performed a moonsault on Bomb and got a pinfall . Luger and Del Ray fought back and forth until Luger performed a running forearm smash on Del Ray to get the pinfall . The Smokin ' Gunns were eliminated next , as Tatanka pinned Bart and Bundy pinned Billy . Luger fought back by pinning Tatanka with a small package . Seven seconds later , Bundy pinned Luger after performing a splash to get the victory . Bundy , Bigelow , and Tatanka continued to attack Luger after the match until Luger 's team returned to the ring to save him . 
 The main event was next , featuring The Undertaker versus Yokozuna in a casket match with Chuck Norris as the special outside referee . The Undertaker gained the early advantage , but Yokozuna reversed the momentum with a Samoan drop . He tried to put The Undertaker in the casket , but The Undertaker fought back . Yokozuna next performed a leg drop and placed The Undertaker in the casket . Before Yokozuna could close the lid , however , The Undertaker attacked him and the two wrestlers fought while standing in the casket . The Undertaker performed a clothesline from the top rope and placed Yokozuna in the casket . King Kong Bundy and Bam Bam Bigelow came down the aisle toward the ring , but Chuck Norris blocked their path . While Norris was distracted , however , Irwin R. Schyster entered the ring from the other side and attacked The Undertaker . He placed The Undertaker in the casket , but The Undertaker recovered before Yokozuna could close the lid . Jeff Jarrett tried to interfere on Yokozuna 's behalf , but Norris stopped him with a superkick . The Undertaker performed a DDT and a big boot on Yokozuna . He then rolled his opponent in to the casket and closed the lid to gain the victory . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Shortly after Survivor Series Diesel was named the top contender to Backlund 's title . Backlund 's first defense of his title was made at a Madison Square Garden live show three days after Survivor Series , where Diesel defeated him with the Jackknife Powerbomb in eight seconds . With the victory , Diesel joined Hart and Pedro Morales as the only wrestlers to that point to be Triple Crown Champion and became the quickest to do so having won all three components within the span of seven months . 
 Hart returned at the Royal Rumble in January 1995 , where he faced Diesel to try to regain his title . Backlund interfered in the match , restarting the rivalry and leading to an I Quit match at WrestleMania XI . Hart won the match by using the crossface chickenwing to make Backlund concede defeat . 
 To fill the vacancy created when Diesel and Michaels broke up , an eight team tournament was announced with the finals scheduled for the Royal Rumble . The 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 Kid and Bob Holly won the tournament by defeating Tatanka and Bam Bam Bigelow and won the titles but dropped the belts the following night to The Smoking Gunns . 
 Michaels and Diesel 's feud resumed at the Royal Rumble when Michaels attacked Diesel during his match with Hart . Michaels then became the top contender for the WWF Championship by winning the 1995 Royal Rumble match . Diesel won their match at WrestleMania after Sid , Michaels ' new bodyguard , accidentally distracted the referee . Diesel offered Michaels a rematch , and Michaels told Sid that his services would not be required during the rematch . Sid attacked Michaels , and Diesel came to Michaels ' defense . This attack caused Michaels to turn face , and he and Diesel resumed their friendship and won the WWF Tag Team Championship later in 1995 . 
 Lex Luger 's feud with the Million Dollar Corporation did not continue , as the Corporation targeted The Undertaker . The Undertaker spent most of the following year feuding with the Corporation , as he faced IRS at the 1995 Royal Rumble , King Kong Bundy at WrestleMania XI , and Kama at SummerSlam 1995 . Luger was placed in a tag team with Davey Boy Smith known as The Allied Powers , but the team never won the tag team titles . The team was dissolved in the summer of 1995 after Smith turned heel and Luger left the company following SummerSlam to return to World Championship Wrestling . 
 Yokozuna did not regain his main event status after Survivor Series . After taking some time off , he made a surprise return at WrestleMania XI as Owen Hart 's partner in a tag team title match against the Smoking Gunns . Yokozuna and Hart won the WWF Tag Team Championship , and Owen 's feud with Bret was dropped . The brothers eventually reunited in 1997 to form The Hart Foundation , a stable that also included Davey Boy Smith and Jim Neidhart . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Survivor Series elimination matches = = = 
 ^ 1 
 ^ 2 
 ^ 3 
 = Elias Abu Shabaki = 
 Elias Abu Shabaki ( also spelled Ilyas Abu Shabaka ; Arabic : <unk> أبو <unk> , May 3 , 1903 – January 27 , 1947 ) was a Lebanese writer , poet , editor , translator and literary critic , he was one of the founders of the literary League of Ten and is considered as one of the leading figures of the Arabic Nahda Movement . 
 Born into a well @-@ to @-@ do Lebanese family , Abu Shabaki became interested in poetry at a young age . The son of a merchant , he was left fatherless in his youth , an experience that would mark his earlier works . Elias worked as a teacher , translator and _ in addition to publishing several volumes of poetry _ as a journalist writing for many Arabic newspapers and literary magazines . Being an adherent to the Romantic school , Abu <unk> believed in inspiration and denounced conscious control in poetry . His poems were gloomy , deeply personal and often contained biblical overtones centering on his internal moral conflicts . Some of Abu Shabaki 's work was very controversial in its time , particularly his poetry collection Serpents of Paradise which was regarded as obscene due to its overt sexual content . The poet 's obsession with the spiritual consequences of carnality that was manifested in his writings was attributed to the guilt brought upon by his sexual escapades with various women when he was married and until his death from leukemia in 1947 . 
 Abu Shabaki called for the renewal and modernization of Arab literature , he inspired succeeding generations of poets . His contributions to literature were commemorated by turning his house in his hometown of Zouk Mikael into a museum . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Childhood and youth = = = 
 Elias Abu Shabaki was born on 3 May 1903 in Providence , USA to Youssef Abu Shabaki , a wealthy Lebanese merchant , and his wife Nayla née Saroufim . Elias ' mother came from a family well known for its poetic gifts , and both Nayla 's brother and maternal uncle ( Elias Ferzan ) were established poets . The couple had left the Lebanon to visit Nayla 's uncle Elias Ferzan in Providence where she gave birth to Elias at Ferzan 's place . In 1904 , Youssef and Nayla settled back in their native town of Zouk Mikael in the current Keserwan District in Mount Lebanon , a town overlooking the Mediterranean sea which is noted for its natural beauty . 
 Elias was raised as a devout Christian by his Maronite parents ; he was admitted in 1911 to the <unk> Saint Joseph College in the nearby town of Aintoura where he studied , among other courses , French and Arabic literature . Nayla introduced Elias to Arabic poetry and taught him a long poem written by her uncle Elias Ferzan , which , according to the young Abu Shabaki , was highly inspirational . 
 In 1914 , while Elias ' father was visiting his estates in the Khartoum region in Sudan , he was attacked by bandits who stripped him of his belongings and killed him ; the loss of his father left young Elias in a state of emotional distress and depression that would mark the rest of his life . The orphaned Elias continued his education at Aintoura until the outbreak of the Great War when he had to quit the school due to financial problems , though the school was later forced to close by the Ottoman authorities . Elias resumed his studies at the College Central in <unk> which was run then by the Marist Brothers before returning a year later to Saint Joseph 's but he never graduated as a result of a quarrel he had with one of his teachers ; nevertheless he continued his self @-@ education and read religious books and French Romantic literature extensively which inspired his first literary efforts . Among the French authors , Elias was particularly fond of the works of Charles Baudelaire and Alfred de Musset . 
 = = = Courtship and marriage = = = 
 When he was 16 , Elias met and was infatuated by his neighbor Olga Saroufim who was two years his senior . Their friendship rapidly evolved as they exchanged literary books and letters . Elias ' attachment to Olga was most evident when she fell ill with fever during a visit to the southern city of Sour ; Elias was reported to have invited his family members to kneel and pray for Olga to get better . After some 10 years of betrothal , Abu Shabaki wedded Olga in December 1931 . Elias and Olga had a lone child together who died at birth in 1932 . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Having lost his father at an early age , Elias was compelled to teach in order to earn a living . He taught for a while at the Jesuit mission school then at the school of the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools in <unk> and lastly at the <unk> school . Elias had had an affinity for journalism since his youth , and he eked a meager living through his contributions to a number of Lebanese newspapers ( al @-@ <unk> , al @-@ Bayan , an @-@ Nidaa , al @-@ Ma <unk> , al- ' <unk> , Lisan al @-@ hal , al @-@ <unk> , al @-@ Makshouf and <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) , also publishing a great number of journalistic articles on a variety of topics . Elias also corresponded with a number of Egyptian newspapers such as al @-@ <unk> and al @-@ Masa . At the request of his publishers , Abu Shabaki translated to Arabic a number of French literary material from the 17th till the 19th century such as Lamartine 's Jocelyn and La Chute d 'un <unk> , Edmond Rostand 's La <unk> , Bernardin St. Pierre 's Paul et Virginie and La Chaumière <unk> and many other works by Henri Bordeaux , Voltaire , Antoine François Prévost , and <unk> . Elias was employed during World War II as a translator in the press and radio services of the French high Commission . 
 In 1926 Elias produced his first poetic juvenilia al @-@ Kithara ( The lyre ) ; the work attests of the young poet 's inexperience but also of his promising talent . In 1928 Elias finished al @-@ Marid as @-@ <unk> ( The silent invalid ) , a narrative poem which is one of Abu Shabaki 's best known works , springing from the center of European romantic tradition . His next book Afa 'i al @-@ Firdaws ( Serpents of Paradise ) , published in 1938 , is lauded by many as Abu Shabaki 's best work and one of the best accomplishments of romantic poetry in modern Lebanese and Arabic literature . Afa 'i al Firdaws and Elias ' latter works would play an influential role in the development of modern Arabic poetry and literature . In 1941 Elias published his third book al @-@ Alhan ( The melodies ) , an ode to simple peasant life , followed in 1944 by Nidaa ' al @-@ Qalb ( The heart 's evocation ) and Ila al @-@ Abad ( Eternally ) , where Elias reverts to discussing matters of the heart from a more mature perspective . Ghalwaa was published in 1945 . The book 's title is an anagram of Olga 's name in Arabic . 
 In addition to poetry , Elias published a number of studies including a study in comparative literature called <unk> al @-@ <unk> wal @-@ <unk> <unk> al @-@ Arab wal @-@ <unk> ( Intellectual and spiritual links between the Arabs and the French ) , in which he sought to demonstrate the weight of French influence on world literature ; he also authored long essays about Lamartine , Baudelaire and Oscar Wilde . In addition , Abu Shabaki produced a series of portraits of literary and political personages which were first published in al @-@ <unk> journal then collected in a volume dubbed al @-@ <unk> ( The Portraits ) . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Elias died on January 27 , 1947 from Leukemia at the Hôtel @-@ Dieu de France Hospital in Beirut , he was buried in his hometown of Zouk Mikael . After his death , Elias ' friends put together a number of verses and works that were published in periodicals in a book dubbed Min Sa 'id al @-@ <unk> ( From the bosom of the Gods ) in 1958 . 
 = = Views and beliefs = = 
 = = = Morality = = = 
 Elias was raised a devout Christian by his Maronite parents in the Lebanese countryside . His religious schooling and upbringing is reflected in his deeply spiritual writings and his resort to the Bible for some of his poems , which reflects the strong hold it had upon him . Elias developed a consuming obsession with the opposing forces of good and evil , awakened at an early age due to the loss of his father at the beginning of World War I ; early writings attest to the young poet 's disgust and disenchantment with human existence . This is best manifested in a poem entitled <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 Abu Shabaki 's stances and the subjects he treated were considered provocative and scandalous at the time . He forthrightly and fearlessly confronted matters of sin , sexuality and immorality in a deeply personal manner . Even though he was one of the first Arab literary figures to bluntly address these taboo issues , Abu Shabaki drew praise for his innovative style . During the course of his lengthy engagement to Olga , Elias had a torrid love affair with a married woman that is subliminally confessed in his writing of <unk> and Serpents of Paradise , where the remorseful Elias engages in constant conflict between lust and love and the struggle to reconcile sensual bestiality with spirituality . Despite Abu Shabaki 's celebration of carnal pleasures , he retained his belief in God whose judgement he feared ; his poems show a concern for the spiritual expenses that these pleasures entail . 
 = = = Women and sexuality = = = 
 Some scholars argue that Elias was a misogynist as attested at an early stage in his works such as this passage from al @-@ Kithara : 
 " Beware of love ! In love is evil , it is a fire in the heart which melts . If there is a deceitful heart in men , then the hearts of women are more so . " 
 Elias epitomized beautiful lewd women as diabolical creatures , cunning temptresses causing man 's downfall and " Serpents of Paradise " ; this bitter and ironical antithesis is an allusion to danger and evil that is brought upon by lust and sin . Elias ' aversion and attraction to women and sex is evident in the poem " Storm " where the disturbed poet condemns a prostitute while asking her to make love ; similarly in " The Wretched Woman " , Abu Shabaki depicts a prostitute who inflicts her clients with venereal diseases as a way to avenge herself . Elias ' attitude towards women softened and changed radically as attest his later works as he went through a process of reconciliation and redemption through love . 
 Despite his views Elias was romantically involved with at least four women according to his biographer <unk> Faraj <unk> . Olga Saroufim whom Abu Shabaki married in 1931 was the main love of his life yet he had an affair with Rose , a married woman in his hometown , while he was engaged to marry in 1929 . Elias alludes to this experience in many of his writings , especially his book " Serpents of Paradise " . The third woman to mark Abu Shabaki 's life , albeit in a minor role , was an Egyptian singer called <unk> who exercised a calming effect on Abu Shabaki , as evidenced by the poem written for her . After having parted with the singer , in 1940 Elias met a dancer called Leila Adem ; the poems in " The Call of the Heart " and " To Eternity " were written for her . Abu Shabaki 's relationship with Leila continued until his death in 1947 . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Abu Shabaki 's was a prolific writer , publishing a wide variety of works including poems , journal articles and literary studies . Widely seen as his most important work was Afa 'i al @-@ Firdaws ( 1938 ) . Elias ' writing is characterized by powerful imagery , realism and often a striking carnality and obsession with the pleasures of the flesh . Elias believed that the purest art evolves from emotion , which he thought was the source of authentic and aesthetic experience ; he set a high value for inspiration and denounced rationalism and the role of conscious control in writing poetry . In one poem Abu Shabaki wrote that truthful poetry is the best , contrary to the old Arabic saying that the best poetry is that which feigns most . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The many hardships and emotional challenges that Abu Shabaki endured , from growing up fatherless amid the First World War to losing his only born son , influenced his gloomy poetry which conveys a strong sense of the presence of evil in the world and an effort to find an escape in love or in the innocence of childhood and nature . Elias ' often pessimistic writings evoked a concern for the body and its lust , greatly affected by Romantic works he had read during his youth which commended loneliness , sorrow , passion , pain and death and denounced the materialism and lewdness of city life . Christian tradition and imagery inspired and permeated much of Abu Shabaki 's work , which abounds in biblical images , mirroring the experiences of a Christian who felt deeply about the teachings of the Catholic Church . 
 = = = League of ten = = = 
 In 1930 , Abu Shabaki along with Michel Abou <unk> , Khalil <unk> and Fouad <unk> , co @-@ founded a literary society conveniently dubbed the " League of ten " ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> ) since it at first included ten literary and artistic figures . In addition to the four founding members , the league consisted of Karam Ali <unk> Karam , Youssef Ibrahim <unk> , <unk> al @-@ <unk> , <unk> Youssef <unk> , Abdallah Lahoud and Michel Asmar . The league waged an assiduous attack on literary figures and the political establishment through articles published in the periodical al @-@ <unk> , which was subsequently forced to close down by the government . The league 's aim was to promote literary renewal and modernization of Arab literature . 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 = = = = Al @-@ Kithara = = = = 
 Elias ' first Diwan , al @-@ Kithara ( The Lyre ) , was published in 1926 by <unk> publishers . Al @-@ Kithara was Elias ' earliest work , attesting of the young poet 's inexperience while revealing his great poetic potential . The juvenilia that showed the influence of classical Arab poets such as Abu <unk> was described as gloomy and pretentious . It contained a number of poems translated from French and was dedicated to the spirit of Abu Shabaki 's dead father ; the dedication established the melancholy and pessimistic mood that pervade the Diwan . 
 = = = = Al @-@ Marid as @-@ <unk> = = = = 
 Al @-@ Marid as @-@ <unk> ( The Silent Invalid ) was Elias ' second juvenilia . It was published in 1928 and was the poet 's first trial at narrative poetry . 
 = = = = Ghalwaa = = = = 
 Abu Shabaka 's narrative poem Ghalwaa was written between the years 1926 and 1932 but wasn 't published until 1945 by <unk> Press , two years before the poet 's death . The poem was inspired by Elias ' love interest and muse Olga ; the poem 's title is an anagram of Olga 's name in Arabic ( <unk> = <unk> ) . It was viewed ever since its publication as an influential and progressive work which revolutionized Arabic literature and as a prime example of Arabic romanticism . The generally acclaimed masterpiece owed its success to its sheer artistic merit , impressive length and the juxtaposition of extreme emotional and moral situations such as passion and sin . Although <unk> writers had produced similar long poems , they seldom engaged in poems with such clear narrative plot . 
 = = = = Afa 'i al @-@ Firdaws = = = = 
 Afa 'i al @-@ Firdaws ( Serpents of Paradise ) is a collection of 13 poems written between 1928 and 1938 and published in 1938 by the now @-@ defunct Dar al @-@ Makshouf publishing press . The book is highly regarded as a masterpiece of Lebanese poetry ; it draws inspiration from love and eroticism in a clear connection to the influences of French romantic works such as Charles Baudelaire 's Les fleurs du mal . In Serpents of Paradise , Elias ' candid and puritanical morality gives way to a sense of sin and spiritual deprivation as he comes to terms with the effects of the love affair that he had while he was betrothed to Olga . The Diwan is characterized by constant antithesis between love and deceit , life and death . 
 = = = = Al @-@ Alhan = = = = 
 Al @-@ Alhan ( The melodies ) is an anthology encompassing 16 poems . Al @-@ Alhan was published in 1941 by Dar al @-@ Makshouf , it was described as a unique work in the history of Arabic literature ; each of the poems deal with a different aspect of rustic country life , where images of Lebanese folklore and colloquialism abound . In the book , Abu Shabaki identifies himself with the peasant , praises the simplicity of traditional ways , and furthers himself from the spurious gifts of technology and displays of false riches . <unk> Hawi , a contemporary literary figure , saw Abu Shabaki 's poem as calling to a form of new paganism where Abu Shabaki " worships the blessing and fertility of the Earth womb . " Through al @-@ Alhan , Abu Shabaki paved the way for a new trend among his contemporary Muslim poets which manifested in a return to Islamic Sufism or to pre @-@ Islamic natural atheism such in the case of <unk> . 
 = = = = Nidaa al @-@ Qalb and Ila al @-@ Abad = = = = 
 Published in 1942 by Dar al @-@ Makshouf , Nidaa al @-@ Qalb ( The Call of the Heart ) is a collection of love poems . In this volume , Elias placed aside his view of Woman as an evil snare and extolled chaste love , in a striking contrast with the harsh judgement and hedonistic pursuits expressed in <unk> al @-@ <unk> . In the poem The Cup , Abu Shabaki , having recovered peace and his faith in love , accepts his predicament as a poet who is unappreciated by his society . 
 Ila al @-@ Abad ( To Eternity ) was the last of Abu Shabaki 's works published during his lifetime , the anthology confirmed Elias ' return to peace that was evidenced in The Call of the Heart . The crude sensuality of his earlier works are totally replaced with more refined and mystical dimensions of love that are further emphasized in this book which was also issued by Dar al @-@ Makshouf in 1944 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Elias is considered a cornerstone in modern Arabic poetry in Lebanon and one of the greatest Arab poets ; he is also one of the leading Lebanese figures of Arabic romanticism . His revival of the romantic school , long dormant in the Occident , was pursed by a large following of Arab contemporary poets and writers . The romantic movement is now outdated in the Middle East but Abu Shabaka 's work still attracts young readers who appreciate sentimentality and poetry and have little taste for the socio @-@ political <unk> found in the work of modern , politically engaged Arab poets . Abou Shabaki 's work confirmed the Christian tradition in modern Arabic literature and helped establish the Bible as a literary source in Arabic . Later writers and poets benefited from the revival of biblical themes and legends which Abu Shabaki 's poetry portrayed . The poet influenced the writings of many of his successors like Badr Shakir al @-@ <unk> , Nizar <unk> , Khalil Hawi , Henry <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Elias Abu Shabaki Museum = = = 
 On 11 June 2008 , the Zouk Mikael municipality inaugurated the Elias Abu Shabaki museum in the poet 's home . Abu Shabaki 's mansion in Zouk Mikael was built by his father and uncle , who traded goods between Egypt , Sudan and Lebanon . The mansion was designed by an Egyptian architect , built by local stonemasons and its interior walls were decorated by Austrian artists . In the later years of his life , Elias had mortgaged his house due to his poor financial condition . The municipality appropriated the plot in the 1970s and saved the house and its gardens from being replaced by a residential building . The mansion was restored during the next 2 decades and was refurbished with the original furniture and accessories of the poet that were saved by his wife 's family ; in addition to the furniture , the museum houses a collection of the poet 's books , original manuscripts and letters . 
 = Pearson 's Candy Company = 
 Pearson 's Candy Company is an American chocolate and confectionery manufacturer headquartered in Saint Paul , Minnesota . Founded as a confectionery distribution firm in 1909 , the company began to manufacture its own products in 1912 . Originally a family @-@ owned company , Pearson 's experienced changes in ownership , acquisitions and product alterations in the 1960s and 1970s , before being purchased in 1989 and resold in 2011 . 
 Pearson 's products are produced on three production lines in the company ’ s Saint Paul plant . The company sells its Mint Patties , Salted Nut Roll and Bit @-@ O @-@ Honey nationally and its Nut Goodie and Bun Bars products in several Midwestern states . Measured by revenue , Pearson 's is among the top 100 global confectionery companies . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pearson family = = = 
 Pearson 's Candy Company was founded as a confectionery distribution firm in 1909 by P. Edward Pearson and his brothers , John and Oscar . Two more brothers , Waldemar and C. Fritz , joined the company several years later . The five brothers determined manufacturing would be more profitable than distribution and , in 1912 , introduced their first confection , the Nut Goodie . 
 Pearson 's grew and began manufacturing for other companies , including Whitmans and Planters . Pearson 's introduced the Salted Nut Roll in 1933 , at the height of The Great Depression . The success of the Salted Nut Roll prompted other manufacturers to mimic the confection . Pearson 's subsequently changed the roll 's name to the Choo Choo Bar , to distinguish the product . The Choo Choo name , however , was not as successful , and the original name was restored with the Pearson 's logo more prominently displayed . 
 By the end of World War II , the Pearson brothers had dropped the distribution aspect of the business . The youngest brother , William Pearson , joined the family business in 1944 , as did George Pearson , son of founder P. Edward Pearson . In 1951 , Pearson 's acquired the Trudeau Candy Company , which brought Mint Patties and the Seven Up bar to Pearson 's product line . The company moved to a new manufacturing plant at its current address in 1959 . In 1962 , Pearson ’ s acquired Milwaukee @-@ based Sperry Candy Company , a company known for its Chicken Dinner Bar . Pearson 's , however , sold Sperry Candy to the Schuler Chocolate Factory of Winona , Minnesota five years later . 
 = = = Ownership changes = = = 
 The Pearson family sold the company in 1968 to ITT / Continental Baking , a New York firm . ITT / Continental Baking sold the company to an out @-@ of @-@ state confectionery partnership in 1979 . During this time , sales declined due to problems with availability and product changes , such as a wrapper redesign and recipe change of the Nut Goodie . 
 In 1985 , the company was purchased by Larry Hassler and Judith Johnston , the current CEO and COO , respectively . The company ’ s previous owners had split up , causing the bank to offer the company in the leveraged buyout . The Nut Goodie 's original wrapper and recipe were restored and , despite the loss of a label contract with General Mills to produce Nature Valley granola bars , which accounted for 1 @.@ 4 million bars daily and 85 percent of the company 's total tonnage , Pearson 's became profitable again in December 1992 . In early 1998 , Pearson 's acquired the Bun Bar trademark from Clark Bar America . Pearson 's introduced Flurries in 2004 . 
 In 2011 , Pearson 's was acquired by <unk> Partners . 
 = = Products = = 
 = = = Current products = = = 
 Salted Nut Rolls and Mint Patties account for approximately 80 percent of the company ’ s sales ; Nut Goodie and Bun Bars account for the remainder . Mint Patties are sold nationally and Salted Nut Rolls are available in approximately 60 percent of the company 's outlets . The Bit @-@ O @-@ Honey brand was acquired from Nestle in 2013 . In the Twin Cities , Salted Nut Rolls consistently rank number one or number three in sales . Although the products are not sold internationally , the company is the 99th largest confectionery company in the world by revenue . 
 Pearson 's utilizes 200 tons of peanuts , 400 tons of sugar , 100 tons of chocolate and 350 tons of corn syrup per month . Products are produced in the company ’ s 130 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 12 @,@ 000 m2 ) . plant on three production lines . Current products include : 
 = = = Discontinued products = = = 
 = = = = Seven Up Bar = = = = 
 The Seven Up Bar was a candy bar comprising seven different chocolate " pillows " , each filled with a different flavor . Flavors changed with the availability and popularity of ingredients , which included , among others , <unk> nut , <unk> , butterscotch , caramel , cherry , coconut , fudge , mint , nougat and orange . The high manufacturing costs and trademark issues with a soda manufacturer ( The American Bottling Company , today Cadbury Schweppes ) , caused the bar to be retired in 1979 . 
 = = = = Chicken Dinner Bar = = = = 
 The Chicken Dinner Bar had been a product of the Sperry Candy Company , which was acquired by Pearson ’ s in 1962 . The bar , introduced during The Great Depression , was so called in reference to President Herbert Hoover ’ s promise of “ a chicken in every pot ” . The bar did not contain chicken or other poultry products , but was , rather , a chocolate @-@ covered nut roll . Pearson ’ s discontinued the bar ’ s production after the acquisition . Early TV commercials sang " Chick - Chick - Chick - Chick - Chicken Dinner " similar to , and in the cadence of a rooster crowing . 
 = = = = Flurries = = = = 
 Flurries were chocolate mint fudge with a white coating that were introduced in 2004 and discontinued sometime later . 
 = Gunfright = 
 Gunfright is an arcade adventure video game developed by Ultimate Play the Game and published by U.S. Gold . It was first released for the ZX Spectrum in 1985 and was ported to the Amstrad CPC and the MSX later that year . In the game , the player takes the role of a sheriff in the town of Black Rock and is tasked with eliminating outlaws who are scattered throughout the settlement . 
 The game was developed directly after Nightshade , and re @-@ uses the latter game 's Filmation II game engine that allows images to be rendered without overlapping each other . The game received mostly positive reviews upon release ; praise was directed at the graphics and presentation , but criticism was directed at the game 's similarity to Nightshade . It was later included in Rare Replay , Rare 's 2015 Xbox One retrospective compilation . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is presented in an isometric format and set in the fictional town of Black Rock . The player takes on the role of Sheriff Quickdraw , and the main objective of the game is to track down and kill a gang of outlaws who are hiding in the town . The game begins with a first @-@ person perspective targeting minigame in which vertically scrolling bags of money can be shot at using crosshairs . Shooting the bags give the player initial sums of money which can be used to purchase ammunition . 
 During the game , Quickdraw must locate the wanted outlaws one by one . Once an outlaw has been found and shot ( shooting the outlaw does not kill him , but only initiates a duel ) , the game shifts to the first @-@ person targeting minigame . This time , the player must shoot the rapidly moving outlaw as quickly as possible . The player can either wait for the outlaw to draw , or take the initiative and shoot first , which will make the bandit draw his weapon as well . If the player successfully shoots an outlaw , a bounty is paid ( increasing with every round ) , and a new outlaw enters the town . 
 During gameplay , players often encounter helpful residents who will point the way to outlaws . The residents need to be protected during gameplay , as the player has to pay a fine if any are shot by either bandits or Sheriff Quickdraw himself . Some outlaws are mounted on horseback , meaning that the player may have to saddle an imaginary horse to pursue them . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , from their headquarters in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch in 1982 . Under the trading name of Ultimate Play the Game , they began producing multiple video games for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . The company were known for their reluctance to reveal details about their operations and upcoming projects . Little was known about their development process except that they used to work in " separate teams " ; one team would work on graphics whilst the other would concentrate on other aspects such as sound or programming . 
 The game was developed with the isometric projection game engine known as Filmation II , which was used previously in Ultimate 's 1985 ZX Spectrum game Nightshade . The Filmation engine was created by the Stamper brothers to portray 3D imagery . Filmation II used an image masking technique that drew and filled holes in the background , allowing the game to create composite structures out of pixelated drawings without visual overlay , despite the limitations platforms such as the ZX Spectrum offered . 
 Gunfright was initially released for the ZX Spectrum in 1985 and was the last game to be developed under the direct involvement of the Stamper brothers . Realising that the graphical limits of platforms such as the ZX Spectrum had been pushed , future projects such as Blackwyche and Dragon <unk> were handed over to designer brothers Dave and Bob Thomas , who were often uncredited for their work . Gunfright , along with Knight Lore , Alien 8 and Nightshade , were re @-@ released for the MSX in 1986 , with Gunfright and Sabre Wulf being ported to the Amstrad CPC later that year . Gunfright was later included in an August 2015 Xbox One compilation of 30 Rare titles , Rare Replay . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mostly positive reviews upon release . Reviewers writing for Crash praised the game 's graphics as highly detailed and " colourful " , but stated that the game was visually similar to Ultimate 's immediately previous game , Nightshade . Gwyn Hughes of Your Sinclair thought the graphics were the best aspect of the game , despite similarly comparing them to those of Nightshade . Hughes also praised the game 's smooth animation and the techniques used to portray the western town . A reviewer for CVG suggested that the game 's style and gameplay was a mix of Nightshade and Nintendo 's Duck Hunt . Reviewing the MSX version , a reviewer for Computer Gamer praised the game 's plot , and was complimentary of the way the game was able to separate itself from Ultimate 's previous game , which had used the same Filmation engine . 
 Reviewers writing for Crash praised the gameplay , stating that the game 's " element " was considerably developed and that the several different stages were " highly addictive " . Writers in CVG criticised the gameplay , noting that they found it difficult to distinguish the outlaws from other male inhabitants of the town . They also noted the absence of puzzle elements which was considered " unusual " for an Ultimate game . Bill Bennett of Your Computer similarly considered the omission of puzzle elements unusual , but welcomed the " witty " change in genre from the previous dungeon @-@ themed video games . 
 = Como Duele ( Ricardo Arjona song ) = 
 " Como Duele " ( English : How Much It Hurts ) is a latin pop song by Guatemalan recording artist Ricardo Arjona , released on 4 November 2008 as the lead single from his eleventh studio album , 5to Piso ( 2008 ) . The song was written and produced by Arjona along with longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin under their stage name Los Gringos , with additional production work and background vocals from Puerto Rican singer @-@ songwriter Tommy Torres . " Como Duele " is the first single Arjona releases after signing a record deal with Warner Music in 2008 , after being signed to Sony Music since 1993 . 
 Lyrically , " Como Duele " was intended to show " the monotony that attacks the couples that have many years together , the lack of passion and <unk> love that seems to pose over them . " The song became an commercial success for Arjona , becoming his first top ten single in the US Billboard Top <unk> Songs since 2005 and , with a peak of No.2 , his highest entry on that list since " El Problema " in 2002 . It also became his sixth song to top the Latin Pop Songs chart , as well as reaching the top in Mexico and Venezuela . " Como Duele " was critically praised by media outlets , receiving comparisons to Arjona 's previous song " Olvidarte " , and being considered as his " biggest hit in years " . 
 An accompanying music video for " Como Duele " was released in September 2008 . It was directed by Ricardo Calderón and filmed in Mexico City . In the clip , focused on a department which rooms are being moved , Arjona is shown inside a room that goes empty , and everything that gave life to the place is going away until the department is finally demolished . " Como Duele " was included in the set list of Arjona 's Quinto Piso Tour ( 2009 ) and Metamorfosis World Tour ( 2012 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 After spending the majority of his career signed to Sony , and later , Sony BMG , Arjona signed a long @-@ term recording deal with Warner Music Latina . The deal was closed in September 2008 . Iñigo Zabala , chairman of Warner Music Latin America commented that " He 's an artist that fits perfectly with our company , " and that " We are a label that has a major catalog of songwriters and quality pop and rock from the likes of Maná , Alejandro Sanz , Laura Pausini , and now , Arjona . " In an interview , the singer commented that while composing 5to Piso he " tried to recoup some of the freshness " of his past releases , stating that " it makes so good to the songs " . He further stated that he believes " all albums are result of an evolution , and contradictions either " , also stating that he celebrated contradictions as part of life . Arjona begun working on the album as early as 2005 . Talking about the process of recording the album , he stated that " We must work to make the albums comfortable to us " , further commenting that " The rest is a matter of how good or bad the albums defend themselves . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Como Duele " is a latin pop ballad about " the monotony that attacks the couples that have many years together , the lack of passion and <unk> love that seems to pose over them . " Jason Birchmeier from Allmusic called the song " phenomenal " , and considered it as to be " his biggest hits in years " . He also named it , alongside " Sin Ti .. Sin Mi " and " El Del Espejo " , to be a standout track from the album . An editor from El Mercurio Online commented that " Como Duele " is " a ballad of merciless chords and lyrics plagued of contradictions made metaphors . " He also stated that " Is the logic of [ past Arjona 's single ] ' Olvidarte ' , that song in which the <unk> talked about making something as difficult as ' pulling the hair out of a bottle ' , " and compared it to his past song " Olvidarte " , from Sin Daños a Terceros . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Como Duele " became a commercial success for Arjona . In the United States , the song reached number two and became Arjona 's first top ten single in the Billboard Top Latin Songs since " Acompañame A Estar Solo " , which reached number seven in 2005 , and his highest @-@ charting single there since " El Problema " , which reached number one back in 2002 . " Como Duele " became Arjona 's sixth song to reach number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart after debuting at number eight , and is the first to do so since " Acompañame A Estar Solo " . Additionally , the song appeared on the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay chart at number 33 , and at number 69 on the Radio Songs chart , being the only song ever by the artist to chart on the latter . " Como Duele " became a hit in Latin America , reaching number one position in Mexico and Venezuela . On the Billboard year @-@ end charts for 2009 , " Como Duele " finished at number 40 on the Top Latin Songs chart , and at number 14 on the Latin Pop Songs chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Como Duele " was shot in Mexico City in September 2008 , in a forum and some other places in the city . It was released on October 20 and was directed by the Mexican filmmaker Ricardo Calderón , who later in 2012 joined Arjona on his own record label , Metamorfosis . The story takes place in a department which rooms are being moved , and in where Arjona lived with his couple . As the video progresses , the room goes empty , and everything that gave life to the place is going away until the department if finally demolished . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits are taken from the iTunes exclusive digital booklet . 
 Personnel 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital Download 
 " Como Duele " — 3 : 30 
 Bachata Version 
 " Como Duele " ( featuring Voz a Voz ) — 3 : 20 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hey Venus ! = 
 Hey Venus ! is the eighth album by Welsh band Super Furry Animals . It was released on 27 August 2007 in the United Kingdom . Hey Venus ! is the band 's first full @-@ length release on current label Rough Trade Records and , at just over 36 minutes , is also their shortest @-@ running studio release . The title is taken from the first line of the song " Into the Night " . 
 The album was conceived as a " rowdy pop record " , both in response to Rough Trade 's request for " one of those pop records like you used to make " and as a result of the " very different atmosphere " the band encountered at shows on the Love Kraft tour when the ' slow ' songs from that album were played . In contrast with many Super Furry Animals albums , no samplers were used during recording of Hey Venus ! as the group made a conscious decision to create a " simple record " which " capture [ d ] the spirit of the band playing live in a room " . Dave Newfeld took over production duties from Mario Caldato Jr . , who had worked on both Phantom Power and Love Kraft , as the band didn 't want to " repeat [ their ] past two records " . As with Love Kraft , all members of the band contributed songs at the recording stage but , besides chief songwriter Gruff Rhys , only guitarist Huw Bunford ( " Battersea Odyssey " ) and keyboard player Cian Ciaran ( " Carbon Dating " ) ended up with their tracks on the finished album . 
 The album follows the life and adventures of a character called Venus as she moves " from a small town to a big metropolis " . The band have given several explanations for the appearance of this narrative arc in the record claiming variously that Hey Venus ! was conceived as a concept album , that the similar themes in the songs were only noticed after they had been written and were used as a way of " structuring and compiling the album " and that the Venus concept was thought up after the album 's completion in order to give sleeve designer Keiichi Tanaami " a reference point to make an illustration from . " After working with Pete Fowler since 1997 's Radiator the band asked Tanaami to produce artwork for Hey Venus ! , having been " blown away " by his work on a Japanese tour . 
 Critical response was generally positive with some reviews claiming Hey Venus ! is " [ the band 's ] most satisfying work " and exhibits a " full @-@ fledged return to pop power " . Some critics , however , pointed out that the album has the " faint whiff of musical conservatism " and " must rank as [ the Super Furry Animals ' ] least adventurous " record . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with Tiny Mix Tapes in January 2008 , the band 's vocalist , Gruff Rhys , stated that Hey Venus ! was deliberately conceived as a ' pop ' record following a request from the band 's new record label Rough Trade : 
 Rhys has also stated that after Love Kraft the band were " kind of thinking of making a loud record " following the " very different atmosphere " at initial shows on the Love Kraft tour , when the group played the " slow " songs from that album . Towards the end of the tour the setlist had become " full of fast songs from [ the Super Furry Animals ] back catalogue " and this had an effect as the band entered into the studio for the Hey Venus ! sessions : " It 's definitely the first time our audience has influenced our music in that sense " . Rhys used his second solo album , <unk> , as an outlet for the quiet , acoustic songs that he had written rather than put them forward for inclusion on Hey Venus ! : 
 = = Recording = = 
 The majority of the album was recorded at Miraval Studios , France , picked , at keyboardist Cian Ciaran 's request , because of its large live room which enabled all the band to set up and play as a group . The Super Furries wanted to " go somewhere new and have a cultural experience " while they recorded what is their eighth album together . Recording in France also enabled the band to get away from distractions such as " clean [ ing ] the house " . Additional recording took place at Rockfield Studios , Monmouth while string instruments were recorded at Metropolis Studios , London . 
 After working with producer Mario Caldato Jr. on their previous albums , Phantom Power and Love Kraft , the band " were looking for someone new to work with " as they didn 't want to repeat these records . They chose Dave Newfeld to produce Hey Venus ! , after hearing his work with Canadian indie rock supergroup Broken Social Scene : 
 Rhys has praised Newfeld for his " knowledge of pop and what makes people react " stating that " most of the time he just stood there by the desk " and " wouldn 't accept a take until he was physically moved by it " . 
 As with Love Kraft Rhys was not the sole writer ; guitarist Huw Bunford wrote " Battersea Odyssey " ( inspired by Battersea Power Station ) , while keyboard player Cian Ciaran wrote " Carbon Dating " . Other members of the band contributed songs that do not appear on Hey Venus ! but might " end up on the next record " . Newfeld also encouraged the group to improvise songs , two of which , " Semi Pro " and " Hot Nutz " , appear briefly on footage of the recording process streamed at the band 's website and included with American editions of the album . Rhys claimed these tracks ( along with 32 other improvised songs recorded during the Hey Venus ! sessions ) would " probably never be released " but give " a glimpse into the magic of the Super Furry Animals in the studio , and the kind of atmosphere that Dave created " . However , " Hot Nutz " was reworked as " <unk> Eyes " for their next album , Dark Days / Light Years . 
 Some of the songs recorded barely resemble their earlier demo versions including " Baby Ate My <unk> " , which originally " had this sort of Miami based rhythm with babies crying and glasses smashing " and was " very abrasive " . The finished track ( which features Huw Bunford " impersonating a police or ambulance siren with the backing vocals " ) was mixed three or four times and " barely resembles the original " . 
 Hey Venus ! reflected the group 's desire to " capture the spirit of the band playing live in a room " . The album was recorded " very quickly " and , as the band did not feel the need to " experiment so much with such a simple record " , is not particularly " sonically adventurous " . In Gruff Rhys 's words Hey Venus ! is " a straight up album of songs ... with key changes and a live band playing them " with more emphasis " on songs than the arrangement " . According to Rhys " nobody brought samplers into the studio , so there 's far less electronics than on a lot of our records ... a lot of electronic music is quite a solitary pursuit . You sit at your computer or sampler and sometimes it 's more of an individual kind of thing . Whereas with this record , we were trying to play as a band : a five people at once kind of record . " 
 Along with the bass , drums and guitar , several other instruments were used during recording including a dulcimer ( for its " sixties spy movie sound " ) , an electric saz ( on " Into the Night " ) , an " electric @-@ sitar box " ( " Like a drum machine for Indian musicians " ) and a harpsichord which , according to Guto Pryce , was used on a lot of songs " because it was there [ Miraval studios ] , and it was more in tune than the pianos " . The latter had a strong influence on the album with Rhys stating : " when we found the harpsichord everything started to go 1960s ... and we kind of followed that feeling ... " Although Gruff Rhys had initially told fans to expect a " speaker @-@ blowing " LP the addition of instruments such as the harpsichord meant this was not the case ; the album instead highlights the band 's " musical sweet tooth " . 
 The band enlisted the help of several musicians when making the album including string arranger Sean O 'Hagan ( of The High Llamas ) , percussionist Kris Jenkins and others who the group have " built up relationships with over the years ... the brass players we 've toured with a lot ... Sean O 'Hagan ... brought his string section in ... they 've played on almost all our records " . 
 Sixteen songs were recorded for the album with only 11 making the final cut . The band made a conscious decision to keep the number of tracks , and therefore the running time of Hey Venus ! , down " because the last three albums have been almost an hour long " . At just over 36 minutes , the album is the shortest full @-@ length release by the band . Some of the songs left off the record were " really heavy and raw " as a result of which Gruff Rhys feels Hey Venus ! is " more consistent with our back catalogue " . Both lead single " Show Your Hand " and " Suckers ! " were originally cut from the album , for being " too generic " and too " obvious ... melodically " respectively , until the band were persuaded to reconsider . Rough Trade Records boss Geoff Travis told the group that " Show Your Hand " was his favourite song and , following the tracks reworking to include a French horn part , it was reinstated . Similarly " Suckers ! " was " really pushed " by producer Dave Newfeld until it too took its place on Hey Venus ! . 
 The album was mixed by Chris Shaw and the Super Furry Animals at Rockfield Studios and the band 's own studio , <unk> , in Cardiff with Dave Newfeld performing additional mixing duties on " Suckers ! " Mastering was undertaken by Greg Calbi at Sterling Sound , New York . 
 Rhys has claimed to be particularly pleased with " Into the Night " ( which " was kind of where my head was at , which is quite a ridiculous place to be " ) and " Carbon Dating " ( " probably the most beautiful song on the record " ) while Huw Bunford has described the album as " one of [ the ] best records we 've ever made " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The album documents the life and adventures of a character called Venus as she moves " from a small town to a big metropolis " . The band have been consistent when describing this central story of " running away from relationships , breaking up in a small town , moving to the big city , losing yourself , having your innocence completely corrupted , and living to tell the tale as a wiser person " , however , several conflicting explanations have been given for the appearance of this narrative arc . Chief songwriter Gruff Rhys has claimed that Hey Venus ! was conceived as a concept album : 
 However both drummer Dafydd Ieuan and Rhys himself have contradicted this statement , Ieuan stating that , although there are " a number of crossovers between songs ... the similarities are more because all the songs were written during a certain period of time " , while Rhys claimed , in an interview with the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , that he only noticed the similar themes running through the songs after he had written them : 
 A third explanation was provided by Rhys during an interview with American music magazine ALARM when he claimed that the concept only came about when sleeve designer Keiichi Tanaami asked what the album was about : 
 After the Super Furry Animals had decided to call the album Hey Venus ! they remembered " slightly too late " that the name had already been used by Northern Irish band That Petrol Emotion for a single taken from their <unk> LP . However , as Rhys and Guto Pryce in particular were fans of the band , they reasoned that it " wasn 't necessarily a bad thing to share a name " with the song . 
 = = Cover = = 
 Hey Venus ! is the first Super Furry Animals studio album since 1996 's Fuzzy Logic without a cover designed by Pete Fowler . Instead , the band hired Japanese artist Keiichi Tanaami to produce the artwork for the album . According to bassist Guto Pryce the band were " blown away " by Tanaami 's art during a tour of Japan a few years before the release of Hey Venus ! : 
 The story of the Venus character helped the band give something to Tanaami that he " could read and maybe translate into a visual representation " . After hearing the album the artist came up with something " quite mental " according to Huw Bunford , who went on to state " it 's amazing what he obviously heard in the music " . 
 The album cover received some criticism from journalists but Gruff Rhys has called it " great " and claims to love the fact that the " graphics and the words are placed in kind of , what seem to be random places ... it 's not a predictable record cover , it doesn 't look like an album by the Editors or something " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Hey Venus ! was released on CD , vinyl and as a digital download on 27 August 2007 in the United Kingdom and was the band 's first release for new label Rough Trade Records . In the United States the album 's release was staggered with vinyl and download versions being made available on 28 August 2007 and the CD version being released on 22 January 2008 . The latter came packaged with a bonus CD containing the b @-@ sides of the " Show Your Hand " and " Run @-@ Away " singles as well as video footage of the band recording the improvised songs " Semi @-@ Professional " and " Hot Nutz " at Miraval Studios . Hey Venus ! reached number 11 on the UK Albums Chart and number 19 on Billboard magazine 's Top Heatseekers chart . 
 " Neo <unk> " impacted US radio on January 22 , 2008 . " Show Your Hand " and " Run @-@ Away " were released as singles in the UK although neither reached the Top 40 of the UK Singles Chart . " The Gift That Keeps Giving " was given away as a free download from the band 's website on Christmas Day 2007 . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Hey Venus ! received a generally favourable reception from critics with The Independent stating that the album " marks a welcome return to form for the Furries " and is " fit to challenge Rings Around the World and Phantom Power as their most satisfying work " and Artrocker calling it the Super Furry Animals ' " eighth excellent album in a row " . Allmusic hailed Hey Venus ! as a " full @-@ fledged return to pop power ... by far the tightest record SFA has released since Radiator " while Yahoo ! Music UK claimed the album is " among the greatest things [ the Super Furry Animals ] have ever done " . London 's Time Out described Hey Venus ! as " a treasure trove of left @-@ of @-@ centre sun @-@ pop that , by rights , should see them back on the radio all day , every day " and the NME claimed that the " melodies on Hey Venus ! are certain to ensnare new hearts in a way hardly any bands who 've been around as long as the Furries can " . 
 However , some reviews pointed out that the album has the " faint whiff of musical conservatism " with both Uncut and Q calling it a " missed opportunity " , the former going on to describe the record as " a consolidation of affairs rather than a step forward " and suggesting that , " while no means a stinker " it " must rank as their least adventurous " LP . Allmusic countered this opinion , stating that Hey Venus ! contains the kind of " subtle innovations that prove that the Furries can still surprise as they enter their second decade " : 
 The track " Run @-@ Away " was singled out for praise by several publications with the Independent on Sunday calling the song " outstanding " , Culture Deluxe claiming the track showed the Super Furries at " their pop @-@ best " and proved they " could do no wrong " and the NME stating that " with a chorus as big as guitarist Huw Bunford 's new serial @-@ killer beard , it 's up there with the most finely polished weapons in the SFA armoury " . " Baby Ate My <unk> " received some criticism , with The Independent claiming that it " falls short of expectations , its limp disco groove providing uncertain footing for Rhys 's rococo confection of harmonies " and Uncut stating that the song , along with " Neo Consumer " , doesn 't " tell us anything we didn 't already know " about the band . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 * denotes an unordered list 
 = = Tour = = 
 Following the release of Hey Venus ! in the United Kingdom the Super Furry Animals embarked on an 11 date tour of Great Britain and Ireland , ending with two shows at London 's Roundhouse . The group visited Japan and Europe before a US and Canadian tour in January and February 2008 during which fans could vote for songs they wanted to hear by using a " voting widget " on the blog page of the Super Furries ' American record label , Beggars Banquet US . 
 The band decided to keep the Hey Venus ! tour simple as the elaborate stage designs and costumes used on previous tours tended to wipe out any profits created , resulting in " financial melt @-@ down " for the group in 2006 . Huw Bunford told a Times journalist in August 2007 that the tour would be " like that bit at the end of the Mike <unk> shows where he said , ' And this is me ' , no <unk> @-@ <unk> . Just us . " Despite this the band did perform in front of a backdrop featuring the lighthouse from Tanaami 's cover art and frequently wore hand @-@ tailored suits , featuring patches designed by Tanaami , during shows . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Super Furry Animals . Lead vocals by Gruff Rhys unless otherwise stated .. 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to Hey Venus ! : 
 = = Album chart positions = = 
 = Monument Valley ( video game ) = 
 Monument Valley is a puzzle game developed and published by indie studio Ustwo . The player leads the princess Ida through mazes of optical illusions and impossible objects while manipulating the world around her to reach various platforms . Monument Valley was developed over ten months beginning in early 2013 based on concept drawings by company artist Ken Wong . Its visual style was inspired by Japanese prints , minimalist sculpture , and indie games Windosill , Fez , and Sword & Sworcery , and was compared by critics to M. C. Escher drawings and Echochrome . The art was designed such that each frame would be worthy of public display . After a closed beta test , it was released for iOS on April 3 , 2014 , and was later ported to Android and Windows Phone . The game received generally favorable reviews . Critics praised its art and sound design , but noted its lack of difficulty and short length . It won a 2014 Apple Design Award , was named Apple 's best iPad game of 2014 , and sold over two million copies by January 2015 ; by May 2016 , sales of the game exceeded 26 million . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Monument Valley , player @-@ character princess Ida journeys through mazes of optical illusions and impossible objects , which are referred to as " sacred geometry " in @-@ game , as she journeys to be forgiven for something . The game is presented in isometric view , and the player interacts with the environment to find hidden passages as Ida progresses to the map 's exit . Each of the ten levels has a different central mechanic . Interactions include moving platforms and pillars , and creating bridges . The player is indirectly cued through the game by design elements like color , and directly cued by crow people , who block Ida 's path . Critics compared the game 's visual style to a vibrant M. C. Escher drawing and Echochrome . The game includes a camera mode where the player can roam the level to compose screenshots . It includes filters similar to those of Instagram . 
 = = Development = = 
 Monument Valley was developed by Ustwo , a digital design firm founded in 2004 that has produced iPhone apps since 2007 . Their Whale Trail game received millions of downloads , and their other apps include design app <unk> and photo sharing app Rando . Monument Valley was conceived as a touch game for tablets . Its development began in the beginning of 2013 , and lasted 10 months . It began with a piece of concept art drawn in the style of M. C. Escher , and the final design did not deviate far from this original . Ustwo management did not give the development team a timeline or budget , and instead told them to focus on " making a high @-@ quality product " . Games development is not a large portion of Ustwo 's revenue , so the company focuses its games development on producing " great products " that reflect well on the company , rather than highly profitable apps . 
 Of the art style , game designer and artist Ken Wong said he aspired to make each frame of the gameplay worthy of public display . The project began as Wong 's concept drawings before it became a game project . The visual style was inspired by Japanese prints , minimalist sculpture , and indie games Windosill , Fez , and Superbrothers : Sword & Sworcery EP . Wong added that the gameplay was designed to let the player find the object of the game through exploration , without direct guidance . The game uses colors to signify where the player can interact , similar to Mirror 's Edge . Wong compared the gameplay experience to a cross between the wonder of a toy shop and the world of The Lion , the Witch , and the Wardrobe , and its story to a symbolic " song " rather than a narrative book . The game was designed to be completed by most players , a style uncommon for games designed for popular audiences . It was intended to be a " premium experience " rather than a difficult challenge . 
 The game was in beta as of December 2013 , where it had over 1 @,@ 000 testers and the average finish time was 90 minutes . It was planned as an iPad exclusive . The game was initially released for iOS on April 3 , 2014 , and the company recouped their cost of development within the first two weeks of release . An Android port went through two beta tests and was later released on May 14 , 2014 . More levels were in development , as of April 2014 . Ustwo said they were adding the levels for " artistic reasons " , such as ideas they wanted to try but could not fit into the original release . Wong stated that , with consumer interest , the company would consider porting the game to other platforms . The game 's technical director said that the game was " not very difficult to port " since it was written in the Unity game engine . But as the game was built with a portrait ( vertical ) screen orientation in mind , the developer had difficulty converting the game for devices with landscape @-@ oriented ( horizontal ) screens , such as the YouTube trailer video format and the PlayStation Vita . 
 An add @-@ on expansion , entitled Forgotten Shores , was released for iOS devices on November 12 , 2014 , on the Appstore on November 20 , 2014 and on Google Play Store on November 24 , 2014 . This adds eight additional levels to the ten in the original game . A Windows Phone port was released on April 30 , 2015 . 
 The game 's soundtrack features music by Stafford <unk> , <unk> , and Grigori . A limited edition vinyl two @-@ volume recording is set to be released by Ustwo and iam8bit sometime in the second quarter of 2016 , and will include the music from the main game and its two expansions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . It immediately went to the top of the App Store paid apps chart , where it stayed for at least a month based on strong reviews and word of mouth . It was chosen as an App Store Editor 's Choice and later both received a 2014 Apple Design Award and was named Apple 's best iPad game of 2014 . Pocket Gamer gave the game their gold award , and their Harry Slater wrote that there was " nothing else like Monument Valley on the App Store " . 
 Multiple reviewers cited the art and sound design as exceptional . Edge added that the sound design 's addition of " deep rumbles " and environmental " clicks " gave the game the feeling of Tomb Raider 's moving " ancient mechanisms " . TouchArcade 's Shaun Musgrave called the visuals " almost impossibly gorgeous " , and Wired wrote that the game " might be the most beautiful iPad game of 2014 " . Creative Review called the game 's puzzles " clever " and appreciated the developers ' attention to detail . 
 While Polygon 's Danielle Riendeau praised the puzzle design , other critics noted its lack of difficulty and short length . Riendeau wrote that the puzzles solutions always felt intuitive and never felt frustrating . She found " everything " about the game to be " soothing , almost hypnotic " . Edge thought that the game did not present a " genuine " challenge , and that the puzzles did not " find fresh ways to confound and delight " until the final levels . The magazine compared the game to " assembling flat @-@ pack furniture " : straightforward in its process , but rewarding in its transformation . Harry Slater of Pocket Gamer wrote that the game was " almost breathtakingly unique " . Riendeau said she finished the game in under three hours , and TouchArcade 's Shaun Musgrave , who could not " even begin to imagine anyone getting stuck on ... the puzzles " , put the game 's length at " an hour and change " . Jeff Marchiafava of Game Informer wanted more content . He was also unsatisfied with the game 's narrative , which he found " obtuse " and " vague " to a fault . Musgrave of TouchArcade thought that while games that focus on experiences can be shorter , Monument Valley did not last long enough " for the mechanics to reach their full potential " , though the time was " just about right " for the story . 
 Monument Valley sold 500 @,@ 000 copies in a month , and one million copies in three months . In November 2014 , the game had sold 1 @.@ 4 million copies and by January 2015 , the game had sold 2 @.@ 4 million copies . In January 2015 , Ustwo noted that the game had seen a large amount of software piracy , with 95 % of the installs on Android and 60 % on iOS devices coming from unpaid copies ; the company asserted some of these may include users installing on multiple devices but believe the majority was though users that had not purchased the title . While these numbers were discouraging , the company asserted it will continue to develop premium titles for mobile devices . Despite the piracy , Ustwo stated they have exceeded $ 6 million in revenue from sales of the game as of mid @-@ January 2015 , exceeding the $ 1 @.@ 4 million in development costs . By January 2016 , <unk> reported that more than 24 million users have downloaded the game , the ten @-@ fold increase from 2015 partially due to legitimate giveaways of the game through Apple 's App Store , Google Play , and Amazon Underground . Of about seven million of the free downloads through Apple , about 35 % of them purchased the " Forgotten Shores " expansion . Ustwo reported total sales over $ 14 million from 26 million copies by May 2016 . 
 The game was named as a finalist for Innovation Award , Best Visual Art , and Best <unk> / Mobile Game for the 2015 Game Developers Choice Awards , and was an honorable mention for Best Design . The game was also named a finalist for Outstanding Achievement in Art Direction , Outstanding Achievement in Game Direction , Outstanding Innovation in Gaming , Mobile Game of the Year , and the D.I.C.E. Spirit Award for the 18th Annual D.I.C.E. Awards by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences . The title won the BAFTA Video Game Awards for best " British Game " and " Mobile / Handheld Game " , while nominated for " Best Game " , " Artistic Achievement " , and " Original Property " awards . Time magazine placed the game on their best of list while being Game Informer 's " Editor 's Choice " for " Best Mobile Exclusive " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The game was a " minor plot point " in the third season of House of Cards , in which Frank Underwood plays the game ; he is inspired by video gamer reviewer Thomas Yates 's elegant description of Monument Valley to bring the reviewer on as his biographer . According to the studio Ustwo , they were approached by Netflix about including the game in the story , and the studio readily agreed without any financial compensation . They made a specialized version of the game for the show to aid in filming and to meet a description of the game provided within the script for the first episode in which it appeared . Ustwo saw the opportunity to introduce the title to a different audience set , and have already seen an increase in sales as a result of this appearance . The game re @-@ entered the top of the most download app charts on the major app stores a few days after the February 2015 release of the season on Netflix . Monument Valley characters were added to the cast of Crossy Road in late 2015 . Jaz Rignall ( USgamer ) noted that the 2015 Lara Croft Go appeared to have been influenced by Monument Valley . 
 = Ihr werdet weinen und heulen , BWV 103 = 
 Ihr werdet weinen und heulen ( You shall weep and wail ) , BWV 103 , is a cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach , a church cantata for the third Sunday after Easter , called Jubilate ( Jubilate Sunday ) . 
 Bach composed the cantata in his second year as Thomaskantor in Leipzig and first performed it on 22 April 1725 . It is the first of nine cantatas on texts by Christiana Mariana von Ziegler , which Bach composed at the end of his second annual cycle of cantatas in Leipzig . Based on the Gospel reading from the Farewell Discourse , where Jesus , announcing that he will leave , says " your sorrow shall be turned into joy " , Bach contrasts music of sorrow and joy , notably in the unusual first movement , where he inserts an almost operatic recitative of Jesus in the fugal choral setting . The architecture of the movement combines elements of the usual concerto form with the more text @-@ related older form of a motet . Bach scores an unusual flauto piccolo ( descant recorder in D ) as an obbligato instrument in an aria contemplating the sorrow of missing Jesus , who is addressed as a doctor who shall heal the wounds of sins . Bach scores a trumpet in only one movement , an aria expressing the joy about the predicted return of Jesus . The cantata in six movements closes with a chorale , the ninth stanza of Paul Gerhardt 's hymn " <unk> Vater , <unk> Gott " . 
 = = History and words = = 
 Bach composed the cantata in Leipzig for third Sunday after Easter , called Jubilate . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the First Epistle of Peter , " Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man " ( 1 Peter 2 : 11 – 20 ) , and from the Gospel of John , Jesus announcing his second coming in the so @-@ called Farewell Discourse , saying " your sorrow shall be turned into joy " ( John 16 : 16 – 23 ) . For this occasion Bach had already composed in 1714 Weinen , Klagen , Sorgen , Zagen , BWV 12 , which he used later as the basis for the movement Crucifixus in his Mass in B minor . 
 In his second year in Leipzig , Bach composed chorale cantatas between the first Sunday after Trinity and Palm Sunday , but for Easter he returned to cantatas on more varied texts , possibly because he lost his librettist . Nine of his cantatas for consecutive occasions in the period between Easter and Pentecost are based on texts by Christiana Mariana von Ziegler , this one being the first of the series especially written for Bach . He had possibly commissioned them in 1724 for his first cantata cycle but not composed them at that time , because of his exceptional workload in creating the St John Passion . 
 The librettist begins with a quotation from the Gospel , verse 20 , and concludes with the ninth stanza of Paul Gerhardt 's hymn " <unk> Vater , <unk> Gott " ( 1653 ) . Her own poetry reflects , in a sequence of recitatives and arias , in two movements sadness at the loss of Jesus , and in two others joy at his predicted return . Bach edited her writing considerably , for example in movement 4 , excising two lines of four and rephrasing the others . 
 Bach first performed the cantata on 22 April 1725 with the Thomanerchor . For later performances , he revised the instrumentation , replacing the flauto piccolo by a flauto traverso . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 The cantata in six movements is scored for three vocal soloists ( alto , tenor and bass ) , a four @-@ part choir , trumpet , flauto piccolo ( descant recorder in D ) , two oboes d 'amore , two violins , viola and continuo . 
 Chorus and arioso ( bass ) : Ihr werdet weinen und heulen 
 Recitative ( tenor ) : Wer <unk> nicht in Klagen <unk> 
 Aria ( alto ) : Kein Arzt ist <unk> dir zu <unk> 
 Recitative ( alto ) : Du wirst mich nach der Angst auch <unk> <unk> 
 Aria ( tenor ) : <unk> euch , betrübte Sinnen 
 Chorale : Ich hab dich einen Augenblick 
 = = Music = = 
 The cantata begins in B minor , illustrating sorrow , but in movement 4 shifts to the relative major key of D major , illustrating the theme of consolation in Ziegler 's text . 
 The opening chorus has an unusual structure , which includes an arioso passage for the bass voice . All instruments except the trumpet play a ritornello , after which a choral fugue pictures the weeping and wailing of the text in unrelated musical material , rich in chromaticism . In great contrast the following line , " aber die Welt wird sich <unk> " ( But the world will rejoice ) , is conveyed by the chorus embedded in a repeat of the first part of the ritornello . The sequence is repeated on a larger scale : this time the fugue renders both lines of the text as a double fugue with the second theme taken from the ritornello , then the ritornello is repeated in its entirety . The bass as the vox Christi ( voice of Christ ) sings three times , with a sudden tempo change to adagio , " Ihr aber werdet <unk> sein " ( But you will be sad ) as an accompagnato recitative . Musicologist Julian Mincham notes : " This recitative is a mere eight bars long but its context and <unk> give it enormous dramatic impact . Bach 's lack of respect for the conservative Leipzig authorities ' dislike of operatic styles in religious music was never more apparent ! " Klaus Hofmann compares the recitative 's " highly expressive melody and harmony " to Bach 's Passions . Finally , the extended sequence of fugue and ritornello with chorus returns transposed , on the text " Doch <unk> <unk> soll in Freude <unk> werden " ( Yet your sorrow shall be changed into joy ) . According to Alfred Dürr , the architecture of the movement is a large scale experiment combining elements of the older style of a text @-@ related motet with the form of a concerto of instrumental groups and voices , as typically used by Bach . 
 John Eliot Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage with the Monteverdi Choir in 2000 , notes that Bach 's " strategy is to superimpose these opposite moods , binding them in a mutually enlightening whole and emphasising that it is the same God who both dispenses and then ameliorates these conditions . 
 Movement 2 is a secco recitative for tenor , concluding in an arioso section with a " deeply moving " melisma on the word " <unk> " ( sorrows ) . Movement 3 , " Kein Arzt ist <unk> dir zu <unk> " ( Besides You is no doctor to be found ) is an aria for alto with the obbligato flauto piccolo , which according to Mincham , employs a " figuration ever striving upwards , moderates the underlying sense of potential tragedy " . The alto recitative " marks a change of scene " , it begins in B minor , like the opening chorus , but modulates to D @-@ major and ends with a wide @-@ ranging coloratura marking the word " Freude " ( joy ) . Movement 5 , " <unk> euch , betrübte Sinnen " ( <unk> now , O troubled feelings ) , picks up the joyful coloraturas , supported by the trumpet and fanfares in triads in the orchestra , Mincham notes that the trumpet " bursts upon us with an energy , acclamation and jubilation unheard , so far , in this work " . The cantata is closed with a four @-@ part setting of the chorale , sung to the melody of " Was mein Gott will , das g <unk> <unk> " which Bach used frequently , including in his St Matthew Passion . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The sortable table are excerpt from the selection on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . For several recordings , the name of the bass soloist is not provided . The type of choir and orchestra is roughly shown as a large group by red background , and as an ensemble with period instruments in historically informed performance by green background . 
 = OPEC = 
 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC , / <unk> / OH @-@ <unk> , or <unk> in several other languages ) is an intergovernmental organization of 14 nations , founded in 1960 in Baghdad by the first five members , and headquartered since 1965 in Vienna . As of 2015 , the 14 countries accounted for 43 percent of global oil production and 73 percent of the world 's " proven " oil reserves , giving OPEC a major influence on global oil prices . 
 OPEC 's stated mission is " to coordinate and unify the petroleum policies of its member countries and ensure the stabilization of oil markets , in order to secure an efficient , economic and regular supply of petroleum to consumers , a steady income to producers , and a fair return on capital for those investing in the petroleum industry . " As of July 2016 , OPEC 's members are Algeria , Angola , Ecuador , Gabon , Indonesia , Iran , Iraq , Kuwait , Libya , Nigeria , Qatar , Saudi Arabia ( the de facto leader ) , United Arab Emirates , and Venezuela . Two @-@ thirds of OPEC 's oil production and reserves are in its six Middle Eastern countries that surround the oil @-@ rich Persian Gulf . 
 The formation of OPEC marked a turning point toward national sovereignty over natural resources , and OPEC decisions have come to play a prominent role in the global oil market and international relations . The effect can be particularly strong when wars or civil disorders lead to extended interruptions in supply . In the 1970s , restrictions in oil production led to a dramatic rise in oil prices and OPEC revenue and wealth , with long @-@ lasting and far @-@ reaching consequences for the global economy . In the 1980s , OPEC started setting production targets for its member nations ; and generally when the production targets are reduced , oil prices increase . In December 2014 , " OPEC and the oil men " ranked as # 3 on Lloyd 's list of " the top 100 most influential people in the shipping industry " – although their influence on international trade is periodically challenged by the expansion of non @-@ OPEC energy sources , and by the recurring temptation for individual OPEC members to exceed production ceilings . 
 = = Membership = = 
 = = = Current member countries = = = 
 As of July 2016 , OPEC has 14 member countries : six in the Middle East ( Western Asia ) , one in Southeast Asia , five in Africa , and two in South America . Their combined rate of oil production represented 43 percent of the world 's total in 2015 , and they accounted for 73 percent of the world 's " proven " oil reserves , including 48 percent from just the six Middle Eastern members : 
 In October 2015 , Sudan formally submitted an application to join OPEC . Approval of a new member country requires agreement by three @-@ fourths of the existing members , including all five of the founders . 
 = = = <unk> members = = = 
 For countries that export petroleum at relatively low volume , their limited negotiating power as OPEC members would not necessarily justify the burdens imposed by OPEC production quotas and membership costs . Ecuador withdrew from OPEC in December 1992 , because it was unwilling to pay the annual US $ 2 million membership fee and felt that it needed to produce more oil than it was allowed under its OPEC quota at the time , although it rejoined in October 2007 . Similar concerns prompted Gabon to suspend membership in January 1995 ; it rejoined in July 2016 . In May 2008 , Indonesia announced that it would leave OPEC when its membership expired at the end of that year , having become a net importer of oil and being unable to meet its production quota . It rejoined the organization in January 2016 . 
 Some commentators consider that the United States was a de facto member of OPEC during its formal occupation of Iraq , due to its leadership of the Coalition Provisional Authority in 2003 – 2004 . But this is not borne out by the minutes of OPEC meetings , as no US representative attended in an official capacity . 
 = = = Observers = = = 
 Since the 1980s , representatives from Egypt , Mexico , Norway , Oman , Russia , and other oil @-@ exporting nations have attended many OPEC meetings as observers , as an informal mechanism for coordinating policies . 
 = = = Leadership and decision @-@ making = = = 
 The OPEC Conference is the supreme authority of the organization , and consists of delegations normally headed by the oil ministers of member countries . The chief executive of the organization is the OPEC Secretary General . The Conference ordinarily meets at the Vienna headquarters , at least twice a year and in additional extraordinary sessions when necessary . It generally operates on the principles of unanimity and " one member , one vote " , with each country paying an equal membership fee into the annual budget . However , since Saudi Arabia is by far the largest and most @-@ profitable oil exporter in the world , with enough capacity to function as the traditional swing producer to balance the global market , it serves as " OPEC 's de facto leader " . 
 = = = International cartel = = = 
 At various times , OPEC members have displayed apparent anti @-@ competitive cartel behavior through the organization 's agreements about oil production and price levels . In fact , economists often cite OPEC as a textbook example of a cartel that cooperates to reduce market competition , as in this definition from OECD 's Glossary of Industrial Organisation Economics and Competition Law : 
 International commodity agreements covering products such as coffee , sugar , tin and more recently oil ( OPEC : Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ) are examples of international cartels which have publicly entailed agreements between different national governments . 
 OPEC members strongly prefer to describe their organization as a modest force for market stabilization , rather than a powerful anti @-@ competitive cartel . In its defense , the organization was founded as a counterweight against the previous " Seven Sisters " cartel of multinational oil companies , and non @-@ OPEC energy suppliers have always had enough market share to maintain a substantial degree of worldwide competition . Moreover , widespread cheating within OPEC largely neutralizes its collective ability to influence global oil prices through members ' agreements . 
 OPEC has not been involved in any disputes related to the competition rules of the World Trade Organization , even though the objectives , actions , and principles of the two organizations diverge considerably . A key US District Court decision held that OPEC consultations are protected as " governmental " acts of state by the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act , and are therefore beyond the legal reach of US competition law governing " commercial " acts . Despite popular sentiment against OPEC , legislative proposals to limit sovereign immunity , such as the <unk> Act , have so far been unsuccessful . 
 = = = Conflicts = = = 
 OPEC often has difficulty agreeing on policy decisions because its member countries differ widely in their oil export capacities , production costs , reserves , geological features , population , economic development , and political circumstances . Indeed , oil reserves can themselves become a source of serious conflict and instability , in what economists call the " natural resource curse " . A further complication is that religion @-@ linked conflicts in the Middle East are recurring features of the geopolitical landscape for this oil @-@ rich region . Internationally important conflicts in OPEC 's history have included the Six @-@ Day War ( 1967 ) , Yom Kippur War ( 1973 ) , a hostage siege directed by Palestinian militants ( 1975 ) , the Iranian Revolution ( 1979 ) , Iran – Iraq War ( 1980 – 1988 ) , Iraqi occupation of Kuwait ( 1990 – 1991 ) , September 11 attacks by mostly Saudi hijackers ( 2001 ) , American occupation of Iraq ( 2003 – 2011 ) , Conflict in the Niger Delta ( 2004 – present ) , Arab Spring ( 2010 – 2012 ) , Libyan Crisis ( 2011 – present ) , and international Embargo against Iran ( 2012 – 2016 ) . Although events such as these can temporarily disrupt oil supplies and elevate prices , the frequent disputes and instabilities tend to limit OPEC 's long @-@ term cohesion and effectiveness . 
 = = Market information = = 
 As one area in which OPEC members have been able to cooperate productively over the decades , the organization has significantly improved the quality and quantity of information available about the international oil market . 
 = = = Publications and research = = = 
 In April 2001 , OPEC collaborated with five other international organizations ( APEC , Eurostat , IEA , <unk> , <unk> ) to improve the availability and reliability of oil data . They launched the Joint Oil Data Exercise , which in 2005 was joined by <unk> and renamed the Joint Organisations Data Initiative ( <unk> ) , covering more than 90 percent of the global oil market . <unk> joined as an eighth partner in 2014 , enabling <unk> also to cover nearly 90 percent of the global market for natural gas . 
 Since 2007 , OPEC has published the " World Oil Outlook " ( <unk> ) annually , in which it presents a comprehensive analysis of the global oil industry including medium- and long @-@ term projections for supply and demand . OPEC also produces an " Annual Statistical Bulletin " ( ASB ) , and publishes more @-@ frequent updates in its " Monthly Oil Market Report " ( <unk> ) and " OPEC Bulletin " . 
 = = = Crude oil benchmarks = = = 
 A " crude oil benchmark " is a standardized petroleum product that serves as a convenient reference price for buyers and sellers of crude oil . Benchmarks are used because oil prices differ based on variety , grade , delivery date and location , and other legal requirements . 
 The OPEC Reference Basket of <unk> has been an important benchmark for oil prices since 2000 . It is calculated as a weighted average of prices for petroleum blends from the OPEC member countries : Saharan Blend ( Algeria ) , <unk> ( Angola ) , Oriente ( Ecuador ) , Rabi Light ( Gabon ) , Minas ( Indonesia ) , Iran Heavy ( Islamic Republic of Iran ) , Basra Light ( Iraq ) , Kuwait Export ( Kuwait ) , Es Sider ( Libya ) , Bonny Light ( Nigeria ) , Qatar Marine ( Qatar ) , Arab Light ( Saudi Arabia ) , <unk> ( UAE ) , and <unk> ( Venezuela ) . 
 North Sea Brent Crude Oil is the leading benchmark for Atlantic basin crude oils , and is used to price approximately two @-@ thirds of the world 's traded crude oil . Other well @-@ known benchmarks are West Texas Intermediate ( <unk> ) , Dubai Crude , Oman Crude , and Urals oil . 
 = = = Spare capacity = = = 
 The US Energy Information Administration , the statistical arm of the US Department of Energy , defines spare capacity for crude oil market management " as the volume of production that can be brought on within 30 days and sustained for at least 90 days ... OPEC spare capacity provides an indicator of the world oil market 's ability to respond to potential crises that reduce oil supplies . " 
 In November 2014 , the International Energy Agency ( IEA ) estimated that OPEC 's " effective " spare capacity , adjusted for ongoing disruptions in countries like Libya and Nigeria , was 3 @.@ 5 million barrels per day ( 560 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) and that this number would increase to a peak in 2017 of 4 @.@ 6 million barrels per day ( 730 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) . By November 2015 , the IEA changed its assessment " with OPEC 's spare production buffer stretched thin , as Saudi Arabia – which holds the lion 's share of excess capacity – and its Gulf neighbours pump at near @-@ record rates . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Post @-@ WWII situation = = = 
 In 1949 , Venezuela and Iran took the earliest steps in the direction of OPEC , by inviting Iraq , Kuwait and Saudi Arabia to improve communication among petroleum @-@ exporting nations as the world recovered from World War II . At the time , some of the world 's largest oil fields were just entering production in the Middle East . The United States had established the Interstate Oil Compact Commission to join the Texas Railroad Commission in limiting overproduction . The US was simultaneously the world 's largest producer and consumer of oil ; and the world market was dominated by a group of multinational companies known as the " Seven Sisters " , five of which were headquartered in the US . 
 = = = 1959 – 1960 anger from exporting countries = = = 
 In February 1959 , the multinational oil companies ( MOCs ) unilaterally reduced their posted prices for Venezuelan and Middle Eastern crude oil by 10 percent . Weeks later , the first Arab Petroleum Congress convened in Cairo , Egypt , where the influential journalist Wanda Jablonski introduced Saudi Arabia 's Abdullah Tariki to Venezuela 's Juan Pablo Pérez Alfonzo . Both oil ministers were angered by the price cuts , and the two led their fellow delegates to establish the Maadi Pact or Gentlemen 's Agreement , calling for an " Oil Consultation Commission " of exporting countries , to which MOCs should present price @-@ change plans . Jablonski reported a marked hostility toward the West and a growing outcry against " absentee <unk> " of the MOCs , which at the time controlled all oil operations within the exporting countries and wielded enormous political influence . In August 1960 , ignoring the warnings , and with the US favoring Canadian and Mexican oil for strategic reasons , the MOCs again unilaterally announced significant cuts in their posted prices for Middle Eastern crude oil . 
 = = = 1960 – 1975 founding and expansion = = = 
 The following month , during 10 – 14 September 1960 , the Baghdad Conference was held at the initiative of Tariki and Pérez Alfonzo . The governments of Iran , Iraq , Kuwait , Saudi Arabia and Venezuela met in Baghdad to discuss ways to increase the price of crude oil produced by their countries , and ways to respond to unilateral actions by the MOCs . Despite strong US opposition : " Together with Arab and non @-@ Arab producers , Saudi Arabia formed the Organization of Petroleum Export Countries ( OPEC ) to secure the best price available from the major oil corporations . " The Middle Eastern members originally called for OPEC headquarters to be in Baghdad or Beirut , but Venezuela argued for a neutral location , and so Geneva , Switzerland was chosen . On 1 September 1965 , OPEC moved to Vienna , Austria , after Switzerland declined to extend diplomatic privileges . 
 During 1961 – 1975 , the five founding nations were joined by Qatar ( 1961 ) , Indonesia ( 1962 – 2008 , rejoined 2016 ) , Libya ( 1962 ) , United Arab Emirates ( originally just the Emirate of Abu Dhabi , 1967 ) , Algeria ( 1969 ) , Nigeria ( 1971 ) , Ecuador ( 1973 – 1992 , rejoined 2007 ) , and Gabon ( 1975 – 1994 , rejoined 2016 ) . Indicating that OPEC is not averse to further expansion , Mohammed <unk> , OPEC 's Acting Secretary General in 2006 , urged his African neighbors Angola and Sudan to join , and Angola did in 2007 . Since the 1980s , representatives from Egypt , Mexico , Norway , Oman , Russia , and other oil @-@ exporting nations have attended many OPEC meetings as observers , as an informal mechanism for coordinating policies . 
 = = = 1973 – 1974 oil embargo = = = 
 In October 1973 , the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries ( <unk> , consisting of the Arab majority of OPEC plus Egypt and Syria ) declared significant production cuts and an oil embargo against the United States and other industrialized nations that supported Israel in the Yom Kippur War . A previous embargo attempt was largely ineffective in response to the Six @-@ Day War in 1967 . However , in 1973 , the result was a sharp rise in oil prices and OPEC revenues , from US $ 3 / bbl to US $ 12 / bbl , and an emergency period of energy rationing , intensified by panic reactions , a declining trend in US oil production , currency devaluations , and a lengthy UK coal @-@ miners dispute . For a time , the UK imposed an emergency three @-@ day workweek . Seven European nations banned non @-@ essential Sunday driving . US gas stations limited the amount of gasoline that could be dispensed , closed on Sundays , and restricted the days when gasoline could be purchased , based on license plate numbers . Even after the embargo ended in March 1974 following intense diplomatic activity , prices continued to rise . The world experienced a global economic recession , with unemployment and inflation surging simultaneously , steep declines in stock and bond prices , major shifts in trade balances and <unk> flows , and a dramatic end to the post @-@ WWII economic boom . 
 The 1973 – 1974 oil embargo had lasting effects on the United States and other industrialized nations , which established the International Energy Agency in response . Oil conservation efforts included lower speed limits on highways , smaller and more energy @-@ efficient cars and appliances , year @-@ round daylight saving time , reduced usage of heating and air @-@ conditioning , better insulation , increased support of mass transit , national emergency stockpiles , and greater emphasis on coal , natural gas , ethanol , nuclear and other alternative energy sources . These efforts became effective enough that US oil consumption would rise only 11 percent during 1980 – 2014 , while real GDP rose 150 percent . But in the 1970s , OPEC nations demonstrated convincingly that their oil could be used as both a political and economic weapon against other nations , at least in the short term . 
 = = = 1975 Special Fund = = = 
 OPEC 's international aid activities date from well before the 1973 – 1974 oil price explosion . For example , the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development has operated since 1961 . 
 OPEC added to its goals the selling of oil for the socio @-@ economic growth of poorer nations . The OPEC Special Fund was conceived in Algiers , Algeria , in March 1975 , and was formally established the following January . " A Solemn Declaration ' reaffirmed the natural solidarity which unites OPEC countries with other developing countries in their struggle to overcome underdevelopment , ' and called for measures to strengthen cooperation between these countries ... [ The Fund 's ] resources are additional to those already made available by OPEC states through a number of bilateral and multilateral channels . " The Fund became an official international development agency in May 1980 and was renamed the OPEC Fund for International Development ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = 1975 hostage siege = = = 
 On 21 December 1975 , Saudi Arabia 's Ahmed Zaki Yamani , Iran 's Jamshid Amuzegar , and the other OPEC oil ministers were taken hostage at their semi @-@ annual conference in Vienna , Austria . The attack , which killed three non @-@ ministers , was orchestrated by a six @-@ person team led by Venezuelan terrorist Carlos the Jackal , and which included Gabriele <unk> @-@ <unk> and Hans @-@ Joachim Klein . The self @-@ named " Arm of the Arab Revolution " group called for the liberation of Palestine . Carlos planned to take over the conference by force and hold for ransom all eleven attending oil ministers , except for Yamani and Amuzegar who were to be executed . 
 Carlos arranged bus and plane travel for his team and 42 of the original 63 hostages , with stops in Algiers and Tripoli , planning to fly eventually to Baghdad , where Yamani and Amuzegar were to be killed . All 30 non @-@ Arab hostages were released in Algiers , excluding Amuzegar . Additional hostages were released at another stop in Tripoli before returning to Algiers . With only 10 hostages remaining , Carlos held a phone conversation with Algerian President Houari <unk> , who informed Carlos that the oil ministers ' deaths would result in an attack on the plane . <unk> must also have offered Carlos asylum at this time and possibly financial compensation for failing to complete his assignment . Carlos expressed his regret at not being able to murder Yamani and Amuzegar , then he and his comrades left the plane . All the hostages and terrorists walked away from the situation , two days after it began . 
 Some time after the attack , Carlos 's accomplices revealed that the operation was commanded by Wadie Haddad , a founder of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine . They also claimed that the idea and funding came from an Arab president , widely thought to be Libya 's Muammar al @-@ Gaddafi . Fellow militants Bassam Abu Sharif and Klein claimed that Carlos received and kept a ransom between US $ 20 million and US $ 50 million from " an Arab president " . Carlos claimed that Saudi Arabia paid ransom on behalf of Iran , but that the money was " diverted en route and lost by the Revolution " . 
 = = = 1979 – 1980 oil crisis and 1980s oil glut = = = 
 In response to oil <unk> and the high prices of the 1970s , industrial nations took steps to reduce their dependence on OPEC oil , especially after prices reached new peaks approaching US $ 40 / bbl in 1979 – 1980 when the Iranian Revolution and Iran – Iraq War disrupted regional stability and oil supplies . Electric utilities worldwide switched from oil to coal , natural gas , or nuclear power ; national governments initiated multibillion @-@ dollar research programs to develop alternatives to oil ; and commercial exploration developed major non @-@ OPEC oilfields in Siberia , Alaska , the North Sea , and the Gulf of Mexico . By 1986 , daily worldwide demand for oil dropped by 5 million barrels , non @-@ OPEC production rose by an even @-@ larger amount , and OPEC 's market share sank from approximately 50 percent in 1979 to less than 30 percent in 1985 . The result was a six @-@ year decline in the price of oil , which culminated by plunging more than half in 1986 alone . 
 To combat falling revenue from oil sales , in 1982 Saudi Arabia pushed OPEC for audited national production quotas in an attempt to limit output and boost prices . When other OPEC nations failed to comply , Saudi Arabia first slashed its own production from 10 million barrels daily in 1979 – 1981 to just one @-@ third of that level in 1985 . When this proved ineffective , Saudi Arabia reversed course and flooded the market with cheap oil , causing prices to fall below US $ 10 / bbl and higher @-@ cost producers to become unprofitable . Faced with increasing economic hardship ( which ultimately contributed to the collapse of the Soviet bloc in 1989 ) , OPEC members that had previously failed to comply with quotas finally began to limit production to shore up prices , based on national quotas that sought to balance oil @-@ related and economic criteria since 1986 . ( Within their sovereign territories , the national governments of OPEC members are able to impose production limits on both government @-@ owned and private oil companies . ) Generally when OPEC production targets are reduced , oil prices increase . 
 = = = 1990 – 2011 responses to wars and instability = = = 
 Leading up to his 1990 Invasion of Kuwait , Iraqi President Saddam Hussein was pressuring OPEC to end overproduction and to push oil prices higher , in order to help OPEC members financially and to accelerate rebuilding from the 1980 – 1988 Iran – Iraq War . But these two Iraqi wars against fellow OPEC founders marked a low point in the cohesion of the organization , and oil prices subsided quickly after the short @-@ term supply disruptions . The 2001 September 11 attacks and the 2003 American invasion of Iraq had even milder short @-@ term impacts on oil prices , as Saudi Arabia and other exporters cooperated to keep the world adequately supplied . 
 Ecuador withdrew from OPEC in December 1992 , because it was unwilling to pay the annual US $ 2 million membership fee and felt that it needed to produce more oil than it was allowed under the OPEC quota , although it rejoined in October 2007 . Similar concerns prompted Gabon to suspend membership in January 1995 ; it rejoined in July 2016 . Iraq has remained a member of OPEC since the organization 's founding , but Iraqi production has not been a part of any OPEC quota agreements since 1998 , due to the country 's daunting political difficulties . 
 Lower demand triggered by the 1997 – 1998 Asian financial crisis saw the price of oil fall back to 1986 levels . After oil slumped to around US $ 10 / bbl , joint diplomacy achieved a gradual slowing of oil production by OPEC , Mexico and Norway . 
 In 2003 , the International Energy Agency ( IEA ) and OPEC held their first joint workshop on energy issues , and they have continued to meet regularly since then to " better understand trends , analysis and viewpoints and advance market transparency and predictability . " 
 Widespread insurgency and sabotage during the 2003 – 2008 height of the American occupation of Iraq , combined with rapidly increasing oil demand from China and investors , recurring violence against the Nigerian oil industry , and dwindling spare capacity as a cushion against global supply disruptions , prompted a sharp rise in oil prices to levels far higher than those previously targeted by OPEC . Price volatility reached an extreme in 2008 , as <unk> crude oil surged to a record US $ 147 / bbl in July and then plunged to just US $ 32 / bbl in December , during the worst global recession since World War II . OPEC 's annual oil export revenue also set a new record in 2008 , estimated around US $ 800 billion , and would go on to approximate US $ 1 trillion in 2011 – 2013 before plunging again . By the time of the 2011 Libyan Civil War and Arab Spring , OPEC was calling for more efforts by governments and regulatory bodies to curb " excessive speculation " in oil futures markets , blaming financial speculators for increasing volatility in prices , disconnected from market fundamentals . 
 In May 2008 , Indonesia announced that it would leave OPEC when its membership expired at the end of that year , having become a net importer of oil and being unable to meet its production quota . A statement released by OPEC on 10 September 2008 confirmed Indonesia 's withdrawal , noting that OPEC " regretfully accepted the wish of Indonesia to suspend its full membership in the organization , and recorded its hope that the country would be in a position to rejoin the organization in the not @-@ too @-@ distant future . " 
 = = = 2008 production dispute = = = 
 The differing economic needs of OPEC member states often affect the internal politics behind OPEC production quotas . Poorer members have pushed for reductions in OPEC production , to increase the price of oil and thus their own revenues . These proposals conflict with Saudi Arabia 's stated long @-@ term strategy of being a partner with the world 's economic powers to ensure a steady flow of oil that would support economic expansion . Part of the basis for this policy is the Saudi concern that overly expensive oil or unreliable supply will drive industrial nations to conserve and develop alternative fuels , curtailing the worldwide demand for oil . To this point , Saudi Oil Minister Yamani famously said in 1973 : " The Stone Age didn 't end because we ran out of stones . " 
 On 10 September 2008 , a production dispute occurred when the Saudis reportedly walked out of a negotiating session where rival members voted to reduce OPEC output . Although Saudi delegates officially endorsed the new quotas , they stated anonymously that they would not observe them . The New York Times quoted one such delegate as saying : " Saudi Arabia will meet the market 's demand . We will see what the market requires and we will not leave a customer without oil . The policy has not changed . " 
 = = = 2014 – 2016 oil glut = = = 
 During 2014 – 2015 , OPEC members consistently exceeded their production ceiling , and China experienced a marked slowdown in economic growth . At the same time , US oil production nearly doubled from 2008 levels and approached the world @-@ leading " swing producer " volumes of Saudi Arabia and Russia , due to substantial improvements in shale " fracking " technology in response to record oil prices . These developments led in turn to a plunge in US oil import requirements ( on a path toward energy independence ) , a record volume of worldwide oil inventories , and a collapse in oil prices that continued into early 2016 . 
 In spite of global oversupply , on 27 November 2014 in Vienna , Saudi Oil Minister Ali Al @-@ <unk> blocked appeals from poorer OPEC members for production cuts to support prices . <unk> argued that the oil market should be left to rebalance itself at lower price levels , strategically rebuilding OPEC 's long @-@ term market share by ending the profitability of high @-@ cost US shale oil production . As he explained in an interview : 
 Is it reasonable for a highly efficient producer to reduce output , while the producer of poor efficiency continues to produce ? That is crooked logic . If I reduce , what happens to my market share ? The price will go up and the Russians , the Brazilians , US shale oil producers will take my share ... We want to tell the world that high @-@ efficiency producing countries are the ones that deserve market share . That is the operative principle in all capitalist countries ... One thing is for sure : Current prices [ roughly US $ 60 / bbl ] do not support all producers . 
 A year later , when OPEC met in Vienna on 4 December 2015 , the organization had exceeded its production ceiling for 18 consecutive months , US oil production had declined only slightly from its peak , world markets appeared to be oversupplied by at least 2 million barrels per day despite Libya producing 1 million barrels below capacity , oil producers were making major adjustments to withstand prices as low as the $ 40s , Indonesia was rejoining the export organization , Iraqi production had surged after years of disorder , Iranian output was poised to rebound with the lifting of international sanctions , hundreds of world leaders at the Paris Agreement were committing to limit carbon emissions from fossil fuels , and solar technologies were becoming steadily more competitive and prevalent . In light of all these pressures , OPEC decided to set aside its ineffective production ceiling until the next ministerial conference in June 2016 . By 20 January 2016 , the OPEC Reference Basket was down to US $ 22 @.@ 48 / bbl – less than one @-@ fourth of its high from June 2014 ( $ 110 @.@ 48 ) , less than one @-@ sixth of its record from July 2008 ( $ 140 @.@ 73 ) , and back below the April 2003 starting point ( $ 23 @.@ 27 ) of its historic run @-@ up . 
 As 2016 continued , the oil glut was gradually trimmed with significant production offline in the US , Canada , Libya , Nigeria and China , and the price gradually rose back toward US $ 50 / bbl . OPEC maintained the status quo at its June conference , and endorsed " prices at levels that are suitable for both producers and consumers " , with the world waiting to see if and when and how the oil market would fully return to balance . 
 = George Koval = 
 George Abramovich Koval ( Russian : <unk> ( Георгий ) <unk> ́ <unk> <unk> ́ <unk> ; IPA : [ <unk> ( <unk> ) <unk> <unk> ] , Zhorzh Abramovich Koval , December 25 , 1913 – January 31 , 2006 ) was an American who acted as a Soviet intelligence officer . According to Russian sources , Koval 's infiltration of the Manhattan Project as a <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( GRU ) agent " drastically reduced the amount of time it took for Russia to develop nuclear weapons . " 
 Koval was born to Jewish immigrants in Sioux City , Iowa , USA . Shortly after reaching adulthood he traveled with his parents to the Soviet Union to settle in the Jewish Autonomous Region near the Chinese border . Koval was recruited by the Soviet Main Intelligence Directorate , trained , and assigned the code name <unk> . He returned to the United States in 1940 and was drafted into the US Army in early 1943 . Koval worked at atomic research laboratories and , according to the Russian government , relayed back to the Soviet Union information about the production processes and volumes of the polonium , plutonium , and uranium used in American atomic weaponry , and descriptions of the weapon production sites . In 1948 , Koval left on a European vacation but never returned to the United States . In 2007 Russian President Vladimir Putin posthumously awarded Koval the Hero of the Russian Federation decoration for " his courage and heroism while carrying out special missions " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Koval 's father , Abram Koval , left his home town of <unk> in Belarus to immigrate to the United States in 1910 . Abram , a carpenter , settled in Sioux City , Iowa , which at the turn of the 20th century was home to a sizeable Jewish population of merchants and craftsmen . He and his wife Ethel <unk> Koval raised three sons : Isaya , born 1912 ; George ( or Zhorzh ) , born Christmas 1913 ; and Gabriel , born 1919 . 
 George Koval attended Central High School , a red @-@ brick Victorian building better known as " the Castle on the Hill " . Neighbors recalled that Koval spoke openly of his Communist beliefs . While attending Central High he was a member of the Honor Society and the debate team . He graduated in 1929 at the age of 15 . Meanwhile , his parents left Sioux City as the Great Depression deepened . Abram Koval became the secretary for <unk> , the Organization for Jewish Colonization in the Soviet Union . Founded by American Jewish Communists in 1924 , the group helped to finance and publicize the development of the " Jewish Autonomous Region " – the Communist answer to Jewish emigration to the British Mandate of Palestine then being undertaken by the Zionist movement . The Koval family emigrated in 1932 , traveling with a United States family passport . They settled in <unk> , near the border of Manchuria . 
 The Koval family worked on a collective farm and were profiled by an American Communist daily newspaper in New York City . The journalist Paul Novick wrote to his readers that the family " had exchanged the uncertainty of life as small storekeepers ... for a worry @-@ free existence for themselves and their children . " While Isaya became a champion tractor driver , George Koval improved his Russian language skills in the collective and began studies at the Mendeleev Institute of Chemical Technology in 1934 . At the university he met and married fellow student Lyudmila Ivanova . Koval graduated with honors in five years and received Soviet citizenship . 
 = = Recruitment and espionage = = 
 Later , Koval was recruited by the Soviet Main Intelligence Directorate ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , or GRU . By the time he received his degree he had left Moscow under orders as part of a subterfuge . He was drafted into the Soviet army in 1939 to explain his sudden disappearance from the city . Though his parents had relinquished their US family passport , Koval returned to the US in 1940 , replacing a spy recalled during Stalin 's purges . His code name was <unk> . Arriving in San Francisco , he traveled to New York City . According to Arnold Kramish , an American colleague he befriended and with whom he re @-@ established contact in 2000 , it was there that Koval assumed deputy command of the local GRU cell . This outpost operated under the cover of the Raven Electric Company , a supplier to firms such as General Electric . Koval told coworkers he was a native New Yorker and an only child . He ingratiated himself with everyone he met . While Koval originally worked under a pseudonym , gathering information on toxins for use in chemical weapons , his handlers decided to have him work under his real name . 
 During the beginning of World War II , President Franklin D. Roosevelt had re @-@ introduced the draft ( conscription ) in September 1940 , and Koval registered for it on January 2 , 1941 . Raven Electric Company secured him a year 's deferment from service until February 1942 . According to historian Vladimir Lota , Koval 's handlers wanted him to steal information about chemical weapons , and felt that he would not be able to do so while drafted . When the deferment expired , Koval was inducted into the United States Army . He received basic training at Fort Dix in New Jersey before being sent to the Citadel in Charleston , South Carolina . There , Koval served as a private in the <unk> Specialized Training and <unk> Unit . On August 11 , 1943 , he was transferred to the Army Specialized Training Program , a unit established in December 1942 to provide talented enlistees with an education and technical training . Koval attended the City College of New York ( CCNY ) and studied electrical engineering . His CCNY classmates looked up to the older Koval as a role model and father figure who never did homework and was a noted ladies ' man , never knowing about his Soviet education and wife . Colleagues recalled that he never discussed politics or the Soviet Union . 
 = = = Atomic secrets = = = 
 The Specialized Training Program was dissolved in early 1944 , as the progress of the war tipped in favor of the Allies ; many of the CCNY classmates were transferred to the infantry , while Koval and a dozen others were selected for the Special Engineer Detachment . The Detachment was part of the covert project to design , engineer , and fabricate an atomic bomb — an American , Canadian and British initiative known as the Manhattan Project . Koval was assigned to Oak Ridge , Tennessee ; at the time , Project scientists were researching enriched uranium and plutonium @-@ based bombs , with the Oak Ridge laboratories central to the development of both . The Project suffered from a lack of human resources , and asked the Army for technically qualified men . 
 Koval enjoyed free access to much of Oak Ridge ; he was made a " health physics officer " , and monitored radiation levels across the facility . According to Federal Bureau of Investigation records , the job gave him top @-@ secret security clearance . At the time , Project scientists discovered reactor @-@ produced plutonium was too unstable for the intended bomb designs , and that polonium initiators ( urchin ) were needed for the necessary chain reactions to occur . Koval was charged by his handlers with watching Oak Ridge 's polonium supply to transmit information about it through a Soviet contact named " Clyde " . His information reached Moscow via coded dispatches , couriers , and the Soviet Embassy . Among the intelligence he sent was that Oak Ridge 's polonium was being sent to another Project site at Los Alamos National Laboratory . 
 Koval was transferred from Oak Ridge to a top @-@ secret lab in Dayton , Ohio on June 27 , 1945 , where polonium initiators were fabricated . The world 's first atomic bomb was detonated in New Mexico on July 16 of that year . Atomic bombs were dropped on Japan on August 6 and 9 , leading to Japan 's surrender and the end of World War II . The Soviet Union responded by increasing efforts to develop its own atomic bomb . While the American Central Intelligence Agency estimated the Soviets would not succeed until 1950 – 53 , the first Soviet atomic bomb was detonated on August 29 , 1949 . The initiator for the plutonium bomb was , according to Russian military officials , " prepared to the ' recipe ' provided by military intelligence agent Delmar [ Koval ] " . 
 = = Later years = = 
 After World War II , Koval was discharged from the Army . He returned to New York and CCNY , where he received his bachelor 's degree in electrical engineering on February 1 , 1948 . Telling his friends he was thinking about taking a trip to Poland or Israel , Koval secured a passport for six months ' travel to Europe . According to the Russian publication Rossiyskaya Gazeta , he might have left because American counter @-@ intelligence agents had discovered Soviet literature about his parents after being tipped off about the leak by a Soviet defector . He left by sea in October 1948 and never returned to his birth country . In Russia , he left the Soviet military with discharge papers as an untrained rifleman and the rank of private . His foreign background and service record made him " a very suspicious character " , he wrote to Kramish . Turned down for education and research positions , Koval turned to his old GRU contact , who secured him a job as a laboratory assistant at the Mendeleev Institute . Eventually , Koval managed to obtain a teaching job there ; his students often laughed at his foreign pronunciations for technical terms . 
 While other spies such as Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and Klaus Fuchs were caught after the war , Koval apparently went <unk> for years . Among the reasons given for his maintained cover was that inter @-@ service politics undermined efforts to perform proper security checks on employees . Another possibility is that the U.S. government chose scientific ability over clear records and political sympathies . In the 1950s , the FBI investigated his wartime activities and interviewed his former colleagues , leaving them with the impression that he might have been a spy . The matter was kept confidential for sixty years as the US was afraid of the damage that would result from the exposure of Koval 's activities . 
 In 1999 , Koval was living on his small pension in Russia and had heard that U.S. War Veterans like he could apply for U.S. Social Security Payments . He applied . In 2000 , the Social Security Administration 's Office of Central Operations , Baltimore , Maryland in this one sentence letter said , " We are writing to tell you that you do not qualify for retirement benefits . " 
 Koval described his 57 years of post @-@ spy life living in Russia as " uneventful " . His family knew he had done work for the GRU , but the subject was never discussed . He did not receive any high awards upon his return , a fact that bothered him . Bigger awards went to " career men " , he told Kramish . However , he ended his correspondence by saying that he was not protesting his treatment ; " [ I am thankful ] that I did not find myself in a Gulag , as might well have happened " . Koval died in his Moscow apartment on January 31 , 2006 , at the age of 92 . 
 Koval 's activities as a spy began to emerge after the publication of a 2002 book , The GRU and the Atomic Bomb , which mentioned Koval by his code name and listed him as one of a handful of spies who evaded counterintelligence groups . On November 3 , 2007 , he received the posthumous title of Hero of the Russian Federation bestowed by Russian President Vladimir Putin . When Koval was honored , the Russian presidential proclamation stated , " Mr Koval , who operated under the pseudonym Delmar , provided information that helped speed up considerably the time it took for the Soviet Union to develop an atomic bomb of its own " . 
 = Outer space = 
 Outer space , or just space , is the void that exists between celestial bodies , including the Earth . It is not completely empty , but consists of a hard vacuum containing a low density of particles , predominantly a plasma of hydrogen and helium as well as electromagnetic radiation , magnetic fields , neutrinos , dust and cosmic rays . The baseline temperature , as set by the background radiation from the Big Bang , is 2 @.@ 7 kelvins ( K ) ( − 270 @.@ 45 ° C ; − 454 @.@ 81 ° F ) . Plasma with a number density of less than one hydrogen atom per cubic metre and a temperature of millions of kelvins in the space between galaxies accounts for most of the baryonic ( ordinary ) matter in outer space ; local concentrations have condensed into stars and galaxies . In most galaxies , observations provide evidence that 90 % of the mass is in an unknown form , called dark matter , which interacts with other matter through gravitational but not electromagnetic forces . Data indicates that the majority of the mass @-@ energy in the observable universe is a poorly understood vacuum energy of space which astronomers label dark energy . Intergalactic space takes up most of the volume of the Universe , but even galaxies and star systems consist almost entirely of empty space . 
 There is no firm boundary where outer space begins . However the Kármán line , at an altitude of 100 km ( 62 mi ) above sea level , is conventionally used as the start of outer space in space treaties and for aerospace records keeping . The framework for international space law was established by the Outer Space Treaty , which was passed by the United Nations in 1967 . This treaty precludes any claims of national sovereignty and permits all states to freely explore outer space . Despite the drafting of UN resolutions for the peaceful uses of outer space , anti @-@ satellite weapons have been tested in Earth orbit . 
 Humans began the physical exploration of space during the 20th century with the advent of high @-@ altitude balloon flights , followed by manned rocket launches . Earth orbit was first achieved by Yuri Gagarin of the Soviet Union in 1961 and unmanned spacecraft have since reached all of the known planets in the Solar System . Due to the high cost of getting into space , manned spaceflight has been limited to low Earth orbit and the Moon . 
 Outer space represents a challenging environment for human exploration because of the dual hazards of vacuum and radiation . <unk> also has a negative effect on human physiology that causes both muscle atrophy and bone loss . In addition to these health and environmental issues , the economic cost of putting objects , including humans , into space is high ; in 1969 , the Apollo program cost approximately $ 24 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( $ 395 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as of 2015 ) . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 In 350 BCE , Greek philosopher Aristotle suggested that nature abhors a vacuum , a principle that became known as the horror <unk> . This concept built upon a 5th @-@ century BCE ontological argument by the Greek philosopher Parmenides , who denied the possible existence of a void in space . Based on this idea that a vacuum could not exist , in the West it was widely held for many centuries that space could not be empty . As late as the 17th century , the French philosopher René Descartes argued that the entirety of space must be filled . 
 In ancient China , there were various schools of thought concerning the nature of the heavens , some of which bear a resemblance to the modern understanding . In the 2nd century , astronomer Zhang Heng became convinced that space must be infinite , extending well beyond the mechanism that supported the Sun and the stars . The surviving books of the <unk> Yeh school said that the heavens were boundless , " empty and void of substance " . Likewise , the " sun , moon , and the company of stars float in the empty space , moving or standing still " . 
 The Italian scientist Galileo Galilei knew that air had mass and so was subject to gravity . In 1640 , he demonstrated that an established force resisted the formation of a vacuum . However , it would remain for his pupil Evangelista Torricelli to create an apparatus that would produce a vacuum in 1643 . This experiment resulted in the first mercury barometer and created a scientific sensation in Europe . The French mathematician Blaise Pascal reasoned that if the column of mercury was supported by air then the column ought to be shorter at higher altitude where the air pressure is lower . In 1648 , his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Florin Périer , repeated the experiment on the Puy de Dôme mountain in central France and found that the column was shorter by three inches . This decrease in pressure was further demonstrated by carrying a half @-@ full balloon up a mountain and watching it gradually expand , then contract upon descent . 
 In 1650 , German scientist Otto von Guericke constructed the first vacuum pump : a device that would further refute the principle of horror <unk> . He correctly noted that the atmosphere of the Earth surrounds the planet like a shell , with the density gradually declining with altitude . He concluded that there must be a vacuum between the Earth and the Moon . 
 Back in the 15th century , German theologian Nicolaus <unk> speculated that the Universe lacked a center and a circumference . He believed that the Universe , while not infinite , could not be held as finite as it lacked any bounds within which it could be contained . These ideas led to speculations as to the infinite dimension of space by the Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno in the 16th century . He extended the Copernican heliocentric cosmology to the concept of an infinite Universe filled with a substance he called aether , which did not cause resistance to the motions of heavenly bodies . English philosopher William Gilbert arrived at a similar conclusion , arguing that the stars are visible to us only because they are surrounded by a thin aether or a void . This concept of an aether originated with ancient Greek philosophers , including Aristotle , who conceived of it as the medium through which the heavenly bodies moved . 
 The concept of a Universe filled with a luminiferous aether remained in vogue among some scientists until the early 20th century . This form of aether was viewed as the medium through which light could propagate . In 1887 , the Michelson – Morley experiment tried to detect the Earth 's motion through this medium by looking for changes in the speed of light depending on the direction of the planet 's motion . However , the null result indicated something was wrong with the concept . The idea of the luminiferous aether was then abandoned . It was replaced by Albert Einstein 's theory of special relativity , which holds that the speed of light in a vacuum is a fixed constant , independent of the observer 's motion or frame of reference . 
 The first professional astronomer to support the concept of an infinite Universe was the Englishman Thomas Digges in 1576 . But the scale of the Universe remained unknown until the first successful measurement of the distance to a nearby star in 1838 by the German astronomer Friedrich Bessel . He showed that the star 61 Cygni had a parallax of just 0 @.@ 31 arcseconds ( compared to the modern value of 0 @.@ 287 ″ ) . This corresponds to a distance of over 10 light years . The distance to the Andromeda Galaxy was determined in 1923 by American astronomer Edwin Hubble by measuring the brightness of cepheid variables in that galaxy , a new technique discovered by Henrietta Leavitt . This established that the Andromeda galaxy , and by extension all galaxies , lay well outside the Milky Way . 
 The earliest known estimate of the temperature of outer space was by the Swiss physicist Charles É . Guillaume in 1896 . Using the estimated radiation of the background stars , he concluded that space must be heated to a temperature of 5 – 6 K. British physicist Arthur Eddington made a similar calculation to derive a temperature of 3 @.@ 18 K in 1926 . 1933 German physicist Erich <unk> used the total measured energy of cosmic rays to estimate an intergalactic temperature of 2 @.@ 8 K. 
 The modern concept of outer space is based on the " Big Bang " cosmology , first proposed in 1931 by the Belgian physicist Georges Lemaître . This theory holds that the observable universe originated from a very compact form that has since undergone continuous expansion . The background energy released during the initial expansion has steadily decreased in density , leading to a 1948 prediction by American <unk> Ralph Alpher and Robert Herman of a temperature of 5 K for the temperature of space . 
 The term outer space was used in 1842 by the English poet Lady Emmeline Stuart @-@ Wortley in her poem " The Maiden of Moscow " . The expression outer space was used as an astronomical term by Alexander von Humboldt in 1845 . It was later popularized in the writings of H. G. Wells in 1901 . The shorter term space is actually older , first used to mean the region beyond Earth 's sky in John Milton 's Paradise Lost in 1667 . 
 = = Formation and state = = 
 According to the Big Bang theory , the Universe originated in an extremely hot and dense state about 13 @.@ 8 billion years ago and began expanding rapidly . About 380 @,@ 000 years later the Universe had cooled sufficiently to allow protons and electrons to combine and form hydrogen — the so @-@ called recombination epoch . When this happened , matter and energy became decoupled , allowing photons to travel freely through space . The matter that remained following the initial expansion has since undergone gravitational collapse to create stars , galaxies and other astronomical objects , leaving behind a deep vacuum that forms what is now called outer space . As light has a finite velocity , this theory also constrains the size of the directly observable universe . This leaves open the question as to whether the Universe is finite or infinite . 
 The present day shape of the Universe has been determined from measurements of the cosmic microwave background using satellites like the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe . These observations indicate that the observable universe is flat , meaning that photons on parallel paths at one point will remain parallel as they travel through space to the limit of the observable universe , except for local gravity . The flat Universe , combined with the measured mass density of the Universe and the accelerating expansion of the Universe , indicates that space has a non @-@ zero vacuum energy , which is called dark energy . 
 Estimates put the average energy density of the Universe at the equivalent of 5 @.@ 9 protons per cubic meter , including dark energy , dark matter , and baryonic matter ( ordinary matter composed of atoms ) . The atoms account for only 4 @.@ 6 % of the total energy density , or a density of one proton per four cubic meters . The density of the Universe , however , is clearly not uniform ; it ranges from relatively high density in galaxies — including very high density in structures within galaxies , such as planets , stars , and black holes — to conditions in vast voids that have much lower density , at least in terms of visible matter . Unlike the matter and dark matter , the dark energy seems not to be concentrated in galaxies : although dark energy may account for a majority of the mass @-@ energy in the Universe , dark energy 's influence is 5 orders of magnitude smaller than the influence of gravity from matter and dark matter within the Milky Way . 
 = = Environment = = 
 Outer space is the closest known approximation to a perfect vacuum . It has effectively no friction , allowing stars , planets and moons to move freely along their ideal orbits . However , even the deep vacuum of intergalactic space is not devoid of matter , as it contains a few hydrogen atoms per cubic meter . By comparison , the air we breathe contains about 1025 molecules per cubic meter . The sparse density of matter in outer space means that electromagnetic radiation can travel great distances without being scattered : the mean free path of a photon in intergalactic space is about 1023 km , or 10 billion light years . In spite of this , extinction , which is the absorption and scattering of photons by dust and gas , is an important factor in galactic and intergalactic astronomy . 
 Stars , planets and moons retain their atmospheres by gravitational attraction . Atmospheres have no clearly delineated boundary : the density of atmospheric gas gradually decreases with distance from the object until it becomes indistinguishable from the surrounding environment . The Earth 's atmospheric pressure drops to about 0 @.@ 032 Pa at 100 kilometres ( 62 miles ) of altitude , compared to 100 @,@ 000 Pa for the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) definition of standard pressure . Beyond this altitude , isotropic gas pressure rapidly becomes insignificant when compared to radiation pressure from the Sun and the dynamic pressure of the solar wind . The thermosphere in this range has large gradients of pressure , temperature and composition , and varies greatly due to space weather . 
 The temperature of the vacuum is measured in terms of the kinetic activity of the gas , as it is on Earth . However , the radiation that fills the vacuum has a different temperature than the kinetic temperature of the gas , meaning that the gas and radiation are not in thermodynamic equilibrium . All of the observable universe is filled with photons that were created during the Big Bang , which is known as the cosmic microwave background radiation ( CMB ) . ( There is quite likely a correspondingly large number of neutrinos called the cosmic neutrino background . ) The current black body temperature of the background radiation is about 3 K ( − 270 ° C ; − 454 ° F ) . The gas temperatures in outer space are always at least the temperature of the CMB but can be much higher . For example , the corona of the Sun has temperatures which range over 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 6 million K. 
 Outside of a protective atmosphere and magnetic field , there are few obstacles to the passage through space of energetic subatomic particles known as cosmic rays . These particles have energies ranging from about 106 eV up to an extreme 1020 eV of ultra @-@ high @-@ energy cosmic rays . The peak flux of cosmic rays occurs at energies of about 109 eV , with approximately 87 % protons , 12 % helium nuclei and 1 % heavier nuclei . In the high energy range , the flux of electrons is only about 1 % of that of protons . Cosmic rays can damage electronic components and pose a health threat to space travelers . According to astronauts , like Don Pettit , space has a burned / metallic odor that clings to their suits and equipment , similar to the scent of an arc welding torch . 
 Despite the harsh environment , several life forms have been found that can withstand extreme space conditions for extended periods . Species of lichen carried on the ESA <unk> facility survived exposure for ten days in 2007 . Seeds of Arabidopsis thaliana and Nicotiana <unk> germinated after being exposed to space for 1 @.@ 5 years . A strain of bacillus subtilis has survived 559 days when exposed to low @-@ Earth orbit or a simulated martian environment . The <unk> hypothesis suggests that rocks ejected into outer space from life @-@ harboring planets may successfully transport life forms to another habitable world . A conjecture is that just such a scenario occurred early in the history of the Solar System , with potentially microorganism @-@ bearing rocks being exchanged between Venus , Earth , and Mars . 
 = = = Effect on human bodies = = = 
 Sudden exposure to very low pressure , such as during a rapid decompression , can cause pulmonary barotrauma — a rupture of the lungs , due to the large pressure differential between inside and outside of the chest . Even if the victim 's airway is fully open , the flow of air through the windpipe may be too slow to prevent the rupture . Rapid decompression can rupture eardrums and sinuses , bruising and blood seep can occur in soft tissues , and shock can cause an increase in oxygen consumption that leads to hypoxia . 
 As a consequence of rapid decompression , any oxygen dissolved in the blood will empty into the lungs to try to equalize the partial pressure gradient . Once the deoxygenated blood arrives at the brain , humans and animals will lose consciousness after a few seconds and die of hypoxia within minutes . Blood and other body fluids boil when the pressure drops below 6 @.@ 3 kPa , and this condition is called ebullism . The steam may bloat the body to twice its normal size and slow circulation , but tissues are elastic and porous enough to prevent rupture . <unk> is slowed by the pressure containment of blood vessels , so some blood remains liquid . Swelling and ebullism can be reduced by containment in a flight suit . The Crew Altitude Protection Suit ( CAPS ) , a fitted elastic garment designed in the 1960s for Shuttle astronauts , prevents ebullism at pressures as low as 2 kPa . Space suits are needed at 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) to provide enough oxygen for breathing and to prevent water loss , while above 20 km ( 12 mi ) they are essential to prevent ebullism . Most space suits use around 30 – 39 kPa of pure oxygen , about the same as on the Earth 's surface . This pressure is high enough to prevent ebullism , but evaporation of nitrogen dissolved in the blood could still cause decompression sickness and gas embolisms if not managed . 
 Humans evolved for life in Earth gravity , and exposure to weightlessness has been shown to have deleterious effects on the health of the human body . Initially , more than 50 % of astronauts experience space motion sickness . This can cause nausea and vomiting , vertigo , headaches , lethargy , and overall malaise . The duration of space sickness varies , but it typically lasts for 1 – 3 days , after which the body adjusts to the new environment . Longer term exposure to weightlessness results in muscle atrophy and deterioration of the skeleton , or spaceflight osteopenia . These effects can be minimized through a regimen of exercise . Other effects include fluid redistribution , slowing of the cardiovascular system , decreased production of red blood cells , balance disorders , and a weakening of the immune system . Lesser symptoms include loss of body mass , nasal congestion , sleep disturbance , and <unk> of the face . 
 For long duration space travel , radiation can pose an acute health hazard . Exposure to radiation sources such as high @-@ energy , ionizing cosmic rays can result in fatigue , nausea , vomiting , as well as damage to the immune system and changes to the white blood cell count . Over longer durations , symptoms include an increased risk of cancer , plus damage to the eyes , nervous system , lungs and the gastrointestinal tract . On a round @-@ trip Mars mission lasting three years , nearly the entire body would be traversed by high energy nuclei , each of which can cause ionization damage to cells . Fortunately , most such particles are significantly attenuated by the shielding provided by the aluminium walls of a spacecraft , and can be further diminished by water containers and other barriers . However , the impact of the cosmic rays upon the shielding produces additional radiation that can affect the crew . Further research will be needed to assess the radiation hazards and determine suitable countermeasures . 
 = = Boundary = = 
 There is no clear boundary between Earth 's atmosphere and space , as the density of the atmosphere gradually decreases as the altitude increases . There are several standard boundary designations , namely : 
 The Fédération Aéronautique Internationale has established the Kármán line at an altitude of 100 km ( 62 mi ) as a working definition for the boundary between aeronautics and astronautics . This is used because at an altitude of about 100 km ( 62 mi ) , as Theodore von Kármán calculated , a vehicle would have to travel faster than orbital velocity in order to derive sufficient aerodynamic lift from the atmosphere to support itself . 
 The United States designates people who travel above an altitude of 50 miles ( 80 km ) as astronauts . 
 NASA 's Space Shuttle used 400 @,@ 000 feet ( 76 mi , 122 km ) as its re @-@ entry altitude ( termed the Entry Interface ) , which roughly marks the boundary where atmospheric drag becomes noticeable , thus beginning the process of switching from steering with thrusters to maneuvering with air surfaces . 
 In 2009 , scientists at the University of Calgary reported detailed measurements with a Supra @-@ Thermal Ion Imager ( an instrument that measures the direction and speed of ions ) , which allowed them to establish a boundary at 118 km ( 73 mi ) above Earth . The boundary represents the midpoint of a gradual transition over tens of kilometers from the relatively gentle winds of the Earth 's atmosphere to the more violent flows of charged particles in space , which can reach speeds well over 268 m / s ( 600 mph ) . 
 The altitude where the atmospheric pressure matches the vapor pressure of water at the temperature of the human body is called the Armstrong line , named after American physician Harry G. Armstrong . It is located at an altitude of around 19 @.@ 14 km ( 11 @.@ 89 mi ) . At or above the Armstrong line , fluids in the throat and lungs will boil away . More specifically , exposed bodily liquids such as saliva , tears , and the liquids wetting the alveoli within the lungs will boil away . Hence , at this altitude the human body requires a pressure suit , or a pressurized capsule , to survive . 
