 = = Legal status = = 
 The Outer Space Treaty provides the basic framework for international space law . It covers the legal use of outer space by nation states , and includes in its definition of outer space the Moon and other celestial bodies . The treaty states that outer space is free for all nation states to explore and is not subject to claims of national sovereignty . It also prohibits the deployment of nuclear weapons in outer space . The treaty was passed by the United Nations General Assembly in 1963 and signed in 1967 by the USSR , the United States of America and the United Kingdom . As of January 1 , 2008 the treaty has been ratified by 98 states and signed by an additional 27 states . 
 Beginning in 1958 , outer space has been the subject of multiple resolutions by the United Nations General Assembly . Of these , more than 50 have been concerning the international co @-@ operation in the peaceful uses of outer space and preventing an arms race in space . Four additional space law treaties have been negotiated and drafted by the UN 's Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space . Still , there remains no legal prohibition against deploying conventional weapons in space , and anti @-@ satellite weapons have been successfully tested by the US , USSR and China . The 1979 Moon Treaty turned the jurisdiction of all heavenly bodies ( including the orbits around such bodies ) over to the international community . However , this treaty has not been ratified by any nation that currently practices manned spaceflight . 
 In 1976 , eight equatorial states ( Ecuador , Colombia , Brazil , Congo , Zaire , Uganda , Kenya , and Indonesia ) met in Bogotá , Colombia . They made the " Declaration of the First Meeting of Equatorial Countries , " also known as " the Bogotá Declaration " , where they made a claim to control the segment of the geosynchronous orbital path corresponding to each country . These claims are not internationally accepted . 
 = = Earth orbit = = 
 A spacecraft enters orbit when it has enough horizontal velocity for its centripetal acceleration due to gravity to be less than or equal to the centrifugal acceleration due to the horizontal component of its velocity . For a low Earth orbit , this velocity is about 7 @,@ 800 m / s ( 28 @,@ 100 km / h ; 17 @,@ 400 mph ) ; by contrast , the fastest manned airplane speed ever achieved ( excluding speeds achieved by deorbiting spacecraft ) was 2 @,@ 200 m / s ( 7 @,@ 900 km / h ; 4 @,@ 900 mph ) in 1967 by the North American X @-@ 15 . 
 To achieve an orbit , a spacecraft must travel faster than a sub @-@ orbital spaceflight . The energy required to reach Earth orbital velocity at an altitude of 600 km ( 370 mi ) is about 36 MJ / kg , which is six times the energy needed merely to climb to the corresponding altitude . Spacecraft with a perigee below about 2 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) are subject to drag from the Earth 's atmosphere , which will cause the orbital altitude to decrease . The rate of orbital decay depends on the satellite 's cross @-@ sectional area and mass , as well as variations in the air density of the upper atmosphere . Below about 300 km ( 190 mi ) , decay becomes more rapid with lifetimes measured in days . Once a satellite descends to 180 km ( 110 mi ) , it will start to burn up in the atmosphere . The escape velocity required to pull free of Earth 's gravitational field altogether and move into interplanetary space is about 11 @,@ 200 m / s ( 40 @,@ 300 km / h ; 25 @,@ 100 mph ) . 
 Earth 's gravity reaches out far past the Van Allen radiation belt and keeps the Moon in orbit at an average distance of 384 @,@ 403 km ( 238 @,@ 857 mi ) . The region of space where the gravity of a planet tends to dominate the motion of objects in the presence of other perturbing bodies ( such as another planet ) is known as the Hill sphere . For Earth , this sphere has a radius of about 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 km ( 930 @,@ 000 mi ) . 
 = = Regions = = 
 Space is a partial vacuum : its different regions are defined by the various atmospheres and " winds " that dominate within them , and extend to the point at which those winds give way to those beyond . Geospace extends from Earth 's atmosphere to the outer reaches of Earth 's magnetic field , whereupon it gives way to the solar wind of interplanetary space . Interplanetary space extends to the heliopause , whereupon the solar wind gives way to the winds of the interstellar medium . Interstellar space then continues to the edges of the galaxy , where it fades into the intergalactic void . 
 = = = Geospace = = = 
 Geospace is the region of outer space near Earth . Geospace includes the upper region of the atmosphere and the magnetosphere . The Van Allen radiation belt lies within the geospace . The outer boundary of geospace is the magnetopause , which forms an interface between the planet 's magnetosphere and the solar wind . The inner boundary is the ionosphere . As the physical properties and behavior of near Earth space is affected by the behavior of the Sun and space weather , the field of geospace is interlinked with <unk> ; the study of the Sun and its impact on the Solar System planets . 
 The volume of geospace defined by the magnetopause is compacted in the direction of the Sun by the pressure of the solar wind , giving it a typical subsolar distance of 10 Earth radii from the center of the planet . However , the tail can extend outward to more than 100 – 200 Earth radii . The Moon passes through the geospace tail during roughly four days each month , during which time the surface is shielded from the solar wind . 
 Geospace is populated by electrically charged particles at very low densities , the motions of which are controlled by the Earth 's magnetic field . These plasmas form a medium from which storm @-@ like disturbances powered by the solar wind can drive electrical currents into the Earth ’ s upper atmosphere . During geomagnetic storms two regions of geospace , the radiation belts and the ionosphere , can become strongly disturbed . These storms increase fluxes of energetic electrons that can permanently damage satellite electronics , disrupting telecommunications and GPS technologies , and can also be a hazard to astronauts , even in low Earth orbit . They also create aurorae seen near the magnetic poles . 
 Although it meets the definition of outer space , the atmospheric density within the first few hundred kilometers above the Kármán line is still sufficient to produce significant drag on satellites . This region contains material left over from previous manned and unmanned launches that are a potential hazard to spacecraft . Some of this debris re @-@ enters Earth 's atmosphere periodically . 
 = = = = <unk> space = = = = 
 The region outside Earth 's atmosphere and extending out to just beyond the Moon ’ s orbit , including the Lagrangian points , is sometimes referred to as cis @-@ lunar space . 
 = = = Interplanetary space = = = 
 Interplanetary space , the space around the Sun and planets of the Solar System , is the region dominated by the interplanetary medium , which extends out to the heliopause where the influence of the galactic environment starts to dominate over the magnetic field and particle flux from the Sun . Interplanetary space is defined by the solar wind , a continuous stream of charged particles emanating from the Sun that creates a very tenuous atmosphere ( the heliosphere ) for billions of kilometers into space . This wind has a particle density of 5 – 10 protons / cm3 and is moving at a velocity of 350 – 400 km / s ( 780 @,@ 000 – 890 @,@ 000 mph ) . The distance and strength of the heliopause varies depending on the activity level of the solar wind . The discovery since 1995 of extrasolar planets means that other stars must possess their own interplanetary media . 
 The volume of interplanetary space is a nearly total vacuum , with a mean free path of about one astronomical unit at the orbital distance of the Earth . However , this space is not completely empty , and is sparsely filled with cosmic rays , which include ionized atomic nuclei and various subatomic particles . There is also gas , plasma and dust , small meteors , and several dozen types of organic molecules discovered to date by microwave spectroscopy . A cloud of interplanetary dust is visible at night as a faint band called the zodiacal light . 
 Interplanetary space contains the magnetic field generated by the Sun . There are also magnetospheres generated by planets such as Jupiter , Saturn , Mercury and the Earth that have their own magnetic fields . These are shaped by the influence of the solar wind into the approximation of a teardrop shape , with the long tail extending outward behind the planet . These magnetic fields can trap particles from the solar wind and other sources , creating belts of magnetic particles such as the Van Allen radiation belt . Planets without magnetic fields , such as Mars , have their atmospheres gradually eroded by the solar wind . 
 = = = Interstellar space = = = 
 Interstellar space is the physical space within a galaxy beyond the influence of each star on the plasma . The contents of interstellar space are called the interstellar medium . Approximately 70 % of the mass of the interstellar medium consists of lone hydrogen atoms ; most of the remainder consists of helium atoms . This is enriched with trace amounts of heavier atoms formed through stellar nucleosynthesis . These atoms are ejected into the interstellar medium by stellar winds or when evolved stars begin to shed their outer envelopes such as during the formation of a planetary nebula . The cataclysmic explosion of a supernova will generate an expanding shock wave consisting of ejected materials . The density of matter in the interstellar medium can vary considerably : the average is around 106 particles per m3 , but cold molecular clouds can hold 108 – 1012 per m3 . 
 A number of molecules exist in interstellar space , as can tiny 0 @.@ 1 μm dust particles . The tally of molecules discovered through radio astronomy is steadily increasing at the rate of about four new species per year . Large regions of higher density matter known as molecular clouds allow chemical reactions to occur , including the formation of organic polyatomic species . Much of this chemistry is driven by collisions . Energetic cosmic rays penetrate the cold , dense clouds and ionize hydrogen and helium , resulting , for example , in the trihydrogen cation . An ionized helium atom can then split relatively abundant carbon monoxide to produce ionized carbon , which in turn can lead to organic chemical reactions . 
 The local interstellar medium is a region of space within 100 parsecs ( pc ) of the Sun , which is of interest both for its proximity and for its interaction with the Solar System . This volume nearly coincides with a region of space known as the Local Bubble , which is characterized by a lack of dense , cold clouds . It forms a cavity in the Orion Arm of the Milky Way galaxy , with dense molecular clouds lying along the borders , such as those in the constellations of Ophiuchus and Taurus . ( The actual distance to the border of this cavity varies from 60 to 250 pc or more . ) This volume contains about 104 – 105 stars and the local interstellar gas counterbalances the <unk> that surround these stars , with the volume of each sphere varying depending on the local density of the interstellar medium . The Local Bubble contains dozens of warm interstellar clouds with temperatures of up to 7 @,@ 000 K and radii of 0 @.@ 5 – 5 pc . 
 When stars are moving at sufficiently high peculiar velocities , their <unk> can generate bow shocks as they collide with the interstellar medium . For decades it was assumed that the Sun had a bow shock . In 2012 , data from Interstellar Boundary Explorer ( <unk> ) and NASA 's Voyager probes showed that the Sun 's bow shock does not exist . Instead , these authors argue that a subsonic bow wave defines the transition from the solar wind flow to the interstellar medium . A bow shock is the third boundary of an astrosphere after the termination shock and the <unk> ( called the heliopause in the Solar System ) . 
 = = = Intergalactic space = = = 
 Intergalactic space is the physical space between galaxies . The huge spaces between galaxy clusters are called the voids . Surrounding and stretching between galaxies , there is a rarefied plasma that is organized in a galactic filamentary structure . This material is called the intergalactic medium ( IGM ) . The density of the IGM is 5 – 200 times the average density of the Universe . It consists mostly of ionized hydrogen ; i.e. a plasma consisting of equal numbers of electrons and protons . As gas falls into the intergalactic medium from the voids , it heats up to temperatures of 105 K to 107 K , which is high enough so that collisions between atoms have enough energy to cause the bound electrons to escape from the hydrogen nuclei ; this is why the IGM is ionized . At these temperatures , it is called the warm – hot intergalactic medium ( <unk> ) . ( Although the plasma is very hot by terrestrial standards , 105 K is often called " warm " in astrophysics . ) Computer simulations and observations indicate that up to half of the atomic matter in the Universe might exist in this warm – hot , rarefied state . When gas falls from the filamentary structures of the <unk> into the galaxy clusters at the intersections of the cosmic filaments , it can heat up even more , reaching temperatures of 108 K and above in the so @-@ called intracluster medium . 
 = = Exploration and applications = = 
 For the majority of human history , space was explored by remote observation ; initially with the unaided eye and then with the telescope . Prior to the advent of reliable rocket technology , the closest that humans had come to reaching outer space was through the use of balloon flights . In 1935 , the U.S. Explorer II manned balloon flight had reached an altitude of 22 km ( 14 mi ) . This was greatly exceeded in 1942 when the third launch of the German A @-@ 4 rocket climbed to an altitude of about 80 km ( 50 mi ) . In 1957 , the unmanned satellite Sputnik 1 was launched by a Russian R @-@ 7 rocket , achieving Earth orbit at an altitude of 215 – 939 kilometres ( 134 – 583 mi ) . This was followed by the first human spaceflight in 1961 , when Yuri Gagarin was sent into orbit on Vostok 1 . The first humans to escape Earth orbit were Frank Borman , Jim Lovell and William Anders in 1968 on board the U.S. Apollo 8 , which achieved lunar orbit and reached a maximum distance of 377 @,@ 349 km ( 234 @,@ 474 mi ) from the Earth . 
 The first spacecraft to reach escape velocity was the Soviet Luna 1 , which performed a fly @-@ by of the Moon in 1959 . In 1961 , Venera 1 became the first planetary probe . It revealed the presence of the solar wind and performed the first fly @-@ by of the planet Venus , although contact was lost before reaching Venus . The first successful planetary mission was the Mariner 2 fly @-@ by of Venus in 1962 . The first spacecraft to perform a fly @-@ by of Mars was Mariner 4 , which reached the planet in 1964 . Since that time , unmanned spacecraft have successfully examined each of the Solar System 's planets , as well their moons and many minor planets and comets . They remain a fundamental tool for the exploration of outer space , as well as observation of the Earth . In August 2012 , Voyager 1 became the first man @-@ made object to leave the Solar System and enter interstellar space . 
 The absence of air makes outer space ( and the surface of the Moon ) ideal locations for astronomy at all wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum . This is evidenced by the spectacular pictures sent back by the Hubble Space Telescope , allowing light from more than 13 billion years ago — almost to the time of the Big Bang — to be observed . However , not every location in space is ideal for a telescope . The interplanetary zodiacal dust emits a diffuse near @-@ infrared radiation that can mask the emission of faint sources such as extrasolar planets . Moving an infrared telescope out past the dust will increase the effectiveness of the instrument . Likewise , a site like the Daedalus crater on the far side of the Moon could shield a radio telescope from the radio frequency interference that hampers Earth @-@ based observations . 
 Unmanned spacecraft in Earth orbit have become an essential technology of modern civilization . They allow direct monitoring of weather conditions , relay long @-@ range communications including telephone calls and television signals , provide a means of precise navigation , and allow remote sensing of the Earth . The latter role serves a wide variety of purposes , including tracking soil moisture for agriculture , prediction of water outflow from seasonal snow packs , detection of diseases in plants and trees , and surveillance of military activities . 
 The deep vacuum of space could make it an attractive environment for certain industrial processes , such as those that require <unk> surfaces . However , like asteroid mining , space manufacturing requires a significant investment with little prospect of an immediate return . An important factor in the total expense is the high cost of placing mass into Earth orbit : $ 7 @,@ 000 – 23 @,@ 000 per kg in inflation @-@ adjusted dollars , according to a 2006 estimate . Proposed concepts for addressing this issue include non @-@ rocket <unk> , momentum exchange tethers , and space elevators . 
 = Trondheim Airport Station = 
 Trondheim Airport Station ( IATA code : TRD ) , also known as Værnes Station ( Norwegian : Værnes <unk> ) , is a railway station located within the terminal complex of Trondheim Airport , Værnes in Stjørdal , Norway . Situated on the Nordland Line , it serves both express trains and the Trøndelag Commuter Rail both operated by Norges Statsbaner . The station was opened on 15 November 1994 along with a new terminal at the airport , making it the first airport rail link in the Nordic Countries . The station cost NOK 24 million , and was built along the existing railway line . In each direction , the station handles one to two hourly commuter rail services , and three daily express services . Travel time to Trondheim is 38 minutes , while it is 9 hours and 5 minutes to Bodø . Access to the airport terminal is outdoors , but sheltered . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The station is located at the terminal of Trondheim Airport , Værnes . The connection between the station and the airport is outside , but there is a roof for the whole distance . The platform is about 190 metres ( 620 ft ) from the check @-@ in at the terminal . The station is 33 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 20 @.@ 5 mi ) from Trondheim Central Station , and located 5 @.@ 0 metres ( 16 @.@ 4 ft ) above mean sea level . There is no manned ticket sale , but a vending machine for tickets is located in the airport terminal . Luggage trolleys are available , and the airport terminal offers an array of traveler services , such as dining , paid parking , restrooms , car rental , taxis , retailing , ATMs and kiosks . There is a single track at the station , but built in such a way that the it can easily be converted to become an island platform with two tracks . Work on a second track has not begun as of 2014 , but there is budget for double track between Hell and Værnes . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Norwegian State Railways operates both commuter and express trains to Trondheim Airport . In each direction , there are three daily express trains , one to Mo i Rana and two to Bodø . One of the Bodø @-@ trains is a night train . Travel time to Mo i Rana is 6 hours and travel time to Bodø is 9 hours and 5 minutes . The Mo i Rana @-@ service is operated with Class 93 trains , while the Bodø @-@ services are operated with Di 4 @-@ hauled trains . 
 The Trøndelag Commuter Rail offers hourly services in each direction : northbound to Steinkjer and southbound to Trondheim and Lerkendal . During peak hours , the frequency is doubled . Travel time to Trondheim is 38 minutes and to Lerkendal 51 minutes . Northwards , travel time to Levanger is 48 minutes , to Verdal 1 hour and 2 minutes , and to Steinkjer 1 hour and 26 minutes . The commuter rail is operated with Class 92 trains . From the airport , there is connection with local buses operated by Nettbuss . <unk> operates an airport coach to and from the city center of Trondheim every ten minutes from 4 in the morning until 9 in the evening . NOR @-@ WAY Bussekspress and TrønderBilene operate a coach service to Steinkjer and onwards to Namsos . 
 = = History = = 
 The railway past Værnes opened on 27 October 1902 as the Hell – Sunnan Line — today part of the Nordland Line . The plans for a railway station in the terminal of Værnes were launched in 1990 , along with the plans to build a second terminal at the airport . Construction of the new terminal started on 1 October 1992 . On 15 March 1993 , NSB announced that they would start a commuter train service between Steinkjer and Melhus , south of Trondheim . The service would give a half @-@ hour headway during peak hours between Stjørdal and Melhus , and a one @-@ hour headway onwards to Steinkjer . NSB stated that the concept was based on the success of the Jæren Commuter Rail and that they hoped to have a 70 % increase in ridership , in part due to the opening of the airport station . The concept would also take advantage of expansion of Trondheim Central Station that would co @-@ locate the main <unk> and train terminals in Trondheim . The service would also give direct services along the Dovre Line to Oppdal and the Røros Line to Tynset . Estimates were that the railway would capture a 10 % ground transport market share . The commuter rail service started on 1 September 1993 . 
 Construction of the railway station started on 7 April 1994 , and cost NOK 24 million . The terminal opened on 15 November 1994 , the same day as the new airport terminal . Minister of Transport and Communications Kjell Opseth performed the official opening . NSB stated that their primary goal was not to compete with the four hourly airport coaches that operated to the hotels in Trondheim , but instead to provide services to communities in Nord @-@ Trøndelag and south of Trondheim . It was the first airport rail link to open in Northern Europe , with the closest integrated train station at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam , the Netherlands . 
 = Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier = 
 Hazelwood School District et al. v. Kuhlmeier et al . , 484 U.S. 260 ( 1988 ) was a landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States that held that public school curricular student newspapers that have not been established as forums for student expression are subject to a lower level of First Amendment protection than independent student expression or newspapers established ( by policy or practice ) as forums for student expression . 
 The case concerned the censorship of two articles in The Spectrum , the student newspaper of Hazelwood East High School in St. Louis County , Missouri , in 1983 . When the school principal removed an article concerning divorce and another concerning teen pregnancy , the student journalists sued , claiming their First Amendment rights were violated . A lower court sided with the students before the decision was later overturned by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit . 
 In a 5 @-@ 3 decision rendered in 1988 , the Supreme Court overturned the circuit court decision with a majority opinion , determining that school administrators could exercise prior restraint of school @-@ sponsored expression , such as newspapers and assembly speeches , if the censorship is " reasonably related to legitimate pedagogical concerns . " In this , school @-@ sponsored newspapers are considered limited public forums of expression . 
 The case and the earlier Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District are considered landmark decisions for defining the right to expression for students in public schools . While subsequent courts have varied significantly on when the Hazelwood decision applies , the case remains a strong precedent in the regulation of student speech . The New Voices bill of 2016 ( to date passed by 18 states ) is neglecting the Hazelwood decision , and returning to the Tinker precedent . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Facts of the case = = = 
 The case concerned The Spectrum , a student newspaper which was published as part of a journalism class at Hazelwood East High School in the Hazelwood School District in St. Louis County , Missouri . The Spectrum was written and edited as part of the Journalism II class at the public school , published roughly every three weeks during the 1982 – 1983 school year . About 4 @,@ 500 copies of the paper were distributed to students and community members during the year . The cost of printing the paper as well as supplies , textbooks , and a portion of the academic advisor 's salary were furnished by the district 's Board of Education , supplemented by newspaper sales . For that school year , the board supplied $ 4 @,@ 668 in printing costs , and the newspaper generated $ 94 @,@ 325 in revenue . 
 On May 10 , 1983 , Howard Emerson , the adviser to the journalism class , submitted page proofs of the May 13 issue of the newspaper to principal Robert Eugene Reynolds for approval , a practice which was customary at the time . Reynolds objected to two of the stories scheduled to run . One was a story concerning teen pregnancy , containing interviews with three students who had been pregnant . The story contained false names to keep the girls ' identities a secret , but Reynolds was concerned the pregnant students would still be identifiable from the text . Reynolds was also concerned the references to sexual activity and birth control were inappropriate for younger students at school . The second story concerned divorce and featured an interview with a student whose parents were divorced , in which she complained her father " wasn 't spending enough time with my mom , my sister , and I ... was always out of town on business or out late playing cards with the guys ... always argued about everything . " Reynolds , unaware that the name of the girl would also be changed , was concerned that her family should have been given an opportunity to respond within the story , or to consent to its publication . 
 Reynolds did not believe there was time to make the appropriate changes to the newspaper , and also that any delay in publication would mean the newspaper would not be published before the end of the school year . After consulting with his supervisors , Reynolds opted to publish a four @-@ page newspaper instead of a six @-@ page one , omitting the pages containing the two stories . Cutting two pages removed a total of seven articles from the paper . Reynolds did not tell the students about the decision , and they did not find out about it until the paper was delivered to the school . 
 In response , editor Cathy Kuhlmeier and reporters Leslie Smart and Leanne Tippett filed suit in January 1984 with the aid of the American Civil Liberties Union . Kuhlmeier later said the idea for the pieces came from old issues of The Spectrum and she had been looking to update them . 
 = = = Legal precedent = = = 
 Until the 1960s , administrative review of student publications was considered routine both at the high school and and collegiate level . Students and faculty advisers also had few alternatives . However , with the rise of the counterculture of the 1960s , student publications began to explore social issues with greater fervor , focusing on issues such as the Vietnam War , the civil rights movement , sexual orientation , and other issues considered sensitive at the time . 
 In 1969 , the U.S. Supreme Court upheld that freedom of expression of students is protected under the First Amendment in Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District ( 393 U.S. 503 ) . Following that precedent , at least 125 other court cases in courts across the country were decided in favor of student expression and against administrative censorship . Whenever an instance of censorship involved action from a government employee such as a school principal or a college dean , the courts held that First Amendment constitutional safeguards apply . Under this precedent , courts recognized student newspapers as public forums where student expression could only be restricted if they could prove substantial disruption of school activities was imminent . School administrators had been opposed to this interpretation . Two additional cases in following years , Healy v. James ( 408 U.S. 169 ) in 1972 and Papish v. University of Missouri Curators ( 410 U.S. 670 ) in 1973 , expanded the First Amendment rights of students on college campuses , but did not strongly define the status of student newspapers as a forum . 
 By the 1980s , however , with the end of the student protest era , school administrators sought to reassert their authority . The first case in the new trend , Bethel School District v. Fraser ( 478 U.S. 675 ) in 1986 , involved the discipline of a high school student for delivering a speech containing sexual innuendos , even though they were not obscene or disruptive in a legal sense . <unk> lower courts in the case , the Supreme Court clarified that the ruling of the Tinker case did not apply because the penalties imposed by the school were unrelated to a political viewpoint . 
 = = = Lower court decisions = = = 
 The case was introduced in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri . The students sought a declaration that their First Amendment and Fourteenth Amendment rights had been violated by undue actions of a public official , as well as injunctive relief and monetary damages . After a bench trial , the district court denied the injunction and monetary damages . The court reached its decision in May 1985 , in which the district court held that school officials may restrain student speech in activities that " are an integral part of the school 's educational function , " as long as the decision has " a substantial and reasonable basis . " The court held that no violation of First Amendment rights had occurred . 
 The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reversed the decision in January 1986 . The court held that , at the outset , The Spectrum was not only a part of the school program , but also a public forum . The newspaper was " intended to be and operated as a conduit for student viewpoint . " As a public forum , the court ruled , The Spectrum could not be censored unless " necessary to avoid material and substantial interference with school work or discipline ... or the rights of others . " 
 The U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari in January 1987 , and the case was argued on October 13 , 1987 . On January 13 , 1988 , the court handed down its decision . 
 = = Supreme Court ruling = = 
 In a 5 @-@ 3 ruling , the Supreme Court overturned the decision of the circuit court . Its majority opinion set a precedent that school @-@ sponsored activities , including student newspapers and drama productions are not normally protected from administrative censorship by the First Amendment . 
 = = = Majority opinion = = = 
 The majority of the justices held that the principal was entitled to censor the articles . The majority opinion , penned by Associate Justice Byron White , stated officials never intended the school paper to be a public forum as were underground publications in cases past . White went on to say educators do not infringe on First Amendment rights when exercising control over student speech in school @-@ sponsored activities " so long as their actions are reasonably related to legitimate pedagogical concerns . " The court established that the student publication could be regulated by school officials , and that they " reserved the forum for its intended purpose , as a supervised learning experience for journalism students . " 
 A school need not tolerate student speech that is inconsistent with its basic educational mission , even though the government could not . ... ( Judicial action to protect students ' rights is justified ) only when the decision to censor a school @-@ sponsored publication , theatrical production or other vehicle of student expression has no valid educational purpose . 
 The decision overrode the precedent set in the Tinker case . The 1969 decision had permitted censorship of student speech only if it violated the rights of other students or if it threatened to cause a campus disruption . The majority opinion held that this case was different . The justices said the school administrators are not required to tolerate speech that is contrary to the school 's academic mission . The majority opinion continued : 
 and that requires a school to tolerate particular student speech — the question we addressed in Tinker — is different from the question whether the First Amendment requires a school affirmatively to promote particular student speech . The former question addresses educators ' ability to silence students ' personal expression that happens to occur on the school premises . The latter question concerns educators ' authority over school sponsored publications , theatrical productions , and other expressive activities that students , parents , and members of the public might reasonably perceive to bear the imprimatur of the school . 
 which protect student journalists , instead stating that , in absence of other rules barring administrative censorship , the First Amendment does not protect student publications . By 2010 seven states — Arkansas , California , Colorado , Iowa , Kansas , Massachusetts and Oregon had such laws on their books , and another 13 states were considering them . In a footnote , the court also clarified that it did not see that the ruling necessarily applied at the collegiate level . 
 = = = Dissenting opinion = = = 
 Associate Justice William J. Brennan , Jr. wrote a dissenting opinion , in which he was joined by Associate Justices Thurgood Marshall and Harry Blackmun , who often took liberal positions on First Amendment issues . In his opinion , Brennan expressed concern about the message the majority opinion would send students . 
 The young men and women of Hazelwood East expected a civics lesson , but not the one the Court teaches them today ... Such unthinking contempt for individual rights is intolerable from any state official . It is particularly insidious from ( a school principal ) to whom the public entrusts the task of inculcating in its youth an appreciation for the cherished democratic liberties that our constitution guarantees . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The case established the standard school personnel must meet before limiting students ' freedom of expression in secondary schools . As representatives of the state , school administrators can censor , restrain or publish school @-@ sponsored student expression if it interferes with the requirements of school discipline , interferes with students ' rights , interferes with academic propriety , generates health or welfare concerns , or is deemed obscene or vulgar . This extends to theatrical productions , public speeches in an assembly environment , and publications produces as part of curricular activity , such as a student newspaper . The majority termed these reasons " legitimate pedagogical concerns . " 
 The standard does not , however , apply to personal communication or non @-@ school @-@ sponsored communication , off @-@ campus publications and non @-@ school @-@ sponsored speech , unless it interferes with school discipline or the rights of others . The case establishes student newspapers as " limited public forums . " This means schools may exercise prior restraint as to " style and content " of a student paper so long as their action is " not unreasonable " , where there previously had to be compelling evidence to warrant censorship . Separate cases also established what constituted school activities , such as in @-@ class parties and art created by students at the behest of teachers . 
 Web @-@ based student publications not subsidized by the school have been one student response to the ruling . Some individual states have also responded with laws designating student newspapers as public forums and offering them greater First Amendment protection . Experts from the Student Press Law Center have contended that the case has meant fewer lawsuits regarding student censorship make it to court . 
 = = = Subsequent jurisprudence = = = 
 While the Supreme Court indicated the Hazelwood did not necessarily apply at the collegiate level , some federal appeals courts have held that it applied at college newspapers while other appeals courts have not . Courts have also been split on viewpoint @-@ based expression in schools , such as religion . A variety of cases have appeared citing the Hazelwood case , citing whether or not a school should have the ability to regulate student dress or speech that certain ethnic groups might find offensive . In other cases though , courts have used the Tinker decision to support student speech if it isn 't found to be disruptive or offensive . 
 A 1989 case , Alabama Student Party v. Student Government <unk> . ( 867 F.2d 1344 ) , held that campus newspapers that are part of a curriculum might not enjoy first amendment protection . A notable 2005 U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit court decision , <unk> v. Carter ( 412 U.S. 731 ) , held that Hazelwood also applied to subsidized student media at the college level . That ruling , though controversial , found there was " no sharp difference between high school and college newspapers , " noting that some are financially subsidized or produced by journalism classes . Students ' rights to speech were further explored in the 2007 decision Morse v. Frederick ( 551 U.S. 393 ) which found the First Amendment did not protect student speech that could be " reasonably viewed as promoting drug use . " 
 A 2001 case in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit , Kincaid v. Gibson ( 236 F. 3d 342 ) , ruled that Hazelwood did not apply at the college level in that instance . The court found in that case that a student publication could not be censored if the censorship is not viewpoint @-@ neutral . The subsequent case Dean v. Utica dealt specifically with what defines a " legitimate pedagogical concern " as used in the Hazelwood case . That case found a school had censored speech wantonly . 
 = Elias Zoghby = 
 Elias Zoghby ( January 9 , 1912 – January 16 , 2008 ) was the Melkite Greek Catholic Archbishop of Baalbek and a leading advocate of Catholic @-@ Orthodox ecumenism . He is best known for his ecumenical interventions during Vatican II and his 1995 Profession of Faith , known as the Zoghby Initiative , which attempted to re @-@ establish communion between the Melkite Greek Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church while maintaining communion with the Roman Catholic Church . 
 Zoghby 's views on topics such as Catholic – Orthodox " double communion " and dissolution of marriage were controversial . Critics labeled him the enfant terrible of his church , while supporters lauded him as an energetic visionary who sought to re @-@ unite the Eastern Churches . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and ministry in Egypt = = = 
 Elias Zoghby was born on January 9 , 1912 in Cairo . His mother , Hanne Ishak Yared , was a Melkite Greek Catholic and his father , Abdallah <unk> Zoghby , was an Antiochian Orthodox convert and former Maronite Catholic . The couple had recently immigrated from Lebanon and settled in Cairo 's <unk> @-@ el @-@ <unk> neighborhood . The area had a Melkite church nearby which his parents attended . Elias and his siblings were baptized into the Melkite faith and raised in a devout household , attending liturgy daily , reading the bible together as a family and praying the Office every afternoon . 
 Zoghby related in Memoires that he first received a vocational call at age sixteen . With his parent 's blessing he left for seminary in the summer of 1928 , going to Jerusalem to study with the White Fathers at the Melkite seminary of Saint Anne . He was ordained a priest at Saint Anne Melkite Basilica in Jerusalem on July 20 , 1936 , following which he was appointed a professor of Arabic Literature and Mathematics at the seminary . He later returned to Cairo as a parish priest . 
 While in Egypt , Zoghby considered the issues of ecumenism and the schism between the Melkite Catholic and Antiochian Orthodox Churches . As he began to study both the historical roots of the separation and the modern divisions of Middle Eastern churches he came to the opinion that the schism was unjustifiable . He also began to question the domination of the so @-@ called Uniate churches by the See of Rome . Zoghby , along with other Melkite priests in Egypt such as George Hakim and Joseph Tawil , were influenced by Father Oreste <unk> , who advocated the need for the Melkite Church to return to its proper traditions and work for communion with the Orthodox Church . 
 In 1951 he was elevated to archimandrite while serving in Alexandria . While there he was threatened with arrest for preventing the execution of a sentence passed by a Sharia tribunal . On August 27 , 1954 he was named auxiliary bishop of Antioch ; then , on September 2 , 1954 he was appointed Titular Archbishop of Nubia . Zoghby was formally consecrated bishop on November 21 , 1954 when he was elevated to Patriarchal Vicar for the See of Alexandria , Cairo and the Sudan . 
 As the leader of the Melkite church in Egypt Zoghby was a vocal proponent of rights for Christians , and opposed the limitations placed on them by that country 's Law of Personal Statutes . The Nasser regime imprisoned him on December 20 , 1954 for his public opposition to the statutes . Released shortly afterwards , he continued to serve as patriarchal vicar in Egypt . 
 = = = Vatican II and Baalbek = = = 
 Zoghby was one of the most active eastern Catholic bishops to participate at the Second Vatican Council , where he offered eleven interventions . While some of the interventions were pastoral in nature , a good number were ecumenical , focusing on the Eastern churches and their relationship with Western Christianity . Zoghby 's efforts helped shape the formation of Orientalium Ecclesiarum , although , to his disappointment , it did not adequately address the needs of the Eastern Catholic Churches or bridge the gulf between Orthodoxy and Catholicism . While Orientalium Ecclesiarum encouraged Eastern Catholics to uphold their traditions and values , Zoghby felt that it " turn [ ed ] a blind eye " to true <unk> ( <unk> in <unk> ) . 
 Following the Council he opposed the acceptance of a Roman cardinalate by Melkite Patriarch Maximos IV Sayegh , stating that the leader of an Eastern Catholic church should not hold a subordinate Latin @-@ rite office . In protest , <unk> resigned his position as patriarchal vicar of Alexandria . Maximos IV died in 1967 ; his successor , Maximos V Hakim , was a friend of Zoghby 's and a fellow Egyptian . In August 1968 the Melkite Synod elected Zoghby archbishop of Baalbek to replace the recently deceased <unk> , Joseph Malouf . Installed as archbishop there on September 9 , 1968 , he led the small eparchy during the Lebanese Civil War . During 1982 he was kidnapped by pro @-@ Iranian terrorists . 
 Zoghby retired on October 24 , 1988 at age 76 . He remained an active proponent of ecumenism following his retirement , urging the reunification of the Melkite Greek Catholic Church and the Antiochian Orthodox Church . He died on January 16 , 2008 in Lebanon ; his funeral was held January 19 at St. Paul Basilica in <unk> . 
 = = <unk> and the Zoghby Initiative = = 
 Zoghby 's ecumenical initiatives gained visibility in May 1974 with the exchange of visits between the Melkite Catholic and the Antiochian Orthodox synods , which met simultaneously in Lebanon . 
 During the visit of the Melkite Catholic delegation to the Orthodox synod Zoghby drew attention to the fact that the original causes of separation between the groups had ceased to exist and the way was open for the " creation by stages of a real union between the two Churches , without waiting for the union of the Church of Rome and the Orthodox Churches . " 
 Afterwards , the churches agreed to form separate commissions for dialogue . Zogby outlined his views on the topic in his book Ecumenical Reflections , which was characterized by Vsevolod , the Orthodox Bishop of <unk> , as an invitation " to ecumenical <unk> ... to recognize that where there is the fundamental common faith , held alike by Catholics and Orthodox , there is no defensible impediment to Eucharistic Communion . " 
 = = Views on dissolution of marriage = = 
 While attending Vatican II Zoghby spoke to Council on September 29 , 1965 about the trauma of the innocent spouse in cases of adultery . Zoghby suggested a solution which considers adultery and abandonment as causes for the dissolution of marriage : 
 " We know how much the Fathers of the Eastern Church tried to dissuade widowers and widows from a second marriage , thus following the Apostle ’ s advice , but they have never wished to deprive the innocent spouse who has been unjustly abandoned of the right to remarry . This tradition , preserved in the East , and which was never reproved during the ten centuries of union , could be accepted again and adopted by Catholics . Progress in patristic studies has indeed brought to the fore the doctrine of the Eastern Fathers who were no less qualified exegetes or moralists than the Western ones . " 
 The following month , Melkite Patriarch Maximos IV declared that , while " Archbishop Zoghby , like all Fathers of the council , enjoys full freedom to say what he thinks ... [ Zoghby ] speaks only for himself personally . With respect to the heart of the problem , the Church must hold fast to the <unk> of marriage . " 
 = = Publications by Elias Zoghby = = 
 We Are All <unk> ( Tous <unk> ? ) . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 019 @-@ 6 
 A Voice from the Byzantine East . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 018 @-@ 9 . This work of ecumenical theology and ecclesiology focuses on the role of the Eastern Catholic Churches in furthering the cause of Christian unity . 
 Ecumenical Reflections . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 06 @-@ 7 . Translated by Bishop Nicholas Samra , 1998 
 St. <unk> , lu par un <unk> d 'Orient . Two volumes 
 Le Credo de l 'Amour . Anthology of poetry 
 Pour vivre notre <unk> . Anthology of poetry 
 Memoires . Un <unk> peu commode , dit @-@ on . Autobiographical reflections 
 Une Experience de Vie en Christ . 
 Quand la <unk> divine se fait Mere . 
 Orthodox Uni , oui ! Uniate , non ! . Reproduced in Eastern Churches Journal , 2 : 3 ( 1995 ) 
 = Bo Xilai = 
 Bo Xilai ( born 3 July 1949 ) is a Chinese former politician . He came to prominence through his tenures as the mayor of Dalian and then the governor of Liaoning . From 2004 to November 2007 , he served as Minister of Commerce . Between 2007 and 2012 , he served as a member of the Central Politburo and secretary of the Communist Party 's Chongqing branch . On 22 September 2013 , Bo was found guilty of corruption , stripped of all his assets , and sentenced to life imprisonment . 
 The son of Bo Yibo , one of the Eight Elders of the Communist Party of China , Bo Xilai is one of the " princelings " of Chinese politics . He cultivated a casual and charismatic image in the media that marked a departure from the normally staid nature of Chinese politics . 
 While serving in Liaoning , Bo held an important niche in the Northeast Area Revitalization Plan . Bo initiated a campaign against organized crime , increased spending on welfare programs , maintained consistent double @-@ digit percentage GDP growth , and campaigned to revive Cultural Revolution @-@ era " red culture " . Bo 's promotion of egalitarian values and the achievements of his " Chongqing model " made him the champion of the Chinese New Left , composed of both Maoists and social democrats disillusioned with the country 's market @-@ based economic reforms and increasing economic inequality . However , the perceived lawlessness of Bo 's anti @-@ corruption campaigns , coupled with concerns about the image he cultivated , made him a controversial figure . 
 Bo was considered a likely candidate for promotion to the elite Politburo Standing Committee in CPC 18th National Congress in 2012 . His political fortunes came to an abrupt end following the Wang Lijun incident , in which his top lieutenant and police chief sought asylum at the American consulate in Chengdu . Wang claimed to have information about the involvement of Bo Xilai and his wife Gu Kailai in the murder of British businessman Neil Heywood , who allegedly had close financial ties to the two . 
 In the fallout , Bo was removed as the party chief of Chongqing in March 2012 and suspended from the politburo the following month . Bo 's dismissal exposed disunity within Communist Party ranks shortly before a leadership transition , and some observers suspected that it was because he threatened Xi Jinping 's future grip on power . He was later stripped of all his party positions , lost his seat at the National People 's Congress , and was eventually expelled from the party . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bo Xilai was the fourth child and second son of prominent Communist Party leader Bo Yibo , one of the Eight Great Eminent Officials , who served as Minister of Finance in the early years of the People 's Republic of China but who fell from favor in 1965 for supporting more open trade relations with the West . When the Cultural Revolution began in 1966 , Bo Yibo was labeled a " rightist " and a " counterrevolutionary " and purged from his posts . He spent the ensuing twelve years in prison , where he was reportedly tortured . His wife , Hu Ming , was abducted by Red Guard in Guangzhou , and was either beaten to death or committed suicide . 
 Bo Xilai was seventeen years old when the Cultural Revolution began , and at the time attended the prestigious No. 4 High School in Beijing , one of the best in the country . In the early years of the Cultural Revolution , Bo is reported to have been an active member of the <unk> Red Guard organization and may have at one point denounced his father . 
 As the political winds of the Cultural Revolution shifted , Bo and his siblings were either imprisoned or sent to the countryside , and Bo Xilai was locked up for five years . After the death of Mao Zedong in 1976 , the members of the Gang of Four were officially blamed for the chaos of the Cultural Revolution , and Bo 's father was released . Bo Yibo was politically rehabilitated , and , in 1979 , became vice premier . 
 After his release , Bo Xilai worked at the Hardware Repair Factory for the Beijing Second Light Industry Bureau . He was admitted to the Peking University by public examination in 1977 . Unlike many of his contemporaries in the Chinese leadership who studied engineering , Bo majored in world history . In the second year of his studies , Bo enlisted in a Master 's program in international journalism at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences , graduating with a master 's degree in 1982 . He joined the Communist Party in October 1980 . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 During the 1980s , the Bo family regained its political influence . Bo Yibo served successively as vice premier and vice @-@ chairman of the Central Advisory Commission . The elder Bo came to be known as one of the " eight elders " ( sometimes referred to as the " Eight Immortals " ) of the Communist Party and was instrumental in the implementation of market reforms in the 1980s . Although he favored more liberal economic policies , the elder Bo was politically conservative , and endorsed the use of military force against demonstrators during the 1989 Tiananmen Square Protests . After the 1989 crackdown , Bo Yibo helped ensure the ascent of Jiang Zemin to succeed Deng Xiaoping as the leader of the Party and helped Jiang consolidate power in the 1990s . Bo Yibo remained a prominent figure in the party until his death in 2007 and was influential in shaping his son 's career . 
 After graduating from university , Bo was assigned to Zhongnanhai – the headquarters of the Communist Party – where he worked with the research office of the CPC Central Committee Secretariat and CPC Central Committee General Office . He soon requested a transfer to the provinces , and in 1984 was appointed deputy party secretary of Jin County ( modern day Jinzhou District , Dalian , Liaoning ) . In an interview with People 's Daily , Bo said that his family name created career obstacles . " For quite a long time people had reservations about me , " he said . Bo subsequently became deputy secretary and then secretary of the party committee of the Dalian Economic and Technological Development Zone and secretary of the Jinzhou party committee . 
 Rising again in rank within the party , he became a member of the Standing Committee of the Dalian Municipal CPC Committee , the city 's top decision @-@ making body , and became the Vice @-@ mayor of Dalian in 1990 . In 1993 , Bo became deputy Party secretary and mayor of Dalian . 
 = = Liaoning = = 
 = = = Mayor of Dalian = = = 
 Bo became acting mayor of Dalian in 1992 and formally assumed the post in 1993 . He remained mayor until 2000 . Bo served as Dalian 's deputy party secretary from 1995 . Bo was promoted to party chief in 1999 and served in that position until 2000 . 
 Bo 's tenure in Dalian was marked by the city 's phenomenal transformation from a drab port city to a modern metropolis , a ' showcase ' of China 's rapid economic growth . In the early 1990s , Bo took some credit for the construction of the Shenyang @-@ Dalian Expressway , China 's first controlled @-@ access freeway , winning accolades for the rapid expansion of infrastructure and for environmental work . Since Bo 's time in office , Dalian became known as one of the cleanest cities in China , having won the UN Habitat Scroll of Honour Award in 1999 . In addition , Bo was an advocate for free enterprise and small businesses , and successfully courted foreign investment from South Korea , Japan , and Western countries . In contrast to his colleagues , he held press conferences at Chinese New Year , and developed a reputation among foreign investors for ' getting things done ' . 
 Bo spent seventeen years in the city of Dalian , a lengthy term in comparison to colleagues of the same rank , who are often transferred to different locales throughout their careers . Despite the accompanying economic growth and rise in living standards , Bo 's tenure in Dalian has sometimes been criticized as having been too focused on aesthetic development projects such as expansive boulevards , monuments , and large public parks . To make way for his large @-@ scale projects , Bo 's administration moved large numbers of local residents from downtown areas into new homes in the city 's outskirts . Dalian 's greenery was dubbed " Xilai Grass " . He also reputedly had a remote control in the Mayor 's office for the fountains on the city 's main square . In addition , he spearheaded the construction of a <unk> in the city . In 2000 , Bo was frontrunner for the post of Mayor of Shenzhen , based on his success in making Dalian the " Hong Kong of the North " . However it was suggested that Bo was too independent and outspoken for the post . The post went to Yu <unk> instead . 
 = = = 15th Party Congress = = = 
 During the 15th Party Congress in 1997 , Bo Xilai 's family launched an unsuccessful campaign to secure his promotion to become a member of the Central Committee of the CCP . Although nepotism was generally frowned upon in China , Bo Yibo 's ambitions for his son were well @-@ known . Bo Yibo advanced the idea that revolutionary elders should ' nominate ' their children to become high officials , and Bo Xilai was selected as his family 's ' representative ' over his older brother Bo Xicheng , ostensibly because of Xilai 's superior academic credentials , which included attendance at the elite Peking University and a master 's degree . 
 In order to secure Bo Xilai 's selection for promotion during the 15th Party Congress , the family launched a nationwide campaign to publicize his son 's " achievements " as mayor of Dalian . They commissioned author Chen <unk> to pen a report portraying Bo as a man who is " as statesman @-@ like as Henry Kissinger , as environmentally conscious as Al Gore , and almost as beloved by the public as Princess Diana . " Despite the publicity campaign , Bo Xilai failed even to gain a seat in the Liaoning provincial delegation to the Party Congress . Ultimately , Bo Yibo helped him gain a seat with the Shanxi delegation , but the younger Bo was unable to secure a promotion . 
 In addition , Bo placed second @-@ last in the confirmation vote for membership in the 15th Central Committee . As he placed in the bottom 5 % of candidates , Bo was denied entry into the elite council , suffering a major political embarrassment . Bo 's failure to get elected was attributed to a general opposition to nepotism within the Party . Moreover , during his tenure in Dalian , Bo caused resentment for the amount of ' special favours ' that he procured for the coastal city at the expense of the rest of the province . His perceived partisan interests locked Bo 's kin in a factional struggle against Li <unk> , one of China 's central leadership figures , who may have created obstacles to his promotion . 
 = = = Provincial Governor = = = 
 In 2001 , a corruption scandal involving former Liaoning governor Zhang <unk> provided an opportunity for Bo 's advancement . Prior to the 15th Party Congress , Bo Yibo and Bo Xilai assisted then @-@ party general secretary Jiang Zemin in preparing to force political rival Qiao Shi into retirement . The Bo family also supported Jiang 's " Three Stresses " ( San Jiang ) campaign in 1997 , which was intended to strengthen ideological conviction and promote internal unity in the Communist Party ; however , the campaign was generally seen as lacklustre by observers and not universally embraced even inside the party leadership . The Bos ' unwavering support for Jiang was said to have worked in Bo Xilai 's favour when the vacancy for Governor of Liaoning opened . Bo became acting governor in 2001 after the dismissal and arrest of Zhang <unk> , and was officially confirmed as governor in 2003 . In his position as governor , which he held until 2004 , Bo gained membership to the Central Committee of the Communist Party . 
 During his tenure in Liaoning , Bo played a critical role in the promotion of the Northeast Area Revitalization Plan . Adopted in 2003 by party authorities , the policy aimed to strengthen economic development in the provinces of Liaoning , Jilin and Heilongjiang . Bo Xilai was particularly enthusiastic about the policy , stating his desire to see the Northeast become " China 's fourth economic engine " ( the others being the Pearl River Delta , Yangtze River Delta , and the Bohai Economic Region ) . 
 The Northeast was at one time known as the " cradle of industrialization " of China . In 1980 , industrial output for Liaoning alone was twice that of the Guangdong . However , the northeast was left behind amidst market reforms of the 1980s and 1990s , while Guangdong and other provinces along the South and East China Sea coasts prospered . Its economy — still largely tied to state @-@ owned enterprises — stagnated relative to other regions , with high unemployment rates . The revitalisation plan aimed to address this by reviving the region 's traditional industries , strengthening trade ties with and encouraging investment from South Korea and Japan , and experimenting with free trade zones in select cities . In 2004 , official media reported that foreign direct investment in Liaoning had nearly doubled since the launch in 2003 of the northeastern rejuvenation strategy . 
 Although Bo established a reputation as a comparatively clean politician during his tenures in Dalian and as governor of Liaoning , he was not immune to corruption allegations . In particular , Bo was the subject of critical investigative reports by Liaoning journalist Jiang <unk> , the whistleblower in the Mu and Ma corruption case in Liaoning – a scandal that Bo benefited from politically . While Bo was not directly involved in the scandal , Jiang accused Bo of providing political cover for his friends and relatives . Jiang was initially sentenced to eight years in prison on trumped @-@ up charges , for which Bo was criticized , but was released after five years under international pressure . Yang Rong , the former chief executive of Brilliance China Automotive who fled to the United States after getting embroiled in a dispute against state property authorities , accused Bo of interfering in his judicial proceedings in Beijing . In addition , Bo openly clashed with Wen Shizhen , then @-@ party secretary in Liaoning who was technically Bo 's superior . Wen reportedly criticized Bo for " developing China 's cities like Europe and its countryside like Africa , " and even held a party to celebrate Bo 's departure from Liaoning in 2004 . 
 Ethan Gutmann , citing Falun Gong allegations that Liaoning was the epicenter of organ harvesting from practitioners while Bo was governor , suggested that he may have used his involvement as a way of building up his political power . David Kilgour , who co @-@ wrote the Kilgour – Matas report on organ harvesting , accused Bo of playing a role . Separately , Falun Gong practitioners abroad filed over ten lawsuits against Bo alleging torture and crimes against humanity In 2009 , a Spanish court indicted Bo Xilai and four other officials for genocide against Falun Gong . 
 = = = 16th Party Congress = = = 
 At the 16th Party Congress in 2002 , Bo 's age , regional tenures , and patronage links fit the profile for a potential candidate to be groomed for the " 5th generation of leaders " that would assume power in 2012 . His chief competitors were seen as Xi Jinping , then party chief of Zhejiang , and Li <unk> , a populist <unk> candidate who was the Governor of Henan . As with the 15th Party Congress five years earlier , the elder Bo lobbied for his son 's promotion . The Bo family enjoyed the patronage of Jiang Zemin . However , Bo Xilai 's unequivocal support for Jiang strengthened the reluctance of his political opponents to support his nomination . Ultimately , although Bo remained a top contender for higher promotion , Xi and Li remained the main candidates to succeed Hu Jintao as Paramount leader . 
 = = Minister of Commerce = = 
 When Hu Jintao succeeded Jiang Zemin as General Secretary in late 2002 , Bo 's career as a local official ended with his appointment to Minister of Commerce in Wen Jiabao 's cabinet to replace Lü <unk> , who retired for health reasons . Bo also earned a seat on the 16th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China . 
 Bo 's stint as Minister of Commerce significantly raised his international profile and generated media attention both in China and abroad . Described as good @-@ looking , articulate and open @-@ minded in his approach to problems , Bo 's rise from a municipal official to the central government generated great media fanfare and elevated his status to something of a ' political star . ' Bo 's political persona was considered a departure from the generally serious and conservative leadership in Beijing . With his youthful vigour , populism , and purported popularity with female reporters , Bo 's political rise had been compared to that of John F. Kennedy . 
 Bo presided over a continued rise in foreign investment in China as Minister of Commerce . His daily schedule was dominated by receiving foreign guests and dignitaries . By the time that he became Minister , he spoke relatively fluent and colloquial English . During a meeting with American officials , Bo reputedly told a struggling interpreter to stop translating because the Chinese officials could understand English and it was wasting time . In May 2004 Bo was one of the few ministers hand @-@ picked to accompany Premier Wen Jiabao on a five @-@ country trip to Europe . The trade policy of the United States toward China also sparked significant controversy . Bo maintained a conciliatory but assertive attitude as he attended talks in Washington . On his trips to the United States , he conducted substantive discussions with his American counterparts and signed agreements on intellectual property , the services sector , agricultural products , food safety , and consumer protection . 
 Bo also oversaw the restructuring of the Ministry , formed from the amalgamation of the National Economics and Commerce Bureau and the Department of International Trade . Bo sought to balance the amount of attention given to foreign investors and domestic commercial institutions . He began tackling the imbalance from the retail sector , whose success up to that point was largely dependent on foreign companies . He drew up plans to protect Chinese industries ' competitive position within a domestic market that was quickly being crowded out by foreign competition . 
 = = = 17th Party Congress = = = 
 At the 17th Party Congress in October 2007 , Bo gained a seat on the 25 @-@ member Politburo , effectively China 's ruling council . He was then tipped to leave the Ministry of Commerce and take over as party chief of Chongqing . Bo 's predecessor , political rival Wang Yang , was reassigned as party chief of Guangdong . 
 At the time , Chongqing was reeling from problems such as air and water pollution , unemployment , poor public health , and complications from the Three Gorges Dam . According to analysts , Hu wanted to transfer his ally Wang Yang out of Chongqing before these problems intensified . Bo was initially reluctant to go to Chongqing and was reportedly unhappy with his new assignment . He had hoped to become vice @-@ premier instead , but Premier Wen Jiabao and Vice @-@ premier Wu Yi argued against Bo 's promotion to vice @-@ premiership . In particular , Wu was critical of Bo 's penchant for self @-@ promotion , and Wen cited international lawsuits against Bo by Falun Gong adherents as a barrier to his holding higher office . 
 Bo took up the Chongqing post on 30 November , a month following the conclusion of the Congress , even though Wang Yang had vacated the position on 13 November . Whilst some saw this transfer as a ' banishment ' from the central government to the hinterlands to keep Bo 's perceived arrogance and high @-@ profile antics out of Beijing 's view , others considered it a promotion since being the party chief in one of the four direct @-@ controlled municipalities came with an ex officio seat on the Politburo . 
 = = Chongqing = = 
 = = = The Chongqing model = = = 
 Although Bo was initially unhappy about his reassignment in Chongqing , he soon resolved to use his new position as a staging ground for a return to higher national office . Bo made no secret of his desire to enter the nine @-@ member Politburo Standing Committee ( PSC ) during the 18th Party Congress in autumn 2012 , as all but two of the PSC members — including President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao — were expected to retire . The transition would be an opportunity for Bo to join the highest echelon of national leadership , likely as a replacement for ally Zhou Yongkang , secretary of the Central Political and Legislative Committee , serving as the head of the party 's security apparatus . 
 In Chongqing , Bo pioneered a new style of governance dubbed the " Chongqing Model " – a set of social and economic policies intended to address diverse challenges facing modern China following economic reforms . 
 The <unk> model was characterized in part by increased state control and the promotion of a neo @-@ leftist ideology . Along with his police chief Wang Lijun , Bo launched a sweeping campaign against organized crime , and increased the security and police presence in the city . Critics noted these policies were accompanied by the erosion of the rule of law , and allegations surfaced of political and personal rivals being victimized amidst Bo 's anti @-@ corruption drive . As a means of addressing declining public morality , Bo launched a " red culture " movement to promote Maoist @-@ era socialist ethics . On the economic front , he actively courted foreign investment — much as he had done in Liaoning . The Chongqing model was also characterized by massive public works programs , subsidized housing for the poor , and social policies intended to make it easier for rural citizens to move to the city , thus reaping the benefits of urban status . Some have compared Bo 's governing style to Russian president Vladimir Putin . 
 The Chongqing model provided an alternate development paradigm that diverged from the policies preferred by those in the national leadership seen as favouring further reform such as Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao . Bo 's leadership in Chongqing dramatically raised his profile , both nationally and internationally . In 2010 , he was named as one of the ' World 's 100 Most Influential People in 2010 ' by Time . Observers noted that , in China 's non @-@ electoral political system , Bo 's high @-@ profile presence and bold political maneuvers essentially amounted to a public ' election campaign ' for the top leadership . However , he drew the ire of some of the country 's leaders ; President Hu and Premier Wen were reluctant to acknowledge Bo publicly , ostensibly due to a discomfort over his leadership style . 
 = = = = Organized crime = = = = 
 Bo 's tenure in Chongqing was dominated by a protracted war against organized crime and corruption known as dahei ( " striking the black " ) . Between 2009 and 2011 , an estimated 5 @,@ 700 people were arrested in the sweeping campaign that ensnared not only criminals , but also businessmen , members of the police force , judges , government officials , and political adversaries . The campaign was overseen by Chongqing police chief Wang Lijun , whom Bo had worked with previously in Liaoning . 
 Wen Qiang , one of the most prominent figures implicated in the trials , had been a prominent municipal official since the days of party chiefs He <unk> and Wang Yang . Wen , the former executive deputy commissioner of the Chongqing police force Public Security for 16 years , was tried and convicted of a litany of crimes and sentenced to death in a sensational headline @-@ grabbing trial . Contrary to the popular perception at the time that the campaign was part of Bo 's perceived penchant for self @-@ promotion , China observer Willy Lam suggested that such a large @-@ scale crackdown will have received approval from central authorities , including Hu Jintao , and that Bo became careful to not let Chongqing appear to be trying to ' set an example ' for the rest of the country so he could benefit from the success politically . 
 The dahei campaign earned Bo national recognition and widespread popularity in Chongqing — all the more because of the city 's historical reputation as a center for criminal activity . In contrast to often colorless and orthodox politicians , Bo gained the reputation as a party boss that " got things done . " The apparent success of dahei earned Bo ' rock star status ' , and resulted in calls to replicate the campaign on a nationwide scale . Through the campaign , Bo gained the support of a number of powerful members of the Politburo Standing Committee , including Wu Bangguo , Jia Qinglin , Li Changchun , Xi Jinping and Zhou Yongkang , all of whom visited Chongqing or praised Bo 's achievements sometime between 2010 and 2011 . 
 However , Bo 's campaign was criticized for running roughshod over judicial due process and eroding the rule of law . Individuals targeted in the campaign were arbitrarily detained by the authorities , with an estimated 1 @,@ 000 being sent to forced labor . Lawyers for the accused were intimidated and harassed , and in at least one case , sentenced to 18 months in prison . Allegations also surfaced over the use of torture to extract confessions . Moreover , assets seized during the campaign were allegedly redirected to help pay for Bo 's popular social housing programs . The Wall Street Journal reported that $ 11 billion went into government coffers through the campaign . Li Jun , a fugitive businessman , asserted that he became a target of Bo anti @-@ corruption drive as a result of a land dispute with the government . When he refused government demands to give up the land , he claims that he was abducted and tortured , and that $ 700 million worth of assets in his business were seized . 
 = = = = Red culture movement = = = = 
 During his time in Chongqing , Bo initiated a series of Maoist @-@ style campaigns to revive ' red culture ' and improve public morale . The initiative included the promotion of Maoist quotes , ' red ' songs , revolutionary television programming and operas , and initiatives to encourage students to work in the countryside , akin to the way students were required to do during the Down to the Countryside Movement of the Cultural Revolution . As part of the movement , Bo and the city 's Media Department initiated a " Red Songs campaign " that demanded every district , government department , commercial enterprise , educational institution , state radio and TV stations begin singing ' red songs ' praising the achievements of the Communist Party . Bo pledged to reinvigorate the city with the Marxist ideals reminiscent of the Mao era . 
 Prior to the 60th Anniversary of the People 's Republic of China celebrations , for instance , Bo sent out ' red text messages ' to the city 's 13 million cellphone users . According to Xinhua , Bo 's text messages were usually quotes from Mao 's Little Red Book , and include phrases such as " I like how chairman Mao puts it : The world is ours , we will all have to work together , " and " responsibility and seriousness can conquer the world , and the Chinese Communist Party members represent these qualities . " Bo and his team of municipal administrators also erected new Mao statues in Chongqing , while providing ' social security apartments ' to the city 's less well @-@ off . Some scholars have characterized this as an example of the revival of Maoism in the Chinese Communist ethos . 
 Reactions to the red culture movement were divided . Bo 's revival of Mao @-@ era culture and accompanying social welfare programs were popular within much of the middle to lower income strata of Chongqing society , and made Bo a star with both conventional Marxists and neo @-@ leftists . Bo won praise for returning the city to what some called China 's ' true socialist heritage ' by de @-@ emphasizing material wealth , and evoked nostalgia to the social egalitarianism that existed during Mao 's time . Some retirees were particularly inspired and said they wanted to pass on " revolutionary spirit " to their children , while others participated as a means to praise the Communist Party for the country 's economic progress . 
 The campaign also had many detractors . Some intellectuals and reformers criticized the campaign for being regressive , akin to " being drowned in a red sea " , and bringing back painful memories from the Cultural Revolution . Several mid @-@ level officials in the city committed suicide due to overwhelming pressure to organize events for the red songs campaign . Bo 's critics derisively referred to him as " little Mao " . 
 = = = = Social policies = = = = 
 A cornerstone of Bo 's Chongqing model involved a series of egalitarian social policies aimed to lessen the gap between rich and poor , and ease the rural @-@ urban divide . Bo promoted the notion of pursuing " red GDP " — an economic model embodying communist egalitarianism — and suggested that , if economic development were analogous to ' baking a cake ' , then the primary task should be to divide the cake fairly rather than building a larger cake . 
 To that end , the city reportedly spent $ 15 @.@ 8 billion on public apartment complexes for use by recent college graduates , migrant workers and low @-@ income residents . In 2007 , the cities of Chongqing and Chengdu were selected to run pilot projects intended to mitigate the rural @-@ urban divide and ease integration of rural residents into the cities . Under China 's hukou registration system , citizens were classified as either rural or urban — a distinction that determines not only where they could live , but also affected educational opportunities , health benefits , taxation , and property rights , effectively making them ' second class citizens ' . Of Chongqing 's 32 million residents , only 27 % held urban hukou as of 2007 . The 2007 project made it easier for rural residents to obtain urban status , a policy intended not only to help balance inequality , but also to enable the government to develop underused rural land . Under Bo 's leadership , Chongqing established " land exchanges " where rural villages could earn credits for maximizing farmland . 
 Bo 's approach to social policy was demonstrated during the November 2008 taxi strikes , which saw over 8 @,@ 000 taxi drivers take to the streets for two days in protests over high fees , unregulated competition and rising fuel costs . Similar protests in China were frequently suppressed — sometimes forcefully — with official media sometimes blaming labor unrest on criminal instigation . Bo 's government instead held a televised roundtable dialogues with the protesters and citizens , and agreed to allow the formation of a trade union . His handling of the situation earned him praise as a comparatively restrained and progressive leader . 
 = = = = Economic policies = = = = 
 Another major component of Bo 's Chongqing model concerned the city 's economic policies . Just as he had done in Liaoning , Bo ambitiously pursued foreign investment in the city , lowering corporate income tax rates ( 15 % compared to the 25 % national average ) , and sought to stimulate rapid urbanization and industrialization . He also carried on with policies initiated by his predecessors which focused on domestic consumption , rather than export @-@ led growth . During his tenure , Chongqing reported annual GDP growth far exceeding the national average . In 2008 , for instance , nationwide GDP growth was reported at 8 % , while Chongqing reported 14 @.@ 3 % ; the same year , foreign trade rose by 28 % , and bank loans were up 29 % . 
 Bo 's model of economic growth won national and international praise for seamlessly combining foreign investment and state @-@ led growth . However , Bo 's critics called the model of " red GDP " – subsidized infrastructure , housing and public works projects – unsustainable and a drain on the city 's budget . Some civil servants complained that they were not getting salaries on time . Chongqing received a disproportionately high share ( some $ 34 billion ) of stimulus money from Beijing in 2008 . Political rivals such as Bo 's predecessor Wang Yang also suggested that economic figures in Chongqing were " rigged " — artificially inflated through unnecessary construction and public works projects . 
 = = = Leadership style = = = 
 Although many of Bo 's campaigns earned popular support , especially from the city 's poor , his leadership style has been described as " propagandistic , " " ruthless , " and " arrogant " by subordinates and city officials , academics , journalists , and other professionals . Michael Wines of The New York Times wrote that although Bo was possessed of " prodigious charisma and deep intelligence , " these qualities were offset by a " studied indifference to the wrecked lives that littered his path to power ... Mr. Bo 's ruthlessness stood out , even in a system where the absence of formal rules ensures that only the strongest advance . " Bo placed onerous demands on government officials in the city , requiring them to be available to work all day and all night , seven days a week . He reportedly called subordinates to late @-@ night meetings , publicly criticized and humiliated those with whom he disagreed , and even hit underlings who failed to meet his demands . According to a psychologist quoted by the Daily Telegraph , since Bo Xilai assumed power , " depression , burn out and suicides have all risen among officials ... Officials now make up the largest share of patients [ seeking ] counselling in the city . " 
 In late 2009 , a popular investigative television show on China Central Television aired a critical story on Bo 's anti @-@ crime drive , expressing concern over the apparent disregard for legal due process . In response , Bo utilized his connections to have the show 's host temporarily banned from the airwaves , and its producer moved to another program . Others who opposed Bo 's initiatives were also met with retribution . Li Zhuang , a defense lawyer from Beijing , was sentenced to two and a half years in prison ( later reduced to 18 months ) in 2009 for attempting to defend one of the high @-@ profile targets of Bo 's crackdown . Cheng Li , a scholar at the Brookings Institution , said that " Nobody really trusts [ Bo ] : a lot of people are scared of him , including several princelings who are supposed to be his power base . " 
 = = = Alleged eavesdropping operations = = = 
 As part of Bo 's efforts to fight crime and maintain social and political stability in Chongqing , he initiated a major electronic surveillance operation . Wang Lijun , Chongqing 's police chief , served as the architect of the state @-@ funded project , which was described in official media as a " comprehensive package bugging system covering telecommunications to the Internet . " The system involved wiretaps , eavesdropping , and monitoring of internet communications , and was designed with the help of cybersecurity expert Fang <unk> , known for his pivotal role in the construction of China 's Great Firewall . 
 According The New York Times , the eavesdropping operations did not only target local criminals , but also the communications of top Chinese leaders , including those of the General Secretary , President Hu Jintao . One source connected to the Chinese leadership said that Bo tried to monitor nearly all central leaders who had visited Chongqing in order to better understand what they thought of him . In August 2011 , a phone call between Hu Jintao and anti @-@ corruption official Ma Wen was found to be wiretapped under Bo 's orders . The revelations about the eavesdropping operation resulted in intense scrutiny from the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection . It was also said to have sowed distrust and played a role in the falling out of Bo and his police chief Wang Lijun , who allegedly began to use the same eavesdropping methods against Bo himself . The operations were believed to have contributed to Bo 's downfall in 2012 . 
 = = = Death of Neil Heywood = = = 
 On 14 November 2011 , British citizen Neil Heywood was found dead in his Chongqing hotel room . At the time , local authorities declared he had died from alcohol over @-@ consumption , though his family noted that he was not a heavy drinker . The official cause of death was not scrutinized until several months later , when revelations emerged that Heywood 's death was a homicide , and Bo Xilai was implicated . 
 Heywood served as an intermediary linking western companies to powerful Chinese politicians . He was a long @-@ time associate of the Bo family : he reportedly shared a close personal relationship with Bo 's wife , Gu Kailai , and had helped the couple 's son Bo Guagua earn admission to Harrow School in England . Heywood also allegedly served as a middleman for the family , helping them clandestinely move large sums of money overseas . 
 In October 2011 , Heywood reportedly had a business dispute with Bo 's wife , Gu Kailai , when he demanded a higher commission for his services . The dispute escalated , with Heywood ultimately threatening to reveal the family 's business dealings and overseas assets , estimated to total in excess of $ 136 million . Heywood was then allegedly poisoned by Gu and an assistant . Gu would be convicted of the murder and receive a suspended death sentence in August 2012 . 
 = = Downfall = = 
 = = = Wang Lijun incident = = = 
 In early 2012 , the party 's Central Commission for Discipline Inspection bolstered its presence within Chongqing as the city 's leaders came under investigation . Much of the attention focused on Bo 's police chief , Wang Lijun , who may have been under investigation for his role in a corruption case in Liaoning . Growing scrutiny over the city 's wiretapping operation against senior leaders also likely fell mainly on Wang . Although details are scarce , several sources have suggested that Wang 's resentment against Bo grew amidst the investigations — resentment that was compounded when Wang realized that he and his wife had also been targets of wiretapping under Bo 's orders . 
 Moreover , Wang was privy to details of Neil Heywood 's death , and had reportedly attempted to voice his concerns to Bo about alleged poisoning . Around 16 January , Wang is believed to have confronted Bo over evidence that implicated Bo 's wife in the murder . Although Bo initially agreed to allow an inquiry , he then changed course and sought to obstruct investigations . Wang was abruptly demoted on 2 February to the far less prestigious position of Vice @-@ mayor overseeing education , science , and environmental affairs . Bo placed Wang under surveillance , and several of his close associates were reportedly taken into custody . Some reports allege that Bo may have been plotting to have Wang assassinated . 
 On 6 February 2012 , apparently fearing for his life , Wang traveled to the U.S. consulate in the nearby city of Chengdu , bringing evidence implicating Bo and his family in the Neil Heywood murder . According to reports , Wang sought and was denied asylum in the United States . He remained in the consulate for approximately 24 hours before leaving " of his own volition " and being taken into the custody of state security officials dispatched from Beijing . Local media in Chongqing announced that he was on a mental health @-@ related sick leave . 
 A day after Wang 's leave , several overseas Chinese @-@ language news websites posted an open letter allegedly penned by Wang , which sharply criticized Bo as a " hypocrite " and " the greatest gangster in China " and accused Bo of corruption . Without knowing what incriminating material Wang may have held against Bo , even Bo 's supporters in China 's top leadership were reluctant to vouch for him . Bo responded in an unusually open press conference during the 2012 National People 's Congress , acknowledging " negligent supervision " of his subordinates , saying he may have " relied upon the wrong person " . 
 = = = Removal from posts = = = 
 On 15 March , Bo was dismissed as Chongqing party chief and its related municipal posts , while temporarily retaining a seat on the Politburo . Due to the potentially destructive effects Bo 's dismissal would have on party unity , party elders were consulted on the matter . The decision was reportedly made at a meeting of the Politburo Standing Committee on 7 March , during which security tsar Zhou Yongkang cast a lone dissenting vote . On 14 March , Bo was reprimanded by Premier Wen Jiabao during the Premier 's annual press conference . Wen called the achievements of Chongqing " significant , " but the result of " multiple administrations , " i.e. , not just Bo himself . Wen also made numerous allusions to the damage wrought by the Cultural Revolution , an indirect rebuke of Bo 's efforts to revive " red culture " . Addressing high @-@ level political changes by a Premier to an open public forum was unprecedented . Political observers believe that Wen 's remarks and Bo 's downfall represented a consensus within the central leadership that Bo not only needed to shoulder the responsibility for the Wang Lijun scandal , but also represented a political triumph for the ' liberal reformer ' wing of the Communist Party . 
 On 10 April , Bo was suspended from the party 's Central Committee and its Politburo , pending investigation for " serious disciplinary violations . " Bo 's wife , Gu Kailai , was now a prime suspect in the inquiry into the death of British businessman Neil Heywood . The announcements , carrying criminal implications , served as something of a death knell for Bo 's political career . 
 On 28 September , the Politburo of the Communist Party of China adopted a decision to expel him from the party . The decision was ratified by a full plenary session of the Central Committee on November 4 . He was accused of major disciplinary violations and corruption charges during his tenure in Dalian , the Ministry of Commerce and Chongqing , including in relation to the Gu Kailai case . 
 On 26 October , the Standing Committee of the 11th National People 's Congress expelled him as a deputy to the national legislature , removing his final public post and setting the stage for his trial . When he was ejected from the Communist Party , the official announcement also mentioned that he had " had or maintained improper sexual relations with multiple women . " Rumors also spread that he had an affair with the star actress of Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon , Zhang Ziyi ; Zhang racked up significant legal bills attempting to sue the sources of the rumour for defamation . During the trial , Bo admitted that he had fallen out with his wife because of an affair he had in the 1990s , prompting her to move to the United Kingdom to be near their son , Guagua . 
 = = = Public reactions = = = 
 Bo 's downfall elicited strong reactions among the Chinese public and with commentators across the political spectrum . Leftist websites such as Utopia , Red China , and <unk> were full of angry commentary over Bo 's dismissal . These websites were shut down for a period of " maintenance " shortly after . Leftist commentators voiced support for Bo : Kong <unk> called Bo 's dismissal ' a plot by enemies of the state ' ; Sima Nan said associating Bo with the Cultural Revolution was a ' smear campaign ' ; Sima 's pro @-@ Bo microblogs were censored . Large numbers of sympathetic posts for Bo appeared in microblogs from Chongqing , and Dalian , where Bo was once mayor . The Global Times also wrote a sympathetic editorial . Liberal media reacted positively , criticizing Bo 's style of ' personality @-@ based rule ' as dangerous and regressive . Right @-@ leaning commentators said Bo 's downfall signified a ' correct orientation ' to China 's future development . Southern Media Group editor Yan <unk> remarked that Bo correctly identified China 's problems but prescribed the wrong solution . <unk> whose assets were seized by Bo 's administration in Chongqing also reacted positively . 
 Bo 's dismissal caused political shockwaves unseen since the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 , and exposing internal conflicts within Communist Party . In the weeks following 15 March , party authorities deliberated on Bo 's case . In the absence of official reports of the proceedings , microblogs churned out a flood of speculation , including rumours of a coup . In response , the authorities instructed newspapers and websites to strictly report only official releases , and arrested six people accused of ' <unk> ' . 
 Aware of its potentially divisive impact , authorities carefully controlled media coverage of Bo 's removal from office . State media reported ' pledges of loyalty ' to the party 's decision to disgrace Bo , including statements from the new Chongqing party authorities , Beijing municipal organs , and grassroots party members rallying to the party line . The party 's mouthpiece People 's Daily issued a front @-@ page editorial calling for unity behind the " correct decision " . The military held ' political education ' sessions on short notice , stressing unity and loyalty to the Party under the leadership of Hu Jintao . Bo 's downfall also affected his ally Zhou Yongkang , who had reportedly relinquished his operational control over Chinese security institutions and lost the right to influence who would succeed him at the 18th Party Congress . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 In July 2013 , Chinese prosecution authorities charged Bo with bribery , abuse of power and corruption , paving the way for his trial . In the build @-@ up to the trial , Song <unk> , a prominent leftist supporter of Bo was detained by police after he urged people to protest against the trial . The verdict and sentence brought to close one of the most lurid political scandals in the history of Communist China and concluded Bo 's downfall . This was largely set in motion by his wife 's murder of a British businessman , followed by a defection of his top aide , who had information about the murder case , to a U.S. consulate just before a power transition . A few days before the trial , Wang <unk> , a prominent forensic scientist who was vice director of the Chinese Forensic Medicine Association and of the Supreme Court 's Prosecutorial Research Center , resigned from her positions . Wang had publicly questioned the forensic evidence used in the trial of Bo 's wife Gu Kailai . Defense counsel for Bo was Beijing @-@ based <unk> Law Offices , a corporate law firm with deep political connections to the state . A Wall Street Journal article on the law firm 's role in the trial described it as acting as an " intermediary " that facilitated between Bo , his relatives and prosecutors the negotiation of " an outcome acceptable to all sides in the run @-@ up to the trial — and to help ensure that the trial itself goes according to plan " . 
 On 22 August 2013 , the Jinan Intermediate People 's Court heard Bo 's case . The proceedings of the trial were being relayed in real @-@ time by the court 's official microblog account , though journalists covering the trial needed to belong to a pre @-@ approved list . Bo was charged with receiving 21 @.@ 79 million yuan ( US $ 3 @.@ 56 million ) from businessmen Xu Ming and Tang Xiaolin , which he denied . At the trial Xu Ming testified that he gave Bo 's wife Gu Kailai $ 3 @.@ 23 million in 2000 to buy a villa in France , and that he paid for their son Bo Guagua 's travel and credit card bills . Bo Xilai cross @-@ examined Xu and denied knowledge of many of the payments . 
 Bo 's trial concluded on 26 August 2013 . On 22 September , the court found him guilty on all counts , including accepting bribes and abuses of power , stripped him of all his personal assets , and sentenced him to life imprisonment . Not long after the trial , on 6 November , citizen activist Wang Zheng established the Zhi Xian Party , which supports Communist Party rule but criticizes it failing to uphold the constitution . Bo Xilai was elected the party 's " Chairman for life " . 
 Chinese attempts to confiscate a € 6 @.@ 95 million villa in Cannes , bought and held for Bo through intermediaries , are ongoing . 
 = = = Aftermath and epilogue = = = 
 After Bo was jailed , the aftermath of the events set off by the Wang Lijun incident continued to reverberate across the Chinese political landscape . Xi Jinping 's accession to power resulted in a series of major political changes with significant consequences . Bo 's erstwhile supporter Zhou Yongkang retired in 2012 , but was caught up in Xi Jinping 's anti @-@ corruption dragnet in 2013 , detained for investigation , and eventually sentenced to life in prison . In addition , Zhou was unable to select the successor to his office possibly as a result of his role in the Bo Xilai scandal . The head of the Central Political and Legal Affairs Commission , which Zhou headed , no longer held a seat on the Politburo Standing Committee following the 18th Party Congress , as the number of seats on the body were reduced from nine to seven . The anti @-@ corruption campaign following the 18th Party Congress became the biggest of its kind in the history of China under Communist rule . By 2014 , Bo had been branded by some media outlets outside of China as part of a so @-@ called " New Gang of Four " composed of disgraced officials Zhou Yongkang , Xu <unk> , and Ling <unk> . 
 Bo 's chief ideological rival , former Guangdong party chief Wang Yang , went on to become Vice @-@ Premier holding the portfolios of agriculture , commerce , and poverty reduction . Wen Jiabao , who was seen as Bo 's foremost critic in the top leadership , suffered significant public embarrassment himself over a New York Times article about his family 's vast empire of wealth whose release coincided closely with Bo 's dismissal . Huang <unk> , the mayor of Chongqing long seen as an ally of Bo , continued his political career basically unscathed . Wang Lijun was sentenced to fifteen years in prison for defection , corruption , and abuse of power . 
 = = Political alignment and affiliations = = 
 In the course of his career , Bo Xilai was the beneficiary of considerable patronage from former Communist Party leader Jiang Zemin . He is thus associated with Jiang 's faction , sometimes referred to as the " elitists , " that is generally known to favor a model that emphasizes free trade , economic development in the coastal regions , and export @-@ led growth . It is a coalition composed largely of " princelings " ( the children of high @-@ ranking former party leaders ) , business people , leaders of coastal cities , and members of the erstwhile " Shanghai clique " . By contrast , the " populist " coalition of Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao advocated more balanced economic development and improvements to China 's social safety net . The populist faction comprised rural leaders , socialist intellectuals , and several leaders who rose to prominence through their connections with the Communist Youth League . 
 While Bo was initially identified with the elitist bloc during his time in Liaoning and as Minister of Commerce , during his tenure in the interior city of Chongqing , he adopted a number of populist policies typically associated with the conservative left . Namely , he implemented social housing programs , gave residency status ( and therefore the associated social welfare benefits ) to rural migrant workers , and emphasized a need for a more balanced distribution of wealth . Although Bo relentlessly pursued technology , capital , and business opportunities , he also spearheaded a large number of government programs to help the working class and disadvantaged groups . Bo 's campaigns against corruption also allegedly seized the assets of private entrepreneurs , in turn allegedly funneling these funds into his own personal wealth , as well as ( more publicly ) state projects and welfare programs , effectively re @-@ asserting state control over wealth . He also sought to promote " red culture , " and mandated the revival of Mao @-@ era slogans and songs , evoking memories that were romantic to the conservative left , but painful to the liberal right of Chinese politics . 
 Bo 's policies in Chongqing ultimately made him a prominent figure among neo @-@ Maoists and leftists , and a representative of the conservative wing of the Communist Party . Although Bo did not favor the discontinuation of market economics or a return to Mao @-@ era policies , he was seen to advocate a strong role for the state in peoples ' lives . Bo 's anti @-@ corruption campaign , in particular , earned him a reputation for heavy @-@ handedness and authoritarian methods in crime and punishment . Bo 's policies put him in opposition to the more liberal and reform @-@ oriented faction , particularly Premier Wen Jiabao and Guangdong party chief Wang Yang , who favored the strengthening of rule of law and a continuation of political reform . To observers , Bo and Wang 's verbal jousting over the future direction of development marked an increasing polarization of Chinese politics into leftist and reformer camps . 
 = = Family = = 
 Bo 's first wife was Li <unk> , the daughter of former Beijing Party First Secretary Li <unk> . They wed in September 1976 and had a son , " Brendan " Li Wangzhi ( <unk> ) , the following year . Their son graduated from Columbia University in 2001 . Li <unk> insisted that her son change his surname to Li following her divorce from Bo Xilai in 1984 . Li Wangzhi was reportedly low @-@ key and modest and was not commonly associated with his father during the latter 's political heyday . Li Wangzhi obtained a master 's degree in media studies and worked for a few years at Citibank , then worked for a law firm in Beijing ; he eventually went into private equity . Li had remarked publicly that his father 's arrest " destroyed his life " . In 2014 , Li released a statement on his microblog feed revealing that his father was doing well in prison and that medical treatment is available to him should he need it . Li wrote , " life is short ... if the law allows , I would like to see him more . Come to think of it , the only times I 've seen him [ since 2007 ] was at funerals , in the courtroom , or in prison . " 
 Bo married his second wife , Gu Kailai , in 1986 . Gu was a prominent lawyer and founder of the Kailai law firm in Beijing . She was said to have overcome a trying childhood during nationwide strife and worked her way to become a well @-@ regarded lawyer and prominent politician 's wife . Gu 's father , Gu <unk> , was a Communist revolutionary . Her mother , Fan <unk> , is a descendant of the renowned Song Dynasty chancellor and poet Fan Zhongyan . In 2013 , Gu was convicted of the murder of British businessman Neil Heywood after a dispute over money which purportedly escalated until he threatened her son 's life . She was sentenced to death with a two @-@ year reprieve , which is typically commuted to life imprisonment . 
 Bo Xilai drew criticism from others in the party for his high @-@ profile courting of media attention and using his family pedigree to further the interests of his wife and her law firm . Bo denied that his wife had profited from his position , saying that his wife had retired her legal practice while the couple lived in Dalian in the 1990s . Bo said that Gu " now basically just stays at home , doing some housework for me . " Jiang <unk> claimed that Gu served as Bo 's " gatekeeper " when Bo was the mayor of Dalian , regularly accepting gifts and bribes from property developers seeking access to him , and from Party officials seeking government appointments . There was speculation that Bo Xilai may have attempted to interfere with a corruption investigation into his wife prior to the Wang Lijun incident . 
 Bo and Gu have one son , Bo <unk> , who is better known as Bo Guagua . He attended Harrow School in the United Kingdom , and was later admitted to Balliol College , Oxford , where in 2006 he started studying for a degree in Philosophy , Politics and Economics . Guagua then went on to study public administration at Harvard 's Kennedy School of Government . Bo Guagua 's high @-@ profile and privileged lifestyle , including luxury cars and frequent social events , has provided tabloid fodder for Chinese @-@ language media . Both Guagua and his father had repeatedly denied allegations that Guagua was the ' playboy prince ' that he was often portrayed , claiming that Guagua got by on a modest allowance and attended social events to only to " broaden his horizons . " Asked how he could afford his son 's tuition fees on his estimated annual salary of $ 22 @,@ 000 , Bo replied that his son received " full scholarships " from the respective institutions . However , the veracity of this assertion has been questioned by several sources . Maclean 's reported that Bo 's family associate Heywood pulled strings to have Guagua accepted into Harrow , shortly after becoming involved with Bo . 
 Bo <unk> , Bo Xilai 's eldest brother , is a vice @-@ chairman and executive director of Hong Kong @-@ listed China <unk> International , but he was purportedly listed under a pseudonym , ' Li <unk> ' . The company declined to confirm if Li <unk> and Bo <unk> are one and the same . 
 = Force = 
 In physics , a force is any interaction that , when unopposed , will change the motion of an object . In other words , a force can cause an object with mass to change its velocity ( which includes to begin moving from a state of rest ) , i.e. , to accelerate . Force can also be described by intuitive concepts such as a push or a pull . A force has both magnitude and direction , making it a vector quantity . It is measured in the SI unit of newtons and represented by the symbol F. 
 The original form of Newton 's second law states that the net force acting upon an object is equal to the rate at which its momentum changes with time . If the mass of the object is constant , this law implies that the acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net force acting on the object , is in the direction of the net force , and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object 
 Related concepts to force include : thrust , which increases the velocity of an object ; drag , which decreases the velocity of an object ; and torque , which produces changes in rotational speed of an object . In an extended body , each part usually applies forces on the adjacent parts ; the distribution of such forces through the body is the so @-@ called mechanical stress . Pressure is a simple type of stress . Stress usually causes deformation of solid materials , or flow in fluids . 
 = = Development of the concept = = 
 Philosophers in antiquity used the concept of force in the study of stationary and moving objects and simple machines , but thinkers such as Aristotle and Archimedes retained fundamental errors in understanding force . In part this was due to an incomplete understanding of the sometimes non @-@ obvious force of friction , and a consequently inadequate view of the nature of natural motion . A fundamental error was the belief that a force is required to maintain motion , even at a constant velocity . Most of the previous misunderstandings about motion and force were eventually corrected by Galileo Galilei and Sir Isaac Newton . With his mathematical insight , Sir Isaac Newton formulated laws of motion that were not improved @-@ on for nearly three hundred years . By the early 20th century , Einstein developed a theory of relativity that correctly predicted the action of forces on objects with increasing momenta near the speed of light , and also provided insight into the forces produced by gravitation and inertia . 
 With modern insights into quantum mechanics and technology that can accelerate particles close to the speed of light , particle physics has devised a Standard Model to describe forces between particles smaller than atoms . The Standard Model predicts that exchanged particles called gauge bosons are the fundamental means by which forces are emitted and absorbed . Only four main interactions are known : in order of decreasing strength , they are : strong , electromagnetic , weak , and gravitational . High @-@ energy particle physics observations made during the 1970s and 1980s confirmed that the weak and electromagnetic forces are expressions of a more fundamental electroweak interaction . 
 = = Pre @-@ Newtonian concepts = = 
 Since antiquity the concept of force has been recognized as integral to the functioning of each of the simple machines . The mechanical advantage given by a simple machine allowed for less force to be used in exchange for that force acting over a greater distance for the same amount of work . Analysis of the characteristics of forces ultimately culminated in the work of Archimedes who was especially famous for formulating a treatment of buoyant forces inherent in fluids . 
 Aristotle provided a philosophical discussion of the concept of a force as an integral part of Aristotelian cosmology . In Aristotle 's view , the terrestrial sphere contained four elements that come to rest at different " natural places " therein . Aristotle believed that motionless objects on Earth , those composed mostly of the elements earth and water , to be in their natural place on the ground and that they will stay that way if left alone . He distinguished between the innate tendency of objects to find their " natural place " ( e.g. , for heavy bodies to fall ) , which led to " natural motion " , and unnatural or forced motion , which required continued application of a force . This theory , based on the everyday experience of how objects move , such as the constant application of a force needed to keep a cart moving , had conceptual trouble accounting for the behavior of projectiles , such as the flight of arrows . The place where the archer moves the projectile was at the start of the flight , and while the projectile sailed through the air , no discernible efficient cause acts on it . Aristotle was aware of this problem and proposed that the air displaced through the projectile 's path carries the projectile to its target . This explanation demands a continuum like air for change of place in general . 
 Aristotelian physics began facing criticism in Medieval science , first by John Philoponus in the 6th century . 
 The shortcomings of Aristotelian physics would not be fully corrected until the 17th century work of Galileo Galilei , who was influenced by the late Medieval idea that objects in forced motion carried an innate force of impetus . Galileo constructed an experiment in which stones and cannonballs were both rolled down an incline to disprove the Aristotelian theory of motion early in the 17th century . He showed that the bodies were accelerated by gravity to an extent that was independent of their mass and argued that objects retain their velocity unless acted on by a force , for example friction . 
 = = Newtonian mechanics = = 
 Sir Isaac Newton sought to describe the motion of all objects using the concepts of inertia and force , and in doing so he found that they obey certain conservation laws . In 1687 , Newton went on to publish his thesis Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica . In this work Newton set out three laws of motion that to this day are the way forces are described in physics . 
 = = = First law = = = 
 Newton 's First Law of Motion states that objects continue to move in a state of constant velocity unless acted upon by an external net force or resultant force . This law is an extension of Galileo 's insight that constant velocity was associated with a lack of net force ( see a more detailed description of this below ) . Newton proposed that every object with mass has an innate inertia that functions as the fundamental equilibrium " natural state " in place of the Aristotelian idea of the " natural state of rest " . That is , the first law contradicts the intuitive Aristotelian belief that a net force is required to keep an object moving with constant velocity . By making rest physically indistinguishable from non @-@ zero constant velocity , Newton 's First Law directly connects inertia with the concept of relative velocities . Specifically , in systems where objects are moving with different velocities , it is impossible to determine which object is " in motion " and which object is " at rest " . In other words , to phrase matters more technically , the laws of physics are the same in every inertial frame of reference , that is , in all frames related by a Galilean transformation . 
 For instance , while traveling in a moving vehicle at a constant velocity , the laws of physics do not change from being at rest . A person can throw a ball straight up in the air and catch it as it falls down without worrying about applying a force in the direction the vehicle is moving . This is true even though another person who is observing the moving vehicle pass by also observes the ball follow a curving parabolic path in the same direction as the motion of the vehicle . It is the inertia of the ball associated with its constant velocity in the direction of the vehicle 's motion that ensures the ball continues to move forward even as it is thrown up and falls back down . From the perspective of the person in the car , the vehicle and everything inside of it is at rest : It is the outside world that is moving with a constant speed in the opposite direction . Since there is no experiment that can distinguish whether it is the vehicle that is at rest or the outside world that is at rest , the two situations are considered to be physically indistinguishable . Inertia therefore applies equally well to constant velocity motion as it does to rest . 
 The concept of inertia can be further generalized to explain the tendency of objects to continue in many different forms of constant motion , even those that are not strictly constant velocity . The rotational inertia of planet Earth is what fixes the constancy of the length of a day and the length of a year . Albert Einstein extended the principle of inertia further when he explained that reference frames subject to constant acceleration , such as those free @-@ falling toward a gravitating object , were physically equivalent to inertial reference frames . This is why , for example , astronauts experience weightlessness when in free @-@ fall orbit around the Earth , and why Newton 's Laws of Motion are more easily discernible in such environments . If an astronaut places an object with mass in mid @-@ air next to himself , it will remain stationary with respect to the astronaut due to its inertia . This is the same thing that would occur if the astronaut and the object were in intergalactic space with no net force of gravity acting on their shared reference frame . This principle of equivalence was one of the foundational underpinnings for the development of the general theory of relativity . 
 = = = Second law = = = 
 A modern statement of Newton 's Second Law is a vector equation : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the momentum of the system , and <formula> is the net ( vector sum ) force . In equilibrium , there is zero net force by definition , but ( balanced ) forces may be present nevertheless . In contrast , the second law states an unbalanced force acting on an object will result in the object 's momentum changing over time . 
 By the definition of momentum , 
 <formula> 
 where m is the mass and <formula> is the velocity . 
 Newton 's second law applies only to a system of constant mass , and hence m may be moved outside the derivative operator . The equation then becomes 
 <formula> 
 By substituting the definition of acceleration , the algebraic version of Newton 's Second Law is derived : 
 <formula> 
 Newton never explicitly stated the formula in the reduced form above . 
 Newton 's Second Law asserts the direct proportionality of acceleration to force and the inverse proportionality of acceleration to mass . <unk> can be defined through kinematic measurements . However , while kinematics are well @-@ described through reference frame analysis in advanced physics , there are still deep questions that remain as to what is the proper definition of mass . General relativity offers an equivalence between space @-@ time and mass , but lacking a coherent theory of quantum gravity , it is unclear as to how or whether this connection is relevant on <unk> . With some justification , Newton 's second law can be taken as a quantitative definition of mass by writing the law as an equality ; the relative units of force and mass then are fixed . 
 The use of Newton 's Second Law as a definition of force has been disparaged in some of the more rigorous textbooks , because it is essentially a mathematical truism . Notable physicists , philosophers and mathematicians who have sought a more explicit definition of the concept of force include Ernst Mach , Clifford Truesdell and Walter Noll . 
 Newton 's Second Law can be used to measure the strength of forces . For instance , knowledge of the masses of planets along with the accelerations of their orbits allows scientists to calculate the gravitational forces on planets . 
 = = = Third law = = = 
 Newton 's Third Law is a result of applying symmetry to situations where forces can be attributed to the presence of different objects . The third law means that all forces are interactions between different bodies , and thus that there is no such thing as a unidirectional force or a force that acts on only one body . Whenever a first body exerts a force F on a second body , the second body exerts a force − F on the first body . F and − F are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction . This law is sometimes referred to as the action @-@ reaction law , with F called the " action " and − F the " reaction " . The action and the reaction are simultaneous : 
 <formula> 
 If object 1 and object 2 are considered to be in the same system , then the net force on the system due to the interactions between objects 1 and 2 is zero since 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 This means that in a closed system of particles , there are no internal forces that are unbalanced . That is , the action @-@ reaction force shared between any two objects in a closed system will not cause the center of mass of the system to accelerate . The constituent objects only accelerate with respect to each other , the system itself remains <unk> . Alternatively , if an external force acts on the system , then the center of mass will experience an acceleration proportional to the magnitude of the external force divided by the mass of the system . 
 Combining Newton 's Second and Third Laws , it is possible to show that the linear momentum of a system is conserved . Using 
 <formula> 
 and integrating with respect to time , the equation : 
 <formula> 
 is obtained . For a system that includes objects 1 and 2 @,@ 
 <formula> , 
 which is the conservation of linear momentum . Using the similar arguments , it is possible to generalize this to a system of an arbitrary number of particles . This shows that exchanging momentum between constituent objects will not affect the net momentum of a system . In general , as long as all forces are due to the interaction of objects with mass , it is possible to define a system such that net momentum is never lost nor gained . 
 = = Special theory of relativity = = 
 In the special theory of relativity , mass and energy are equivalent ( as can be seen by calculating the work required to accelerate an object ) . When an object 's velocity increases , so does its energy and hence its mass equivalent ( inertia ) . It thus requires more force to accelerate it the same amount than it did at a lower velocity . Newton 's Second Law 
 <formula> 
 remains valid because it is a mathematical definition . But in order to be conserved , relativistic momentum must be redefined as : 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the velocity and 
 <formula> is the speed of light 
 <formula> is the rest mass . 
 The relativistic expression relating force and acceleration for a particle with constant non @-@ zero rest mass <formula> moving in the <formula> direction is : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 where the Lorentz factor 
 <formula> 
 In the early history of relativity , the expressions <formula> and <formula> were called longitudinal and transverse mass . Relativistic force does not produce a constant acceleration , but an ever decreasing acceleration as the object approaches the speed of light . Note that <formula> is undefined for an object with a non @-@ zero rest mass at the speed of light , and the theory yields no prediction at that speed . 
 If <formula> is very small compared to <formula> , then <formula> is very close to 1 and 
 <formula> 
 is a close approximation . Even for use in relativity , however , one can restore the form of 
 <formula> 
 through the use of four @-@ vectors . This relation is correct in relativity when <formula> is the four @-@ force , <formula> is the invariant mass , and <formula> is the four @-@ acceleration . 
 = = Descriptions = = 
 Since forces are perceived as pushes or pulls , this can provide an intuitive understanding for describing forces . As with other physical concepts ( e.g. temperature ) , the intuitive understanding of forces is quantified using precise operational definitions that are consistent with direct observations and compared to a standard measurement scale . Through experimentation , it is determined that laboratory measurements of forces are fully consistent with the conceptual definition of force offered by Newtonian mechanics . 
 Forces act in a particular direction and have sizes dependent upon how strong the push or pull is . Because of these characteristics , forces are classified as " vector quantities " . This means that forces follow a different set of mathematical rules than physical quantities that do not have direction ( denoted scalar quantities ) . For example , when determining what happens when two forces act on the same object , it is necessary to know both the magnitude and the direction of both forces to calculate the result . If both of these pieces of information are not known for each force , the situation is ambiguous . For example , if you know that two people are pulling on the same rope with known magnitudes of force but you do not know which direction either person is pulling , it is impossible to determine what the acceleration of the rope will be . The two people could be pulling against each other as in tug of war or the two people could be pulling in the same direction . In this simple one @-@ dimensional example , without knowing the direction of the forces it is impossible to decide whether the net force is the result of adding the two force magnitudes or subtracting one from the other . Associating forces with vectors avoids such problems . 
 Historically , forces were first quantitatively investigated in conditions of static equilibrium where several forces canceled each other out . Such experiments demonstrate the crucial properties that forces are additive vector quantities : they have magnitude and direction . When two forces act on a point particle , the resulting force , the resultant ( also called the net force ) , can be determined by following the parallelogram rule of vector addition : the addition of two vectors represented by sides of a parallelogram , gives an equivalent resultant vector that is equal in magnitude and direction to the transversal of the parallelogram . The magnitude of the resultant varies from the difference of the magnitudes of the two forces to their sum , depending on the angle between their lines of action . However , if the forces are acting on an extended body , their respective lines of application must also be specified in order to account for their effects on the motion of the body . 
 Free @-@ body diagrams can be used as a convenient way to keep track of forces acting on a system . Ideally , these diagrams are drawn with the angles and relative magnitudes of the force vectors preserved so that graphical vector addition can be done to determine the net force . 
 As well as being added , forces can also be resolved into independent components at right angles to each other . A horizontal force pointing northeast can therefore be split into two forces , one pointing north , and one pointing east . Summing these component forces using vector addition yields the original force . Resolving force vectors into components of a set of basis vectors is often a more mathematically clean way to describe forces than using magnitudes and directions . This is because , for orthogonal components , the components of the vector sum are uniquely determined by the scalar addition of the components of the individual vectors . Orthogonal components are independent of each other because forces acting at ninety degrees to each other have no effect on the magnitude or direction of the other . Choosing a set of orthogonal basis vectors is often done by considering what set of basis vectors will make the mathematics most convenient . Choosing a basis vector that is in the same direction as one of the forces is desirable , since that force would then have only one non @-@ zero component . Orthogonal force vectors can be three @-@ dimensional with the third component being at right @-@ angles to the other two . 
 = = = Equilibrium = = = 
 Equilibrium occurs when the resultant force acting on a point particle is zero ( that is , the vector sum of all forces is zero ) . When dealing with an extended body , it is also necessary that the net torque in it is 0 . 
 There are two kinds of equilibrium : static equilibrium and dynamic equilibrium . 
 = = = = Static = = = = 
 Static equilibrium was understood well before the invention of classical mechanics . Objects that are at rest have zero net force acting on them . 
 The simplest case of static equilibrium occurs when two forces are equal in magnitude but opposite in direction . For example , an object on a level surface is pulled ( attracted ) downward toward the center of the Earth by the force of gravity . At the same time , surface forces resist the downward force with equal upward force ( called the normal force ) . The situation is one of zero net force and no acceleration . 
 Pushing against an object on a frictional surface can result in a situation where the object does not move because the applied force is opposed by static friction , generated between the object and the table surface . For a situation with no movement , the static friction force exactly balances the applied force resulting in no acceleration . The static friction increases or decreases in response to the applied force up to an upper limit determined by the characteristics of the contact between the surface and the object . 
 A static equilibrium between two forces is the most usual way of measuring forces , using simple devices such as weighing scales and spring balances . For example , an object suspended on a vertical spring scale experiences the force of gravity acting on the object balanced by a force applied by the " spring reaction force " , which equals the object 's weight . Using such tools , some quantitative force laws were discovered : that the force of gravity is proportional to volume for objects of constant density ( widely exploited for millennia to define standard weights ) ; Archimedes ' principle for buoyancy ; Archimedes ' analysis of the lever ; Boyle 's law for gas pressure ; and Hooke 's law for springs . These were all formulated and experimentally verified before Isaac Newton expounded his Three Laws of Motion . 
 = = = = Dynamic = = = = 
 Dynamic equilibrium was first described by Galileo who noticed that certain assumptions of Aristotelian physics were contradicted by observations and logic . Galileo realized that simple velocity addition demands that the concept of an " absolute rest frame " did not exist . Galileo concluded that motion in a constant velocity was completely equivalent to rest . This was contrary to Aristotle 's notion of a " natural state " of rest that objects with mass naturally approached . Simple experiments showed that Galileo 's understanding of the equivalence of constant velocity and rest were correct . For example , if a mariner dropped a cannonball from the crow 's nest of a ship moving at a constant velocity , Aristotelian physics would have the cannonball fall straight down while the ship moved beneath it . Thus , in an Aristotelian universe , the falling cannonball would land behind the foot of the mast of a moving ship . However , when this experiment is actually conducted , the cannonball always falls at the foot of the mast , as if the cannonball knows to travel with the ship despite being separated from it . Since there is no forward horizontal force being applied on the cannonball as it falls , the only conclusion left is that the cannonball continues to move with the same velocity as the boat as it falls . Thus , no force is required to keep the cannonball moving at the constant forward velocity . 
 Moreover , any object traveling at a constant velocity must be subject to zero net force ( resultant force ) . This is the definition of dynamic equilibrium : when all the forces on an object balance but it still moves at a constant velocity . 
 A simple case of dynamic equilibrium occurs in constant velocity motion across a surface with kinetic friction . In such a situation , a force is applied in the direction of motion while the kinetic friction force exactly opposes the applied force . This results in zero net force , but since the object started with a non @-@ zero velocity , it continues to move with a non @-@ zero velocity . Aristotle misinterpreted this motion as being caused by the applied force . However , when kinetic friction is taken into consideration it is clear that there is no net force causing constant velocity motion . 
 = = = Forces in Quantum Mechanics = = = 
 The notion " force " keeps its meaning in quantum mechanics , though one is now dealing with operators instead of classical variables and though the physics is now described by the Schrödinger equation instead of Newtonian equations . This has the consequence that the results of a measurement are now sometimes " quantized " , i.e. they appear in discrete portions . This is , of course , difficult to imagine in the context of " forces " . However , the potentials V ( x , y , z ) or fields , from which the forces generally can be derived , are treated similar to classical position variables , i.e. , <formula> . 
 This becomes different only in the framework of quantum field theory , where these fields are also quantized . 
 However , already in quantum mechanics there is one " caveat " , namely the particles acting onto each other do not only possess the spatial variable , but also a discrete intrinsic angular momentum @-@ like variable called the " spin " , and there is the Pauli principle relating the space and the spin variables . Depending on the value of the spin , identical particles split into two different classes , fermions and bosons . If two identical fermions ( e.g. electrons ) have a symmetric spin function ( e.g. parallel spins ) the spatial variables must be antisymmetric ( i.e. they exclude each other from their places much as if there was a repulsive force ) , and vice versa , i.e. for antiparallel spins the position variables must be symmetric ( i.e. the apparent force must be attractive ) . Thus in the case of two fermions there is a strictly negative correlation between spatial and spin variables , whereas for two bosons ( e.g. quanta of electromagnetic waves , photons ) the correlation is strictly positive . 
 Thus the notion " force " loses already part of its meaning . 
 = = = Feynman diagrams = = = 
 In modern particle physics , forces and the acceleration of particles are explained as a mathematical by @-@ product of exchange of momentum @-@ carrying gauge bosons . With the development of quantum field theory and general relativity , it was realized that force is a redundant concept arising from conservation of momentum ( 4 @-@ momentum in relativity and momentum of virtual particles in quantum electrodynamics ) . The conservation of momentum can be directly derived from the homogeneity or symmetry of space and so is usually considered more fundamental than the concept of a force . Thus the currently known fundamental forces are considered more accurately to be " fundamental interactions " . When particle A emits ( creates ) or absorbs ( annihilates ) virtual particle B , a momentum conservation results in recoil of particle A making impression of repulsion or attraction between particles A A ' exchanging by B. This description applies to all forces arising from fundamental interactions . While sophisticated mathematical descriptions are needed to predict , in full detail , the accurate result of such interactions , there is a conceptually simple way to describe such interactions through the use of Feynman diagrams . In a Feynman diagram , each matter particle is represented as a straight line ( see world line ) traveling through time , which normally increases up or to the right in the diagram . Matter and anti @-@ matter particles are identical except for their direction of propagation through the Feynman diagram . World lines of particles intersect at interaction vertices , and the Feynman diagram represents any force arising from an interaction as occurring at the vertex with an associated instantaneous change in the direction of the particle world lines . Gauge bosons are emitted away from the vertex as wavy lines and , in the case of virtual particle exchange , are absorbed at an adjacent vertex . 
 The utility of Feynman diagrams is that other types of physical phenomena that are part of the general picture of fundamental interactions but are conceptually separate from forces can also be described using the same rules . For example , a Feynman diagram can describe in succinct detail how a neutron decays into an electron , proton , and neutrino , an interaction mediated by the same gauge boson that is responsible for the weak nuclear force . 
 = = Fundamental forces = = 
 All of the forces in the universe are based on four fundamental interactions . The strong and weak forces are nuclear forces that act only at very short distances , and are responsible for the interactions between subatomic particles , including nucleons and compound nuclei . The electromagnetic force acts between electric charges , and the gravitational force acts between masses . All other forces in nature derive from these four fundamental interactions . For example , friction is a manifestation of the electromagnetic force acting between the atoms of two surfaces , and the Pauli exclusion principle , which does not permit atoms to pass through each other . Similarly , the forces in springs , modeled by Hooke 's law , are the result of electromagnetic forces and the Exclusion Principle acting together to return an object to its equilibrium position . Centrifugal forces are acceleration forces that arise simply from the acceleration of rotating frames of reference . 
 The development of fundamental theories for forces proceeded along the lines of unification of disparate ideas . For example , Isaac Newton unified the force responsible for objects falling at the surface of the Earth with the force responsible for the orbits of celestial mechanics in his universal theory of gravitation . Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell demonstrated that electric and magnetic forces were unified through one consistent theory of electromagnetism . In the 20th century , the development of quantum mechanics led to a modern understanding that the first three fundamental forces ( all except gravity ) are manifestations of matter ( fermions ) interacting by exchanging virtual particles called gauge bosons . This standard model of particle physics posits a similarity between the forces and led scientists to predict the unification of the weak and electromagnetic forces in electroweak theory subsequently confirmed by observation . The complete formulation of the standard model predicts an as yet unobserved Higgs mechanism , but observations such as neutrino oscillations indicate that the standard model is incomplete . A Grand Unified Theory allowing for the combination of the electroweak interaction with the strong force is held out as a possibility with candidate theories such as supersymmetry proposed to accommodate some of the outstanding unsolved problems in physics . Physicists are still attempting to develop self @-@ consistent unification models that would combine all four fundamental interactions into a theory of everything . Einstein tried and failed at this endeavor , but currently the most popular approach to answering this question is string theory . 
 = = = Gravitational = = = 
 What we now call gravity was not identified as a universal force until the work of Isaac Newton . Before Newton , the tendency for objects to fall towards the Earth was not understood to be related to the motions of celestial objects . Galileo was instrumental in describing the characteristics of falling objects by determining that the acceleration of every object in free @-@ fall was constant and independent of the mass of the object . Today , this acceleration due to gravity towards the surface of the Earth is usually designated as <formula> and has a magnitude of about 9 @.@ 81 meters per second squared ( this measurement is taken from sea level and may vary depending on location ) , and points toward the center of the Earth . This observation means that the force of gravity on an object at the Earth 's surface is directly proportional to the object 's mass . Thus an object that has a mass of <formula> will experience a force : 
 <formula> 
 In free @-@ fall , this force is unopposed and therefore the net force on the object is its weight . For objects not in free @-@ fall , the force of gravity is opposed by the reactions of their supports . For example , a person standing on the ground experiences zero net force , since his weight is balanced by a normal force exerted by the ground . 
 Newton 's contribution to gravitational theory was to unify the motions of heavenly bodies , which Aristotle had assumed were in a natural state of constant motion , with falling motion observed on the Earth . He proposed a law of gravity that could account for the celestial motions that had been described earlier using Kepler 's laws of planetary motion . 
 Newton came to realize that the effects of gravity might be observed in different ways at larger distances . In particular , Newton determined that the acceleration of the Moon around the Earth could be ascribed to the same force of gravity if the acceleration due to gravity decreased as an inverse square law . Further , Newton realized that the acceleration due to gravity is proportional to the mass of the attracting body . Combining these ideas gives a formula that relates the mass ( <formula> ) and the radius ( <formula> ) of the Earth to the gravitational acceleration : 
 <formula> 
 where the vector direction is given by <formula> , the unit vector directed outward from the center of the Earth . 
 In this equation , a dimensional constant <formula> is used to describe the relative strength of gravity . This constant has come to be known as Newton 's Universal Gravitation Constant , though its value was unknown in Newton 's lifetime . Not until 1798 was Henry Cavendish able to make the first measurement of <formula> using a torsion balance ; this was widely reported in the press as a measurement of the mass of the Earth since knowing <formula> could allow one to solve for the Earth 's mass given the above equation . Newton , however , realized that since all celestial bodies followed the same laws of motion , his law of gravity had to be universal . <unk> stated , Newton 's Law of Gravitation states that the force on a spherical object of mass <formula> due to the gravitational pull of mass <formula> is 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the distance between the two objects ' centers of mass and <formula> is the unit vector pointed in the direction away from the center of the first object toward the center of the second object . 
 This formula was powerful enough to stand as the basis for all subsequent descriptions of motion within the solar system until the 20th century . During that time , sophisticated methods of perturbation analysis were invented to calculate the deviations of orbits due to the influence of multiple bodies on a planet , moon , comet , or asteroid . The formalism was exact enough to allow mathematicians to predict the existence of the planet Neptune before it was observed . 
 It was only the orbit of the planet Mercury that Newton 's Law of Gravitation seemed not to fully explain . Some astrophysicists predicted the existence of another planet ( Vulcan ) that would explain the discrepancies ; however , despite some early indications , no such planet could be found . When Albert Einstein formulated his theory of general relativity ( GR ) he turned his attention to the problem of Mercury 's orbit and found that his theory added a correction , which could account for the discrepancy . This was the first time that Newton 's Theory of Gravity had been shown to be less correct than an alternative . 
 Since then , and so far , general relativity has been acknowledged as the theory that best explains gravity . In GR , gravitation is not viewed as a force , but rather , objects moving freely in gravitational fields travel under their own inertia in straight lines through curved space @-@ time – defined as the shortest space @-@ time path between two space @-@ time events . From the perspective of the object , all motion occurs as if there were no gravitation whatsoever . It is only when observing the motion in a global sense that the curvature of space @-@ time can be observed and the force is inferred from the object 's curved path . Thus , the straight line path in space @-@ time is seen as a curved line in space , and it is called the ballistic trajectory of the object . For example , a basketball thrown from the ground moves in a parabola , as it is in a uniform gravitational field . Its space @-@ time trajectory ( when the extra <unk> dimension is added ) is almost a straight line , slightly curved ( with the radius of curvature of the order of few light @-@ years ) . The time derivative of the changing momentum of the object is what we label as " gravitational force " . 
 = = = Electromagnetic = = = 
 The electrostatic force was first described in 1784 by Coulomb as a force that existed intrinsically between two charges . The properties of the electrostatic force were that it varied as an inverse square law directed in the radial direction , was both attractive and repulsive ( there was intrinsic polarity ) , was independent of the mass of the charged objects , and followed the superposition principle . Coulomb 's law unifies all these observations into one succinct statement . 
 Subsequent mathematicians and physicists found the construct of the electric field to be useful for determining the electrostatic force on an electric charge at any point in space . The electric field was based on using a hypothetical " test charge " anywhere in space and then using Coulomb 's Law to determine the electrostatic force . Thus the electric field anywhere in space is defined as 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the magnitude of the hypothetical test charge . 
 Meanwhile , the Lorentz force of magnetism was discovered to exist between two electric currents . It has the same mathematical character as Coulomb 's Law with the proviso that like currents attract and unlike currents repel . Similar to the electric field , the magnetic field can be used to determine the magnetic force on an electric current at any point in space . In this case , the magnitude of the magnetic field was determined to be 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the magnitude of the hypothetical test current and <formula> is the length of hypothetical wire through which the test current flows . The magnetic field exerts a force on all magnets including , for example , those used in compasses . The fact that the Earth 's magnetic field is aligned closely with the orientation of the Earth 's axis causes compass magnets to become oriented because of the magnetic force pulling on the needle . 
 Through combining the definition of electric current as the time rate of change of electric charge , a rule of vector multiplication called Lorentz 's Law describes the force on a charge moving in a magnetic field . The connection between electricity and magnetism allows for the description of a unified electromagnetic force that acts on a charge . This force can be written as a sum of the electrostatic force ( due to the electric field ) and the magnetic force ( due to the magnetic field ) . Fully stated , this is the law : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the electromagnetic force , <formula> is the magnitude of the charge of the particle , <formula> is the electric field , <formula> is the velocity of the particle that is crossed with the magnetic field ( <formula> ) . 
 The origin of electric and magnetic fields would not be fully explained until 1864 when James Clerk Maxwell unified a number of earlier theories into a set of 20 scalar equations , which were later reformulated into 4 vector equations by Oliver Heaviside and Josiah Willard Gibbs . These " Maxwell Equations " fully described the sources of the fields as being stationary and moving charges , and the interactions of the fields themselves . This led Maxwell to discover that electric and magnetic fields could be " self @-@ generating " through a wave that traveled at a speed that he calculated to be the speed of light . This insight united the nascent fields of electromagnetic theory with optics and led directly to a complete description of the electromagnetic spectrum . 
 However , attempting to reconcile electromagnetic theory with two observations , the photoelectric effect , and the nonexistence of the ultraviolet catastrophe , proved troublesome . Through the work of leading theoretical physicists , a new theory of electromagnetism was developed using quantum mechanics . This final modification to electromagnetic theory ultimately led to quantum electrodynamics ( or QED ) , which fully describes all electromagnetic phenomena as being mediated by wave – particles known as photons . In QED , photons are the fundamental exchange particle , which described all interactions relating to electromagnetism including the electromagnetic force . 
 It is a common misconception to ascribe the stiffness and rigidity of solid matter to the repulsion of like charges under the influence of the electromagnetic force . However , these characteristics actually result from the Pauli exclusion principle . Since electrons are fermions , they cannot occupy the same quantum mechanical state as other electrons . When the electrons in a material are densely packed together , there are not enough lower energy quantum mechanical states for them all , so some of them must be in higher energy states . This means that it takes energy to pack them together . While this effect is manifested macroscopically as a structural force , it is technically only the result of the existence of a finite set of electron states . 
 = = = Strong nuclear = = = 
 There are two " nuclear forces " , which today are usually described as interactions that take place in quantum theories of particle physics . The strong nuclear force is the force responsible for the structural integrity of atomic nuclei while the weak nuclear force is responsible for the decay of certain nucleons into leptons and other types of hadrons . 
 The strong force is today understood to represent the interactions between quarks and gluons as detailed by the theory of quantum chromodynamics ( QCD ) . The strong force is the fundamental force mediated by gluons , acting upon quarks , antiquarks , and the gluons themselves . The ( aptly named ) strong interaction is the " strongest " of the four fundamental forces . 
 The strong force only acts directly upon elementary particles . However , a residual of the force is observed between hadrons ( the best known example being the force that acts between nucleons in atomic nuclei ) as the nuclear force . Here the strong force acts indirectly , transmitted as gluons , which form part of the virtual pi and rho mesons , which classically transmit the nuclear force ( see this topic for more ) . The failure of many searches for free quarks has shown that the elementary particles affected are not directly observable . This phenomenon is called color confinement . 
 = = = Weak nuclear = = = 
 The weak force is due to the exchange of the heavy W and Z bosons . Its most familiar effect is beta decay ( of neutrons in atomic nuclei ) and the associated radioactivity . The word " weak " derives from the fact that the field strength is some 1013 times less than that of the strong force . Still , it is stronger than gravity over short distances . A consistent electroweak theory has also been developed , which shows that electromagnetic forces and the weak force are indistinguishable at a temperatures in excess of approximately 1015 kelvins . Such temperatures have been probed in modern particle accelerators and show the conditions of the universe in the early moments of the Big Bang . 
 = = Non @-@ fundamental forces = = 
 Some forces are consequences of the fundamental ones . In such situations , idealized models can be utilized to gain physical insight . 
 = = = Normal force = = = 
 The normal force is due to repulsive forces of interaction between atoms at close contact . When their electron clouds overlap , Pauli repulsion ( due to fermionic nature of electrons ) follows resulting in the force that acts in a direction normal to the surface interface between two objects . The normal force , for example , is responsible for the structural integrity of tables and floors as well as being the force that responds whenever an external force pushes on a solid object . An example of the normal force in action is the impact force on an object crashing into an immobile surface . 
 = = = Friction = = = 
 Friction is a surface force that opposes relative motion . The frictional force is directly related to the normal force that acts to keep two solid objects separated at the point of contact . There are two broad classifications of frictional forces : static friction and kinetic friction . 
 The static friction force ( <formula> ) will exactly oppose forces applied to an object parallel to a surface contact up to the limit specified by the coefficient of static friction ( <formula> ) multiplied by the normal force ( <formula> ) . In other words , the magnitude of the static friction force satisfies the inequality : 
 <formula> 
 The kinetic friction force ( <formula> ) is independent of both the forces applied and the movement of the object . Thus , the magnitude of the force equals : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the coefficient of kinetic friction . For most surface interfaces , the coefficient of kinetic friction is less than the coefficient of static friction . 
 = = = Tension = = = 
 Tension forces can be modeled using ideal strings that are massless , frictionless , unbreakable , and <unk> . They can be combined with ideal pulleys , which allow ideal strings to switch physical direction . Ideal strings transmit tension forces instantaneously in action @-@ reaction pairs so that if two objects are connected by an ideal string , any force directed along the string by the first object is accompanied by a force directed along the string in the opposite direction by the second object . By connecting the same string multiple times to the same object through the use of a set @-@ up that uses movable pulleys , the tension force on a load can be multiplied . For every string that acts on a load , another factor of the tension force in the string acts on the load . However , even though such machines allow for an increase in force , there is a corresponding increase in the length of string that must be displaced in order to move the load . These tandem effects result ultimately in the conservation of mechanical energy since the work done on the load is the same no matter how complicated the machine . 
 = = = Elastic force = = = 
 An elastic force acts to return a spring to its natural length . An ideal spring is taken to be massless , frictionless , unbreakable , and infinitely stretchable . Such springs exert forces that push when contracted , or pull when extended , in proportion to the displacement of the spring from its equilibrium position . This linear relationship was described by Robert Hooke in 1676 , for whom Hooke 's law is named . If <formula> is the displacement , the force exerted by an ideal spring equals : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the spring constant ( or force constant ) , which is particular to the spring . The minus sign accounts for the tendency of the force to act in opposition to the applied load . 
 = = = Continuum mechanics = = = 
 Newton 's laws and Newtonian mechanics in general were first developed to describe how forces affect idealized point particles rather than three @-@ dimensional objects . However , in real life , matter has extended structure and forces that act on one part of an object might affect other parts of an object . For situations where lattice holding together the atoms in an object is able to flow , contract , expand , or otherwise change shape , the theories of continuum mechanics describe the way forces affect the material . For example , in extended fluids , differences in pressure result in forces being directed along the pressure gradients as follows : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the volume of the object in the fluid and <formula> is the scalar function that describes the pressure at all locations in space . Pressure gradients and differentials result in the buoyant force for fluids suspended in gravitational fields , winds in atmospheric science , and the lift associated with aerodynamics and flight . 
 A specific instance of such a force that is associated with dynamic pressure is fluid resistance : a body force that resists the motion of an object through a fluid due to viscosity . For so @-@ called " Stokes ' drag " the force is approximately proportional to the velocity , but opposite in direction : 
 <formula> 
 where : 
 <formula> is a constant that depends on the properties of the fluid and the dimensions of the object ( usually the cross @-@ sectional area ) , and 
 <formula> is the velocity of the object . 
 More formally , forces in continuum mechanics are fully described by a stress – tensor with terms that are roughly defined as 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the relevant cross @-@ sectional area for the volume for which the stress @-@ tensor is being calculated . This formalism includes pressure terms associated with forces that act normal to the cross @-@ sectional area ( the matrix diagonals of the tensor ) as well as shear terms associated with forces that act parallel to the cross @-@ sectional area ( the off @-@ diagonal elements ) . The stress tensor accounts for forces that cause all strains ( deformations ) including also tensile stresses and compressions . 
 = = = Fictitious forces = = = 
 There are forces that are frame dependent , meaning that they appear due to the adoption of non @-@ Newtonian ( that is , non @-@ inertial ) reference frames . Such forces include the centrifugal force and the Coriolis force . These forces are considered fictitious because they do not exist in frames of reference that are not accelerating . Because these forces are not genuine they are also referred to as " pseudo forces " . 
 In general relativity , gravity becomes a fictitious force that arises in situations where spacetime deviates from a flat geometry . As an extension , Kaluza – Klein theory and string theory ascribe electromagnetism and the other fundamental forces respectively to the curvature of differently scaled dimensions , which would ultimately imply that all forces are fictitious . 
 = = <unk> and torque = = 
 Forces that cause extended objects to rotate are associated with torques . Mathematically , the torque of a force <formula> is defined relative to an arbitrary reference point as the cross @-@ product : 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the position vector of the force application point relative to the reference point . 
 Torque is the rotation equivalent of force in the same way that angle is the rotational equivalent for position , angular velocity for velocity , and angular momentum for momentum . As a consequence of Newton 's First Law of Motion , there exists rotational inertia that ensures that all bodies maintain their angular momentum unless acted upon by an unbalanced torque . Likewise , Newton 's Second Law of Motion can be used to derive an analogous equation for the instantaneous angular acceleration of the rigid body : 
 <formula> 
 where 
 <formula> is the moment of inertia of the body 
 <formula> is the angular acceleration of the body . 
 This provides a definition for the moment of inertia , which is the rotational equivalent for mass . In more advanced treatments of mechanics , where the rotation over a time interval is described , the moment of inertia must be substituted by the tensor that , when properly analyzed , fully determines the characteristics of rotations including precession and nutation . 
 Equivalently , the differential form of Newton 's Second Law provides an alternative definition of torque : 
 <formula> where <formula> is the angular momentum of the particle . 
 Newton 's Third Law of Motion requires that all objects exerting torques themselves experience equal and opposite torques , and therefore also directly implies the conservation of angular momentum for closed systems that experience rotations and revolutions through the action of internal torques . 
 = = = Centripetal force = = = 
 For an object accelerating in circular motion , the unbalanced force acting on the object equals : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the mass of the object , <formula> is the velocity of the object and <formula> is the distance to the center of the circular path and <formula> is the unit vector pointing in the radial direction outwards from the center . This means that the unbalanced centripetal force felt by any object is always directed toward the center of the curving path . Such forces act perpendicular to the velocity vector associated with the motion of an object , and therefore do not change the speed of the object ( magnitude of the velocity ) , but only the direction of the velocity vector . The unbalanced force that accelerates an object can be resolved into a component that is perpendicular to the path , and one that is tangential to the path . This yields both the tangential force , which accelerates the object by either slowing it down or speeding it up , and the radial ( centripetal ) force , which changes its direction . 
 = = Kinematic integrals = = 
 Forces can be used to define a number of physical concepts by integrating with respect to kinematic variables . For example , integrating with respect to time gives the definition of impulse : 
 <formula> 
 which by Newton 's Second Law must be equivalent to the change in momentum ( yielding the Impulse momentum theorem ) . 
 Similarly , integrating with respect to position gives a definition for the work done by a force : 
 <formula> 
 which is equivalent to changes in kinetic energy ( yielding the work energy theorem ) . 
 Power P is the rate of change <unk> / dt of the work W , as the trajectory is extended by a position change <formula> in a time interval dt : 
 <formula> 
 with <formula> the velocity . 
 = = Potential energy = = 
 Instead of a force , often the mathematically related concept of a potential energy field can be used for convenience . For instance , the gravitational force acting upon an object can be seen as the action of the gravitational field that is present at the object 's location . <unk> mathematically the definition of energy ( via the definition of work ) , a potential scalar field <formula> is defined as that field whose gradient is equal and opposite to the force produced at every point : 
 <formula> 
 Forces can be classified as conservative or nonconservative . Conservative forces are equivalent to the gradient of a potential while nonconservative forces are not . 
 = = = Conservative forces = = = 
 A conservative force that acts on a closed system has an associated mechanical work that allows energy to convert only between kinetic or potential forms . This means that for a closed system , the net mechanical energy is conserved whenever a conservative force acts on the system . The force , therefore , is related directly to the difference in potential energy between two different locations in space , and can be considered to be an artifact of the potential field in the same way that the direction and amount of a flow of water can be considered to be an artifact of the contour map of the elevation of an area . 
 Conservative forces include gravity , the electromagnetic force , and the spring force . Each of these forces has models that are dependent on a position often given as a radial vector <formula> emanating from spherically symmetric potentials . Examples of this follow : 
 For gravity : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the gravitational constant , and <formula> is the mass of object n . 
 For electrostatic forces : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is electric permittivity of free space , and <formula> is the electric charge of object n . 
 For spring forces : 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the spring constant . 
 = = = <unk> forces = = = 
 For certain physical scenarios , it is impossible to model forces as being due to gradient of potentials . This is often due to <unk> considerations that yield forces as arising from a macroscopic statistical average of microstates . For example , friction is caused by the gradients of numerous electrostatic potentials between the atoms , but manifests as a force model that is independent of any macroscale position vector . <unk> forces other than friction include other contact forces , tension , compression , and drag . However , for any sufficiently detailed description , all these forces are the results of conservative ones since each of these macroscopic forces are the net results of the gradients of microscopic potentials . 
 The connection between macroscopic nonconservative forces and microscopic conservative forces is described by detailed treatment with statistical mechanics . In macroscopic closed systems , nonconservative forces act to change the internal energies of the system , and are often associated with the transfer of heat . According to the Second law of thermodynamics , nonconservative forces necessarily result in energy transformations within closed systems from ordered to more random conditions as entropy increases . 
 = = Units of measurement = = 
 The SI unit of force is the newton ( symbol N ) , which is the force required to accelerate a one kilogram mass at a rate of one meter per second squared , or kg · m · s − 2 . The corresponding CGS unit is the dyne , the force required to accelerate a one gram mass by one centimeter per second squared , or g · cm · s − 2 . A newton is thus equal to 100 @,@ 000 <unk> . 
 The gravitational foot @-@ pound @-@ second English unit of force is the pound @-@ force ( lbf ) , defined as the force exerted by gravity on a pound @-@ mass in the standard gravitational field of 9 @.@ <unk> m · s − 2 . The pound @-@ force provides an alternative unit of mass : one slug is the mass that will accelerate by one foot per second squared when acted on by one pound @-@ force . 
 An alternative unit of force in a different foot @-@ pound @-@ second system , the absolute fps system , is the <unk> , defined as the force required to accelerate a one @-@ pound mass at a rate of one foot per second squared . The units of slug and <unk> are designed to avoid a constant of proportionality in Newton 's Second Law . 
 The pound @-@ force has a metric counterpart , less commonly used than the newton : the kilogram @-@ force ( kgf ) ( sometimes <unk> ) , is the force exerted by standard gravity on one kilogram of mass . The kilogram @-@ force leads to an alternate , but rarely used unit of mass : the metric slug ( sometimes mug or <unk> ) is that mass that accelerates at 1 m · s − 2 when subjected to a force of 1 kgf . The kilogram @-@ force is not a part of the modern SI system , and is generally deprecated ; however it still sees use for some purposes as expressing aircraft weight , jet thrust , bicycle spoke tension , torque wrench settings and engine output torque . Other arcane units of force include the <unk> , which is equivalent to 1000 N , and the kip , which is equivalent to 1000 lbf . 
 See also Ton @-@ force . 
 = = Force measurement = = 
 See force gauge , spring scale , load cell 
 = Sue Me , Sue You Blues = 
 " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " is a song written by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1973 album Living in the Material World . Harrison initially let American guitarist Jesse Ed Davis record it for the latter 's Ululu album ( 1972 ) , in gratitude to Davis for his participation in the Concert for Bangladesh . When writing the song , Harrison drew inspiration from the legal issues surrounding the Beatles during the early months of 1971 , particularly the lawsuit that Paul McCartney initiated in an effort to dissolve the band 's business partnership , Apple Corps . 
 The inclusion of " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " on Material World marked a rare example of a secular composition on Harrison 's most spiritually oriented album . Recorded at the Beatles ' Apple Studio in London , the track features his extensive use of the dobro @-@ style resonator guitar , as well as musical contributions from Gary Wright , Nicky Hopkins , Klaus Voormann and Jim Keltner . The song 's musical mood and lyric recall aspects of old English square dance , a quality that some writers identify as mirroring the changing of sides amid the lawsuits relating to the Beatles ' break @-@ up . Some critics have compared the track with John Lennon 's " How Do You Sleep ? " ; Stephen Holden of Rolling Stone magazine described it as a " clever <unk> diatribe " . 
 Harrison performed " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " throughout his 1974 North American tour , utilising a funk @-@ inspired arrangement that featured musicians Willie Weeks , Andy Newmark and Tom Scott . For these performances , Harrison modified the lyrics to reflect the former Beatles uniting against manager Allen Klein . The song 's title was a phrase that Harrison and commentators adopted when referring to Beatles @-@ related legal issues during the 1970s . A film clip containing Harrison 's 1971 demo of " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " appeared on the DVD accompanying the 2006 remaster of Living in the Material World . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 As third songwriter to Lennon and McCartney , George Harrison had written about his experiences regarding the disharmonious atmosphere within the Beatles during the late 1960s , in compositions such as " Not Guilty " , " I Me Mine " , " Wah @-@ Wah " and " Run of the Mill " . The latter two songs , which reflect on the failing friendships among the Beatles , appeared on Harrison 's critically acclaimed triple album All Things Must Pass , released in November 1970 , seven months after Paul McCartney 's departure had initiated the band 's break @-@ up . On 31 December of that year , McCartney filed suit against Apple Corps and his former bandmates at London 's High Court of Justice , in an effort to free himself from the legal obligations imposed on him by the Beatles ' partnership , and particularly from manager Allen Klein . Author Robert Rodriguez describes the situation as an " <unk> sour turn of events " that " mystified " the public and angered fans of the Beatles . 
 Beginning on 19 February 1971 , the court heard reports from Harrison , John Lennon and Ringo Starr of McCartney 's attempts to control the band , and McCartney 's equally unflattering assessment of Klein . Although the other three former Beatles had presented a united front against McCartney since his April 1970 departure from the band , the recent publication of Lennon 's scathing comments to Rolling Stone editor Jann Wenner , about McCartney , Harrison and Starr , added to the ill @-@ feeling surrounding the group . 
 On 12 March , High Court judge Mr Justice Stamp ruled in McCartney 's favour , appointing London accountant James Spooner as Apple Corps ' official receiver . While Lennon reportedly unleashed his anger that day by throwing two bricks through the windows of McCartney 's St John 's Wood home , Harrison channelled his frustration into a new composition , " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " . Harrison biographer Simon Leng suggests that the song " takes a nearly impersonal overview of the Beatles ' self @-@ <unk> legal wounds " . In his 1980 autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison describes the opening verse as being " vaguely based on the Square dance type of fiddle lyric " : 
 Well , you serve me and I 'll serve you 
 Swing your partners , all get screwed 
 Bring your lawyer and I 'll bring mine 
 Get together , and we could have a bad time 
 In Leng 's opinion , the song 's lyrics " revel in the certainty that lawyers are an easy target for general scorn and a quick way of securing a common denominator " . During the second verse , the line " It 's affidavit swearing time " reflects real @-@ life events – whereby Harrison , Lennon and Starr all submitted their statements to the court via affidavit – before Harrison concludes : " Now all that 's left is to find yourself a new band . " In the third verse , Harrison predicts the eventual outcome of the lawsuit : 
 Hold the block on money flow 
 Move it into joint escrow 
 Court receiver , laughs and thrills 
 But in the end we just pay those lawyers their bills 
 Author Ian Inglis identifies Harrison 's use of the plural form " we " in the lyric as evidence of his hope for " a shared and sensible outcome " for the former Beatles , since the situation " disadvantages them all " . While Harrison biographer Dale Allison interprets a degree of animosity towards the other Beatles in the song 's lyrics , Leng argues that they are directed solely at the legal profession . Inglis similarly dismisses the idea that Harrison was targeting his former bandmates ; instead , the song expresses " frustration rather than hostility " and addresses the " absurdity " of the situation . Inglis writes of " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " : " It makes clear that amid the legal arguments , financial requirements , and technical language ... there are four former friends who are powerless to control events . " 
 Regarding the song 's square @-@ dance theme , Leng suggests that folk dancing 's cycle of about @-@ turns and to @-@ and @-@ fro movement reminded Harrison of the Beatles ' " seemingly endless , and pointless , legal orbits around one another " . The song 's lyrics are set against a blues @-@ based bottleneck riff , typical of Harrison 's work at the time with the dobro . Played in his favoured open E tuning , " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " was one of a number of bottleneck @-@ inspired Harrison compositions from the early 1970s . 
 The song title soon became part of regular Harrison parlance , as evidenced by his appearance on The Dick Cavett Show in November 1971 , when he used the phrase to goad Capitol Records boss Bhaskar Menon over delaying the release of the Concert for Bangladesh live album . Commentators similarly adopted " sue me , sue you blues " as a description for the litigation surrounding Harrison and his fellow ex @-@ Beatles throughout the 1970s . 
 = = Pre @-@ Living in the Material World recording history = = 
 = = = Harrison 's solo demo = = = 
 Harrison recorded a brief demo of " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " , in the Delta blues style , which became available in the 1990s on bootleg compilations such as Pirate Songs . Leng describes this 1971 recording as " astonishing " and a " must " for inclusion on any forthcoming George Harrison anthology , with Harrison sounding like " a lost bluesman , bootlegged in Chicago " . 
 The demo was officially issued in September 2006 , on the DVD included in the deluxe edition of Harrison 's remastered 1973 solo album , Living in the Material World . The song is set to archival footage , showing images of Harrison 's National resonator guitar , over which his handwritten lyrics are superimposed . In the opinion of Music Box editor John Metzger , this version of " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " " stings more than its studio counterpart " . Although the 2006 reissue lists it as an " acoustic demo version " , Harrison played electric slide guitar on the recording . The same film clip appears on the DVD exclusive to the Apple Years 1968 – 75 Harrison box set , released in September 2014 . 
 = = = Jesse Ed Davis 's version = = = 
 Harrison met Tulsa @-@ born guitarist Jesse Ed Davis through mutual friends , singer @-@ songwriter Leon Russell and drummer Jim Keltner , both of whom took part in the hastily arranged session for Harrison 's " Bangla Desh " charity single in July 1971 . Russell also assisted Harrison in recruiting personnel for the associated benefit concerts , held at Madison Square Garden in New York , and suggested Davis as a replacement for Eric Clapton , who was then dealing with a severe heroin addiction . Both Davis and Clapton ended up playing at the two shows , on 1 August . In gratitude to Davis , Harrison offered him " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " for inclusion on his second solo album , Ululu . 
 A former guitarist with blues singer Taj Mahal , Davis arranged the song as a Southern blues shuffle , creating a " beautiful version " in the words of music critic Thom Jurek . As on the 1971 demo , which Harrison had passed on to Davis , this version of " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " omits the song 's third verse and , at just 2 minutes 45 seconds , it is significantly shorter than Harrison 's better @-@ known 1973 recording . Other musicians on Davis 's version include Keltner , Dr. John and Billy Rich . Like Keltner , Davis went on to work with all the former Beatles except McCartney during the 1970s , remaining close to Harrison and playing regularly with Lennon over the 1973 – 75 period . 
 Ululu was released in March 1972 , before which Atco Records had issued " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " as the album 's advance single on 25 January . Davis co @-@ produced the recording with Grammy Award @-@ winning producer <unk> <unk> . In an interview with Los Angeles Free Press the following year , Davis expressed disappointment with his two albums on the Atco label and named " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " as one of the few songs he liked . 
 = = Living in the Material World recording = = 
 Harrison returned to the song in December 1972 , during a break in the sessions for his Living in the Material World album , the start of which had been delayed by the various business and tax problems connected with his Concert for Bangladesh aid project . By this time , Harrison , Lennon and Starr had grown disaffected with manager Allen Klein and had chosen not to renew his contract . Once album sessions resumed in January 1973 , Harrison taped the basic track for " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " at the Beatles ' Apple Studio , in central London . 
 Harrison was backed on the recording by Keltner on drums , keyboard players Gary Wright and Nicky Hopkins , and bassist Klaus Voormann . These musicians provided the core line @-@ up throughout the Material World sessions , in a deliberate move by Harrison to work with a small band and pare down the production after the excesses of All Things Must Pass . 
 The recording begins with the song 's single @-@ chord riff , created by a combination of Hopkins ' low piano notes and Harrison 's dobro , before the rhythm shifts to what author Alan Clayson calls " downbeat hootenanny " over the verses . Leng identifies the rhythm as approximating the do @-@ si @-@ do dance step found in square dancing . Harrison takes the first solo , midway through the track , playing a second , overdubbed dobro , while Wright 's Wurlitzer electric piano leads the instrumental passage that closes the song . Contrasting with his more substantial presence on All Things Must Pass , " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " marks a rare instance where Wright 's keyboard work , rather than just Hopkins ' , features prominently on Living in the Material World . 
 Harrison completed the song 's vocals by late February , soon after his 30th birthday . He then travelled to Los Angeles for a series of Beatles @-@ related business meetings held at the offices of Apple 's US distributor , Capitol Records , primarily to discuss the upcoming Beatles compilations 1962 – 1966 and 1967 – 1970 . While these two double albums were intended to foil bootleggers , Doggett notes that the profits financed the Beatles ' litigation against Klein until well into 1974 . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " was issued at the end of May 1973 as the second track on Living in the Material World , following the album 's lead single , " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " . According to authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter , Harrison considered an alternative running order , whereby " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " was track 1 and " Give Me Love " opened side two of the album . In the UK cassette format , " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " was the opening track , followed by " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " . 
 The song 's inclusion marked the only secular composition on Material World . It also served as a rare foray into rock amid the album 's abundance of spiritually themed ballads and occasional acoustic @-@ based pop such as " Give Me Love " and " Don 't Let Me Wait Too Long " . Reflecting the album content , Tom Wilkes 's design for the record 's face labels contrasted a devout spiritual existence with life in the material world , by featuring a painting of Krishna and his warrior prince Arjuna on side one and a picture of a Mercedes stretch limousine on the reverse . 
 Regarded by some as the most level @-@ headed and musically consistent ex @-@ Beatle in mid 1973 , with " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " Harrison provided observers with another example in the band 's tradition of self @-@ referential songwriting . Leng has written of the public and the media " long [ ing ] for these further installments of ' the Beatles soap opera ' " , of which this song was " less paranoiac " than " How Do You Sleep ? " and " not as roseate " as Starr 's " Early 1970 " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On release , Billboard magazine noted " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " as a comment on " the Beatles and their mish @-@ mash " , while Stephen Holden of Rolling Stone described the track as " a biting slide @-@ guitar showcase for Harrison , its lyric a clever <unk> diatribe against such monetary quarrels as those that ended the Beatles " . In their respective books discussing the former Beatles ' first decade as solo artists , Nicholas Schaffner and NME critic Bob Woffinden likewise praised Harrison 's dobro playing , Schaffner likening it to the " vicious slide guitar work " Harrison had supplied for Lennon on " How Do You Sleep ? " Woffinden compared " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " with Harrison 's 1966 Beatles track " Taxman " , as a composition that showed its author 's " <unk> [ ce ] with those who come between him and his money " , and for that reason , found it " rather out of place " on Material World . Recalling the album 's release in The Cambridge Companion to the Beatles , Michael Frontani writes : " Harrison 's slide @-@ playing is featured throughout , with the swamp @-@ drenched , nocturnal wails of ' Sue Me , Sue You Blues , ' in particular , demonstrating his grasp of the form . " 
 Among more recent reviewers , AllMusic 's Lindsay Planer draws parallels with Lennon 's compositions " How Do You Sleep ? " and " Steel and Glass " , and describes " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " as a " scathing rocker " in which Harrison " forgoes his trademark arid wit for a decidedly more acerbic and direct approach " . To Zeth Lundy of PopMatters , " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " expresses Harrison 's " passive @-@ aggressiveness " . John Metzger views the lyrics as " ridiculously simplistic " and the track as " perhaps , the most bilious song that [ Harrison ] ever penned " . 
 AllMusic critic Bruce Eder and Chip Madinger and Mark Easter instead recognise humour in Harrison 's lyrics . Writing for Rough Guides , Chris Ingham views this track and " Try Some , Buy Some " as " wry , reasonable digs at symptoms of what Harrison sees as symptoms of a diseased world " , while Hugh Fielder of Classic Rock magazine recognises the song 's place on its parent album , in that the legal wrangling " explains his retreat from the material world " . Blogcritics ' Chaz Lipp considers " the sinewy ' Sue Me , Sue You Blues ' " to be among the highlights of Material World and a song that " rank [ s ] right alongside Harrison 's best work " . 
 Among Harrison biographers , Ian Inglis finds an additional comic element in the use of dobro and , like Leng , sees the do @-@ si @-@ do rhythm as an apt musical metaphor for the changing alliances occurring in the courtroom through the early 1970s . Another author who recognises " a good pinch of humour " in the song , Elliot Huntley describes " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " as an " excellent " track , with a " magnificent steel guitar riff " . Leng praises the performance of all the musicians on the recording , particularly Keltner , and describes it as " one of Harrison 's most accomplished pieces " . " It speaks of a very confident , classy musician near the height of his powers " , Leng writes , while remarking on the contrast between Harrison in 1972 – 73 and the " resigned figure " he had portrayed in the Beatles ' 1970 documentary film Let It Be . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 During an interview midway through Harrison 's 1974 North American tour with Ravi Shankar , band leader Tom Scott described " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " as having been a certain inclusion in the setlist from the start of rehearsals , along with " What Is Life " , " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " and Lennon 's Beatles @-@ era composition " In My Life " . Harrison gave " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " a new musical arrangement , the track " reborn as horn @-@ driven funk " , Leng writes , via the all @-@ American rhythm section of Willie Weeks and Andy Newmark , and Scott 's three @-@ piece horn section . In a feature article for Rolling Stone that otherwise savaged the opening West Coast portion of the Harrison – Shankar tour , Ben Fong @-@ Torres wrote approvingly of its inclusion while bemoaning the paucity of other " familiar Beatles or Harrison songs " in the setlist . 
 The tour coincided with speculation about a possible Beatles reunion , as well as an agreement regarding the official dissolution of their partnership , which would be ratified following the receipt of all four members ' signatures in December 1974 . With Starr opting to sign in London , to avoid being subpoenaed by Klein upon entering the United States , Harrison and McCartney provided their signatures in New York on 19 December . Throughout the tour , Harrison changed a line in " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " to reflect the turnaround in his , Lennon 's and Starr 's allegiances over the previous two years – " Bring your lawyer and I 'll bring Klein " name @-@ checking the common enemy of all four ex @-@ Beatles by 1974 . Instead of a copy of the Bible , as in the studio versions of the song , Harrison now sang " Hold your Gita in your hand " . 
 Despite his plans for a live album and a concert film , no recording of this or any other Harrison song from the tour has ever received widespread official release . A noted performance of " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " appears on bootlegs from his show at Long Beach Arena , where , Leng writes , " the crowd was buzzing " , so " set [ ting ] the tone " for a series of successful concerts in America 's Southern states . During this Long Beach performance , on 10 November , Harrison followed his lyric about " find [ ing ] yourself a new band " with the quip " I think I 've got one of those ! " , reflecting his claim that he was having " too much fun " with his current musicians to consider a Beatles reunion . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals , <unk> , backing vocals 
 Gary Wright – electric piano 
 Nicky Hopkins – piano 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 = Hurricane Cora = 
 Hurricane Cora was the first tropical cyclone of the 1978 Atlantic hurricane season to reach hurricane strength . Forming from a disturbance that exited the African coast on August 7 , the storm moved at an unusually high forward speed for a cyclone in the Atlantic Ocean in August . The storm later reached hurricane strength and formed a well @-@ defined eye that lasted only 12 hours before the eye rapidly lost organization for unknown reasons , though the post @-@ season report on the storm mentions the possibility that its high speed caused the eye to dissipate . The storm moved west @-@ southwestward , weakening before making landfall on the island of Grenada . The storm lost its circulation and became a tropical wave on August 12 . The remnant crossed over Central America into the Pacific Ocean , where it reintensified , becoming Hurricane Kristy . 
 Cora was an unusual cyclone , maintaining an unusually low latitude for the Atlantic in August at high speeds , similar to the tracks of Tropical Storm Alma in 1974 and Tropical Storm Fran in 1990 . The hurricane was also upgraded into a hurricane based solely on satellite photography , the second time this occurred . Although it passed through the Windward Islands and the Lesser Antilles , only minor effects were reported . Cora was also responsible for altering weather conditions allowing for a takeoff of the historical flight of the Double Eagle II hot air balloon . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early August , a disturbance was observed in satellite images moving off the coast of Africa on August 4 . Moving westward along the Intertropical Convergence Zone at a forward speed of roughly 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) , the disturbance showed no signs of development until a cloud mass broke away from the ITCZ on August 6 . The separated mass began rapidly organizing , becoming Tropical Depression Three late on August 7 . The tropical depression continued to gain organization and was upgraded to a tropical storm on August 8 , receiving the name Cora . 
 The newly named tropical storm continued to grow , reaching hurricane strength later that day after developing a well @-@ defined eye , peaking early on August 9 with 90 mph ( 140 km / h ) winds , a minimum pressure of 980 mbar , and gale – force winds extending 100 mi ( 160 km ) from the center . The hurricane began to shift into a west @-@ southwest track while moving at 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) . The hurricane would continue in this direction throughout its lifespan . Only 12 hours after forming , the eye rapidly dissipated on satellite imagery for unknown reasons , although the hurricane 's high forward speed may have played a part . After becoming disorganized , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft — the first one to fly in the storm — reported that the cyclone had winds of only 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , the highest winds recorded in the storm . After the report , Cora was downgraded into a tropical storm early on August 10 . The dissipating storm continued on , striking the island of Grenada on August 11 as it weakened into a tropical depression . On August 12 , the depression weakened into a tropical wave near Aruba due to continental influence despite atmospheric conditions being favorable for development . The wave was notable in that it was almost completely devoid of any cloudiness or convection . The remnants of Cora crossed Central America and uneventfully continued westward until August 18 , when its remains contributed to the formation of Hurricane Kristy . 
 = = Impact , records , and naming = = 
 While passing through the Lesser Antilles , reports of squalls with wind speeds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) were received from St. Lucia and Barbados . Rain was also reported , but totals were not large due to the storm 's quick passage . One death was attributed to Cora on St. Lucia when a 22 – year old stepped on a high tension power line that was downed by the winds from the storm in Castries . In addition , an industry on the island reported tree losses of two to four percent from the storm . No reports of damage were received from the other Windward Islands and damage on Grenada , if any , is unknown . Although it remained far to the south , Hurricane Cora affected weather conditions that reached as far north as Presque Isle , Maine , where balloonists Ben Abruzzo , Maxie Anderson , and Larry Newman were preparing to make the first ever transatlantic balloon flight on the Double Eagle II . The winds created by Cora 's influence would give the hot air balloon the northerly push required for takeoff according to Anderson . After six days , the Double Eagle II completed the flight , landing near <unk> , France . Cora also affected another record attempt when swimmer Diana <unk> was delayed due to the hurricane 's influence . The planned marathon swimming record attempt was for her to swim from Cuba to Florida , a total of 103 mi ( 166 km ) . The record attempt ultimately failed after 42 hours . 
 According to the preliminary report on the hurricane , neither track forecasts or intensity forecasts panned out for the storm . The track forecasts called for a path more northward than the actual track whereas following the development of the eye , intensity forecasts called for further strengthening until it became clear the cyclone was weakening . When it was upgraded to a hurricane on August 8 , Cora became the second hurricane to have been upgraded to that intensity based solely on satellite presentation after 1975 's Hurricane Doris . The hurricane was also the second of three storms in the season to reform or be reclassified as East Pacific storms . The other two were Tropical Storm Bess ( which became Hurricane Iva ) , and Hurricane Greta @-@ Olivia . Of these , only Greta maintained its circulation over land . This was the only time an Atlantic hurricane was named Cora . 
 = Tropical Storm Erika ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Erika was a short @-@ lived tropical cyclone that had minor impacts in the Lesser Antilles . The fifth named storm of the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season , Erika originated out of a tropical wave on September 1 near the Lesser Antilles . Although it was a disorganized system , it was immediately declared a tropical storm , rather than a tropical depression . Later that day , the system reached its peak intensity with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1004 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 65 inHg ) . Increased wind shear caused the storm to weaken shortly thereafter , with Erika barely maintaining tropical storm @-@ status by September 2 . Later that day , the storm passed over the island of Guadeloupe and entered the Caribbean Sea . On September 3 , Erika weakened to a tropical depression as the low pressure center became fully displaced from convective activity . Later that day , the system degenerated into a remnant low before dissipating near Puerto Rico on September 4 . 
 Due to the storm 's low intensity , Erika produced little damage in the Lesser Antilles during its passage through the islands . Guadeloupe recorded up to 12 @.@ 1 in ( 310 mm ) of rain , leading to flooding and some landslides ; 12 @,@ 000 people on the island were left without power . Several other islands recorded moderate rainfall form the system before the tropical storm degenerated into a remnant low . In Puerto Rico , the cyclone 's remnants produced heavy rainfall , peaking at 7 @.@ 58 in ( 193 mm ) , that triggered flooding in several regions . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Erika originated from a tropical wave accompanied by disorganized shower and thunderstorm activity that moved off the west coast of Africa , near the Cape Verde Islands , on August 25 . The following day , convection surrounding the wave began to show signs of organization as it tracked westward across the Atlantic . By August 28 , an area of low pressure developed from the wave . Environmental conditions ahead of the low were favorable for further development of the system . Despite the favorable conditions , the low became increasingly disorganized on August 29 , with little convection remaining around the center of circulation . The next day , the system quickly became organized , with shower and thunderstorms developing around the center and the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted that the low would likely become a tropical depression within 24 hours . Although convection was well @-@ organized , the system lacked a defined low @-@ level circulation center , leading to the NHC not issuing advisories on the system at that time . 
 On September 1 , a Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance mission into the low found a closed circulation center and tropical storm @-@ force winds . Upon finding the low @-@ level circulation center , the NHC began monitoring the system as Tropical Storm Erika , the fifth named storm of the 2009 season . Erika was slightly disorganized due to moderate wind shear , with the center partially devoid of convection . However , with warm sea surface temperatures , the storm was forecast to intensify to a strong tropical storm within a few days . A mid @-@ level ridge to the north led to Erika maintaining a general westward track for most of its existence . Several hours after being classified , the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1004 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 65 inHg ) . However , the peak intensity was operationally placed at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) based on readings from reconnaissance missions . In post @-@ storm analysis of these readings , it was determined that the NHC had overestimated the wind speeds in an area of unusually heavy rains . By the morning of September 2 , Erika became significantly disorganized , and Hurricane Hunters reported the possibility that multiple circulation centers existed within the broader storm system . 
 Wind shear began to increase earlier than forecast models anticipated , causing the storm to weaken into a minimal tropical storm later that morning . Around 1830 UTC , the center of Erika passed over the island of Guadeloupe with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) as the storm entered the eastern Caribbean Sea . The circulation later became elongated and began to degenerate into a trough of low pressure . The NHC noted that due to the large size of the overall system , the center of Erika could reform elsewhere and restrengthen . Following a brief increase in convective activity , the storm slightly intensified before succumbing to wind shear once more . By the afternoon of September 3 , the center of Erika was fully devoid of convection and the NHC downgraded it to a tropical depression . Shortly after , the system degenerated into a remnant low , coinciding with the issuance of the final advisory from the NHC . The following day , the remnants approached the southern coast of Puerto Rico , producing heavy rainfall across the island . The system was last noted later on September 4 as it dissipated roughly 80 mi ( 140 km ) south of Puerto Rico . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon the declaration of Tropical Storm Erika on September 1 , tropical storm watches were issued for St. Maarten , Antigua , Barbuda , St. Kitts , Nevis , Anguilla , St. Martin and Saint Barthélemy . The following day , all of the watches were upgraded to tropical storm warnings as Erika neared the Lesser Antilles . When the storm entered the Caribbean Sea , a tropical storm warning was issued for Dominica and tropical storm watches were for Puerto Rico , the U.S. Virgin Islands and the British Virgin Islands . Early on September 3 , the tropical storm watches were upgraded to warnings as Erika drifted through the eastern Caribbean . Later that day , the warnings for Dominica and Guadeloupe were discontinued . Shortly thereafter , all remaining warnings were canceled . 
 Exports from the <unk> oil refinery in St. Croix , with a daily production of roughly 500 @,@ 000 barrels ( 79 @,@ 000 m3 ) , were canceled as ports across the island were closed . All businesses were shut down in Dominica on September 3 due to the storm . In Antigua and Barbuda , all schools and the local airport were closed as a precautionary measure . Two cruise ships , the Carnival Glory and a Royal Caribbean ship postponed their docking dates and stayed at sea for a few additional days . The islands of Saint Martin and Saint Barthélemy were placed under an orange alert , the second @-@ lowest alert level , and Guadeloupe was placed under a yellow alert , the lowest alert level . In Puerto Rico , officials closed schools and government offices on September 4 and opened 433 shelters across the island . Officials in the Dominican Republic placed nine provinces under warnings as a precautionary measure . Nearby Haiti was also alerted of the possibility of heavy rains . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On September 3 , all governmental buildings in Dominica were closed due to flooding triggered by heavy rain from Erika . Landslides were reported in Petite Savanne resulting in road closures . In Guadeloupe , heavy rainfall from Erika , exceeding 7 @.@ 9 in ( 200 mm ) in several areas , produced flooding in Côte @-@ sous @-@ le @-@ Vent . The most significant rain was recorded on La Désirade at 12 @.@ 1 in ( 310 mm ) , of which a record 9 @.@ 4 in ( 240 mm ) fell in 24 hours . Sustained winds reached 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) on the island of Marie Galante . One rock slide occurred near <unk> , in <unk> . Several roads became impassable due to flood waters . At the height of the storm , an estimated 12 @,@ 000 people were without power across the island . Up to 5 @.@ 5 in ( 140 mm ) of rain fell along the foothills in Trinidad . In St. Martin , a peak of 3 @.@ 7 in ( 94 mm ) of rain fell . In the United States Virgin Islands , up to 1 @.@ 61 in ( 41 mm ) of rain fell in a 24 ‑ hour span , resulting in minor flooding . 
 In Puerto Rico , the remnants of Erika produced significant amounts of rainfall , causing the rivers of La Plata , Loíza , and <unk> to overflow their banks and trigger widespread flooding . A weather station in Naguabo recorded 7 @.@ 92 in ( 201 mm ) of precipitation . Several other areas recorded upwards of 4 in ( 100 mm ) . In the municipality of Guanica , several homes were flooded , leaving $ 5 @,@ 000 in damage . The most severe damage took place in the municipality of Las Piedras where $ 15 @,@ 000 was reported in flood losses . One river rose to a level of 29 @.@ 27 ft ( 8 @.@ 92 m ) , 7 @.@ 27 ft ( 2 @.@ 22 m ) above flood stage . Damage in Fajardo was estimated at $ 10 @,@ 000 after homes were inundated by flood waters . Additionally , flooding in Caguas resulted in $ 5 @,@ 000 in damage . In the Dominican Republic flood warnings were issued for the provinces of La Altagracia , El <unk> , Hato Mayor , Monte Plata , Samana , Duarte and Maria Trinidad Sanchez due the threat of continued rainfall and flooding . 
 = <unk> Ralph = 
 <unk> Ralph ( born 8 August 1988 ) is an Australian water polo centre back / driver . She attended the Curtin University of Technology and is a dental therapist . She competes for the Fremantle Marlins in the National Water Polo League , and was on sides that won the league championship in 2003 , 2004 , 2006 and 2007 . She has been a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team on the junior and senior level . She has won gold medals at the 2011 Canada Cup and at the 2007 FINA Junior World Championships . She won silver medals at the 2010 FINA World League Super Finals and at the 2010 FINA Women 's Water Polo World Cup . She won a bronze medal at the 2009 FINA World League Super Finals . She is one of seventeen players vying for thirteen spots on the national team to represent Australia in water polo at the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Ralph was born on 8 August 1988 in Geraldton , Western Australia . She has three siblings , one of whom , Mercedes Ralph , has represented Australia on an international tour . She is 176 cm ( 5 ft 9 in ) tall , weighs 67 kilograms ( 148 lb ) and is right handed . In addition to water polo , she has also participated in competitive swimming but made the commitment to water polo because she found swimming boring . She has an associate degree in School Dental Therapy from the Curtin University of Technology and currently works as a dental therapist . She took time off from competing in water polo internationally in 2007 to complete her studies . 
 = = Water polo = = 
 Ralph took up water polo at the age of thirteen , with her first competition being the Melville <unk> Competition . She has a water polo scholarship from the Western Australian Institute of Sport . She plays in the centre back / driver positions and prefers to wear cap number eight . As a young player , she would get up at 4 am to get to the pool to train . 
 = = = Club water polo = = = 
 Ralph 's water polo club is Melville Water Polo Club and she plays water polo for the Longmont Fremantle Marlins in the National Water Polo League . Her team won the National Water Polo League championship in 2003 , 2004 , 2006 and 2007 . She was with the team in 2007 as an eighteen @-@ year @-@ old . During 2010 , she was coached by Wendy Arancini , the mother of fellow senior national team member Zoe Arancini . In 2010 , in the finals tournament , she was named to the league final 's All Star team . Her team finished third , beating the Cronulla team 11 – 9 in the bronze medal match . She currently plays for the team with her sister Mercedes . 
 = = = Junior national team = = = 
 Ralph has represented Australia on the junior national level . She was a member of the junior national side at the 2007 FINA U20 World Championships in Porto , Portugal that won a gold medal . She was one of only two Western Australians on the team . 
 = = = Senior national team = = = 
 Ralph is a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team . She made her senior side debut in China in 2006 during the preliminary rounds of the FINA World League . She competed in another tournament for the senior side in 2006 because Melissa Rippon and <unk> <unk> were injured . She was a member of the 2009 team that finished third at the FINA World League Super Finals in Kirishi , Russia and sixth at the FINA World Championships in Rome , Italy . In 2010 , she was a member of the national team that competed in the preliminary rounds of the FINA World League in Japan from 21 – 23 May and in China from 26 – 28 May . Australia finished second in the tournament . In 2010 , she was a member of the Stingers squad that competed at the FINA World Cup in Christchurch , New Zealand and earned a silver medal . She played in the game where Australia beat Greece by a score of 11 – 7 . She scored twice for the team during the third period . She competed Australia 's 10 – 8 defeat of Russia . In the third quarter of the match , she scored two goals . At the 2011 Canada Cup , she scored s goal in the first period in the gold medal match against China that the Australian team ended up winning . She was named a member of the All Star team for the 2011 Canada Cup . In July 2011 , she was a member of the Australian Stingers that competed in the 2011 FINA World Championships in Shanghai as a field player . In preparation for this tournament , she attended a team training camp in Perth , Western Australia . She competed in the Pan Pacific Championships in January 2012 for the Australian Stingers . In February 2012 , she was named to the final training squad for the 2012 Summer Olympics . She attended training camp that started on 20 February 2012 at the Australian Institute of Sport . The team of seventeen players will be cut to thirteen before the team departs for the Olympic games , with the announcement being made on 13 June . She was part of the Stingers squad that competed in a five @-@ game test against Great Britain at the AIS in late February 2012 . This was the team 's first matches against Great Britain 's national team in six years . 
 = SMS Erzherzog Friedrich = 
 SMS Erzherzog Friedrich ( German : " His Majesty 's ship Archduke Friedrich " ) was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in 1902 . The second ship of the Erzherzog Karl class , she was launched on 30 April 1904 . She was assigned to the III Battleship Division . 
 For most of World War I , Erzherzog Friedrich remained in her home port of Pula , in present @-@ day Croatia , except for four engagements . In 1914 , she formed part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian flotilla sent to protect the escape of the German ships SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau from the British @-@ held Mediterranean ; she advanced as far as Brindisi before being recalled to her home port . Her sole combat engagement occurred in late May 1915 , when she participated in the bombardment of the Italian port city of Ancona . She also took part in suppressing a major mutiny among the crew members of several armored cruisers stationed in Cattaro between 1 – 3 February 1918 . She also attempted to break through the Otranto Barrage in June of that year , but had to retreat when the dreadnought SMS Szent István was sunk . After the war , Erzherzog Friedrich was awarded to the French as a war prize in 1920 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Erzherzog Friedrich displaced 10 @,@ 472 long tons ( 10 @,@ 640 t ) . She was 414 feet 2 inches ( 126 @.@ 2 m ) long , had a beam of 71 feet 5 inches ( 21 @.@ 8 m ) and a draft of 24 feet 7 inches ( 7 @.@ 5 m ) . She was manned by 700 men . She and her sisters were the last and largest pre @-@ dreadnought class built by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , surpassing the Habsburg class by approximately 2 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 968 long tons ) . She was propelled by two two @-@ shaft , four cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines . On trials , they developed 18 @,@ 000 ihp ( 13 @,@ 423 kW ) , which propelled the ship at a speed of 20 @.@ 5 knots ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Erzherzog Friedrich carried a primary armament of four 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) / 40 caliber guns in two twin turrets on the centerline . These guns were an Austro @-@ Hungarian replica of the British 24 cm / 40 ( 9 @.@ 4 " ) Krupp C / 94 , which was used on the Habsburgs . Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 19 @-@ centimeter ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) / 42 caliber guns , also made by Škoda , mounted in eight single casemates on either wing of the ship and two twin turrets on the <unk> shell 20 @,@ 000 metres ( 22 @,@ 000 yd ) at maximum elevation with a muzzle velocity of 800 metres per second ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) . The gun weighed 12 @.@ 1 tons and could fire three rounds per minute . The ships had a tertiary armament for protection against torpedo boats in the form of the 6 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) / 45 caliber gun , also manufactured by Škoda . Anti @-@ aircraft and airship protection was covered by the four 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Vickers anti @-@ aircraft guns on the ship bought from Britain in 1910 and mounted onto Erzherzog Karl . Erzherzog Karl was also fitted with two above water 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , although rarely used . 
 = = Service history = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I , Erzherzog Friedrich was in the III division of the Austrian @-@ Hungarian battle @-@ fleet . She was mobilized on the eve of the war along with the remainder of the fleet to support the flight of SMS Goeben and SMS Breslau . The two German ships were attempting to break out of Messina , which was surrounded by British troops , and make their way to Turkey . The breakout succeeded . When the flotilla had advanced as far south as Brindisi in south eastern Italy , the Austro @-@ Hungarian ships were recalled . In company with other units of the Austro @-@ Hungarian navy , Erzherzog Friedrich took part in the bombardment of Ancona on 24 May 1915 . There she and her sisters expended 24 rounds of 240 mm armor @-@ piercing shells at signal and semaphore stations as well as 74 rounds of 190 mm shells aimed at Italian gun @-@ batteries and other port installations . 
 A major mutiny among crews of the armored cruisers stationed in Cattaro , including Sankt Georg and Kaiser Karl VI , began on 1 February 1918 . Two days later , Erzherzog Friedrich and her two sister ships arrived in the port and assisted with the suppression of the mutiny . Following the restoration of order in the naval base , the armored cruisers Sankt Georg and Kaiser Karl VI were decommissioned and Erzherzog Friedrich and her sisters were stationed in Cattaro in their place . For the morning of 11 June , Admiral Miklos Horthy planned a major assault on the Otranto Barrage ; the three Erzherzog Karls and the four Tegetthoff @-@ class battleships were to provide support for the Novara @-@ class cruisers . The plan was intended to replicate the success of the raid conducted one year earlier . Horthy 's plan was to destroy the blockading fleet by luring Allied ships to the cruisers and lighter ships , which were protected from the heavier guns of the battleships , including the guns of the Erzherzog Karl class . However , on the morning of 10 June , the dreadnought Szent István was torpedoed and sunk by an Italian torpedo boat . Horthy felt that the element of surprise had been compromised , and therefore called off the operation . This was to be the last military action Erzherzog Friedrich took part in and she spent the rest of their career at port in Pula . Following the end of World War I in November 1918 and the surrender of Austria @-@ Hungary , Erzherzog Friedrich was ceded as a war reparation to France in 1920 . She was later scrapped in 1921 . 
 = Oryzomys dimidiatus = 
 Oryzomys dimidiatus , also known as the Nicaraguan oryzomys , Thomas 's rice rat , or Nicaraguan rice rat , is a rodent in the genus Oryzomys of the family Cricetidae . It is known from only three specimens , all collected in southeastern Nicaragua since 1904 . Placed in Nectomys upon its discovery , it was later classified in its own subgenus of Oryzomys and finally recognized as closely related to other species now placed in Oryzomys , including the marsh rice rat and Oryzomys couesi , which occurs in the same region . 
 With a head and body length of 110 to 128 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 0 in ) , Oryzomys dimidiatus is a medium @-@ sized rice rat . The upperparts are gray @-@ brown and the underparts are grayish , not buffy as in O. couesi . The tail is only slightly darker above than below . All three specimens were caught near water and the species may be semiaquatic , spending some time in the water . Its conservation status is currently assessed as " Least Concern " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first known specimen was obtained by W.G. Palmer in 1904 and the next year , Oldfield Thomas of the British Museum of Natural History described this animal as the holotype of a new species he named Nectomys dimidiatus . He placed it in the genus Nectomys , commenting that it was much smaller than but otherwise similar to previously known members of that genus . The species was listed as a Nectomys in taxonomic overviews in the next decades , including a 1944 review of the genus by Philip Hershkovitz . 
 After examining the holotype in London , Hershkovitz instead placed the species in the genus Oryzomys in 1948 . He remarked that it was an especially distinctive member of that genus , and hence classified it in its own subgenus Micronectomys . J. Hernández @-@ Camacho described a second species of Micronectomys , Oryzomys ( Micronectomys ) borreroi , from Colombia in 1957 . In 1970 , Hershkovitz treated O. dimidiatus in another publication and conceded that his name Micronectomys was a nomen nudum ( " naked name " ) because he had not explicitly mentioned characters differentiating it from other taxa in his 1948 publication . Nevertheless , he did not do anything to rectify the situation , and Micronectomys remains a nomen nudum . Hershkovitz also noted that while O. dimidiatus resembles a juvenile Nectomys in external anatomy , it is otherwise similar to the marsh rice rat ( Oryzomys palustris ) . He accepted O. borreroi as an Oryzomys , but did not think it closely related to O. dimidiatus . Six years later , Alfred Gardner and James Patton instead suggested that O. borreroi was a Zygodontomys , and in his 1991 review of that genus Robert Voss confirmed that it is the same as Zygodontomys brunneus . 
 A second specimen was obtained in 1966 and the find was published in 1971 by Hugh <unk> and Knox Jones , who noted that the species is closely similar to O. palustris . Later workers affirmed the relationship between O. dimidiatus , O. palustris and associated species like O. couesi . Fiona Reid reported in 1997 that a third specimen had been found . In 2006 , Marcelo Weksler and coworkers removed most of the species formerly placed in Oryzomys from the genus , because they are not closely related to the type species O. palustris , but kept O. dimidiatus as an Oryzomys . 
 Oryzomys dimidiatus is now recognized as one of eight species in the genus Oryzomys . O. dimidiatus is further part of the O. couesi section , which is centered on the widespread Central American O. couesi and also includes six other species with more limited and peripheral distributions . O. couesi occurs with O. dimidiatus in southeastern Nicaragua . Many aspects of the systematics of the O. couesi section remain unclear and it is likely that the current classification underestimates the true diversity of the group . Oryzomys is classified in the tribe Oryzomyini ( " rice rats " ) , a diverse assemblage of American rodents of over a hundred species , and on higher taxonomic levels in the subfamily Sigmodontinae of family Cricetidae , along with hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents . 
 = = Description = = 
 Oryzomys dimidiatus is a medium @-@ sized rice rat , smaller than O. couesi , with thick , glossy fur and velvety underfur . The hairs on the back are about 6 mm in length . The upperparts are gray @-@ brown with some dark hairs , appearing darker overall than in O. couesi ; the color becomes more yellowish towards the sides . According to Thomas , a faint buff line extends from the sides to the inner sides of the hindlegs . The underparts are grayish , contrasting with the buffy underparts of O. couesi . The snout is short and the well @-@ haired ears are partly hidden by the fur . The hands and feet are off @-@ white or brownish above , not white as in O. couesi . The hindfeet show small interdigital webs , but they lack long tufts of hair on the digits and some of the pads are reduced or absent . The tail is about as long as the head and body and contains about 15 rings per centimeter . It is slightly darker ( grayish ) above than below ( whitish ) , but the difference in color is much less pronounced than in O. couesi . 
 Compared to that of Nectomys , the skull is lightly built and has narrow nasals and a broad , round braincase without conspicuous ridges on it . The zygomatic plate is broad . The incisive foramina ( perforations of the front part of the palate ) extend between the first molars and are broadest in their back halves . The broad mesopterygoid fossa , the gap behind the end of the palate , is perforated by sphenopalatine vacuities . The molar crowns are not as simplified as in Nectomys species , but the front cusps of the upper ( anterocone ) and lower first molar ( anteroconid ) are not divided in two . In addition to the main roots , the upper and lower first molars have smaller additional roots . 
 Measurements for the first two known examples are as follows ( in each case , the first measurement given is from the holotype , taken in 1904 , the second , from the specimen taken in 1966 ) : head and body length 125 and 118 mm ( 4 @.@ 9 and 4 @.@ 6 in ) , tail length 115 and 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 and 4 @.@ 3 in ) , hindfoot length 27 and 28 mm ( 1 @.@ 1 and 1 @.@ 1 in ) , ear length 13 and 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 51 and 0 @.@ 59 in ) , skull length 29 @.@ 8 and 29 @.@ 0 mm ( 1 @.@ 17 and 1 @.@ 14 in ) . The 1966 specimen weighed 46 @.@ 0 g ( 1 @.@ 62 oz ) and had testes 11 mm ( 0 @.@ 43 in ) long ; these measurements were not recorded in the 1904 specimen . Reid , who mentioned the third specimen , reported a maximum head and body length of 128 mm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) , tail length of 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) , hindfoot length of 31 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) , and ear length of 19 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 in ) . 
 = = Distribution , ecology , and behavior = = 
 Oryzomys dimidiatus is known from three specimens collected in the lowlands of the South Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region in southeastern Nicaragua . The first , an old male , was collected on November 5 , 1904 , in a banana plantation with very moist red clay on the Río Escondido near El Rama . The second , a young adult male , was caught on July 26 , 1966 , in dense cane on the south bank of the Río Mico at El <unk> , 15 km ( 9 mi ) west from the location of the first specimen , along with three other rice rats ( O. couesi , Melanomys <unk> , and Oligoryzomys <unk> ) , the cotton rat Sigmodon hirsutus , and the cottontail rabbit Sylvilagus brasiliensis . The third was caught at a stream near Bluefields . Reid suggested that the species is semiaquatic , spending some time in the water , like other Oryzomys . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The 2009 IUCN Red List assessed the conservation status of Oryzomys dimidiatus as " Least Concern " , noting that its distribution may be larger than currently known . Its population is presumed to be large and no threats to its habitat are known . 
 = Teliko = 
 " Teliko " is the third episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Howard Gordon and directed by James Charleston . The episode originally aired in the United States on October 18 , 1996 , on the Fox network . It is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Teliko " earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 3 , being watched by 18 @.@ 01 million people upon its initial broadcast . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully are called in to investigate the unexplained deaths of several African and African @-@ American people whose skin color has turned white as the result of either a rare medical disorder or a bizarre curse . 
 The episode features the second appearance by Laurie Holden as Marita Covarrubias , following her debut in the fourth season premiere " Herrenvolk " . Carl Lumbly guest stars as a social worker . Inspired by the topics of racial discrimination , " Teliko " explores xenophobia and prejudice . The make @-@ up effects in the episode were difficult to apply and took several hours to be completed . The episode received mixed reviews from critics , who compared the episode to older episodes of the series . The racial topics of the episode drew mixed attention . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On an international airline flight , an African man enters the bathroom , where he is attacked by a man exhibiting albino traits . The attacker leaves the bathroom with his normal black skin tone . After the plane lands in the United States , a flight attendant discovers the victim in the bathroom , devoid of his skin pigmentation . 
 Three months later , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) calls in Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and informs her that four African American men have been kidnapped in Philadelphia . One of them has been found dead exhibiting depigmentation . A specialist from the CDC believes that the men have died from a disease , and has requested Scully to investigate the case . Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) joins Scully and has some of the evidence samples from Sanders ' autopsy analyzed by Agent Pendrell , who finds a seed from a rare West African <unk> . Mulder takes the seed to his UN informant Marita Covarrubias and asks for her help ; she provides him with information on the incident on the plane . 
 Meanwhile , Samuel Aboah ( Willie Amakye ) , an African immigrant who is seeking citizenship , attacks a young black man while he is waiting for a bus , kidnapping him . Investigating Kittel 's disappearance , Mulder finds a seed at the bus stop . They have Marcus Duff ( Carl Lumbly ) , a social worker who is helping Aboah apply for citizenship , cross @-@ reference the names from the flight with those applying for permanent residency or a work visa . This leads them to Aboah , who runs when they try to question him and is discovered after squeezing himself into a drainage pipe . Aboah appears to have no symptoms of disease when he is analyzed at a local medical center , but Scully plans to examine him more . 
 Mulder sees <unk> , a diplomat from Burkina Faso . <unk> tells him an old folk tale of the Bambara people about the Teliko , which were nocturnal " spirits of the air " . Meanwhile , Scully examines a PET scan of Aboah , which shows that he has no pituitary gland . Aboah escapes the hospital and meets Duff in a car ; he paralyses Duff in the same manner as his other victims and inserts a long metal object up his nose . A policeman finds Duff and requests an ambulance , and the police tell Mulder and Scully that they are sweeping the area for Aboah . Driving around , Mulder tells Scully that he thinks Aboah is the mythical Teliko . He stops at a demolition site , remembering that Pendrell found asbestos fibers on Sanders ' body . Mulder and Scully split up at the site ; Scully finds the missing men dead , and Mulder is pierced as Kittel was . Scully finds him , calls for medical help , and shoots Aboah . In her field journal , Scully writes that Aboah will stand trial if he lives long enough . She muses that Aboah 's condition and survival may be discovered by science , but humans have a fear of an alien among them which causes them to " deceive , inveigle , and obfuscate " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer and executive producer Howard Gordon was originally working on an episode about someone who appeared to be immortal , but after discussions with consulting producer Ken Horton he added in the notion of xenophobia and " melanin @-@ sucking albino vampires " . Series creator Chris Carter approved the storyline , but the first draft of the script was met with disapproval by the writing staff , and the story was restructured and rewritten . As the episode entered pre @-@ production , Carter asked Gordon to refine the script to give it a purpose , and it was then that Gordon came up with the theme of " deceive , inveigle , and obfuscate " . The same phrase is also uttered by Scully in the episode during her closing sentiments . 
 This replaces the usual " The Truth is Out There " tagline during the title sequence of the episode . Carter also came up with Aboah 's weapons used to extract the pituitary gland that he kept hidden in his esophagus . " Teliko " is Greek for " end " , though it is the name of a " spirit of the air " in African mythology which is sometimes thought to be an albino . Fellow writer John Shiban suggested that the Teliko emerge from the country of Burkina Faso based on his former job of programming foreign air @-@ mail rates for a computer software company . 
 Casting for the episode was difficult , as the production team wanted real Africans . They auditioned every one they could find , including an African theater troupe that was passing by . The role of Marcus Duff eventually went to Carl Lumbly , who was known for his role on CBS 's Cagney & Lacey . The role of Aboah went to Willie Amakye , a Ghanaian Olympic runner who had just returned to his home in Southern California from the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta , Georgia . To appear albino , Amakye 's skin underwent several layers of cover @-@ up cream , layers of white powder , and a little pink powder for color . He also wore contacts for the transparent pink eyes . Amakye 's hair was dyed orange for post @-@ production special effects to change it back and forth from black and white . As revealed on his resident alien card , Aboah 's birthday is September 25 , a reference to the birthday of Gillian Anderson 's daughter . 
 " Teliko " ' s opening sequence makes use of an airplane cabin set built for the later season episodes " Tempus Fugit " and " Max " , though the set 's hydraulic shaking rig had not been completed yet . Composer Mark Snow used African drums , flutes , and chants in his score for the episode . He also used samples from " The Bulgarian Women 's Chorus " , a recording known in Southern California in promotion for a local radio station . Compositions by Snow often utilized elements of African tribal drums , but " Teliko " features rather prominent usage . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " Teliko " explores the concept of the other , with the " other " representing characters of a different race . In the episode , the US and its culture are treated as the norm , wherein the African culture in the episode is depicted in an intimidating way . African folk tales , which are not often considered strange in their own nation , are shown in the episode as ominous and bizarre . The episode prominently features tribal music , and according to Allan F. Moore in his book Analyzing Popular Music , the usage of the episode reinforces a " dangerous but culturally dangerous slippage between the others . " The writer claimed that linking the supernatural ethnic character to the tribal music adds a more " exotic " feeling to the character . 
 By making the character seem more unnatural , it adds an " extraterrestrial " quality to him , making him seem even more unusual in nature . Charles D. Martin mused in The White African American Body that " blackness is clearly attached to racial identity " in the episode , commenting that the episode equates the cultural understanding of race to mere skin color . Martin cites Mulder 's joke about Michael Jackson as a self @-@ aware comment on " another contemporary white negro " which reinforces a stereotype . 
 Zoe <unk> @-@ <unk> , in her book The Flesh Made Text Made Flesh , commented on the episode 's depiction of race . She argues that the episode makes the point that a " perfectly normal " black man looks a certain way , pointing out that the episode states that a black man is defined by a " certain skin pigment " . Any exception to this norm is depicted in a negative manner , with science being the only answer to unnatural phenomena . Dean Kowalski agreed with the analysis in The Philosophy of The X @-@ Files , commenting that one of the main themes of the episodes revolved around science 's attempt to explain folk theories and paranormal phenomena . The episode 's antagonist Aboah , escapes the FBI by fitting into a dinner cart , a feat that was compared to slaves escaping in <unk> slave ships . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Teliko " originally aired on the Fox network on October 18 , 1996 . The episode marked the final time that an episode of the series aired on a Friday . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 3 , with a 20 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 20 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . " Teliko " was seen by 18 @.@ 01 million viewers on first broadcast . 
 The episode received generally mixed reviews from critics . Entertainment Weekly gave " Teliko " a grade of " C – " , finding it similar to the first season episode " Squeeze " . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club gave it a " B – " , also noting its similarity to " Squeeze " and finding that it had uncomfortable racial overtones . However , he did feel that the climax was " wonderfully tense " and " one of the better climaxes the show 's done " . Sarah Stegall awarded the episode two stars out of five , also noting the similarities to " Squeeze " . She criticized the depiction of Mulder and Scully , commenting that the two lacked quality scenes together . She did compliment the scene where Agent Pendrell is disappointed at not seeing Scully , describing it as the highlight of the episode . In his book The Nitpicker 's Guide for X @-@ Philes , author Phil Farrand pointed out an inconsistency in the episode ; before the timeline of the episode , Aboah only kills four men in three months , but during the duration of the episode he kills two men in a matter of days . 
 = Tropical Storm Bret ( 2005 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Bret was a short @-@ lived tropical storm of the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season that made landfall in the Mexican state of Veracruz , the first of four during the season . The second named storm of the season , Bret developed along a tropical wave on June 28 in the Bay of Campeche , and quickly intensified . Tracking to the west @-@ northwest , Bret moved ashore within 24 hours of forming , and dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 Bret was the first of six tropical cyclones ( three hurricanes , two of them major , and three tropical storms ) to make landfall in Mexico during the season . With the formation of the tropical storm on June 28 , the 2005 season became the first since 1986 with two storms in the month of June . The storm dropped heavy rainfall along its path , peaking at 266 mm ( 10 @.@ 67 inches ) , which caused flooding and one drowning death . About 7 @,@ 500 people were affected , and damage totaled over 100 million pesos ( 2005 MXN , $ 9 @.@ 3 million 2005 USD , $ 10 @.@ 3 million 2008 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave accompanied by a weak surface low pressure area crossed Central America and eastern Mexico from June 24 through June 27 . An area of disturbed weather associated with the system moved into the Bay of Campeche early on June 28 , though initially unfavorable upper @-@ level wind shear and land interaction limited initial development . It tracked west @-@ northwestward at 8 – 16 km / h ( 5 – 10 mph ) , and after moving into open waters the organization of deep convection increased with curved banding features developing . Based on data from a Hurricane Hunters flight into the system , it is estimated it developed into Tropical Depression Two at 18 : 00 UTC on June 28 , while located about 100 km ( 62 mi ) northeast of the city of Veracruz . At the time of its first advisory , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning from Veracruz to Tampico . 
 About four hours after formation , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Bret , upon which it attained a minimum central pressure of 1002 mbar . Shortly thereafter , its appearance on radar deteriorated , and convection warmed around the center . With a mid @-@ level anticyclone over Texas , Bret tracked steadily to the west @-@ northwest , and began to re @-@ organize just before moving ashore ; at 12 : 00 UTC on June 29 , the storm made landfall just southeast of Tuxpan with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . After crossing the coast , the storm quickly degenerated to tropical depression status , though Bret retained a well @-@ organized cloud pattern with deep convection . The center turned to the north @-@ northwest , and early on June 30 Bret dissipated inland over Mexico . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Tropical Storm Bret produced heavy rainfall along its path , with a peak 24 ‑ hour rainfall total of 266 mm ( 10 @.@ 47 inches ) recorded in El <unk> , Veracruz ; several other locations reported over 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of precipitation . The rainfall caused widespread flooding in Veracruz , especially in the city of Naranjos where an overflown river flooded portions of the city with 2 m ( 7 ft ) of water . Several other rivers reported river flooding . 
 By shortly after the passage of the storm , the government of Veracruz opened 6 @,@ 000 emergency storm shelters for impacted citizens . Floodwaters from the rainfall inundated scores of houses and cars , with a total of 7 @,@ 500 families in Veracruz directly affected by the storm . The Mexican Army , combined with the efforts of police officers and state officials , worked with amphibious vehicles to rescue families in flooded houses , of whom many waited on rooftops ; according to reports from the Civil Defense of the government of Veracruz , a person drowned in the city of Cerro Azul . Several people were reported missing , as well . Landslides from the flooding cut communications and left 66 villages temporarily isolated . Across Veracruz , the most affected localities were Naranjos , <unk> de <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Benito Juárez , Tamiahua , and Tempoal de Sánchez . The government of Veracruz declared a state of emergency for 14 municipalities . Damage in the state totaled over 100 million pesos ( 2005 MXN , $ 9 @.@ 3 million 2005 USD , $ 10 @.@ 3 million 2008 USD ) ; the state government requested reconstruction aid amounting to the equivalent of the damage total . 
 = Robbing the Cradle = 
 " Robbing the Cradle " is a level created by Ion Storm for their final video game , Thief : Deadly Shadows ( 2004 ) . Unlike other levels in the game , it features a strong survival horror theme , in addition to the stealth gameplay typical of the Thief series . Players traverse an abandoned , haunted orphanage and mental asylum called the Shalebridge Cradle , while attempting to free the soul of a young girl from the building 's captivity . 
 The level was designed by Jordan Thomas and Randy Smith , with a soundscape composed by Eric Brosius . Using theories of interactive horror design developed by Smith in 2000 , the team sought to create the scariest level ever to appear in a game . They took influence from works such as House of Leaves , Session 9 and the Silent Hill series , and they studied mental asylums and reportedly haunted buildings for inspiration . 
 " Robbing the Cradle " was widely praised , and it has been described by publications such as Computer & Video Games , PC Gamer UK and Bloody Disgusting as one of the scariest scenes in the history of video games . Jordan Thomas went on to create the " Fort Frolic " level in BioShock , and to serve as creative director for BioShock 2 . The positive reception of " Robbing the Cradle " inspired Eidos Montreal to create a similar asylum level in Thief ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Overview = = 
 " Robbing the Cradle " is the penultimate level of Thief : Deadly Shadows ( 2004 ) , a video game developed by Ion Storm . In addition to the stealth gameplay typical of the game , the level features a strong survival horror theme . " Robbing the Cradle " takes place inside the Shalebridge Cradle , a conscious , malevolent and abandoned orphanage and mental institution . It is patrolled by creatures called " Puppets " , the reanimated bodies of former inmates . Protagonist Garrett enters the building in hopes of solving a mystery related to a supernatural murderer , the Gray Lady . Once inside , he encounters the ghost of a deceased orphan , <unk> , who was killed by the Gray Lady . She is trapped within the Cradle because it " remembers " her . 
 The Shalebridge Cradle is divided into two sections : the " Inner Cradle " and " Outer Cradle " . The player begins in the Outer Cradle , which is designed to terrify players , but which secretly contains no dangers or enemies . The Inner Cradle is roamed by Puppets . The building 's backstory is unveiled in a nonlinear fashion , via clues scattered within the level . The player must free <unk> by locating and disposing of artifacts that allow the Cradle to remember her . However , after completing this objective , Garrett discovers that the Cradle has remembered him . To escape , the player travels back in time within the Cradle 's memory , while fleeing from silhouettes of the Cradle 's staff . The player ends the level by leaping from the Cradle 's highest window , which convinces the building that Garrett is dead . 
 = = Development = = 
 The central ideas behind " Robbing the Cradle " were conceived by Thief : Deadly Shadows project director Randy Smith in 2000 . Smith had designed a horror @-@ based level , " Return to the Cathedral " , in 1998 's Thief : The Dark Project . Although he had intended only to make it " atmospheric and suspenseful " , the level was widely held to be terrifying . In 2000 , Smith was in the process of being hired at Ion Storm to work on Deadly Shadows , and he was contacted by PC Gamer UK writer Kieron Gillen to discuss " Return to the Cathedral " . As the interview progressed via email , Smith developed a theory of horror design to retroactively explain the success of the level . His core concept was that players try to establish boundaries between safety and danger , and that fear results when these boundaries become unpredictable , or when the player is compelled to cross them " of their own free will " . Smith decided to consciously apply this theory in Deadly Shadows , and the result was " Robbing the Cradle " . 
 Smith 's goal with " Robbing the Cradle " was to create the scariest level ever to appear in a game , which would " knock ' Return to the Cathedral ' off the charts " . Designer Jordan Thomas joined the Deadly Shadows team in November 2001 , in part because of his interest in horror design . Smith worked with Thomas during the early planning of " Robbing the Cradle " , which was referred to at Ion Storm as the " haunted house " . Thomas explained that the key to their design was " dread " , which he described as the feeling of being " seven steps from the unspeakable " . Thomas drafted a level design based on this idea , while seeking to retain the stealth focus of other levels in Deadly Shadows . He saw " Robbing the Cradle " both as a level and as a test of the possibilities of interactive horror design . Smith later noted that his own biggest contributions were the level 's beats : he designed ways for players ' boundaries to be regularly violated , such as by forcing them to explore threatening areas . Thomas spent a large portion of his off @-@ hours working on the level , and Smith stated that Thomas was responsible for " all of the implementation " of the level 's theories . 
 The team worked to discover the causes and mechanics of fear , and they analyzed horror films for inspiration . " Robbing the Cradle " includes influences from the Silent Hill and System Shock series , from the films The Devil 's Backbone , Jacob 's Ladder and Session 9 , and from the books House of Leaves , From Hell and The Shining . Thomas applied psychological horror techniques that he hoped would stay with the player even after the level 's end . To generate fear , he used a combination of scripted sequences and unplanned , emergent factors . Every light source in the level dims and brightens at an imperceptibly slow speed , which Thomas hoped would create a " subconscious sense of breathing " and thereby make the Shalebridge Cradle feel like a living entity . Lights were programmed to flicker when approached by Puppets ; however , Puppets roam the level in real @-@ time , and so Thomas was unable to predict which lights would flicker at which times . He believed that this gave the player the feeling of being hunted . 
 Thomas explained that the Shalebridge Cradle 's design was based on " dozens of actual , existing Victorian hospitals and reputedly haunted buildings " . The Danvers State Hospital was a key influence , and Smith went with other members of the team to visit an abandoned asylum in Austin , Texas . Thomas gathered photographs by urban explorers and studied past methods of treating mental disorders , and he " read reams of patient and staff interviews " . Audio director Eric Brosius composed the Cradle 's soundscape , which Gillen later described as " a drunken miasma of sound [ ... that makes ] you uneasy until an unexpected noise splits asunder " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 " Robbing the Cradle " was widely praised . It was the subject of a ten @-@ page feature by Kieron Gillen in PC Gamer UK , the first and only article dedicated to a single level in that magazine . Gillen hailed it as " one of the most brilliant and disturbing levels ever committed to PC " , and he believed that it was " probably the scariest level ever made " . Tom McNamara of IGN wrote that the level " just has to be experienced to be believed " , and he praised its sound design . He considered the level to be a high point of Deadly Shadows . GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin called the level " remarkable " and " nerve @-@ wracking " , and IGN 's <unk> <unk> noted in a retrospective feature that the level 's audiovisuals combine to " scare the living daylights out of you " . In April 2013 , the level was highlighted as " powerfully atmospheric " by Valve Corporation writer Marc Laidlaw . 
 Maximum PC included " Robbing the Cradle " in its list of the " Scariest Video Game Moments " , with the magazine 's Brittany Vincent noting that the level features " a frightful mixture of lobotomized patients , suffering spirits , and evil intentions " . Bloody Disgusting placed the level fourth in its " The 15 Scariest Moments in Non @-@ Horror Games " , and its staff wrote that the level " managed to burn itself into our minds forever , as well as creep us the hell out . " Writing for Official Xbox Magazine , Ryan McCaffery ranked Deadly Shadows fourth on his " My Top 5 Scariest Games of All @-@ Time " list , based solely on " Robbing the Cradle " . He considered the level to be " perhaps the single most brilliantly designed mission in a genius trilogy of games . " In a reader poll conducted by The Daily Telegraph , Deadly Shadows tied as the twelfth scariest video game , in large part because of " Robbing the Cradle " . The level led Computer & Video Games to place Deadly Shadows on its list " Fear Factor : The 12 Scariest Games Ever Made " . The magazine 's Iain Wilson wrote that the level is " considered one of the scariest levels ever created " . 
 After finishing work on Deadly Shadows , Jordan Thomas went to Irrational Games , where he designed the " Fort Frolic " section of BioShock . He later became the creative director of BioShock 2 . Because of tensions and disagreements within the Deadly Shadows team , Randy Smith was fired from Ion Storm near the end of the game 's production , and he founded Tiger Style with fellow Deadly Shadows designer David Kalina . Smith later wondered if the team had " overdone it " with " Robbing the Cradle " , and he stated , " I worry a little bit in retrospect about people who just wanted a ' sneaking around mansions and stealing stuff ' experience [ being ] forced into their deepest nightmares . " The positive reception of " Robbing the Cradle " inspired Eidos Montreal to create a similar asylum level in 2014 's Thief . 
 = The Blue Lotus = 
 The Blue Lotus ( French : Le Lotus bleu ) is the fifth volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . Commissioned by the conservative Belgian newspaper Le Vingtième Siècle for its children 's supplement Le Petit Vingtième , it was serialised weekly from August 1934 to October 1935 before being published in a collected volume by Casterman in 1936 . Continuing where the plot of the previous story , Cigars of the Pharaoh , left off , the story tells of young Belgian reporter Tintin and his dog Snowy , who are invited to China in the midst of the 1931 Japanese invasion , where he reveals the machinations of Japanese spies and uncovers a drug @-@ smuggling ring . 
 In creating The Blue Lotus , Hergé exhibited a newfound emphasis on accuracy and documentation in his portrayal of foreign societies . He was heavily influenced by his close friend Zhang Chongren , a Chinese student studying in Belgium , and the work both satirises common European misconceptions about China as well as criticising the actions of the Japanese invaders . The Blue Lotus was a commercial success in Belgium and was soon serialised in France and Switzerland , while news of the book led to the Chinese political leader Chiang Kai @-@ shek inviting Hergé to visit China itself . Hergé continued The Adventures of Tintin with The Broken Ear , while the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . In 1946 , The Blue Lotus was re @-@ drawn and coloured in Hergé 's distinctive ligne @-@ claire style by the cartoonist and his team of assistants ; during this process a number of minor plot elements were changed . The Adventure introduces the recurring characters J.M. Dawson and Chang Chong @-@ Chen . The story was adapted for a 1991 episode of the Ellipse / Nelvana animated series The Adventures of Tintin . Critical analysis of the story has been positive , with various commentators considering it to be one of Hergé 's finest works . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Staying at the palace of the Maharaja of Gaipajama in India , Tintin is approached by a visitor from Shanghai in China . The visitor supplies him with the name of Mitsuhirato , a Japanese businessman based in Shanghai , but before finishing his message is hit by a dart dipped in Rajaijah , the " poison of madness . " Tintin and his fox terrier Snowy travel to Shanghai to meet Mitsuhirato , who warns them that the Maharajah is in danger and that they should return to India . Surviving several attempts on his life by mysterious assailants , Tintin attempts to leave for India by boat , but is kidnapped . His abductors reveal themselves as members of a secret society known as the Sons of the Dragon , who are devoted to combating the opium trade . Their spokesman , Wang Chen @-@ Yee , explains to Tintin that Mitsuhirato is both a Japanese spy and an opium smuggler , and enlist Tintin in their fight to stop him . Tintin agrees , and spies on Mitsuhirato at the Blue Lotus opium den . Following the spy , he discovers him blowing up a Chinese railway . The Japanese government use this as an excuse to invade Northern China , taking Shanghai under its control . 
 Tintin is captured by Mitsuhirato , who plans to poison him with Rajaijah ; however , a member of the Sons of the Dragon swaps the poison for coloured water , and Tintin escapes unscathed . When Mitsuhirato discovers the deception , he convinces J.M. Dawson , the corrupt Chief of Police at the Shanghai International Settlement , to put a warrant out for Tintin 's arrest . Meanwhile , Tintin enters the Settlement in search for Professor Fang Hsi @-@ ying , an expert in poisons whom he hopes can develop a cure for <unk> , but discovers that he has been kidnapped . Dawson 's police arrest Tintin and hand him over to the Japanese , who sentence him to death before he is rescued by Wang . 
 Travelling to <unk> with the ransom money for Fang , Tintin comes across a flood that has destroyed a village and rescues a young Chinese orphan , Chang Chong @-@ Chen . Chang accompanies Tintin to <unk> , where one of Mitsuhirato 's spies ambushes them ; they realise that it was a trap and that Fang was not there . Meanwhile , the detectives Thomson and Thompson are employed by Dawson to arrest Tintin , but fail on multiple occasions . Returning to Shanghai , Tintin intends to confront Mitsuhirato , and allows himself to be captured by him . Being held prisoner at The Blue Lotus , it is revealed that Mitsuhirato is working with the film director Rastapopoulos , who is the head of the international opium smuggling organisation that Tintin had previously battled in Cigars of the Pharaoh . However , Tintin formulates a plan , with Chang and the Sons of the Dragon appearing to rescue Tintin and Fang ; Rastapopoulos is arrested while Mitsuhirato commits seppuku . Fang develops a cure for Rajaijah , while Wang adopts Chang as his son . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Georges Remi — best known under the pen name Hergé — was employed as editor and illustrator of Le Petit Vingtième ( " The Little Twentieth " ) , a children 's supplement to Le Vingtième Siècle ( " The Twentieth Century " ) , a staunchly Roman Catholic , conservative Belgian newspaper based in Hergé 's native Brussels which was run by the Abbé Norbert Wallez . In 1929 , Hergé began The Adventures of Tintin comic strip for Le Petit Vingtième , about the exploits of fictional young Belgian reporter Tintin . Wallez ordered Hergé to set his first adventure in the Soviet Union to act as anti @-@ socialist propaganda for children ( Tintin in the Land of the Soviets ) , to set his second adventure in the Belgian Congo to encourage colonial sentiment ( Tintin in the Congo ) , and to set his third adventure in the United States to use the story as a denunciation of American capitalism ( Tintin in America ) . On 24 November 1932 , Le Petit Vingtième published a fictional interview with Tintin in which the reporter announced that he would travel to China via Egypt , India , Sri Lanka , and Indochina . This plotline resulted in Tintin in the Orient , the first part of which was an Adventure set in Egypt , Arabia , and India that Hergé later titled Cigars of the Pharaoh . Cigars ceased publication in Le Petit Vingtième in February 1934 , and Hergé next provided the standalone story Popol out West for the newspaper . The Blue Lotus was the second half of the Tintin in the Orient story that Hergé had begun with Cigars of the Pharaoh . 
 However , Hergé knew as little about China as he did about the Soviet Union or the Belgian Congo . At the time most Belgians held to a negative stereotype of China , viewing it as " a distant continent of a nation , barbaric , overpopulated , and inscrutable " , and Hergé had long believed this view . He had included Chinese characters in two previous Adventures , in both instances depicting them according to traditional European clichés . In Tintin in the Land of the Soviets , he included two <unk> Chinese men hired by the Bolsheviks to torture Tintin , while in Tintin in America he featured two Chinese hoodlums who plotted to eat Snowy . Hergé learned a bit about the country from Albert Londres ' book China Madness , based on Londres ' experiences in the country . He was also influenced in his portrayal of China by the 1933 German film <unk> ( At the End of the World ) . 
 Learning of Hergé 's intention to set the next Adventure in China , Abbot Léon Gosset , a Roman Catholic chaplain to the Chinese students at the Catholic University of Louvain , contacted Hergé and asked him to be cautious in his depiction of the country . His students read Le Petit Vingtième and he thought it would be counterproductive if Hergé continued to propagate negative stereotypes about the Chinese people . Hergé was sensitive to Gosset 's ideas , and Gosset proceeded to put him in touch with two of his Chinese students , Arnold Chiao Ch 'eng @-@ Chih and his wife Susan Lin . He also gave him the address of a Chinese student a year Hergé 's junior , Zhang Chongren . The pair first met on 1 May 1934 , soon becoming close friends and spending every Sunday afternoon with each other for over a year . Zhang later commented that he and Hergé became akin to " two brothers " . A student of painting and sculpture at Brussels ' Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium , Zhang taught Hergé about Chinese artistic styles , giving him a set of traditional Chinese brushes and explaining to him the art of painting a tree and Chinese calligraphy , alongside explaining the tenets of Taoist philosophy . Both his artistic and philosophical training under Zhang would have a profound effect over Hergé . 
 Hergé had also gotten in contact with Father Édouard Neut , <unk> at the St. Andrew 's Abbey near Bruges . Neut had a special interest in China , and was excited by Hergé 's latest venture , commenting that it could contribute to " a work of inter @-@ racial understanding and true friendship between Orientals and whites " . He sent him two books , Father <unk> 's Aux origines du conflict <unk> ( On the Origins of the Manchu Conflict ) and Zheng Zheng 's Ma Mère ( My Mother ) , a first @-@ hand account of Chinese family life . He also sent Hergé a 1932 article discussing the differences between Chinese and Japanese cultures . At the time , Neut worked as the assistant of Lou Tseng @-@ <unk> , a Chinese Catholic who had moved to Belgium , where he published a book on the Japanese invasion and occupation of Manchuria , an area of northern China . Mainstream Western press was broadly sympathetic to the Japanese cause , viewing them as a bulwark against the Soviet Union , a view that Hergé was to eschew . 
 = = = Original publication , 1934 – 1935 = = = 
 The comic strip began serialisation in Le Petit Vingtième on 9 August 1934 as Les Aventures De Tintin Reporter En Extrême @-@ Orient ( The Adventures of Tintin in the Far East ) . It began serialisation in France in Cœurs Vaillants from 29 December 1935 , and later in the Swiss magazine L 'Écho <unk> . Alongside protagonists Tintin and Snowy , Hergé also included the detectives Thomson and Thompson in the story , who had been introduced in the previous story . He also alluded to the movie that Tintin had witnessed being filmed in Cigar , Rastapopoulos ' The Sheik 's House , having characters enter a cinema where it was being screened . 
 Hergé actively satirised typical European opinions of China in The Blue Lotus . He had Thomson and Thompson dress in what they perceived as traditional Chinese costume , as <unk> , only to stand out in stark contrast to the actual clothing worn in China . He also had Gibbons , one of the story 's antagonists , express racist attitudes toward the Chinese , and made Tintin give a speech to Chang explaining western misunderstandings of the Chinese . He took " a radical view " by expressing a criticism of Western activity in China 's International Settlement , depicting it as extremely corrupt and only interested in its own commercial interests . He gained much of his information on such issues from Zhang , who informed him of the political events occurring in China from a Chinese perspective . Building on this information , Hergé 's depiction of the Japanese invasion was largely accurate , although it served as an outright attack on Japanese imperialism . Hergé depicted fictionalised versions of both the real @-@ life Mukden Incident , although he shifted its location nearer to Shanghai , and Japan 's walking out of the League of Nations . However , The Blue Lotus contained no mention of one of the central historical events of the period , the Long March of communist Mao Zedong . 
 Further devoting himself to greater accuracy , Hergé also made increasing use of photographs to draw from , such as of Chinese clothing , street scenes , and landscape . Hergé 's newfound emphasis on accuracy and documentation imbued the rest of the Adventures . While Hergé relied on nonsensical Arabic for the backgrounds in Cigars , for The Blue Lotus Zhang drew the many ideograms that appeared as street signs and advertisements throughout the story . Among these ideograms were those of a political nature , proclaiming slogans such as " Down with Imperialism " , " Abolish unfair treaties " , and " Down with Japanese merchandise " . Zhang also sketched out a number of images for Hergé , such as the outline of Wang 's house . Zhang 's signature was also included twice throughout the comic , reflecting his artistic contribution ; Hergé wanted to include Zhang 's name as co @-@ author . In gratitude , Hergé created the character of Chang in honour of his friend Zhang . 
 Upon realising the anti @-@ Japanese tone of the story , Japan 's diplomats stationed in Belgium issued an official complaint , conveyed to Hergé by Lieutenant @-@ General Raoul Pontus , president of the Sino @-@ Belgian Friendship Association . The diplomats threatened to take their complaint to the Permanent Court of International Justice at The Hague . In learning of this , Zhang congratulated Hergé , stating that it would only further expose the actions of Japan in China to further international scrutiny and would make Hergé " world @-@ famous " . Hergé 's strip also came under criticism from a Belgian general , who commented , " This is not a story for children ... It 's just a problem for Asia ! " The story was nevertheless a commercial success , and Le Petit Vingtième organised a celebration to commemorate the return of Tintin from the Far East , sponsored by the L 'Innovation and Bon Marché department stores . Taking place at the Cirque Royal , it was attended by 3000 fans of the series , many of whom were Scouts , and involved an actor portraying Tintin who accompanied Hergé , the newspaper 's staff , a contortionist and a clown . 
 In September 1935 , Zhang returned to China at his family 's request . Hergé meanwhile set about preparing the strip for publication in book form through Casterman . Proud of this Adventure , he encouraged them to increase the level of marketing and advertising for the work . At their advice , he renamed the story from The Adventures of Tintin in the Far East to The Blue Lotus , commenting of this new title : " It is short , it sounds Chinese and it is mysterious . " At Casterman 's prompting , he also inserted a number of coloured plates throughout the work , and devised a new design for the front cover . The book was finally published in October 1936 . Hergé was pleased with the product , commenting , " I was just bowled over ! It is the height of luxury and my first thought was ' It 's much too good for children ! ' ... I was far from expecting that . " He sent a copy to Zhang , who replied to thank him . After news of its publication reached China , in 1939 political leader Chiang Kai @-@ shek , who had enjoyed The Blue Lotus , asked his wife Soong Mei @-@ ling to invite Hergé to visit them there , although he was unable to do so due to the impending Second World War . He finally took up her offer in 1973 , visiting her on the island of Taiwan . 
 = = = Second version , 1946 = = = 
 In the 1940s and 1950s , when Hergé 's popularity had increased , he and his team at Studios Hergé redrew many of the original black @-@ and @-@ white Tintin adventures in colour using the ligne claire ( " clear line " ) drawing style he had developed so that they visually fitted in with the new Tintin stories being created . The Studios reformatted and coloured The Blue Lotus in 1946 . Little was actually changed for the 1946 edition , although many of the backgrounds were embellished . Minor alterations included replacing three highland Scotsman who briefly featured in the story with three Sikhs . The map that appears on the opening page was made smaller , while a reference to Sir Malcolm Campbell was removed . The European Palace Hotel was renamed The Continental , while Gibbons ' company was also renamed from the Americano @-@ Anglo Chinese Stell [ sic ] Company Limited to American and Chinese Steel Incorporated , and the drug smuggling ship known as the S.S. City of <unk> was renamed the S.S. <unk> Maru . 
 = = = Later publications = = = 
 Both Rastapopoulos and Dawson reappeared in the series 20 years later in The Red Sea Sharks . Casterman republished the original black @-@ and @-@ white version in 1979 in a French @-@ language collected volume with Cigars of the Pharaoh and The Broken Ear , the second part of the Archives Hergé collection . In 1985 , Casterman published a facsimile version of the original . Meanwhile , Methuen , the British publisher of The Adventures of Tintin , felt that the story was dated , and only published The Blue Lotus in 1983 , the year of Hergé 's death . The translation into English was undertaken by Michael Turner and Leslie Lonsdale @-@ Cooper , although it lost the English accent of the British troops which was conveyed in the original French . The Adventures of Tintin also became popular in Japan , something Michael Farr thought indicated that the Japanese had not taken offence to Hergé 's portrayal of them in The Blue Lotus . After Hergé 's death , the original illustrated manuscript of The Blue Lotus was discovered at Studio Hergé , and was subsequently exhibited as the centrepiece of an exhibit commemorating the 60th anniversary of The Adventures of Tintin . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Jean @-@ Marc and Randy Lofficier commented that The Blue Lotus was " unarguably Hergé 's first masterpiece " . They felt that for the first time in the series , " one senses that the story has become important " as Tintin first expresses " a purpose , a mission " to his adventure . Commenting on the character Chang , they thought that he was an " endearing personality " despite having little relevance the plot , also believing that Dawson and Gibbons were the most loathsome characters in the Adventure . They compared the scene in which the Japanese invaded China with that in Tintin in America where the U.S. army force Native Americans off of their land , and praised the linear illustrations of the story , although also opined that the original black @-@ and @-@ white version was better than its colour counterpart . Overall , they awarded The Blue Lotus four stars out of five . 
 Harry Thompson noted that some people believed that Hergé 's depiction of the Japanese as buck @-@ toothed and inherently violent in The Blue Lotus was racist . He nevertheless thought that these accusations " stupidly " missed " the point of the story " , which was to counter widespread racist attitudes toward East Asians among Belgians . Due to the inclusion of actual historical events , he thought that the comic lacked the " timelessness " of other Adventures but that for 1934 it was " a marvelous piece of comic strip art " . Hergé biographer Pierre Assouline thought that the book combined " social realism " with the spirit present in the work of Charles Dickens and Alexandre Dumas . 
 Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters thought that there was an obvious difference in The Adventures of Tintin before and after The Blue Lotus , and that it represented " an essential turning point both graphically and ideologically " as Hergé shifted from his former " classically right @-@ wing " ideas . Also feeling that the work was " exceptionally moving , " he noted that The Blue Lotus was far from Tintin in the Congo in its attitude to non @-@ Europeans , while other Belgian comic strips like Blake and Mortimer and Buck Danny would continue to perpetuate negative stereotypes of East Asians for decades . Elsewhere , he stated that it was the first Adventure where Hergé " really took control " of the story , also opining that it was the " most politically involved " entity in the series . 
 Michael Farr stated that there was a " general agreement " that The Blue Lotus was Hergé 's first masterpiece , being " better planned " than its predecessors and for the first time having " a carefully devised structure " . At the same time he thought that it retained the best qualities of the earlier works . Thinking it " much more serious " than Tintin 's prior Adventures , he nevertheless thought it " no less enjoyable " , being the first story to bring " emotion and tragedy " to the series . Farr thought that Hergé 's " total absorption " in his subject resulted in him gaining an " extraordinary feel " for it and allowed him to foresee future political events in China much like a " finely tuned " political commentator . He singled out the depiction of the Mukden Incident for particular praise , thinking it " a marvellous example of political satire " . Philippe Goddin thought that this depiction of the build @-@ up to invasion was " brilliantly " done , also comparing it to the scene of ethnic cleansing in Tintin in America . 
 Literary critic Tom McCarthy thought that The Blue Lotus showed evidence of Hergé 's " left @-@ wing counter @-@ tendency " that rejected his earlier right @-@ wing worldview . He believed that this was partly due to the influence of Zhang , who had destroyed Hergé 's " European absolutism " , and overall thought of it as " the most visually rich of all the Tintin books " . Literary critic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès of Stanford University thought that Wang signified the forces of good in the story while Rastapopoulos represented evil , and that the character Didi – who was poisoned with <unk> – inverted " the model of justice ruling the world of the Good " . He saw a similarity between Didi and Tintin , who both have " feline suppleness , a devotion to good causes , and the patience of an animal stalking its prey " . He furthermore argued that Didi 's desire to behead people when under the poison 's influence expressed his Oedipus complex and was a substitute for castration . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The Blue Lotus was adapted into a 1991 episode of The Adventures of Tintin television series by French studio Ellipse and Canadian animation company Nelvana . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , Thierry Wermuth voiced the character of Tintin . In March 2013 , Steven Spielberg said that The Blue Lotus might be the basis for the third Tintin film in his film series that began with The Adventures of Tintin ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Cultural Influence = = 
 In the cult classic The Avengers ( TV Series ) in the final moments of the December 4 , 1968 episode " <unk> ( stop me if you 've heard this one ) But There Were These Two Fellers ... " John Steed is seen reading " Le Lotus Bleu " . In three other episodes of The Avengers Steed is seen reading three other The Adventures of <unk> books . 
 = Tago Mago = 
 Tago Mago is the third album by the German krautrock band Can , and was originally released as a double LP in 1971 by United Artists . It was the band 's second studio album and the first to feature Kenji " Damo " Suzuki after their previous vocalist , Malcolm Mooney , quit the band in 1970 to return to the United States . 
 Tago Mago has been described as Can 's most extreme record in terms of sound and structure . The album has received much critical acclaim since its release and has been cited as an influence by various artists . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After Malcolm Mooney left Can in 1970 ( according to some rumors , as a result of a nervous breakdown ) , the remaining members were left without a vocalist . Bassist Holger Czukay happened to meet Kenji " Damo " Suzuki when the latter was busking outside a cafe in Munich . He introduced himself as a member of an experimental rock band and invited Suzuki to join them . That evening , Suzuki performed with the band at the " Blow Up club " and subsequently became a member of Can . 
 Tago Mago was recorded in 1971 by Czukay in Schloss Nörvenich , a castle near Cologne . The band was allowed to stay there for a year without paying any rent by the owner , an art collector named Mr. <unk> . 
 This was the first of Can 's albums to be made from not only regularly recorded music , but combined " in @-@ between @-@ recordings " , where Czukay secretly recorded the musicians jamming while waiting for various technical problems to be resolved . Czukay would edit these long , disorganized jams into structured songs . According to Czukay , the album was named after Isla de <unk> , an island off the east coast of Ibiza . Recording was completed in three months . 
 It was originally released as a double LP in 1971 by United Artists . In September 2004 , the album , along with the majority of Can 's discography , was remastered and released as a hybrid SACD . The rerelease includes a booklet with commentary on the album by Bobby Gillespie of Primal Scream and David Stubbs , as well as previously unreleased photos of the band . 
 In 2011 , for the 40th anniversary of its release , the 2004 remaster was released again with an extra disc of previously unreleased 1972 live performances . 
 = = Single = = 
 The side @-@ long track " Halleluhwah " was shortened from 18 ½ to 3 ½ minutes for the B @-@ side of the single " Turtles Have Short Legs " , a novelty song recorded during the Tago Mago sessions and released by Liberty Records in 1971 . A different , 5 ½ <unk> shortened version of " Halleluhwah " would later appear on the compilation Cannibalism in 1978 while the single 's A @-@ side remained out @-@ of @-@ print until its inclusion on 1992 's Cannibalism 2 . 
 = = Music = = 
 Julian Cope wrote in <unk> that Tago Mago " sounds only like itself , like no @-@ one before or after " , and described the lyrics as delving " below into the Unconscious " . Tago Mago finds Can changing to a jazzier and more experimental sound than previous recordings , with longer instrumental interludes and fewer vocals ; this shift was caused by the dramatic difference between Suzuki and the band 's more dominant ex @-@ singer Mooney . On the album , Can took sonic inspiration from sources as diverse as jazz musicians such as Miles Davis and from electronic avant @-@ garde music . The album was also inspired by the occultist Aleister Crowley , which is reflected through the dark sound of the album as well as being named after Isla de <unk> , an island which features in the Crowley legend . Czukay reflects that the album was " an attempt in achieving a mystery musical world from light to darkness and return " . The group has referred to the album as their " magic record " . The tracks have been described as having an " air of mystery and forbidden secrets " . Tago Mago is divided into two LPs , the first of which is more conventional and structured and the second more experimental and free @-@ form . 
 " <unk> " , the opening track , is one of the shorter songs on the album . Allmusic critic Ned Raggett depicted the song as " beginning with a low @-@ key chime and beat , before amping up into a rumbling roll in the midsection , then calming down again before one last blast . " " Mushroom " is the following track , which Leone noted as having a darker sound than the previous song . " Oh Yeah " and " Halleluhwah " contain the elements that have been referred to as Can 's " trademark " sound : " Damo Suzuki 's vocals , which shift from soft mumbles to aggressive outbursts without warning ; Jaki Liebezeit 's manic drumming ; Holger Czukay 's production manipulations ( e.g. the backwards vocals and opening sound effects on ' Oh Yeah ' ) . " Both " Oh Yeah " and " Halleluhwah " use repetitive grooves . 
 The second LP features Can 's more avant @-@ garde efforts , with Roni Sarig , author of The Secret History of Rock calling it " as close as it ever got to avant @-@ garde noise music . " Featuring Holger Czukay ’ s tape and radio experiments , the tracks " Aumgn " and " Peking O " have led music critics to write that Tago Mago is Can 's " most extreme record in terms of sound and structure . " " Aumgn " features keyboardist Irmin Schmidt chanting rather than Suzuki 's vocals . The closing track , " Bring Me Coffee or Tea " , was described by Raggett as a " coda to a landmark record . " 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 Tago Mago has been critically well received and is credited with pioneering various modern musical styles . Raggett called Tago Mago a " rarity of the early ' 70s , a double album without a wasted note " . In the book Kraftwerk : Man , Machine and Music , Pascal Bussy described the double LP as " hugely influential " . The album is listed in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die in which it stated , " Even after 30 years Tago Mago sounds refreshingly contemporary and gloriously extreme . " Many critics , particularly in the UK , were eager to praise the album , and by the end of 1971 Can played their first show in the UK . 
 Various artists have cited Tago Mago as an influence on their work . John Lydon of the Sex Pistols and Public Image Ltd. called it " stunning " in his biography , Rotten : No Irish , No Blacks , No Dogs . Bobby Gillespie of Jesus and Mary Chain and Primal Scream said " The music was like nothing I 'd ever heard before , not American , not rock & roll but mysterious and European . " Mark Hollis of Talk Talk called Tago Mago " an extremely important album " . Marc Bolan listed Suzuki 's freeform lyricism as an inspiration . Jonny Greenwood and Thom Yorke of Radiohead cite the album as an early influence . 
 There have been attempts by several artists to play cover versions of songs from Tago Mago . The Flaming Lips album In a Priest Driven Ambulance contains a song called " Take Meta Mars " , which was an attempt at covering the song " Mushroom " . However , the band members had only heard the song once and didn 't have a copy of it at the time , so the song is only similar @-@ sounding and not a proper cover . The Jesus and Mary Chain have covered the song more faithfully to the original ; it was performed live and included on the CD version of Barbed Wire Kisses . British band The Fall recorded a song indebted to the Tago Mago track " Oh Yeah " entitled " I Am Damo Suzuki " , named after the Can singer , on their seminal 1985 LP This Nation 's Saving Grace . New York band The Mooney Suzuki were named after Can vocalists Malcolm Mooney and Damo Suzuki . 
 Remix versions of several Tago Mago tracks by various artists are included on the album <unk> . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Holger Czukay , Michael Karoli , Jaki Liebezeit , Irmin Schmidt and Damo Suzuki . 
 = = 40th Anniversary Edition = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Damo Suzuki – vocals 
 Holger Czukay – bass , engineering , editing 
 Michael Karoli – guitar , violin 
 Jaki Liebezeit – drums , double bass , piano 
 Irmin Schmidt – keyboards , vocals on " Aumgn " 
 = = = Production = = = 
 U. Eichberger – original artwork & design 
 Andreas <unk> – design ( 2004 rerelease ) 
 = Yugoslav monitor Vardar = 
 The Yugoslav monitor Vardar was a Sava @-@ class river monitor built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as SMS Bosna , but was renamed SMS Temes ( II ) before she went into service . During World War I she was the flagship of the Danube Flotilla , and fought the Serbian Army , the Romanian Navy and Army , and the French Army . She reverted to the name Bosna in May 1917 , after the original SMS Temes was raised and returned to service . After World War I , she was transferred to the newly created Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) , and renamed Vardar . 
 During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , she was the flagship of the 1st Monitor Division , and along with her fellow monitor Sava , she laid mines in the Danube near the Romanian border during the first few days of the invasion . The two monitors fought off several attacks by the Luftwaffe , but were forced to withdraw to Belgrade . Due to high river levels and low bridges , the monitors ' navigation was difficult , and they were scuttled by their crews on 11 April . Some of her crew may have been killed when a demolished bridge collapsed onto a tugboat after they abandoned ship . A number tried to escape cross @-@ country towards the southern Adriatic coast , but most were obliged to surrender to the Germans at Sarajevo on 14 April . The remainder made their way to the Bay of Kotor , where they were captured by the Italian XVII Corps on 17 April . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Vardar was a Sava @-@ class river monitor built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy by Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino , and was laid down as Bosna at Linz in 1914 , as part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian 1914 – 15 Naval Program . She was named after the river Bosna , but was renamed Temes ( II ) during construction , after the sinking of the original SMS Temes by a mine on the Sava River on 23 October 1914 . Along with her sister ship Sava , she had an overall length of 62 m ( 203 ft 5 in ) , a beam of 10 @.@ 3 m ( 33 ft 10 in ) , and a normal draught of 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 ft 3 in ) . Her displacement was 580 tonnes ( 570 long tons ) , and her crew consisted of 91 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered using steam generated by two Yarrow boilers driving two triple @-@ expansion steam engines , and the ship carried 75 tonnes ( 74 long tons ) of fuel oil . Its engines were rated at 1 @,@ 750 ihp ( 1 @,@ 300 kW ) and she was designed to reach a top speed of 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ; 15 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 Her main armament was a twin gun turret of 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / L45 guns forward of the conning tower and a twin turret of 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / <unk> howitzers aft of the conning tower . She also mounted twin 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) / <unk> anti @-@ aircraft guns , two 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) / L44 guns , and seven machine guns . The maximum range of her Škoda 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 45 guns was 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) . Her armour consisted of belt and bulkheads 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick , deck armour 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , and her conning tower , gun turrets and cupolas were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . Temes was completed on 9 July 1915 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
