 Temes was commissioned into the Danube Flotilla in 1915 , and was in action against the Serbian Army at Belgrade in early October , when the Serbs evacuated the city in the face of an Austro @-@ Hungarian assault . During the final river crossing and reinforcement of the resulting bridgehead , Temes provided close support . During this task , she attempted to draw fire away from the battle @-@ damaged monitor Enns but after receiving a direct hit in the crew quarters aft , she had to move out of range . She was run ashore to put out fires and stop leaks , before being towed out of the battle area by an armed steamer , and taken to Budapest for repairs . 
 In November 1915 , the other monitors were assembled at Rustschuk , Bulgaria . The geopolitical position of Romania was uncertain , with the Central Powers being aware that the Romanians were negotiating to enter the war on the side of the Entente . To protect the 480 @-@ kilometre ( 300 mi ) Danubian border between Romania and Bulgaria , the flotilla established a sheltered base in the Belene Canal . When the Romanians entered the war on 27 August 1916 , the monitors were again at Rustschuk , having been joined by Temes after her repairs were completed . The monitors were immediately attacked by three improvised torpedo boats operating out of the Romanian river port of Giurgiu . The torpedoes that were fired missed the monitors , but struck a lighter loaded with fuel . The 1st Monitor Division , including Temes , was tasked with escorting supply ships back to the Belene anchorage . This was followed by forays of the Division both east and west of Belene , during which both Turnu Măgurele and Zimnicea were shelled . On 9 May 1917 , she was renamed SMS Bosna as the original SMS Temes was due to return to service after a complete rebuild . 
 In April 1918 , Bosna , along with three other monitors , two patrol boats and a tug were formed into Flottenabteilung Wulff ( Fleet Division Wulff ) under the command of Flottenkapitän ( Fleet Captain ) Olav Wulff . Flottenabteilung Wulff was sent through the mouth of the Danube and across the Black Sea to Odessa , where it spent several months supporting the Austro @-@ Hungarian troops enforcing the peace agreement with Russia . It returned to the Danube at the end of August , and was anchored at Brăila on 12 September . On 16 October , Bosna and the rest of the 1st Monitor Division sailed from Brăila to Belene . The Danube Flotilla then protected Austro @-@ Hungarian troops withdrawing towards Budapest , fighting French and irregular Serbian forces as they withdrew , and arrived on 6 November . 
 = = = Interwar period and World War II = = = 
 Immediately after the armistice , Bosna was crewed by sailors of the newly created Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( KSCS , later the Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) in 1918 – 19 . Under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye concluded in September 1919 , Bosna was transferred to the KSCS along with a range of other vessels , including three other river monitors , but was officially handed over to the KSCS Navy and renamed Vardar in 1920 . In 1925 – 26 , Vardar was refitted , but by the following year only two of the four river monitors of the KSCS Navy were being retained in full commission at any time . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships were engaging in little gunnery training , and few exercises or manoeuvres , due to reduced budgets . 
 On 6 April 1941 , the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia began , and Vardar was based at Dubovac , as the flagship of the 1st Monitor Division , responsible for the Romanian border on the Danube , under the operational control of the 3rd Infantry Division Dunavska . She was commanded by Poručnik bojnog broda Milivoj <unk> . On that day , Vardar and her fellow monitor Sava fought off several attacks by individual Luftwaffe aircraft on their base . Over the next three days , the two monitors laid mines in the Danube near the Romanian border . 
 On 11 April , the two monitors were forced to withdraw from Dubovac towards Belgrade , during which they came under repeated attacks by Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers . Vardar and her fellow monitor were undamaged , and anchored at the confluence of the Danube and Sava near Belgrade about 20 : 00 , where they were joined by the monitor Morava . The three captains conferred , and decided to scuttle their vessels due to the high water levels in the rivers and low bridges , which meant there was insufficient clearance for the monitors to navigate freely . The crews of the monitors were transshipped to two tugboats , but when one of the tugboats was passing under a railway bridge , charges on the bridge accidentally exploded and the bridge fell onto the tugboat . Of the 110 officers and men aboard the vessel , 95 were killed . 
 After the scuttling of the monitors , around 450 officers and men from the Vardar and various other riverine vessels gathered at Obrenovac . Armed only with personal weapons and some machine guns stripped from the scuttled vessels , they started towards the Bay of Kotor in the southern Adriatic in two groups . The smaller of the two groups reached its objective , but the larger group only made it as far as Sarajevo by 14 April when they were obliged to surrender by German troops approaching the city . The Bay of Kotor was captured by the Italian XVII Corps on 17 April . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = Jimmy Norman = 
 Jimmy Norman ( August 12 , 1937 – November 8 , 2011 ) was an American rhythm and blues and jazz musician and a songwriter . In his early career , Norman had a charting single of his own , " I Don 't Love You No More ( I Don 't Care About You ) " , as well as performing session work with Jimi Hendrix , but he is better known as a lyricist and songwriter . He wrote the expanded lyrics of the song " Time Is on My Side " , which became a hit for The Rolling Stones , and later in 1985 re recorded and produced by Stephen Vanderbilt featuring " St. Tropez " as the A side of a 45 released on the album " Home " throughout Europe . Norman composed a number of songs performed by well @-@ known musicians including Johnny Nash and Bob Marley . In 1969 he became involved with doo @-@ wop band The Coasters , first as a producer and then as a touring member . He was also recording independently , releasing a solo album in 1998 , the same year poor health forced him to retire from performance . Like many other musicians of his time , he was not financially prepared for retirement or heavy medical bills , and with few royalties for his writing soon found himself in economic crisis . With the assistance of charitable organization Jazz Foundation of America , Norman regained his feet and resumed performing , releasing his first wide distribution album in 2004 , Little Pieces . He performed in the Manhattan area until shortly before his death . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Born August 12 , 1937 as James Norman Scott in Nashville , Tennessee , Norman relocated to California as a teenager , beginning his career as a touring musician throughout the Midwest and southern regions of the United States before settling in New York . There , he wrote music for Broadway and performed . In 1962 , Norman released his biggest charting single , " I Don 't Love You No More ( I Don 't Care About You ) " , which reached # 21 on the Billboard " Black Singles " chart and # 47 on the " Pop Singles " chart . 
 = = Songwriting and session work = = 
 In 1964 , singer Irma Thomas went into the studio to record the single " Anyone Who Knows What Love Is ( Will Understand ) " . It was decided that the b @-@ side , a cover of Kai Winding 's " Time Is on My Side " , needed additional lyrics , since the only words in the original composition were " Time is on my side " and " You 'll come runnin ' back . " Norman was contacted and composed the rest of the lyrics to the tune . The Rolling Stones also recorded the song with Norman 's lyrics and released it as a single , which became the band 's first hit to break the top ten . The Rolling Stones ' releases did credit Norman as lyric writer for a number of years , but eventually his name was removed ; in the early 1990s , he was told by the publisher that the credit was not legally binding , as it had been a " clerical error " . 
 In 1966 , Norman recorded several tracks with Jimi Hendrix on session at <unk> Studio in New York : " You 're Only Hurting Yourself " , " Little <unk> " and " On You Girlie It Looks so Good " . The second of these songs was retooled under the title " Groove Maker " and has been included on a number of Hendrix releases . According to Black Gold : The Lost Archives of Jimi Hendrix , Norman — not Lonnie Youngblood as popularly supposed — was the primary performer besides Hendrix on this song . Jimi Hendrix – From the Benjamin Franklin Studios 3rd Edition Part 1 : The Complete Guide to the Recorded Work of Jimi Hendrix posits Youngblood on saxophone , but gives writing credit to Norman . Jimi Hendrix : Musician documents the confusion surrounding this and other Hendrix sessions of the time , including the difficulty in tracking contributions when they also rose from later manipulation of the material as Hendrix became famous . " You 're Only Hurting Yourself " and " Little <unk> " were first released under Norman 's name as Samar records single 112 in 1966 and never again released in original form . " On You Girlie It Looks so Good " remains unreleased . 
 In 1968 , Norman was visited by a young Bob Marley in his Bronx apartment . Norman had at that time written a number of songs for Johnny Nash , whose record label had just signed Marley , and Marley wanted to learn more about rhythm and blues . Along with Al Pyfrom , Norman 's co @-@ writer , and Marley 's wife Rita , the pair spent several days in a jam session that ultimately resulted in a 24 @-@ minute tape of Marley performing several of his own and Norman @-@ Pyfrom 's compositions . According to Reggae archivist Roger Steffens , the tape — which was lost among Norman 's possessions for decades — is rare for Marley in that it was influenced by pop music rather than reggae , highlighting a point in Marley 's career when he was still trying to find his path . Some of the songs from this early jam session were released on the Marley album Chances Are . 
 Following these sessions , Norman went to Kingston , Jamaica and spent more than half a year there , working in the studio with Marley and composing songs . A number of his compositions were recorded by Marley , Peter Tosh , Byron Lee and the <unk> , and Neville Willoughby . Some of the tapes recorded by Norman during his sessions with Marley have been commercially released as part of the Marley compilation album , Soul Almighty . 
 = = Coasters years = = 
 After producing a single for the doo @-@ wop band The Coasters in 1969 for Lloyd Price 's <unk> Records , Norman replaced Vernon Harrell as the regular substitute ( permanently , later on ) for Billy Guy in the group in the 1970s , touring with them until forced to retire by ill @-@ health in 1998 , the same year his album Tobacco Road was released by independent label Bad Cat Records . In interview , Norman cited the limited repertoire , noting that fans of the band were only interested in hearing hits like " Yakety Yak " , " Charlie Brown " and " Poison Ivy " ; " In 30 years we did maybe 10 songs . " Norman did have opportunity to deviate with other love songs from the 1950s , the era when The Coaster 's rose to fame . 
 During his time with the Coasters , Norman teamed up with Eddie Palmieri as lead vocalist in the group Harlem River Drive , which released a self @-@ titled album in 1971 . 
 = = Health and economic crisis = = 
 Norman suffered multiple heart attacks and respiratory disease which restricted him , impoverished , to his home in Manhattan . Though he had a successful career that allowed him at one point to own several clubs , he did not plan for retirement and , like many composers of his time , receives little to no royalties for his compositions . In 2002 , he told The Jamaica Observer with respect to the songs he wrote that were released by Marley , " Periodically , I get chump change , nothing big . A lotta people have been making money off of it , not me . " Norman attempted to get local work without success and , lacking health insurance and investment funds , was near the point of eviction when he came to the attention of the Jazz Foundation of America , which helps redress what The Crisis characterizes as the exploitation of " less savvy or uneducated performers " by record labels and other more powerful members of the music community . 
 = = Recovery and death = = 
 Wendy <unk> , director of the Foundation , arranged for housekeeping and free medical care for Norman , as well as helping him plan for his future , providing back rent and negotiating with Norman 's landlord . In the course of that housekeeping , in July 2002 , Norman 's rare tape of his jam session with Marley was located in his apartment and placed on auction , retrieving considerably above its estimated value when auctioned at $ 26 @,@ 290 . During the same housekeeping session , Norman rediscovered old notebooks containing his compositions . Producer Kerryn Tolhurst recorded Norman performing the songs on a tape recorder in his apartment , taking the tapes into the studio later to add parts by other musicians . Judy Collins , whose drummer Tony Beard contributed to the project , released the resultant album under her own Wildflower label in 2004 . The project , titled Little Pieces , is the first album Norman has ever released with wide distribution . In 2006 , Little Pieces won in The 5th Annual Independent Music Awards for Best Blues Album . 
 In the 2000s , Norman has performed live . In 2003 , he performed a benefit concert for the Jazz Foundation at the <unk> House in New York . In 2007 , he took part in the Jazz Foundation 's annual " Great Night in Harlem " , performing " Time Is on My Side " . As of 2007 , Norman was performing locally in Manhattan . 
 Norman died on November 8 , 2011 , in New York City after a long illness . He had held his last public performance on October 29 , 2011 , for the Jazz Foundation of America . Married three times , he was the father of two children . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Chart singles = = = 
 = Fourth Test , 1948 Ashes series = 
 The Fourth Test of the 1948 Ashes series was one of five Tests in a cricket series between Australia and England . The match was played at Headingley Stadium at Leeds from 22 to 27 July with a rest day on 25 July . Australia won the match by seven wickets to take an unassailable 3 – 0 series lead . In successfully chasing a target of 404 , they set a new world record for the highest victorious runchase in Test history . 
 Needing to win the match to prevent an Australian series victory , England captain Norman Yardley won the toss and elected to bat . England continued to rearrange their team , making three changes in an attempt to find a combination that could challenge Australia , which made two changes forced by injury . Unlike the preceding Tests , England 's openers were able to withstand the Australian new ball attack , and the partnership of Len Hutton and Cyril Washbrook put on 168 for the opening stand . Washbrook fell for 143 in the last over of the day , but England clearly had the better of the play , ending at 268 / 2 by stumps . Australia 's bowlers were heavily criticised for their performance , which was seen as lethargic . The next day , England continued to amass runs , with Australia appearing unthreatening and unable to dislodge Bill Edrich and nightwatchman Alec Bedser , who batted until mid @-@ afternoon . Bedser and Edrich then fell in quick succession for 79 and 111 respectively as England then collapsed and lost 8 / 73 to be all out for 496 late in the day . The hosts were heavily criticised for the collapse , which was largely due to unforced errors . Among the Australian bowlers , the wickets were shared . Australia then reached 63 / 1 in reply at stumps on day two . 
 Australia were in early trouble on the third morning when English bowler Dick Pollard removed Arthur Morris and captain Donald Bradman in the same over to leave the score at 68 / 3 . However , Keith Miller ( 58 ) and Neil Harvey ( 112 ) launched a rapid counter @-@ attack , adding 121 runs in 90 minutes in a display praised for its aesthetic beauty . They were later supported by Sam Loxton ( 93 ) — who hit five sixes — and Ray Lindwall ( 77 ) , who both struck the ball powerfully . Australia ended the day at 457 / 9 , having added 394 runs in one day , and 102 runs for the last two wickets to that point . 
 Australia were bowled out for 458 early on the fourth morning after the rest day , and England set about extending their lead , adding 129 for the first wicket , until both openers fell without further addition . In the meantime the workload on the Australian bowlers was heavy as Ernie Toshack had broken down in the first innings and unable to participate further . Edrich and Denis Compton took the score to 232 / 2 until a late collapse saw England reach stumps at 362 / 8 . England batted on for two overs on the final day , declaring at 365 / 8 . Bill Johnston was the most successful bowler with 4 / 95 . This left Australia a target of 404 in less than a day , which would require a world record runchase , and allowed Yardley to use the heavy roller to break up the pitch , making batting even harder for the tourists . Most observers predicted an easy England win on a deteriorating surface . Australia started slowly , and Bradman joined Morris at 57 / 1 with 347 runs still needed in 257 minutes . They put together a stand of 301 in only 217 minutes , aided by erratic bowling , several missed catches and stumpings to help Australia to a win by seven wickets with 15 minutes remaining . Morris made 182 while Bradman was unbeaten on 173 . The England selectors were heavily criticised after the match for failing to include a leg spinner in the team to exploit the favourable conditions . For the third time in a row , the match set a new record for the highest attendance at a Test in England . 
 = = Background = = 
 Australia had proceeded through the first two months of their tour of England undefeated . After winning 10 of the first 12 games — the other two being drawn — eight of these by an innings , they won the First Test by eight wickets . Between the Tests , they defeated Northamptonshire by an innings before drawing against Yorkshire . They crushed England by 409 runs in the Second Test at Lord 's , <unk> defeating Surrey by ten wickets and crushing Gloucestershire by an innings and 363 runs , after amassing 774 / 7 declared , their highest score of the season . The Third Test was drawn amid rain interruptions that cost a day and a half of play ; England had been in a strong position , having been 316 runs ahead with seven wickets in hand in their second innings when rain came at the end of the third day . Australia proceeded to claim a ten @-@ wicket triumph over Middlesex in their only county game before the Fourth Test . 
 Australia made two changes for the Test at Headingley . Middle @-@ order batsman Neil Harvey replaced the injured opener Sid Barnes , who had collapsed while fielding during the Third Test after being hit in the ribs by a Dick Pollard pull shot . Australia declined to replace Barnes with the reserve opener Bill Brown , instead opting to use vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett as a makeshift opener rather than in his customary position in the middle @-@ order . Harvey had scored an unbeaten 73 and a 95 in the recent tour matches against Surrey and Gloucestershire respectively . Ron Saggers replaced first @-@ choice wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon behind the stumps . Tallon 's little left finger had swelled up after the Third Test , and he exacerbated the injury during the match against Middlesex . Former Australian Test leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly criticised the Australians for opting to use only one spinner , pointing out that he and Chuck Fleetwood @-@ Smith , a left @-@ arm wrist spinner , had taken 17 wickets between them during the last Anglo @-@ Australian Test at Headingley in 1938 . O 'Reilly cited a further instance of an Ashes Test at the same venue in 1934 in which he and Clarrie Grimmett had significant success for Australia . He wanted at least one of the two leg spinners , Colin McCool or Doug Ring , to have played alongside off spinner Ian Johnson , the only specialist spinner to have played in the three preceding Tests . 
 England made three changes . George Emmett was dropped after making 10 and a duck on his debut , and Len Hutton was recalled to take his opening position after being controversially omitted after the Second Test . England 's leading batsman , Hutton had scored 74 in the First Test and made 52 and 64 for the Marylebone Cricket Club against Australia in the lead @-@ up matches , when none of his teammates passed 26 . O 'Reilly praised the decision and the England selectors for stopping " all nonsense and phoney tactics " . He further speculated that they would have done so irrespective of Hutton 's form to avoid the wrath of the parochial Yorkshire spectators at Headingley , but in any case he regarded the original axing as scapegoating for England 's two losses . O 'Reilly believed the English administrators were penalising Hutton for angering them rather than poor performance . The decision to recall Hutton was met with wide approval from the cricketing public . 
 Jim Laker , the off spinner , replaced his left arm finger @-@ spinning colleague Jack Young , who had taken 1 / 78 in the previous match against Australia for Middlesex , and totalled 3 / 174 in his two Tests in the series . Since his omission after the Second Test , Laker had taken 15 wickets in four matches for Surrey . 
 Middle @-@ order batsman Tom Dollery , who had made only 38 in three innings in the Second and Third Tests , was replaced by all @-@ rounder Ken Cranston . Playing mainly for Lancashire , Cranston had scored a century and four fifties , and taken 37 wickets in his last ten matches , but his previous outings against the tourists had not been successful . In two matches for the MCC and Lancashire against Australia , he had managed only 47 runs in three innings and a total of 2 / 109 . English commentator John Arlott said Cranston 's selection was an " indication that the selectors were again hankering after the non @-@ existent Test all @-@ rounder " . O 'Reilly regarded it as " the best team that the English selectors chose during the season " but felt they would be largely incapable of stopping an Australian series victory . 
 = = Scorecard = = 
 = = = England innings = = = 
 = = = Australia innings = = = 
 = = 22 July : Day One = = 
 As Australia were leading 2 – 0 after three Tests , England needed to win the last two matches to square the series . The hosts won the toss and elected to bat on an ideal batting pitch , which was seen as being unhelpful to fast bowling . Despite saying the pitch would be more conducive to spinners , O 'Reilly described the playing strip as being " so green that it was difficult to decide where the out @-@ field ended and the pitch began " . Although fast , the outfield was bumpy in some parts . On some sections of the ground , there was a downward slope towards the edge of the playing arena , meaning the ball would accelerate downhill after being hit . At times the crowd spilled over the unfenced boundary , making the ground smaller than intended . All these factors meant scoring a boundary would be an easier task for the batsmen . 
 The England openers Cyril Washbrook and Len Hutton were given a loud reception as they walked out to bat , particularly the Yorkshire local Hutton . They had to face the Australian opening pair of Ray Lindwall and Keith Miller without the aid of sightscreen . It was the first time some of the Australians had played in a first @-@ class match without a sightscreen , and those cricketers would later have to bat without its assistance . It was believed the Yorkshire administrators were reluctant to install a sightscreen as it would have taken up space and lowered the capacity of the ground , and thus the gate takings . 
 The large crowd roared boisterously as Hutton got off the mark with a single in the first over from Lindwall . At the other end , Miller bowled with less pace than normal and his opening over saw three full tosses . In Miller 's first over , Hutton scored the first boundary of the day , driving past mid @-@ off . Both Australian pacemen felt their legs for strained muscles , and after two overs O 'Reilly described as " very innocuous " , Miller was taken off . He was replaced by the left @-@ arm pace of Bill Johnston , who appeared to be having back problems . Johnston had bowled the most overs of any bowler on the tour and his loss would have meant a heavy workload for his remaining colleagues . Johnston 's apparent discomfort led onlookers to opine that he should have been given more rest in the county matches . The Australian bowlers appeared to be unsettled and Bradman made four bowling changes in the first 50 minutes of play . 
 Bradman thought his faster bowlers could not extract much bounce from the surface and soon removed the short leg fielder , and pursued a 6 – 3 off @-@ side field with three slips and a deep point , trying to encourage the English openers to cut through the vacant area between the slips and extra cover . However , they declined Bradman 's incentive and decided to bat in a low @-@ risk manner , favouring straight @-@ batted shots . After 80 minutes of batting , England 's openers reached 50 , the first time they had put on a half @-@ century in the series . Hutton and Washbrook appeared set for the long haul , and did not react to the applause . They continued on cautiously , and persisted in eschewing the cross @-@ batted cut and pull shots and relying on the safe accumulation of singles . 
 Hutton then edged a ball from left @-@ arm medium pacer Ernie Toshack through the slips , and was dropped by Lindsay Hassett on 25 after flicking the ball behind square leg from the medium pace of Sam Loxton . Hutton then hit a square drive past point and Washbrook pulled a ball along the ground past Harvey , who was patrolling the midwicket boundary . England were 88 without loss at the lunch interval , with Hutton and Washbrook on 46 and 41 respectively . After a slow start , they had scored at almost a run a minute after passing 50 , and five boundaries were hit from a spell of six overs by Lindwall . 
 Immediately after lunch , Lindwall made a confident appeal for leg before wicket ( lbw ) against Washbrook , but was not supported behind the stumps by a silent Saggers , and the umpire ruled against the tourists . At the other end , Hutton square drove Toshack for four , bringing up his fifty in 125 minutes . He followed this with another boundary in the same direction , and Washbrook back cut Lindwall for four more at the other end . This brought up England 's 100 , its first without loss for the series . Washbrook then on @-@ drove a ball to the boundary and brought up his half @-@ century , as Bradman pondered how to capture Australia 's first wicket . England brought up 150 without loss 30 minutes before tea , and continued unhindered by two brief rain interruptions . Up to this point , the Australian bowling had been loose and inaccurate . 
 In bright sunshine , Bradman called on the off spin of Ian Johnson , who had delivered only three overs to this point , the rest of the proceedings having been through fast bowlers . Seeking to stem the flow of runs , Bradman set a defensive ring field , with no slip in place . While Johnson bowled two consecutive maidens , Washbrook took 24 at the other end to reach 85 . O 'Reilly said Bradman 's defensive field settings " made the sorry admission of impotency " . Bradman then called for the new ball with the score on 164 , which Hutton on @-@ drove for four from Lindwall . This took the opening partnership to 168 , the best by England in the series . Washbrook refrained from the hook shot , which had caused him to lose his wicket on earlier occasions in the series . The partnership ended on the very next ball when Hutton went onto the front foot and was clean bowled by Lindwall , much to the dismay of the home crowd . Nevertheless , England had made a strong start , continuing their spirited showing in the previous Test . Washbrook was joined by Edrich , who had scored two 50s in the Third Test at Old Trafford after a lean start to the series . O 'Reilly said the hosts ' incoming batsmen had an ideal opportunity to amass a large score as " the Australian attack was completely at the mercy of the two Englishmen . It had lost all its sting and looked quite innocuous . " 
 Washbrook reached his century with the score on 189 / 1 ; he reached triple figures half an hour after tea , having batted for 230 minutes and 16 boundaries . Washbrook avoided cross @-@ batted shots and solidly defended shorter balls from the back foot , and profited from many over @-@ pitched balls , which he drove away for boundaries . It was a welcome return to form for the opener from Lancashire . He had scored six , one , eight , 37 and 11 in his first five innings of the series , and was dropped on 21 in the second innings of the Third Test before proceeding to an unbeaten 85 . After reaching his century , Washbrook began to play more expansively , driving in a manner that prompted Arlott to compare him to Frank Woolley . 
 Washbrook and Edrich batted until late in the first day , when the former was dismissed by Johnston for 143 in the last over before stumps , hitting a catch to Lindwall in the slips . His innings included 22 fours and the dismissal ended a second wicket partnership worth exactly 100 runs . Washbrook had been solid in his back foot defence and scored many runs from overpitched deliveries . Bedser was sent in as the nightwatchman , and he survived the last four balls from Johnston as England closed at 268 / 2 without further addition to the score , with Edrich , who played fluently as he had done in the previous Test , on 41 . England 's supporters were much buoyed with the situation at the end of the first day . 
 Former Test batsman Jack Fingleton , who covered the tour as a journalist , said Australia 's day went " progressively downhill " and described the efforts as the country 's worst day of bowling since World War II , citing the proliferation of full tosses . England had batted conservatively , steadily accumulating runs on a pitch unfavourable for fast bowlers , and Miller bowled placidly . Fingleton 's fellow journalist and former playing colleague O 'Reilly criticised the bowling display as the worst by the Australians on tour and said none of the bowlers could be excused . He lambasted the attack for operating " without object — hopelessly and meaninglessly " throughout the day . He decried the " so @-@ called attack " for being " so blatantly inaccurate both in direction in length " and likened it to what was on offer in " another monotonously uninteresting county match " . O 'Reilly criticised Bradman 's players for what he regarded as an overly casual and relaxed disposition in the morning , which gradually became more lethargic throughout the day as the home team strengthened their position . O 'Reilly speculated that the tourists had become complacent because of their comfortable 2 – 0 series lead . 
 = = 23 July : Day Two = = 
 The next day , England resumed hoping for more of what happened on the opening day . The ground was again full , with even more people squashed in than the previous day . The sun was obscured by heavy cloud cover , further hindering the visibility of a ground without a sightscreen . The two English batsmen were initially tentative and played and missed frequently , and only two singles were scored in the first 15 minutes of play . The England team frequently looked towards the sky ; as they needed to win the match and were in a good position , they hoped that time would not be lost to rain . Bradman set a deep @-@ set defensive field as he sought to have Lindwall and Johnston contain the batsmen before the third new ball became available . In all , England scored only five runs in the first half @-@ hour , as the two batsmen sought to survive and be set when the new ball was taken and the Australian attack advantaged . During this time the main threat to the batsmen was Lindwall , who bowled a spell at high pace and unsettled Edrich , who sparred at a number of balls . As soon as it was possible , Bradman took the new ball , and Bedser endeavoured to keep his wicket intact to shield Denis Compton and the other middle @-@ order batsmen from having to come in against a swinging ball . During this period Bedser did not attempt to exploit his strong physique to hit the ball hard . Continuing the defensive strategy of seeing off the new ball , it was not until the 48th minute of play that Edrich reached his 50 in 193 minutes , although he did miss several attempted cut shots that went past the outside edge . However , the hosts had seen off the new ball without losing a wicket . Bedser then glanced a ball for four ; England scored only 22 runs in the first hour . 
 After the new ball bowlers had finished their new ball spells , Bradman reverted to the slower bowlers , using run @-@ saving , defensive field settings . Immediately thereafter , Bedser targeted Toshack and hit three consecutive fours and a two in one over . Bradman immediately removed the left @-@ armer and replaced him with Johnson . The Australian captain set his infield rather deep , effectively allowing the batsmen to take easy singles . Bedser responded cautiously , surveying Johnson 's off spin for one over , before going on the attack in the next . He lofted Johnson into the leg side three times , yielding a six over long on and two fours , taking his score to 47 . Bedser then hit a ball back to the bowler Loxton , which was almost caught , before reaching 50 . Bradman also brought back a tired Miller to bowl medium pace off breaks , to no avail . England went to the lunch adjournment at 360 / 2 , with Edrich on 76 and Bedser on 52 . They had added 92 for the session , including 70 in the second hour . Lindwall had been the only bowler who caused much difficulty to the batsmen , particularly concerning Edrich , but the Englishmen dealt with his colleagues comfortably and Miller , nursing fitness concerns , was forced to bowl medium @-@ paced off breaks . 
 Edrich and Bedser continued to amass runs after the break , and Lindwall appealed for lbw for the fourth time while Saggers remained silent . The pair brought up their century partnership as England scored 22 runs in the 30 minutes after lunch . Johnson came on , and Edrich lofted him for six to reach 96 . Edrich then hit a long hop from the part @-@ time wrist spin of Arthur Morris for four to reach his century . Bedser joined the attack and lifted Morris high over square leg for six , and Bradman replaced him with Toshack , who bowled a maiden . O 'Reilly said that during the partnership , only Lindwall appeared capable of threatening the batsmen . He said Lindwall " kept slogging away , tirelessly retaining his pace and enthusiasm long after the other members of the attack had lost all signs of hostility … Bradman could not afford to spare him from doing much more than his share of the galley @-@ slave work . " O 'Reilly decried Lindwall 's workload as excessive and potentially harmful to his longevity . However , against the run of play , Bedser was out caught and bowled by Johnson after almost three hours of batting , ending a 155 @-@ run stand for the third wicket . His on @-@ drive was intercepted by the bowler , who dived across the pitch to his right @-@ hand side to complete the catch . Bedser had struck eight fours and two sixes in a Test best of 79 . He appeared upset by his dismissal , patting the ball back to the bowler when he could have hit it decisively . Edrich attempted to pull a Johnson long hop to the leg side , targeting the large gap between square leg and mid @-@ on , but only ballooned the ball to Morris , who completed the catch diving forwards at wide mid @-@ on . This came after only three runs after Bedser 's dismissal and left the score at 426 / 4 . Edrich had batted for 314 minutes in compiling 111 , with 13 fours and a six . 
 With two new batsmen — Compton and Jack Crapp — at the crease , Australia quickly made further inroads . Toshack bowled Crapp for five with an inside @-@ edged half volley to leave England at 447 / 5 . With this , Bradman took the new ball , and Compton exploited its hardness to score quickly . However , after the shine wore off and the ball went soft , Compton could not score for 25 minutes . O 'Reilly decried Compton 's " helpless " effort in failing to dispatch the tired Australian bowling as " the worst Test innings I have seen him play " . 
 After Compton and captain Norman Yardley had added 26 for the sixth wicket , the former edged Lindwall down the leg side , and Saggers completed his first Test catch to leave England at 473 / 6 . O 'Reilly speculated that Compton 's inability to make progress against the bowling deflated his colleagues . Playing in his second Test of the summer , Loxton bowled Ken Cranston for 10 to claim his first Ashes wicket , leaving England at 486 / 7 . Cranston opted to not play at a ball that went straight into his leg stump . Loxton then removed Godfrey Evans and Jim Laker in quick succession as England fell to 496 / 9 . Evans fell meekly , prodding a ball straight to Hassett at silly mid @-@ on , prompting O 'Reilly to deem Loxton " lucky to be on deck when the English tail were falling over themselves in their nervous speed to commit hara @-@ kiri " . In contrast , Laker edged Loxton down the leg side and it took a diving , low catch from Saggers to complete the dismissal . Umpire Baldwin asked his colleague Chester at square leg to confirm the ball had carried on the full before sending Laker back to the pavilion . Miller then bowled Yardley to end England 's innings at 496 . The home side had batted for 192 @.@ 1 overs and lost their last eight wickets for the addition of 73 runs . Loxton took 3 / 55 while Lindwall and Johnson both took two apiece . However , the late wickets came at a cost for Australia , who lost the services of Toshack to a knee injury . 
 The collapse was heavily condemned . Fingleton said England " encountered something [ ascendancy over Australia ] which they had not known in post @-@ war cricket with Australia and did not know how to handle it " . O 'Reilly called the capitulation a " disgustingly bad show " . He asked what " was there to make bowlers ... pulverize the carefully chosen cream of English batting on a perfect wicket ? " before concluding that the collapse was caused by " an unfortunate absence of concentration " rather than the opposition bowling . Both thought England had wasted an opportunity to put themselves in an unassailable position . 
 With Barnes injured , Hassett moved up from the middle order to open the innings with Morris . Using the new ball , Bedser removed Morris , who chipped the ball in the air to Cranston at mid @-@ wicket and fell for six to leave Australia at 13 / 1 . This brought Bradman to the crease and he was mobbed by the spectators on a ground where he had scored two triple centuries in Tests in 1930 and 1934 . Many spectators surged onto the playing arena to greet Bradman , and he doffed his baggy green and raised his bat to acknowledge them . Fingleton wrote " on this field he [ Bradman ] has won his greatest honours ; nowhere else has he been so <unk> acclaimed " . 
 Bradman got off the mark from his first ball , which Compton prevented from going for four with a diving stop near the boundary . Hassett was restrained while Bradman attacked , taking three fours from one Edrich over . Bradman was 31 and Hassett 13 as the tourists reached stumps at 63 / 1 . The Australian captain did the majority of the scoring in the late afternoon , adding 31 in a partnership of 50 . The tourists batted with little discomfort on a pitch that was still offering even bounce at a gentle pace . 
 = = 24 July : Day Three = = 
 On the third morning , play resumed under hot and humid conditions . There had been rain on the pitch at 07 : 00 , and Bradman resumed proceedings by taking a single from a Bedser no ball . In same over , one ball reared from the pitch and moved into Bradman , hitting him in the groin , causing a delay as he recovered from the pain and recomposed himself before play resumed . In the second over of the day , Pollard got the second ball to lift . Caught out by the unexpected bounce , Hassett was unable to get out of the way and edged the ball to Crapp in the slips for 13 . Miller came to the crease and drove his first ball for three runs , bringing Bradman on strike for the fourth ball of the over . Pollard then pitched a ball in the same place as he did to Hassett , but this time it skidded low off the pitch , deviated back in and knocked out Bradman 's off stump for 33 . According to O 'Reilly , Bradman backed away from the ball as it cut off the pitch with a noticeable flinch . O 'Reilly attributed Bradman 's unwillingness to get behind the ball to the blow inflicted on him by Bedser in the previous over and the rearing ball that dismissed Hassett . 
 Sensing the importance of the two quick wickets , in particular that of Bradman , who had been so productive at Headingley , the crowd erupted . Australia were struggling at 68 / 3 as Harvey , playing his first Ashes Test and the youngest member of the squad at the age of 19 , walked out bareheaded to join Miller at the crease . The tourists were more than 400 behind , and another wicket would expose the lower order and give England the opportunity to take a large first innings lead . Harvey told his senior partner " What 's going on out here , eh ? Let 's get stuck into ' em " . He got off the mark by forcing the ball behind point . 
 The pair launched a counterattack , Miller taking the lead . He hoisted off spinner Laker 's first ball over the square leg fence for six . Miller shielded Harvey from Laker , as his younger partner was struggling against the off breaks that were turning away from him , including one that spun and bounced sharply to beating the outside edge . Miller drilled one off @-@ drive off Laker for four , and after mis @-@ hitting the next , much to the amusement of the crowd , hit the off spinner flat over his head , almost for six into the sightscreen . This allowed Australia to seize the initiative , and Harvey joined the fightback in the next over , hitting consecutive boundaries against Laker , the second of which almost cleared the playing area . He struck another boundary to reach 44 , while Miller 's score stayed on 42 . After half an hour of play , the early morning life in the pitch appeared to have died out . 
 Miller then lifted Laker for another six over long off , hitting a spectator in the head . The English captain , noted for his ability to break partnerships with his occasional bowling , brought himself on . Miller responded by striking a four over long on from Yardley 's bowling to reach 54 . He drove the next ball through cover for four . The English skipper responded by stacking the leg side with outfielders and bowled outside leg stump , challenging Miller to attempt another hit for six . Yardley bowled a half @-@ volley outside leg stump and the batsman obliged , but edged the ball off the back of his bat onto wicket @-@ keeper Evans ' head and was caught by a forward @-@ diving Edrich at short fine leg . 
 The partnership had yielded 121 runs in 90 minutes , and was likened by Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack to a " hurricane " . Fingleton said he had never " known a more enjoyable hour " of " delectable cricket " . He acclaimed Miller 's innings as " one of the rarest gems in the Test collection of all time " and " a moment to live in the cricket memory " . O 'Reilly said Miller and Harvey had counter @-@ attacked with " such joyful abandon that it would have been difficult , if not absolutely impossible , to gather from their methods of going about it that they were actually retrieving a tremendously difficult situation " . The crowd was in raptures at both the batting and Edrich 's catch . Arlott said " two of the greatest innings of all Test cricket were being played " , and praised Miller for elevating " cricket to a point of aesthetic beauty " . 
 Loxton came in to join Harvey at 189 / 4 , who continued attacking , unperturbed by Miller 's departure . Cranston came on and Harvey square drove and then hooked to deep square leg for two consecutive boundaries . Yardley moved a man from fine leg to the location where the previous hook had gone ; Harvey responded by glancing a ball to where the fine leg fielder had been , collecting three more runs . Australia thus went to lunch at 204 / 4 , with Harvey on 70 . 
 After lunch , Australia scored slowly as Loxton struggled to find his fluency against the bowling . Yardley took the new ball in an attempt to trouble the batsmen with extra pace , but instead , Loxton began to settle in . The Australian lofted Pollard to the leg side , almost for six , and hit three fours off a subsequent Pollard over . Harvey accelerated as well , and 80 minutes into the middle session , reached his century to a loud reception as Australia passed 250 . He had taken 177 minutes and hit 14 fours . Loxton then dominated the scoring in a display of power hitting . He brought up his 50 by hitting Cranston into the pavilion for six , eliciting spontaneous applause from the English players . The century stand yielded 105 runs in only 95 minutes . Harvey was out for 112 from 183 balls , bowled by Laker while playing a cross @-@ batted sweep . His shot selection prompted Bradman to throw his head back in disappointment . Nevertheless , it was an innings noted for powerful driving on both sides of the wicket , and Harvey 's fast scoring helped to wrest the match back from England 's firm control . O 'Reilly said the innings was one of " no inhibitions ... completely unspoiled by any preconceived plan to eliminate any particular shot " . He added that it was " the very mirror of truth in the batting art " , " delightfully untrammeled by the <unk> of good advice or any other handicapping influence " , and deemed Harvey 's innings to be most pleasing he had seen since Stan McCabe 's 232 at Trent Bridge in 1938 . 
 Harvey 's departure at 294 / 5 brought the first of the bowlers , Johnson , to the crease . This did not deter Loxton , who was particularly severe on Laker , lifting the off spinner for four more sixes , two over the leg side followed by consecutive off drives into the gallery . On each occasion , umpire Chester walked to the edge of the playing field and tried to inspect where the ball landed amongst the crowd , trying to see if the point of impact was beyond the original playing arena . They were ruled as sixes in any case and some thought Chester 's actions to be more for theatrical than umpiring purposes . Laker refused to be deterred by the aggressive batting and continued to bowl normally by pursuing defensive off or leg theory . Johnson scored 10 before falling with the score at 329 / 6 , hitting Laker to Cranston . 
 Australia was still some way behind when Lindwall replaced Johnson at the crease . Fifteen runs later , Yardley bowled Loxton for 93 , who appeared disappointed at playing such a wild cross @-@ batted swing with a maiden Test century beckoning . Saggers came in and only managed five in his first Test innings before being stumped after being lured out of his crease by Laker , who was still bowling in an attacking manner and flighting his deliveries , undeterred by the sixes Loxton had hit from him , rather than bowling leg theory . This left Australia at 355 / 8 ten minutes before tea , with only Johnston and Toshack remaining . 
 Lindwall hit out , scoring 77 in an innings marked by powerful driving and pulling , dominating stands of 48 and 55 with Johnston and Toshack respectively . He particularly liked to use his feet to get to the ball on the half @-@ volley so he could hit lofted drives . Of the 103 added for the last two wickets , Johnston and Toshack managed only 25 between them . Johnston accompanied Lindwall for 80 minutes , before Toshack lasted the last 50 minutes until stumps , with Johnston as his runner . Australia were 457 / 9 at stumps , with Lindwall on 76 and Toshack on 12 . During Lindwall 's partnership with Johnston , Yardley bowled himself for over an hour , failing to bring on a frontline bowler in his stead despite being unable to dislodge the batsmen . Lindwall farmed the strike by trying to hit boundaries and twos during the over , but Yardley did not resort to the tactic of setting a deep field to yield a single to Lindwall to get the tailenders on strike . Despite Toshack and Johnston 's lack of familiarity with having and acting as a runner respectively , and the resulting disorders in running between the wickets , Lindwall was able to manipulate the strike so he faced most of the balls . Lindwall 's partners were able to survive against the English pacemen , leading O 'Reilly to lament the absence of leg spinner Doug Wright , whose guile and flight was held in high regard by the Australians . O 'Reilly thought Yardley may have bowled himself in an attempt to contain the Australians rather than dismiss them before the close of play , so his openers would not have to bat for a short period before stumps when the visitors ' attack could have made inroads . However , Yardley was neither able to contain nor dismiss the Australian tail . 
 = = 26 July : Day Four = = 
 Sunday was a rest day , and the match resumed on Monday morning . In the third over of the day , Lindwall was the last man out at 458 , leaving Australia 38 runs in arrears on the first innings . Bradman 's men had added only one run to its overnight score of 457 / 9 . Bedser took the final wicket as Lindwall edged , and Crapp took the catch low down in the slips with his left hand . Bedser ended with 3 / 92 and Laker 3 / 113 , while Pollard and Yardley ended with two wickets each . England 's use of Cranston as an all rounder had not been successful ; he conceded almost four runs per over without taking a wicket . Although England only had a slight lead , Australia had the disadvantage of being a bowler short due to Toshack 's injury . This meant Johnston and Johnson among the slower bowlers were left to exploit the wearing pitch . 
 For the remainder of the fourth day , England set about extending their lead . Early in the innings , the capacity crowd encroached substantially onto the ground and the umpires spent eight minutes trying to force them back to the edge of the official playing area , but they again spilled over . Initially , Hutton and Washbrook played cautiously to see off the new ball before trying to lift the run rate . Lindwall 's first two overs were maidens , but Hutton and Washbrook scored 21 runs from his next five overs , while taking only five from Miller 's six overs . The English batsmen attacked the bowling and reinforced their aggressive strokeplay with quick running . England reached lunch at 72 / 0 with Hutton on 40 and Washbrook on 28 . Washbrook was particularly confident and Bradman decided to not risk Johnson in the morning session . 
 The afternoon session continued with further spectator encroachments . After lunch , Bradman set defensive fields with the intent of restricting the scoring , and used his remaining bowlers in short spells to conserve their energy , expecting a long day in the field . The absence of Toshack also meant Loxton had a substantial workload with the ball . The English batsmen continued to accelerate , and when Bradman finally brought Johnson into the attack , they targeted him . Washbrook hit a straight six from Johnson , and Hutton followed suit to take England from 98 to 104 . For the second time in the match , the English openers had put on a century stand , and the shot also brought up Hutton 's 50 in 125 minutes . This feat made Hutton and Washbrook the first pair to make century opening partnerships in both innings of a Test on two occasions ; they had done this for the first time against Australia in the Fourth Test at the Adelaide Oval in 1946 – 47 . Bradman replaced Johnson with Lindwall immediately , and Washbrook responded by cutting the paceman for four to reach his half @-@ century . Lindwall responded with two bouncers . Washbrook then hooked one a short ball from Johnston and got a top edge , but Bradman failed to take the catch . 
 Washbrook then attempted another hook from Johnston towards deep square leg . Connecting with the middle of the bat , he imparted much power on the ball , which flew flat and never went more than six metres above the ground . Harvey quickly moved in across the outfield from the square leg fence and bent over to catch the ball at his ankles while still on the run . Fingleton called it " the catch of the season — or , indeed , would have been had Harvey not turned on several magnificent aerial performances down at The Oval [ in an earlier match against Surrey ] " . O 'Reilly doubted " whether any other player on either side could have made the distance to get to the ball , let alone make a neat catch of it " . He further said the " hook was a beauty and the catch was a classic " . 
 Johnson then removed Hutton for 57 without further addition to the total , caught by Bradman on the run , leaving England at 129 / 2 . The Yorkshire batsman went for a lofted shot and mistimed it high in the air after being beaten in flight , and the Australian captain ran backwards from mid @-@ on to complete the catch . This meant the two new batsmen at the crease , Edrich and Compton , were still yet to score , and the second new ball was only six overs away , so they had to preserve their wickets while conditions were at their most favourable for Australia 's fast bowlers . During a slow period in which only 15 runs came in half an hour , Edrich and Compton were pinned down by defensive field settings with no slips in place . After 45 minutes , Compton premeditated a charge down the pitch and hit Johnson to the leg side for a boundary . The pair accelerated , Compton taking risks in cutting Johnson against the spin . Australia took the new ball and each batsman hit a boundary to bring up the fifty partnership , which took an hour . Worried by the substantial and hazardous craters he and the other bowlers had created in the pitch while following through on the left @-@ hand side of the crease , Lindwall changed to bowling from around the wicket and was warned by umpire Baldwin for running on the pitch , before reverting to over the wicket , although he delivered from the edge of the crease to avoid the holes . O 'Reilly said Baldwin 's warning to Lindwall had played into Australia 's hands as the bowler 's follow through from around the wicket was accentuating a rough patch outside the right @-@ hander 's off stump , which the English bowlers could target when Bradman 's men had to chase the target . Compton then hit boundaries with hooks and pulls from Lindwall and Johnston and England went to tea at 209 / 2 . Compton was on 42 and Edrich 33 . 
 After the interval , Bradman continued with his strategy of rotating his bowlers in short spells , and set a defensive , well @-@ spread field for Johnson 's bowling . Edrich hit three consecutive boundaries from Johnson before lofting a fourth ball into the crowd for six . He then passed his half @-@ century — his fourth consecutive Test score in excess of 50 — before Lindwall trapped him lbw for 51 to leave England at 232 / 3 , ending a third @-@ wicket partnership of 103 . Crapp came in and added 18 before he was bowled by Lindwall , inside edging an attempted forcing stroke through the off side from the back foot . This left England at 260 / 4 , and precipitated a mini @-@ collapse . Yardley deliberately lifted Lindwall over the vacant slips region and reached seven before he fell to Johnston , caught by a leaping Harvey while attempting a lofted shot . Johnston then had Cranston caught behind for a duck with only a further run added to leave England at 278 / 6 , a lead of 316 . Evans came in and edged his first ball through the slips at a catchable height for four . Compton drove Lindwall for a boundary but then fell to Johnston for 66 , caught by Miller at cover . England were 293 / 7 with no recognised batsmen remaining , having lost 4 / 33 . Wicket @-@ keeper Evans was joined by Bedser , and the pair added 37 before Miller removed the latter . Laker came in and helped Evans to add a further 32 as England reached 362 / 8 at the close of the fourth day . Evans — mainly through boundaries — had helped England to add 69 runs in the last 45 minutes of play . 
 = = 27 July : Day Five = = 
 England batted on for five minutes during the final morning , adding three runs in two overs before Yardley declared at 365 / 8 , with Evans unbeaten on 47 . Johnston had the pick of the bowling figures , with 4 / 95 . Batting into the final day allowed Yardley to ask the groundsman to use a heavy roller at the start of the morning , which would help break up the wicket and make it more likely to spin . Bradman had done a similar thing during the previous Ashes series in Australia before setting England a target . The hosts needed to beat Australia to avoid a series defeat . Bradman elected to not have the pitch rolled at all , demonstrating his opinion that such a device would make the surface less favourable for batting . 
 The declaration left Australia with a victory target of 404 runs . At the time , this would have been the highest ever fourth innings score to result in a Test victory for the batting side . Australia had only 345 minutes to reach the target , and the local press wrote them off , predicting their dismissal by lunchtime on a deteriorating wicket expected to favour the spinners . In addition , most of the Australian onlookers present at the ground thought their team had no chance of victory . Morris and Hassett started slowly , making only six runs in the first six overs on a pitch offering spin and bounce . It appeared they were playing carefully at first before deciding whether to try to achieve the target at a later point . In Bedser 's second over , the third of the innings , Morris chipped the ball in the air towards mid @-@ wicket , in a similar manner to his first innings dismissal , but this time the ball evaded Cranston . After 15 minutes Australia had only scored 10 runs . 
 After Bedser had bowled three overs , Yardley introduced Laker in his place in the seventh over to exploit the spin . An attacking field , with two slips and a gully , was put in a place , but Laker bowled inaccurately and the Australian openers took 13 runs from his first over . Hassett hit a four and took a single to give Morris the strike . Morris hit a four , was beaten by a bouncing ball that hurried off the pitch and then hit another boundary . Despite this over , only 44 runs came in the first hour , meaning that 360 runs were needed in 285 minutes . After his poor first over , Laker had settled down and conceded only two runs from his next six overs . The frustrated crowd heckled the Australian openers for their slow scoring and Morris was ironically applauded after taking a single . Evans then missed a leg @-@ side stumping opportunity against Hassett , and Bedser beat each of the Australians with extra bounce . During his early spell , Laker " was getting at least one ball every over to turn considerably " . 
 Noting Laker 's ability to extract substantial turn from the pitch , Yardley brought on the part @-@ time left @-@ arm unorthodox spin of Compton , who bowled inaccurately although with some turn . Morris struck two fours in Compton 's first over to register Australia 's 50 in 64 minutes . Compton 's next over was more potent ; he deceived Morris , who danced down the pitch and missed the ball , but Evans fumbled the stumping opportunity . At the time , Morris was on 32 and Australia at 55 / 0 . Laker beat Morris in the next over with an off break that spun a foot , and in the succeeding over , Hassett was dismissed by Compton with the score at 57 . Compton had caught Hassett 's leading edge and dived forward in his follow through to catch the ball one @-@ handed just above the ground . 
 Bradman joined Morris with 347 runs needed in 257 minutes . After receiving another rapturous welcome from the Headingley spectators in his last innings at the ground , the Australian captain signalled his intentions by hitting a boundary from Compton and another off the first ball he faced from Laker , cover driving against the spin . Bradman reached 12 in six minutes . 
 Yardley then called upon the occasional leg spin of Hutton in an attempt to exploit the turning wicket . The latter had taken only four wickets in the 1947 English season and had never dismissed an Australian batsman in ten Tests against such opponents . As Australia were still behind the required run rate , Yardley could afford to take risks and sacrifice some runs if he got wickets in return . Morris promptly joined Bradman in the counter @-@ attack , hitting three consecutive fours from Hutton 's first over , which Fingleton described as " rather terrible " due to the errant length . This over took Morris to 51 . After an economical over from Compton , Bradman took two fours off Hutton 's next over before almost holing out to Yardley . Despite the near miss , the 20 runs from Hutton 's two inaccurate overs had allowed Australia to reach 96 / 1 from 90 minutes . 
 In the next over , Compton bowled a googly to deceive Bradman , who expected the ball to turn in . However , it went the other way , took the outside edge and ran away past slip for four . Bradman leg glanced the next ball for another boundary , before again failing to read a googly on the third ball of the over . This time the edge went to Crapp , who failed to hold on to the catch . The sixth ball of Compton 's over beat Bradman and hit him on the pads . Compton had control of Bradman for the over , but went unrewarded . At the other end , Morris continued to plunder Hutton 's inaccurate leg breaks , and Australia reached lunch at 121 / 1 , with Morris on 63 and Bradman on 35 . Hutton had conceded 30 runs in four overs , and in the half hour preceding the interval , Australia had added 64 runs . Both Morris and Bradman had been given lives . Although Australia had scored at a reasonable rate , they had also been troubled by many of the deliveries and were expected to face further difficulty if they were to avoid defeat . 
 Upon resumption , Compton continued as Yardley attempted to exploit the turning wicket . However , Compton was not a regular bowler and he sent down a series of ill @-@ directed full tosses and long hops that were easily dispatched for runs . Morris struck seven fours in two overs of what Fingleton called " indescribably bad bowling " . This included six fours in eight balls . As Morris continued to attack , Compton began to crack under the pressure and his inaccuracy increased . The part @-@ time bowler had generated trouble for the batsmen by tossing the ball up and beating the bat or inducing edges , but Morris counterattacked with drives . Compton tried to hold back his length to avoid being driven but the Australian opener pounced on the shorter balls . Morris reached the 90s just 14 minutes after the interval and hit another boundary to reach his century in a little over two hours . Morris had added 37 runs since lunch , mainly from Compton 's wayward offerings , while Bradman had only added three . 
 The onslaught prompted Yardley to take the new ball and replace Compton with his pacemen . Bradman reached 50 in 60 minutes and then aimed a drive from Cranston 's bowling , but sliced it in the air to point . Yardley dived forward and got his hands to the ball , but failed to hold on . Australia reached 202 — halfway to the required total — with 165 minutes left , after Morris dispatched consecutive full tosses from Laker . England began to become demoralised and their fielding continued to deteriorate . Bradman hooked two boundaries , but suffered a fibrositis attack , which put him in significant pain . Drinks were taken while Bradman was being treated , and Morris had to shield his captain from the strike until the pain had subsided . Australia reached 250 shortly before tea with Morris on 133 and Bradman on 92 . Bradman then reached his century in 147 minutes as the second @-@ wicket stand passed 200 . 
 Morris was given another life on 136 when Laker dropped him while fielding at square leg from Compton 's bowling . Bradman was given another life at 108 when he advanced two metres down the pitch to Laker and missed , but Evans fumbled the stumping opportunity with the batsman far out of his ground . Australia reached tea at 292 / 1 with Morris on 150 . The pair had added 171 during the session . Morris was eventually dismissed by Yardley for 182 , after hitting a tired @-@ looking shot to mid @-@ off , having partnered Bradman in a stand of 301 in 217 minutes . He struck 33 fours in a 290 @-@ minute innings . This brought Miller to the crease with 46 runs still required . Miller struck two boundaries and helped take the score to 396 before falling lbw to Cranston with eight runs still needed . Harvey came in and got off the mark with a boundary that brought up the winning runs . Australia had won by seven wickets , setting a new world record for the highest successful Test runchase , with Bradman unbeaten on 173 in only 255 minutes of batting with 29 fours . 
 The attendance of 158 @,@ 000 was the highest for any cricket match on English soil and the takings were 34 @,@ 000 pounds . The crowd remains a record for a Test in England . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the Fourth Test , the Australians had five tour matches before the final Test . They defeated Derbyshire by an innings , before having a washout against Glamorgan . The Australians then defeated Warwickshire by nine wickets , before drawing with Lancashire , who hung on with three wickets in hand on the final day . This was followed by a two @-@ day non @-@ first @-@ class match against Durham , which was drawn after rain washed out the second day . During this period , Barnes returned to action after recuperating from his rib injury . Toshack also recovered to play against Lancashire , but injured himself again and was ruled out of the remainder of the tour . 
 Following Australia 's unlikely win at Headingley , the England selectors were widely condemned for their failure to choose a specialist wrist spinner to exploit the turning pitch . This was cited as a reason for the hosts ' loss , as the part @-@ timer Compton was able to trouble the batsmen and generate opportunities for wickets , only to see them foregone because of missed catches and stumpings . In response , the English selectors made four changes to the team for the Fifth Test , one of these being the inclusion of leg spinner Eric Hollies . Their frequent changes to the team meant the hosts used a total of 21 players for the five Tests , and the repeated changes to personnel resulted in heavy criticism . 
 Despite Hollies being able to trouble most of their batsmen , Australia completed the Test series with a convincing innings victory in the Fifth Test to complete a 4 – 0 result . The Fifth Test was the last international match , and Australia only had seven further matches to negotiate in order to fulfil Bradman 's aim of going through the tour undefeated . They secured three consecutive innings victories against Kent , the Gentlemen of England and Somerset . They proceeded to take first innings leads of more than 200 against the South of England and Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI , but both matches were washed out . The last two matches were two @-@ day non @-@ first @-@ class matches against Scotland , both won by an innings . Bradman 's men thus completed the tour undefeated , earning themselves the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 = Childers Incident = 
 The Childers Incident of 2 January 1793 marked the opening shots between British and French forces during the French Revolutionary Wars , the first phase of a 23 @-@ year @-@ long war between the two countries . Following the French Revolution of 1789 , diplomatic relations between the Kingdom of Great Britain and the French Republic had steadily deteriorated and France was in political and social turmoil . One of the strongest hotbeds of republican activity was the principal Atlantic naval base of the French Navy at Brest in Brittany , the scene of a significant mutiny in 1790 . 
 On 2 January a small British warship , the 14 @-@ gun brig HMS Childers under Commander Robert Barlow , was ordered to enter the Roadstead of Brest to reconnoitre the state of readiness of the French fleet . As Childers entered the Goulet de Brest , the vessel came under fire from French batteries flying the tricolour . Although Barlow clearly identified his brig as a neutral British vessel the fire continued until he was able to withdraw . Although Childers had been struck by a 48 lb ( 22 kg ) cannonball , none of the crew were wounded . The incident was of itself inconsequential , with minimal damage and no casualties on either side , but it marked a symbolic moment in the deterioration of relations between Britain and France in the approach to war , which broke out on 1 February 1793 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the French Revolution of 1789 relations between the newly declared French Republic and its European neighbours sharply deteriorated . In April 1791 , the Declaration of Pillnitz was jointly issued by the Austria and Prussia stating their support for King Louis XVI . In February 1792 Austria and Prussia formally allied and the French Legislative Assembly responded on 20 April 1792 by declaring war on Austria . This first conflict , known as the War of the First Coalition , began on land as other than France the principal European <unk> remained neutral . The arrest of the French king in August 1792 and the expansion of the war into Northern Italy brought about the start of the naval war in the Mediterranean Sea . 
 Britain had remained neutral throughout the first stages of the war . Although unsympathetic to the violence and upheaval of the French Revolution , Britain 's Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger was unwilling to go to war alongside the absolutist monarchies of Eastern Europe . Nevertheless , the Royal Navy had made extensive preparations for war should it occur , starting with the Spanish Armament of 1790 . The French Atlantic Fleet however was in poor condition : the principal fleet base at Brest in Brittany had been the scene of a significant mutiny in 1790 and by 1791 desertion rates among French naval officers were running at more than 80 % . Despite its strong republican politics and command difficulties , the fleet itself was very strong , having been expanded and improved during the 1780s – indeed the tax rises to pay for the French Navy had been one of the causes of the original Revolution in 1789 . 
 = = Childers incident = = 
 The strength of the French Atlantic fleet was a major cause of concern to the British Admiralty , and in late 1792 orders were issued for the small British brig , the 14 @-@ gun HMS Childers under Commander Robert Barlow , to enter the Roadstead of Brest and investigate the state of readiness of the French fleet . 
 On 2 January 1793 , Childers was approaching the entrance to the roadstead under overcast skies and with a light , unreliable breeze . The only entrance to Brest harbour is through a narrow waterway known as the Goulet de Brest . The Goulet lies between the Pointe du Petit <unk> and the Pointe du <unk> on the north shore and the <unk> des <unk> and the Pointe des <unk> on the <unk> peninsula to the south . Due to its importance as the entrance to Brest , the shores of the Goulet were heavily fortified . As Childers entered the Goulet one of the forts covering the entrance from the southern shore fired a shot at a distance of 0 @.@ 75 nautical miles ( 1 @.@ 39 km ) which passed over the brig into the sea beyond . 
 Assuming this warning shot had been fired in the belief that his brig , which was not flying a flag , may be an enemy vessel , Barlow ordered the British naval ensign and the pennant of the Channel Fleet run up . Thus clearly identified as a neutral British warship , Barlow allowed Childers to drift closer inshore with the tide . The French battery responded by raising tricolour flags and red pennants , a move copied by the other batteries covering the Goulet . Having drifted much closer to two batteries Childers suddenly came under heavy fire , the batteries containing very large 48 @-@ pounder cannon . 
 Under fire and with the wind too calm for sailing , Barlow ran out oars to try and pull his brig away from the French batteries . The diminutive size of his vessel made it a difficult target and he was soon able to take advantage of a fresh breeze to withdraw from the crossfire . A single shot struck the brig , smashing into one of the 4 @-@ pounder cannon on deck and breaking it into three pieces , although none of the crew were wounded by the strike . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Having successfully withdrawn Childers from danger , Barlow returned to Britain on 4 January after battling a strong gale in the Channel . Anchoring at the small Cornish port of Fowey , Barlow took an express coach directly to the Admiralty in London , arriving on 11 January carrying the 48 lb ( 22 kg ) cannonball as evidence of the incident and what British historian William James called the " strong spirit of hostility on the part of the new republic " . Historian Edward Pelham Brenton , writing in 1825 , noted however that French hostility on this occasion was justified , commenting that " in the then troubled state of Europe Childers and her captain had no business to be prying into the equipments at Brest within gunshot of the forts : if we had seen a French vessel of war running from the Needles to St Helens , and making observations , I suspect we should , at such a crisis , have taken the liberty to bring her to action . " 
 On 24 January the French ambassador was expelled in response to the execution of Louis XVI in Paris on 21 January and on 1 February the National Convention declared war on Great Britain . The naval campaign in the Atlantic began in earnest in March 1793 , when a French battle squadron briefly put to sea before a mutiny forced it to return . The war between Britain and France begun in the Goulet on 2 January 1793 was to last , with a 14 @-@ month break in 1802 – 1803 , until 1815 . 
 = AMX @-@ 30 = 
 The AMX @-@ 30 is a main battle tank designed by GIAT and first delivered to the French Army in 1966 . The first five tanks were issued to the 501st Régiment de <unk> de Combat ( Tank Regiment ) in August of that year . The production version of the AMX @-@ 30 weighed 36 metric tons ( 40 short tons ) , and sacrificed protection for increased mobility . The French believed that it would have required too much armour to protect against the latest anti @-@ tank threats , thereby reducing the tank 's maneuverability . Protection , instead , was provided by the speed and the compact dimensions of the vehicle , including a height of 2 @.@ 28 metres . It had a 105 mm gun , firing a then advanced high explosive anti @-@ tank warhead known as the Obus G. The Obus G used an outer shell , separated from the main charge by ball bearings , to allow the round to be spin stabilized by the gun without affecting the warhead inside . Mobility was provided by the 720 horsepower ( 540 kW ) HS @-@ 110 diesel engine , although the troublesome transmission adversely affected the tank 's performance . 
 In 1979 , due to issues caused by the transmission , the French Army began to modernize its fleet of tanks to AMX @-@ 30B2 standards , which included a new transmission , an improved engine and the introduction of a new fin @-@ stabilized kinetic energy penetrator . Production of the AMX @-@ 30 also extended to a number of variants , including the AMX @-@ 30D armored recovery vehicle , the AMX @-@ 30R anti @-@ aircraft gun system , a bridge @-@ layer , the Pluton tactical nuclear missile launcher and a surface @-@ to @-@ air missile launcher . 
 It was preceded by two post @-@ war French medium tank designs . The first , the ARL 44 , was an interim tank . Its replacement , the AMX 50 , was cancelled in the mid @-@ 1950s in favor of adopting the M47 Patton tank . In 1956 , the French government entered a cooperative development program with Germany and Italy in an effort to design a standardized tank . Although the three nations agreed to a series of specific characteristics that the new tank should have , and both France and Germany began work on distinctive prototypes with the intention of testing them and combining the best of both , the program failed as Germany decided not to adopt the new French 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) tank gun and France declared that it would postpone production until 1965 . As a result , both nations decided to adopt tanks based on their own prototypes . The German tank became known as the Leopard 1 , while the French prototype became the AMX @-@ 30 . 
 As early as 1969 , the AMX @-@ 30 and variants were ordered by Greece , soon followed by Spain . In the coming years , the AMX @-@ 30 would be exported to Saudi Arabia , Venezuela , Qatar , the United Arab Emirates , Cyprus and Chile . By the end of production , 3 @,@ 571 units of AMX @-@ 30s and its variants had been manufactured . Both Spain and Venezuela later began extensive modernization programs to extend the life of their vehicles and to bring their tanks up to more modern standards . In the 1991 Gulf War , AMX @-@ 30s were deployed by both the French and Qatari armies . Qatari AMX @-@ 30s saw action against Iraqi forces at the Battle of Khafji . However , France and most other nations replaced their AMX @-@ 30s with more up @-@ to @-@ date equipment by the end of the 20th century . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although the occupation of France during World War II temporarily interrupted French development of armoured fighting vehicles , clandestine research allowed the French to quickly recover lost ground after its liberation in mid @-@ 1944 . During the occupation , the French had secretly worked on an armour program that was , in 1944 , taken over by the state workshop Atelier de Construction de <unk> ( ARL ) , resulting in the design and production of the ARL 44 , which began production in 1946 . The tank was powered by a Maybach HL @-@ 230 575 horsepower ( 429 kW ) engine , and armed with a 90 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) tank gun . Although the 48 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 53 @-@ short @-@ ton ) vehicle was comparable to contemporary battle tanks in firepower and engine power , it suffered from distinct disadvantages , including an antiquated track design . While 600 were planned , only 60 were ultimately produced by 1950 . That year , these were issued to the French Army 's 503rd Tank Regiment . Given that the ARL 44 had been considered only a stop @-@ gap vehicle for the French Army 's armoured forces since inception , work on a new tank had begun as early as March 1945 . 
 Development of the new tank was offered to five separate manufacturers : Atelier de Construction d 'Issy @-@ les @-@ Moulineaux ( AMX ) , Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée ( FCM ) , Renault , Societe Lorraine de Dietrich ( SLD @-@ Lorraine ) and Societé d <unk> Mécanique et d <unk> d 'Artillerie ( SOMUA ) . The new vehicle was based on the new post @-@ war requirement for a single battle tank . The new vehicle was designated the AMX 50 . Its hull and suspension were similar to that of the German Panther tank , which had been used by the French Army in the immediate post @-@ war . The French government 's specifications for the new tank were strongly influenced by both the Panther tank and the heavier Tiger I ; specifically , the French Army was looking for a tank with the protection of the former and the firepower of the latter . Although the design borrowed from German tanks , including the Maybach 1 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 750 kW ) engine , based on an earlier model , and the torsion bar sprung road wheels , the AMX 50 also included a number of unique features . For example , it included an oscillating turret , mounted on trunnions , which was the first of its kind . The oscillating turret consisted of two parts , one of which was mounted on the trunnions of the lower part , attached to the turret ring . The main gun was attached to the upper part , facilitating gun elevation and depression , as well as simplifying the fire control equipment and the installation of the automatic loading system . Of the three contractors , Renault withdrew from the program , while in early 1946 the French government selected AMX and SOMUA to continue the development . The prototypes were designated <unk> , and AMX completed its prototype in 1949 , while SOMUA would not be finished until 1956 . AMX 's first prototype was armed with a 90 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) cannon , although a second prototype was fitted with a larger 100 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) gun in July 1950 Although it was intended to put the AMX 50 into production as the standard medium tank of the Western European Union , financial reasons and the arrival of military aid from the United States in the form of 856 M47 Patton tanks caused the original program to be abandoned . In 1951 it was decided to turn the program into a heavy tank project with an even larger 120 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) tank gun ; though three prototypes were built , this too was abandoned in 1956 , mainly due to a failure to design a powerful enough engine . 
 With the demise of the 100 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) AMX 50 program in 1951 , France temporarily officially abandoned the thought of producing a medium tank . It was expected that West Germany would soon be allowed to rearm , and the Germans had appeared to entertain the concept of equipping their forces with a host of low @-@ cost light , but relatively powerfully armed tanks , their quantity compensating for a lack of full armament parity with the latest medium tanks . The prospect of delivering many thousands of these to the Germans induced the French to adopt the idea and plan to create light tank " Type 67 " armoured divisions , for which the AMX @-@ 13 / 105 was specially designed . A private enterprise design aimed at fulfilling the same requirement was the somewhat larger Char Batignolles @-@ Châtillon . A derived medium tank prototype of the latter , made in 1955 , proved that it was possible to produce a tank with a first @-@ rate gun and frontally protected with 80 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) steel equivalence within a weight constraint of 30 metric tons ( 33 short tons ) . This revived interest in the medium tank concept . 
 In 1956 , the WEU defence workgroup <unk> ( named after France , Italy , Netherlands , Belgium and Luxembourg ) , founded in 1953 and consisting of representatives of the various General Staffs , drafted a set of specifications for a new medium tank to eventually replace their American and British tanks . That same year , Germany joined the workgroup , turning it into FINABEL ( the added " A " standing for <unk> , " Germany " in French ) and on 27 October 1956 at Colomb @-@ Béchar a bilateral agreement was concluded between France and Germany to collaborate in building a tank . Though the other FINABEL nations did not formally participate , the type was called Europa @-@ Panzer to indicate its common European nature , and experts from all countries were involved in the design process . The specifications ( FINABEL <unk> ) for the new tank called for a lightweight and mobile battle tank , setting the weight limit to 30 metric tons ( 33 short tons ) and compromising the ability to heavily armour the vehicle . French and German engineers , during a conference in Bonn on 12 February 1957 , defined the requirements for the future tank . This included a maximum width of 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 @.@ 3 ft ) , a height of 2 @.@ 15 metres ( 7 @.@ 1 ft ) and a 105 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) tank gun , to be developed by the Franco @-@ German military research institute at Saint Louis . The new tank would have an air @-@ cooled , petrol engine , a torsion bar suspension with hydraulic shocks , a power @-@ to @-@ weight ratio of at least 30 horsepower ( 22 kW ) / metric ton and a road range of at least 350 kilometres ( 220 mi ) . In May , Italy joined the project , though only nominally , without any material contribution , because after the war it had no tank design bureaus . That same year , on 28 November , the French and German ministries of defence in Paris agreed upon a contract which would allow both countries to produce two prototypes separately . The next year , however , the project suffered a first setback when Charles de Gaulle took power in France , creating the Fifth Republic : the Paris treaty had as its main point developing a common nuclear weapon and on 17 June 1958 de Gaulle decided to refuse Germany and Italy the atomic bomb , to avoid antagonizing the USA and United Kingdom . This made Germany lose much interest in a common tank project also . 
 The French prototypes were developed and produced by the Atelier de Construction d 'Issy @-@ les @-@ Moulineaux , under the direction of General Joseph <unk> of the Direction des Études et Fabrications d <unk> ( DEFA , the later Direction Technique des <unk> Terrestres ) and AMX head engineer <unk> , The first prototype was completed in September 1960 and tested from February 1961 ; the second , with an improved range finder and track was tested in July 1961 . These first vehicles had a very rounded turret , in a deliberate imitation of the Soviet T @-@ 54 , and <unk> petrol engines . Another seven , with an improved sleeker turret cast , were manufactured between 1961 and 1963 . Work on the German prototypes was carried out by two teams , including Team A composed of Porsche , Maschinenbau Kiel , Luther & Jordan and Jung @-@ <unk> . Team B was made up by <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> and Henschel . Wood mock @-@ ups were completed in 1959 , while the first two prototypes were finished by 1961 ( completed by Team A ) . 
 = = Development history = = 
 De Gaulle decided that France , though formally remaining a member , would no longer participate in the NATO military organization . This caused a rift between France and West Germany , which then started to emphasize standardization with American equipment , especially in armament , and to follow the new NATO policy to use <unk> diesel engines . German defence minister Franz Josef Strauss began to oppose the common tank project . In July 1963 , the defence committee of the German Bundesrat decided to procure a purely national tank . In response , the same month the French government decided likewise . 
 Comparative trials were nevertheless held at <unk> @-@ le @-@ Camp , Meppen , Bourges and <unk> between five French and five German prototypes between August and October 1963 , under Italian , Dutch , Belgian and American supervision . The French type had received a separate national designation : AMX 30 . The trials indicated that the German type , on 1 October also getting its own name Leopard , had a better mobility and acceleration . The French government decided that it could not procure a new tank until 1965 , while the Germans refused to adopt the Franco @-@ German 105 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) tank gun , in lieu of the British Royal Ordnance L7 , of which they had already ordered 1 @,@ 500 in the autumn of 1962 , their plan having failed for Rheinmetall to produce in Germany a common type of munition of sufficient quality . Suggestions to save the project by combining the French turret with the German chassis failed . As a result , the program was cancelled and the French and Germans definitely decided to adopt their two separate tanks . 
 The prototypes of the AMX @-@ 30 weighed 32 @.@ 5 metric tons ( 35 @.@ 8 short tons ) , and were compact , with a width of 3 @.@ 1 metres ( 10 ft ) , comparable only to the Swiss Panzer 61 , and a height of 2 @.@ 28 meters ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) , comparable only to the Soviet T @-@ 55 . In contrast to the AMX 50 , the AMX @-@ 30 was issued a conventional turret , because it was found that it was more difficult to seal oscillating turrets from radioactive dust and against water when the tank was submerged . Oscillating turrets also had a large ballistic weakness in the area of the skirt and turret ring . Originally , the first two prototypes were powered by a 720 horsepower ( 540 kW ) spark ignition engine , named the <unk> 12 <unk> . Later , a multi @-@ fuel diesel engine was adopted , developed by Hispano @-@ Suiza . The seven 1963 prototypes of the AMX @-@ 30 were later rebuilt with the new diesel engine . Two further prototypes , meant to be direct preproduction vehicles , were delivered in November 1965 . Besides the diesel engines , they had changed hull and turret casts and different gun mantlets ; the latter would again be changed in the production vehicles . 
 The first production versions of the AMX @-@ 30 , named AMX 30B to distinguish them from the AMX 30A prototypes , were completed in June 1966 , manufactured with a welded and cast hull and a fully cast turret . The production version of the tank had a combat weight of 36 metric tons ( 40 short tons ) . The AMX @-@ 30 's survivability was based on its mobility ; French engineers believed that the tank 's mobility would have been compromised had they added enough steel plating to protect against modern anti @-@ tank threats , including high explosive anti @-@ tank warheads ( HEAT ) . As a result , the type had the thinnest armour of any main battle tank produced at the time . The turret has a maximum armour thickness of 50 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) , the armour sloped at 70 degrees on the front plate and 23 degrees on the side , offering protection against 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) armour piercing projectiles . The Line @-@ of @-@ Sight armour values are : 79 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) for the front of the hull ; 59 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 3 in ) for the forward sides of the hull ; 30 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) for the rear sides and rear of the hull ; 15 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) for the hull top and bottom ; 80 @.@ 8 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 18 in ) for the turret front ; 41 @.@ 5 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 63 in ) for the turret sides ; 50 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) for the turret rear and 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) for the turret top . Further protection is offered by a nuclear , biological and chemical protection suit , including a ventilation system . 
 One of the unique features of the AMX @-@ 30 was the Obus à Charge <unk> de 105 mm Modèle F1 ( Obus G ) HEAT projectile and its main gun , the Modèle F1 , a <unk> steel 105 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) cannon . HEAT warheads suffer when spin stabilized , a product of rifled barrels , causing the French to develop the Obus G , ( <unk> ) . This projectile was composed of two major parts , including the outer shell and a suspended inner shell , divided by ball bearings . This allowed the projectile to be spin @-@ stabilized , and therefore more accurate than a normal fin @-@ stabilized HEAT @-@ round , while the inner shell did not move , allowing the warhead to work at maximum efficiency . The warhead , containing 780 gram <unk> , could penetrate up to 400 millimeters ( 16 in ) of steel armour and was effective against tanks at up to 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 300 yd ) . As it combined a good accuracy with a penetration that was independent of range , it has been considered an " ideal round " for its day The AMX @-@ 30 was also designed to fire the OCC F1 <unk> high explosive projectile , the SCC F1 training warhead and the <unk> PH @-@ 105 F1 smoke round . The main gun was coupled with a 380 @-@ millimeter ( 15 in ) recoil brake , which had a maximum extension of 400 millimeters ( 16 in ) , and could depress to − 8 degrees or elevate to 20 degrees . The turret 's firepower was augmented by a coaxial 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) M2 Browning machine gun . The tank commander also made use of a 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) anti @-@ aircraft machine gun on the turret roof . The vehicle carried 50 105 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) projectiles , 748 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) rounds and 2 @,@ 050 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) bullets . The tank commander was issued a cupola which offered ten all @-@ around direct @-@ vision episcopes , and a binocular telescope with 10x magnification . The commander was also given an optical full @-@ field coincidence range finder . The gunner was given a telescoping gun sight and two observation periscopes . 
 The production version of the AMX @-@ 30 was fitted with Hispano @-@ Suiza 's HS @-@ 110 diesel engine , located in the rear of the hull . The 28 @.@ 8 liters ( 1 @,@ 760 cu in ) engine could be replaced on the field in 45 minutes , and produced 720 horsepower ( 540 kW ) , offering the tank a maximum velocity of 65 kilometers per hour ( 40 mph ) on roads . The fuel efficient engine , in conjunction with a total fuel capacity of 970 liters ( 260 U.S. gal ) , gave the AMX @-@ 30 a maximum road range of up to 600 kilometers ( 370 mi ) . The engine 's drive is taken through a Gravina <unk> twin @-@ plate centrifugal clutch . The gearbox was an AMX 5 @-@ SD @-@ 200D , with five forward gears and five reverse gears . This transmission was heavily influenced by that of the German Panther tank and was based on a project which had begun in 1938 . The transmission was one of the AMX @-@ 30 's major faults and caused a variety of mechanical problems , including that the driver would have to manually change gears at specific times , even if the tank was moving over rough terrain . The tank 's weight is distributed over five double , aluminum @-@ alloy , rubber @-@ <unk> road wheels on either side , propelled on 570 @-@ millimeter ( 22 in ) wide tracks . The tank could ford 1 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 1 @.@ 4 yd ) deep water obstacles without preparation , up to 2 meters ( 2 @.@ 2 yd ) with minor preparation , and up to 4 meters ( 4 @.@ 4 yd ) with full preparation . Full preparation for water operations consisted of the addition of a snorkel tube , the installation of blanking plates , carried on the front of the hull , over the engine compartment 's air intake louvers , and the installment of infra @-@ red driving equipment , including a searchlight . In 1969 a single special dive training vehicle was adapted , nicknamed the AMX 30 <unk> ( from French faire <unk> , " gurgle " ) , without engine and tracks , that over a ramp could quickly be lowered into a reservoir by a winch ; it was equipped with an escape tube . 
 = = = Modernization = = = 
 During the production run , many improvements were implemented . These included gun stabilization from 1971 , and from 1972 replacing the original coaxial heavy machine gun with a dual purpose 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) autocannon against light armour and helicopters , with the ability to depress to − 8 degrees and elevate to 40 degrees . All French army vehicles were eventually brought to this newer standard ; the designation remained AMX 30B . 
 Beginning as early as 1973 , only seven years after the beginning of production , the French began a research program for a future modification of the tank . The project was to result in a AMX 30 <unk> ( " upgraded AMX @-@ 30 " ) . In June 1979 , the French Army decided to both build new and modernize existing AMX @-@ 30s with an improved fire control system and a new transmission , and designated them AMX @-@ 30B2s . The first new production vehicles were taken into service in January 1982 . Improvements to the <unk> APX M @-@ 508 fire control system included the installation of a laser rangefinder and a low @-@ light TV ( LLTV ) . The main gun 's lethality was improved with the introduction of a new armour piercing fin stabilized discarding sabot ( APFSDS ) . The original engine was exchanged for an improved variant , known as the HS @-@ 110 @.@ 2 , producing 680 horsepower ( 510 kW ) . The poor transmission was replaced with the semi @-@ automatic <unk> <unk> transmission ( now <unk> France ) , with a torque converter . The suspension was improved by adopting new torsion bars and shocks , which increased the vertical deflection range of the road wheels , thereby improving the tank 's off @-@ road mobility . From 1998 , the French army started to replace the engines of its remaining AMX @-@ 30 tanks and variants with 500 Renault Mack E9 750 hp engines . 
 In the nineties , a reactive armour package , named <unk> or Brennus , was developed for the AMX @-@ 30B2 , but was issued only to two tank regiments , which in peacetime were combined into the 1er / 2e Chasseurs , that were part of France 's rapid reaction force ; the other two regiments using the AMX @-@ 30 , the 2e / 5e Dragons , only had their tanks adapted for a possible relatively quick upgrade , in case of an emergency . The <unk> system used 112 GIAT BS ( <unk> de <unk> ) G2 explosive reactive boxes with a total weight of 1 @.@ 7 metric tons ( 1 @.@ 9 short tons ) , offering a protection equivalent to 400 millimeters ( 16 in ) of steel at 60 ° . Recently , the AMX @-@ 30 has also been used as a testbed for several stealth technologies , including air cooling of hull surfaces and the use of visual camouflage . This prototype is known as the <unk> <unk> à <unk> . Its hull and turret are fully covered by a superstructure built of angled plates made of radar absorbent material . 
 = = = Comparison to contemporary tanks = = = 
 = = Variants = = 
 The AMX @-@ 30 has a number of different variations , including a number of other armoured vehicles based on the same chassis . A simplified version of the tank , without the infra @-@ red searchlight and periscopes and a less complex commander 's cupola was developed for export , known as the " basic AMX @-@ 30 " . This version also came devoid of the pressurized air filtering system , and moved the smaller 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) machine gun into the coaxial position and the larger 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) M2 to the turret roof . Another version was considered for the French Army , adopting a 142 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 6 in ) tank gun able to fire the supersonic ACRA ( Anti @-@ Char Rapide <unk> ) anti @-@ tank guided missile , as well as high explosive rounds . A prototype was finished in 1967 with a new cast turret , wide enough to hold the much larger armament . However , the high costs of the missiles forced the French Army to abandon the program in 1972 . The vehicles based on the chassis include an armoured recovery vehicle , a <unk> , a self @-@ propelled anti @-@ aircraft vehicle , a tactical nuclear missile launcher and a self @-@ propelled artillery piece . 
 The armoured recovery vehicle , known as the AMX @-@ 30D ( AMX @-@ 30 <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , was designed to recuperate or help maintain vehicles in the field . Work on the AMX @-@ 30D began in 1966 , as the French Army researched developing a recovery vehicle to be issued to units receiving the AMX @-@ 30 tank . A prototype was produced and delivered for experimentation in 1971 , and in February 1973 the first of a pre @-@ series of five vehicles was delivered . That same year , another 100 AMX @-@ 30Ds were ordered , and these began production in 1975 . The recovery vehicle includes a winch powered by the vehicle 's engine , with the ability to pull a maximum of 35 metric tons ( 39 short tons ) of weight . The vehicle also has a 80 @-@ meter ( 87 yd ) heavy towing cable , while an auxiliary winch has another 120 @-@ meter ( 130 yd ) towing cable , able to tow up to 20 metric tons ( 22 short tons ) when working over the front of the AMX @-@ 30D . In the latter case the vehicle must be supported by removable props , which are carried on the vehicle , and the bulldozer blade must be lowered on the ground . The crane can lift up the 3 @.@ 29 metric tons ( 3 @.@ 63 short tons ) power pack and the 10 metric tons ( 11 short tons ) turret . Instead of a turret , the AMX @-@ 30D is fitted with a superstructure , and weighs 36 metric tons ( 40 short tons ) , although with the extra power pack it can weigh up to 40 metric tons ( 44 short tons ) . The vehicle can protect itself with a 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) machine gun . The driver 's visibility is aided by the inclusion of three M @-@ 223 episcopes . The AMX @-@ 30D has a maximum on @-@ road velocity of 60 kilometers per hour ( 37 mph ) and a maximum road range of 500 kilometers ( 310 mi ) . 
 The AMX @-@ 30 <unk> , or <unk> de pont , consists of the AMX @-@ 30 's chassis with a box @-@ like superstructure , supporting a scissor @-@ type folding bridge . The 22 @-@ meter ( 24 yd ) long bridge can span 20 @-@ meter ( 22 yd ) gaps . The bridge has a width of 3 @.@ 1 meters ( 3 @.@ 4 yd ) , but can be increased to 3 @.@ 95 meters ( 4 @.@ 32 yd ) through the use of appliqué panels . It can support weighs of up to 46 metric tons ( 51 short tons ) . <unk> development began as early as 1963 , although it was not until June 1967 that development began on a prototype . Although a prototype designated AMX @-@ <unk> was finished in 1968 , it was not until 1971 that the vehicle was evaluated . At the end of the evaluations in September 1971 , a pre @-@ series of five vehicles was ordered , resulting in a new period of evaluations beginning on 16 October 1972 . In 1975 , the AMX @-@ <unk> was declared standard in the French Army , although none of these vehicles were ever ordered . 
 The self @-@ propelled anti @-@ aircraft gun began development in 1969 to provide this type of vehicle to the French Army and for export . Although ultimately none were ordered for France , in 1975 Saudi Arabia ordered an improved version , denominated the AMX @-@ <unk> . Developed to defend against low @-@ altitude attacks , the system included two Hispano @-@ Suiza 30 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) 831 A automatic guns , coupled to an <unk> @-@ noir fire control system . This system had already been installed on the AMX @-@ 13 , in lieu of a heavier chassis , using a turret designated the S 401 A. Although this particular vehicle began production in 1962 , the appearance of the AMX @-@ 30 offered a larger chassis to which the S 401 A turret could be mounted on , providing superior mobility . The heavier AMX @-@ 30 also provided a more stable platform for the guns , and allowed the system to carry much more ammunition ( 1 @,@ 200 rounds , as compared to the 600 carried by the AMX @-@ 13 version ) . The guns were designed to fire in 5 @-@ round or 15 @-@ round bursts , with a cyclic rate of fire of 650 rounds per minute . They were controlled by an analogue computer , receiving information from a Doppler radar , which could be folded into an armoured box when not in use to protect from damage . The radar depended on visual tracking , and so could only work in clear weather . 
 Three missile systems were developed to be mounted on the AMX @-@ 30 chassis . Recognizing the need for tactical nuclear missile mobile launchers , the French Army began developing the Pluton missile in 1963 . In 1964 , the program was suspended and instead the French Army opted for a missile with a longer range , able to be mounted on the AMX @-@ 30 . A contract to develop the system was established in 1968 . The first prototype was soon delivered and testing occurred between July and August 1970 , followed by the production of a second prototype in 1971 . Two more prototypes were fabricated in 1972 . The next year , the vehicle was put into mass production and by 1 May 1974 four of these vehicles had been delivered to the 3rd Artillery Regiment . The missile itself weighs 2 @.@ 4 metric tons ( 2 @.@ 6 short tons ) and is 7 @.@ 6 meters ( 8 @.@ 3 yd ) long . Using a simplified inertial guidance system and a solid propellant rocket motor , the Pluton has a maximum range of 120 kilometers ( 75 mi ) . The second missile system is the AMX @-@ 30R ( Roland ) surface @-@ to @-@ air missile launching system , which began development in 1974 . Five vehicles of a pre @-@ series were completed by 1977 and then evaluated , prompting the order of 183 vehicles that same year . The Roland includes a rectangular superstructure , taller than that of both the AMX @-@ 30D and the Pluton , which houses the radar system and mounts two launching tubes on either side , with an <unk> system feeding from an eight missile reserve inside the superstructure . The Roland 's exploration radar has a detection range of 16 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) . The third missile system , called the AMX @-@ <unk> , was developed in 1975 for Saudi Arabia , to fire the SA @-@ 10 <unk> , developed and manufactured by Thomson @-@ CSF ; the launching vehicle was heavily based on the AMX @-@ 30R . 
 The canon <unk> de 155 <unk> ( for Grande Cadence de Tir , fast rate of fire ) was developed based on the AMX @-@ 30 chassis to provide tactical artillery support to units in the French Army , who refer to it as the <unk> . The 155 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) howitzer was 40 calibers long , and was <unk> allowing it a rate of fire of eight rounds per minute , with a maximum range of 30 kilometers ( 19 mi ) with the <unk> round . The turret enables the gun to have an elevation of up to 66 degrees , and allows it to traverse a full 360 degrees . The vehicle carries 42 rounds of ammunition , with combustible cartridge cases . The origins of the decision to design a self @-@ propelled howitzer can be traced back to 1969 , with the first prototype completed in 1972 . By 1979 , seven prototypes had been produced , and six pre @-@ series vehicles , followed by the production of 110 vehicles . This order was later increased to 190 . 
 The first prototype of an improved AMX @-@ 30 for the export market , known as the AMX @-@ 32 , was unveiled in June 1979 . Originally intended as an alternative for the AMX @-@ 30B2 , and deliberately imitating the spaced armour concept the Germans had successfully implemented on the Leopard 1A3 and A4 , the AMX @-@ 32 fielded greater armour protection to offer increased survivability against anti @-@ tank guided missiles . A 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) autocannon was included as the main gun 's coaxial weapon , and a 7 @.@ 62 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 300 in ) machine gun attached to the roof . However , no orders were ever placed . 
 = = Production = = 
 AMX @-@ 30 production occurred at the Atelier de Construction de Roanne in the town of Roanne . This heavy manufacturing factory was built during World War I to produce artillery shells , although by 1952 the factory had begun producing armoured fighting vehicles . Before producing the AMX @-@ 30 , for example , it had made 1 @,@ 900 AMX @-@ 13s and variants . The Roanne factory was responsible for final assembly , most components were made elsewhere : the powerplant by the Atelier de Construction de Limoges , the full armour set by the Ateliers et Forges de la Loire , the turret by the Atelier de Construction de Tarbes , the cannon by the Atelier de Construction de Bourges , the cupola and machine @-@ gun by the Manufacture d 'Armes de Saint @-@ Étienne and the optics by the Atelier de Construction de <unk> ; all these again used many subcontractors . In a series of corporate mergers under state guidance , most of these firms would eventually be concentrated into GIAT . 
 Originally , 300 AMX @-@ 30s were ordered by the French Army , and by 1971 the order had been increased to 900 , divided between eight batches , including all variants based on the chassis . Beginning in 1966 , ten AMX @-@ 30s were assembled per month , and the first five were issued in August 1966 to the 501st Régiment de <unk> de Combat . Monthly production grew to 15 – 20 tanks as new factories began to manufacture components of the vehicle and existing factories increased their production potential . However , in April 1969 , production was again reduced to ten per month . By 1971 , about 180 vehicles were in service ; in 1975 delivery began of the last 143 units of the final eighth batch of the original order . In 1985 , the number of AMX @-@ 30s had risen to 1 @,@ 173 . By the end of production , France had accepted 1 @,@ 355 AMX @-@ 30s into service , including 166 brand @-@ new AMX @-@ 30B2s . Another 493 tanks were refitted and modernized to AMX @-@ 30B2 standards ; originally 271 new and 820 refitted vehicles had been planned . The French Army also accepted a large number of variants , including 195 self @-@ propelled howitzers , 44 AMX @-@ 30 Pluton tactical nuclear missile launchers , 183 AMX @-@ <unk> , 134 AMX @-@ 30Ds and 48 engineer vehicles ( AMX @-@ <unk> ) . The last 35 new battle tanks were in 1989 ordered by Cyprus and the last new variant vehicles , a batch of twenty <unk> , in 1994 by France . 
 In the late 1990s , the French Army began to accept the new Leclerc main battle tank to replace the antiquated AMX @-@ 30 . The first units to be outfitted with the new tank were the 501st and 503rd tank regiments , followed by the 6th and 12th Cuirassier Regiments . 
 = = Export = = 
 Having in February 1964 decided to produce its own battle tank , Israel at first considered licence production of AMX @-@ 30 hulls , while importing the turrets from France . Favoring heavier armour over mobility , Major @-@ General Israel Tal discontinued negotiations with France when the United Kingdom agreed to allow licensed production of the Chieftain tank , in 1966 . 
 France eventually also failed to obtain orders from the remaining two FINABEL nations , Belgium and the Netherlands : the Dutch did not even test the type and the Belgians ordered the Leopard when France refused to allow partial component production of the AMX @-@ 30 in Belgium , fearing it would increase the unit cost . 
 Less expensive and easier to maintain , the AMX @-@ 30 has been preferred over the Leopard 1 by less affluent or developed nations . 
 In 1969 , the Greek military junta agreed to procure a total of 190 AMX @-@ 30s and 14 AMX @-@ 30Ds , making Greece the first foreign nation to purchase the French tank . Throughout the 1960s , Spain had considered both the AMX @-@ 30 and the Leopard 1 to complement their existing fleet of M47 and M48 Patton tanks . Ultimately , Spain opted for the AMX @-@ 30 for a variety of reasons , including British unwillingness to sell the L7 tank gun to a fascist regime and the French offer to allow the AMX @-@ 30 to be manufactured in Spain . Spain ordered 19 tanks in 1970 , and later agreed to manufacture another 180 tanks in Spain . In 1979 , Spain began the production of a second batch of 100 tanks , completing a total of 299 AMX @-@ 30s issued to the Spanish Army ; these were designated AMX @-@ 30Es . Spain also procured 10 AMX @-@ 30Ds and 18 AMX @-@ <unk> . As production of the AMX @-@ 30E ended in 1979 , the Spanish Army was already looking for a modernization program to improve the quality of the tank 's mobility . In 1987 , the Spanish Army began a six @-@ year modernization program which brought 150 tanks up to AMX @-@ 30EM2 standards and modified another 149 tanks to AMX @-@ 30EM1 standards . The former was a much more complete upgrade , which saw improvements to the tank 's mobility through the adoption of a new engine and gearbox , as well as to the tank 's firepower , with the development of a new kinetic energy penetrator and the introduction of a far more complex and accurate fire control system for the tank 's gunner , amongst other things . The AMX @-@ 30EM1 was termed a " reconstruction " and only saw improvements to the tank 's mobility by adopting a new transmission and renovating much of the vehicle 's worn out systems , such as the brakes , indicators and controls . These rebuilt AMX @-@ 30s were soon replaced by M60 Patton tanks procured from the United States in the early 1990s , while its fleet of AMX @-@ 30EM2s was later replaced by the B1 Centauro anti @-@ tank vehicle . 
 In 1972 , France was able to gain a contract with Saudi Arabia over the purchase of 190 AMX @-@ 30S ' , designed for the desert environment of the Middle Eastern nation . Named the <unk> Contract , Saudi Arabia 's tanks were delivered between 1973 and 1979 , while 59 AMX @-@ 30Ds were exported between 1975 and 1979 , 12 AMX @-@ <unk> between 1977 and 1979 , and finally 51 self @-@ propelled howitzers , delivered between 1979 and 1980 . Between 1979 and 1981 , Saudi Arabia also received 52 AMX @-@ <unk> and later 50 AMX @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ 2s delivered in two batches , between 1980 and 1989 . By the 21st century , 50 % of Saudi Arabia 's AMX @-@ 30 fleet were in storage , given that the AMX @-@ 30 lacked the capabilities to deal with more modern threats , such as against Iraqi T @-@ 62s and T @-@ 72s , and Israeli Merkava tanks . These were largely displaced by an order for 315 M1A2 Abrams tanks in 1989 , and the acquisition of 450 M60A3 Patton tanks . Although Saudi Arabia planned to procure more M1 tanks , it was unable to do so for financial reasons and the AMX @-@ 30 has still not been retired . 
 Venezuela originally placed an order for 142 tanks in 1972 , although this was later reduced to 82 and four AMX @-@ 30Ds . In the mid @-@ 1980s , Venezuela adopted a modernization plan for its deprecated AMX @-@ 30s , opting to replace the original engine with a new Continental <unk> @-@ 1790 @-@ 5A diesel engine , producing 908 horsepower ( 677 kW ) and exchanging the existing transmission with an Allison CD @-@ 850 @-@ 6A . Venezuelan AMX @-@ 30s received new fuel tanks , increasing the tank 's road range to 720 kilometers ( 450 mi ) , while firepower was improved through the adoption of a modern <unk> <unk> fire control system and Ballistic computer from Elbit Systems . In 1977 , France and Qatar signed an agreement which garnered France another 24 AMX @-@ 30s sold , which would rise to 54 when Qatar ordered a further 30 AMX @-@ 30B2s in 1987 . The United Arab Emirates placed an order in 1977 for 64 tanks and a single armoured recovery vehicle , to complete an armoured brigade , in 1977 . Due to political issues between Chile and Argentina , the former placed an order for 46 tanks , although this was later cut short to 21 when the contract was canceled by the French government in 1981 . In 1982 , Cyprus acquired a total of 16 AMX @-@ 30B2s and a single AMX @-@ 30D , and later ordered another 36 AMX @-@ 30B2s . Total production of the AMX @-@ 30 and variants totaled 3 @,@ 571 units . 
 Later many used vehicles were resold to other nations : in 2005 Cyprus had 102 AMX @-@ 30s ( obtained from Greece ) and 52 AMX @-@ 30B2s ; Bosnia 32 AMX @-@ 30s ( from the UAE ) . French strength had dwindled to about 250 AMX @-@ 30B2s . 
 = = Combat history = = 
 Qatari AMX @-@ 30s saw combat during the Gulf War at the Battle of Khafji , where on 30 January 1991 they counter @-@ attacked in an attempt to retake the city of Khafji from Iraqi forces which had occupied it the night before . During the action , Qatari AMX @-@ 30s knocked out three Iraqi T @-@ 55s and captured four more . At least one Qatari AMX @-@ 30 was lost during the battle . 
 The French participation in the Gulf War , codenamed Opération Daguet , saw the deployment of the 6e Division Légère Blindée ( " 6th Light Armoured Division " ) , referred to for the duration of the conflict as the Division Daguet . Most of its armoured component was provided by the AMX @-@ <unk> of the cavalry reconnaissance regiments , but a heavy armoured unit , the 4e Régiment de Dragons ( " 4th Dragoon Regiment " ) was also sent to the region with a complement of 44 AMX @-@ 30B2s . Experimentally , a new regimental organisational structure was used , with three squadrons of thirteen tanks , a command tank and six reserve vehicles , instead of the then normal strength of 52 units . Also six older AMX @-@ <unk> were deployed , fitted with Soviet mine rollers provided by Germany from East German stocks , and named AMX 30 <unk> . The vehicles were all manned by professional crews , without conscripts . The Daguet Division was positioned to the West of the Coalition forces , to protect the left flank of the U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps . This disposition gave the French commander greater autonomy , and also lessened the likelihood of encountering Iraqi T @-@ 72s , which were superior both to the AMX @-@ <unk> and the AMX @-@ 30B2s . With the beginning of the ground offensive of 24 February 1991 , French forces moved to attack its first target , " Objective Rochambeau " , which was defended by a brigade from the Iraqi 45th Infantry Division . A raid by Gazelle helicopters paved the way for an attack by the 4e Régiment de Dragons . Demoralized by heavy coalition bombardments , the Iraqi defenders rapidly surrendered . The following day , the 4e Dragons moved on to their next objective , " Chambord " , where they reported destroying ten tanks , three BMPs , fifteen trucks and five mortars with the assistance of USAF A @-@ 10s , and capturing numerous prisoners . The final objective was the As @-@ Salman air base ( " Objective White " ) , that was reported captured by 18 : 15 , after a multi @-@ pronged attack , with the 4e Dragons attacking from the South . In all , the AMX @-@ 30s fired 270 main gun rounds . 
 = = Operators = = 
 = = = Current operators = = = 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 50 units 
 Cyprus 52 units plus 6 AMX @-@ 30D <unk> 's 
 Nigeria 16 units 
 Qatar 30 units – to be replaced by Leopard 2 
 Tunisia ND units AMX @-@ 30S ( <unk> ) 
 Venezuela 80 AMX @-@ <unk> units from 82 AMX @-@ 30B purchased and 4 AMX @-@ 30D after upgrade ( status unknown ) 
 United Arab Emirates 45 units ( stored ) 
 = = = Former operators = = = 
 France 
 Iraq 5 AMX @-@ 30D delivered in 1981 , 85 AMX <unk> delivered in 1983 / 1985 . No longer operational , and out of usage in the Iraqi Army 
 Saudi Arabia 
 Spain 
 Greece 190 units , some transferred to Cyprus 
 Chile 
 = Music of Final Fantasy I and II = 
 The music of the video games Final Fantasy and Final Fantasy II was composed by regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu , who would go on to be the exclusive composer for the next seven Final Fantasy games . Although they were composed separately , music from the two games has only been released together . All Sounds of Final Fantasy I • II , a compilation of almost all of the music in the games , was released by DataM / Polystar in 1989 , and subsequently re @-@ released by NTT Publishing in 1994 . Symphonic Suite Final Fantasy , an arranged album of music from the two games by Katsuhisa Hattori and his son Takayuki Hattori was released by DataM in 1989 , and re @-@ released by NTT Publishing / Polystar in 1994 . Final Fantasy & Final Fantasy II Original Soundtrack , another arranged album , this time by Nobuo Uematsu and Tsuyoshi Sekito , was released in 2002 by DigiCube and again in 2004 by Square Enix . 
 The music was well received by critics ; reviewers have praised the quality and power of the original pieces , and reacted favorably to the arranged soundtracks . Several tracks , especially " Opening Theme " , " Main Theme " and " Matoya 's Cave " , remain popular today , and have been performed numerous times in orchestral concert series , as well as having been published in arranged and compilation albums by Square Enix and outside groups . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 When Uematsu was working at a music rental shop in Tokyo , a woman working in the art department for Square , which would later become Square Enix , asked if he would be interested in creating music for some of the titles they were working on , and he agreed . Uematsu considered it a side job , and he did not believe it would become any sort of full @-@ time job . He said it was a way to make some money on the side , while also keeping his part @-@ time job at the music rental shop . Before joining Square , he composed music for television commercials . While working at Square , he met Final Fantasy creator Hironobu Sakaguchi , who asked him if he wanted to compose music for some of his games , which Uematsu agreed to . Sakaguchi gave him a few instructions , such as that the game needed a " battle " music and a " town " music , but left the remainder of the composing to Uematsu , aside from informing him of the specific technical limitations of the Famicom . Several pieces from Final Fantasy I and Final Fantasy II have been reused in different forms throughout the series , especially the " Prelude " , " Opening Theme " , " Battle " , " Victory " and " Chocobo " themes . 
 = = All Sounds of Final Fantasy I • II = = 
 All Sounds of Final Fantasy I • II is a soundtrack album of video game music from Final Fantasy I and Final Fantasy II , composed , arranged , and performed by Nobuo Uematsu . It spans 49 tracks and covers a duration of 62 : 32 . It was first released on February 28 , 1989 , by DataM / Polystar , and subsequently re @-@ released on March 25 , 1994 , by NTT Publishing . The original release bears the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> , and the re @-@ release bears the catalog number PSCR @-@ <unk> . Tracks 1 and 49 are arranged versions of tracks which appeared in both of the games , tracks 2 @-@ 21 are from Final Fantasy I , and 22 @-@ 47 are from Final Fantasy II . Track 48 , " Dungeon " , was composed for Final Fantasy II , but was not used in the game ; it was later used in Final Fantasy VI under the name " The Magic House " . 
 All Sounds of Final Fantasy I • II was moderately well received by critics such as Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan , who felt that it had " the same power today that it had 18 years ago " , although he also felt that it was much weaker than Uematsu 's later works with many of the themes " simplistic and undeveloped " . Patrick Gann of RPGFan , on the other hand , praised the album for what he considered to be good music and the rush of nostalgia it brought with it , and was especially pleased with the two arranged tracks . Aaron Lau of Soundtrack Central agreed with the sentiments expressed by Gann , and stated that the arranged tracks alone were worth buying the album for . <unk> <unk> of Soundtrack Central , however , felt that while the soundtrack was good , it was " only worth one or two listens " and recommended it for fans of the original versions of video game music . Nick of Square Enix Music Online said that the album was " an acquired taste " and recommended it primarily to fans of Nobuo Uematsu interested in his earlier work . 
 = = Symphonic Suite Final Fantasy = = 
 Symphonic Suite Final Fantasy is an arranged soundtrack album of music from Final Fantasy I and Final Fantasy II , composed by Nobuo Uematsu , arranged by Katsuhisa Hattori and his son Takayuki Hattori , and performed by the Tokyo Symphony Orchestra . It spans 7 tracks and covers a duration of 39 : 49 . It was first released on July 25 , 1989 , by DataM , and subsequently re @-@ released on March 25 , 1994 , by NTT Publishing / Polystar . The original release bears the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> , and the re @-@ release bears the catalog number PSCR @-@ <unk> . The music itself is a recording of a concert given by the Tokyo Symphony Orchestra in the <unk> temporary hall in Tokyo . 
 Symphonic Suite Final Fantasy was very well received by reviewers , with Patrick Gann saying that " the music itself is brilliant " and that " the arrangements are stunning " while remarking not only on the nostalgia inherent in the music but also the combination of the choir and orchestra . Other reviewers such as Chris and Simon from Square Enix Music Online agreed , terming the album " an orchestral masterpiece amassed with some of the best quality and most subtle attempts of arranging available in the Final Fantasy series ' discography " and " technically accomplished and on scale that was rarely done at the time of making " , respectively . Isaac Engelhorn of Soundtrack Central also enjoyed the album , calling it " wonderful " and his favorite Final Fantasy arranged album , although he did take issue with the length of the album , as well as the sound quality . 
 = = Final Fantasy & Final Fantasy II Original Soundtrack = = 
 Final Fantasy & Final Fantasy II Original Soundtrack is a soundtrack album of video game music from the PlayStation version of the games , Final Fantasy Origins . The soundtrack contains versions of the original game music arranged to take advantage of the PlayStation 's sound hardware . The tracks were composed by Nobuo Uematsu and arranged by Nobuo Uematsu and Tsuyoshi Sekito . It spans 65 tracks on two disks and covers a duration of 1 : 42 : 30 . It was first released on October 23 , 2002 , by DigiCube , and subsequently re @-@ released on September 23 , 2004 , by Square Enix . The original release bears the catalog numbers SSCX @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 , and the re @-@ release bears the catalog numbers SQEX @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . The first disk contains music from Final Fantasy I by Nobuo Uematsu , while the second disk contains Final Fantasy II by Tsuyoshi Sekito . 
 Final Fantasy & Final Fantasy II Original Soundtrack reached # 87 on the Japan Oricon charts and was well received , with Luc of Square Enix Music Online approving of Tsuyoshi Sekito 's influence on the arrangements and recommending the album to hardcore fans of Final Fantasy . 
 Track list 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Black Mages , a band led by Nobuo Uematsu that arranges music from Final Fantasy video games into a rock music style , have arranged two pieces from Final Fantasy I. These are " Battle Scene " from the album The Black Mages , published in 2003 and " Matoya 's Cave " from the album The Skies Above , published in 2004 . They have also arranged a track from Final Fantasy II , " Battle Scene II " , in their The Black Mages album . Lyrical versions of " Matoya 's Cave " from Final Fantasy I and " Main Theme " from Final Fantasy II , sung by Risa Ohki , appeared on Final Fantasy : Pray , a compilation album produced by Square . Additionally , lyrical versions of " Main Theme " from Final Fantasy I and " Finale " from Final Fantasy II , sung by Risa Ohki and Ikuko Noguchi , appeared on Final Fantasy : Love Will Grow . 
 The music of Final Fantasy I and II has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as 20020220 music from FINAL FANTASY , a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including several pieces from the games . Additionally , several pieces from the games were performed as part of a medley by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra for the Distant Worlds - Music from Final Fantasy concert tour , while a different medley of tunes from the two games were performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . " Main Theme " from Final Fantasy I was performed at the Press Start -Symphony of Games- 2006 concert in Tokyo . A concerto suite of music from Final Fantasy I was performed on July 9 , 2011 at the Symphonic Odysseys concert , which commemorated the music of Uematsu . Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy I and II music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix , which focuses on arranging video game music . Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites . 
 = Blackout ( Britney Spears album ) = 
 Blackout is the fifth studio album by American recording artist Britney Spears . It was released on October 25 , 2007 , by JIVE Records and the Zomba Label Group . Opting to re @-@ establish her music career after her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) , she began planning the project in 2006 . Work continued into 2007 , during which time Spears ' much @-@ publicized personal struggles , including several instances of erratic behavior and her divorce from Kevin Federline , overshadowed her professional endeavors . 
 Blackout represents a musical departure from Spears ' earlier work , featuring a foreboding and atmospheric tone in terms of musical and lyrical direction . She collaborated with producers including Danja , Bloodshy & Avant , Sean Garrett , and The Neptunes in several recording studios around the United States , including Spears ' home in Los Angeles , with the intention of creating uptempo , high @-@ energy music . Their efforts resulted in a primarily electropop , dance @-@ pop , and R & B record , which sees additional influences from euro disco , dubstep , and funk . The lyrical themes revolve around fame , media scrutiny , sex , and clubbing . 
 Upon its release , Blackout received mixed to positive reviews from music critics , who complimented it as Spears ' most progressive and consistent album . The Times named it as the fifth best pop album of the decade . In 2012 , the album was added to the library and archives of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . 
 Blackout was originally scheduled to be released on November 13 in the United States , though it was ultimately rush @-@ released after several unauthorized internet leaks . It was expected to debut at number one on the US Billboard 200 , but debuted at number two with first @-@ week sales of 290 @,@ 000 copies after a last @-@ minute rule change . Consequently , Blackout is distinguished as Spears ' first studio album not to debut in the number @-@ one position in the United States , although it was later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for exceeding one million shipments . The record charted in the top @-@ ten of several national charts internationally , and has attained several certifications worldwide . By the end of 2008 , Blackout had sold 3 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , although some sources claim between 3 @.@ 1 million – 3 @.@ 2 million . 
 Three singles were released from Blackout . Its lead single " Gimme More " peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 , and charted strongly internationally . Follow @-@ up singles " Piece of Me " and " Break the Ice " respectively peaked at numbers 18 and 43 in the United States , and experienced moderate success worldwide . Unlike her previous records , Spears did not heavily promote Blackout ; her only televised appearance for Blackout was a universally @-@ panned performance of " Gimme More " at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In November 2003 , while promoting her fourth studio album In the Zone , Spears told Entertainment Weekly that she was already writing songs for her next album and was also hoping to start her own record label in 2004 . Henrik Jonback confirmed that he had written songs with her during the European leg of The Onyx Hotel Tour , " in the bus and in her hotel room between the concerts . " Following her marriage with Kevin Federline in October 2004 , Spears announced through a letter on her official website that she was going to " take some time off to enjoy life . " However , on December 30 , 2004 , she made a surprise appearance at Los Angeles radio station KIIS @-@ FM to premiere a rough mix of a new midtempo track , " Mona Lisa " . Spears had recorded the song live with her band while on tour , and dedicated it to all the " legends and icons out there . " The lyrics lament the fall of Mona Lisa , calling her " unforgettable " and " unpredictable " , and cautions listeners not to have a " breakdown " . She also revealed she wanted the song to be the first single of her upcoming album , tentatively titled The Original Doll , and hoped to release it " probably before summertime [ 2005 ] , or maybe a little sooner than that . " In January 2005 , Spears posted another letter on her website , saying , 
 I think I should <unk> myself from my previous letters when I was talking about taking a ' break ' . What I meant was I am taking a break from being told what to do . ... It 's cool when you look at someone and don 't know whether they are at work or play since it 's all the same to them . The things I 've been doing for work lately have been so much fun , because it 's not like work to me anymore . I 've been even more ' hands on ' in my management and the business side of things , and I feel more in control than ever . 
 A representative for JIVE Records stated that although Spears was working in the studio , " no album is scheduled at the moment " and " there are no plans to service ' Mona Lisa ' to radio . " " Mona Lisa " was released in a bonus CD included in the DVD of Britney & Kevin : Chaotic . ( 2005 ) . Spears gave birth to her first son , Sean Preston , on September 14 , 2005 . In an interview with People in February 2006 , Spears explained that she was anxious to resume her career , commenting she missed " traveling [ ... ] the road , seeing different places and being with the dancers and having fun . That feeling of being on the stage , knowing it 's your best – I love that . I needed a break . I needed to be hungry again . " When asked about her next album , she said she had been experimenting in her home studio with live musicians , stripping down her sound and playing the piano . Spears wanted the album to represent her Louisiana roots , explaining that she grew up listening to blues . " When I was little , I would listen to myself [ ... ] But the record label signs you , and you 're just thankful to get a hit song . You can 't really show off your voice and where you came from . I would like to try to have more influences of that sound . Not that I 'm going to be like frickin ' Tina Turner . But you never know " , she stated . She also said that she hoped the album would reinvigorate the current pop scene , adding that " It 's been boring . Nothing 's been wow to me . " On May 9 , 2006 , Spears announced she was pregnant with her second son . A few days later , producers such as J. R. Rotem and Sean Garrett told MTV News they were working with Spears . On September 12 , 2006 , Spears gave birth to her second child , Jayden James . She filed for divorce from Federline on November 7 , 2006 , citing irreconcilable differences . After the divorce , her partying and public behaviour drew attention from the worldwide media , and ended with two separate stints at rehab facility Promises in February 2007 . Her manager Larry Rudolph released a statement on March 20 , 2007 , saying that she " successfully complet [ ed ] their program . " 
 = = = The M + M 's Tour = = = 
 The M + M 's Tour was the fifth concert tour by Britney Spears . She started rehearsing for a show at House of Blues venues in secret , and pulled out of a surprise performance on April 25 , 2007 , at Los Angeles nightclub Forty Deuce . After a marquee reading " The M + M 's " at the House of Blues in San Diego , appeared in late April 2007 , media sources identified the act as Spears , and the show quickly sold out . The tour began in San Diego and marked the first time Spears performed live since The Onyx Hotel Tour in June 2004 . The show featured Spears accompanied by four female back @-@ up dancers performing shortened versions of five songs , including hits such as " ... Baby One More Time " and " Toxic " . It displayed choreographed dance numbers and only one costume change . During the performance of " Breathe on Me " from In the Zone , a male audience member participated onstage . The opening performance received mixed reviews from critics . Some said that Spears looked happy and in great shape , while others deemed the show as subpar . Although seen as inferior to her previous efforts , it was a great experience for Spears , who seemed to love returning to stage in a simple setting . <unk> outside the San Diego venue sold tickets with a face value of $ 35 for prices between $ 200 and $ 500 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Earnest recording of the album began in 2006 , according to a Spears ' representative . Spears first met Rotem in Las Vegas , Nevada in March 2006 , and enlisted him to work on the album after listening to Rihanna 's " SOS " . They wrote and recorded four songs together , including " Everybody " and " Who Can She Trust " . In July 2006 , she started working with Danja , who contacted songwriters such as Keri Hilson , Jim Beanz , Marcella Araica and Corte Ellis to work with him . The team wrote seven tracks for Spears : " Gimme More " , " Break the Ice " , " Get Naked ( I Got a Plan ) " , " Hot as Ice " , " Perfect Lover " , " Outta This World " and " Get Back " . Danja explained that the creative process was not difficult at first since he was " left to do pretty much whatever I wanted to " , and " if she felt it , she was gonna ride with it . If she didn 't , you ’ d see it in her face . " Hilson wrote " Gimme More " with Spears in mind after Danja played her the instrumental , saying , " I just started singing , ' Give me , Give me , ' and added a little more in and just having fun and messing around really . " Spears began recording with them at Studio at the Palms in Las Vegas in August 2006 , while she was seven months pregnant with Jayden James . Recording continued at Spears ' house in Los Angeles , three weeks after she gave birth . Hilson commented that " She gave 150 percent . [ ... ] I don ’ t know any other mother that would do that . " Danja added that despite all her problems in her personal life , " As far as her work ethic , I haven 't seen anybody come in like that and do what you go to do . " Regarding the sound of the album , He deemed it as bigger , more mature and " a new Britney " , explaining , " I come from hip @-@ hop , so it 's underlined with [ it ] , but I throw it down . " 
 Kara DioGuardi , co @-@ producer of " Heaven on Earth " and co @-@ writer and co @-@ producer of " Ooh Ooh Baby " worked with Spears while she was pregnant with her second child . DioGuardi said that Spears " worked really hard " and called her " unstoppable " . In September 2006 , Rotem told MTV News that him and Spears were trying to innovate the current sound of radio at the moment , exemplifying Nelly Furtado 's " Promiscuous " . In November 2006 , Spears recorded " Radar " with Ezekiel Lewis and Patrick M. Smith of The Clutch at Sony Music Studios in New York City . Lewis had wanted to work with her for a long time and was motivated to produce something for her that was going to " help her project become a great project to come back with " . Smith stated that the team tried to create a record " for the Britney Spears that we know and love " and that it did not " touch on anything that was really dealing with all the stuff that she was dealing with . " Both commented that although Spears arrived late to the recording sessions , she caught them off guard with her efficiency and professionalism , with Lewis adding , " It was absolutely nuts , and she took directions very well . [ ... ] I don ’ t know what I was expecting because we went in to cut that record the day after she filed divorce from Kevin . " T @-@ Pain , who co @-@ wrote " Hot as Ice " , was in the studio with Spears in February 2007 , and stated that one of the three songs they recorded was finished in only an hour . He said that he " thought she was going to be sitting on the couch eating Doritos or nachos or something [ ... ] but she came in , shook my hand , gave me a hug and went right in the booth . She got in there and put it down . " 
 " Heaven on Earth " was written by Nicole Morier , Nick Huntington and Michael <unk> , the latter two known as <unk> . Although Morier had been writing songs with Greg Kurstin and other artists , she felt she " hadn 't really found [ her ] niche " until she wrote " Heaven on Earth " , which she described as " a very honest song " . After she played the song to her publisher , they met with Spears and her A & R Teresa LaBarbera @-@ Whites , who both loved it . Morier described " Heaven on Earth " as the song that transformed her career . Christian Karlsson and Pontus Winnberg , known as Bloodshy & Avant , co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced four tracks : " Piece of Me " , " Radar " , " Freakshow " and " Toy Soldier " . When the album was considered to be finished , they were persuaded by LaBarbera Whites to work on a new track . Winnberg commented that it had always been " an unwritten rule " to not write songs about Spears ' personal life , since " Sweet Dreams My LA Ex " , an answer song to Justin Timberlake 's " Cry Me a River " , was rejected by her record label . However , the duo wrote " Piece of Me " with Klas Åhlund anyway as an answer to Spears ' critics , and sent it to the singer who " loved it " . Winnberg stated , " We knew that the song broke all the rules we had , [ ... ] When she came to the studio , she was extremely psyched , had learned the lyrics by heart in the car , and recorded the song on half an hour . " Before the album 's release , LaBarbera @-@ Whites told MTV News that the album " shows a lot of growth as a performer . [ ... ] She was very involved in the songs and how they turned out . It 's her magic that turns these songs into what they are . " Among the producers who worked on Blackout but did not make the album were Scott Storch , Dr. Luke and Ne @-@ Yo . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Danja stated that Spears ' objective was to make a fun , danceable album with uptempo , high @-@ energy music , saying , " She wanted to stay away from being personal . It 's fun , it 's basic and there 's nothing wrong with that . It 's about feeling good , celebrating womanhood . " The album opens with the first single " Gimme More " , an upbeat dance @-@ pop and electropop song with influences of disco and funk . The song opens with a spoken intro in which Spears says the line " It 's Britney , bitch " . The lyrics appears to be about dance and sex , although they are actually about the media 's fascination with her private life , as noted in the lines " Cameras are <unk> ' while we 're dirty dancin ' / They keep watchin ' , keep watchin ' " . The next song and second single , " Piece of Me " runs through a down @-@ tempo dance beat and consists of over @-@ the @-@ top vocal distortions , causing a split sound effect and making it difficult to discern which voice is Spears ' . It talks about fame and is written like a biography retelling her mishaps , while she sings in a nearly spoken manner . The third track of the album , " Radar " , is an electropop and Euro disco song which features distorted synthesizers emulating sonar pulses , that received comparisons to those of Soft Cell 's " Tainted Love " ( 1981 ) . In the lyrics , Spears lets the subject know he is on her radar , while she lists the qualities the man has . 
 The fourth song and third single " Break the Ice " opens with Spears singing the lines " It 's been a while / I know I shouldn 't have kept you waiting / But I 'm here now " . The song features a choir and Keri Hilson singing background vocals sounding almost like a duet . Hilson explained the song is about " two people , a girl and a guy , [ ... ] and the girl is saying , ' You 're a little cold . Let me warm things up and break the ice . ' " After the chorus , the bridge begins with Spears saying " I like this part " mimicking Janet Jackson in " Nasty " ( 1986 ) . The album 's fifth track , " Heaven on Earth " , is a Euro disco love song with new wave influences . It is inspired by Donna Summer 's " I Feel Love " ( 1977 ) , with three vocal lines taking place over the beat . Nicole Morier commented that the song was written from a very dark place , saying , " I was thinking of someone and thinking they were so perfect and that I have all these imperfections . [ ... ] I think what 's touching about it is that it 's from the perspective of someone who feels like they really need this person just to feel safe and feel good . " Spears named the song her favorite from Blackout . The sixth track , " Get Naked ( I Got a Plan ) " is an uptempo R & B song about sex . It is constructed as a duet between Spears and Danja , who sings the chorus with his voice distorted to sound like a decaying moan . Spears contributes a series of gasps , sighs and chants and her voice is also distorted . The seventh track , " Freakshow " , is built around the ' wobbler ' effect of dubstep . Spears sings about dancing and being in the spotlight in lyrics such as " Make them other chicks so mad / I 'm ' bout to shake my ass / Watch that boy " . During the bridge , her vocals are pitched down low , making her sound masculine . 
 After " Freakshow " is Blackout 's eight track , " Toy Soldier " , an R & B song reminiscent of Destiny 's Child that showcases a military <unk> and Spears singing about needing a new lover . In " Hot as Ice " , an R & B song featuring background vocals by T @-@ Pain , she sings in a higher register , " I 'm just a girl with the ability to drive a man crazy / Make him call me ' mama , ' make him my new baby . " Blackout 's tenth track " Ooh Ooh Baby " contains a flamenco guitar and blends the beat from Gary Glitter 's " Rock and Roll " ( 1972 ) and the melody of The Turtles ' " Happy Together " ( 1967 ) . In the lyrics , she sings to a lover " Touch me and I come alive / I can feel you on my lips / I can feel you deep inside " . Kara DioGuardi said she was inspired by the relationship between Spears and her first son in the studio , saying , " I would look at the two of them , the way they looked at each other and the way she would hold the baby . It kind of struck me as interesting . At times it 'd be about a kid at times about a lover . " " Perfect Lover " an R & B song , has a propulsive , clattery belly @-@ dance beat in which Spears sings lyrics such as " Tick @-@ tock / Tick @-@ tock / Come and get me while I 'm hot " . The twelfth track is " Why Should I Be Sad " , a midtempo R & B song directed to her ex @-@ husband Kevin Federline . One of the bonus tracks , " Everybody " , samples Eurythmics ' " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " ( 1983 ) . It features Spears singing about the dancefloor in a breathy lower register . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 In June 2007 , Spears posted a message on her official website asking for assistance with a title for the album . Among the options were OMG Is Like Lindsay Lohan Like Okay Like , What If the Joke Is on You , Down Boy , Integrity and Dignity . On October 6 , 2007 , JIVE Records announced through a press release that the album would be titled Blackout , referring to " blocking out negativity and embracing life fully . " Blackout was set to be released on November 13 , 2007 . However , JIVE announced on October 10 , 2007 , that the release date would be moved up two weeks , to October 30 , 2007 , due to unauthorized leaks . The following day , Zomba Label Group filed a lawsuit against Perez Hilton claiming he illegally obtained and posted on his gossip blog at least ten songs and unfinished demos of the album . Zomba representatives alleged the posts had taken place over the course of the previous three months , and requested real and punitive damages as well as legal costs . On June 30 , 2009 , the parties submitted a stipulation to dismiss the case , pursuant to an undisclosed settlement agreement . The following month , The District Court judge dismissed the case , with prejudice . 
 The cover sleeve and images were shot by Ellen von Unwerth . The cover was released by JIVE Records on October 12 , 2007 . It features Spears sporting black hair and wearing a white fedora . A reviewer for the Ottawa Citizen felt the design was " horrendous " . The centerfold pictures feature Spears and a priest in suggestive poses in a confessional . The first image shows Spears , who wears a cross and fishnet stockings , sitting on the priest 's lap , while in the second one she leans suggestively against the confessional with the priest sitting on the other side of the partition . After the album was released , the Catholic League 's director of communications Kiera McCaffrey stated that the group considered the photos a " cheap publicity stunt " to promote the album and condemned Spears for " mocking a Catholic sacrament " . McCaffrey added , " All we see is how troubled this girl is now , especially with her family , losing her kids , with her career on a downward slide . And now she 's put out this album and this is her tactic to promote it ? " Gil Kaufman of MTV said that the images were reminiscent of Madonna 's music video for " Like a Prayer " ( 1989 ) . The booklet also contains pictures of empty chairs with ripped tabloid pages and still images from the music video for " Gimme More " . The album does not include a thank @-@ you list , unlike her previous albums . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Blackout received mixed to positive reviews from most music critics . The album holds a score of 61 out of 100 ( indicating " generally positive reviews " ) based on 24 critical reviews , according to the music review aggregator Metacritic . Stephen Thomas Erlewine , senior editor of AllMusic , said the album " is state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art dance @-@ pop , a testament to skills of the producers and perhaps even Britney being somehow cognizant enough to realize she should hire the best , even if she 's not at her best . " A reviewer from Blender deemed it as " her most consistent [ album ] , a seamlessly entertaining collection of bright , brash electropop . " Margeaux Watson of Entertainment Weekly commented that while the album is not poetry , " there is something delightfully escapist about Blackout , a perfectly serviceable dance album abundant in the kind of bouncy electro elements that buttressed her hottest hits . " A reviewer for NME said that the heavily treated vocals make Spears sound robotic , adding that " it could really do with a few more human touches . " Pitchfork Media 's Tom Ewing called " Get Naked ( I Got a Plan ) " the centerpiece of the album , and added that " like most of Blackout , is superb modern pop , which could probably only have been released by this star at this moment . Britney as walking catastrophe makes for great car @-@ crash copy and her record can fit into that if you want it to . " Mike Schiller of PopMatters said that " Right down to its utterly garish cover , Blackout is utterly disposable and ultimately forgettable . " Melissa Maerz from Rolling Stone explained that Blackout " is the first time in her career that she 's voiced any real thoughts about her life " and that " she 's gonna crank the best pop booty jams until a social worker cuts off her supply of hits . " Rob Sheffield of the same magazine described Blackout as " one of the most influential albums in modern pop " . 
 Slant Magazine writer Sal Cinquemani compared the album unfavorably to In the Zone , saying that although Blackout " scores well , and its hotness quotient is remarkably high , [ it ] isn 't much of a step forward for Britney following 2003 's surprisingly strong In the Zone , for which she received a writing credit on a majority of the songs ( as opposed to a scant three here ) . " Andy Battaglia of The A.V. Club said Blackout " counts both as a significant event and as a disquieting aberration that couldn 't be more mysteriously manufactured or bizarrely ill @-@ timed " in which " every song counts as markedly progressive and strange . " Alexis Petridis from The Guardian called it " a bold , exciting album : the question is whether anyone will be able to hear its contents over the deafening roar of tittle @-@ tattle . " Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times said , " The electronic beats and bass lines are as thick as Ms. Spears 's voice is thin , and as the album title suggests , the general mood is bracingly unapologetic . " Peter Robinson of The Observer stated that Spears " delivered the best album of her career , raising the bar for modern pop music with an incendiary mix of Timbaland 's Shock Value and her own back catalogue . " The Phoenix 's <unk> Dean said the album " may be more a tribute to the skills of the A @-@ list producers who guided her through the disc than to any of her own talents . But at least she was smart enough to accept that guidance . " In his consumer guide for MSN Music , critic Robert Christgau gave the album a B + and said that " From ' Gimme More ' ' s ' It 's Britney bitch ' <unk> to ' Piece of Me ' ' s single @-@ of @-@ the @-@ year sonics , from ' Ooh Ooh Baby ' ' s ' feel you deep inside ' to ' Perfect Lover ' ' s ' touch me there , ' this album is pure , juicy , plastic get @-@ naked . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 According to Nielsen SoundScan , Blackout sold 124 @,@ 000 copies during its first day of availability in the United States . Jessica Letkemann of Billboard compared the sales favorably to those of the number @-@ one album of the previous week , Carrie Underwood 's Carnival Ride , which sold 49 @,@ 000 copies . Letkemann also estimated that Blackout would possibly debut at the top of the Billboard 200 . On November 6 , 2007 , Billboard announced that even though The Eagles 's first @-@ week sales of Long Road Out of Eden had handily surpassed Spears , they would not debut at the top of the charts because of rules forbidding albums exclusively sold at one retail outlet ( Walmart in this case ) from entering the Billboard 200 . The magazine 's senior analyst and director of charts Geoff Mayfield explained he was frustrated by the situation , saying " I can believe the Eagles sold more , but I 'm not seeing anything that verifies for me that they outsold her and anything we see otherwise might be from people with a stake in suggesting that . " During the afternoon of the same day , Walmart issued a press release announcing that Long Road Out of Eden had sold 711 @,@ 000 copies . At night , it was announced through an article on Billboard.biz that after an agreement with Nielsen SoundScan , Billboard would allow exclusive album titles that were only available through one retailer to appear on the charts , effective that same week . Hence Long Road Out of Eden would top the Billboard 200 , while Blackout would debut at number two , with sales of 290 @,@ 000 copies . It became Spears ' first studio album to not debut at number one . The album , however , set the record as the biggest selling digital album debut by a female artist in one week at the time . Following the release of Circus in December 2008 , Blackout re @-@ entered the chart at number one @-@ hundred ninety eight , with sales of 4 @,@ 600 copies . As of March 2015 , the album has sold over 1 million copies in the United States . 
 In Canada , Blackout debuted atop of the Canadian Albums Chart with sales of 29 @,@ 000 units . It became her first number @-@ one album there since Britney in 2001 . It was certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia and New Zealand , Blackout debuted at number three and eight in the official charts , respectively . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) indicating shipments of 70 @,@ 000 units . Blackout debuted at number two on the UK Albums Chart with sales of 42 @,@ 000 units , only behind Long Road Out of Eden . It stayed on the chart for twenty @-@ eight weeks . It was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . In Ireland , the album debuted at the top of the Irish charts , replacing Magic by Bruce Springsteen . Blackout also debuted at number @-@ one in the European Top 100 Albums , holding off Long Road Out of Eden and Eros Ramazzotti 's e ² from reaching the top of the chart . The album had consistent performance across the European region , hitting the top ten in ten markets , including debuting at number four in Switzerland , number six in Austria , Italy and Denmark , and number ten in Germany and Portugal . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , the album was the thirty @-@ second best selling album of 2007 . By the end of 2008 , Blackout had sold 3 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Gimme More " was released as the album 's lead single . The song received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the music but some criticized Spears ' overly @-@ processed vocals . " Gimme More " peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming her fifth top ten hit and also her second highest @-@ peaking single at the time . It also peaked at the top of the charts in Canada and reached top five positions in fourteen countries . The accompanying music video premiered on October 5 , 2007 . It displayed Spears as a stripper and featured a break from Spears ' highly choreographed music videos . It received mixed to negative reviews from critics , who panned Spears ' pole dancing as well as the lack of storyline . 
 " Piece of Me " was released as the second single from the album . Critics gave the song positive reviews , praising its production and defiant lyrics , while citing it as one of the highlights from Blackout . Rolling Stone ranked the song at number fifteen on their list of the 100 Best Songs of 2007 . It peaked at number one in Ireland and reached top ten positions in Australia , Austria , Canada , Denmark , Finland , New Zealand , Sweden and the United Kingdom . In the United States , it became the second single from the album to have peaked at the top of the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart . The music video , directed by Wayne Isham , portrayed Spears ' life at the time and showed her with her friends disguising themselves in order to confuse the paparazzi . Isham 's concept was to have Spears confidently parodying her situation . It received mixed reviews from critics , most arguing her body was digitally altered . The video was nominated in three categories at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards and won all of them , including Video of the Year . 
 " Break the Ice " was released as the third and final single from Blackout . It received positive reviews from music critics , who deemed it as a strong electronic track of the album . The song was a moderate success , reaching the top ten in Belgium , Canada , Finland , Ireland and Sweden and charting within the top forty in Australia , New Zealand and many European countries . In the United States , the song reached number forty @-@ three on Billboard Hot 100 , while peaking at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . An accompanying music video , directed by Robert Hales , was released on March 12 , 2008 . The anime video was based on the superheroine character of Spears ' " Toxic " music video , and portrays her destroying a highly secured laboratory with several clones , including one of herself . " Radar " was originally planned to be released as the third single from Blackout , according to Ezekiel Lewis of The Clutch . " Break the Ice " was released instead and " Radar " was chosen as the fourth single . However , the release was scrapped when Spears began recording new material for her sixth studio album , Circus . It was later released as the fourth single and a bonus track from that album . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 After days of media speculation , it was confirmed on September 6 , 2007 that Spears would open the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards at the Pearl Theatre in the Palms Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas on September 9 , 2007 . It was also announced that she was going to perform " Gimme More " , with a magic act from illusionist Criss Angel in some parts of the performance . However , the bit is thought to have been rejected by the show 's organisers at the last minute . The performance began with Spears lip synching the first lines of Elvis Presley 's 1958 song " Trouble " . " Gimme More " began , and the camera panned out to reveal Spears wearing a black , jewel @-@ encrusted bikini and black boots . She was accompanied by male and female dancers dressed in black outfits . Several pole dancers danced in smaller stages around the audience . The performance was universally panned by critics . Jeff Leeds of The New York Times said that " no one was prepared for Sunday night 's fiasco , in which a listless Ms. Spears teetered through her dance steps and mouthed only occasional words in a wan attempt to lip @-@ synch her new single " . Vinay Menon of the Toronto Star commented Spears " looked hopelessly dazed . She was wearing the expression of somebody who had been deposited at the Palms Casino Resort by a tornado , one that promptly twisted away , taking her clothing and sense of purpose . [ ... ] [ She was ] lumbering , in slow motion , as if somebody had poured cement into her streetwalker boots " . David Willis of BBC stated her performance would " go down in the history books as being one of the worst to grace the MTV Awards " . 
 Unlike Spears ' previous albums , Blackout was not heavily promoted through magazine interviews , talk @-@ show appearances or televised performances besides the performance at the Video Music Awards and was not accompanied by a tour either . On November 27 , 2007 , MTV launched the contest " Britney Spears Wants a Piece of You " , in which fans could direct a separate video for " Piece of Me " , using footage of interviews and performances from Spears . Using the MTV Video Remixer , fans could mix and create a mash up of the footage . The winning video premiered on TRL on December 20 , 2007 , and MTV , JIVE Records and Spears herself picked the winner . The winner also received a Haier Ibiza Rhapsody device along with a one @-@ year subscription to Rhapsody , as well as Spears ' entire discography released in the United States . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 When Blackout was released , Spears ' behaviour in public began to clash with her image . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated that Spears was an artist that always relied on her " carefully sculpted sexpot @-@ next @-@ door persona " , but for Blackout " those images [ we ] re replaced by images of Britney beating cars up with umbrellas , wiping her greasy fingers on designer dresses , and nodding off on @-@ stage , each new disaster stripping away any residual sexiness in her public image . " Erlewine added that the album served as a soundtrack " for Britney 's hazy , drunken days , reflecting the excess that 's splashed all over the tabloids " , while noting that the album had a coherence that the public Spears lacked . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times said Spears became a spectral presence in her own album , explaining that when compared to her previous records , " [ she ] cuts a startlingly low profile on Blackout [ ... ] Even when she was being marketed as a clean @-@ cut ex @-@ Mouseketeer , and even when she was touring the country with a microphone that functioned largely as a prop , something about her was intense . " Tom Ewing of Pitchfork Media compared the relationship between Spears and Blackout with American television series Twin Peaks , saying that what made the show " so great wasn 't the central good @-@ girl @-@ gone @-@ bad story , it was the strangeness that story liberated . And Britney 's off @-@ disc life is both distraction from and enabler for this extraordinary album " . 
 Critics also referred to the high expectations of the album 's direction and quality . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian elaborated that when faced with a public image in freefall , an artist has two options : making music " that harks back to your golden , pre @-@ tailspin days " to " <unk> [ e ] your complete normality " or " to throw caution to the wind : given your waning fortunes , what 's the harm in taking a few musical risks ? " Petridis commented that Spears opted for the latter and the results were " largely fantastic . " Ewing said that " eleven successive tracks of hard , defiant , envelope @-@ pushing dance @-@ pop " may have been what he expected from Spears , but " on paper and on precedent you might have expected an apologetic ballad or two ; a song about her kids , maybe ; a high @-@ profile guest star , [ ... ] You don 't get any of those things and I 'd like to think Britney had the sense to avoid them herself . " Ewing noted that after " Freakshow " leaked online , a dubstep forum thread on the song hit seven pages in 24 hours , generating mixed reactions and exemplifying that " it still seems [ that ] when the mainstream borrows underground music , [ it ] brings it into the wider pop vocabulary . " He also attributed the quality of every track of Blackout to economic reasons , since one of the main causes album sales began to suffer during the digital era is due to the " <unk> " of albums in online stores – making it easier for consumers to buy some tracks rather than the entire album . Ewing explained that " The Revolver blueprint for pop albums – every track good , every track a potential hit – makes more sense than ever . Especially if a star can keep sonically up @-@ to @-@ date in a fast @-@ moving market . " 
 Reviewers noted the use of Auto @-@ Tune in Spears ' voice . Ewing said that Blackout serves as a reminder of how instantly recognizable Spears ' vocals are , saying that " treated or untreated : her thin Southern huskiness is one of the defining sounds of 00s pop . " He noted that the album " is a masterclass in autotune and vocal treatment as a studio instrument , disrupting and jamming the songs as much as it helps them . " While reviewing Spears ' demo of " Telephone " , Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone compared it to " Piece of Me " , " proving yet again how much impact Britney has had on the sonics of current pop . People love to make fun of Britney , and why not , but if ' Telephone ' proves anything , it 's that Blackout may be the most influential pop album of the past five years . " In June 2012 , " Blackout " was added to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's musical library and archive . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Blackout was ranked by Rolling Stone at number fifty on their list of the 100 Best Albums of 2007 . The album topped Billboard 's Reader 's Choice poll as the best album of the year . Spears won by 37 % of the votes , and over 16 @,@ 000 votes were cast . Blackout won International Album of the Year at the 2008 NRJ Music Awards , and Album of the Year at the 2008 MTV Europe Music Awards . The Times named it as the fifth best pop album of the decade . The album also appeared on Rolling Stone 's end of the decade poll , where it was voted the seventh best album of the decade by readers . On their ranking of the best albums from the 2000s ( decade ) , Stylus Magazine included " Blackout " at number 54 . The album also appeared on The Guardian writers ' favourite albums ever list . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a vocal producer 
 ^ b signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ c signifies a remixer 
 ^ d signifies an additional producer 
 " Everybody " contains a sample from " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " , as written by Annie Lennox and Dave Stewart . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for Blackout adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Joe Wilson ( Australian footballer ) = 
 Joseph Francis " Joe " Wilson ( 27 September 1870 – 7 December 1912 ) was an Australian sportsman who was prominent during the late 19th century . Originally from Launceston , Tasmania , he was educated at Launceston Grammar School and played Australian rules football and cricket for the school 's firsts aged only 15 . In addition to his school sports , Wilson played football for the Launceston Football Club in the Northern Tasmanian Football Association ( NTFA ) and cricket for several senior Launceston clubs . He established himself as one of Launceston 's best all @-@ round sportsmen by the time he completed high school ; he was a prominent member of Launceston Football Club 's consecutive NTFA premiership teams of 1888 and 1889 , and he regularly represented Northern Tasmania in cricket and football . 
 Wilson moved to Melbourne in 1890 after being offered a banking job on the condition he play for the Melbourne Football Club , which competed in the Victorian Football Association ( VFA ) , and the Melbourne Cricket Club ( MCC ) . He played for the cricket club for four seasons , but was never consistently selected in the first XI . Wilson 's most notable performances for the MCC were the final match of the 1892 – 93 season when he was part of a last @-@ wicket partnership that secured the premiership for Melbourne and a match against a touring English XI where he took the wickets of three Test cricketers . 
 As a footballer , Wilson was known for his marking and versatility — he was as a utility who could be positioned as a forward , defender or follower . He quickly established himself as one of Melbourne 's best players and represented Victoria in his second season with the club . Melbourne had been one of the weaker sides in the competition when he joined , but the recruitment of Wilson and several other prominent players began to steadily turn the club around . By the mid @-@ 1890s , Melbourne was a regular contender for the VFA premiership and in 1893 and 1894 they finished runners @-@ up , both times to powerhouse Essendon . Towards the end of the 1895 season , the Melbourne captain , Eddie Fox , retired and Wilson was appointed his replacement for the remainder of the year . He continued in the role for a further season before retiring at the end of 1896 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Joe Wilson was educated at Launceston Grammar School . A talented junior sportsman , he regularly represented the school in football and cricket . He is first recorded playing football for the school 's firsts in 1885 , which is around the same time he first played for Launceston Football Club 's seconds . The following summer he played cricket for his school and the Our Boys Cricket Club first XI . In one match for Our Boys , his batting was described by the Launceston Examiner as " the feature of the game " . In March 1886 , Wilson dominated a match between his school and Horton College — he made 154 runs in his team 's first innings , at the time the second highest individual score ever recorded at the Launceston Cricket Ground , and then took 17 wickets , including a hat @-@ trick , for only 28 runs in Horton 's two innings . At the conclusion of the cricket season , Wilson won two trophies from the Our Boys club — for highest individual score and highest batting average . 
 In June 1886 , Wilson played his first match for Launceston Football Club 's senior team , in a non @-@ premiership game against Latrobe . He spent most of the season in the seconds and kicked one goal for the year . The next cricket season he again played for Our Boys and his school . On Boxing Day 1886 , Wilson represented Northern Tasmania in the annual North v South match in Hobart . After a match in February 1887 , Launceston 's Daily Telegraph described Wilson as " from his present form , [ ... ] fit for any eleven in Tasmania " . At the conclusion of the cricket season , Wilson again represented Northern Tasmania , this time against the touring Melbourne Cricket Club ( MCC ) . 
 Wilson played several matches for Launceston 's firsts during the 1887 football season . In a match against <unk> , he was named among the team 's best players . Wilson played for his school during the 1887 – 88 cricket season and , in one match against Esk , took five wickets for 67 runs ( 5 / 67 ) . Later that season he also played for Launceston Cricket Club in a game against Esk . In April 1888 , he represented his school in rowing . 
 For the 1888 season , Wilson was made captain of the Launceston Grammar School football team . He also became a leading player for the Launceston Football Club . Wilson kicked two of his team 's three goals in a school match against Horton College , and was named in Launceston 's best players in several games , including matches against South Launceston and City that counted towards the premiership . In a match that was to decide the premiership , against South Launceston , Wilson put in a creditable performance . The game ended in a draw , which left the teams even on the ladder , and a subsequent game was scheduled for two weeks later . In that match , Wilson kicked one of Launceston 's five goals as they ran out two @-@ goal victors to win their first Northern Tasmanian Football Association ( NTFA ) premiership . He was named in Launceston 's best players for the match by the Launceston Examiner . For the following cricket season , Wilson moved to play with St. Leonards . 
 = = = After high school = = = 
 In one of the early matches of the 1889 football season , Wilson was best on ground in Launceston 's win against City . It was reported in June 1889 by The Colonist that Wilson had moved to Hobart and was likely to join Railway Football Club in the Southern Tasmanian Football Association ( <unk> ) . However , before completing the move , Wilson changed his mind and elected to keep playing for Launceston . When Victorian Football Association ( VFA ) side South Melbourne toured in July , Wilson represented the NTFA against them — he was named one of the local side 's better players in a six @-@ goal loss . Launceston won their second consecutive premiership that year . In a game towards the end of the season , En Avant of The Colonist described Wilson 's marking as " a treat to witness " . 
 Wilson played for Tamar Cricket Club during the 1889 – 90 season . He again represented Northern Tasmania in the annual North v South match , playing an innings that was said to " please all lovers of the game " . In another representative match , he played for a combined Northern Tasmania side against the touring Victorians ; Wilson made 45 runs against a bowling attack that included Test cricketers Harry Trott and Eugene Palmer . 
 = = Melbourne = = 
 = = = Move to Melbourne = = = 
 In April 1890 , it was announced in The Colonist that Wilson was leaving Launceston to move to Melbourne . He had been recruited by Major Wardill , the secretary of the Melbourne Cricket Club , who offered Wilson a " lucrative position " at a Melbourne branch of the National Bank of Australasia if he came to play for the cricket club and the Melbourne Football Club , with which the cricket club had a close affiliation . On his departure from Tasmania , he was described as " the best all @-@ round cricketer and footballer in the North " . 
 Wilson made his debut for the Melbourne Football Club on 24 May in a match against Ballarat that did not count towards the VFA premiership . He had an immediate impact , kicking the first goal of the match . Wilson made his VFA debut a week later , playing as a follower in a match against South Melbourne . Writing in The Australasian , Markwell was complimentary of Wilson 's performance , saying he gave South trouble . In the round 8 match against Geelong , Wilson scored what was described as a " splendid goal " . 
 Wilson began playing with the Melbourne Cricket Club in the 1890 – 91 season . He played two premiership matches early in the season , against Port Melbourne and Richmond , but scored only 13 runs in two innings and was not called upon to bowl . He did not play in another senior premiership game until the next season . In a match against Wesley College in March 1891 , he played a high quality innings , scoring 121 runs . Several weeks later , while playing for MCC 's seconds against South Melbourne 's seconds , he took 13 wickets for 61 runs . The Tasmanian noted that it was pity he had not played that well earlier in the season , or he probably would have secured a permanent place in the first XI . 
 = = = Breaking through = = = 
 By the 1891 football season , Wilson was considered one of the best players in Melbourne 's team . In June 1891 , he was named among Melbourne 's best players in a win over St Kilda and was one of four Melbourne players to represent Victoria in an intercolonial match against South Australia . While reviewing the round 15 match between Melbourne and Geelong , Markwell wrote that Wilson was a particular crowd favourite due to his fair play . Wilson kicked a goal during the round 17 match against South Melbourne and was noted as being part of " a talented combination of followers " for Melbourne . In his review of the 1891 season , Follower listed Wilson among Melbourne 's followers who had " worthily held their own " throughout the year . 
 After a disappointing initial season for the MCC , Wilson 's 1891 – 92 season was much more productive . A regular in the firsts , he was described as batting " soundly and freely " in a match against Carlton and made a " highly spoken of performance " against South Melbourne , where he scored 47 runs and was Melbourne 's leading wicket @-@ taker with three . Wilson played a total of four premiership matches for Melbourne that season and also represented them against Lord Sheffield 's touring English XI . In that match Wilson took the wickets of George Bean , George Lohmann and William Attewell , all Test cricketers . In the final match of the Victorian cricket season , to decide the pennant between Melbourne and South Melbourne , Wilson was selected for MCC , but did not get a chance to bat and only bowled four overs in a weather @-@ affected match that ended in a draw — the premiership defaulted to South Melbourne because they had a slightly higher average during the season . 
 Wilson was again one of Melbourne 's better players for the 1892 football season . In a round 14 match against Fitzroy , Wilson kicked three of the Redlegs ' six goals in a one @-@ goal victory . Two weeks later , he was described as " performing <unk> " in a game where he also kicked a goal . In the third @-@ last game of the season , Melbourne drew a match away to a poor Collingwood team . Markwell wrote in The Australasian that Wilson and Dolly Christy , who had both missed the match , were sorely missed . Melbourne finished the season in fourth position on the ladder , their highest finish since 1886 , though Markwell thought the result was disappointing when considering the calibre of players the club had recruited . He named Wilson as one of the team 's " most deserving " players for the year . 
 The 1892 – 93 season was Wilson 's most productive in Victorian cricket . He played six senior premiership matches and took 10 wickets at an average of 22 @.@ 20 , including an innings of 3 / 40 against South Melbourne where he dismissed first @-@ class players Willie Over and Albert Rains . Melbourne played against Fitzroy in the final match of the season to decide the premiership . Fitzroy batted first and made 282 , with Wilson taking 3 / 56 from 18 @.@ 2 overs , including the wickets of Victorian players Thomas Hastings and George Beacham . Melbourne had only to pass Fitzroy 's first innings total to secure the premiership , but were in a perilous situation at 9 / 237 when Wilson came in at number 11 . He joined James O 'Halloran to put on a partnership of 48 , of which Wilson contributed 24 , which was just enough to surpass Fitzroy 's score . Writing for The Australasian , Felix observed that , although Wilson was not as comfortable at the crease as his partner O 'Halloran , he still put in a performance that was " deserving of mention " and that several of the fours he hit off Beacham " had to be seen to be appreciated " . Fitzroy got to 5 / 60 in their second innings before stumps was called and the result was declared a draw , enough for Melbourne to win the premiership . Wilson took one wicket from his two overs , that of Albert Fox . 
 Melbourne began the 1893 football season strongly , winning their first eight matches . Wilson missed the first match of the year , but returned for the Redlegs ' round 2 victory over Port Melbourne . He missed the following week 's clash against St Kilda due to work commitments , which The Sportsman jokingly called " a new experience for bank clerks " . In Melbourne 's victory over South Melbourne on 17 June , Markwell reported in The Australasian that Wilson 's performance was " meritorious " . Coming in to round 9 , both Melbourne and Essendon had both won their first eight matches and the contest between the two was highly anticipated . In front of about 25 @,@ 000 spectators at the East Melbourne Cricket Ground , the two teams put on what Observer of The Argus called a great match . Melbourne kicked away early to lead by five goals to one at half time , but Essendon , who had won the past two premierships , fought back , kicking four goals to nil in the second half for the match to finish in a thrilling draw . Observer called Wilson a " first @-@ class Red man " and noted that he " [ held ] his marks well " while playing in the backline . 
 The Redlegs went on to win their next four games , including a match against Collingwood where Wilson played as a forward and kicked two of the team 's four goals in the absence of their main goalkicker William Smith . A week later against Fitzroy , Wilson again played forward and kicked two goals , including one from over 60 yards ( 55 m ) out , in a two @-@ goal win . Wilson was one of Melbourne 's best in the round 13 game against Williamstown , according to the North Melbourne Advertiser . The next week Melbourne met Essendon for the second time that season . Each side had won all their matches for the year so far , except for the drawn game between the two teams earlier in the year . The Age wrote that the match had been eagerly awaited and that nearly 30 @,@ 000 spectators attended , including hundreds of people from places as far away as Bendigo and Ballarat . In a contrast to the two sides ' first meeting , it was the Same Olds who started strongest and they led by four goals to one at half time . Wilson had one of the opening shots on goal of the game , but was only able to register a behind . Melbourne began to come back in the second half and Wilson set up Mickey Roche to kick the Redlegs ' second goal of the match . At three @-@ quarter time , Melbourne were still three goals in arrears and they came out playing some of their best football of the year — O 'Loughlin kicked a goal midway through the quarter and then several players , including Wilson , had unsuccessful shots on goal . Ernest Howes scored the Reds ' fourth goal , but it was too late for Melbourne as the siren to end the game sounded only seconds later . 
 Melbourne bounced back the next week with a win over Carlton , but lost the week after at home to Geelong , despite leading by five goals to one at quarter time . This opened up a two @-@ win advantage for Essendon at the top of the ladder . Reviewing the match , Markwell wrote that Wilson had played better games , but that he worked as hard as anyone on the ground and was " singularly unselfish " . Melbourne dropped more points with a round 17 draw against South Melbourne and when the Redlegs played another draw two weeks later , this time against St Kilda , The Argus declared the premiership race all but over . Wilson recovered from a form slump to kick both of Melbourne 's goals in the St Kilda match , but it was not enough to get the Redlegs over the line . He was again in the best players in Melbourne 's round 20 win over Carlton . The Reds closed out the season with two more wins , but it was not enough to catch Essendon who remained undefeated and Melbourne finished runners @-@ up . In his appraisal of the season , Markwell named Wilson in his best dozen Melbourne players . 
 Wilson 's last season for the Melbourne Cricket Club came in 1893 – 94 . He missed the first two premiership matches of the season , but after top scoring with 47 and taking two wickets in a non @-@ premiership match against Fitzroy , Wilson was selected for the third match , against North Melbourne . Wilson took 1 / 72 in the first innings against North , the wicket being that of Isaac Drape , and scored 27 runs batting an number 10 . He was not called upon to bat or bowl in the second innings . Wilson was retained in the side for the next match against Carlton . He batted at 11 in the first innings and was on 0 not out when the innings closed . Wilson was not required to bowl or bat again in what ended up being his final match for the MCC . In total , he played 14 matches for Melbourne for a return of 138 runs at a batting average of 10 @.@ 61 and 15 wickets at a bowling average of 30 @.@ 73 . 
 = = = Post @-@ cricket retirement = = = 
 According to Observer , Wilson almost retired from football too , and it was only " with difficulty " that he was persuaded to continue training . He missed the first four games of the 1894 premiership season , during which Melbourne struggled and lost two . Wilson made his first appearance that year in round 5 against Richmond ; Observer wrote that Wilson 's return was an " agreeable surprise " and that his marking in particular was impressive . He kicked one goal in a game Melbourne won nine goals to eight . The Redlegs faced Essendon the next week , who were again top of the table . Melbourne lost by four goals to six , largely due to their inaccuracy kicking for goal . Wilson was said by Markwell to " come under favourable notice " while playing in defence that match . Melbourne responded the next week to defeat Port Melbourne in game where Wilson 's leadership and direction was praised and Observer commented that he was " as useful a man as Melbourne had " . He was switched into attack for the round 8 victory over Carlton and Markwell wrote that Wilson was " frequently troublesome " . 
 Melbourne continued on their winning way with a round 11 win against South Melbourne . Wilson played forward and kicked three of Melbourne 's nine goals in a comprehensive victory . The Redlegs ' winning streak stretched to eight games ; during this time Wilson 's forward play was at various times described as " clever " , " busy " and a " shining example of unselfishness " . Melbourne 's good form came to a grinding halt in the reverse fixture against Essendon . They were comprehensively defeated by the Same Olds who secured their fourth consecutive premiership . The Reds ' forwards were roundly criticised by Observer , but Wilson was praised as the " only one of them who played a decent game " . Melbourne won two of their remaining three games to finish runners @-@ up for the second consecutive year . 
 Wilson began the 1895 season much as he had finished 1894 , playing in the forward line and often receiving praise from football journalists . Melbourne defeated South Melbourne in their first game of the season and Markwell wrote that he did " a lot of serviceable work " . In round 3 , the Reds were finally able to defeat Essendon after falling short four times in the previous two years , although the match was said to be of poor quality . Wilson was one of the Redlegs ' <unk> . The club 's vice @-@ captain , O 'Loughlin , returned to Queensland in June and Wilson was elected to replace him . In his first match after being appointed , against North Melbourne in round 6 , Wilson was said to do " every honour to the distinction " as he played his best game of the season and kicked a goal to help Melbourne remain undefeated . Melbourne played Richmond the next week and won again with Wilson this time described as a " brilliantly consistent worker " . Their winning run continued through to round 9 as the Reds defeated Williamstown by a goal ; Wilson was " the pick of Melbourne 's forwards " that match according to Markwell . Melbourne 's undefeated run came to an end the next week , in a loss to Fitzroy . Due to the absence of many of Melbourne 's regular followers in round 14 against Essendon , Wilson was required to play in that position . The Redlegs lost the match , but Wilson was named one of Melbourne 's best on the day . 
 = = = Captaincy = = = 
 Eddie Fox , who had been Melbourne 's captain for six of the last seven seasons , retired from football in late August . Wilson was named captain in his stead at what was a difficult time , the Redlegs having lost their last two matches . In his first game in charge , against North Melbourne , Wilson was said to have " showed much judgment in disposing his men " . Melbourne won the match four goals to two and Wilson also had a good individual game playing in a variety of positions . The Reds finished the season having won three of their four games under Wilson 's captaincy , which was enough to finish third on the ladder , two wins away from Fitzroy in top spot . 
 Wilson remained captain for the 1896 season , though he missed the first four matches of the year due a suspension he had incurred at the end of the previous season . He returned to the side for round 5 against Williamstown and played up forward in a comfortable 11 @-@ goal win . In Melbourne 's round 7 win over St Kilda , Markwell wrote that Wilson was " distinctly at his best " . And in a round 11 victory against North Melbourne , the same journalist wrote that he had the " soundest judgement " of all forwards on the field . Wilson played " excellently " in the Reds ' defeat of Carlton the next week ; Markwell remarked upon his desire " to annihilate the men in blue " . He kicked his first goal of the season in round 15 , a two @-@ goal win over Collingwood , and finished the day with two majors . Markwell observed that Wilson 's " judgment and coolness " went a long way to Melbourne winning their round 16 encounter with Essendon . Melbourne finished the season in fourth place on the ladder . Though they never seriously challenged for the premiership , it was noted that the club had bad luck through suspension and injury , and when they got their best team on the field they could challenge anyone . In his review of the season , Markwell named Wilson one of Melbourne 's best half dozen players . 
 Wilson retired from football at the conclusion of the 1896 season . In 1897 he played bowls instead of football . After his retirement , he was remembered as being " solidity itself " for Melbourne . In his native state he was mentioned alongside Fred <unk> , William Smith , Colin Campbell and George <unk> as players who left Tasmania and more than held their own against the mainland 's best . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Wilson worked for the National Bank of Australasia for 23 years at various suburban Melbourne branches , including East Collingwood , Clifton Hill , <unk> and finally Footscray . He had a unique record of never missing a morning 's work with the bank . Wilson was married to Elizabeth Mackey , the daughter of a wine and spirits merchant . On 7 December 1912 , Wilson died at his home in Footscray of a heart ailment he had been suffering from for a year . He was survived by his wife and a child . He was buried at Footscray Cemetery . 
 = SM U @-@ 22 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 22 or U @-@ XXII was a U @-@ 20 @-@ class submarine or U @-@ boat built for and operated by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) during the First World War . The design for U @-@ 22 was based on submarines of the Royal Danish Navy 's Havmanden class ( three of which had been built in Austria @-@ Hungary ) , and was largely obsolete by the beginning of the war . 
 U @-@ 22 was just over 127 feet ( 39 m ) long and was armed with two bow torpedo tubes , a deck gun , and a machine gun . The submarine was laid down in mid 1915 and launched in January 1917 . The still unfinished U @-@ boat sank in the harbor at Fiume in June but was raised , repaired , and relaunched in October . After her commissioning in November , U @-@ 22 patrolled off the Po River estuary and , later , in the northern Adriatic out of Trieste . 
 After undergoing months of repairs for her failed electric motor in mid 1918 , U @-@ 22 returned to duty and patrolled off the Montenegrin coast out of Cattaro in August . At Cattaro at the end of World War I , U @-@ 22 was ceded to France as a war reparation and scrapped in 1920 . U @-@ 22 had no wartime successes . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 When it became apparent to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy that the First World War would not be a short one , they moved to bolster their U @-@ boat fleet by seizing the plans for the Danish Havmanden class submarines , three of which had been built at Whitehead & Co. in Fiume . Although the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy was not happy with the design , which was largely obsolete , it was the only design for which plans were available and which could be begun immediately in domestic shipyards . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy unenthusiastically placed orders for U @-@ 22 and her three sister boats on 27 March 1915 . 
 U @-@ 22 was one of two boats of the class to be built at the Hungarian <unk> yard in Fiume . Due to demands by the Hungarian government , subcontracts for the class were divided between Hungarian and Austrian firms , and this politically expedient solution worsened technical problems with the design , resulting in numerous modifications and delays for the class in general . 
 U @-@ 22 was an ocean @-@ going submarine that displaced 173 tonnes ( 191 short tons ) surfaced and 210 tonnes ( 231 short tons ) submerged and was designed for a complement of 18 . She was 127 feet 2 inches ( 38 @.@ 76 m ) long with a beam of 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) and a draft of 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) . For propulsion , she featured a single shaft , a single 450 bhp ( 340 kW ) diesel engine for surface running , and a single 160 shp ( 120 kW ) electric motor for submerged travel . She was capable of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) while surfaced and 9 knots ( 17 km / h ) while submerged . Although there is no specific notation of a range for U @-@ 22 , the Havmanden class , upon which the U @-@ 20 class was based , had a range of 1 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) , surfaced , and 23 nautical miles ( 43 km ) at 8 knots ( 15 km / h ) submerged . 
 U @-@ 22 was armed with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes located in the front and carried a complement of two torpedoes . She was also equipped with a 66 mm / 26 ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) deck gun and an 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun . 
 U @-@ 22 was laid down at Fiume in mid 1915 and launched on 27 January 1917 , the last of the four U @-@ 20 @-@ class boats to be launched . On 10 June , while not yet complete , the U @-@ boat sank in the harbor at Fiume . Raised from her resting point at a depth of 9 meters ( 30 ft ) the following day , U @-@ 22 underwent four months of repairs . She was launched again on 6 October . 
 = = Service career = = 
 On 18 November 1917 the U @-@ boat sailed for Pola , where she was commissioned as SM U @-@ 22 on 23 November under the command of Linienschiffsleutnant Josef Holub . The 31 @-@ year @-@ old Galician had been assigned to U @-@ 22 in February and had been in charge of sister boat U @-@ 21 from June 1916 until his assignment to U @-@ 22 . 
 Holub led U @-@ 22 out on her first patrol when they departed Pola on 5 December for duty off the Po estuary . After returning to Pola on 10 December , Holub led U @-@ 22 on another Po estuary tour from 15 to 17 December . On 29 December , Holub was transferred to U @-@ 27 . His replacement was Linienschiffsleutnant Friedrich Sterz . It was the first U @-@ boat command of the 25 @-@ year @-@ old native of <unk> , <unk> ( in present @-@ day Italy ) . 
 On 3 January 1918 , Sterz returned U @-@ 22 to the Po estuary for a third patrol there . While in the area , an enemy submarine was spotted but no attack could be made because of bad weather ; the same bad weather forced U @-@ 22 to put in at Rovigno the following day . Setting out from Rovigno on 5 January , U @-@ 22 unsuccessfully attacked an Italian torpedo boat and two steamships . After a return to Rovigno on 6 January , Sterz steered his boat to the submarine base at Brioni . Ten days later , U @-@ 22 headed to Trieste , where she conducted patrols in the northern Adriatic . On 5 February , U @-@ 22 avoided being hit by seven bombs dropped by an enemy airplane . Departing the northern Adriatic in late April , U @-@ 22 was headed for Cattaro when her electric motor failed . After a quick stop at Cattaro , U @-@ 22 returned to Pola for three months of repairs . 
 After returning to service in August , U @-@ 22 operated out of <unk> , patrolling off the Montenegrin coast over the next two months . On 17 October , the boat returned to Cattaro , where she remained until the war 's end . She was ceded to France as a war reparation and scrapped in 1920 . Like all of her sister boats , U @-@ 22 had no wartime successes . 
 = Boardwalk Empire ( episode ) = 
 " Boardwalk Empire " is the pilot episode of the HBO crime drama Boardwalk Empire . Written by series creator Terence Winter and directed by Martin Scorsese with a budget of $ 18 million , the episode introduces the character of Nucky Thompson , played by Steve Buscemi , as the corrupt treasurer of Atlantic City who is involved in gambling and bootlegging in 1920 . The show used a large ensemble cast and a specially constructed boardwalk set to re @-@ create the Prohibition and Jazz Era , and was based on Boardwalk Empire : The Birth , High Times and Corruption of Atlantic City by Nelson Johnson . Filming for the pilot took place at various locations in and around New York City in June 2009 . The episode first aired in the United States on September 19 , 2010 . 
 The episode opens with bootleggers being ambushed , and then moves to a Temperance rally two days earlier during which Nucky Thompson attracts the attention of a pregnant woman who later seeks assistance from Thompson for her husband , Schroeder . In a night club the day after the rally , we are introduced to other characters , including Thompson 's brother , Eli , the town sheriff , and Jimmy Darmody , a political assistant . Thompson makes a deal to supply alcohol to four gangsters , including Arnold Rothstein who agrees to use his own men to transport the alcohol . Meanwhile Schroeder drunkenly tangles with Thompson , and then beats his ( Schroeder 's ) wife into a miscarriage . The next day , Darmody plots with Al Capone to rob Rothstein 's incoming whiskey shipment . The episode returns to the ambush and we see Capone and Darmody shoot all the bootleggers and run off with the whiskey , with Darmody later giving Thompson a share of the heist . 
 David Hinkley of the New York Daily News awarded the episode five stars , saying " Watching HBO 's new ' Boardwalk Empire ' is like sitting in your favorite tavern and hearing someone say , ' Drinks are on the house . ' Friends , it doesn 't get much better . " Paige Wiser of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called it " ... an event not to be missed , " and praised Buscemi in particular , calling his performance " fascinating . " The episode gained a 2 @.@ 0 / 5 ratings share among adults aged 18 – 49 and garnered 4 @.@ 81 million viewers . This was the highest rated premiere for a HBO series since the pilot of Deadwood in March 2004 . Following this successful debut , HBO immediately renewed the series for a second season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens in the year 1920 . A group of bootleggers smuggle Canadian Club whisky from boats into the United States but two men in ski masks later ambush their trucks and hold them at gunpoint . The scene then cuts to three days prior , as Atlantic County treasurer Enoch " Nucky " Thompson delivers the keynote address at a Women 's Temperance League rally on the eve of Prohibition . He inspires the all @-@ female audience with his rags @-@ to @-@ riches story and anti @-@ alcohol rhetoric . 
 Nucky leaves the rally early and promptly heads to Babette 's Supper Club , where a raucous gathering of elected officials , including Atlantic City 's mayor and Nucky 's brother , Sheriff Elias " Eli " Thompson , are celebrating the onset of Prohibition and the lucrative bootlegging opportunities it will bring . Nucky lays out the logistics and introduces his driver James " Jimmy " Darmody , who has just returned after serving in World War I , and appoints him an assistant to Paddy Ryan , a young ward boss who is part of Nucky 's political machine . As midnight strikes and Prohibition officially goes into effect , the partygoers in the club all toast the " death " of alcohol and merrily continue the party . Moody and uncomfortable , Jimmy quickly leaves . 
 The following morning , Jimmy and Angela , his common @-@ law wife , discuss their future . She wants him to return to his studies at Princeton , but he believes this will take too long and decides to continue working for Nucky . Meanwhile , Thompson meets Margaret Schroeder , a pregnant member of the Temperance League . When she asks about a job for her husband , Nucky gives her a wad of money and has Jimmy drive her home . 
 As night falls , Jimmy and Nucky visit Mickey Doyle 's funeral parlor , a front for distilling alcohol . Mickey pranks Jimmy by giving him a drink of formaldehyde , and Jimmy attacks him , nearly compromising the operation . <unk> by Nucky , Jimmy demands more important work and implies that the war has matured him . Nucky at first cajoles him but ultimately challenges Jimmy to make his own opportunities . 
 Afterwards , Nucky dines with four major mob figures , New York 's Arnold Rothstein and Lucky Luciano and Chicago 's Big Jim Colosimo and Johnny Torrio , who agree to start buying Nucky 's seaborne liquor shipments . Rothstein requests some alcohol for a friend 's wedding and Nucky agrees to sell him his latest shipment , on the condition that Rothstein 's own men pick it up . Rothstein asks to defer payment until the next day . As Jimmy waits for Nucky outside , he befriends Torrio 's driver , Al Capone . 
 The next day , Rothstein , a well @-@ known card shark and cheat , takes Nucky 's casino for over $ 90 @,@ 000 . Nucky arrives and gets Rothstein to leave with his winnings , less the cost of the whiskey shipment . As he leaves , Hans Schroeder , Margaret 's jealous and abusive husband , confronts Nucky . When Nucky sees Hans gambling with the money he had given Margaret earlier , he beats him and has him thrown out . That night , the drunken Hans severely beats Margaret , causing her to miscarry . 
 The day of the heist arrives . Jimmy recruits Capone to hijack Rothstein 's whiskey shipment . The episode returns to the conclusion of the opening robbery , in a montage interspersed with scenes from a comedy routine performed by Eddie Cantor attended by Nucky and his mistress . Capone , startled by a deer , opens fire on the surrendering smugglers . Jimmy and Capone kill them all and flee with the stolen trucks . At the same time , only three miles away , a team of federal agents raid Mickey 's funeral parlor . 
 With Eli 's help , Nucky deduces that Jimmy had met with agents the day before and informed on Mickey and therefore must also be involved in the simultaneous robbery . When confronted , Jimmy admits that he counted on Nucky 's forgiveness and again asks for his help with more aggressive criminal enterprises , claiming that the war has left him with no future other than violence . Jimmy seals Nucky 's complicity by presenting him with a share of the take and warns Nucky that Nucky can no longer afford to be " half a gangster . " 
 Nucky learns about Margaret 's hospitalization . He has Eli kidnap Hans . Scenes showing Eli and his deputies taking Hans out to sea and beating him to death are interspersed with the assassination of Colosimo in his Chicago restaurant . A radio reports that the police have named Hans as the suspect in the murder of Rothstein 's men , implying that Nucky will continue to protect Jimmy . The episode ends with Nucky delivering flowers to a recovering and widowed Margaret . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Emmy Award winner Terence Winter , who had served as executive producer and writer on the critically acclaimed HBO series The Sopranos , was hired to adapt the novel Boardwalk Empire : The Birth , High Times , and Corruption of Atlantic City on June 4 , 2008 . Winter had been interested in creating a series set in the 1920s , feeling that it had never properly been explored before . It was for this reason that he decided to focus his adaption of the novel on the Prohibition era section . On September 1 , 2009 , it was announced that Academy Award @-@ winning director Martin Scorsese would direct the pilot . It would be the first time he had directed an episode of television since an episode of Steven Spielberg 's Amazing Stories in 1986 . The production would be very ambitious , with some even speculating it would be too large scale for television . " I kept thinking ' This is pointless . How can we possibly afford a boardwalk , or an empire ? ' " says creator Terence Winter . " We can 't call it ' Boardwalk Empire ' and not see a boardwalk . " The production would eventually build a 300 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 91 m ) boardwalk in an empty lot in Brooklyn , New York at the cost of five million dollars . Despite a reported budget of up to $ 50 million , the pilot 's final budget came in at $ 18 million . 
 On why he chose to return to television , Scorsese said " What 's happening the past 9 to 10 years , particularly at HBO , is what we had hoped for in the mid @-@ Sixties with films being made for television at first . We 'd hoped there would be this kind of freedom and also the ability to create another world and create longform characters and story . That didn 't happen in the 1970s , 1980s and in the 1990s I think . And of course ... HBO is a trailblazer in this . I 've been tempted over the years to be involved with them because of the nature of long @-@ form and their development of character and plot . " He went on to praise network HBO by saying , " A number of the episodes , in so many of their series , they 're thoughtful , intelligent [ and ] brilliantly put together ... It 's a new opportunity for storytelling . It 's very different from television of the past . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Scorsese is an actor magnet , " commented Winter . " Everybody wants to work with him . I had all these pictures on my wall and I thought , ' I 'd really better write some good stuff for these people . ' " In casting the role of Nucky Thompson ( based upon real @-@ life Atlantic City political boss Enoch L. Johnson ) , Winter wanted to stray from the real life Johnson as much as possible . " If we were going to cast accurately what the real Nucky looked like , we 'd have cast Jim Gandolfini . " The idea of casting Steve Buscemi in the lead role came about when Scorsese mentioned wanting to work with the actor , whom Winter knew well having worked with him on The Sopranos . Winter sent the script out to Buscemi , who responded very enthusiastically . " I just thought , ' Wow . I 'm almost sorry I 've read this , because if I don 't get it , I 'm going to be so sad . ' My response was ' Terry , I know you 're looking at other actors ' ... and he said , ' No , no , Steve , I said we want you . ' " Explained Scorsese , " I love the range he has , his dramatic sense , but also his sense of humor . " 
 The casting of Buscemi was soon followed by Michael Pitt , best known for his role in the Bernardo Bertolucci film The Dreamers . He was soon joined by Kelly Macdonald , Vincent Piazza and Michael Shannon , who had just received an Oscar nomination for his role in the Sam Mendes film Revolutionary Road . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming for the pilot took place at various locations in and around New York City in June 2009 . In creating the visual effects for the series , the company turned to Brooklyn @-@ based effects company Brainstorm Digital . Says Glenn Allen , visual effects producer for Boardwalk Empire and co @-@ founder of Brainstorm , " It 's our most complex job to date . Everything is HD now , so we have to treat it like a feature film . " " Anytime you get to work on a period piece , it 's more fun , " comments visual effects artist Chris " Pinkus " <unk> , who used archival photographs , postcards , and architectural plans to recreate the Atlantic City boardwalks as accurately as possible . " We got to explore what the old Atlantic City was really like . The piers were one of the toughest parts because every summer they would change – new houses , new advertisements . " It took two months for the firm to complete all the visual effects for the pilot . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The pilot episode received acclaim from television critics . TV Guide 's Matt Roush praised the marriage of Scorsese and Winter , saying it " ... brilliantly marries Martin Scorsese 's virtuosic cinematic eye to Terence Winter 's panoramic mastery of rich character and eventful story , " and finished his review by stating " It 's the most purely — and <unk> — enjoyable storytelling HBO has delivered in ages , like a movie that you never want to end . " Variety 's Brian Lowry praised the show for returning network HBO to top form , saying " This is , quite simply , television at its finest , occupying a sweet spot that — for all the able competition — still remains unique to HBO : An expensive , explicit , character @-@ driven program , tackling material no broadcast network or movie studio would dare touch ... For those wondering when the channel would deliver another franchise to definitively put it on top of the world , Ma , the wait is over : Go directly to " Boardwalk . " " " One of the unexpected joys of " Boardwalk Empire , " though , lies in the way the show revels in the oddities of its time , peeling back the layers of polite society to reveal a giddy shadow world of criminals and politicians collaborating to keep the liquor flowing , " says online magazine Salon 's Heather Havrilesky who went on to call the pilot " breathtaking . " Roberto Bianco from USA Today said in his review that Boardwalk Empire was " <unk> produced , shockingly violent and as cold and hard as ice , Boardwalk Empire brings us back to the world 's former playground at the start of Prohibition — and brings HBO back to the forefront of the TV @-@ series race . " 
 However , not all critical reviews were favorable . Nancy Franklin of The New Yorker felt that the series too closely echoed The Sopranos , and went on to say that " ... the first episode alone cost nearly twenty million dollars @-@ and it looks authentic in a way that , paradoxically , seems lifeless . You 're constantly aware that you 're watching a period piece , albeit one with some vivid scenes and interesting details . " Chris Barsanti from PopMatters affords the show six out of ten , remarking that the series " .. doesn 't begin in the most thought @-@ proving manner ... " and added that the character of Jimmy Darmody is a " dud " and Michael Pitt gives " a one @-@ note performance . " Aaron Riccio of Slant praised the series overall ( awarding it three and a half stars ) , but commented that the show was " too big " and had too many subplots . " The plots that Boardwalk Empire does settle on are too complex for a single episode , " he said , " ... while this style of drawn @-@ out , season @-@ long storytelling can work the writers don 't establish enough tension up front to carry the back @-@ heavy narrative . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its original airing at 9 pm , " Boardwalk Empire " gained a 2 @.@ 0 / 5 ratings share among adults aged 18 – 49 and garnered 4 @.@ 81 million viewers . The episode was re @-@ played twice that night , once at 10 : 15 pm and again at 11 : 30 pm Taking these broadcasts into account , a total of 7 @.@ 1 million Americans viewed the episode on the night of its original broadcast , and is the highest rated premiere for an HBO series since the pilot of Deadwood in March 2004 . Following this successful debut , HBO immediately renewed the series for a second season . 
 = Milan Lucic = 
 Milan Lucic ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ͡ <unk> ͡ ɕ ] ; born June 7 , 1988 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey left winger who is currently playing for the Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He played major junior hockey with the Vancouver Giants in the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) for three seasons and captured a Memorial Cup , while being named tournament MVP in 2007 . He was selected 50th overall in the 2006 NHL Entry Draft and made the Bruins ' roster as a 19 @-@ year @-@ old in 2007 – 08 . Three years later , he won a Stanley Cup with the Bruins . He spent the first eight seasons of his NHL career with Boston prior to joining Los Angeles in June 2015 . 
 Internationally , he captained the Canadian national junior team at the 2007 Super Series . Lucic plays physically in the style of a power forward . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lucic was born in East Vancouver to Serbian couple <unk> " Dobro " <unk> and <unk> Kesa . His father , a longshoreman , emigrated from Yugoslavia ( now Bosnia and Herzegovina ) when he was 27 , while his mother arrived from Yugoslavia ( now Croatia ) with her family at the age of two . He has a younger brother named Nikola and an older brother named Jovan . His maternal uncle , Dan Kesa , is a retired NHL right winger who played for the Vancouver Canucks , Pittsburgh Penguins , Tampa Bay Lightning , and Dallas Stars . 
 Growing up , Lucic attended Killarney Secondary in Vancouver . He was a fan of the hometown Vancouver Canucks and has singled out power forward Todd Bertuzzi as one of his favourite players when following the team . At the age of 15 , he was diagnosed with Scheuermann 's disease , a condition that can cause the upper back to curve and has given Lucic a hunched @-@ over posture . 
 Lucic played minor hockey ( <unk> ) in Vancouver , but nearly quit the sport after being passed up in the 2003 WHL Bantam Draft . He was invited to play for the Coquitlam Express of the Junior A British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) , but was further demoralized when he initially failed to make the team out of rookie camp . He agreed to play , instead , for the Junior B Delta Ice Hawks , but later played his way onto the Express after five games . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur = = = 
 Lucic began his junior career with the Coquitlam Express of the BCHL in 2004 – 05 . In the same season , he made his major junior debut with the Vancouver Giants , his hometown Western Hockey League ( WHL ) team , playing in one regular @-@ season game and two playoff games . He joined the Giants full @-@ time in 2005 – 06 , scoring 19 points in 62 games . He added seven points in 18 playoff games to help the Giants to a WHL title and an appearance in the 2006 Memorial Cup . In the off @-@ season , he was selected 50th overall by the Boston Bruins in the second round of the 2006 NHL Entry Draft . Bruins management had considered taking Lucic earlier in the second round with the 37th overall pick , but chose defenceman Yuri Alexandrov instead . Bruins Director of Scouting Scott Bradley admitted he did not expect Lucic to still be available with the 50th pick , adding , " We were fortunate to get him . " 
 The following season , in 2006 – 07 , Lucic emerged as one of the Giants ' leaders , finishing first in team scoring with 68 points in 70 games . He added 19 points in 22 post @-@ season games as the Giants lost the WHL Finals to the Medicine Hat Tigers in seven games . Despite losing the WHL title , Vancouver appeared in the 2007 Memorial Cup as tournament hosts . Lucic and the Giants met Medicine Hat once more in the tournament final , capturing the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) title by a 3 – 1 score . Lucic assisted on Michal Řepík 's tournament @-@ winning goal with five minutes to play in regulation . He finished the tournament tied for the lead in scoring with Řepík ( with more goals , Řepík was awarded the Ed Chynoweth Trophy as leading scorer ) and earned the Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy as tournament MVP . 
 Nearly four years after his last junior game , Lucic was honoured by the Giants prior to a game against the Chilliwack Bruins on February 25 , 2011 . Dubbed " Milan Lucic Night , " he was added to the club 's Ring of Honour , showcasing the top Giants alumni of all @-@ time . The first 500 game @-@ attendees were also given free Lucic bobblehead dolls . As part of the team 's ten @-@ year anniversary , he was also voted by fans as the team 's best player of all @-@ time . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 = = = = Boston Bruins ( 2007 @-@ 2015 ) = = = = 
 In the 2007 off @-@ season , Lucic signed an entry @-@ level contract with the Bruins on August 2 . He had been chosen as the Giants ' next team captain , but made the Bruins ' 2007 – 08 opening roster out of training camp . He played in his first career NHL game on October 5 , 2007 , a 4 – 1 loss to the Dallas Stars , in which he fought opposing forward Brad Winchester . His first goal came a week later on October 12 against Jonathan Bernier , a game winner , in an 8 – 6 win against the Los Angeles Kings . By also fighting Kings forward <unk> <unk> and notching an assist , he recorded a Gordie Howe hat trick ( an unofficial statistic constituting a goal , an assist and a fight in one game ) . Unsure of whether the Bruins would keep him or return him to junior , he stayed in a downtown hotel in Boston to start the season . However , Lucic made enough of an impression during his first set of games with the Bruins , showing grit and consistent willingness to fight ( he recorded 13 fighting majors in his rookie season ) , that they decided to keep him in the lineup . Bruins management informed the Giants prior to Lucic 's tenth game , accounting for the NHL 's nine @-@ game maximum for junior @-@ eligible players to stay with their NHL club without initiating their contract . He was chosen to participate in the 2008 NHL YoungStars Game and finished his rookie campaign with eight goals and 27 points . Towards the end of the season , he was voted by Bruins fans for the team 's Seventh Player Award for exceeding expectations . Matched up against the first @-@ seeded Montreal Canadiens in the opening round , Lucic scored his first Stanley Cup playoff goal in Game 3 on April 13 , 2008 . He finished his first NHL post @-@ season with two goals as the Bruins were eliminated by the Canadiens in seven games . 
 Early into the 2008 – 09 season , Lucic recorded his first career NHL hat @-@ trick and added an assist in a 5 – 4 win against the Atlanta Thrashers on October 25 , 2008 . Later that week , Lucic made a much @-@ publicized return to his hometown in a game against the Vancouver Canucks , which featured a picture of him as a baby on the back page of Vancouver 's The Province newspaper . Earlier in the year , Lucic 's 2007 Memorial Cup ring had been stolen from his home in East Vancouver on July 10 , 2008 . In a private ceremony before the game against the Canucks , he was presented a replacement ring by Vancouver Giants ownership . 
 Lucic was chosen to his second YoungStars Game in January 2009 . However , he did not compete for the sophomores in Montreal due to an undisclosed upper @-@ body injury . Near the end of the season , on April 4 , 2009 , Lucic was awarded the Bruins ' Eddie Shore Award for hustle and determination . He finished his second NHL season improving to 17 goals and 42 points in 72 games , while playing predominantly on a line with the Bruins ' top centre , Marc Savard . 
 Entering the 2009 playoffs with the Bruins as the first seed in the Eastern Conference , Lucic received a one @-@ game suspension after delivering a cross @-@ check to the head of Montreal Canadiens forward Maxim Lapierre in Game 2 of the first round . While the Bruins argued that Lucic used predominantly his glove , rather than his stick , the League held its decision . After serving his suspension , Lucic and the Bruins went on to eliminate the Canadiens , advancing to the second round against the Carolina Hurricanes , who the Bruins lost to in seven games . Lucic added nine points in ten games in the playoffs . 
 With the 2009 – 10 season marking the final year of his original entry @-@ level contract , it was announced on October 6 , 2009 , that Lucic had been signed to a three @-@ year , US $ 12 @.@ 25 million contract extension with the Bruins through to the 2012 – 13 season . The deal is structured at US $ 4 million for the first two seasons and US $ 4 @.@ 25 million in the third , a raise from his US $ 685 @,@ 000 base salary in 2009 – 10 . Ten days later , on October 16 , he suffered a broken finger requiring surgery in a game against the Dallas Stars while hitting defenceman Stéphane <unk> . Lucic returned to the Bruins lineup on November 19 , but was injured again four games later , suffering a sprained ankle in a game against the Minnesota Wild on November 25 . His left leg had buckled from underneath him while reaching behind him to receive a pass from teammate Dennis Wideman . Missing an additional 18 games , Lucic was limited to 50 contests in his third NHL season . His play was perceived by Head Coach Claude Julien to have suffered following the two injuries ; he recorded nine goals and 20 points to finish the regular season . He added nine points in 13 playoff games as the Bruins were eliminated in the second round by the Philadelphia Flyers . They became the third team in NHL history to lose a playoff series after having led three games to none . All five goals Lucic scored in the playoffs were recorded in the second round , including two in the deciding seventh game , which the Bruins lost 4 – 3 . 
 In the second month of the 2010 – 11 season , Lucic recorded a natural hat @-@ trick on November 18 , 2010 , during a 4 – 0 win over the Florida Panthers . Later in the campaign , he was fined $ 3 @,@ 500 by the NHL for his actions during a game against Atlanta on December 23 . After Lucic was hit by opposing defenceman Freddy Meyer , teammate Andrew Ference engaged Meyer in a fight . In the ensuing scrum , Lucic punched Meyer as the two were being restrained by referees , resulting in a match penalty . Three days following the game , Lucic received a $ 2 @,@ 500 fine for his punch and an additional $ 1 @,@ 000 for an obscene gesture he had made to players on the Thrashers ' bench immediately afterwards . In January 2011 , he missed three games with a shoulder injury . Lucic completed the season with a career @-@ high 30 goals , 32 assists and 62 points in 79 games . He led the Bruins in goal @-@ scoring while tying for the points lead with centre David Krejčí . Entering the 2011 playoffs as the third seed in the East , the Bruins eliminated the Montreal Canadiens , Philadelphia Flyers and Tampa Bay Lightning in the first three rounds , en route to the Stanley Cup Finals against Vancouver . Although Lucic scored below his regular @-@ season pace during the post @-@ season with 12 points ( five goals and seven assists ) in 25 games , he helped the Bruins to their first Stanley Cup since 1972 , as the team defeated the Canucks in Game 7 of the Finals . It was later reported that Lucic was playing through a couple of injuries during the playoffs . During the Eastern Conference Finals , he suffered a broken toe after blocking a shot from teammate Tyler Seguin during practice . He also struggled with a sinus infection , which was part of a larger problem in his right nostril that traced back to the end of the 2009 – 10 season and caused improper breathing . Lucic underwent surgery in the off @-@ season to repair the sinus . 
 In August 2011 , Lucic had his customary day in possession of the Stanley Cup , which he spent in Vancouver . While it is traditional for players to host public celebrations with the trophy in their hometowns , Lucic chose to keep the day private , explaining that " I grew up a Canucks fan . I know how it is . " Following the Canucks ' defeat in the Finals , fans had staged an hours @-@ long riot in Downtown Vancouver . More personally , posters of Lucic at a local cultural community centre were defaced . Also , an appearance by Lucic at a Greek festival in Vancouver sparked a public brawl ; The Vancouver Sun reported that Lucic did not throw any punches . While Lucic 's day with the Cup was private , many of his functions were held in public venues , which were reportedly well received by passers @-@ by . He brought the trophy to his hometown church , St. Archangel Michael Serbian Orthodox Church in Burnaby , for a gathering of approximately 350 people and on a harbour cruise with friends and family . He finished the day atop Grouse Mountain , the same place where he and his Vancouver Giants teammates took the Memorial Cup after their CHL victory in 2007 . Months later , in February 2012 , the church he brought the trophy to was vandalized . 
 A month and a half into the 2011 – 12 season , Lucic received considerable attention for a hit against opposing goaltender Ryan Miller during a game against the Buffalo Sabres . Miller had come out of his net to play a puck that Lucic last touched midway between the centre line and the Sabres ' blue line . As Miller shot the puck towards the end @-@ boards , Lucic collided with him heavily , knocking him to the ice . Miller was diagnosed with a concussion and was sidelined for several games ; he also heavily criticized Lucic for his actions and called him a " gutless piece of shit " in post @-@ game comments . The day after the hit , the NHL held a hearing with Lucic and later announced that he would not be suspended for the play , citing that the minor penalty for charging that was assessed during the game was sufficient . A few weeks after this incident , he received a one @-@ game suspension for an illegal hit on Philadelphia forward Zac Rinaldo . Lucic hit Rinaldo from behind during a battle for the puck along the boards , although he was not seriously injured on the play . A short time into the 2013 – 14 season , Lucic scored his first @-@ ever NHL overtime goal to break a 2 – 2 tie game at home against the visiting Columbus Blue Jackets . 
 = = = = Los Angeles Kings ( 2015 @-@ 16 ) = = = = 
 On June 26 , 2015 , Lucic was traded to the Los Angeles Kings in exchange for goaltender Martin Jones , Colin Miller and the 13th overall pick ( Jakub <unk> ) in the 2015 NHL Entry Draft . Lucic excelled during his season with the Kings , playing a strong 2 @-@ way game while posting 20 goals , 35 assists for 55 points during the regular season . Lucic also added 3 assists in 5 games in the NHL Playoffs . 
 = = = = Edmonton Oilers ( 2016 @-@ present ) = = = = 
 As an unrestricted free agent , on the opening day of free agency , Lucic agreed to a 7 @-@ year $ 42 million contract with the Edmonton Oilers on July 1 , 2016 . Lucic will wear # 27 with the Oilers , as # 17 was retired by the Oilers . 
 = = International play = = 
 In the off @-@ season following Lucic 's MVP performance at the 2007 Memorial Cup , he was named team captain of Canada for the 2007 Super Series against Russia . The series , an eight @-@ game competition between Canada and Russia 's under @-@ 20 teams , commemorated the 35th anniversary of the historic 1972 Summit Series . He recorded three assists as Canada won the series with seven wins and a tie . 
 Two years later , Lucic was invited to Canada 's summer orientation camp in Calgary for the 2010 Winter Olympics . He was not , however , chosen to the final roster . Lucic was also invited to the orientation camp for the 2014 Winter Olympics , but again did not make the final roster . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lucic married his longtime girlfriend Brittany Carnegie in the summer of 2012 . The couple has two daughters , Valentina and <unk> . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International statistics = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = Major junior = = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 * Did not play due to injury 
 = = = Boston Bruins = = = 
 = 2005 Azores subtropical storm = 
 The 2005 Azores subtropical storm was the nineteenth nameable storm of the record @-@ breaking 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . It was not officially named by the National Hurricane Center as it was operationally classified as a non @-@ tropical low . The storm developed in the eastern Atlantic Ocean out of a low @-@ pressure area that gained subtropical characteristics on October 4 . The storm was short @-@ lived , crossing over the Azores later on October 4 before becoming extratropical again on October 5 . No damage or fatalities were reported . After being absorbed into a cold front , the system went on to become Hurricane Vince , which affected the Iberian Peninsula . 
 Months after the hurricane season , when the National Hurricane Center was performing its annual review of the season and its named storms , forecasters Jack Beven and Eric Blake identified this previously unnoticed subtropical storm . Despite its unusual location and wide wind field , the system had a well @-@ defined center convecting around a warm core — the hallmark of a subtropical storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The system originated out of an upper @-@ level low just west of the Canary Islands on September 28 . The low organized itself over the next several days , producing several bursts of convection . While remaining non @-@ tropical with a cold core it moved gradually west to northwest . On October 3 , it became a broad surface low about 400 nautical miles ( 460 mi , 740 km ) southwest of São Miguel Island in the Azores . Early on October 4 , convection increased as the surface low organized itself , and the system became a subtropical depression . Around the same time , the depression turned northeast into a warm sector ahead of an oncoming cold front and strengthened into a subtropical storm . The system continued to track northeast and strengthened slightly , reaching its peak intensity of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) as it approached the Azores that evening . After tracking through the Azores , the storm weakened slightly as it moved to the north @-@ northeast . Through an interaction with the cold front early on October 5 the subtropical storm became extratropical . The system was fully absorbed by the front later that day . The newly absorbed system would separate from the dissolving frontal system and become Subtropical Storm Vince on October 8 . 
 At the time , the system was not believed to have been subtropical . However , there were several post @-@ season findings that confirmed that the system was indeed a subtropical storm . The first was the cloud pattern , in which it had deep convection around the center and was better organized with a well @-@ defined center of circulation . In addition , the system had a warm core more typical of tropical cyclones as opposed to the cold core of extratropical cyclones . The warm @-@ core nature also meant that there were no warm or cold fronts attached to the system , as temperatures did not change ahead of and behind the system until the unrelated cold front passed the Azores . Satellite imagery suggested that the system was briefly a tropical storm as the warm core was found ; however , the widespread wind field and the presence of an upper @-@ level trough confirmed that it was merely subtropical . 
 = = Impact , classification , and records = = 
 Tropical storm @-@ force winds were reported across parts of the Azores , primarily on the eastern islands . The strongest winds were reported on Santa Maria Island , where 10 @-@ minute sustained winds reached 49 mph ( 79 km / h ) with gusts to 59 mph ( 94 km / h ) . Ponta Delgada faced 38 mph ( 61 km / h ) winds , with the peak recorded gust being 52 mph ( 85 km / h ) . No damage or fatalities were reported . 
 The storm was not classified as a subtropical storm until April 10 , 2006 , after a reassessment by the National Hurricane Center . Every year , the NHC re @-@ analyzes the systems of the past hurricane season and revises the storm history frequently if there is new data that was operationally unavailable . If the storm had been operationally recognized it would have been named Subtropical Storm Tammy , and storms forming after October 4 would have been moved one name down the list . Hurricane Wilma would have been given the name Alpha : a name that , had it been retired like Wilma was , could not be replaced by an " alternate " Greek letter , as is the convention with names on the standard A – W list . When the system strengthened into a subtropical storm on October 4 , it was the earliest the 19th tropical or subtropical storm of the season formed . The old record was held by an unnamed storm in the 1933 Atlantic hurricane season , which formed on October 25 , 1933 . It was also only the fourth time that 19 storms formed in a season . 
 = Taxiride = 
 Taxiride is an Australian rock band . Formed in 1997 , the band consists of lead singer Jason Singh , guitarists Dan Hall and Tim Wild , and drummer Sean McLeod . 
 Prior to formation , the four founding members of Taxiride — Singh , Wild , Hall , and Tim Watson — had been playing in cover bands around Melbourne , travelling around in a yellow Ford Falcon EB ex @-@ taxi . The quartet recorded an EP , which a taxi @-@ driving friend of theirs helped promote . They took their name from the experience had by passengers hearing their music on a taxi ride . After their music was heard by an executive from record label Warner , the band signed a contract and released their debut album , Imaginate , in 1999 . This was followed by 2002 's Garage Mahal . Both albums were certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . 2005 's Axiomatic did not follow in the success of its predecessors . 
 Taxiride 's musical style has changed significantly over the course of their career — what began as a pop / pub rock band on their first two albums moved to a much more heavy sound on later works . Throughout their history , the band has had multiple lead singers and songwriters on the majority of their songs . As of 2006 , the future of Taxiride has been uncertain . They have continued to tour , mostly as the supporting act for larger names , however Singh is now working on a solo album and Taxiride 's website states that the band is on a hiatus . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early work ( 1997 – 1999 ) = = = 
 Prior to forming Taxiride , Tim Watson , Tim Wild , Jason Singh , and Dan Hall had each played in cover bands across Melbourne . Watson and Wild began writing together in 1997 in Camberwell , Melbourne , and soon recruited Singh as an additional vocalist . The trio invited Hall , whom Wild first encountered busking , to join the group , and he accepted . The band named themselves Taxiride because they had given some of their early work to a friend of theirs , a taxi driver , who had tested these songs on passengers . The group produced a demo at Melbourne 's Secret Sound Studios , and used it to land a contract with Warner in Australia . Meanwhile , a friend of the group passed their work onto a Sire Records executive in the U.S. , who signed them despite the group being unknown . 
 = = = Pop success ( 1999 – 2002 ) = = = 
 In 1998 , Taxiride relocated to Ocean Way Recording studios in Los Angeles to work with producer Jack Joseph Puig on their debut album . Imaginate , released on 1 June 1999 in the U.S. and 18 October in Australia , reached number one on the ARIA Albums Chart , with debut single " Get Set " reaching number eight on the ARIA Singles Chart , number 41 on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and number 36 on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart . " Get Set " won the 1999 ARIA Award for " Breakthrough Artist - Single " and was nominated for " Best Pop Release " , while Imaginate was nominated for " Breakthrough Artist - Album " and " Highest Selling Album " in 2000 . Imaginate was certified double platinum , indicating an excess of 140 @,@ 000 sales . 
 Taxiride wrote the majority of the album in a studio , and the final product generally used songs that band members had worked on individually . Imaginate earned a mediocre reception from critics . Steve <unk> of Allmusic gave it three stars , calling the album a " slick ... bid for pop radio " . The use of a sitar on " Get Set " was praised , as was the Beatles influence and Puig 's production . To promote the album , Taxiride toured Australia , America , Japan , and Europe , with the album selling well in all areas . Despite the album 's success , Hall , then lead singer , left the band to work independently and with his other pet project , Airway Lanes . Hall said he was unhappy with " the pop direction the band was taking " . 
 Following Hall 's departure , the band recruited drummer Sean McLeod and bass guitarist Andy McIvor , and began work on their second album . Garage Mahal was released on 5 August 2002 , and produced three singles : " Creepin ' Up Slowly " , " How I Got This Way " , and " Afterglow " . All three songs charted in Australia ; " Creepin ' Up Slowly " was the most successful at number six , also reaching number 19 in New Zealand . In 2002 , Garage Mahal and " Creepin ' Up Slowly " were certified platinum by ARIA . 
 Much of Garage Mahal was written on the road , while touring , and as such had a different sound from the band 's prior work . Most of the writing was done in two places ; Mount Macedon in Victoria , and Palindrome Studio in Venice Beach , California , the home of producer Fred Maher . Mixing was done by David Way and Mike Shipley . Despite the change in sound , the band were still seen as purely a pop band — Australian Musician magazine claimed this was because they spent too much time overseas . Gary Glauber of PopMatters praised the album , noting it had not lost the quality of its predecessor , although it was a good deal heavier . Glauber reported on the overall high quality of songs , noting that " almost any of these songs could work as a single " , and calling the lyrics of " Creepin ' Up Slowly " " perpetually catchy " . Bernard Zuel of The Sydney Morning Herald said that the band did not hold back in their aim for American radio , calling the lyrics overly generic , and arguing the band only focused on their mainstream image . 
 = = = Independent and acoustic ( 2003 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Watson left Taxiride in 2003 , and the band began work on a new album . They decided to release independently after splitting up with Warner Music , and recorded at Wild 's Melbourne home for a total of 12 months . During that time , the band collaborated with vocalist Chris Bailey ( The Saints lead singer ) and Hall , who took time out from working with Airway Lanes . Taxiride 's third album , Axiomatic , was released on 5 September 2005 , shortly after the first single , " Oh Yeah " . It would be the only song to chart from the album , reaching number 40 in Australia . To support the album , the band toured India as part of VH1 's Rock Rumble . 
 In creating Axiomatic , Taxiride worked independently , moving away from record labels in an attempt to make an album that would better reflect the music they wanted to produce . The band 's prior albums were described by Singh as being Americanised , and the band now wanted to make " an Australian record " . Pink Floyd and Led Zeppelin influences were common ; " Oh Yeah " was recorded using a vocoder , which was popular in the 1970s . The album was described as containing " heavier rock sounds " than its predecessors . 
 Following the release of Axiomatic , Wild and Singh began to write new songs , accompanied by Hall . The band 's first live album , Electrophobia , was released on 16 September 2006 on Australian record label Liberation . It features songs from the band 's first three albums , all recorded in a standalone session in a Melbourne church on 26 May 2006 . The production was arranged by Rob John ( producer for Led Zeppelin and The Tea Party ) . 
 Andy McIvor left the band in 2006 , and is now playing with former Australian crawl member James Reyne 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Taxiride is primarily a pop rock band , also drawing influences from pub rock . On Electrophobia , they showed a different side , playing acoustic music for the first time . The band 's style has progressed over their career ; the pop direction the band took in the Imaginate era caused Hall to leave the group , only to return for heavier rock collaborations in the Axiomatic days . Allmusic 's Ed Nimmervoll said that the band distanced themselves from the boy band generation , comparing them to Crosby , Stills , Nash , & Young . Steve <unk> , in reviewing Imaginate , related the album to the pop work of boy bands The Beatles , The Beach Boys , and The Everly Brothers , labeling the album as a bid for pop radio . 
 The International Herald Tribune 's Mike Zwerin noted the band 's style of having " four lead singers , four potential front men " — Imaginate 's strength was in their collective sound , argued Zwerin . On Garage Mahal , Taxiride had three active singer @-@ songwriters , with their strong opinions on musical content clashing frequently . Singh told Dan <unk> of Metropolis Tokyo that the arguments came about " because we were very passionate about what goes down onto tape " , and so they were resolved by recognising the overall goal of the band 's work . 
 = = Band member timeline = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Imaginate ( 1999 ) 
 Garage Mahal ( 2002 ) 
 Axiomatic ( 2005 ) 
 Live albums 
 Electrophobia ( 2006 ) 
 = Steph Davies = 
 Stephanie Ann Davies , commonly known as Steph Davies , ( born 21 October 1987 ) is an international cricketer who has represented the England women 's cricket team in four One Day Internationals ( ODIs ) . A right @-@ arm medium @-@ fast bowler and right @-@ handed attacking batsman , she has played for Somerset women since 2001 . 
 After making her county debut for Somerset at the age of 13 , Davies quickly progressed into the England development and youth sides . She toured Australia with England Under @-@ 19s aged 15 and after two successful European tournaments , she captained the England Under @-@ 21s to victory in the 2006 Under @-@ 21 European Championships . After more matches for the development squad , and a number of tour matches for England , she made her ODI debut during the 2007 – 08 tour of Australia and New Zealand , playing the fifth and final one @-@ day match against Australia , and three of the five matches against New Zealand . Following this , she continued to be involved in the England Academy , but has not made any further ODI appearances . In 2009 , she took on the captaincy of Somerset . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 After watching cricket with her father , Davies began playing Kwik cricket , and then played age @-@ group cricket for local boys ' teams , including Mountain Ash and Mid Glamorgan . At the age of 13 , she took part in a women 's trial match , and was selected to play with the older women cricketers in the South West of England . At this time , she began to play women 's cricket for Somerset Wanderers as well as her boys ' matches . She soon progressed into the Somerset county side , making her debut that same year , aged 13 against Lancashire . She played four of Somerset 's five Women 's County Championship matches in 2001 , and claimed her first wicket for the side in the third of these , trapping Derbyshire 's Jane Morris leg before wicket during an economical spell in which she conceded only five runs off four overs . 
 Davies progressed quickly into the England development squad , representing them in a 2002 match against British Universities Sports Association . She also played a match for Wales , helping her native country defeat Scotland by seven wickets . Although she did not appear for Somerset in the County Championship during the season , she did help Somerset Wanderers reach the semi @-@ final of the ECB Women 's National Knockout . In 2002 , she made her first appearance in the Super Fours — a competition in which the England selectors place the 48 leading players into four teams — playing one match for the Knight Riders . 
 = = = England Under @-@ 19 debut = = = 
 She was chosen as part of the England Under @-@ 19s squad to tour Australia during the English winter of 2002 – 03 , in which the England side took part in the Women 's Australian Under @-@ 19 Championships . Davies had little impact in the competition , claiming two wickets from her nine overs , and scoring eleven runs during her two innings . She also played in one of the two matches against the Australia Under @-@ 19s side , bowling six overs in which she claimed one wicket . 
 In 2003 , Davies was again selected for the Super Fours competition , appearing in three matches for the Braves without standing out . She played five County Championship matches for Somerset , moving up the batting order ; after batting at number four in her first match of the season , she was promoted to open the innings for the remainder of the season . The move proved profitable , she passed her previous highest total during her first match in the new position , scoring 35 against Middlesex , and after a couple of lower totals , she made her highest score in women 's List A cricket when she scored 70 against Hampshire . Despite this move she remained in the lower order on her next international appearance , a 50 @-@ over contest for the England development squad which served as a warm @-@ up for the touring South Africa national women 's cricket team . She claimed three wickets during her seven overs as the English side won by seven wickets . 
 Twenty20 cricket was introduced into the English women 's domestic game for the first time in 2004 as part of the Super Fours competition . Playing her first match of this format , Davies took four wickets for Braves , helping them to a 12 run victory in the semi @-@ final of the competition . Davies had some success in the 50 @-@ over tournament ; although she only claimed two wickets in her four matches , she boasted the third lowest economy rate . She continued to open the batting for Somerset , but did not pass 50 runs in a match during her four matches for the county . Upon the conclusion of the English domestic season , Davies travelled to Ireland as part of the England squad to compete in the 2004 Women 's European Under @-@ 21 Championships . Davies played two different roles for England during the tournament ; in the first match she was used purely as an opening batsman , scoring 25 runs off 27 balls to help chase down a small Scotland total of 57 in under 10 overs . In the subsequent two matches , she batted as part of the middle order , and bowled at least five overs in each match . Against the Netherlands , she bowled very economically , finishing with figures of 1 / 5 off her 5 @.@ 3 overs . England won all three of their matches to win the competition . 
 During 2005 , Davies passed 50 twice , making 65 against Nottinghamshire and 51 against Berkshire in the second half of the season . Due to her improved performances with the bat in the previous season , Davies was promoted to bat slightly higher in the order for the Braves , playing two matches at number five and two at number three . At the close of the season , she played for England A women in a match against the senior England side , scoring 8 runs after opening the batting . She was then selected as part of the England Development Squad to compete in the 2005 Women 's European Championship in Wales . As with her appearances in the Under @-@ 21 European Championship , her role altered from match to match . On the two occasions on which she was asked to bat , she scored 23 at number three against Ireland , and 31 opening the innings against Netherlands . She finished the tournament as the leading bowler in terms of wickets , bowling average and economy . In total she claimed nine wickets in her four matches , coming at an average of 5 @.@ 88 . The highlight of her bowling came in the match against Scotland , when Davies collected four wickets in 6 @.@ 2 overs , conceding just five runs during this time . 
 Davies had a reasonably quiet 2006 domestic season with both bat and ball . In four 50 @-@ over matches for Somerset she scored 34 runs at an average of 8 @.@ 50 , and took four wickets at an average of 33 @.@ 75 , taking a wicket in each match . Davies was again selected for the Super Fours , this time playing for the Emeralds . She made 74 runs at 14 @.@ 80 in five matches with a highest score of 29 , but was ineffective with the ball , taking 2 wickets at 74 @.@ 00 . Davies performed well for England A during a match against the touring Indian side , restricting the visitors to just fifteen runs off her ten overs , taking two wickets as she did so . Opening both the batting and bowling for England in this match , she then added an unbeaten 27 , albeit off 77 balls , to help England A secure victory via the Duckworth – Lewis method . She was named as captain of the England Under @-@ 21 side for the 2006 Women 's European Under @-@ 21 Championships , and led her side to three large victories to retain the competition title . She finished the tournament near the top of both the batting and bowling averages charts , boosted by her performance against Ireland , in which she took three wickets for just six runs conceded in her bowling duties , and followed it up with a score of 31 as her side chased a low Irish total of 69 to win . 
 = = = Full international debut = = = 
 In June 2007 , Davies made her first appearance for the senior England side , albeit in a non @-@ international match against an England Cricket Board Invitational XI . She was not required to bat or bowl in the match , which England won by five wickets . As the English summer continued , she played three matches for the England development squad , making scores of 34 and 18 in matches against South Africa , and 15 against England . In November 2007 , she was named as part of the England squad which travelled to Australia and New Zealand , her first tour as a member of the senior England side . She was selected to play in two of the three warm @-@ up matches on the tour , but did not make her ODI debut until the fifth and final match of the series . Coming on to bowl as the first change , Davies claimed four wickets in her first international innings , trapping Lisa Sthalekar , Kate Blackwell and Leonie Coleman leg before wicket , and having Kirsten Pike stumped off the last ball of the innings . Despite her performance , Australia won the match by 41 runs . After playing the only warm @-@ up match in New Zealand , in which she scored 25 from the lower order , Davies missed the first ODI , returning for the second . She bowled six wicket @-@ less overs in this match , and was not required to bat as England chased down the hosts total for the loss of only one wicket . Her bowling was used slightly more in the next match , claiming the wicket of Amy Satterthwaite during her nine overs . As with the previous match , her batting was not required as England reached the required target with six wickets remaining . She added one more wicket the fourth ODI , but there was no result as the match was washed out , leaving Davies without a batting innings during the series . 
 In September 2007 , Davies started studying Sport and Physical Education at the University of Wales Institute , Cardiff , meaning that she had to juggle her cricket career with her academic studies in 2008 . She represented England sides twice , both in early August , playing for the academy against Ireland and for the development squad the following day against the senior England side . As an MCC Young Cricketer , she was also selected to play in an MCC side against India later in the same month . She played five Somerset 's six County Championship matches , her best performance of the season coming against Warwickshire , when she claimed a wicket and scored 25 runs to help her county to victory . She also made one appearance in the Super Fours for Rubies . 
 = = = Somerset captain = = = 
 Davies was named Somerset captain for the 2009 season , taking over from Hannah Lloyd , who continued to play for the side . In her first match as captain — against Surrey on 10 May 2009 — she scored a half @-@ century , and shared a 128 @-@ run partnership with fellow opener Sophie Le Marchand , helping her side to a 21 run victory . That score remained her best of the season , and in a rebuilding season for the county , she finished as the leading run @-@ scorer , with 217 . She also finished the season as Somerset 's most economical bowler , and her seven wickets meant that she trailed only Izzy Westbury among wicket @-@ takers . She continued to play for both England Academy and MCC Young Cricketers , and represented the academy in two Twenty20 matches against Pakistan prior to the 2009 ICC Women 's World Twenty20 . She continued as captain in 2010 , and in Somerset 's opening fixture of the season , against Berkshire , she claimed her fourth List A four @-@ wicket haul . 
 = Widerøe Flight 710 = 
 Widerøe Flight 710 , commonly known as the Torghatten Accident ( Norwegian : Torghatten @-@ ulykken ) , was a controlled flight into terrain into the mountain of Torghatten in Brønnøy , Norway . The Widerøe @-@ operated de Havilland Canada Dash 7 crashed on 6 May 1988 at 20 : 29 : 30 during approach to Brønnøysund Airport , Brønnøy . All thirty @-@ six people on board LN @-@ <unk> were killed ; the crash remains the deadliest accident of the Dash 7 and in Northern Norway . The direct cause of the accident was that the aircraft had descended from 500 meters to 170 meters ( 1 @,@ 500 – 550 ft ) at 8 nautical miles ( 15 km ; 9 @.@ 2 mi ) instead of 4 nautical miles ( 7 @.@ 4 km ; 4 @.@ 6 mi ) from the airport . 
 An investigation found several shortcomings in the airline 's operating procedures , in particular lack of proper cockpit communication and mutual control of the descent and approach plans . This was in part caused by the airline electing to not follow the Sterile Cockpit Rule and that a passenger was sitting in a cockpit jump seat during the flight . The investigating commission also found lack of proper pilot training in the airline . Flight 710 was the second of four Widerøe accidents between 1982 and 1993 , all of which revealed shortcomings in the airline 's operations and internal control . 
 = = Flight = = 
 The accident aircraft was a four @-@ engine de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 7 Dash 7 Series 102 , with serial number 28 , built in 1980 . It was bought used by Widerøe in 1985 and registered as LN @-@ <unk> on 8 November 1985 . Its certificate of airworthiness was last renewed on 4 November 1987 and was valid until 30 November 1988 . The aircraft had operated 16 @,@ 934 hours and 32 @,@ 347 cycles prior to its last flight . The last A @-@ check took place on 15 April 1988 , after which the aircraft had flown 147 hours and 30 cycles . The 58 @-@ year @-@ old captain held a D @-@ certificate issued 8 April 1981 and was last renewed on 11 December 1987 . He took his initial license in 1949 and had worked as a pilot in Widerøe since 1 April 1960 . At the time of his last renewal , he had flown 19 @,@ 886 hours , of which 2 @,@ 849 hours were with the Dash 7 . He had completed periodical flight training with the Dash 7 on 8 March 1988 . He had just come home from a six @-@ week vacation in Spain . 
 The first officer was 31 years old and held a C @-@ certificate which limited him to being first officer on the Dash 7 . The certificate was issued on 5 January 1987 and had been valid for the Dash 7 since 23 February 1988 . He had started his flight training in 1977 and had completed it in the United States in 1979 . He was hired as a pilot for Widerøe on 6 February 1986 , where he had originally served on the de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 6 Twin Otter . He was checked out as first officer on the Dash 7 in February 1988 . He had a total flight time of 6 @,@ 458 hours , of which 85 were on the Dash 7 . The flight attendant was 28 years old and had worked for Widerøe since 1983 . 
 The aircraft had been used during the morning of 6 May on a multi @-@ leg flight from Bodø Airport to Trondheim Airport , Værnes and back . It had then flown back to Trondheim where it changed crew . They had arrived at Trondheim with a flight at 18 : 50 on 5 May and left the hotel in Trondheim at 16 : 15 on 6 May . Flight 710 was scheduled to fly from Trondheim via Namsos Airport , Høknesøra ; Brønnøysund Airport , Brønnøy ; and Sandnessjøen Airport , Stokka . It departed Værnes at 19 : 23 , one and a half hours after scheduled , because of technical problems with another different aircraft . Flight 710 had a crew of three : a captain , a first officer and a flight attendant . The aircraft was packed and therefore a jump seat in the cockpit was used by a passenger , bringing the number of people on board to 52 . 
 The aircraft made a stop @-@ over at Namsos , where sixteen of the passengers disembarked . This reduced the number of passengers on board to thirty @-@ three , but the passenger occupying the jump seat continued to sit there on the next leg . The captain was the flying pilot for the segment . The aircraft departed Namsos at 20 : 07 and contacted Trondheim Air Traffic Control Center ( ATCC ) at 20 : 13 to receive permission to ascend to flight level 90 ( FL 90 ) , which was received . During the flight , the passenger in the jump seat held a conversation with the captain and asked several questions regarding the operations . The first officer did not participate in this discussions , and it was he who conducted radio contact with air traffic control and the airline 's operations ' center . 
 The first officer contacted the airline at 20 : 16 and informed that they expected to arrive at 20 : 32 . At 20 : 20 : 29 , the aircraft asked permission from Trondheim ATCC to switch to Brønnøysund Aerodrome Flight Information Service ( AFIS ) , which was granted . The aircraft announced at 20 : 20 : 42 that they would start the descent and would switch to Brønnøysund AFIS . Contact was made at 20 : 22 : 34 , at which time the aircraft announced it was 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ; 29 mi ) from the airport and at FL 80 . AFIS informed that there were no known aircraft in the area and that runway 22 was in use ; wind was 5 knots ( 9 km / h ; 6 mph ) from southeast , 5 nautical miles ( 9 km ; 6 mi ) visibility , a light shower and 6 ° C ( 43 ° F ) . At 20 : 23 : 22 the first officer held a 62 @-@ second conversation with the airline ordering a taxi for one of the passengers so he could reach his connecting ferry . 
 The captain asked for the descent checklist at 20 : 24 : 24 . The fasten seat belt sign was switched on and the flight attendant started the process of preparing the cabin for landing . At 20 : 24 : 46 the captain , as part of the checklist , informed the first officer that they would go down to 1 @,@ 500 meters ( 5 @,@ 000 ft ) at Torghatten and then down to 170 meters ( 550 ft ) . This was followed first by a partially unreadable conversation between the captain and the first officers , which included if they were to fill fuel , and then an unreadable conversation between the captain and the jump seat passenger . The direction of the VHF omnidirectional radio range ( VOR ) and distance measuring equipment ( DME ) at Brønnøysund was checked at 20 : 26 : 37 . 
 The approach checklist was started at 20 : 27 : 01 , at which time the aircraft 's altitude reached 500 meters ( 1 @,@ 500 ft ) . The first point on the checklist were not readable , but the last three were . At 20 : 27 : 32 the captain asked for flaps and landing gear , which were immediately deployed by the first officer and resulted in the aircraft gaining 70 meters ( 200 ft ) of altitude . The landing gears were confirmed locked at 20 : 28 : 00 . Four seconds later the passenger asked the captain if there were reserve systems which could be used if the landing gear did not deploy properly . At this point the aircraft started the descent from 500 meters ( 1 @,@ 500 ft ) . 
 AFIS asked for the aircraft 's position at 20 : 28 : 10 , and the first officer responded at 20 : 28 : 13 that it was 8 nautical miles ( 15 km ; 9 mi ) away . He asked AFIS for a wind check , and AFIS responded that it was from 220 degrees and 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 mph ) . The first officers confirmed the information at 20 : 28 : 24 . The aircraft reached 170 meters ( 550 ft ) altitude and remained at that height for the rest of the flight . A short conversation was initiated by the passenger at 20 : 28 : 55 . Three seconds later , the captain asked for " 25 degrees flaps and props fully fine " . This was confirmed by the first officer two seconds later . The pre @-@ landing checklist was completed between 20 : 29 : 04 and : 19 . 
 The autopilot had been used since 25 seconds after take @-@ off from Namsos and was used for the remainder of the flight . From 20 : 29 : 21 all four engines showed increasing torque and immediately before the crash the aircraft had shifted its angle from − 2 @.@ 5 degrees to 5 degrees . At 20 : 29 : 29 the ground proximity warning system showed ' minimum ' . The aircraft crashed into the western side Torghatten at 20 : 29 : 30 at 170 meters ( 560 ft ) elevation . 
 The aircraft flew into the mountain at an angle of 15 to 20 degrees , with the starboard side towards the mountain . The aircraft was ascending at a seven @-@ degree angle , plus / minus one degree . The tip of the starboard wing was the first to hit the mountain , followed by engine number four ( the right @-@ most ) . The engine was immediately torn off and the aircraft started to rotate . The aircraft started being torn in the back rib of the starboard wing . Then the nose and port wing from engine number two ( the inner ) hit a depression in the mountain @-@ face , causing engine number one to loosen from its nacelle and the port wing to break between the engines . At the same time the aircraft 's body was broken in two . The aircraft 's forward movement stopped , the wreck pieces rotated with the vertical stabilizer away from the mountain @-@ side , the port wing caught on fire and exploded and the rest of the aircraft fell down the slope . On the way down , the starboard wing caught on fire . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The commission found that the direct cause of the crash was that the approach was started 4 nautical miles ( 7 km ; 5 mi ) too early and that the aircraft therefore came below the height of the terrain . No specific reason for the early approach was found , although there were several non @-@ compliance by the crew members to regulations and procedures . Specifically , the commission pointed to the lack of internal control which would have identified operation shortcomings and the lack of proper cockpit procedures , especially regarding callouts . There were no technical faults to the aircraft , and the pilots had full control of the aircraft at the time of the collision , making it a controlled flight into terrain . 
 Interviews with random pilots in Widerøe showed that the airline had shortcomings in its training procedures , in part because it lacked a Dash 7 simulator . There was a culture in the airline to divert from cockpit procedures and cooperation . The flight plans often made procedures for mutual control of procedures impractical , and they were commonly skipped . The commission was of the impression that Widerøe 's transition from an all @-@ Twin Otter airline to also operate the more demanding Dash 7 was not properly carried out , which had resulted shortcomings in the training and operating procedures . All checklists during the flight were followed correctly . However , the pilots did not elect a method of double @-@ control of the descent and approach , such as by using briefings and callouts . 
 The pilots had several non @-@ <unk> to regulations in their descent . This included using " Torghatten " during the captain 's briefing , despite no marking on the map using this name , nor one being located close to the mountain . The aircraft was supposed to have flatted out at 750 meters ( 2 @,@ 500 ft ) , but instead this took place at 500 meters ( 1 @,@ 500 ft ) . The next descent was started at 8 nautical miles ( 15 km ; 9 mi ) instead of 4 nautical miles ( 7 km ; 5 mi ) from the airport and the aircraft thus came under permitted altitude . 
 The aircraft was using instrument flight rules ( IFR ) and Torghatten was covered in fog . The visibility was within the permitted range of IFR . The commission found five errors on Widerøe 's maps which could have influenced the accident . This included a formulation which gave the impression that DMR was not in use ; a closed " <unk> " marker beacon was still on the maps ; a vertical flight plan from <unk> was not included ; the height limitations in the accident area were noted through comments rather than through a graphical presentation ; and confusion as to when the timing of final approach should start . The commission also criticized the airline for its checklists instructing the pilots to one of VHF channels to the company frequency during descent , at a time when non @-@ safety @-@ related communication is unwanted . 
 Because the aircraft was fully booked , a passenger was allowed to sit in the jump seat in the cockpit . The passenger had no connection with the airline , but was granted permission by the captain via acquaintance in the airline . Several of the other passengers were employees in Widerøe and should — according to the airline 's rules — instead have been seated there . From Namsos to Brønnøysund there were available seats in the cabin , but the jump seat passenger continued to sit in the cockpit . The commission felt that the passenger 's conversation with the captain drew his attention and concentration away from his duties at a critical point of the flight . This also disrupted communication between the two pilots , resulting in the mutual control being disrupted . 
 = = Salvage and investigation = = 
 The aircraft crashed into Torghatten , which is located 5 nautical miles ( 9 km ; 6 mi ) south @-@ west of Brønnøysund Airport . The mountain is 271 meters ( 888 ft ) tall and is a distinct height in an area which is otherwise rather flat . The aircraft hit the western side of the mountain at a point where the terrain is forty degrees steep . The center line of the flight path is 800 meters ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) from Torghatten . The wreck was spread over an area 60 to 100 meters ( 200 to 330 ft ) below the point of impact . 
 AFIS made several attempts to call up the aircraft . It received a call from a resident close to Torghatten which said they had heard aircraft noise followed by a crash . Brønnøysund Fire Department and an ambulance helicopter with a doctor was dispatched to Torghatten . The rescue work was made difficult by low clouds , small fires and explosions . The terrain was difficult and the lack of daylight made assisting the situation difficult . A helicopter with medical personnel and the airport direct arrived at 21 : 25 , while a meeting place for the next of kin was established at the airport . At 23 : 30 the police stated that there was no hope of finding survivors and the scene changed from a search to an investigation scene . Due to the fog it was not possible to verify that all people had been killed until the next day . Seventy @-@ five people from the Home Guard participated in the salvage . 
 The Accident Investigation Board Norway was informed about the accident at 21 : 10 . Four members of the investigation commission were appointed , consisting of leader Lieutenant General Wilhelm Mohr , Pilot <unk> <unk> , Lieutenant Colonel Asbjørn Stein and Chief @-@ of @-@ Police Arnstein <unk> . Because of poor weather conditions , the commission was not assembled in Brønnøy until 15 : 00 on 7 May . The same day the National Criminal Investigation Service arrived to assist AIBN . Six people appointed by the Canadian Aviation Safety Board , including representatives from de Havilland Canada and Pratt & Whitney Canada , were sent to aid the investigation . Four representatives from Widerøe were available for consultation with the commission . The investigation commission was later supplemented by Psychologist Grethe Myhre and <unk> replaced by Arne <unk> . 
 The VOR / DME system was tested by the Civil Aviation Administration on 7 May and found to be working correctly . AIBN established a base of operations at the hangar at Brønnøysund Airport and used a helicopter to freight the pieces of the wreck there and bodies to Trondheim University Hospital for identification . Technical investigations started on 9 May . The aircraft was equipped with a flight data recorder and a cockpit voice recorder . Both were found intact and were decoded at the Air Accidents Investigation Branch in the United Kingdom . Improper use of the microphone made it difficult to hear the captain 's voice , but it was possible to reconstruct the conversations and line of events . A memorial service was held on 10 May and was attended by Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland . The last Home Guard personnel concluded their work on 11 May and the police concluded their investigations at Torghatten on 13 May . 
 In May 2013 the investigation board was made aware of that two passengers had each their <unk> <unk> @-@ 450 mobile telephone with them on the flights . As this had not been mentioned in the original report , AIBN conducted a review of the issue and especially if the telephones could have influenced the vertical navigation . They concluded in December that this was not the case , as there were no indications of interferences and that there are no instances where electromagnetic interference has been a contributing cause to an aviation accident . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Flight 710 was the second fatal and write @-@ off accident of a Dash 7 , and remains the deadliest . It was at the time the third @-@ deadliest aviation accident in Norwegian history , after the <unk> Accident in 1961 and Braathens SAFE Flight 239 in 1972 . It has since been relegated to the fourth @-@ deadliest by Vnukovo Airlines Flight 2801 . It remains the deadliest accident in Northern Norway . 
 The commission recommended that Widerøe update its maps for Brønnøysund , review and improve its landing procedures , improve its internal control procedures to ensure that pilots follow the airline 's flight operation regulations , and introduce the Sterile Cockpit Rule . The commission recommended that the Civil Aviation Administration change the flight paths at Brønnøysund to increase the altitude around Torghatten . Flight 710 was the second of four fatal Widerøe accidents which occurred between 1982 and 1993 . In the first accident , Flight 933 , a poor cockpit culture had also been discovered , but little was followed up , in part because of a conspiracy theory which surfaced regarding a collision with a fighter jet . Also in the following two major Widerøe accidents , Flight 893 in 1990 and Flight 744 in 1993 , the investigation uncovered operational shortcomings . 
 The press had an aggressive coverage of the accident . Several major press organizations attended the memorial service , and newspapers published close @-@ up pictures of crying next of kin on their front pages . The Norwegian Press Complaints Commission , a committee appointed by the newspapers themselves , acquitted Dagbladet after a complaint for their aggressive image use . However , the accident coverage started an internal debate among journalists about their coverage of major accidents . The conclusion was that private sorrow was not to be covered in the media and since the media has had a strict self @-@ enforcement of such a policy . 
 Brønnøysund Airport installed the SCAT @-@ I satellite @-@ based landing system on 29 October 2007 . Avinor 's Steinar Hamar stated at the opening ceremony that the system would have prevented both Flight 710 and Flight 744 at Namsos Airport in 1993 . The roll @-@ out , taking place at most of Avinor 's regional airports , is scheduled for completion in 2013 . 
 = 2012 Budweiser Shootout = 
 The 2012 Budweiser Shootout was the first exhibition stock car race of the 2012 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series . It was held on February 18 , 2012 at the Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach , Florida , before a crowd of 82 @,@ 000 . The 82 @-@ lap race was won by Kyle Busch of the Joe Gibbs Racing team . It was Busch 's first victory in the event ; Tony Stewart finished second and Marcos Ambrose came in third . 
 Pole position driver Martin Truex , Jr. was immediately passed by Jeff Gordon before the first turn , and Dale Earnhardt , Jr. led at the end of the first lap . On the ninth lap , a multiple @-@ car accident prompted the first caution flag . Sixteen laps later the second caution was issued , with Jamie McMurray leading . During the caution period , all teams made pit stops . On lap 62 Gordon reclaimed the lead , holding it until he was involved in an accident ( the race 's final caution ) . Stewart took the lead , holding it until the final lap when Busch passed him to win . Five cautions were issued during the race , which saw twenty @-@ six lead changes by thirteen different drivers and attracted 7 @.@ 46 million television viewers . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Daytona International Speedway is one of six superspeedways to hold NASCAR races ; the others are Michigan International Speedway , Auto Club Speedway , Indianapolis Motor Speedway , Pocono Raceway and Talladega Superspeedway . Its standard track is a four @-@ turn , 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) superspeedway . Daytona 's turns are banked at 31 degrees , and the front stretch ( the location of the finish line ) is banked at 18 degrees . 
 The Budweiser Shootout was created by Busch Beer brand manager Monty Roberts as the Busch Clash in 1979 . The race , designed to promote Busch Beer , invites the fastest NASCAR drivers from the previous season to compete . The race is considered a " warm @-@ up " for the Daytona 500 . It was renamed the Bud Shootout in 1998 . The name changed to the Budweiser Shootout in 2001 , and it was rebranded the Sprint Unlimited in 2013 . 
 Thirty @-@ three drivers were eligible to compete in the race , including the top 25 in the 2011 championship standings and previous winners at Daytona ( including the Daytona 500 and the Coke Zero 400 ) . Kurt Busch was the defending champion . The race was scheduled to be 75 laps long , with two segments of 25 and 50 laps separated by a ten @-@ minute pit stop . During the pit stop , teams could change tires , add fuel , and make normal chassis adjustments but could not change springs , shock absorbers or rear ends . Work could be done in the garage or on the pit road . Caution and green @-@ flag laps were counted in the race . 
 After the two @-@ car style draft ( also called tandem racing ) dominated races held on restrictor plate tracks during 2011 , NASCAR reduced the size of the radiators from five liters to two liters and the air intakes were moved towards the car 's fascia section . The size of the restrictor plate was reduced by 1 ⁄ 64 inch ( 0 @.@ 4 mm ) and the cars were required to run with softer springs and a smaller rear spoiler . These changes were intended to reduce the effectiveness of two @-@ car style drafting and to make the cars more challenging to turn . Sprint Cup Series director John Darby stated NASCAR wanted to be able to allow teams more options with drafting and hoped the difference in speeds between tandem drafting and pack style racing would be reduced . 
 = = = Practice and qualification = = = 
 Two practice sessions were held on Friday afternoon . The first session lasted 45 minutes ; the second , scheduled for 60 minutes , was shortened to ten because of rain . Matt Kenseth had the fastest time ( 44 @.@ 607 seconds , five @-@ thousandths of a second faster than Jeff Burton ) in the first session ( where drivers tried out pack and tandem drafting ) . David Ragan ( with a time of 44 @.@ 966 seconds ) was third , ahead of Jamie McMurray , Ryan Newman , and Denny Hamlin . Brad Keselowski was seventh , within one second of Kenseth 's time . Tony Stewart and Kurt Busch collided near the end of the session , beginning a chain @-@ reaction accident involving cars driven by A. J. Allmendinger , Keselowski and Kyle Busch ; Keselowski , Allmendinger , and Kyle and Kurt Busch were required to use their backup cars . Stewart was taken to the track 's infield care center where he was treated for minor injuries and later released . McMurray was fastest in the second practice session , ( where twelve drivers took part ) with a time of 45 @.@ 524 seconds . Juan Pablo Montoya was second , ahead of Greg Biffle and Kasey Kahne . Marcos Ambrose was fifth fastest , with a time of 46 @.@ 037 seconds . Hamlin , Michael Waltrip , Joey Logano , Kenseth , and Carl Edwards rounded out the top ten positions . 
 The 25 drivers determined their starting positions by lot , a feature that is unique to the event . Martin Truex , Jr. drew the pole position , with Kyle Busch , Keselowski , McMurray and Ragan rounding out the first five positions . Kurt Busch drew sixth place and Biffle drew seventh , ahead of Dale Earnhardt , Jr. and Allmendinger in eighth and ninth . Logano , Edwards , Burton , Newman , and Jeff Gordon drew the next five positions . Tony Stewart , who drew fifteenth , was followed by Hamlin , Clint Bowyer , Jimmie Johnson , Kahne , and Waltrip for the first 20 spots . Ambrose , Kevin Harvick , Kenseth , Paul Menard , and Montoya drew the last five positions in the race . Once the lot was completed , Truex commented , " I haven 't been in this race in a few years . I absolutely hated being down here ( those years ) and watching this race , so it 's cool just to be in it and to get the pole is icing on the cake . " 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The 2012 Budweiser Shootout was the first exhibition race of the season , and was televised live in the United States by Fox , which began at 8 : 10 pm EST . Tim McNeil of First Methodist Church began the pre @-@ race ceremonies with an invocation . Country music group Little Big Town performed the national anthem , and Petty 1st Class Officer William <unk> , Petty 1st Class Officer Andres Reyes and Petty Officer 2nd Class Aaron Schwartz from the United States Armed Forces gave the command for the drivers to start their engines . During the pace laps , Keselowski , Allmendinger , and Kyle and Kurt Busch had to move to the rear of the grid because they had switched to their backup cars . 
 McMurray accelerated faster than Truex off the line ( leading him at the first turn ) , but by the end of the first lap Earnhardt had the lead . Three laps later , McMurray reclaimed the lead ; one lap later , Logano passed him . On lap six , Truex briefly reclaimed the lead before Harvick passed him . Three laps later a multiple @-@ car collision between turns one and two , involving Waltrip , Menard , Martin , Ragan , Kenseth , and Montoya , triggered the first caution of the race and the pace car . The race restarted on lap sixteen , with Earnhardt leading Harvick and Truex . On the seventeenth lap , McMurray passed Harvick on the backstraightaway to move into the lead . One lap later , Truex took the lead for a lap before he was passed by Kurt Busch . On the 21st lap , McMurray moved back into second place ; two laps later McMurray passed Truex to reclaim the lead , with Edwards moving into second . 
 On lap 25 , Gordon passed Edwards between the third and fourth turns to move into second place and a second caution was issued shortly afterward . After the caution , all the teams made a ten @-@ minute pit stop before the restart . McMurray led Gordon , Edwards , Johnson , and Biffle in the first lap of the rolling start before Gordon took the lead ; one lap later , Edwards passed Kyle Busch to move into second place . On lap 28 , Biffle , assisted by team mate Edwards , passed Gordon to take the lead . Bowyer experienced oversteer on lap 29 , but regained control of his car . Two laps later , Bowyer spun sideways after he was hit by teammate Truex leaving the tri @-@ oval ; a third caution was issued , during which most of the leaders , including Biffle , made pit stops for fuel and tires . Earnhardt led the field back up to speed at the restart . McMurray reclaimed the lead on lap 38 ; Earnhardt tried to pass underneath McMurray going into the third turn two laps later , but McMurray kept the position . Truex passed McMurray on lap 44 , with help from Earnhardt . By the 47th lap , Harvick had moved into the lead position ; Kyle Busch collided with the wall , escaping with minor damage to the front of his car . He passed McMurray to reclaim the lead one lap later , with Gordon taking over first place by the start of lap 50 . One lap later McMurray , aided by team mate Harvick , regained the lead . 
 The fourth caution was issued on lap 54 when Ambrose made contact with Logano , causing a multiple @-@ car collision involving Earnhardt , Kenseth , and Truex . Most of the leaders made pit stops during the caution . During lap 55 Harvick and Logano drove to their garages , retiring from the race . Biffle led at the lap 61 restart before Gordon reclaimed the lead , with Johnson moving into second place . Ten laps later , Kyle Busch took the lead until Stewart passed him two laps later . On lap 74 , Kyle Busch lost control of his car which caused Gordon to hit the wall ; his car rolled over , prompting the fifth and final caution . Kurt Busch , Johnson and McMurray were caught up in the wreck . The race restarted on lap 81 , for a green – white – checker finish ( extending the race to 82 laps ) with Stewart leading Ambrose , Bowyer and Keselowski until Ambrose ( with assistance from Keselowski ) passed him . On the final lap , Stewart reclaimed the lead ( with help from Kyle Busch ) before Busch passed him to win the race . The margin of victory was 0 @.@ 013 seconds , the closest in the history of the event . Ambrose finished third , Keselowski fourth and Hamlin fifth . Biffle , Newman , Bowyer , Edwards and Montoya rounded out the top ten finishers in the race . 
 = = = Post @-@ race comments = = = 
 Kyle Busch appeared in victory lane to celebrate his first victory of the season ; the win earned him $ 198 @,@ 550 . He said , " I don 't know how many times I spun out and didn 't spin out . Amazing race . It was fun to drive when I wasn 't getting turned around " , and , " Stab and steer , stab and steer , That 's what you do . And some brakes . There are brakes involved , too . I thought I was clear ... and I tried going down slowly , and Jimmie just must have been there a little bit , turned me sideways and got me on the apron — scared everybody half to death , including me . " Stewart , who finished second , said , " I actually had fun racing at Daytona again , which I haven 't had for a while . I don 't know what the consensus is from everybody else , but I had more fun as a driver tonight than what we 've had in the past . " Ambrose , who finished third in the race , explained , " It 's definitely a lot more fun , more entertaining for the fans , and more in control for the drivers . " 
 According to Ragan , who was involved in the race 's largest accident , " Everybody was real racy and I just got into the back of Menard . You get a good run , and you 're pushing a little bit , and I guess he was pushing whoever was in front of him . And when you 've got the meat in between the sandwich , you usually get wrecked . " Harvick blamed the accident on drivers who had little experience of pack racing : " The biggest problem is the tandem racing has been so easy for these guys to stay attached that some of them haven 't raced in pack racing . It 's going to take a lot more patience from a lot of guys who haven 't done this before . " Nevertheless , Menard thought that the pack style of racing would be a good combination for the Daytona 500 and believed it would be " chaotic " and " exciting " . Four days after the race , NASCAR announced that the pressure relief values in the engine would be increased from 25 psi ( 1 @.@ 7 bar ) to 28 psi ( 1 @.@ 9 bar ) after some drivers complained of overheating issues while they were running in packs . The race had a television audience of 7 @.@ 46 million viewers . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race results = = = 
 = Miss Independent ( Kelly Clarkson song ) = 
 " Miss Independent " is a song by American pop artist Kelly Clarkson . It served as the lead single from her debut studio album , Thankful ( 2003 ) . Written by Clarkson , Christina Aguilera , Rhett Lawrence , and Matt Morris , with Lawrence serving as producer , it was released by RCA Records on April 10 , 2003 . The track was initially intended for Aguilera 's fourth album , Stripped ( 2002 ) , but was later given to Clarkson when the song was left unfinished at the time of Stripped ’ s development . 
 " Miss Independent " is a pop rock song with R & B influences . It tells of a story of an independent woman who finally allows herself to lower her emotional and communication barriers to fall in love . Its theme of self @-@ sufficiency would later served as a template for Clarkson 's subsequent releases . The song generally received positive response from music critics , while criticism targeted the song 's similarity to Aguilera 's material . 
 The song became a commercial success , it helped in presenting Clarkson 's " girl next door " image to the public and contributed in eliminating her " American Idol " persona . In the United States , it peaked at number 1 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart and peaked at number 9 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . It also attained a top ten position in Australia , Canada , the Netherlands , and the United Kingdom . It was eventually certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and was nominated Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 46th Grammy Awards in 2004 . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Liz Friedlander , and featured Clarkson singing at a house party . She has performed the song in several live performances , premiering it in the second season of American Idol , and has included it in set lists in most of her concert tours . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 American record producer Rhett Lawrence first offered the song " Miss Independence " to American R & B trio Destiny 's Child whom later turned down the offer to record the song . Lawrence then collaborated with Christina Aguilera and Matt Morris to record it for Aguilera 's fourth studio album Stripped ( 2002 ) as " Miss Independence " . Aguilera ultimately decided not to include it for the album , leaving it half @-@ finished without the bridge . Lawrence , Clarkson 's then manager Simon Fuller and music mogul Clive Davis suggested that Clarkson contribute lyrics to the song , and record it for her debut album Thankful ( 2003 ) . One of Clarkson 's A & R managers , Keith <unk> , suggested to re @-@ title it as " Miss Independent " . The song was released by RCA Records on April 10 , 2003 , ten days ahead of the Thankful ’ s release . In 2009 , it was made available for purchase as a downloadable content ( DLC ) for the Rock Band , Rock Band 2 , and Lego Rock Band video games . 
 In an interview on Total Request Live , Aguilera revealed that upon hearing Clarkson 's version of the track , she became miffed that RCA , which was also her record label , decided to release it without her permission - however she also praised Clarkson 's vocal performance . She told Clarkson on the air , " if the song was to go to anyone I 'm glad that it went to you because you gave it justice . " In 2010 , Clarkson told the Bournemouth Daily Echo that " I had to argue with the record label to the point of literally crying to get " Miss Independent " on the album , then they released it as my debut single and it was a hit . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Miss Independent " is a R & B @-@ styled pop rock song . Katherine St Asaph of Popdust noted that " it ’ s the closest Kelly Clarkson ’ s come to R & B. " Clarkson credited that Aguilera 's rhythmic style has heavily influenced the song . She remarked , " You can hear a lot of her influence in " ' Miss Independent " , especially the hook . And once you hear the song , it 's constantly in your head . Believe me , I cannot get it out ! " <unk> Kipp of Associated Press wrote that " Miss Independent " " sounds like a half @-@ baked remake of Aguilera 's " Dirrty " ( 2002 ) " The song has a length of three minutes and 35 seconds and is written in the key of D major , Clarkson 's vocal range spans from F ♯ 3 to F ♯ 5 . The lyrics tells the story of an independent woman who was apprehensive about being in a relationship in fears of being rejected , she finally allows herself to break her emotional and communication barriers when she begins to fall in love . Clarkson revealed that she finds herself similar to the titular " Miss Independent " . She said , " It 's very funny when the song came into play with me ... ' cause at that certain time of my life , I was actually going through that kind of thing , " Clarkson said . " I 've always been real guarded about work and career . It wasn 't even with , like , guy relationships , it was just , like , friends and just letting people in , you know ? And so it was kinda weird ' cause I was going through that same thing at the same time , so it was very easy for me to write the bridge to the song . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Miss Independent " has received mixed to positive reviews from music critics , who lauded Clarkson for distancing herself from her American Idol persona , but criticism targeted the song 's resemblance to some of the song 's on Stripped — particularly on " Dirrty " and " Fighter " ( 2002 ) . On its release , Brian Hiatt of Entertainment Weekly noted that " its hard R & B sound may shock fans who embraced the mellow " A Moment Like This . " " Miss Independent " begins with Clarkson singing in a throaty moan over a bangin ' hip @-@ hop beat , then bursts into a power @-@ chord @-@ propelled , disco @-@ diva chorus that 's not unlike Britney Spears ' " Stronger " . " Rolling Stone wrote , " " A Moment Like This " was exactly the sort of treacly by @-@ the @-@ numbers ballad critics expected of a TV @-@ contest winner ; that 's probably why its assertive follow @-@ up , " Miss Independent , " was such a surprise . " AllMusic 's senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that it " managed to make Kelly Clarkson seem younger and hipper without <unk> her up like Christina Aguilera ( who , ironically , co @-@ wrote " Miss Independent , " the first single from Thankful ) while retaining a strong sense of melodic songcraft . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine wrote that the song " gives Clarkson the youthful edge she desperately needs to balance out the Adult Contemporary goo of songs like " Anytime " and " A Moment Like This . " Cinquemani also added , " " Miss Independent " is no " Dirrty , " but it proves that if anyone can out @-@ sing Aguilera , it 's Clarkson . " On March 5 , 2013 , Billboard ranked the it the number sixteen in its list of " Top 100 American Idol Hits of All Time " . 
 Howard Cohen of The Baltimore Sun wrote , " The R & B @-@ styled stomper " Miss Independent " , sounds like the fat removed from Aguilera 's meatier " Fighter " - which could well be the case , since she co @-@ wrote both tunes . " Elysa Gardner of USA Today was more critical of the song , calling it " breathless " and " colorless " . She also added that the song " sounds less like the edgy , strong @-@ but @-@ vulnerable @-@ woman number it purports to be than the Christina Aguilera throwaway it basically is . " The song received a nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 2004 Grammy Awards , but lost out to Aguilera 's " Beautiful " . It was also nominated for Choice Summer Song at the 2003 Teen Choice Awards . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Miss Independent " debuted at the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 23 on the week ending May 3 , 2003 . It then debuted on the Pop Songs chart for the week ending May 10 , 2003 , eventually topping the chart for six weeks beginning on the week ending June 28 , 2003 . The song debuted on the main Billboard Hot 100 on the week ending May 17 , 2003 at number 61 , eventually reaching at number 9 on the week ending July 19 , 2003 , becoming her second Top Ten single in the United States . It also charted on Adult Pop Songs and Adult Contemporary charts at number 14 and number 28 , respectively . The single 's success came out at the time when the Billboard charts were relying to more R & B and rhythmic stations than pop stations . As of April 2010 , " Miss Independent " has sold over 759 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States . It was certified Gold by Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 2006 . 
 Internationally , the song also became a commercial success , becoming Clarkson 's first single to chart outside of North America . In Australia , it debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number 17 on August 2003 , it eventually peaked at number 4 after Clarkson performed it at the 2003 NRL Grand Final at the Stadium Australia on October 5 , 2003 . It eventually became her highest @-@ charting single in Australia along with " Since U Been Gone " ( 2004 ) before being overtaken by " Mr. Know It All " , which topped the chart in 2011 . In the United Kingdom , " Miss Independent " debuted at the UK Singles Chart on August 2003 . It the Netherlands , the song debuted on the Dutch Top 40 at number 27 , eventually peaking at number 9 . The song also charted in Austria , Germany , Ireland , Sweden , and Switzerland . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's accompanying music video was filmed in Los Angeles by Liz Friedlander , who didn 't know Clarkson at the time . Friedlander remarked , " Honestly , I never watched American Idol , so I didn 't have a preconceived notion of her . " She said about the video , " The song is explosive and young and has some cool electronic beats , so we took the visual style from the music . " Clarkson added " It 's gonna be more Kelly Clarkson the artist , not [ Kelly Clarkson ] from ' American Idol . " The video features Clarkson performing at a house party in reverse , starting from the morning after and working its way back to the previous night , where she appears attracted to a " surfer " whom she keeps seeing in mirrors . Friedlander adds , " And in the end — maybe — they get together . " It premiered on MTV on June 2 , 2003 . The video received three nominations at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards — Best New Artist in a Video , Best Pop Video , and Viewer 's Choice Award . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Clarkson premiered " Miss Independent " on the second season of American Idol in May 2003 . Throughout 2003 , she performed it on various television events , including the inaugural season of Australian Idol , The Late Show with David Letterman , and The Late Late Show with Craig Kilborn . She also performed the song in sports events , notably at the 2003 NRL Grand Final at the Stadium Australia on October 5 , 2003 . Since then , she has included the song in her set lists on tour , even naming her first co @-@ headlining tour , the Independent Tour ( <unk> , after the song . In 2012 , she performed a medley of her songs at the 40th Anniversary American Music Awards , beginning with " Miss Independent " , continuing to " Since U Been Gone " , " Stronger ( What Doesn 't Kill You ) " , and " Catch My Breath " . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Chrono ( series ) = 
 The Chrono ( クロノ ) series is a video game franchise developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) . It began in 1995 with the time travel role @-@ playing video game Chrono Trigger , which spawned two continuations , Radical Dreamers : Nusumenai Hōseki and Chrono Cross . It was produced in 1995 by Kazuhiko Aoki and directed by Akihiko Matsui , Yoshinori Kitase and Takashi Tokita . A promotional anime called Dimensional Adventure Numa <unk> and two ports of Chrono Trigger were also produced . As of March 31 , 2003 , Chrono Trigger was , with 2 @.@ 65 million units , Square Enix 's 12th best @-@ selling game ( based on copies shipped ) ; Chrono Cross was , with 1 @.@ 5 million units , the 24th . As of March 2011 , the two games have sold over 5 @.@ 3 million units . Chrono Trigger has placed highly on all six of multimedia website IGN 's " top 100 games of all time " lists — 4th in 2002 , 6th in early 2005 , 13th in late 2005 , 2nd in 2006 , 18th in 2007 , and 2nd in 2008 . The music of the series has been very highly regarded and enjoyed wide popularity . The games have been subject to extremely positive reviews . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Chrono Trigger was produced in 1995 by Kazuhiko Aoki and directed by Akihiko Matsui , Yoshinori Kitase and Takashi Tokita . The development of the game was dubbed the " Dream Project " , because it was headed by a " Dream Team " composed of supervisor Hironobu Sakaguchi , of Final Fantasy fame , as well as freelance supervisor Yuji Horii and character designer Akira Toriyama , both of Dragon Quest fame . Yuuji Horii worked on the general outline of the story ; as a fan of time travel fictions , such as the TV series The Time Tunnel , he focused on a theme of time travel for Chrono Trigger . The outline was then finalized by story planner and script writer Masato Kato . 
 In 1996 , Masato Kato and several other members of the Chrono Trigger staff worked on a minor project for the Super Famicom Satellaview extension , titled Radical Dreamers : Nusumenai Hōseki . Initially , the game was intended to be a short , original text @-@ based adventure developed in three months with almost no planning . Nevertheless , by the end of the development , Masato Kato had connected the game 's plot and characters to Chrono Trigger , turning it into a side story . Since the platform of the game was not mainstream , the connections were however left blurred on purpose and were not advertised on the game 's release . 
 In 1999 , a continuation of Chrono Trigger , titled Chrono Cross , was announced . Although the " Dream Team " members did not participate in Chrono Cross , the game was developed mostly by the same staff as the first installment . In terms of basic system and gameplay , producer Hiromichi Tanaka made it clear that the new installment was not a sequel to Chrono Trigger ; rather , the game designers ' approach was to make the " gameplay evolve with the hardware " , creating a completely new game while restructuring the former style so as to maximize the performance of the console . The gameplay focuses on the theme of parallel worlds rather than time travel , although the latter is still deeply involved in the game 's plot . In terms of storyline , Chrono Cross was described by director and scenario writer Masato Kato as " not a Chrono Trigger 2 " , but " a result of a pulled trigger " , " another Chrono " . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Chrono Trigger = = = 
 Chrono Trigger is a role @-@ playing video game which was released on the Super Nintendo Entertainment System on March 11 , 1995 in Japan and on August 22 , 1995 in North America . The game 's story follows a group of young adventurers led by Crono , who are accidentally transported through time and learn that the world will be destroyed in the distant future . Vowing to prevent this disaster , they travel throughout history to discover the means to save the planet . Chrono Trigger was ported to the PlayStation in 1999 as a standalone title in Japan and in 2001 as part of the Final Fantasy Chronicles compilation in North America . A third version was released for the Nintendo DS handheld platform on November 20 , 2008 . It is regarded today as one of the greatest games ever made . 
 Additionally , three Chrono Trigger @-@ related applications were released the same year for the Super Famicom Satellaview extension . Chrono Trigger inspired several sequels and expansion packs or add @-@ ons ; the first were three titles released for the Satellaview in 1995 . They included Chrono Trigger : Jet Bike Special , a racing game based on a minigame from the original ; Chrono Trigger : Character Library , featuring profiles on characters and monsters from the game ; and Chrono Trigger : Music Library , a collection of music from the game 's soundtrack . The contents of Character Library and Music Library were later included as extras in the PlayStation rerelease of Chrono Trigger . 
 = = = Radical Dreamers = = = 
 Radical Dreamers : Nusumenai Hōseki ( literally " The Jewel That Cannot Be Stolen " ) is a Japanese @-@ exclusive text @-@ based game released in 1996 through the Super Famicom Satellaview extension . The player takes on the role of Serge , a young adventurer accompanied by Kid , a teen @-@ aged thief , and Gil , a mysterious masked magician . It is a side story to Chrono Trigger wrapping up a loose end from its predecessor 's plot . 
 = = = Chrono Cross = = = 
 Chrono Cross was released on the PlayStation on November 18 , 1999 in Japan and on August 15 , 2000 in North America . The story is partly a remake of Radical Dreamers , and as such replaces it as Chrono Trigger 's successor . The protagonist Serge , faced with an alternate reality in which he died as a child , struggles to uncover his past and meets Kid , a thief seeking the mysterious Frozen Flame artifact . Serge and Kid 's fates are ultimately revealed to find their roots in the events of Chrono Trigger . 
 = = = Chrono Break = = = 
 Chrono Brake and Chrono Break are the names of two trademarks owned by Square Co . ; the first applied in Japan on November 5 , 2001 , and the second registered in the United States on December 5 of the same year . The registrations were preceded by a press report in which Hironobu Sakaguchi mentioned that the Chrono Cross team was interested in developing a new game in the Chrono series , and that script and story ideas were being considered . However , Square did not publish further news , and the American trademark Chrono Break was eventually dropped on November 13 , 2003 . 
 = = Dimensional Adventure Nu @-@ Mamonja = = 
 Dimensional Adventure Nu @-@ Mamonja ( <unk> ～ , <unk> Bōken <unk> , lit . " Time and Space Adventures : Nu @-@ Mamonja " ) is a 16 @-@ minute humoristic and promotional Chrono Trigger anime which was broadcast at the Japanese V @-@ Jump Festival of July 31 , 1996 . It was created by Production I.G , and written by Hiroshi Izawa and Akihiro Kikuchi , while <unk> <unk> served as director , Tensai Okamura as animation director , and <unk> <unk> as character designer . 
 The anime takes place in the same setting as Chrono Trigger during the night before the beginning of the game 's events . It follows two monsters from the game , a Nu and a Mamo ( called <unk> in the English version of the game ) , voiced by <unk> and Mayumi Tanaka respectively , through various adventures . These all take place in the " Millennial Fair " , the festival at the beginning of Chrono Trigger , which in the anime has been infested by a festive gathering of monsters coming through portals . They meet several characters from the game , including Johnny and Gonzalez ( called Gato in the English version of the game ) . The anime ends with a scene from the following morning after the monsters have all left , in which Crono and Lucca can be seen . The credits show Nu and Mamo parodying scenes from the game . 
 The anime was followed by a manga series of the same name published in V Jump starting in 1996 . The series follows Mamo and Nu , who are joined by Johnny and <unk> ( in the form of a frog ) , as they continue their adventure through time . They meet various characters from Chrono Trigger along the way , including Masamune , Lavos , Gaspar , Ozzie , Slash and Flea . In 1998 , the chapters of the series were released as a tankōbon . 
 = = Music = = 
 The music of the Chrono series was mainly composed by Yasunori Mitsuda . Chrono Trigger was the first game for which he had served as composer . However , after Mitsuda contracted stomach ulcers , Final Fantasy composer Nobuo Uematsu was brought onto the project to compose ten songs . At the time of the game 's release , the quantity of its tracks and sound effects were unprecedented . Additionally , a one @-@ disc acid jazz arrangement called The Brink of Time was also released . Mitsuda went on to compose the soundtrack for Radical Dreamers : Nusumenai Hōseki , which was never commercially released as an album . 
 In 1999 , Yasunori Mitsuda , now a freelance composer , returned to score the soundtrack for Chrono Cross after being contacted by Masato Kato . Mitsuda decided to center his work around old world cultural influences , including Mediterranean , Fado , Celtic , and percussive African music . Xenogears contributor Tomohiko Kira played guitar on the beginning and ending themes . Noriko Mitose , as selected by Masato Kato , sang the ending song , " Radical Dreamers ~ Le Trésor <unk> " . Mitsuda was happy to accomplish even half of what he envisioned . Certain songs were ported from the score of Radical Dreamers , while other entries in the soundtrack contain leitmotifs from both Chrono Trigger and Radical Dreamers . 
 In 2006 , Yasunori Mitsuda arranged versions of music from the Chrono series for Play ! video game music concerts , presenting the Chrono Trigger and Chrono Cross main themes , as well as " Frog 's Theme " , and " To Far Away Times " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Chrono series has been very successful in game rankings and sales . Chrono Trigger sold more than 2 @.@ 36 million copies in Japan and 290 @,@ 000 abroad , reaching two million in sales in only two months . It ended 1995 as the third best @-@ selling game of the year behind Dragon Quest VI : Realms of Revelation and Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest . The game was met with substantial success upon release in North America , and its rerelease on the PlayStation as part of the Final Fantasy Chronicles package topped the NPD TRSTS PlayStation sales charts for over six weeks . The Chrono Trigger DS remake has shipped 490 @,@ 000 copies in Japan and 220 @,@ 000 in North America as of December 2008 . Chrono Cross also sold well , shipping 850 @,@ 000 and 650 @,@ 000 units in Japan and abroad respectively . It was re @-@ released once in the United States as a Greatest Hits title and again as part of the Japanese Ultimate Hits series . 
 Chrono Trigger has placed highly on all six of multimedia website IGN 's " top 100 games of all time " lists — 4th in 2002 , 6th in early 2005 , 13th in late 2005 , 2nd in 2006 , 18th in 2007 , and 2nd in 2008 . GameSpot included Chrono Trigger in " The Greatest Games of All Time " list released in April 2006 , and it also appeared as 28th on an " All Time Top 100 " list in a poll conducted by Japanese magazine Famitsu . Nintendo Power 's 100th issue placed it eighteenth on their " 100 Best Nintendo Games of All Time " , and in their twentieth anniversary issue named it the fifth best Super NES game . Chrono Cross was also well @-@ received by reviewers ; GameSpot awarded the game a perfect 10 , one of only seven games in over 40 @,@ 000 games listed on Gamespot to have been given the score , and its Console Game of the Year Award for 2000 . IGN gave the game a score of 9 @.@ 7 , and Cross appeared 89th in its 2008 Top 100 games list . 
 The music of the series has been very highly regarded and enjoyed wide popularity . IGN termed the Chrono Trigger soundtrack " one of the best videogame soundtracks ever produced " and said that the music was a large part of the game 's ability to " capture the emotions of the player " . It furthermore called the soundtrack " some of the most memorable tunes in RPG history " . The game itself won the " Best Music in a Cartridge @-@ Based Game " award in Electronic Gaming Monthly 's 1995 video game awards . The soundtrack for Chrono Cross won the Gold Prize for Sony 's PlayStation Awards of 2000 . IGN , in their review of the game , termed the soundtrack " a brilliant score " that " does wonders in stirring the emotional strings of the players as they 're playing through the game " . In a separate piece about Japanese RPG composers , IGN named Yasunori Mitsuda the second best out of ten behind Nobuo Uematsu . 
 = Giveamanakick = 
 Giveamanakick — typeset as <unk> and abbreviated as <unk> — are an Irish rock music duo from Limerick . The two band members were Stephen Ryan ( <unk> ) , the vocalist and guitarist , and Keith Lawler ( <unk> ) , the drummer . 
 Giveamanakick performed regularly in Ireland , toured the United Kingdom with The Undertones and also performed in Germany during their existence . The duo featured at festivals such as Electric Picnic , Indie @-@ pendence and Hard Working Class Heroes and also took part in the 2fm 2moro <unk> . They released three albums ; Is it ok to be loud , Jesus ? ( 2003 ) , We Are the Way Forward ( 2005 ) and Welcome to the Cusp ( 2008 ) before the end was announced in August 2009 . 
 Remaining in Limerick throughout the existence of Giveamanakick , the duo were declared " the best hard @-@ rock band in the country " by rock critic Eamon Sweeney and received the approval of Hot Press , No Disco 's Leagues O 'Toole and Fight Like Apes . 
 = = History = = 
 Giveamanakick formed in 2001 following the demise of Tooth . Left with several songs , Ryan performed as a solo artist with an electric guitar . One night , he encountered Keith Lawler , who played guitar in another band at the time , and Lawler began drumming with Ryan . In 2002 , the duo released a split single with Mr. <unk> titled " Darko <unk> " , a song which would later feature as the final track on their debut album . By 2003 , they had supported several more established acts , including Yeah Yeah Yeahs and Rocket from the Crypt . In 2003 , there were reports that the duo 's debut album , titled Is it ok to be loud , Jesus ? , would be released on a label called Larry Gogan Records but this later emerged to be a joke published by a fledgling Foggy Notions . The duo 's debut album was in fact published on 3 July 2003 with that same title by the independent label Out On A Limb Records as the label 's first release , with Giveamanakick having finished recording it in January that year . It received two out of five stars in a review by RTÉ 's Tom <unk> who wrote , " this is what happens when rawness comes without any real sense of purpose " . The Hot Press reviewer said listening to the album was " something akin to being battered round the head with a plank of wood for half an hour " but , nonetheless , " bloody fantastic " . 
 A second album , We Are the Way Forward , was recorded over an eight @-@ day period and released by Out On a Limb in 2005 . It received three from five stars in a review by RTÉ 's Harry Guerin who said : " you 'll get what you paid for from their stomp and swing " . Phil Udell 's Hot Press review gave the album 4 @.@ 5 out of five stars , saying it " gives you that much sought after visceral thrill " and that the duo " wrote it , recorded it , fucked off . A classic " . Their live performances also came in for increasing critical acclaim . When Eamon Sweeney of the Irish Independent attended a show by The Presidents of the United States of America in May 2006 , his review stated that they " were well and truly blown off the stage by the support band " who were Giveamanakick . Stephen Ryan has said in several interviews that their early Sunday morning performance at Electric Picnic in 2006 was " one to remember " with so many festival @-@ goers coming to view them . He described the performance as a " bit of a blur " as they " pretty dumbfounded by the reaction " and the idea of " playing with some of our musical heroes such as Dinosaur Jr. and Deftones was a dream come through [ sic ] " . 
 In 2007 , Giveamanakick toured Germany before beginning to record their follow @-@ up album . They did the 2fm 2moro <unk> with The Flaws and Messiah J & The Expert . In October that year , rock critic Eamon Sweeney , bemoaning the lack of original Irish music that year , singled out Giveamanakick as " the best hard @-@ rock band in the country " and said they " could teach all those Dublin <unk> with stupid haircuts and no ideas a thing or two " . 
 Giveamanakick were described as a " promising act " for 2008 by Eamon Sweeney of the Irish Independent in January of that year . They performed several Irish dates in January that year . Their third album , Welcome to the Cusp , was recorded over a ten @-@ day period in Letterkenny , County Donegal and released on 2 May 2008 on the duo 's own label , <unk> Recordings . It received three from five stars in a review by RTÉ 's Harry Guerin who described the music as " immediate and memorable " . Other publications called it " the best Irish record of 2008 " . The track " Brittle Bones " , released as the second single from the album , marked the first use of an acoustic guitar by the duo . Ryan claimed that Welcome to the Cusp was the album which " most accurately represents what the Giveamanakick sound actually is " and described the songs as " possibly the most structurally challenging ones so far " . 
 Giveamanakick performed a nationwide tour following the release of Welcome to the Cusp , including a date at Indie @-@ pendence in August 2008 . Prior to their Friday night performance at Electric Picnic in 2008 , Tony Clayton @-@ Lea , writing in The Irish Times , recommended festival @-@ goers to see them , remarking that " despite keeping a profile lower than a Dachshund 's belly , Giveamanakick have managed to keep things grooving along by virtue of their innate boisterousness and musical flash @-@ bang @-@ wallop " . 
 In September 2008 , Giveamanakick played Hard Working Class Heroes , at which the organisers selected them alongside acts such as The Blizzards and Heathers to play the CMJ Festival in New York the following month . On 3 April 2009 , the duo appeared on Phantom FM alongside <unk> to perform cover versions of Nirvana songs . Giveamanakick 's end came with an announcement on 17 August 2009 . The final shows are scheduled to take place in Cork , Dublin , Galway and Limerick in November and December 2009 . \ \ In June 2013 , it was announced that <unk> were to reform for one night only to celebrate their label 's 10th birthday . 
 = = Style = = 
 The duo were described as " noise rock 's version of The Odd Couple " by RTÉ . Ryan once described himself as a " Beastie Boys fanatic " and the duo were compared to acts such as Pixies . His lyrics regularly featured references to popular culture . However , the opening track on their debut album , titled " Ger Canning " , was not a reference to the broadcaster of the same name . They wrote self @-@ described pop songs , where " Keith hits his drums really hard and I [ Steve Ryan ] like my guitars turned up very loud but we do this with a pop sensibility " , and employed techniques such as using gas masks to distort their vocals when playing live , performing with streamers and encouraging their audience to <unk> themselves by clapping their own ears . They lived in Limerick throughout their existence , citing a positive music scene , the humour and the hurling as being some of their reasons for liking their home city . 
 = = Members = = 
 Stephen Ryan was the guitarist and vocalist . He is originally from <unk> . He grew up in a background of traditional music , listened to The Beatles on his father 's record player , learned how to play the keyboard at the age of ten , the guitar at the age of fifteen and joined a band called Tooth in his early twenties . He has also performed as <unk> . 
 Keith Lawler was the drummer . He is from <unk> , Co . Clare . He liked Nirvana when he was fourteen years of age , and learned how to play the guitar when he was a teenager but began to learn the drums at the age of sixteen when he realised that there was a surplus of guitarists in his area . Tooth used to rehearse near his house and he often listened to them from outside . Two of his cousins were already drummers , having performed with The Charming and The Cranberries . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Giveamanakick released three albums . 
 Is it ok to be loud , Jesus ? ( 2003 ) 
 We Are the Way Forward ( 2005 ) 
 Welcome to the Cusp ( 2008 ) 
 = SMS Dresden ( 1907 ) = 
 SMS Dresden ( " His Majesty 's Ship Dresden " ) was a German light cruiser built for the Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) , the lead ship of her class . She was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg in 1906 , launched in October 1907 , and completed in November 1908 . Her entrance into service was delayed by accidents during sea trials , including a collision with another vessel that necessitated major repairs . Like the preceding Königsberg @-@ class cruisers upon which her design was based , Dresden was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two torpedo tubes . 
 Dresden spent much of her career overseas . After commissioning , she visited the United States in 1909 during the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration , before returning to Germany to serve in the reconnaissance force of the High Seas Fleet for three years . In 1913 , she was assigned to the Mediterranean Division . She was then sent to the Caribbean to protect German nationals during the Mexican Revolution . In mid @-@ 1914 , she carried the former dictator Victoriano Huerta to Jamaica , where the British had granted him asylum . She was due to return to Germany in July 1914 , but was prevented by the outbreak of World War I from doing so . At the onset of hostilities , Dresden operated as a commerce raider in South American waters in the Atlantic , then moved to the Pacific Ocean in September and joined Maximilian von Spee 's East Asia Squadron . 
 Dresden saw action in the Battle of Coronel in November , where she engaged the British cruiser HMS Glasgow , and at the Battle of the Falkland Islands in December , where she was the only German warship to escape destruction . She eluded her British pursuers for several more months , until she put into Robinson Crusoe Island in March 1915 . Her engines were worn out and she had almost no coal left for her boilers , so the ship 's captain contacted the local Chilean authorities to have Dresden interned . She was trapped by British cruisers , including her old opponent Glasgow . The British violated Chilean neutrality and opened fire on the ship in the Battle of Más a Tierra . The Germans scuttled Dresden and the majority of the crew escaped to be interned in Chile for the duration of the war . The wreck remains in the harbor ; several artifacts , including her bell and compass , have been returned to Germany . 
 = = Design = = 
 Dresden was 118 @.@ 3 meters ( 388 ft 1 in ) long overall with a beam of 13 @.@ 5 m ( 44 ft 3 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 53 m ( 18 ft 2 in ) forward . She displaced 4 @,@ 268 t ( 4 @,@ 201 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two Parsons steam turbines , designed to give 14 @,@ 794 shp ( 11 @,@ 032 kW ) for a top speed of 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . The engines were powered by twelve coal @-@ fired water @-@ tube boilers . Dresden carried up to 860 tonnes ( 850 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 3 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 700 km ; 4 @,@ 100 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . She had a crew of 18 officers and 343 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 13 @,@ 300 yd ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . The secondary battery comprised eight 5 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 55 guns , with 4 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with four torpedoes , mounted on the deck . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Dresden was ordered under the contract name Ersatz Comet . She was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg in 1906 and launched on 5 October 1907 . The Oberbürgermeister of her namesake city , Otto Beutler , christened the ship . Fitting @-@ out work then commenced , and Dresden was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 14 November 1908 . Following her commissioning , Dresden began her sea trials . On 28 November she accidentally collided with and sank the Swedish <unk> Cäcilie outside Kiel . Dresden 's starboard propeller shaft was shoved in 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) , and she required six months of repair work . She resumed sea trials in 1909 , but a turbine accident necessitated further repairs , which lasted until September . 
 Although Dresden had not completed the required testing , her trials were declared over on 7 September , as she had been ordered to visit the United States . The purpose of the voyage was to represent Germany at the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration in New York ; Dresden was joined by the protected cruisers Hertha and Victoria Louise and the light cruiser Bremen . Dresden left Wilhelmshaven on 11 September and stopped in Newport , where she met the rest of the ships of the squadron . The ships arrived in New York on 24 September , remained there until 9 October , and arrived back in Germany on 22 October . 
 Dresden then joined the reconnaissance force for the High Seas Fleet ; the following two years consisted of the peacetime routine of squadron exercises , training cruises , and annual fleet exercises . On 16 February 1910 , she collided with the light cruiser Königsberg . The collision caused significant damage to Dresden , though no one on either vessel was injured . She made it back to Kiel for repairs , which lasted eight days . Dresden visited Hamburg on 13 – 17 May that year . From 14 to 20 April 1912 , she was temporarily transferred to the Training Squadron , along with the armored cruiser Friedrich Carl and the light cruiser Mainz . For the year 1911 – 12 , Dresden won the Kaiser 's Schießpreis ( Shooting Prize ) for excellent gunnery amongst the light cruisers of the High Seas Fleet . From September 1912 through September 1913 , she was commanded by Fregattenkapitän ( Frigate Captain ) Fritz Lüdecke , who would command the ship again during World War I. 
 On 6 April 1913 , she and the cruiser Strassburg were sent from Kiel to the Adriatic Sea , where she joined the Mittelmeer @-@ Division ( Mediterranean Division ) , centered on the battlecruiser Goeben and commanded by Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Konrad <unk> . The ships cruised the eastern Mediterranean for several months , and in late August , Dresden was ordered to return to Germany . After arriving in Kiel on 23 September , she was taken into the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Shipyard ) for an overhaul that lasted until the end of December . She was scheduled to return to the Mediterranean Division , but the Admiralstab ( Admiralty Staff ) reassigned Dresden to the North American station to protect German interests in the Mexican Revolution . The cruiser Bremen , then in North American waters , was also due to return to Germany , but her intended replacement , Karlsruhe , had not yet entered service . On 27 December 1913 , Dresden departed Germany and arrived off Vera Cruz on 21 January 1914 , under the command of Fregattenkapitän Erich Köhler . The United States had already sent a squadron of warships to the city , as had several other countries . 
 The Admiralstab ordered Hertha , which had been on a training cruise for naval cadets , to join Dresden off Mexico . Bremen was also recalled to reinforce the German naval contingent ; after arriving , she was tasked with transferring European nationals to German HAPAG liners . Dresden and the British cruiser HMS Hermione rescued 900 American citizens trapped in a hotel in Vera Cruz and transferred them to American warships . The German consul in Mexico City requested additional forces , and so Dresden provided a landing party of a maat ( Junior Petty Officer ) and ten sailors , armed with two MG 08 machine guns . On 15 April 1914 , Dresden steamed to Tampico on Mexico 's Caribbean coast . That month , the German @-@ flagged merchant ship SS Ypiranga arrived in Mexico , carrying a load of small arms for the regime of Mexican dictator Victoriano Huerta . The United States had put an arms embargo into effect in an attempt to reduce the violence of the civil war . The US Navy intercepted Ypiranga on 21 April . Dresden arrived , confiscated the merchantman , and pressed her into naval service to transport German refugees out of Mexico . Despite the American embargo , the Germans delivered the weapons and ammunition to the Mexican government on 28 May . 
 On 20 July , after the Huerta regime was toppled , Dresden carried Huerta , his vice president , Aureliano Blanquet , and their families to Kingston , Jamaica , where Britain had granted them asylum . Upon arriving in Kingston on the 25th , Köhler learned of the rising political tensions in Europe during the July Crisis that followed the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand . By this time , the ship was in need of a refit in Germany , and met with her replacement , Karlsruhe , in Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , Haiti , the following day . Lüdecke , who had arrived in command of Karlsruhe , traded places with Köhler aboard Dresden . The Admiralstab initially ordered Dresden to return to Germany for overhaul , but the heightened threat of war by the 31st led the staff to countermand the order , instead instructing Lüdecke to prepare to conduct Handelskrieg ( trade war ) in the Atlantic . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 After receiving the order to remain in the Atlantic , Lüdecke turned his ship south while maintaining radio silence to prevent hostile warships from discovering his vessel . On the night of 4 – 5 August , he received a radio report informing him of Britain 's declaration of war on Germany . He chose the South Atlantic as Dresden 's operational area , and steamed to the Brazilian coast . Off the mouth of the Amazon River , he stopped a British merchant ship on 6 August . The ship , SS <unk> , whose captain professed to know nothing of Britain 's entry into the war , was permitted to proceed unmolested in accordance with the rules set forth in the Hague Convention of 1907 . Dresden rendezvoused with the German collier SS Corrientes , a converted <unk> vessel . The cruiser moved to the Rocas Atoll on the 12th , along with the HAPAG steamers Prussia , Baden , and Persia . After departing the atoll , en route to Trinidade , Dresden caught the British steamer SS Hyades ; Lüdecke took off the ship 's crew and then sank the merchantman . Dresden captured the British collier SS Holmwood on 24 August and sank her after evacuating her crew . After arriving in Trinidade , she rendezvoused with the gunboat Eber and several steamers . 
 On 26 August , while steaming off the mouth of the Río de la Plata , she caught two more British steamers , but the poor condition of Dresden 's engines curtailed further operations . On 5 September , Dresden put into Hoste Island for engine maintenance until the 16th . While the ship was there , the HAPAG steamer Santa Isabel arrived from Punta Arenas with news of the war , and the heavy merchant traffic off the western coast of South America . Lüdecke decided to steam there , and on 18 September Dresden passed the Strait of Magellan . While en route , Dresden encountered the French steamer SS Ortega ; Lüdecke refrained from attacking the transport ship , since she had fled into neutral waters . After steaming up the Chilean coast , she stopped in the Juan Fernández Islands , where she made radio contact with the light cruiser Leipzig , which was operating on the Pacific coast of South America . Dresden saw no further success against British shipping , and on 12 October , she joined Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Maximilian von Spee 's East Asia Squadron , which had crossed the Pacific and was coaling at Easter Island . The following day , Lüdecke was promoted to Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) . 
 On 18 October , Dresden and the East Asia Squadron , centered on the armored cruisers Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , departed Easter Island for the South American coast . They arrived at Más a Fuera island on 26 October . The following evening , the German cruisers escorted the auxiliary cruiser SS Prinz Eitel Friedrich and the merchant ships SS Yorck and SS Göttingen to Chile . The flotilla arrived off Valparaiso on 30 October , and the following evening , von Spee received intelligence that a British cruiser was at the Chilean port of Coronel . Von Spee decided that his squadron should ambush the cruiser — HMS Glasgow — when it was forced to leave port due to Chile 's neutral status , which required belligerent warships to leave after twenty @-@ four hours . Von Spee did not realize that Glasgow was in the company of Rear Admiral Christopher Craddock 's 4th Cruiser Squadron , which also included the armored cruisers Monmouth and Good Hope and the auxiliary cruiser Otranto . 
 = = = = Battle of Coronel = = = = 
 Early on the morning of 1 November , von Spee took his squadron out of Valparaiso , steaming at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) south toward Coronel . At around 16 : 00 , Leipzig spotted the smoke column from the leading British cruiser . By 16 : 25 , the other two ships had been spotted . The two squadrons slowly closed the distance , until the Germans opened fire at 18 : 34 , at a range of 10 @,@ 400 m ( 11 @,@ 400 yd ) . The German ships engaged their opposite numbers , with Dresden firing on Otranto . After Dresden 's third salvo , Otranto turned away ; the Germans claimed a hit that caused a fire , though Otranto reported taking no damage . Following Otranto 's departure , Dresden shifted her fire to Glasgow , which was also targeted by Leipzig . The two German cruisers hit their British opponent five times . 
 At around 19 : 30 , von Spee ordered Dresden and Leipzig to launch a torpedo attack against the damaged British armored cruisers . Dresden increased speed to position herself off the British bows , and briefly spotted Glasgow as she was withdrawing , but the British cruiser disappeared in the haze and gathering darkness . Dresden then encountered Leipzig ; both ships initially thought the other was hostile . Dresden 's crew was loading a torpedo when the two ships confirmed each other 's identity . By 22 : 00 , Dresden and the other two light cruisers were deployed in a line that searched unsuccessfully for the British cruisers . Dresden had emerged from the battle completely unscathed . 
 On 3 November , von Spee took Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Nürnberg back to Valparaiso for provisioning and to consult with the Admiralstab . Neutrality laws permitted only three belligerent warships in a port at a given time . Dresden and Leipzig remained with the squadron 's colliers in Más a Fuera . Von Spee returned to Más a Fuera on 6 November , and detached Dresden and Leipzig for a visit to Valparaiso , where they also restocked their supplies . The two cruisers arrived on 12 November , left the following day , and met the rest of the squadron at sea on 18 November . Three days later , the squadron anchored in St. Quentin Bay in the Gulf of Penas , where they coaled . The Royal Navy had deployed Vice Admiral Doveton Sturdee 's pair of battlecruisers , Invincible and Inflexible , to hunt down the German squadron . They left Britain on 11 November , and arrived in the Falkland Islands on 7 December . There , they joined the armored cruisers Cornwall , Kent , and Carnarvon , and the light cruisers Glasgow and Bristol . 
 On 26 November , the German East Asia Squadron left St. Quentin Bay , bound for the Atlantic . On 2 December , they caught the Canadian sailing ship Drummuir , which was carrying 2 @,@ 750 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 710 long tons ; 3 @,@ 030 short tons ) of high @-@ grade Cardiff coal . The following morning , the Germans anchored off Picton Island , where they unloaded the coal from Drummuir into their own auxiliaries . On the morning of 6 December , von Spee held a council aboard Scharnhorst to discuss their next moves . With the support of the captains of Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , he successfully argued for an attack on the Falklands to destroy the British wireless station and coal stocks there . Lüdecke and the captains of Leipzig and Nürnberg all opposed the plan , and were in favor of bypassing the Falklands and proceeding to the La Plata area to continue to raid British shipping . 
 = = = = Battle of the Falkland Islands = = = = 
 On the afternoon of 6 December , the German ships departed Picton Island , bound for the Falklands . On 7 December , they rounded Tierra del Fuego and turned north into the Atlantic . They arrived off the Falklands at around 02 : 00 ; three hours later , von Spee detached Gneisenau and Nürnberg to land a party ashore . By 08 : 30 , the ships were approaching Port Stanley , when they noticed thick columns of smoke rising from the harbor . After closing to the harbor entrance , they quickly realized they were confronted by a much more powerful squadron , which was just getting up steam . Von Spee immediately broke off the operation and turned east to flee before the British ships could catch his squadron . By 10 : 45 , Gneisenau and Nürnberg had rejoined the fleet , and the German auxiliaries were detached to seek shelter in the maze of islands off Cape Horn . 
 The British ships set off in pursuit , and by 12 : 50 , Sturdee 's two battlecruisers had overtaken the Germans . A minute later , he gave the order to open fire at the trailing German ship , Leipzig . Von Spee ordered the three small cruisers to try to escape to the south , while he turned back with Scharnhorst and Gneisenau in an attempt to hold off the British squadron . Sturdee had foreseen this possibility , and so had ordered his armored and light cruisers to pursue the German light cruisers . The battlecruisers quickly overwhelmed von Spee 's armored cruisers , and destroyed them with heavy loss of life . Dresden , with her turbine engines , was able to outpace her pursuers , and was the only German warship to escape destruction . Lüdecke decided to take his ship into the islands off South America to keep a steady supply of coal available . 
 On 9 December , she passed back around Cape Horn to return to the Pacific . That day , she anchored in Sholl Bay , with only 160 t ( 160 long tons ; 180 short tons ) of coal aboard . Oberleutnant zur See ( lieutenant at sea ) Wilhelm Canaris convinced the Chilean naval representative for the region to permit Dresden to remain in the area for an extra twenty @-@ four hours so enough coal could be taken aboard to reach Punta Arenas . She arrived there on 12 December , and received 750 t ( 740 long tons ; 830 short tons ) of coal from a German steamer . The Admiralstab hoped that Dresden would be able to break through to the Atlantic and return to Germany , but the poor condition of her engines precluded this . Lüdecke instead decided to attempt to cross the Pacific via Easter Island , the Solomon Islands , and the Dutch East Indies and raid commerce in the Indian Ocean . Dresden took on another 1 @,@ 600 t ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ; 1 @,@ 800 short tons ) of coal on 19 January . On 14 February , Dresden left the islands off the South American coast for the South Pacific . On 27 February , the cruiser captured the British barque Conway Castle south of Más a Tierra . From December to February , the German liner Sierra Cordoba had supplied Dresden and had accompanied her northward to a final coaling at Juan Fernández Islands just before the cruiser was sunk . 
 On 8 March , Dresden was drifting in dense fog when lookouts spotted Kent , which also had her engines off , about 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ; 17 mi ) away . Both ships immediately raised steam , and Dresden escaped after a five @-@ hour chase . The strenuous effort depleted her coal stocks and overtaxed her engines . Lüdecke decided that his ship was no longer operational , and determined to have his ship interned to preserve it . The following morning , she put into Más a Fuera , dropping anchor in Cumberland Bay at 8 : 30 . The following day , Lüdecke received by wireless the Kaiser 's permission to let Dresden be interned , and so Lüdecke informed the local Chilean official of his intention to do so . 
 = = = = Battle of Más a Tierra = = = = 
 On the morning of 14 March , Kent and Glasgow approached Cumberland Bay ; their appearance was relayed back to Dresden by one of her pinnaces , which had been sent to patrol the entrance to the bay . Dresden was unable to maneuver , owing to her fuel shortage , and Lüdecke signaled that his ship was no longer a combatant . The British disregarded this message , as well as a Chilean vessel that approached them as they entered the bay . Glasgow opened fire , in violation of Chile 's neutrality ; Britain had already informed Chile that British warships would disregard international law if they located Dresden in Chilean territorial waters . Shortly thereafter , Kent joined in the bombardment as well . The German gunners fired off three shots in response , but the guns were quickly knocked out by British gunfire . 
 Lüdecke sent the signal " Am sending negotiator " to the British warships , and dispatched Canaris in a pinnace ; Glasgow continued to bombard the defenseless cruiser . In another attempt to stop the attack , Lüdecke raised the white flag , which prompted Glasgow to cease fire . Canaris came aboard to speak with Captain John Luce ; the former strongly protested the latter 's violation of Chile 's neutrality . Luce simply replied that he had his orders , and demanded an unconditional surrender . Canaris explained that Dresden had already been interned by Chile , and thereafter returned to his ship , which had in the meantime been prepared for scuttling . 
 At 10 : 45 , the scuttling charge detonated in the bow and exploded the forward ammunition magazines . The bow was badly mangled ; in about half an hour , the ship had taken on enough water to sink . As it struck the sea floor , the bow was torn from the rest of the ship , which rolled over to starboard . As the rest of the hull settled below the waves , a second scuttling charge exploded in the ship 's engine rooms . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Most of the ship 's crew managed to escape ; only eight men were killed in the attack , with another twenty @-@ nine wounded . The British auxiliary cruiser HMS Orama took fifteen severely wounded men to Valparaiso ; four of them died . The destruction of his ship had left Lüdecke in shock , and so Canaris took responsibility for the fate of the ship 's crew . They remained on the island for five days until two Chilean warships brought a German passenger ship to take the men to <unk> Island , where they were interned for the duration of the war . Canaris escaped from the internment camp on 5 August 1915 and reached Germany exactly two months later . On 31 March 1917 , a small group of men escaped on the Chilean barque Tinto ; the voyage back to Germany lasted 120 days . The rest of the crew did not return to Germany until 1920 . 
 The wreck lies at a depth of 70 meters ( 230 ft ) . In 2002 , the first survey of the wreck was done by a team led by James P. Delgado for the Sea Hunters documentary produced by the National Underwater and Marine Agency . The team included the archaeologist Dr. Willi Kramer , the first German to visit the wreck since she sank 88 years before . Dresden lies on her starboard side pointed north , toward the beach . The wreck is heavily damaged ; much of the upper works , including the bridge , the masts , the funnels , and many of the guns have been torn from the ship . The bow has been cut off by the scuttling charges detonated by the ship 's crew , and sits upright on the sea floor . The stern is also badly damaged , with the main deck blasted away and many shell holes in the ship 's side . Some of the damage to the aft of the ship appears to have been done by an undocumented salvage operation before Delgado 's survey . According to German records , Dresden was carrying gold coins from their colony at Tsingtau ; Delgado speculated that this salvage work was an attempt to retrieve these . 
 In 1965 , the ship 's compass and several flags were recovered and returned to Germany , where they are held at the German Naval Academy Mürwik in Flensburg @-@ Mürwik . In 2006 , Chilean and German divers found and recovered Dresden 's bell , which is now in Germany . CS Forester 's novel Brown on Resolution , and two subsequent movies , were inspired by the Dresden 's escape and subsequent destruction . 
 = Para @-@ swimming classification = 
 Para @-@ swimming classification is a function @-@ based classification system designed to allow for fair competition in disability swimming . The classes are prefixed with " S " for freestyle , butterfly and backstroke events , " SB " for breaststroke and " SM " for individual medley events . Swimmers with physical disabilities are divided into ten classes based on their degree of functional disability . Those with visual impairments are placed in three additional classes . A final class , S14 , is reserved for swimmers with intellectual disabilities . 
 Swimming was one of the first organised sports for people with disabilities , and was contested at the first Summer Paralympics in 1960 . Both the rules for the sport and approval of classifications were the responsibility of the Fédération International de Natation Amateur ( FINA ) until 1992 , when the International Paralympic Committee took over the governance of classification . As of 2012 , people with visual , physical and intellectual disabilities are eligible to compete in the sport . The classification system was originally based on medical criteria , but has since moved to one largely based on functional disability to make para @-@ swimming more competitive . The sport is currently moving towards an evidence @-@ based classification system . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Para @-@ swimming classification is based on a system in which functional criteria are assessed . Athletes who have different physical disabilities may compete in the same class so long as their functional impairments are similar . In swimming , amputations of the arms below the elbow have a significant impact on functional ability . As a result , swimming classifications differ from athletics classifications . Swimmers are divided into ten classes based on degree of functional disability : S1 , S2 , S3 , S4 , S5 , S6 , S7 , S8 , S9 and S10 . The most severely affected are in class S1 ; these swimmers are normally use wheelchairs outside of the pool . Classes are prefixed with the letter " S " for freestyle , butterfly and backstroke events , while those prefixed with " SB " are for breaststroke , and those with " SM " for individual medley events . This is because different strokes require the use of different muscle groups . In the case of the breaststroke , for example , the hand and the hip play a crucial role . Because of this , a swimmer may compete in one class for one stroke and a different class for another . It also means that swimmers with cerebral palsy , spinal cord injuries and limb deficiencies may compete against each other . For the individual medley , the class assigned is the mean average of the classes assigned for each individual stroke ( rounded to the nearest whole number with .5 rounding up ) . 
 There are three additional classes , S11 , <unk> and S13 , for visually impaired swimmers . The lower number indicates a greater degree of impairment : class S11 swimmers are blind or nearly blind , and compete in blacked @-@ out goggles . They each have a " tapper " who uses a pole or " <unk> " to warn the swimmer that they are approaching the end of the pool . The visual classifications are based on medical classification , and not on functional mobility . A final class , S14 , is for intellectually disabled swimmers . This class was dropped for the 2004 Summer Paralympics and the 2008 Summer Paralympics , but was restored for the 2012 Summer Paralympics . 
 The general rules for Paralympic swimming are based on those intended for able @-@ bodied competitors . The rules regarding strokes , turns and the length of time that swimmers may remain under water are similar to those for the Olympic Games . Events take place in a standard 50m pool . Swimmers may dive in or start in the water . Swimmers may not use any assistive technology while competing . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Swimming was one of the eight sports contested in the first Paralympics , the 1960 Summer Paralympics in Rome . Both the rules for the sport and for the approval of swimmers ' classifications were set by the Fédération International de Natation Amateur ( FINA ) . In 1992 , the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) formally became the governing body for disability swimming . Four different sporting bodies , the International Blind Sports Federation ( IBSA ) , International Sports Federation of the Disabled ( ISOD ) , International Wheelchair and Amputee Sports Federation ( ISMWSF ) and the Cerebral Palsy International Sports and Recreation Association ( CP @-@ ISRA ) , assisted the IPC in governing swimming at the 1992 Summer Paralympics . The IPC Classification Code and IPC Swimming govern the classification process . Classification of swimmers is performed by classifiers that are recognised by the IPC . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest classification system for para @-@ swimming was created during the 1940s . At this time , swimmers were classified based on their medical conditions . During the late 1960s and early 1970s , the classification system was set up as a series of " handicaps " . In an effort to clearly describe disabilities and promote fairness , the number of classifications ballooned . This made organizing competitive events difficult as there were too few people in each classification ; international events for people with disabilities were said to have as many winners as competitors . At the 1988 Summer Paralympics in Seoul , the number of eligible classes was so great that 60 gold medals were awarded in one swimming event . 
 In 1974 , the Disabled of the German State of North Rhine - <unk> ( BSNW ) developed a swimming classification system that stayed in use until 1982 . This system had seven classifications . There was a CP class for athletes with <unk> who would also compete in the same class against competitors who were single arm above the elbow amputees , had double @-@ arm dysmelia type <unk> , had single arm paralysis or had a fixed shoulder joint . There was an intellectual disability class called Class J , and a Class H for people with severe disabilities . BSNW classification events included swimming races from 50 to 1500 metres . The system was later expanded to include nine classes before it was discontinued . The BSNW system did not gain international support , and only was used inside Germany . It was discarded because of a need to have athletes classified for international competitions . 
 In 1983 , classification for swimmers with cerebral palsy was governed by CP @-@ ISRA . There were five cerebral palsy classifications . Class 1 competitors could compete in the 25 metre freestyle event with flotation devices with or without flotation devices . Class 2 competitors could compete in the same events , but only against class 2 competitors . That year , 80 to 85 per cent of all competitors with cerebral palsy competed in the same classification in international competitions . 
 Classification for swimming relied on a points system to assess the severity of physical disability without considering athlete functionality specifically as it applied to the ability to swim a particular stroke . This caused problems because certain types of disability had a greater negative impact on swimming than others , and the point system did not directly address functional ability . Toto address this , in 1990 point consideration was eliminated for disability types that did not impact performance . The IPC decided to reduce the number of classifications , and to try to fix classification so that competitors could have more certainty in which classification they would compete in before attending an event . This was a major change , as previously , athletes would be classified immediately before , and even during , an event . As a result , the number of swimming classifications dropped from 31 at Seoul in 1988 to 10 at the 1992 Summer Paralympics in Barcelona . 
 Going into the 1992 Summer Paralympics , the International Coordinating Committee and the Technical Committee of the IPC push for a move towards a functional classification system . This came to a head at the November 1989 meeting of the Barcelona Olympics Organising Committee ( Comite <unk> <unk> Barcelona - <unk> ) , when a discussion started about what events and classifications should be eligible for the Games . A study by the organising committee and the Polytechnic University of Catalonia in the lead @-@ up to the meeting looked at the results of recent international competitions . It proposed a series of classes , based on the competitive results , for use in Barcelona . <unk> insisted that such a system be implemented to ensure the sport at the Paralympic Games was serious and competitive , instead of recreational . The suggestions were implemented for sports such as swimming and athletics . The Games were the first ones where swimmers of different types of disabilities competed against each other , swimmers had a guaranteed right to appeal their classification . 
 The move to functional classification coincided with the rise of sports science . The first detailed international swimming sport science project was conducted at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul . This was followed by a similar project at the 1992 Summer Paralympics in Barcelona . These studies provided an increasingly detailed understanding of the factors involved in high performance swimming . Henceforth sports science became the driver of both performance and classification . 
 Ahead of the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney , changes were made in classification for the breaststroke , bringing the total number of functional classifications down from ten that had competed in <unk> to nine . Swimmers who had been classified as <unk> at the 1996 Summer Paralympics in Atlanta opted not to compete in Sydney . Several former <unk> and <unk> swimmers moved down a class to compete , and made the finals in their classifications . The IPC 's Olympian aspiration to become an premier elite international sporting competition still fell short . In Sydney , 561 gold medals were awarded in 18 sports , compared with 300 in 28 sports at the 2000 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Classification process = = 
 During the classification process , classifiers evaluate factors including whether a swimmer 's physical limitations require him or her to start in the water , and how the swimmer enters the water in competition . A two @-@ person panel that includes at least one person with a medical background handles classification at international competitions . Classifiers are required to be familiar with the type of disability they are classifying , whether physical , visual or intellectual . Classification by national sports bodies mirrors the international classification process , conducted by nationally @-@ recognised IPC classifiers . For Australian competitors , for example , classification is managed by the national sport federation , Swimming Australia , with support from the Australian Paralympic Committee . There are three types of classification available for Australian competitors : provisional , national and international . The first is for club @-@ level competitions , the second for state and national competitions , and the third for international competitions . 
 Internationally , all classification is handled in English but athletes are allowed to have an interpreter present during the process . Swimmers are required to disclose any medications they regularly use , and provide detailed records of their medical history if a classifier deems them relevant . They are allowed to have someone familiar with their swimming limitations present during the process . The process includes a physical assessment , observation assessment , and a functional assessment that may include performance in the pool . Swimmers with visual impairment do not require the functional and observational components of assessment . If a swimmer intentionally misrepresents his or her disability , he or she is barred from the classification process for a minimum of two years , and is unable to compete . 
 If swimmers do not agree with their classifications , they can appeal through the IPC Board of Appeal on Classification , which is the body recognised by IPC Swimming . Formal processes exist for how to do this in both non @-@ competition and competition periods . Classification assessment took roughly 30 to 45 minutes at the 1996 Summer Paralympics . Classification for blind swimmers only lasted about 15 minutes . 
 = = Classification at the Paralympics = = 
 All disability types were eligible to participate at the 1992 Summer Paralympics . The IPC oversaw classification based on functional disability . General and functional classification took place in the Paralympic Village , with functional swimming classification taking place on the same dates at the <unk> Bernat <unk> . The process became a contentious issue at the Paralympics because of on @-@ the @-@ spot <unk> that resulted in changes to the competition schedule . On @-@ the @-@ spot classification or re @-@ classification was viewed as a negative aspect of the 1996 Summer Paralympics , and the Paralympic movement overall . At the 2000 Summer Paralympics , 54 assessments were conducted , resulting in 13 class changes . There was one Paralympic New Status ( PNS ) protest and two Paralympic Permanent Status ( PPS ) protests by a national Paralympic committee , with one classification upheld and two denied . Six classification appeals were lodged for swimming at the 2000 Summer Paralympics involving four athletes , resulting in two class changes . For the 2016 Summer Paralympics in Rio , the International Paralympic Committee had a zero classification at the Games policy . This policy was put into place in 2014 , with the goal of avoiding last minute changes in classes that would negatively impact athlete training preparations . All competitors needed to be internationally classified with their classification status confirmed prior to the Games , with exceptions to this policy being dealt with on a case by case basis . In case there was a need for classification or reclassification at the Games despite best efforts otherwise , swimming classification was scheduled to take place at the Olympic Aquatics Stadium , with visually impaired swimmers getting classified from September 4 to 6 and all other swimmers being classified from September 3 to 5 . For sportspeople with physical or intellectual disabilities going through classification or reclassification in Rio , their in competition observation event is their first appearance in competition at the Games . 
 = = Future = = 
 Going forward , disability sport 's major classification body , the IPC , is working on improving classification to be more of an evidence @-@ based system , as opposed to a performance @-@ based system , so as not to punish elite athletes whose performance makes them appear in a higher class compared to competitors who train less . 
 = Francis B. Wai = 
 Francis Brown Wai ( April 14 , 1917 – October 20 , 1944 ) was a captain in the United States Army and received the Medal of Honor for actions during the recapture of the Philippines from Japan in 1944 . As a youngster , Wai liked to surf and he played several sports in high school and college . He graduated from college with a degree in finance . Although he initially planned to work with his father , he joined the Hawaii National Guard , commissioned a lieutenant . Wai was sent with his unit to fight in World War II and he was killed during the U.S. amphibious assault on Leyte , Philippines . 
 He was initially awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , the United States ' second highest decoration for valor . After an extensive review of awards in 2000 , his medal was upgraded to the Medal of Honor . To date , Wai is the only Chinese American and one of only two Asian American officers to receive the medal . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wai was the child of a Native Hawaiian mother and a Chinese father . Growing up , he often surfed with Duke Kahanamoku , regarded as the father of surfing , and Buster Crabbe , who later became an actor . He attended the Punahou School in Honolulu where he earned athletic letters in track , football and baseball . He went to college at the Sacramento Junior College before transferring to UCLA . At UCLA , he was a four sport athlete and graduated in 1939 with a bachelor 's degree in Banking and Finance . He intended to work alongside his father in real estate and banking but instead joined the military upon the outbreak of World War II . 
 = = Military service and death = = 
 After his graduation , Wai enlisted in the Hawaii National Guard and was called into active duty before the United States ' entrance into World War II . He received a commission as an officer and completed Officer Candidate School in 1941 . His commission was rare at a time when few Asian Americans were allowed to serve in combat leadership roles . He was eventually assigned to the 34th Infantry Regiment of the 24th Infantry Division with the rank of Captain . The 24th Division , based at Schofield Barracks , Oahu , was among the first American units to be involved in the Pacific Theater , exchanging fire with Japanese aircraft during the December 7 , 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor . 
 = = = Operation Reckless = = = 
 In May 1943 , Captain Wai deployed to Australia with the 24th Infantry Division and by September 19 , 1943 , the unit was at Camp Caves , near Rockhampton , on the eastern coast of Australia . Wai and the rest of the unit began intensive combat training . With training completed , the division moved to Goodenough Island on January 31 , 1944 , to prepare for Operation Reckless , the amphibious invasion of Hollandia , Netherlands New Guinea ( now Jayapura , in the Papua province of Indonesia ) . 
 The 24th landed at Tanahmerah Bay on April 22 , 1944 and seized the Hollandia <unk> despite torrential rain and marshy terrain . Shortly after the Hollandia landing , the division 's 34th Infantry Regiment moved to Biak to reinforce the 41st Infantry Division . Wai 's regiment captured the <unk> and <unk> airdromes before returning to the division on Hollandia in July . In two months , Wai and his unit had crossed New Guinea and recaptured three airdromes from the Japanese . 
 = = = Leyte = = = 
 After occupying the Hollandia area , Wai was assigned to X Corps of the Sixth United States Army in preparation for the invasion of the Philippines . On October 20 , 1944 , his division was paired with the 1st Cavalry Division within X Corps , and the two divisions made an assault landing at Leyte . When Captain Wai landed at Red Beach , the Japanese forces stationed on the island concentrated their fire on the waves of incoming troops from gun positions located in a palm grove bounded by submerged rice paddies . When Wai arrived on the beach in the fifth wave , he found the soldiers there to be leaderless , disorganized , and pinned down on the open beach . Assuming command , he moved through the rice paddies , without cover . His demeanor and example inspired the other men to follow him . With deliberate disregard of his own personal safety , he advanced without cover to draw Japanese machine gun and rifle fire , thus exposing the locations of the entrenched Japanese forces . <unk> , the Japanese positions were assaulted and overcome . Wai was killed leading an assault against the last Japanese pillbox in the area . For his actions during the landing on Leyte , Wai was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . After the war , his remains were interred at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific in Hawaii . His grave can be found in section Q , grave 1194 . 
 = = Military awards and honors = = 
 In 1996 , amid allegations of prejudicial treatment of Asian Americans in uniform in World War II , Congress directed Louis Caldera , then Secretary of the Army , to conduct a full review of military records . The review concluded that 22 Asian Americans , including Wai , did not receive full consideration for the Medal of Honor and in 2000 , Wai 's Distinguished Service Cross was upgraded to the Medal of Honor . 
 Of those whose medals were upgraded , Wai was one of only two who did not belong to the predominantly Japanese American 442nd Regimental Combat Team / 100th Infantry Battalion ; the other being Rudolph B. Davila of the 7th Infantry . At a White House ceremony June 20 , 2000 , President Bill Clinton presented the Medal of Honor to 22 Asian Americans whose Distinguished Service Crosses were upgraded to the Medal of Honor . 
 During the course of his short military career , Wai earned eight awards and decorations . 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
