 Rank and organization : Captain , U.S. Army , Headquarters , 34th Infantry Place and date : Leyte , Philippine Islands , October 20 , 1944 Entered service at : Honolulu , Hawaii Born : Honolulu , Hawaii 
 Citation : 
 " Captain Francis B. Wai distinguished himself by extraordinary heroism in action , on 20 October 1944 , in Leyte , Philippine Islands . Captain Wai landed at Red Beach , Leyte , in the face of accurate , concentrated enemy fire from gun positions advantageously located in a palm grove bounded by submerged rice paddies . Finding the first four waves of American soldiers leaderless , disorganized , and pinned down on the open beach , he immediately assumed command . Issuing clear and concise orders , and disregarding heavy enemy machine gun and rifle fire , he began to move inland through the rice paddies without cover . The men , inspired by his cool demeanor and heroic example , rose from their positions and followed him . During the advance , Captain Wai repeatedly determined the locations of enemy strong points by deliberately exposing himself to draw their fire . In leading an assault upon the last remaining Japanese pillbox in the area , he was killed by its occupants . Captain Wai 's courageous , aggressive leadership inspired the men , even after his death , to advance and destroy the enemy . His intrepid and determined efforts were largely responsible for the rapidity with which the initial beachhead was secured . Captain Wai 's extraordinary heroism and devotion to duty are in keeping with the highest traditions of military service and reflect great credit on him , his unit , and the United States Army . " 
 Wai was inducted into the UCLA Athletics Hall of Fame on October 11 , 2014 . 
 = Battle of Arcadiopolis ( 970 ) = 
 The Battle of Arcadiopolis was fought in 970 between a Byzantine army under Bardas Skleros and a Rus ' army , the latter also including allied Bulgarian , Pecheneg and Magyar contingents . In the preceding years , the Rus ' ruler Sviatoslav had conquered Bulgaria , and was now menacing Byzantium as well . The Rus ' force had been advancing through Thrace towards Constantinople when it was met by Skleros ' force . Having fewer men than the Rus ' , Skleros prepared an ambush and attacked the Rus ' army with a portion of his force . The Byzantines then feigned retreat , and succeeded in drawing off the Pecheneg contingent into the ambush , routing it . The remainder of the Rus ' army then panicked and fled , and suffered heavy casualties from the pursuing Byzantines . The battle was important as it bought time for the Byzantine emperor John I Tzimiskes to settle his internal problems and assemble a large expedition , which eventually defeated Sviatoslav the next year . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 965 or 966 , a Bulgarian embassy visited the Byzantine emperor Nikephoros II Phokas ( r . 963 – 969 ) at Constantinople to receive the annual tribute that had been agreed by the two powers as the price of peace in 927 . Phokas , flush and self @-@ confident from a series of victories against the Arabs in the East that had led to the recovery of Crete , Cyprus and Cilicia , refused to comply , and even had the envoys beat up . He followed this up with a show of military strength , by sending a small force to raze a number of Bulgarian border posts in Thrace . 
 It was a clear declaration of war , but Nikephoros ' forces were largely preoccupied in the East . Thus the emperor turned to the traditional Byzantine expedient of turning one of the peoples living further north , in modern @-@ day Ukraine , against Bulgaria . He sent an ambassador , the patrikios Kalokyros , to Sviatoslav , ruler of the Rus ' with whom the Byzantines had maintained close relations . Sviatoslav enthusiastically responded , and invaded Bulgaria in 967 or 968 in a devastating raid , before returning home to defend his capital against a Pecheneg attack . This forced the Bulgarian tsar , Peter I , to the negotiating table , agreeing to terms favourable to Byzantium . However , this brief sojourn also awakened in Sviatoslav the desire to conquer Bulgaria and establish his own realm there . He returned in force in July or August 969 and conquered the country within a few months . 
 Nikephoros ' scheme had backfired dramatically : instead of peace , a new and formidable foe had appeared in the Balkans , and a large part of the Bulgarian nobility appeared to side with the Rus ' prince . The emperor , however , was murdered in December 969 , and it fell to his successor , John I Tzimiskes ( r . 969 – 976 ) , to deal with the Rus ' threat . Sviatoslav now turned his sights on Byzantium , and to John 's entreaties for peace he allegedly answered that the Empire should abandon its European territories to him and withdraw to Asia Minor . Tzimiskes himself was preoccupied with consolidating his position and with countering the unrest of the powerful Phokas clan and its adherents , and delegated the war in the Balkans to his brother @-@ in @-@ law , the Domestic of the Schools Bardas Skleros , and to the eunuch stratopedarches Peter . They were to winter in Thrace and raise an army , whilst sending spies to discover Sviatoslav 's intentions . 
 At the news of this , a powerful Rus ' force , along with many Bulgarians and a Pecheneg contingent , was sent south over the Balkan Mountains . After sacking the last major Bulgarian stronghold of Philippopolis ( modern Plovdiv ) , they bypassed the heavily defended city of Adrianople and turned towards Constantinople . The size of the Rus ' army , and whether it comprised the entirety of Sviatoslav 's forces or just a division , is unclear . John Skylitzes , for instance , implies that this was the entire Rus ' army , numbering an incredible 308 @,@ 000 men , but the contemporary Leo the Deacon reports that it was a detachment of " over 30 @,@ 000 men " ; conversely , the Russian Primary Chronicle gives the entire Rus ' army under Sviatoslav at some 30 @,@ 000 , whilst numbering the Rus ' at Arcadiopolis at only 10 @,@ 000 , faced with 100 @,@ 000 Byzantines . It is clear , however , that the Byzantines were considerably outnumbered , and that the Rus ' force at Arcadiopolis included significant numbers of Bulgarians , as well as allied contingents of Pechenegs and " Turks " ( i.e. Magyars ) . 
 = = The battle = = 
 Skleros then quickly assembled a force of ten to twelve thousand men and set out to meet the Rus ' . The two armies met near Arcadiopolis ( modern <unk> in Turkish Thrace ) , some 80 km west of Constantinople . The two primary accounts on the Byzantine side differ on the preliminaries of the battle : Leo the Deacon reports that Skleros sent a scouting detachment ahead under the patrikios John <unk> , and then gave battle after only a day , but the later chronicle of Skylitzes reports that for a few days , Skleros with his men remained within the walls of Arcadiopolis as the Rus ' encamped nearby , and refused to come out and meet them in battle despite their repeated challenges for him to do so . According to Skylitzes , the Rus ' quickly became convinced that the imperial army was too afraid to face them ; consequently they roamed about the countryside plundering , neglected their camp defences and spent their nights in heedless revelry . 
 Skleros eventually set out from the city , and divided his forces into three groups : two divisions were placed in ambush on the wooded sides of the road leading towards the Rus ' camp , while another , probably some 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 men , was placed under himself ( or <unk> in Skylitzes ' account ) and went forth to attack the Rus ' host . The Byzantine detachment quickly came into contact with the Rus ' army , and charged the Pecheneg contingent . The Byzantines executed a gradual orderly retreat , turning at intervals to charge back at the pursuing Pechenegs , who had thus become separated from the main body of the Rus ' army . This conflict was fierce and bloody , taxing the discipline and endurance of the small Byzantine force . According to Leo the Deacon , at one point one of the Pechenegs charged Bardas himself and delivered a sword blow on his helmet , which was deflected by the metal without doing harm . Bardas ' young brother Constantine came to his rescue , killing the Pecheneg . 
 When the two opposing forces reached the place of the ambush , Bardas ordered the trumpets blown and the two concealed Byzantine divisions attacked the Pechenegs from the flanks and the rear . Cut off from aid and surrounded , the Pechenegs began to panic and flee . One of their leaders tried to rally his men , but he was attacked by Bardas Skleros himself , who killed him with a single sword @-@ blow that reportedly cut him in two from his head down to the waist , through the Pecheneg 's helmet and cuirass . The loss of the Pecheneg commander turned the battle into a complete rout , and panic spread to the Bulgarian contingent following behind the Pechenegs , which also suffered heavy casualties in the general chaos . The Byzantine casualties in the battle were low ( Skylitzes speaks of 25 dead and Leo of 55 ) although they lost many horses to the Pecheneg arrows , while the losses of the Rus ' force , although certainly lower than Leo 's claimed 20 @,@ 000 , were still significant , probably running into several thousands . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Byzantines were unable to exploit this victory or pursue the remnants of the Rus ' army , since Bardas Phokas rose in revolt in Asia Minor . Bardas Skleros and his men were consequently withdrawn to Asia Minor , whilst Sviatoslav restricted his forces to the north of the Balkan Mountains . In the spring of the next year , however , with Phokas ' rebellion subdued , Tzimiskes himself , at the head of his army , advanced north into Bulgaria . The Byzantines took the Bulgarian capital Preslav , capturing the Bulgarian tsar Boris II , and confined the Rus ' in the fortress of Dorostolon ( modern Silistra ) . After a three @-@ month siege and a series of pitched battles before the city walls , Sviatoslav conceded defeat and abandoned Bulgaria . 
 = Shin Megami Tensei : Digital Devil Saga = 
 Shin Megami Tensei : Digital Devil Saga , known in Japan as Digital Devil Saga : Avatar Tuner ( Digital Devil Saga アバタール ・ <unk> , <unk> Debiru <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a duology of role @-@ playing video games developed by Atlus for the PlayStation 2 . They are a spin @-@ off of the Megami Tensei series . The first Digital Devil Saga was released in Japan in 2004 , North America in 2005 and Europe in 2006 . Its direct sequel , Shin Megami Tensei : Digital Devil Saga 2 ( Digital Devil Saga アバタール ・ <unk> , <unk> Debiru <unk> <unk> <unk> Tsū , lit . Digital Devil Saga : Avatar Tuner 2 ) , released in 2005 in Japan and North America , and 2007 in Europe . The games were published in Europe by Ghostlight and in other regions by Atlus . 
 Digital Devil Saga follows the Embryon , a tribe who fight against six other tribes in a digital world called the Junkyard . After being infected with a demon virus that grants them demonic powers , the Embryon must fight with and devour the other tribes to ascend to " Nirvana " . During the conflict , they shelter a woman named Sera , who has the power to calm their demonic powers . In Digital Devil Saga 2 , having escaped into the devastated real world , the Embryon are caught up in the fight against the Karma Society , who are intimately linked to the source of the disaster . The gameplay of both titles feature third @-@ person navigation of <unk> characters around to @-@ scale environments , and turn @-@ based gameplay against demonic monsters and human enemies . 
 Digital Devil Saga began development pre @-@ 2002 under the working title New Goddess . The game 's concept and original draft were written by Japanese author Yu Godai , but she withdrew from the project for personal reasons , and was replaced by Atlus scriptwriter Tadashi Satomi . The gameplay concept of the characters transforming into demons was based on an unused idea for Shin Megami Tensei . The second game began development immediately after the first , with the main development effort going into refining and improving the gameplay . While their commercial performances varied , both games were praised by critics for their story , graphics and gameplay . Since release , the game has inspired a mobile prequel , and Godai wrote a series of novels based on her original premise for the story . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In the Shin Megami Tensei : Digital Devil Saga role @-@ playing games , players take control of the characters Serph , Heat , Argilla , Gale and Cielo , with the characters Sera and Roland becoming playable in Digital Devil Saga 2 . These characters are able to transform into a demon form , which is their main form in battle . Characters navigate to @-@ scale environments , fighting enemies in both random encounters and story @-@ focused boss battles . After each battle , experience points are awarded to characters . Character abilities are governed by Mantra Grids , a system where Mantras are bought using the in @-@ game currency Macca , then mastering them using gaining Atma Points gained from defeated enemies . The maximum number of abilities that a character can learn is eight . If two or more characters equip a certain ability , they can perform a stronger version of it through a combo . Each character can learn abilities from one of four categories : Physical , Magic , Shield and Auto . 
 The Digital Devil Saga games use a turn @-@ based battle system , with three allied characters fighting in battle . Both player characters and enemies are governed by a mechanic called the Press Turn system : each character has a symbol representing a turn . The character can forfeit a turn to allow the next character an action ; turns cannot be passed more than once . If an enemy 's weakness is exploited or a character lands a critical hit , an extra turn is gained ; if a character resists an attack , a turn is lost . In Digital Devil Saga 2 , characters will sometimes enter battle in a half @-@ transformed " berserk " mode , which increases attack power while locking away magic skills and lowering a character 's defense . While battle is focused around strengthening characters ' demon forms , they can also fight in their human forms using conventional weapons , and can equip ammunition . A human character can perform a combo with one in demon form . The magic system uses nine magic attributes . Ice and Lightning magic have a chance of causing the " freeze " and " stun " status , while <unk> magic reduces an enemy 's hit points by a certain percentage , and Death magic causes an instant kill . Status magic can inflict status effects on enemies . 
 Each time a character 's experience level raises , they receive stat boosts . While the protagonist can assign stat points at will , the other main characters each have certain specializations . Money is also dropped , which can be used to buy supplies from merchants . Atma is gained after each battle , but a greater amount is gained from eating enemies . If an enemy is " frightened " , the amount of Atma is further increased . Characters can also be afflicted with a status ailment if they overeat . In Digital Devil Saga 2 , special Karma Ring items can be assigned to characters to grant stat boosts . Fitting different gems dropped from defeated enemies granting specific stat boosts and effects . Effects range from granting free status buffs on the player party to casting ailments on enemies . Importing save data from the first game enables some skills and abilities learned during the first game to be transferred to the characters that learned them . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 The first Digital Devil Saga takes place in the Junkyard , a combat simulator program divided between six tribes where it always rains : the Embryon , Vanguards , Solids , Maribel , Brutes and Wolves . Each tribe holds a particular territory , and initially are devoid of emotions : the only common ground is a great tower at the Junkyard 's center called the Karma Temple , which acts as a meeting place for all the tribe leaders . The following game is set on Earth , which has been devastated by a phenomenon known as the " Black Sun " , a manifestation of God 's anger . The survivors of humanity are ruled by the Karma Society . 
 The main protagonists of the Digital Devil Saga duology are silent protagonist Serph ( <unk> , Sa @-@ fu ) , leader of the Embryon ; and Sera ( <unk> ) , a woman who can commune with God . The other Embryon are the kind Argilla ( <unk> , <unk> ) ; the hot @-@ tempered Heat ( <unk> , Hito ) the light @-@ hearted Cielo ( <unk> , <unk> ) ; and the highly logical Gale ( <unk> , <unk> ) . The main antagonist is Angel ( <unk> ) , who is Sera 's intersexual biological parent . In Digital Devil Saga 2 , two new main characters are introduced : <unk> , the alcoholic leader of the <unk> resistance group ; and Madame Margot Cuvier , head of the Karma Society . All the main characters barring Cuvier become infected with the demon virus , a condition that causes them to turn into demonic beings and lust after human flesh . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 During a border skirmish between the Embryon and the Vanguards , a demon virus is introduced that infects everyone in the Junkyard : branded with a mark representing their " Atma " and gradually awakening to basic emotions , the people of the Junkyard must devour their foes to satiate their demonic hunger or risk going berserk . Sera , a so @-@ called cyber shaman , arrives suffering from amnesia and is taken in by the Embryon , revealing herself capable of calming their hunger with her singing . The Embryon first become conscious of their new powers when they meet the surviving Vanguard : during their time there , they are forced to kill the Vanguards ' leader Harley . Serph is then summoned to the Karma Temple along with the surviving tribe leaders . Once they are assembled there , a female being calling itself Angel orders the tribes to conquer their neighbors and ascend the Temple 's tower to " Nirvana " , bringing Sera as proof of their achievements . The Embryon decide to ally with the Maribel as a means of defeating the stronger tribes . 
 After gaining the trust of the Maribel 's leader <unk> , they are betrayed by her second @-@ in @-@ command Bat , who allies with the Brutes along with the Solids ' leader Mick . <unk> , having refused to eat as she needed to , goes berserk and must be killed . The Solids then capture Sera , leading the Embryon into a fight to the death against Mick . They also successfully trick the Brutes ' forces and Bat into a booby @-@ trapped ship , killing them . During this time , the Wolves are subdued by the Brutes , whose leader Varin has awakened memories of a former life where he was known as " Colonel Beck " , and unsuccessfully attempted to persuade Angel to release him from the Junkyard . With help from the Wolves ' deposed leader Lupa , the Embryon infiltrate the Brutes ' castle , but Lupa is killed after going berserk . After fighting Varin , he accuses Sera of being a monster before he dies . Sera regains her memories and runs to the Karma Temple with the Embryon in pursuit . There , Sera faces the human form of Angel , who threatens to delete the Junkyard with a computer virus if Sera does not return to the real world with her . The Embryon arrive and successfully fight Angel , but in the process release the computer virus . The Embryon , Sera and Angel only just escape as the Junkyard is destroyed . 
 In Digital Devil Saga 2 , the Embryon appear in the real world , which is slowly being destroyed by the Black Sun : the only ones able to survive the sun 's rays are those infected with the demon virus . Serph , Cielo , Argilla and Gale learn that Sera is the captive of Angel and Madame Cuvier at the Karma Society headquarters . With the help of Roland and a young by named Fred , the group infiltrate the Karma Society 's building . While they attempt to rescue Serah , Angel plans to subvert Cuvier and use the demon virus to create a society ruled by the strong . The Embryon are also faced by Heat , who is working with Cuvier on the promise of Sera 's safety . Reaching the EGG , a man @-@ made replica of God , the party rescue Sera , but Heat appears and wounds Serph . Both fall into the EGG , and God begins absorbing the Earth 's data : in the chaos , Angel kills Cuvier , while the remaining Embryon and Sera , now able to assume a demon form herself , shut down the Power Plant in an unsuccessful attempt to stop the EGG . In the process , both Roland and Argilla are killed by a powerful demon . Returning to the EGG so Sera can speak with God , they are confronted by Heat , who has fused with the EGG and gone berserk . Inside the EGG , Serph is met by a higher being calling itself Schrödinger , who reveals the truth about what happened . 
 The Karma Society was founded to study God , who was losing his faith in humanity due to their behavior . Sera was the only survivor of a group of children with the ability to communicate with God . To hide from the pain of the experiments , Sera created an artificial environment that would become the Junkyard , populating it with benign versions of Karma Society staff : these artificial beings would become the Junkyard 's five tribes . The original Serph manipulated Sera for his own ends while the original Heat attempted to protect her : when Sera saw Serph killing Heat when linked to the EGG , God felt her pain and attacked Earth . The original Serph was overwhelmed by a flood of data and became a demon before being killed . Now knowing the truth , Serph escapes from the EGG , killing Heat in the process . Sera then decides to head for a secondary Karma facility to communicate with God : on the way , Gale dies defeating Angel , and Cielo sacrifices himself so Sera and Serph can reach the transmission site . As Sera begins transmission , the base is destroyed , killing her and Serph . Their data travels to the sun and merges into a new being called Seraph . Aided by the data of the Embryon , Seraph confronts God , fighting an avatar of him to prove humanity 's worth . Upon victory , Seraph achieves enlightenment and travels with Schrödinger to new worlds , while God restores the sun and Earth . At the game 's end , it is shown that the Embryon , Angel , and aspects of Sera and Serph have reincarnated , with a grown Fred acting as their caretaker . 
 = = Development = = 
 Production on the initial Digital Devil Saga started prior to the beginning of active development on Shin Megami Tensei : Nocturne in 2002 . During production , it was known under the working title New Goddess . The project was formed in part to make the Megami Tensei series accessible to a broader audience while staying true to its roots . The games were directed by Katsura Hashino , a new director who had worked in lesser roles in previous Megami Tensei titles . The design director was Makoto Kitano , while the movie director was Ichirō Itano , a noted anime director . Itano was responsible for storyboarding and character movement choreography . The team was divided into multiple divisions , each in charge of different aspects of the game 's design . The original story was written by Japanese novelist Yu Godai , but due to personal reasons she withdrew from the project before the full scripts were written . Her role was filled by Tadashi Satomi , who had previously written scripts for the first three Persona games . Satomi 's role as story writer necessitated discussions with other teams assigned to the game . Due to characters having dialogue in the field , the team needed to have extensive notes prepared . The battle system was taken from that used in Nocturne , but with elements added to both differentiate it from other Megami Tensei games and incorporate the game 's themes . During development of Digital Devil Saga , the team were faced with repeated problems with fitting the entire experience on a single DVD : the amount of data was estimated to be two times that of Nocturne . 
 Production of Digital Devil Saga 2 began immediately after the release of the first game . To tease it prior to its official announcement , a large number of unfinished plot threads and vague hints relating to the main characters ' previous lives were incorporated into the first game . For Digital Devil Saga 2 , the team expanded upon the systems implemented in the first game . Due to extra features added , the team sometimes felt that they could not fit it all on a single disc . The main priority was to ensure smooth motion and a quick transfer into battles and cutscenes . The game 's setting was inspired in Satomi 's mind by the frequent reporting of natural disasters and outbreaks of diseases around the world . Another theme he incorporate was the inherent contradiction of wanting to avoid violence while being forced to fight others in order to survive . According to Satomi , while the first game 's motif was " rain " , the second game 's was " sun " . Itano returned to his role as storyboarder and movement choreographer . A large amount of work was done to refine the gameplay experience , such as opening up the character customization system . The team used player feedback from the first game 's systems to make their adjustments . For both games , Atlus received additional development support for artwork assets from Kusanagi Corporation . 
 = = = Character design = = = 
 The character and demon designs were done by regular series artist Kazuma Kaneko . At the start , Kaneko was given the instruction to give the characters tribal uniforms instead of normal clothes , and an Atma tattoo somewhere on their body to signify their demon power . The uniforms signified their eternal conflict within the Junkyard . To help bring individuality to the main characters , Kaneko create slight variations in them , such as giving them hoods or capes . The grey tribal uniforms were created so the main characters ' key colors would stand out . Serph , as the player character and silent protagonist , was given few personality traits and designed with a stern expression . The aspect that separated him from other silent protagonist within the Megami Tensei series was that his name was spoken by the other characters rather than chosen by the player . To emphasize the fact that the world of Digital Devil Saga was unlike the typical setting for Megami Tensei titles , he gave all the characters hair and eye colors that would be naturally impossible in the real world . The only one not to have a strange hair color was Sera , signifying her unique status . The characters ' demon forms were designed to be animal @-@ like , signifying their urge to eat . They were given prominent mouths as demons , as the idea was that they would eat their foes when in demon form . Their eyes were removed as they stood out too much . Each character was designed around a specific elemental theme , which both flowed into the gameplay and matched an individual 's personality : an example of this is Heat , who has an angry personality and uses Fire as his primary element . 
 Kaneko was the first to propose the game 's concept , which was then worked on by other staff members . The initial game 's themes were defined as " awakening " and " change " , referenced in how the characters gradually awoke to their emotions and the static environment of the Junkyard was drastically changed . The Junkyard was designed to emphasize the desperation of the characters during their awakening . The concept behind the demon transformations originated during the development of Shin Megami Tensei . Kaneko , who worked on Shin Megami Tensei , had wanted the game 's Chaos Hero to regularly switch between his human and demon forms . The idea did not appear in the finished game , but eventually reemerged and became the base for Digital Devil Saga 's gameplay . The game 's character models were created based on development knowledge from Nocturne . Creating the models proved difficult due to the need to extensively use level of detail while staying true Kaneko 's distinctive designs . While Nocturne was defined by its " static " feel , the team wanted Digital Devil Saga to have a feeling of motion to contrast Nocturne . Makoto Kitano was responsible for creating 3D representations of the game 's demons , A noted element was the design of Cerberus , which combined elements of the three @-@ headed version first designed for Devil Summoner : Soul Hackers and the shape of sharks . One of the additional challenges was the fact that it was the first Megami Tensei title to feature extensive voice acting , inspired by the need to fully express the game 's themes and story . Before the official voice actors were cast , Atlus staff provided the characters ' voices . Due to the wish to appeal to a wider audience than previous Megami Tensei games , the proposed amount of violence and graphic imagery was cut down . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Digital Devil Saga was principally composed by Shoji Meguro , who had worked on multiple previous Megami Tensei titles . Some tracks from the first game were composed by Kenichi Tsuchiya . While he had previously been restricted in his music quality by the limited storage space of the CD medium , Meguro was able to play half the tracks using real @-@ time streaming . For the sound compression , Meguro used <unk> compression software . Using the software , Meguro was able to fit in high @-@ quality music alongside the sound effects and voice track . Nevertheless , he needed to make some compromises on tracks . 
 For the first game , Meguro made heavy use of guitar music , taking his inspiration from music of the 1960s and 70s . It was meant to represent the vicious new nature of the environment , and of how the main protagonists gradually awoke to their humanity . Tsuchiya was in charge of environmental tracks that deviated from the normal layout and feel of the Junkyard . The game 's battle theme , " Hunting " , was originally going to be the boss theme , but its instrumentation was wrong and so it was changed to the normal battle theme . For the second game , Meguro changed the original 's dark tone to give it a harsher feel and techno instrumentation , reflecting the state of the real world and clashing with the views of the main characters . He also reached out to an external firm to help with fitting in more complicated tracks with less loops , getting round some of the limitations he faced with the first game . 
 Multiple theme songs were created for the games . The first game 's opening theme , " Pray " , was sung by Sera 's voice actress Houko Kuwashima . " Pray " also formed the core musical theme for the games . For the North American version , the opening theme was changed to " Danger " , composed by electronic band Etro Anime . The song , described as a " melancholy track " , was designed to blend with the constant rain of the Junkyard . The opening theme for Digital Devil Saga 2 was " Alive " : it was written by Meguro , sung by <unk> <unk> , and had backing vocals by Yumi Kawamura . The ending theme song is " Time Capsule " by Japanese singer @-@ songwriter As . The song was used in television commercials advertising the game in Japan , and was the singer 's debut single . 
 = = Release = = 
 Digital Devil Saga first announced in the Japanese director 's cut version of Nocturne in February 2004 . The game 's formal title had only been decided upon shortly before its reveal . As part of the game 's promotion in Japan , entertainer and model Mayuko Iwasa appeared in live @-@ action advertisements in the role of Sera , and promoted the game at events . An eight @-@ megabyte PlayStation 2 memory card was sold that featured artwork of Serph and his demon form . Digital Devil Saga 2 was officially announced at the 2004 Tokyo Game Show . To promote Digital Devil Saga 2 , a special DVD containing selected music tracks and movie material was created as an over @-@ the @-@ counter giveaway for the initial print of the game . Both Digital Devil Saga games were re @-@ released by Atlus in 2006 as part of their " Atlus Best Collection " budget release series . 
 Digital Devil Saga was officially announced for the west at the 2004 Electronic Entertainment Expo for release in the winter of that year . It was subsequently delayed into 2005 , and a <unk> edition which would include a box for containing both Digital Devil Saga games was announced as a consolation . The second game 's release window was officially announced at the 2005 Electronic Entertainment Expo , to be published in North America by Atlus . The game arrived in stores in North America a week earlier than originally scheduled . Both Digital Devil Saga games were published in Europe by Ghostlight . 
 As the original version featured a cast of well @-@ known anime voice actors , the localization team sought out well @-@ known English voice actors for the dub , and took extra care with syncing the English dialogue with the original characters ' lip movements . Digital Devil Saga was the first Megami Tensei project to feature an extensive voice acting element . During localization , localization project manager Yu Namba made a spelling error during one of the early cutscenes where the name of Serph 's demon form was shown : the demon 's name was displayed as " Varna " , when it was actually " Varuna " . The error was not spotted until it was too late , and so remained in the game . One of the main concerns was to keep the characters ' personalities intact when shifting from Japanese to English dialogue : a cited example of how this change was accomplished was Cielo , who was given a Jamaican accent to express the character 's easy @-@ going and friendly personality . After the release of Nocturne , the " Shin Megami Tensei " moniker was attached to the Digital Devil Saga games to help with marketing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 By the end of 2004 , the first game sold 153 @,@ 421 units in Japan , coming in at the 81st best @-@ selling title in Japan for that year . The second game sold 90 @,@ 812 units in Japan by the end of 2005 , becoming the 144th best @-@ selling game for 2005 . Digital Devil Saga did not manage to meet its projected sales targets in Japan , and contributed to the company 's console division posting a substantial loss for the 2004 / 2005 financial year , resulting in several staff members being laid off . According to a representative of Atlus USA , the games ' sales performances in 2005 were " absolutely fabulous " . In Europe , it was stated by its publisher that the first game had sold above expectations in the region . Upon their re @-@ release on PlayStation Network , the games appeared in the top ten rankings in North America and Europe . 
 Digital Devil Saga received positive critical reception : aggregate sites GameRankings and Metacritic show ratings of 80 % and 78 / 100 respectively . General praise went to the story , characters and gameplay . The high difficulty , issues with repetition and pacing , and the cliffhanger ending drew criticism . Famitsu cited the game 's significant shift away from the hardcore mechanics of the main series , positively noting the freedom of character customization . The reviewer for 1UP.com , despite missing the demon fusion systems from earlier Megami <unk> titles , thoroughly enjoyed the game , calling it " a great Final Fantasy alternative " . Jeremy Dunham of IGN said that " Despite its repetition and unfinished storyline , [ Digital Devil Saga ] still has plenty to like " , citing its plot and battle system . GameSpot 's Bethany Massimilla said that Digital Devil Saga 's combat and world design made it a compelling title worthy of the Shin Megami Tensei moniker . RPGamer 's Derek Cavin said that Digital Devil Saga " manages to be a good game , despite its flaws " . Eurogamer 's Rob Fahey said that players expecting a traditional role @-@ playing game would be disappointed , while stating that Digital Devil Saga delivered a generally positive impression while avoiding many cliches of the RPG genre . John McCarroll of RPGFan generally enjoyed his time with the game despite issues with camera control , praising the positive mixture of gameplay and story elements . 
 Digital Devil Saga 2 received an even better reception : its aggregate scores from GameRankings and Metacritic were 83 % and 83 / 100 respectively . While critics generally cited a necessity for knowledge of the first game , the story and gameplay were generally cited as an improvement over the original . Famitsu was again fairly positive , enjoying the story and characters , while also noting the accommodations for first @-@ time players . Dengeki PlayStation was highly positive about the game , praising its story and gameplay additions , though saying that the two games were a little too similar , and that people who had not played the first game would be confused by the story and character relations . 1UP.com 's Shane Bettenhausen said that while the game shared many similarities with its predecessor , it was not as repetitive as other games such as the .hack series , and was still a good game . <unk> said that Digital Devil Saga 2 had managed to realize the first game 's storytelling ambitions , enjoying the experience despite noting some design flaws . Fahey said that the game was " everything that an excellent sequel should be " , generally praising its mechanical and narrative improvements over Digital Devil Saga . Cavin said that it improved on nearly every aspect of the original game , recommending it to players of RPGs . McCarroll said " [ Digital Devil Saga 2 ] is easily the finest game I 've had a chance to play this year and stands to be one of the great games of this generation " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In its reviews , RPGFan named both Digital Devil Saga games as " Editor 's Choice " . In 2011 , Digital Devil Saga and its sequel Digital Devil Saga 2 ended up topping the site 's " Top 20 RPGs of the Last Decade " list . Kurt Kalata , writing for 1UP.com in an article concerning the controversial content of the Megami Tensei series , made mention of Digital Devil Saga due to its examination of the ethics of eating others to survive . 
 = = = Related media = = = 
 A manga spin @-@ off of Digital Devil Saga titled Digital Devil Saga : Avatar Tuner - <unk> no <unk> was published in Japan in 2005 by Jive . The manga revolves around a separate group of characters within the Junkyard . A five @-@ volume light novels series titled Quantum Devil Saga : Avatar Tuner ( <unk> <unk> ) have been authored by Yu Godai in 2011 . While she had left the project early , her contract with Atlus enabled her to write her own work based on the premise . The novels are Yu 's alternate take on her own story , redone without any of the restrictions involved with a video game narrative . 
 Digital Devil Saga : Avatar Tuner : A 's TEST Server ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> アバタール ・ <unk> A 's TEST Server ) , a mobile role @-@ playing game , was developed by Interactive Brains for mobile phones and published by Atlus and Bbmf through the <unk> α service . Using gameplay systems similar to the console games , the story is an original narrative set within the Digital Devil Saga universe : when Serph awakens in an enormous tower with no memories , he and the other Embryon must explore the towers with Sera 's help to recover his memories . 
 = History of the New York Giants = 
 The history of the New York Giants , an American football team which currently plays in the NFL 's National Football Conference , comprises more than 80 seasons . The Giants were founded in 1925 by Tim Mara in the then five @-@ year @-@ old NFL . Mara owned the team until his death in 1959 , when it was passed on to his sons , Wellington and Jack . During their history , the Giants have won eight NFL championships , four of which came in Super Bowls . 
 In just its third season , the team finished with the best record in the league at 11 – 1 – 1 and was awarded the NFL title . In a 14 @-@ year span beginning in 1933 , New York qualified to play in the NFL championship game eight times , winning twice ( 1934 and 1938 ) . They did not win another championship until 1956 , aided by several future Hall of Fame players such as running back Frank Gifford , linebacker Sam Huff , and offensive tackle Roosevelt Brown . From 1958 to 1963 , the Giants played in the NFL championship game five times , but failed to win . The 1958 NFL Championship game , in which they lost 23 – 17 in overtime to the Baltimore Colts , is credited with increasing the popularity of the NFL in the United States . 
 The Giants registered just two winning seasons from 1964 to 1980 and were unable to advance to the playoffs . From 1981 to 1990 , the team qualified for the postseason seven times and won Super Bowls XXI and XXV . The team 's success during the 1980s was aided by head coach Bill Parcells , quarterback Phil Simms and Hall of Fame linebackers Lawrence Taylor and Harry Carson . New York struggled throughout much of the 1990s as Parcells left the team , and players such as Simms and Taylor declined and eventually retired . They returned to the Super Bowl in 2000 , but lost to the Baltimore Ravens in Super Bowl XXXV . The Giants upset the heavily favored New England Patriots in Super Bowls XLII and XLVI . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Season by season timeline of the New York Giants franchise including the team name , changes of Home Field , Postseason Championships Seasons , and coaches throughout the years . 
 = = Birth and success : 1925 – 1930 = = 
 The Giants were founded in 1925 by original owner Tim Mara with an investment of $ 500 . Legally named " New York Football Giants " ( which they still are to this day ) to distinguish themselves from the baseball team of the same name , they became one of the first teams in the then five @-@ year @-@ old National Football League . In 1919 , Charles Stoneham , the owner of the New York Giants baseball team , had organized and promoted a professional football team to be called the New York Giants . The team folded before its first game . 
 The New York Football Giants played their first game against All New Britain in New Britain , Connecticut on October 5 , 1925 . 
 Although the Giants were successful on the field in their first season , going 8 – 4 , their financial status was a different story . Overshadowed by baseball , boxing , and college football , professional football was not a popular sport in 1925 . They were in dire financial straits until the eleventh game of the season , when Red Grange and the Chicago Bears came to town , attracting over 73 @,@ 000 fans . This gave the Giants a much needed influx of revenue , and perhaps altered the history of the franchise . 
 New York finished 11 – 1 – 1 in 1927 . Their league @-@ best defense posted 10 shutouts in 13 games . New coach Earl <unk> led the team into a late @-@ season game against Chicago with first place on the line . New York won 13 – 7 in what lineman Steve Owen called " the toughest , roughest football game I ever played . " Then they won their final two regular season games to secure their first championship . 
 Following a disappointing 4 – 7 – 2 season the next year , <unk> was replaced by LeRoy Andrews . Before the 1929 season , Mara purchased the entire squad of the Detroit Wolverines , including star quarterback Benny Friedman . The Wolverines had finished in third place the year before . Led by Friedman , New York 's record soared to 13 – 1 – 1 . However , their lone loss was a 20 – 6 setback in November to the Green Bay Packers , and by virtue of this win , and their 12 – 0 – 1 record , won the NFL title . Following the season , Mara transferred ownership over to his two sons to insulate the team from creditors . At the time , Jack was just 22 , and Wellington only 14 . 
 In 1930 , the quality of the professional game was still in question , with many claiming the college " amateurs " played with more intensity . In December 1930 , the Giants played a team of Notre Dame All @-@ Stars at the Polo Grounds to raise money for the unemployed of New York City . It was also an opportunity to establish the superiority of the pro game . Knute Rockne reassembled his Four Horsemen along with other Notre Dame legends , and told them to score early , then defend . But from the beginning , it was a one @-@ sided contest , with Benny Friedman running for two Giants touchdowns and Hap Moran passing for another . Notre Dame failed to score . When it was over , Rockne told his team , ' " [ t ] hat was the greatest football machine I ever saw . I am glad none of you got hurt . " The game raised $ 115 @,@ 183 for the homeless , and is often credited with establishing the legitimacy of the professional game . 
 = = Steve Owen era : 1931 – 1953 = = 
 The Giants hired All @-@ Pro offensive tackle Steve Owen to be their new player @-@ head coach prior to the 1931 season . He coached the team for the next 23 years , including two NFL championships , and was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1966 . Owen never had a contract with the Mara family ; he coached his entire tenure on a handshake basis . 
 Before the 1931 season , New York acquired center Mel Hein , who also played the linebacker position . He would go on to a fifteen @-@ year NFL career in which , as a center , he became an All @-@ NFL First Team selection eight times , and the only offensive lineman ever named league MVP . Friedman quit the team following the season when Mara denied him an ownership stake , telling him " I 'm sorry ... but the Giants are for my sons . " New York struggled in 1931 and 1932 , finishing with a combined record of 11 – 12 – 3 . 
 The Giants acquired University of Michigan All @-@ American quarterback Harry Newman and versatile free agent halfback Ken Strong before the 1933 season . New York finished 11 – 3 , first in the new Eastern Division . Newman led the NFL in passes completed ( 53 ) , passing yards ( 973 ) , touchdown passes ( 11 ) , and longest pass completion ( 78 yards ) , with his passing yardage total setting an NFL record . New York 's resurgence was led by some of the league 's best linemen , such as Ray Flaherty and future Hall of Famers Red <unk> , and Hein . They advanced to play in the league 's first official championship game in Chicago 's Wrigley Field versus the Bears , where they lost 23 – 21 in a game which had six lead changes . 
 In the 1934 NFL Championship Game , the Giants defeated previously unbeaten Chicago 30 – 13 at the Polo Grounds on an icy field with temperatures peaking at 25 degrees . Before the game , team treasurer John Mara talked with Owen and team captain Flaherty about the field conditions . Flaherty suggested the Giants wear sneakers on the frozen field , as he had played in a game under similar circumstances at Gonzaga , and the sneakers proved to be effective . Mara dispatched equipment manager Abe Cohen to get as many sneakers as he could get . Due to traffic and the inability to find any athletic goods stores open on Sunday , Cohen was unable to return before the game started , and the Giants , wearing conventional footwear , trailed 10 – 3 at the end of the first half . Realizing time was short , Cohen went to Manhattan College — where he had a key to the equipment and locker rooms — and returned to the Polo Grounds at halftime with nine pairs of basketball sneakers , saying that " nine pairs was all I could get . " Players donned the sneakers and New York , after allowing Chicago another field goal late in the 3rd quarter , responded with 27 unanswered points in the 4th quarter to win their first NFL Championship game . The game would come to be known as " The Sneakers Game " , and the 27 points the Giants scored in the 4th quarter set a single – quarter championship game scoring record that stood for decades . After the game , offensive tackle Len Grant expressed his sincere gratitude by stating " God bless Abe Cohen . " 
 The Giants were unable to repeat as champions in 1935 , as they fell to the Detroit Lions 26 – 7 in the NFL Championship game . The Lion staked a 13 – 0 lead before the Giants were able to cut the lead to 13 – 7 in the 3rd quarter . However , the Lions defense helped their team score two late touchdowns with a blocked punt and an interception . 
 The Giants were so successful from the latter half of the 1930s until the United States ' entry into World War II , that according to one publication , " [ f ] rom 1936 to 1941 the New York Giants annually fielded a collection of NFL all @-@ stars . " They added their third NFL championship in 1938 with a 23 – 17 win over Green Bay . The Giants blocked two Green Bay punts to establish an early advantage before the Packers came back to take a 17 – 16 lead . However , in the 4th quarter , Ed Danowski threw a 23 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Hank Soar , and the Giants defense held the Packers scoreless . 
 The Giants made the championship game again the next year , but lost in a rematch to the Packers , 31 – 16 . They also advanced to the championship game in 1941 , losing to the Bears 37 – 9 . Both games were close early before their respective opponents went on an offensive surge to break the game open late . In 1944 , the Giants reached the championship game , where they faced the Green Bay Packers for the third time in ten seasons . They lost again , this time 14 – 7 as Ted Fritsch scored two touchdowns , and the Packers defense was able to hold on to the lead despite a 4th @-@ quarter touchdown by the Giants . By 1946 , Mara had given over complete control of the team to his two sons . Jack controlled the business aspects , while Wellington controlled the on @-@ field operations . In 1946 , the Giants again reached the Championship game , for the eighth time in 14 seasons . However , they were beaten by the Sid Luckman @-@ led Bears , 24 – 14 . 
 Before the 1948 season , the Giants signed defensive back Emlen <unk> , the first African American player in team history , and later the first African American inducted into the Hall of Fame . They struggled from 1947 to 1949 , never finishing above .500 , but came back with a solid 10 – 2 record in 1950 . However , they lost to the Cleveland Browns , who they had beaten twice in the regular season , 8 – 3 in the 1950 divisional playoff game . In 1949 , halfback Gene " Choo @-@ Choo " Roberts scored a league high 17 touchdowns , and in 1950 , he set a team record that would stand for over 50 years , when he rushed for 218 yards on November 12 . 
 = = Jim Lee Howell and the Hall of Famers : 1954 – 1958 = = 
 Following the 1953 season , an important transition in Giants history occurred . After being the team 's coach for 23 years , Steve Owen was fired by Wellington and Jack Mara , and replaced by Jim Lee Howell . Wellington later described the move by calling it " the hardest decision I 'd ever made " . New York went 7 – 5 in 1954 under Howell . In their 31st and final season playing their home games at the Polo Grounds in 1955 , they went 5 – 1 – 1 over their final seven games to finish 6 – 5 – 1 . They were led by rejuvenated running back Frank Gifford , who played the entire season solely on offense for the first time in several years . 
 The Giants won their fourth NFL Championship in 1956 . Playing their home games at Yankee Stadium for the first time , New York won the Eastern Division with an 8 – 3 – 1 record . In the NFL Championship Game on an icy field against the Chicago Bears , the Giants wore sneakers as they had 22 years previous . They dominated the Bears , winning 47 – 7 . The 1956 Giants featured a number of future Hall of Fame players , including Gifford , Sam Huff , and Roosevelt Brown . Equally notable , the team featured as its coordinators future Hall of Fame head coaches Tom Landry ( defense ) and Vince Lombardi ( offense ) . 
 = = = The Greatest Game Ever Played : 1958 = = = 
 The Giants had another successful year in 1958 . They tied for the Eastern Division regular season title with a 9 – 3 record by defeating the Cleveland Browns 13 – 10 on the last day of the regular season . They beat the Browns again a week later in a one @-@ game playoff to determine the division winner . They advanced to play the Baltimore Colts in the NFL Championship Game . This game , which would become known as " The Greatest Game Ever Played " , is considered a watershed moment in league history , and marked the beginning of the rise of professional football into the dominant sport in the American market . The game was competitive . The Giants got off to an early 3 – 0 lead , then the Colts scored two touchdowns to take a 14 – 3 halftime lead . 
 In the 3rd quarter , New York 's defense made a goal line stand , which became a turning point in the game . New York , who had trouble mounting drives to that point , then had a 95 @-@ yard drive which culminated in a touchdown , making the score 14 – 10 . They drove again in the 4th quarter , with quarterback Charlie Conerly throwing a 15 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Frank Gifford to take the lead , 17 – 14 . 
 The Colts put together one last drive with less than two minutes left . The standout player was receiver Raymond Berry , who caught three passes for 62 yards , the last one for 22 yards to the New York 13 @-@ yard line . With seven seconds left in regulation , Steve <unk> kicked a 20 @-@ yard field goal to tie the score 17 – 17 , sending a game to overtime for the first time in NFL history . 
 After winning the coin toss and receiving the ball , the Giants offense stalled and was forced to punt . From their own 20 , the Colts drove the ball to the New York 1 @-@ yard line , where Alan Ameche ran for a touchdown to give the Colts the championship , 23 – 17 . 
 = = More success : 1959 – 1963 = = 
 New York 's success continued in the 1960s . They finished 9 – 3 in 1959 and faced the Colts in a championship game rematch . They lost again , this time in a far less dramatic game , 31 – 16 . Led by quarterback Y.A. Tittle and head coach Allie Sherman , the Giants won three consecutive Eastern Division titles from 1961 – 1963 . In 1961 , they were beaten 37 – 0 by the Packers . In 1962 , they went into the championship game with a league @-@ best 12 – 2 record and a nine – game winning streak , but they lost to the Packers again , 16 – 7 . 
 The Giants finished with an 11 – 3 record in 1963 and faced the Bears in the NFL championship game . On an icy field in Chicago , the Giants ' defense played well , but the Bears newly invented zone defense intercepted Tittle five times and battered him throughout the game . Sherman resisted calls from players such as linebacker Sam Huff to replace the struggling Tittle . The Giants defense held the Bears in check , but they lost 14 – 10 , their third straight NFL Championship Game defeat . 
 The Giants ' run of championship game appearances combined with their large market location translated into financial success . By the early 1960s , the Giants were receiving $ 175 @,@ 000 a game under the NFL 's television contract with CBS — four times as much as small @-@ market Green Bay , which was one of the most successful teams of the era . However , in the league 's new contract , the Maras convinced the other owners that it would be in the best interest of the NFL to share television revenue equally , a practice which is still current , and is credited with strengthening the league . 
 = = Wilderness years begin : 1964 – 1972 = = 
 After the 1963 season , the team fell apart . A roster filled with mostly older veterans plus some bad personnel moves ( e.g. the dispatching of Rosey Grier , Sam Huff , and Don Chandler ) lead to a quick exit from the top of the standings . The Giants finished 2 – 10 – 2 in 1964 , beginning an 18 @-@ season playoff drought . 
 The seasons of 1964 through 1980 in team history have often been referred to as " the wilderness years " for several reasons : 1 ) The franchise lost its status as an elite NFL team by posting only two winning seasons , against twelve losing and three .500 seasons during this span ; 2 ) The Giants became a " team of nomads , " calling four different stadiums home in the 1970s ( Yankee Stadium , the Yale Bowl , Shea Stadium , and finally Giants Stadium in 1976 ) ; 3 ) New York tried several head coach and quarterback combinations during this period , but with almost no success ( from 1964 to 1983 , no coach or starting quarterback could boast even a .500 record ) . The team rebounded with a 7 – 7 record in 1965 , ( mostly due to the acquisition of quarterback Earl Morrall during the offseason ) before compiling a league @-@ worst 1 – 12 – 1 record and allowing over 500 points on defense in 1966 . This season also included a 72 – 41 loss to the rival Washington Redskins at D.C. Stadium in the highest @-@ scoring game in league history . Interest in the team was waning , especially with the rapid rise of the New York Jets , with their wide @-@ open style of play and charismatic quarterback Joe Namath . 
 The Giants acquired quarterback Fran Tarkenton from the Minnesota Vikings before the 1967 season in exchange for their <unk> and 2nd @-@ round draft picks , and showed improvement . They finished 7 – 7 in 1967 and were 7 – 3 through ten games in 1968 . Leaving them one game behind Capitol Division leader Dallas . However , New York dropped its final four games to again finish 7 – 7 . Notably , in 1968 , one of Tarkenton 's favorite targets , wide receiver Homer Jones made the Pro Bowl ; it wasn 't until 2010 that another Giants receiver , ( Steve Smith ) , would make the Pro Bowl . Through the 2007 season , no other Giants receiver has been selected for the Pro Bowl . Jones ' average of 22 @.@ 3 yards per reception for his career is still an NFL record . 
 During the 1969 preseason , the Giants lost their first meeting with the Jets , 37 – 14 at the Yale Bowl in New Haven , Connecticut . Following the game , Wellington Mara fired coach Allie Sherman and replaced him with former Giants fullback Alex Webster . On opening day of the 1969 regular season , Tarkenton led New York to a 24 – 23 victory over his former team , the Vikings , by throwing two touchdown passes in the 4th quarter . The Giants went 6 – 8 that season . They showed marked improvement in 1970 ; after an 0 – 3 start , they rebounded to finish 9 – 5 , narrowly missing the playoffs by losing their final game to the Los Angeles Rams . Tarkenton had one of his best seasons as a Giant and made his fourth straight Pro Bowl . Running back Ron Johnson was also selected to the Pro Bowl ; the halfback ran for 1 @,@ 027 yards , becoming the first Giant to gain 1 @,@ 000 yards rushing in a season . 
 In 1971 , Johnson missed most of the season with a knee injury , and New York dropped to 4 – 10 , resulting in Tarkenton being traded back to the Vikings . The Giants rallied somewhat in 1972 to finish 8 – 6 . Journeyman quarterback Norm Snead ( acquired in the trade for Tarkenton ) led the league in completion percentage and had his best season . Other standouts and Pro Bowl selections that year were running back Johnson , who rushed for 1 @,@ 182 yards ( breaking his own team record ) and caught 45 passes , tight end Bob Tucker , who followed up his 1971 NFC @-@ leading 59 @-@ catch season with 55 in 1972 , and defensive stars Jack Gregory and John Mendenhall . The Giants boasted the top offense in the NFC and after a season @-@ finishing 23 – 3 win at Dallas to secure their second winning campaign in three years , the future looked bright . However , after the 1972 season , New York would endure one of the worst periods in its history . 
 = = Leaving New York : 1973 – 1978 = = 
 Desiring their own home stadium , in 1973 , the Giants reached an agreement with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority to play their home games at a new , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art , dedicated football stadium . Later named Giants Stadium , it was to be built at a new sports complex in East Rutherford , New Jersey . 
 As the complex was being built , and their current home at Yankee Stadium was being renovated , they would be without a home for three years , and dubbed " the orphans of the NFL . " Their final full season at Yankee Stadium was 1972 . After playing their first two games there in 1973 , the Giants played the rest of their home games in 1973 , as well as all of their home games in 1974 , at the Yale Bowl in New Haven , Connecticut . This was done out of a desire to have their own home field , as opposed to having to share Shea Stadium with the Jets . However , between access problems , neighborhood issues , the fact that the Yale Bowl was not ideally suited for pro football ( the stadium did not have lights , nor does it today ) , the age of the stadium ( built in 1914 ) , and the lack of modern amenities , the Giants reconsidered their decision and agreed to share Shea Stadium with the Jets in 1975 . New York left the Yale Bowl after losing all seven home games played there in 1974 and compiling a home record of 1 – 11 over that two @-@ year stretch . 
 One of the bright spots in this era was tight end Bob Tucker . From 1970 through 1977 , Tucker was one of the top tight ends in the NFL . He amassed 327 receptions , 4 @,@ 376 yards , and 22 touchdowns during his years as a Giant . 
 Despite their new home and heightened fan interest , New York still played subpar football in 1976 and 1977 . In 1978 , the Giants started the year 5 – 6 and on November 19 , 1978 , played the Philadelphia Eagles at home with a chance to solidify their playoff prospects . However , the season imploded in one of the most improbable finishes in NFL history . The Giants led 17 – 12 and had possession of the ball with only 30 seconds left . They had to just kneel the ball to end the game , as the Eagles had no time outs . However , instead of kneeling the ball , offensive coordinator Bob Gibson ordered New York quarterback Joe <unk> to hand the ball off to fullback Larry Csonka . Csonka was unprepared to receive the handoff , and the ball rolled off his hip and bounced free . Eagles safety Herman Edwards picked up the loose ball and ran , untouched , for a score , giving the Eagles an improbable 19 – 17 victory . This play is referred to as " The Miracle in the Meadowlands " among Eagles fans , and " The Fumble " among Giants fans . 
 In the aftermath of the defeat , Gibson was fired , and the Giants lost three out of their last four games to finish out of the playoffs for the 15th straight season , leading them to let coach John McVay go as well . However , following the 1978 season came the steps that would , in time , return New York to the pinnacle of the NFL . 
 = = Building a champion : 1979 – 1985 = = 
 New York decided to hire a general manager for the first time in franchise history following the 1978 season . The search grew contentious and fractured the relationship between owners Wellington and Tim Mara . Finally , the Maras asked NFL Commissioner Pete Rozelle to step in with a recommendation . Rozelle recommended George Young , who worked in personnel for the Miami Dolphins and had been an assistant coach for the Baltimore Colts . Young was hired , but the rift between the Maras lasted for several years . 
 Young hired San Diego Chargers assistant Ray Perkins as head coach and drafted unknown quarterback Phil Simms from Morehead State to the surprise of many . New York continued to struggle , finishing 6 – 10 in 1979 and 4 – 12 in 1980 . With the 2nd overall pick in the 1981 draft , the Giants selected linebacker Lawrence Taylor . The impact that Taylor had on the Giants ' defense was immediate . He was named the NFL Defensive Rookie of the Year and NFL Defensive Player of the Year , becoming , to date , the only rookie to ever win the NFL Defensive Player of the Year award . His arrival raised the Giants linebacking corps — which already included future Hall of Famer Harry Carson and Pro Bowler Brad Van Pelt — into one of the NFL 's best . It also predicated New York 's transformation from allowing 425 points in 1980 to 257 in 1981 . They went 9 – 7 and defeated the Eagles in the first round of the playoffs , 27 – 21 , then lost to the eventual Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers 38 – 24 in the divisional playoffs . 
 In the strike @-@ shortened 1982 season , the Giants lost their first two games before the strike , and their first game upon returning . They won their next three games to even their record at 3 – 3 . Perkins then announced that he was leaving to take the head coaching job at Alabama after the season , and the team lost the next two games , effectively eliminating them from the playoffs ( despite defeating the Eagles in the season finale to go 4 – 5 ) . Taylor remained a bright spot , repeating as the league 's Defensive Player of the Year . Young chose Bill Parcells , the Giants ' defensive coordinator , as the team 's new head coach . 
 Parcells first year proved difficult . In his first major decision , he named Scott Brunner as his starting quarterback over Phil Simms . At first , it appeared his decision was justified , especially after a 27 – 3 Monday night victory over Green Bay gave New York a 2 – 2 record . But then they lost 10 of their final 12 games . Parcells ignored fans ' protests and stuck with Brunner for most of the year , although Jeff Rutledge saw considerable late @-@ season action . Simms finally played in a week six game against the Eagles , only to suffer a season – ending thumb injury . 
 Simms won the starting job back in 1984 , and Brunner was traded . The Giants had a resurgent season , highlighted by a second @-@ half stretch where they won five of six games . Despite losing their last two to finish 9 – 7 , they still made the playoffs . In the first round , they defeated the highly favored Los Angeles Rams 16 – 13 on the road before losing 21 – 10 to the eventual Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers . Simms threw for 4 @,@ 044 yards , making him the first Giant to pass for 4 @,@ 000 yards in a season . 
 The Giants success continued in 1985 by going 10 – 6 . The defense carried the team and led the NFL in sacks with 68 . They won their first @-@ round playoff game , 17 – 3 over the defending champion 49ers . It was New York 's first postseason win at home since 1958 , and their first ever at Giants Stadium . In the divisional playoffs , they lost 21 – 0 to the eventual Super Bowl champion Chicago Bears . Many of the players that would play key roles on New York 's Super Bowl teams emerged in 1985 . Joe Morris became the feature back , running for 1 @,@ 338 yards , scoring 21 touchdowns , and making the Pro Bowl . Second @-@ year receiver Lionel Manuel led the Giants with 49 receptions , and rookie tight end Mark Bavaro had 37 catches . Simms threw every pass for New York for the second consecutive season , and passed for over 3 @,@ 800 yards . Defensive end Leonard Marshall recorded 15 @.@ 5 sacks , and Taylor added 13 . 
 = = Back on top : 1986 – 1990 = = 
 = = = 1986 : Super Bowl Champions = = = 
 New York entered the 1986 season as one of the favorites to win the Super Bowl . They had their first test in a Monday Night game against the defending NFC East champion Dallas Cowboys . They lost at Texas Stadium , 31 – 28 . However , they won their next five in a row and 14 of their last 15 , to finish the season with a 14 – 2 record . One of the signature plays of the season occurred during a Monday Night game in December . Here is a description of the play taken from a Monday Night Football broadcast in 2005 : " On December 1st , 1986 ... with the Giants trailing , ( Mark ) Bavaro catches an innocent pass from Phil Simms over the middle . It takes nearly seven 49ers defenders to finally drag him down , some of which are carried for almost 20 yards , including future Hall of Famer Ronnie Lott . Bavaro ’ s inspiring play jump starts the Giants , who win the game and eventually the Super Bowl . " New York 's defense allowed 236 points during the season , second fewest in the NFL , and Taylor set a team record with 20 @.@ 5 sacks . He won a record third Defensive Player of the Year Award , and was named league MVP . 
 The Giants defeated San Francisco 49 – 3 in the NFC Divisional Playoffs , then Washington 17 – 0 in the NFC Championship Game . The Giants advanced to play the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXI in front of 101 @,@ 063 fans at the Rose Bowl . After falling behind 10 – 9 at halftime , they came back to beat the Broncos 39 – 20 . Simms was named the game 's MVP after completing 22 of 25 ( 88 % ) of his passes — a Super Bowl record . 
 = = = 1987 – 1989 = = = 
 In 1987 , the Giants lost their first two games before the players strike . Unlike the players strike five years previous , NFL owners made a decision to use replacement players , but still lost all three replacement games , putting them at 0 – 5 when the strike ended . Though the Giants went 6 – 4 over their final 10 games , they finished out of the playoffs at 6 – 9 . Bright spots for the season included tight end Mark Bavaro , who led the team in catches with 55 , and three New York 's linebackers making the Pro Bowl — Taylor , Carson , and Carl Banks . 
 New York 's 1988 season got off to a turbulent start due an offseason scandal involving Taylor . Taylor had abused cocaine , violating the NFL 's substance abuse policy and was suspended for the first four games of the season . Taylor 's over @-@ the @-@ edge lifestyle was becoming an increasing concern for fans and team officials . After his return , however , Taylor recorded 15 @.@ 5 sacks in 12 games . The intense worry and scrutiny would prove to be for naught as for the rest of his career Taylor would pass his drug tests . 
 Predictably , the Giants struggled to start the season . They were 2 – 2 when Taylor returned from his suspension . With Taylor back and playing well , however , they won six out of their next eight games . After two straight losses , the Giants won their next three contests to set up a win @-@ or @-@ go @-@ home game against the Jets in the season finale . The Jets defeated the Giants 27 – 21 . When the Eagles beat the Cowboys , and the 49ers lost to the Rams later that night , the Eagles won the NFC East and the Rams clinched the final Wild Card berth . The Giants finished on the outside looking in despite a 10 – 6 record , because in the tiebreakers , they were swept in the season series by Philadelphia and had a worse conference record than the Rams . 
 The Giants ' 12 – 4 record in 1989 was the NFC 's second @-@ best ( only to San Francisco 's 14 – 2 record ) They lost their divisional playoff game in overtime to the Rams , 19 – 13 . The highlight of the game was wide receiver Flipper Anderson 's catch of the game winning touchdown pass . After catching the ball , Anderson made a long run to the end zone , silencing the crowd in attendance . In 1989 , free @-@ agent acquisition Ottis Anderson ran for 1 @,@ 023 yards and caught 28 passes . Rookie Dave Meggett also emerged as a threat on third downs and special teams , catching 34 passes for 531 yards , and making the Pro Bowl . 
 = = = 1990 : Champions again = = = 
 The Giants won their first 10 games of the 1990 season , setting a record for the best start in the team 's history . The San Francisco 49ers also got off to a strong start , matching New York with their own 10 – 0 start . Although both teams lost their next game , their Week 13 matchup was still eagerly anticipated . The Giants held the 49ers ' vaunted offense to seven points , but scored just three themselves . 
 New York won the following week against Minnesota before facing the Buffalo Bills in their regular season home finale . Despite holding a significant advantage in time of possession , they lost 17 – 13 , for their third loss in four games . To compound New York 's problems , Phil Simms went down with an injury that would sideline him for the rest of the year . His replacement , Jeff Hostetler , was an unproven career backup , who had thrown a mere 68 passes coming into the season . 
 The Giants won their final two games to secure a 13 – 3 record and a first @-@ round playoff bye as the NFC 's # 2 seed . They defeated Chicago 31 – 3 in the Divisional Playoffs , setting up a rematch with the 49ers in San Francisco for the NFC Championship . As they had in Week 13 , the Giants ' defense held San Francisco 's offense in check . In the game 's waning moments , nose tackle Erik Howard caused a Roger Craig fumble , and Taylor recovered it . New York drove downfield into San Francisco territory , and on the game 's last play , kicker Matt Bahr hit a 42 @-@ yard field goal to defeat the 49ers , 15 – 13 . 
 The win set up another rematch , this time in the Super Bowl against the Buffalo Bills . 
 = = = = Super Bowl XXV = = = = 
 Super Bowl XXV took place amidst a background of war and patriotism . The Persian Gulf War had begun less than two weeks previous , and the nation rallied around the Super Bowl as a symbol of America . The Giants got off to a quick 3 – 0 lead ; however , the Bills scored the next 12 points . The Giants responded by running a nearly eight @-@ minute drive , which culminated in a 14 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Hostetler to Stephen Baker . 
 The Giants received the second @-@ half kickoff and mounted a record @-@ setting drive . The opening drive ran for over nine minutes ( a Super Bowl record ) and culminated in a 1 @-@ yard touchdown run by Ottis Anderson , giving the Giants a 17 – 12 lead . On the first play of the 4th quarter , the Bills ' Thurman Thomas ran for a 31 @-@ yard touchdown that put Buffalo back in front , 19 – 17 . On the ensuing possession , the Giants drove down to the Buffalo 4 @-@ yard line , and Bahr made a 21 @-@ yard field goal , which gave the Giants a 20 – 19 lead . Both teams exchanged possessions before the Bills began one final drive , driving down to the Giants 29 @-@ yard line to set up what would be a potential game @-@ winning 47 @-@ yard field goal attempt by Scott Norwood . In what would become the game 's signature moment , Norwood 's attempt missed wide right , and the Giants won their second Super Bowl , 20 – 19 . 
 The Giants set a Super Bowl record for time of possession with a mark of 40 : 33 , and Ottis Anderson was named MVP of the game after rushing for 102 yards and a touchdown . 
 = = = End of an era = = = 
 The 1990 season marked the end of an era . After the Super Bowl , defensive coordinator Bill Belichick left to become head coach of the Cleveland Browns . Parcells also decided to leave the Giants in the spring of 1991 to pursue a career in broadcasting . In addition , there was an ownership change in what had been one of the most stable front offices in professional sports . In February 1991 , Tim Mara was diagnosed with cancer , and he sold his 50 % interest in the team to Bob Tisch for a reported $ 80 million . This marked the first time since their inception in 1925 that the Giants had not been wholly owned and controlled by the Mara family . 
 = = After Parcells – The Handley era : 1991 – 1992 = = 
 Following the departure of Parcells and Belichick — who many people saw as the likely successor to Parcells — the surprise choice as head coach was running backs coach Ray Handley . Handley , however , was a somewhat reluctant coach , whose approach stood in stark contrast to the passionate and emotional style employed by Parcells . 
 As with Parcells eight years previous , one of Handley 's first major decisions involved replacing Phil Simms as starting quarterback . Jeff Hostetler was named the team 's starter . Though the Giants won their opening game in an NFC Championship Game rematch against the 49ers , 16 – 14 , they lost three out of their next four games to drop to 2 – 3 . Though they rallied to finish the season 8 – 8 , and Simms reclaimed his starting job later in the year , the excitement that surrounded the Giants the previous year was gone . One of the few promising young players to emerge on the team was second – year running back Rodney Hampton , who led the Giants in rushing with 1 @,@ 059 yards . 
 Through the 1991 season , it was clear that the team 's core players on defense had aged quickly . This deterioration continued in 1992 , when Lawrence Taylor ruptured his Achilles tendon in the team 's tenth game , and the Giants promptly lost six out of their last seven games to finish the year 6 – 10 . The defense continued its descent , finishing 26th in the league in points allowed after leading the league in that category in 1990 . Handley , who had become unpopular with both players and fans , was fired after the end of the regular season . 
 = = Dan Reeves takes over : 1993 – 96 = = 
 Handley was replaced by former Denver Broncos head coach Dan Reeves , who led the Broncos to three Super Bowls in four years , one against the Giants . After his dismissal from the Broncos , Reeves took the unusual step of lobbying for the job . After being rebuffed by a number of candidates , George Young was pleased that someone with Reeves 's credentials wanted the job . 
 Reeves ' impact was immediate . As Parcells had done in 1984 , Reeves named Simms his starting quarterback . The defense returned to form , and allowed more than 20 points once all season . With two regular season games left , the Giants were 11 – 3 and appeared poised for a first @-@ round playoff bye . They were upset by a Phoenix Cardinals team , who came into the game with just five wins , 17 – 6 , in the next @-@ to @-@ last week of the season , setting up a winner – take – all contest against Dallas in the final regular season game . Though the Giants played well , it was Emmitt Smith 's memorable performance with a separated shoulder that led the Cowboys to a 16 – 13 overtime win , giving the Cowboys a sweep of the season series and home @-@ field advantage throughout the NFC Playoffs . Despite the loss , the Giants made the playoffs as a Wild Card and won their first @-@ round game , 17 – 10 over the Vikings . However , they were defeated by the San Francisco 49ers 44 – 3 in the divisional playoffs . Simms played in all 16 games , completing nearly 62 % of his passes , and threw for over 3 @,@ 000 yards and 15 touchdowns . Simms , Hampton , offensive linemen Jumbo Elliot and center Bart Oates made the Pro Bowl , and Reeves was named Coach of the Year by the Associated Press . After the season , Lawrence Taylor and Phil Simms , the two biggest figures of the late 1980s and early 1990s Giants teams , retired . 
 Before the 1994 season , Reeves named Dave Brown , who had been a # 1 supplemental draft choice in 1992 , the Giants starting quarterback . Though Brown led the Giants to wins in their first three games , they lost their next seven . The Giants recovered to win their last six games of the season , but missed the playoffs . During the winning streak , they never allowed more than 20 points in a game . 
 The Giants regressed to a 5 – 11 record in 1995 . Much of the blame for the Giants ' poor performance was placed on Brown . He put up lackluster numbers for the second straight year . Though the Giants defense still played well , and young players like Michael Strahan and Jessie Armstead began to emerge , the Giants inspired tepid interest league @-@ wide and sent no players to the Pro Bowl for the second straight year . 
 The Giants had another losing season in 1996 , finishing 6 – 10 . Though Brown again started every game for the Giants , he turned in one of the worst seasons of any starting quarterback in the NFL , throwing for just 12 touchdowns against 20 interceptions . The Giants ' offense was one of the worst in the NFL and , unlike in previous years , the defense was unable to carry the team . After missing the playoffs for three consecutive seasons , Reeves was fired . 
 = = Jim Fassel era = = 
 = = = 1997 – 1999 = = = 
 The Giants hired former Arizona Cardinals offensive coordinator Jim Fassel as their head coach before the 1997 season . With the team 's offense floundering once again and a 2 – 3 record after five games , Fassel turned to inexperienced Danny Kanell as the starting quarterback over Dave Brown . The Giants experienced a resurgent season , finishing 10 – 5 – 1 and winning the NFC East . They hosted a first – round playoff game against the Minnesota Vikings . The Giants led the Vikings for most of the game , including 22 – 13 in the 4th quarter , but following a muffed onside kick , the Vikings booted a last @-@ second field goal to win 23 – 22 . Following the season , George Young left the Giants . He was replaced by Ernie Accorsi , a veteran general manager who had successful stints building the Baltimore Colts and Cleveland Browns . 
 The Giants regressed to an 8 – 8 record in 1998 . The strength of the team during the season was their defense , which featured two Pro Bowlers in Armstead and Strahan . However , the offense continued to struggle . Dave Brown had been released before the season and replaced by Kanell and Kent Graham . However , neither quarterback provided Pro Bowl @-@ caliber play . Before the 1999 season , the Giants signed quarterback Kerry Collins . Collins had been the first – ever draft choice of the Carolina Panthers , and in his second season , led them to the NFC Championship game . However , problems with alcohol abuse , conflicts with his teammates , and questions about his character led to his release from the Panthers . Although many people questioned the wisdom of Accorsi and the Giants giving Collins a $ 16 @.@ 9 million contract , Accorsi was confident in Collins ' abilities . 
 In 1999 , Tiki Barber emerged as a solid pass – catching running back , catching 66 passes . Wide receiver Amani Toomer also had a breakout season , accumulating over 1 @,@ 100 yards receiving and six touchdowns , and Ike Hilliard finished just shy of 1 @,@ 000 yards receiving . The defense rebounded , ranking 11th in the league , and Armstead and Strahan again were selected to the Pro Bowl . Though the Giants stood at 7 – 6 and poised for a playoff berth , they lost their final three games to miss the playoffs . 
 = = = 2000 : Super Bowl season = = = 
 The 2000 season was considered a make @-@ or @-@ break year for Fassel . The conventional wisdom was that Fassel needed to have a strong year and a playoff appearance to save his job . After back @-@ to @-@ back losses at home against the St. Louis Rams and Detroit Lions , the Giants fell to 7 – 4 , and their playoff prospects were in question . At a press conference following the loss to Detroit , Fassel guaranteed that " [ t ] his team is going to the playoffs . " The Giants responded , winning the next week 's game against Arizona and the rest of their regular season games to finish the season 12 – 4 and earn a bye and home @-@ field advantage as the NFC 's top seed . 
 The Giants won their first playoff game against the Eagles , 20 – 10 , and then defeated the Vikings 41 – 0 in the NFC Championship game . They advanced to play the Baltimore Ravens in Super Bowl XXXV . Though the Giants kept the game close early and went into halftime down only 10 – 0 , the Ravens dominated the second half . The Ravens ' defense harassed Kerry Collins all game long , and he had one of the worst games in Super Bowl history . Collins completed only 15 of 39 passes for 112 yards and four interceptions , and the Ravens won the game , 34 – 7 . The Giants ' only score came on a Ron Dixon 97 @-@ yard kickoff return for a touchdown late in the 3rd quarter . On the ensuing kickoff , the Ravens ' Jermaine Lewis scored a touchdown on an 84 @-@ yard return . 
 = = = 2001 – 2003 = = = 
 The Giants were unable to build on their Super Bowl appearance . They ended the 2001 season 7 – 9 and out of the playoffs for the third time in four seasons . Collins continued his success as the team 's quarterback , throwing for over 3 @,@ 700 yards and 19 touchdowns , and Strahan broke the NFL record by recording 22 @.@ 5 sacks In 2002 , Collins had one of the best seasons of his career , throwing for over 4 @,@ 000 yards , and Barber rushed for 1 @,@ 386 yards and caught 69 passes for 597 yards . Rookie tight end Jeremy Shockey caught 74 passes for a total of 894 yards . The team started 6 – 6 , but made the playoffs as a wild card by winning their last four regular season games . 
 In the wild card playoffs , the Giants built a 38 – 14 3rd @-@ quarter lead against San Francisco . However , the 49ers rallied , scoring a field goal , and three touchdowns to take a 39 – 38 lead with a minute left in the game . Collins then drove the Giants down to the 49ers 23 @-@ yard line with six seconds left , setting up a potential game winning 41 @-@ yard field goal attempt for Matt Bryant . On the final play of the game , 40 @-@ year @-@ old long snapper Trey Junkin — who had just been signed for this playoff game — snapped the ball low , and punter Matt Allen could not spot the ball properly for the attempt . Allen picked the ball up and threw an unsuccessful pass downfield to offensive lineman Rich Seubert as time expired , and the Giants lost 39 – 38 . 
 The Giants started the 2003 season 4 – 4 , but lost their final eight games . With two games remaining in the season , Jim Fassel requested a meeting with team management , and asked , if he was to be fired , that they do so now rather than wait until the end of the season . Management complied with his request , formally firing Fassel on ( or around ) December 17 , 2003 , but allowing him to coach the team 's final two games . 
 = = Eli Manning and Tom Coughlin era : 2004 – Present = = 
 = = = 2004 – 2006 = = = 
 After a brief search , Ernie Accorsi hired former Jacksonville Jaguars coach Tom Coughlin to be the Giants ' head coach . Coughlin was considered a disciplinarian , in contrast to the departed Fassel , whose lenient style was criticized in his final years with the club . Accorsi coveted quarterback Eli Manning , brother of Peyton and son of Archie , in the 2004 NFL Draft . Manning had indicated before the draft that he did not want to play for the San Diego Chargers , who held the top pick . The Chargers drafted him nonetheless , and then traded him to the Giants for their first round picks in 2004 and 2005 . The Giants released Kerry Collins , who was unhappy with a backup role , and signed veteran quarterback Kurt Warner . The plan was for Warner to be the starter , while the team groomed Manning to ultimately take over the job . After losing to the Eagles in the 2004 season opener , the Giants , with Warner at quarterback , won five of their next six games , making them 5 – 2 . After losing two close games , to the Bears and Cardinals , to drop to 5 – 4 , Coughlin announced that Manning would start the rest of the season . Manning struggled , and the Giants did not score more than 14 points in their next four games . He performed better later in the season , but the Giants finished the season 6 – 10 . Barber established a career high in rushing with 1 @,@ 518 yards . He also had 52 catches and a total of 15 touchdowns . 
 The Giants started 4 – 2 in 2005 . Then , on October 25 , patriarch Wellington Mara died after a brief illness at the age of 89 . Mara had been involved with the Giants since he was nine years old , when he worked for them as a ball boy . Except a tour of duty in the military during World War II , Mara spent his entire adult life with the team . He was beloved by many of the players , and was noted for making an effort to get to know each of them . The Giants dedicated their next game to Mara , and defeated the Redskins 36 – 0 . Just twenty days after Mara 's death , on November 15 , the other Giants Executive Officer , Bob Tisch , died at the age of 79 . The Giants honored Tisch by defeating the Eagles 27 – 17 in their next game . Barber set a new team single @-@ game rushing record with 220 yards , and the team 's single @-@ season record with 1 @,@ 860 yards in a victory over the Kansas City Chiefs . The Giants finished 11 – 5 and hosted the Carolina Panthers in the wild card playoffs , but lost 23 – 0 . 
 The Giants regressed to an 8 – 8 record in 2006 . The season was characterized by inconsistent play , criticism of the coaching by the media and players , and Manning 's struggles . They won five straight following a 1 – 2 start , giving them a two @-@ game lead in the NFC East , but they lost six of their last seven games , and the players publicly clashed with Coughlin . One of the team 's worst losses was a 24 – 21 defeat to Tennessee , in which the team surrendered a 21 @-@ point 4th @-@ quarter lead . Following a season @-@ ending win at Washington , the Giants made the playoffs as a wild card in spite of their record , but were defeated 23 – 20 by Philadelphia . 
 Barber led the Giants with 1 @,@ 662 yards rushing and over 2 @,@ 000 yards from scrimmage , Manning threw for 3 @,@ 244 yards and 24 touchdowns , and Jeremy Shockey led the team in receptions . Defensively , the team struggled against the pass ( 28th in the league ) and gaining a consistent pass rush ( tied for 23rd in the league in sacks ) . 
 = = = 2007 : Third Super Bowl Championship = = = 
 In 2007 , the Giants made the playoffs for the third consecutive season . In a September game against the Eagles , they tied the NFL record for most sacks in a game by sacking Philadelphia quarterback Donovan McNabb 12 times , with Osi Umenyiora recording six of those sacks . They became the third NFL franchise to win 600 games when they defeated the Atlanta Falcons 31 – 10 in October . That same month , they also played in the NFL 's first regular season game outside of North America , in London 's Wembley Stadium , where they beat Miami 13 – 10 . They ended the regular season 10 – 6 and defeated Tampa Bay 24 – 14 in the first round of the playoffs , earning Manning and Coughlin their first playoff victories with the Giants . The next week , the Giants won their ninth consecutive road game by beating the top @-@ seeded Dallas Cowboys 21 – 17 . In the NFC championship game , Lawrence Tynes kicked an overtime field goal to give them a 23 – 20 road victory over the Green Bay Packers . 
 In Super Bowl XLII , the Giants defeated the previously unbeaten New England Patriots 17 – 14 . The signature play of the game came on a 3rd @-@ and @-@ 5 , with the Giants on their own 44 @-@ yard line , down 14 – 10 , and 1 : 15 remaining in the 4th quarter . Manning dropped back to pass , but was surrounded by New England pass rushers . Escaping three tackles , he threw a long pass to David Tyree , who caught the ball against his own helmet , while being covered by Patriots safety Rodney Harrison . Four plays later , Manning threw the game @-@ winning touchdown pass to Plaxico Burress with 35 seconds left . Manning won the game 's MVP award by completing 19 of 34 passes for 255 yards and two touchdowns . The Giants ' win is considered one of the biggest upsets in Super Bowl history . 
 Michael Strahan retired after the game as the team 's all @-@ time leader in sacks . 
 = = = 2008 – 2015 = = 
 The Giants ' 12 – 4 record in 2008 earned them a first @-@ round bye in the playoffs . They won 11 of their first 12 games before stumbling to lose four of their last five , including a 23 – 11 loss to the Eagles in the NFC Divisional Playoffs . Manning threw for 3 @,@ 238 yards , 21 touchdowns , and 10 interceptions , and was named to the Pro Bowl after the season . Other standouts included Brandon Jacobs and Derrick Ward who both rushed for 1 @,@ 000 yards ( who helped the Giants lead the NFL in rushing yards ) ; Justin Tuck , who led the team with 12 sacks ; and Antonio Pierce , who was the team 's leading tackler . The Giants featured a balanced offense with no receiver topping 600 receiving yards . 
 The Giants won their first five games in 2009 , but lost their next four . After beating the Atlanta Falcons in overtime , they lost badly to Denver on Thanksgiving . They defeated Dallas 31 – 24 in Week 13 , then lost 45 – 38 to Philadelphia the next week . At 8 – 6 , they still had a chance to make the playoffs , but losses to Carolina and Minnesota to finish the season left them out of the playoffs at 8 – 8 . 
 In the spring of 2010 , construction on the New Meadowlands Stadium ( now MetLife Stadium ) was completed , and the Giants and Jets opened it in August with their annual preseason game . In the regular season , they won their home opener against Carolina , 31 – 18 , avenging their late @-@ season loss from the previous year . They went on the road to play Indianapolis in the second " Manning Bowl " in Week 2 . Peyton outplayed Eli ( who threw for just 161 yards ) in a 38 – 14 Colts victory . Discipline became a growing problem for the Giants during the season . In the Colts game , Jacobs threw his helmet into the stands , and in the next game , offensive tackle David Diehl ripped off the helmet of Tennessee Titans cornerback Cortland Finnegan . 
 During the 2011 preseason , the Giants lost tight end Kevin Boss , wide receiver Steve Smith , guard Rich Seubert , linebacker Keith Bulluck , wide receiver Derek Hagan , and Pro Bowl center Shaun O 'Hara to free agency . However , the 2011 season also saw the emerging of second @-@ year wide receiver Victor Cruz and second @-@ year tight end Jake Ballard . The Giants opened the season against the Washington Redskins on the 10th anniversary of the September 11th attacks , with both New York City and Washington being a target of the attacks . The Redskins beat the Giants 28 – 14 , but the Giants won their next three games , against the Rams , Eagles , and Cardinals . After a loss against the Seattle Seahawks because of an Eli Manning interception , they went on another three @-@ game winning streak . A key victory was an upset of the New England Patriots 24 – 20 at Gillette Stadium . The victory ended the Patriots ' NFL record home @-@ game winning streak , after a touchdown pass from Manning to Ballard with 15 seconds left . However , the Giants seemed to hit a wall after the midpoint of the season . <unk> by inconsistent game play , questionable play @-@ calling , and injuries , the team struggled and lost their next three games . The Giants broke their losing streak and regained their position atop the NFC East with a tightly contested 37 – 34 victory over the Dallas Cowboys on December 11 . Soon after , the Giants lost to the Redskins again , but they avenged their defeat by beating their cross @-@ town rival New York Jets , also knocking the Philadelphia Eagles out of playoff contention , leaving them with a tiebreaker versus the Cowboys . On a cold night in New Jersey , the Giants defeated the Cowboys 31 – 14 in Week 17 to clinch the NFC East and thus their NFL record 31st playoff appearance , breaking their tie with the Cowboys at 30 . 
 In the first round of the playoffs , the Giants defeated the Atlanta Falcons 24 – 2 . After giving up an early safety in the first half , Eli Manning threw three consecutive touchdowns . Running backs Ahmad Bradshaw and Brandon Jacobs combined for 172 yards rushing , a season @-@ high for the Giants . With the victory , the Giants advanced to the second round against the top @-@ seeded Green Bay Packers . 
 The following week , the Giants defeated the Packers 37 – 20 . Manning threw for 330 yards and three touchdowns , two of them to wide receiver Hakeem Nicks . This earned the Giants a spot in the NFC Championship Game against the San Francisco 49ers . They won that game in overtime , 20 – 17 with Lawrence Tynes scoring the game @-@ winning field goal as he did four years earlier in the same game against the Green Bay Packers . 
 The New York Giants won Super Bowl XLVI against the New England Patriots by a score of 21 – 17 . The winning touchdown drive began with a 38 @-@ yard reception by receiver Mario Manningham . As in Super Bowl XLII , Eli Manning was the game 's MVP , defeating Tom Brady for a second time in the Super Bowl . 
 = = = 2012 – present = = = 
 Despite winning 2 Super Bowl championships in 5 years , the 2012 ( 9 @-@ 7 ) , 2013 ( 7 @-@ 9 ) , and 2014 ( 6 @-@ 10 ) seasons saw the Giants missing the playoffs 3 years in a row . A bright spot of the 2014 season was rookie Odell Beckham Jr . , who burst onto the scene catching 91 passes on 132 targets , for 1 @,@ 305 yards and 12 touchdowns , and in doing so winning Offensive Rookie of the Year . 
 The Giants struggled in 2015 , finishing 6 @-@ 10 again and third in the NFC East . Quarterback Eli Manning threw for a career high 35 touchdown passes and also set career highs in attempts and completions . After the season , head coach Tom Coughlin resigned after 12 seasons . 
 = The Tic Code = 
 The Tic Code ( also known as Lessons in the Tic Code ) is a drama film directed by Gary Winick and written by Polly Draper . It tells of a single mother , the relationship she forms with a jazz musician who has Tourette syndrome , and her young son — a jazz piano prodigy — also with the disorder . The musician and the boy form a friendship , and the film is loosely based upon the experiences of Draper 's jazz musician husband Michael Wolff , who provided the film 's score . Draper , star of Thirtysomething , portrays the mother and Gregory Hines plays the musician with Christopher George Marquette as the boy . 
 Principal photography took place in 1997 in New York City . The Tic Code appeared at several film festivals in 1998 and 1999 , where it won a number of awards . It received a limited theatrical release in the United States on August 4 , 2000 , and a DVD release in February 2001 . Critical response to the film was generally favorable . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film tells the story of a young boy , Miles Caraday ( Marquette ) , a jazz piano prodigy who has Tourette syndrome , and his divorced mother Laura Caraday ( Draper ) . Miles has a school friend , Todd ( Desmond Robertson ) who seems not to be bothered by Miles ' condition . Miles wants to become a jazz pianist against the wishes of his classical @-@ oriented instructor Miss <unk> ( Carol Kane ) . At a local nightspot , Miles becomes friends with a jazz saxophonist , Tyrone Pike ( Hines ) , who also has Tourette 's but has learned ways to cover up his condition . 
 In the film , Tyrone tells Denny Harley who bullies Miles that the reason they both tic is : 
 Tyrone : [ ... ] because we both know the code . 
 Denny : [ ... ] Code , what code ? 
 Tyrone : [ ... ] ' the tic code ' . 
 Denny : So you and Miles made this whole thing up ? 
 Tyrone : No , the C.I.A. did ; a lot of people know about it now . 
 = = Filming = = 
 The Tic Code was in development for five years before finally being made . Principal photography took place on location in New York City in 1997 , on a budget of US $ 2 million . The film was directed by Gary Winick , who took over after original director Norman René died during pre @-@ production . It was written by Polly Draper , who also produced alongside Karen <unk> , Midge Sanford , Sarah Pillsbury and Larry <unk> . Draper based the screenplay on the experiences of her noted jazz musician husband Michael Wolff , who has Tourette syndrome . Wolff 's involvement as co @-@ producer ensured the cooperation of jazz club The Village Vanguard , which granted the production permission to use its name and exterior shots of the building . Herman Leonard loaned his collection of photographs of famous jazz musicians , and the Blue Note jazz club allowed its name to be used on fake fliers . Wolff also provided the film 's piano score , to which Alex Foster also contributed by providing the soundtrack for scenes of Hines ' playing the saxophone . 
 = = Post production = = 
 The Tic Code appeared at the first Newport International Film Festival in June 1998 . It was subsequently shown at the Wine Country Film Festival in July – August 1998 , and at the Hamptons International Film Festival in October 1998 . It also appeared at several film festivals in 1999 , including the Vancouver Reel to Real Festival on March 3 , 1999 , the Berlin International Film Festival , and the Giffoni Film Festival . On April 2 , 1999 , the film aired on the Starz ! television network . The distribution rights were subsequently picked up by insurance company @-@ backed film library <unk> Pictures , which buys independent films that have run into financial difficulty . The rights were sold to Lions Gate Entertainment in May 1999 . Lions Gate gave The Tic Code a limited theatrical release in the United States , opening on August 4 , 2000 . It grossed US $ 205 @,@ 000 from nine theaters and closed on October 5 , 2000 . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Gregory Hines plays Tyrone Pike , a jazz saxophonist and Laura 's boyfriend . Hines also studied Wolff to imitate his ticcing and develop the character . During filming , Hines committed himself to spending a full day as a <unk> ; after being stared at by a taxi driver , Hines reflected that he had not considered how embarrassing the disorder could be . He also studied tapes of Alex Foster to learn how to finger the saxophone . 
 Polly Draper plays Laura Caraday , Miles ' single mother . 
 Christopher Marquette plays Miles Caraday , a young jazz piano prodigy with Tourette Syndrome . Marquette learned how to play the piano from Wolff . He also studied ticcing from Wolff and watched videotapes , including the documentary Twitch and Shout , to perfect his technique . In preparation for the role , Marquette practiced ticcing in public . 
 The film also features Desmond Robertson as Todd , Miles ' friend ; Carol Kane as Miss <unk> , Miles ' music instructor and teacher ; Robert <unk> as Denny Harley , a bully ; Bill Nunn and Tony Shaloub as bartenders Kingston and Phil ; Camryn Manheim as Mrs. Lily <unk> , one of Laura 's customers ; and James McCaffrey as Michael Caraday , Laura 's ex @-@ husband . Wolff cameos as Sound Engineer # 2 . 
 = = Awards and reception = = 
 The Tic Code received generally favorable reviews from film critics . Rotten Tomatoes reported that 77 % of critics gave the film a positive write @-@ up , based upon a sample of 26 , with an average score of 6 @.@ 6 / 10 . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 64 , based on 17 reviews . 
 In 1998 , the film won the Audience Award for Most Popular Feature at the Hamptons International Film Festival . It also received a " special recognition " award from the festival jury . Polly Draper won the Bronze Gryphon award for Best Actress at the Giffoni Film Festival , and Christopher George Marquette won the Bronze Gryphon award for Best Actor . In 1999 , the film won the Crystal Bear award at the Berlin International Film Festival . The film also took the Best Overall Film award at the first Vancouver Reel to Reel Festival . 
 = Herbert Ernest Hart = 
 Brigadier General Sir Herbert Ernest Hart KBE , CB , CMG , DSO , VD ( 13 October 1882 – 5 March 1968 ) was an officer in the New Zealand Military Forces who served during the Second Boer War and the First World War . He later served as the Administrator of Western Samoa and worked for the Imperial War Graves Commission . 
 Hart volunteered for the Ninth New Zealand South African Contingent , which was raised for service in South Africa during the Second Boer War . By the time the contingent arrived in South Africa , the war was largely over . He saw extensive action during the First World War as a volunteer with the New Zealand Expeditionary Force , first at Gallipoli and then on the Western Front . By the end of the war , he had advanced in rank to brigadier general , commanding a number of brigades in the New Zealand Division . 
 Trained as a lawyer before the war , Hart returned to New Zealand to resume his legal practice after his discharge from the New Zealand Expeditionary Force . He later served as Administrator of Western Samoa from 1931 to 1935 and was knighted for his services in this role . From 1936 to 1943 , he worked in the Middle East for the Imperial War Graves Commission , a task made difficult by the outbreak of the Second World War and the subsequent fighting in the region . Following his retirement in late 1943 , he became involved in Rotary International . He died at his home in Masterton on 5 March 1968 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hart was born at <unk> , a small community near Carterton in the Wairarapa region . His father , William , was a farm labourer and the grandson of John Hart , a three @-@ time Premier of South Australia . One of four children , he was educated firstly at <unk> School , and then Carterton School . After finishing his formal education he worked for his uncle , an auctioneer and land broker , while also studying bookkeeping . 
 In 1900 , Hart 's brother Walter travelled to South Africa for service with the Fourth Contingent in the Second Boer War . This inspired Hart to volunteer for the Eighth New Zealand South African Contingent , but his application was declined . However , he , along with another brother , George , successfully enlisted for the Ninth Contingent . The minimum age for volunteers was 20 and he falsified his age to enlist . By the time he reached South Africa in April 1902 , the war was effectively over . He was discharged in July 1902 with the rank of lance sergeant but travelled to England instead of returning to New Zealand with the rest of the contingent . 
 Hart eventually returned to New Zealand in early 1903 . Shortly after his return he married Minnie <unk> , the daughter of a farmer . The couple would have four children , one of whom died in infancy . He resumed working at his uncle 's business and eventually became a director of the company . However , rather than pursue bookkeeping as a career , he commenced legal studies . He qualified as a solicitor in 1907 , becoming a partner in a Carterton practice which he had joined the previous year . 
 Hart was also active in the Volunteer Force . It was common practice in the Volunteer Force for the men of a unit to elect their officers although they were sometimes directed by their superiors to vote for certain candidates . Hart was duly elected a lieutenant in the Carterton Rifle Volunteers . When the Volunteer Force was abolished in 1910 and replaced with the Territorial Force , which was organised more like a conventional military , he chose to continue his service . He was well regarded by his superiors and was promoted to captain in 1911 . When he was promoted to major the following year , he was the youngest officer with that rank in his battalion . He was serving with the 1st Battalion of the 17th ( Ruahine ) Regiment when the First World War broke out . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Following the outbreak of the First World War , Hart immediately volunteered for the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) , which was being raised for service in the war on Britain 's behalf . He was appointed second in command of the Wellington Infantry Battalion , under Lieutenant Colonel William Malone . The battalion embarked from Wellington in October 1914 for Egypt , and upon arrival , was primarily engaged in training before it was deployed along the Suez Canal late in January 1915 to support Indian troops stationed to guard against a rumoured Turkish attack . Three weeks of sentry duty ensued for the battalion before returning to Cairo . 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 At this stage of the war , the Allied forces were preparing for the Gallipoli Campaign , which was part of a plan conceived by the First Lord of the Admiralty , Winston Churchill , to seize control of the Dardanelles . This would leave the Turkish capital , Constantinople , vulnerable to attack . The New Zealand and Australian Division , under the command of Major General Alexander Godley ( also commander of the NZEF ) , was being formed for the campaign , and Hart 's battalion was attached to the New Zealand Infantry Brigade , one of the two infantry brigades ( the other was the Australian 4th Brigade ) that formed the bulk of the division . In April , the division embarked for Gallipoli and the Wellington Battalion was landed at Anzac Cove on the afternoon of 25 April , and made its way up to Plugge 's Plateau . 
 The battalion was involved in defending against Turkish attacks on Walker 's Ridge on 27 April . Hart was wounded in the thigh while supervising the establishment of defensive positions . His wounds necessitated his evacuation to Alexandria the following day . He was later awarded a Distinguished Service Order for his leadership of the battalion during this action . 
 Hart was promoted to lieutenant colonel while recovering from his wounds in England . He returned to the Dardanelles in September 1915 as commander of the Wellington Battalion , Malone having been killed in action in early August during the Battle of Chunuk Bair . The battalion had been decimated during the battle but remained in the line manning positions at ' The Apex ' , a knoll near Chunuk Bair . Along with the rest of the New Zealand Infantry Brigade , the battalion was transferred to the Greek island of Lemnos on 14 September for a period of rest and recuperation while it was also being built up with reinforcements from New Zealand . While on Lemnos , Hart commanded the brigade for a 12 @-@ day period when its nominal commander , Brigadier General Francis Earl Johnston , was hospitalised . 
 Hart led the battalion back to Gallipoli in early November , where it returned to its former positions at " The Apex " . With no major offensive operations conducted since its return , he and his battalion eventually evacuated the peninsula in December , with Hart amongst the last of his unit to leave on 19 December . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 Returning to Egypt , Hart was heavily involved with the training of his command , which included a substantial number of replacements . He was also required to divest a number of his more experienced officers and non @-@ commissioned officers to help with the formation of the 2nd Battalion of the Wellington Regiment . His battalion was subsequently re @-@ designated as the 1st Battalion , Wellington Regiment , while the New Zealand Infantry Brigade was reformed as the 1st Infantry Brigade . The brigade was one of the three infantry brigades to make up the newly formed New Zealand Division , intended for service on the Western Front and it was duly shipped to France in April 1916 . 
 The division was initially based near Armentières and Hart 's battalion was among those manning the trenches in the sector . The battalion had to contend with artillery and repelling localised attacks and raids by the opposing Germans . Hart organised a counter @-@ raid to be conducted by his battalion , and this was successfully executed on 1 July . The division would remain in the Armentières sector until August 1916 , at which stage it was withdrawn for use in the forthcoming Somme Offensive in September . Hart led his battalion during the Battle of Flers @-@ Courcelette and the subsequent period in the trenches , and was mentioned in despatches for his work during this time . He also had spells as temporary commander of the brigade while Johnston was on leave , and from December 1916 to January 1917 was in command of 3rd New Zealand ( Rifle ) Brigade . 
 In March 1917 , Hart was promoted to brigadier general and appointed commander of the newly formed 4th Infantry Brigade . The new brigade was intended for service with the New Zealand Division . After a brief training period in England , the brigade was transferred to France for further training and a period in the front line . In October , it saw service during the successful attack on the Abraham Heights on the Gravenstafel Spur in what was known as the Battle of Broodseinde and was commended for its services by both Godley , still commanding the NZEF , and the commander of the New Zealand Division , Major General Andrew Russell . The brigade was in reserve for the subsequent First Battle of Passchendaele , and , apart from a brief period in training , would remain in the Ypres sector until January . He was mentioned in despatches for his work with the 4th Infantry Brigade while it was on the front line . 
 Hart was made commander of the 2nd Infantry Brigade when the 4th Brigade was disbanded in February 1918 . He was mentioned in despatches for his work with the 4th Infantry Brigade while it was on the front line . His new brigade absorbed many of the soldiers of his previous command . However , on 18 February , just two weeks after taking command , he was badly gassed during an artillery barrage on his headquarters . The barrage , using a mixture of high explosive and mustard gas shells , also incapacitated most of his staff . Temporarily blinded , he was evacuated to a hospital in the rear and then to Étaples . After recovering his sight , which took about a week , he was dispatched to the south of France to convalesce . 
 Upon recovery from the effects of his gassing , and aided by the temporary presence of his wife Minnie , Hart returned to England and was placed in command of the New Zealand reserves at Sling Camp in Bulford . Here he was responsible for the training of reinforcements and casualties who were regaining fitness . On 3 June , his leadership of the 4th Brigade was honoured with an appointment as a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George , although he took little personal satisfaction in the recognition . 
 Hart 's duties at Sling Camp ended in July , when he was recalled to France to take over command of the 3rd New Zealand ( Rifle ) Brigade . He led the brigade through the Hundred Days Offensive , which included an action during the Second Battle of Bapaume that impressed his commanding officer , Russell . During the battle , Hart 's headquarters was again shelled with mustard gas . After his previous experience of being gassed , Hart found the shelling ' annoying ' . The brigade also participated in the capture of Le Quesnoy in November 1918 . This was a difficult assignment for the presence of civilians in the walled town meant that artillery could not support the attack . Instead a small party was able to scale the walls and put flight to the Germans defending that section . This allowed the remainder of the attacking force to enter the town , which quickly surrendered . A few days later , the mayor of Le Quesnoy presented Hart with the French flag that was raised over the town on the day it was captured from the Germans . 
 After the armistice that ended the war , Hart led the brigade into Germany for occupation duties with the remainder of the New Zealand Division . His headquarters was based near Cologne and in January 1919 , played host to the Prince of Wales . The division itself was in the process of demobilising , with around 1 @,@ 000 men returning to New Zealand via England every week , and the Rifle Brigade was disbanded in early February . Hart was twice mentioned in despatches during his period in command of the Rifle Brigade . In mid @-@ February he received his orders to return to New Zealand and he duly left England on 12 March 1919 . 
 Hart arrived in his home town of Carterton to a hero 's welcome on 25 April 1919 , five years to the day after being landed at Gallipoli . The guest of honour at several receptions held around the Wairarapa over the next several days , he made a point of acknowledging the role played by the ordinary soldier in the eventual victory over the Germans while downplaying his own contributions . He was eventually discharged from the NZEF in late May 1919 . His services in the war were subsequently recognised with his appointment as a Companion of the Order of the Bath . The French government also awarded him with the Croix de guerre . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Upon discharge from the NZEF , Hart resumed legal work in his Carterton practice . However , within a few months , he moved his family to Masterton and established a new law firm . He became involved with the charity organisation Rotary International and set up the Masterton chapter of Rotary in 1925 . He maintained an association with the military ; after an initial spell in the reserve of officers , he resumed his involvement with the Territorial Force and served as commander of the 2nd ( Wellington ) Infantry Brigade for several years . He was eventually returned to the reserve of officers in 1925 . To acknowledge his long military career , he was awarded the Colonial Auxiliary Forces Officers ' Decoration ( VD ) and appointed honorary colonel of his old Territorial Force unit , the Hawkes ' Bay Regiment ( formerly 17th ( Ruahine ) Regiment ) . He retired from the military in 1930 . 
 Hart was a longtime advocate for the welfare of former soldiers and was active in the Returned Services Association ( RSA ) . The organisation later awarded Hart the Gold Badge , its highest honour , for his advocacy on the behalf of former servicemen . 
 = = = Western Samoa = = = 
 In 1930 , Hart applied for and was appointed to the position of Administrator of Western Samoa , which was controlled by New Zealand under a mandate from the League of Nations . This was a difficult period for the colony as many of its citizens wanted independence . The Mau movement in particular was agitating for self @-@ determination and employed tactics of civil disobedience as a means of opposing the New Zealand administration . After some heavy @-@ handed management of protestors by his predecessor had resulted in several deaths amongst the movement , Hart made progress in improving relationships with the Mau when he took up his position in 1931 . He also returned some financial stability to the colony which had struggled during the Great Depression . Hart was knighted as a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his services in Samoa shortly before completing his term as administrator and returning to New Zealand in July 1935 . 
 = = = Imperial War Graves Commission = = = 
 In 1936 , Hart accepted a position in the Middle East with the Imperial War Graves Commission ( now the Commonwealth War Graves Commission ) . This position was usually the preserve of an Australian or New Zealander due to the number of dead from these two countries buried in the area . Although his new position of Deputy Controller of the Eastern District was nominally based in Jerusalem , he and his wife initially moved to Cairo because of the Arab revolt against the British Mandate in Palestine . It was not until March 1937 , after the conditions in Palestine had sufficiently improved , that the couple moved to Jerusalem . They were later joined by their daughter , Bettina , who was married to a British Army officer also based in Jerusalem . 
 Hart 's new role involved overseeing the upkeep of the cemeteries and memorials established by the Commission in the Middle East , Turkey and Greece . Ensuring the maintenance of these places required extensive travel , and his duties also became more difficult when Italy joined in the Second World War in June 1940 and conflict broke out in the Middle East . This required the creation of an organisation responsible for the graves of Allied personnel killed in the region . Consequently , Hart became Assistant Director , Graves Registration and Inquiry Section for the Middle East , in addition to his existing Commission duties . His new position entailed him becoming a serving officer in the British Army as a lieutenant , but with the acting rank of brigadier . He set up grave registration units , new cemeteries and organised the relocation of existing graves in remote areas to the new cemeteries . This work struck a personal note when his nephew was killed during the Second Battle of El Alamein in late 1942 . Early the following year Hart visited the El Alamein battlefield and the nearby cemetery , the establishment of which was partly due to the infrastructure he helped put in place , to lay flowers at his nephew 's grave . 
 Although he found the work satisfying , Hart retired from the Commission in September 1943 . His wife , daughter , and <unk> , his granddaughter who had been born in Jerusalem , had left for New Zealand earlier that month . He followed a few weeks later once his successor at the Commission arrived . His work with the Graves Registration section had finished a year earlier . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Settling back in the Wairarapa , Hart resumed his involvement with Rotary . He served a spell as president of the North Island district of Rotary , and attended overseas conventions . During the 1960s , there was a growing argument that the First World War was an unnecessary conflict . In speeches that he made during his community and RSA duties , he continued to advocate the importance of the war in countering Imperial German aggression . He attended reunions of his former units , including the Wellington Infantry Regiment and the Rifle Brigade . He had assisted the authors of the histories of both formations in the years after the First World War . In 1955 , in honour of the 40th anniversary of the formation of the Rifle Brigade , Hart presented the flag which he had been given by the mayor of Le Quesnoy following its capture from the Germans in 1918 to Wellington Cathedral . 
 With age , Hart 's involvement in community affairs decreased but he remained physically active , regularly playing golf and bowls . He died at his home in Masterton on 5 March 1968 , his wife having predeceased him by nearly 18 months , and was buried with full military honours . The last surviving senior officer of the NZEF at the time of his death , he was well regarded by both the men he had commanded during the war and his superior officers . 
 = 2007 Scottish Challenge Cup Final = 
 The 2007 Scottish Challenge Cup Final was an association football match between Dunfermline Athletic and St Johnstone , held on 25 November 2007 at Dens Park in Dundee . It was the 17th final of the Scottish Challenge Cup since it was first organised in 1990 to celebrate the centenary of the Scottish Football League . 
 St Johnstone progressed through four knock @-@ out rounds to reach the final whilst Dunfermline Athletic contested only three after receiving a random bye into the second round . The 2007 final was Dunfermline 's second appearance in a cup final in six months having lost the previous season 's Scottish Cup final in May , however , it was the club 's first Challenge Cup final . The match was St Johnstone 's second appearance in the final of the tournament having lost in 1996 . The tournament was contested by clubs below the Scottish Premier League with both clubs from the First Division . 
 St Johnstone took a 3 – 0 lead within the first 30 minutes with a penalty kick from Paul Sheerin and goals from Peter MacDonald and Kenny Deuchar . Scott Wilson scored for Dunfermline after 37 minutes to make it 3 – 1 at half time . In the 70th minute , Stephen Glass scored the final goal of the game for Dunfermline from a penalty to make it 3 – 2 . St Johnstone 's victory was the first time the club had won a national cup trophy in its 123 @-@ year history . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 The competition was a knock @-@ out tournament and in 2007 was contested by the 30 teams that played in the First , Second and Third Divisions of the Scottish Football League . The first round draw was split into two geographical regions with 15 teams in each : north / west and south / east . In each regional draw , teams were paired at random and the winner of each match progressed to the next round and the loser was eliminated . Dunfermline Athletic and Partick Thistle received random byes into the second round , at which stage the regional format ended and all remaining teams entered the same draw . 
 = = = Dunfermline Athletic = = = 
 Dunfermline Athletic entered the second round after receiving a bye in the first round draw and faced the First Division club and previous season 's runners @-@ up , Clyde , at Broadwood Stadium . Mark Burchill scored first for Dunfermline in the 26th minute with Ruari MacLennan equalising for Clyde one minute into the second half . Owen Morrison scored Dunfermline 's second goal after 57 minutes before he and Burchill both scored again to make it 4 – 1 and win the match . 
 In the quarter @-@ finals Dunfermline faced Airdrie United , a competitor in the Second Division , away from home at the Excelsior Stadium . The score was goalless at half time but Burchill 's two goals in the second half after 54 and 81 minutes respectively sealed a 2 – 0 win to progress to the semi @-@ finals . With four teams left in the tournament Dunfermline were drawn to play Ayr United , also of the Second Division , at home at East End Park . Similar to the previous round , the scoreline was 0 – 0 for most of the game before Glass scored a late winner for Dunfermline in the 83rd minute to win 1 – 0 and send Dunfermline into their first Challenge Cup final . 
 = = = St Johnstone = = = 
 St Johnstone entered the north / east section of the first round draw and were paired with Second Division club Raith Rovers away from home at Stark 's Park . Paul Sheerin scored the first goal of the game for St Johnstone in the 13th minute from a penalty kick . The scoreline remained that way until the 89th minute when Andy Tod scored a late equaliser for Raith Rovers to force extra time to be played . The score stayed 1 – 1 for the 30 minutes of extra time so the winner was decided by a penalty shoot @-@ out , which St Johnstone won 5 – 4 to progress to the second round . In the second round St Johnstone faced the defending champions Ross County , also away from home , at Victoria Park . Kenny Deuchar scored the first goal for St Johnstone in the 14th minute before Andy Jackson scored the game 's only other goal in the 49th minute to secure a 2 – 0 win and advance to the next round . 
 St Johnstone played another Second Division club , Brechin City , at home at McDiarmid Park in the quarter @-@ finals , taking a four @-@ goal lead in the first half : Kenny Deuchar scored twice and Andy Jackson and David <unk> made it 4 – 0 shortly before half time . In the second half , Calum Smith pulled a goal back for Brechin City in the 57th minute to make it 4 – 1 which was how the score remained and St Johnstone progressed to the semi @-@ finals . With four teams left in the tournament , St Johnstone travelled to <unk> to face fellow First Division club Greenock Morton . Both teams scored early in the match ; Andy Jackson for St Johnstone in the 10th minute and Brian Graham for Greenock Morton two minutes later to make it 1 – 1 . In the second half , St Johnstone scored two more goals from Peter MacDonald and Rocco Quinn to win 3 – 1 and advance to the final for the first time since losing in 1996 to Stranraer . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 = = = Venue = = = 
 The 2007 final was hosted at Dens Park in Dundee which had been Dundee F.C. ' s home since it was opened in 1889 . The match was the first time Dens Park hosted a national cup final since the Scottish League Cup in 1980 . St Johnstone were allocated approximately 4 @,@ 200 tickets and supporters occupied the Bob Shankly Stand and part of the Main Stand . Dunfermline fans were initially allocated the Bobby Cox Stand , the South Enclosure and the remainder of the Main Stand , but it was decided by the Scottish Football League to leave the South Enclosure unused after Dunfermline returned all tickets for the enclosure due to lack of ticket sales . Dunfermline Athletic travelled around 47 miles ( 75 @.@ 6 km ) to the venue whereas Perth @-@ based St Johnstone travelled approximately 22 miles ( 35 @.@ 4 km ) . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 In order to reach the final , Dunfermline played three matches ; one at home at East End Park and two away from home . Dunfermline scored seven goals and conceded only one in the rounds before the final , keeping two clean sheets in the process . St Johnstone contested four matches before the final ; one at home at McDiarmid Park and the other three away , scoring ten goals , conceding three and keeping only one clean sheet . 
 Both teams were competing in the Scottish First Division at the time of the final and despite being ranked at opposite ends of the league table , St Johnstone in third and Dunfermline in ninth , both teams were in relatively bad form . St Johnstone had drawn seven games from thirteen and were nine points behind second placed Dundee ; whilst Dunfermline had won only three games in thirteen and were two points off the bottom of the table . The match was the first time the clubs had met in the Challenge Cup , however , they had already played each other twice in the season in the First Division ; both matches ended in 0 – 0 draws . 
 Three days before the final , St Johnstone 's manager Owen Coyle was announced as the new manager of English Championship club Burnley , and so assistant manager Sandy Stewart was appointed as caretaker manager for the final ; he accepted an offer to join Coyle at Burnley after the match . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = First half = = = 
 The beginning of the match was dominated by St Johnstone and after 13 minutes they were awarded a penalty kick by referee Eddie Smith when Dunfermline midfielder Stephen Simmons collided with St Johnstone 's Steven Anderson in the penalty area . Paul Sheerin took the penalty kick and scored beyond Dunfermline 's goalkeeper , Paul Gallacher , by hitting the ball into the bottom @-@ left corner of the goal to score his seventh penalty of the season . Just several minutes after the first goal St Johnstone had an opportunity to score again when Kenny Deuchar had an attempt on goal after a pass from Rocco Quinn ; the header beat goalkeeper Gallacher but went just wide of the goalpost . In the 19th minute , however , St Johnstone did score their second goal when Peter MacDonald struck a left @-@ footed volley from 12 yards out which Dunfermline 's goalkeeper Gallacher failed to stop . St Johnstone 's early dominance coupled with Dunfermline 's poor defending resulted in St Johnstone scoring a third goal after only 30 minutes ; forward Andy Jackson passed the ball to Derek McInnes who then played the ball to Deuchar who moved past defender Sol Bamba in the penalty area and scored past the opposing goalkeeper from eight yards out to make it 3 – 0 . Four minutes after the third goal , Dunfermline manager Stephen Kenny made the first substitution of the match , replacing defender Calum Woods with Darren Young . In the 37th minute , shortly after the substitution , Dunfermline scored when Scott Wilson 's header beat St Johnstone goalkeeper Alan Main . Dunfermline 's form changed for the better after their first goal and they almost scored again just before half time when substitute Young 's goal @-@ attempt rebounded off the goalpost . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Only 40 seconds into the second half , Quinn almost restored St Johnstone 's 3 @-@ goal advantage but his attempt on goal rebounded off the goalpost despite beating the goalkeeper . In the 59th minute , Dunfermline defender Danny Murphy was the first player to be cautioned by the referee , receiving a yellow card for bringing Quinn to the ground whilst tackling for the ball . In the 64th minute , Dunfermline made their second substitution ; Michael McGlinchey was replaced by Jim Hamilton and he had an almost immediate impact on the match , earning a penalty kick after being pushed by Anderson . Referee Smith initially awarded a free kick on the edge of the penalty area but changed his mind amid complaints from Dunfermline players and awarded a penalty kick instead . Stephen Glass took the penalty kick , hitting the ball past goalkeeper Main into the top corner of the goal to make the score 3 – 2 . Dunfermline continued to pressure for an equalising goal and almost did so when St Johnstone defender Goran Stanić nearly scored an own goal after mis @-@ hitting the ball but it rebounded off the crossbar . Despite Dunfermline 's late improvement in form , St Johnstone held on to win the match and claim the first national cup trophy in their 123 @-@ year existence . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 After the match , St Johnstone caretaker manager Sandy Stewart declared his interest in becoming the permanent manager but admitted he had already been offered the job as assistant manager to Owen Coyle at Burnley , which he later confirmed . Reflecting on his decision to go to Burnley , Stewart mentioned : " It was a tricky decision ... but , football @-@ wise , I just felt it was too good an opportunity to turn down . " Dunfermline manager Stephen Kenny praised his team 's efforts after the game but admitted that poor defending had resulted in the defeat . Kenny was sacked as manager a week later due to continuing poor league results and was replaced by player Jim McIntyre . 
 = Okehampton Castle = 
 Okehampton Castle is a medieval motte and bailey castle in Devon , England . It was built between 1068 and 1086 by Baldwin FitzGilbert following a revolt in Devon against Norman rule , and formed the centre of the Honour of Okehampton , guarding a crossing point across the West Okement River . It continued in use as a fortification until the late 13th century , when its owners , the de Courtenays , became the Earls of Devon . With their new wealth , they redeveloped the castle as a luxurious hunting lodge , building a new deer park that stretched out south from the castle , and constructing fashionable lodgings that exploited the views across the landscape . The de Courtenays prospered and the castle was further expanded to accommodate their growing household . 
 The de Courtenays were heavily involved in the 15th century Wars of the Roses and Okehampton Castle was frequently confiscated . By the early 16h century the castle was still in good condition , but after Henry Courtenay was executed by Henry VIII the property was abandoned and left to decay , while the park was rented out by the Crown . Parts of the castle were reused as a bakery in the 17th century , but by the 19th century it was completely ruined and became popular with Picturesque painters , including J. M. W. Turner . Renovation work began properly in the 20th century , first under private ownership and then , more extensively , after the castle was acquired by the state . In the 21st century it is controlled by English Heritage and operated as a tourist attraction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1066 @-@ 1296 = = = 
 Okehampton Castle was built between 1068 and 1086 following the Norman conquest of England by Baldwin FitzGilbert . William the Conqueror defeated the Anglo @-@ Saxon forces at the battle of Hastings in 1066 , but violence continued to flare up periodically for several years after the invasion . Baldwin FitzGilbert , a Norman lord , was responsible for putting down a rebellion in Devon in 1068 . He was probably given extensive lands in the county at this time , and by the time of Domesday Book in 1086 he was noted as the owner of the Honour of Okehampton and well as the Sheriff of Devon and Constable of Exeter Castle . The Honour of Okehampton was a grouping of around 200 estates across Devon , guarded by several castles , including Baldwin 's main castle - or caput - at Okehampton , and those owned by his tenants , including Neroche and Montacute . 
 Baldwin 's castle was positioned to protect an important route from Devon into Cornwall , including two fords that formed a crossing point over the West Okement River , and to control the existing town of <unk> . The castle was protected by a castle @-@ guard system , in which lands were given out to Baldwin 's tenants in exchange for their contributing to the castle 's garrison . Baldwin also established a new town near the castle about 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) away , complete with a market and a mill to grind grain . This town eventually dominated the older Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement and became known as Okehampton . 
 On Baldwin 's death the castle was inherited by his daughter , Adeliza , but the family appear to have taken little interest in the property . Okehampton Castle does not seem to have played a part in the civil war from 1139 and 1153 known as the Anarchy . 
 In 1173 Oakhampton Castle passed to Renaud de Courtenay in marriage ; his son , Robert de Courtenay married the daughter of William de Redvers , the Earl of Devon . The castle continued to have military utility and was requisitioned by Richard I between 1193 and 1194 to assist in the royal defence of Devon . The de <unk> carried out some building work at the castle , installing new structures in the castle bailey . Robert was followed by his son John de Courtenay and by 1274 , when John 's son Hugh de Courtenay had inherited the property , the castle was reported to comprise only " an old motte which is worth nothing , and outside the motte a hall , chamber and kitchen poorly built " , although this may underestimate the extent and condition of the castle . 
 = = = 1297 @-@ 1455 = = = 
 The Redvers family line ran out in 1297 , and as a result Hugh 's son , another Hugh de Courtenay , inherited the Redvers family lands , later being confirmed as the Earl of Devon . Hugh 's main seat was at Tiverton Castle , but Hugh and his father redeveloped Oakhampton Castle , expanding its facilities and accommodation to enable it be used as a hunting lodge and retreat . Extensive building work turned the property into a luxurious residence . 
 As part of this development , the family created a large , new deer park around the castle , replacing the older , unenclosed hunting grounds . Deer parks were an important status symbol in this period , and many nobles who acquired power and wealth for the first time chose to undertake similar projects . Creating the park , which spread out from the south of the castle to cover 690 hectares ( 1 @,@ 700 acres ) , required clearing away the older settlements around the castle and abandoning various fields and pastures . These settlements , comprising long houses built in warmer climate of the 12th and early 13th century , may already have become less sustainable due to the onset of the cooler climate that began to emerge at the end of the 13th . Land near the castle , later called Kennel Field , was used to hold required the packs of dogs for hunting . 
 Once the castle 's deer park was established , intensively farmed fallow deer became common on the lands , although wild boar , foxes and hare were also hunted . Like other rural castles , the occupants of Okehampton Castle consumed a relatively large amount of venison , a prestige meat during the period . Some of this would have come from the surrounding deer park , but prime cuts of venison , such as the haunches , were also brought in specially from other locations . Excavations have shown that in addition to fish from large ponds in the park , Okehampton Castle also imported fish from the coast , over 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) away , with hake , herring , plaice and whiting being most commonly eaten . 
 The Courtenays continued to own Okehampton for many years , the property passing through Hugh 's son , Hugh , to his grandson Edward and then his great @-@ grandson , another Hugh de <unk> . The size of noble households expanded during the period , and by the 1380s , when Edward controlled the castle , his " familiars " , or extended household , could be up to 135 strong . In the late 14th and early 15th centuries Okehampton Castle 's facilities were extended further , probably to accommodate these increased numbers . 
 = = = 1455 @-@ 1900 = = = 
 In the 15th century , however , the Courtenays were embroiled in the civil conflict in England known as the Wars of the Roses between the rival alliances of the Lancastrians and the Yorkists . Thomas de Courtenay fought for the Yorkists , but reconciled himself with the Lancastrians . His son , Thomas , died following his capture by the Yorkists at the battle of Towton in 1461 . Edward IV confiscated Okehampton Castle , which was later returned to the family by the Lancastrian Henry VI . John Courtenay died fighting for the Lancastrians at the battle of Tewkesbury in 1471 and the castle and earldom was again confiscated . When Henry VII took the throne at the end of the conflict in 1485 , however , the earldom and Okehampton were returned to Edward Courteney . 
 Edward 's son , William , enjoyed a turbulent political career , during which time the castle was again confiscated for a period , and his son , Henry , was executed by Henry VIII in 1539 and his properties confiscated , permanently breaking the link between the Courtenay family and the castle . After his death , a survey praised the castle as having " all manner of houses of offices " , but from this time onwards the castle appears to have been abandoned and left to decay , although there is evidence that the lead and some of the stonework was taken for use on other projects . The castle 's deer park was rented out by the Crown after Courtenay 's execution . 
 Ownership of the castle remained important , however , as from 1623 onwards ownership carried the right to appoint Okehampton 's two Members of Parliament . Despite the battle of <unk> Down being fought in 1643 near Okehampton during the English Civil War , the castle played no part in the conflict . A bakehouse was established in the castle in late @-@ 17th century , reusing parts of the western lodgings . The deer park was <unk> during the 18th century , reverting to farmland . 
 In the 18th century , the castle became a popular topic for painters interested in the then fashionable landscape styles of the Sublime and the Picturesque . Richard Wilson painted the castle in 1771 , dramatically silhouetting the keep against the sky , producing what historian Jeremy Black describes as a " calm , <unk> and melancholic " effect . Thomas Walmesley 's rendition went further , depicting Oakhampton Castle surrounded by an imaginary , Italianate lake in 1810 . Thomas Girtin painted the castle in 1797 , as did his friend J. M. W. Turner in 1824 . Sir <unk> Vyvyan conducted some minor repairs to the castle during the 19th century . 
 = = = 20th @-@ 21st centuries = = = 
 In the early 20th century Okehampton Castle was bought by a local man , Sydney Simmons , who between 1911 and 1913 cleared away the vegetation that had grown over the castle and conducted some repairs to the stonework . Simmons passed the castle to the Okehampton Castle Trust in 1917 , who carried out limited repairs over the coming decades . The Ministry of Public and Works took over the site in 1967 and extensive restoration work was subsequently carried out . Extensive archaeological investigations were carried out in the 1970s at the site by Robert Higham . In the 21st century , the castle is operated as a tourist attraction by English Heritage . It is protected under law as an ancient monument and as a grade I listed building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Okehampton Castle was built along a long , thin rocky outcrop , rising up from the surrounding countryside . The stream that runs around the north side of the castle would have been more substantial in the medieval period and provided additional protection on that side , while the south side of the castle would have probably overlooked water @-@ logged fields . The castle was mostly built from local stone , with <unk> from nearby <unk> and some <unk> from south @-@ east Devon ; the interior and exterior stonework would have originally been rendered with lime plaster . The castle 's final design involved a visitor entering from the barbican in the north @-@ east , along a long passageway up the hill , into the bailey . On the south @-@ west side of the bailey lay the motte , mounted by the keep . 
 The castle 's structure shows the results of its redesign at the start of the 14th century , using two very different forms of architecture . Seen from the north , where the main road carrying the general public made its way past , the castle had what Oliver Creighton terms a " martial facade " of traditional military defences , with narrow windows and towering defences . Seen from the deer park on the south of the property , however , the castle 's lodgings and accommodation were on full display , with low walls and large windows . A similar architectural dichotomy can be seen at Ludlow and Warkworth Castles . The park was effectively fused with the south side of the castle , with the chase running right up to the property . From the two large windows of the eastern lodgings , it would have been possible to gaze out across the parklands and appreciate the extensive views without seeing any trace of rural settlements or the nearby town . The result , as historian Stephen <unk> describes , would have been " stunning " . 
 The barbican was built at the beginning of the 14th century and contained a guard @-@ room on the first floor . The barbican contains numerous putlog holes from its construction , although these would have been masked by exterior plasterwork in the medieval period . A passageway led up from the barbican to the gatehouse , probably originally guarded by a drawbridge and containing the accommodation for the castle 's constable . 
 The castle bailey contained a number of buildings by the 14th century . On the north side were the Great Hall , the buttery and the castle kitchens , the former lit by a large decorative window and <unk> the kitchen and buttery by a wooden screen . Above the buttery was a luxurious solar , or apartment . On the south side of the bailey were the western lodgings , well @-@ equipped accommodation for guests , built by in @-@ filling part of the ditch between the motte and the bailey , and later converted into a bakery . A chapel and accommodation for the castle 's chaplain lay alongside , and the chapel has remaining plaster work , which shows that the walls were painted with red lines to resemble ashlar cut stone . On the far side of the chapel were the eastern lodgings , whose detailing mirrored those at Tiverton Castle , another de Courtenay property built in the same period . 
 The motte , on the far side of the bailey , is predominantly made up of a natural rock outcrop , strengthened further with earth from the construction of the rest of the castle ditches . It stands up to 32 metres ( 105 ft ) high and measures 29 @.@ 5 metres ( 97 ft ) by 15 @.@ 5 metres ( 51 ft ) at the top . The motte is separated from the main castle by ditches in a similar way to the motte at Windsor Castle . On top of the motte is the castle keep , originally built in the 11th century , with massive stone walls at least one storey high and possibly as high as three storeys , and then redeveloped as a two storey structure with a rectangular addition on the western side in the early 14th century . The 11th century parts of the keep make use of granite stone , probably taken from the river bed of the West Okement . The 14th century keep had two sets of lodgings on the upper floor , similar in style to those in the bailey , and a turret containing a staircase , some of which still survives . 
 The keep is unusual both for the period and for Devon as a whole , being a very strong defensive structure , albeit without any independent source of water or facilities to support a garrison in the event of a siege . Other rectangular 11th century keeps in Devon existed , including at <unk> and Lydford , and were typically associated with the king or major nobles . Few were built on top of fresh mottes , as at Okehampton , and this may have been made possible in this case because the motte was largely natural and therefore able to support the heavy weight . 
 = California State Route 56 = 
 State Route 56 ( SR 56 ) is an east – west state highway in the U.S. state of California . It runs 9 @.@ 210 miles ( 14 @.@ 822 km ) from Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) in the Carmel Valley neighborhood of San Diego to I @-@ 15 . The eastern terminus of the highway is also the western end of the Ted Williams Parkway . SR 56 serves as an important connector between I @-@ 5 and I @-@ 15 , being the only east – west freeway between SR 78 in north San Diego County , several miles away , and SR 52 near Marine Corps Air Station Miramar . It is also named the Ted Williams Freeway , after the San Diego @-@ born baseball player . 
 SR 56 was added to the state highway system in 1959 as Legislative Route 278 , and was renumbered SR 56 in the 1964 state highway renumbering . Plans in 1964 were to connect SR 56 to the north end of SR 125 and continue east to SR 67 , but these plans did not come to fruition . The eastern end from Black Mountain Road to I @-@ 15 was completed in 1993 ; the western end from I @-@ 5 to Carmel Creek Road was completed in 1995 after several lawsuits filed by the Sierra Club and other community groups . The two ends were not connected until the middle portion of the freeway was completed in 2004 . The delay was largely due to funding issues and environmental concerns . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Eastbound SR 56 begins as a ramp from the northbound I @-@ 5 's local bypass lanes . The interchange is not complete ; southbound I @-@ 5 traffic must exit to Carmel Valley Road before entering SR 56 . Westbound traffic on SR 56 merges into the southbound I @-@ 5 local bypass lanes , which provide access to I @-@ 805 . Continuing east , the route then has a diamond interchange at Carmel Creek Road , which provides access to the nearby San Diego Jewish Academy , and proceeds eastward through a residential area . After passing milepost 2 , the freeway has another diamond interchange with Carmel Country Road south of the community of Torrey Hills . 
 SR 56 meets Carmel Valley Road and curves northward , passing Canyon Crest Academy before turning southeastward . The route passes over <unk> Creek before intersecting Camino Del Sur , which serves the nearby Westview High School . Southeast of Camino Del Sur , SR 56 curves back east , passing under Carmel Mountain Road without an exit . The route encounters exits with Black Mountain Road and Rancho Peñasquitos Boulevard in Rancho Peñasquitos in a primarily residential area before meeting its terminus at a diamond interchange with I @-@ 15 . Past the bridge over I @-@ 15 , the road continues as Ted Williams Parkway . 
 SR 56 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System ; it is not part of the National Highway System , a network of highways that are essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . In 2014 , SR 56 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 32 @,@ 000 between I @-@ 15 and the eastern terminus at Ted Williams Parkway , and 81 @,@ 000 between Carmel Creek Road and Carmel Country Road , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the freeway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning and initial construction = = = 
 Planning for SR 56 started in 1956 , according to San Diego Councilwoman Barbara Warden . The route was first added to the California State Highway System in 1959 as Legislative Route Number 278 ( LRN 278 ) . The routing ran from LRN 2 , which later became US 101 , all the way east to LRN 198 , which is now SR 67 . In the 1964 state highway renumbering , LRN 278 was renumbered SR 56 and was designated to run from I @-@ 5 to SR 67 . On December 30 , 1980 , the City of Poway included SR 56 in their city plan extending all the way east through the city to a northern extension of SR 125 . In 1983 , both the cities of San Diego and Poway supported the extension of SR 56 all the way to SR 67 , although Poway wanted the route moved and had reservations about the freeway ending in their city . Nevertheless , as of 2014 there are no plans to construct the portion of SR 56 east of I @-@ 15 ; several arterial roads connect the eastern end of the SR 56 freeway with SR 67 , including Ted Williams Parkway , Twin Peaks Road , <unk> Road ( CR S5 ) , and Poway Road ( CR S4 ) . 
 Citizens began to lobby for the construction of SR 56 in 1986 , in a similar action to efforts for SR 52 . As far back as 1987 , the Sierra Club opposed the use of sales tax revenue to build the freeway because of environmental concerns . A public forum was held on April 10 , 1990 , in Rancho Peñasquitos . Since funds were not available for constructing the middle of the route , many opposed the construction of the eastern part of SR 56 as a " road to nowhere " . Opposition to the western end of the freeway related to concerns about destruction of " farmland , marshland , and willow scrubland " , the habitat of the endangered least Bell 's vireo . The San Diego City Council voted against such widening of Carmel Valley Road on April 12 , citing the environmental concerns . Caltrans rejected other routes , and insisted on ending the freeway at I @-@ 5 and Carmel Valley Road . The council reversed its decision on May 8 ; after the public gave several opinions on the matter , Caltrans agreed to set aside 69 acres ( 28 ha ) for environmental mitigation , and $ 2 million ( about $ 4 @.@ 67 million in 2015 dollars ) was to be set aside for the purchase of land for a park near the San Dieguito River . 
 In June 1990 , the Del Mar Terrace Conservancy and the Carmel Valley Coalition sued the San Diego City Council to require them to move the western terminus of SR 56 closer to Sorrento Valley . On August 1 , the City of San Diego received a petition in which more than 45 @,@ 000 people requested that the City Council overturn their decision or refer it to a public referendum . The City Council backed down and rescinded the appropriate zoning changes on August 7 , in efforts to keep the city from having to run a special election . They also approved the plans for the eastern portion between Black Mountain Road and I @-@ 15 . Meanwhile , the Carmel Valley Coalition sued the city as well . The California Coastal Commission approved the construction on September 13 , and several local residents representing both sides of the debate attended the meeting in Marina del Rey . 
 Construction on the predecessor of SR 56 began on November 16 , 1987 , the Newland @-@ California Company paying for the work as a local developer . Around 1990 , the North City Parkway was completed as a two @-@ lane road between Rancho Peñasquitos Boulevard ( then Peñasquitos Boulevard ) and I @-@ 15 , along the proposed route of SR 56 . The first official segment of the freeway from Black Mountain Road to I @-@ 15 was constructed next , beginning on July 25 , 1991 by Daley Corporation and W.R. Connelly Inc . This was scheduled to open in May 1993 , at a cost of $ 13 million ( about $ 29 @.@ 8 million in 2015 dollars ) . 
 Opposition to the western segment ( from I @-@ 5 to Carmel Valley Road ) persisted . By 1991 , the Del Mar Terrace Conservancy filed an appeal with the 4th District Court of Appeals after losing the lawsuit to the city of San Diego and Caltrans . The Sierra Club had also sued the California Coastal Commission . On July 16 , 1992 , the Sierra Club withdrew its lawsuit after the City of San Diego agreed to work to keep the Peñasquitos Lagoon flowing to the ocean and to restore a wetland area . Following the Sierra Club 's settlement , the City of Del Mar raised an objection to the club 's decision to accept a settlement , since the city had given a $ 7 @,@ 000 contribution ( about $ 15 @,@ 000 in 2015 dollars ) to the case . The Sierra Club agreed to return the money in August 1992 . 
 The Del Mar Conservancy suit continued , and the plaintiffs requested a court order to stop construction . This lawsuit claimed that the state and city had not done enough environmental studies and mitigation . The 4th District Court of Appeals denied an appeal on October 23 . In 1993 , citizens complained that funds were being diverted from a recreational park to build the freeway , possibly hindering the development of a new elementary school . The segment was finally completed at a projected cost of $ 27 @.@ 2 million ( about $ 57 @.@ 4 million in 2015 dollars ) , opening to traffic by 1995 . The ramps connecting SR 56 to I @-@ 5 were opened between 1997 and 1998 ; traffic was diverted onto Carmel Valley Road in the meantime . 
 The freeway is named after Ted Williams , a Hall of Fame baseball player born in San Diego who played for the Boston Red Sox during his 21 @-@ year career . The San Diego City Council also considered naming SR 56 after the former governor and San Diego mayor Pete Wilson . The Council voted 7 @-@ 1 to name it after Williams on May 12 , 1992 . Since Williams was still alive , the State of California had to approve the name . Lionel Van <unk> alleged that Councilwoman Abbe <unk> nominated Wilson for the honor as political ammunition against Councilman Ron Roberts . Williams came to Mt . Carmel High School on July 12 , 1992 , for the freeway dedication . Kevin McNamara , who had worked with the government to get the name approved despite opposition , was charged $ 15 @,@ 000 ( about $ 33 @,@ 000 in 2015 dollars ) for the highway signs when the name was official . The freeway was officially named after Ted Williams in 1993 by the Legislature . 
 = = = Filling the gap = = = 
 A 5 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) gap in the freeway remained , nevertheless . Concerns about the missing funds for the freeway date back to 1990 . Since the proposed route passed through the open area between Carmel Valley and Rancho Peñasquitos , revenue from the Proposition A sales tax hike could not be used . In 1993 , a " Citizens United for State Route 56 " group was commissioned to work on the funding issues . Two years later , County Supervisor Pam Slater briefly proposed making SR 56 a toll road in order to raise funds for construction . The city of San Diego agreed to pay $ 25 million ( about $ 48 @.@ 5 million in 2015 dollars ) , and the state indicated that it would contribute $ 20 million . 
 Highway 680 was a planned county route that would have run from Encinitas to Rancho Bernardo . The San Diego County Board of Supervisors cancelled the plans in February 1994 , respecting the wishes of the city of Encinitas . There were concerns that some of the traffic from this proposed route would now travel on SR 56 instead . On May 17 , 1994 , $ 20 million ( about $ 40 @.@ 2 million in 2015 dollars ) allocated to Highway 680 was given to the SR 56 project . 
 In January 1998 , the State Transportation Improvement Program approved a $ 245 million allocation ( about $ 415 million in 2015 dollars ) for the expansion , and hopes were to finish construction by 2000 , with traffic projected to decrease by 20 percent on I @-@ 15 . There were environmental concerns that fostered consideration of four northern alternatives . One of them was chosen in June 1998 by the San Diego City Council , amid concerns that by moving the route away from " environmentally sensitive canyons " , the freeway would be closer to residences . Some of those living in Rancho Glens Estates sued the city over these concerns in August . 
 Construction began on the missing portion of SR 56 on October 21 , 1999 , amid allegations of a missing Army Corps of Engineers permit , at an estimated cost of $ 111 million ( about $ 179 million in 2015 dollars ) . The California Coastal Commission approved the extension on May 10 , 2000 , after residents lost two lawsuits relating to the proximity of the freeway . Caltrans was required to install a drainage system because of the wetlands ; this requirement was similar to a court ruling for a project in the <unk> Chica Ecological Reserve . At this time , the completion was estimated to occur in 2004 , at a cost of $ 151 million ( about $ 231 million in 2015 dollars ) . In October 2000 , Carmel Valley Road was extended to Black Mountain Road , providing a paved alternative until SR 56 was completed ; commuters had to travel on a 2 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 5 km ) unpaved road , one of the only roads between I @-@ 5 and I @-@ 15 in North County . 
 Local developers contributed $ 21 million ( about $ 31 @.@ 5 million in 2015 dollars ) for the construction of the interchange at Camino Ruiz , and construction began on July 11 , 2001 . An open house was held on the 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) portion of the freeway between the Camino Ruiz ( renamed Camino del Sur ) interchange and the Black Mountain Road interchange on April 5 , 2003 . The road was scheduled to open on April 12 , 2003 , and was projected to decrease the traffic on city streets coming from the extended Carmel Valley Road . 
 The city of San Diego constructed SR 56 from Black Mountain Road to Carmel Mountain Road , and Caltrans built the remaining portion of the route to Carmel Creek Road . The bridges were still under construction in November 2000 on the city portion . San Diego mayor Dick Murphy commissioned the San Diego Freeway Congestion Strike Team to attempt to accelerate stalled freeway projects such as SR 56 in 2001 . In May 2001 , the City Council allocated another $ 5 @.@ 1 million ( about $ 7 @.@ 64 million in 2015 dollars ) to purchase land to build the freeway . Critics stated that the construction of SR 56 was a short @-@ term solution , and that traffic would return by 2020 . 
 FCI Constructors Inc. and W.R. Connelly Inc. won the contract for the Caltrans portion of the new freeway at a bid of $ 50 @.@ 2 million ( about $ 73 @.@ 4 million in 2015 dollars ) , with completion scheduled for 2004 . The freeway was built with two lanes in each direction , additional land being available to expand to three lanes if necessary . The project continued on schedule through the 2003 California budget crisis , receiving $ 4 @.@ 3 million from the state in 2003 . In 2004 , there were citizen complaints about the lack of a sound wall to reduce the freeway noise in private residences . It took until July 19 , 2004 , to join the west and east ends of the freeway ; a public festival was held on the freeway on July 17 . The cost of completing the middle 5 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) segment was reported at $ 220 million in 2004 ( about $ 293 million in 2015 dollars ) . Citizens complained in 2008 that the bike path along SR 56 was difficult to access from the northern side of the interchange with El Camino Real ; however , funding issues prevented the construction of a paved path at the time . 
 = = = Ramps and bypasses = = = 
 The construction of a " dual freeway " at the western end was scheduled to begin in early 2002 , referring to the two carriageways needed for each direction of the freeway . It would require drivers to use the new local lanes to access eastbound SR 56 from I @-@ 5 or I @-@ 805 . The project would allow for trucks to use the new lanes to assist in merging with traffic . The northbound lanes were scheduled to open in February 2006 . The southbound I @-@ 15 to westbound SR 56 ramp was improved in a construction project in 2005 . 
 Concerns about the lack of a ramp from westbound SR 56 to northbound I @-@ 5 date back from 1988 , because of a projected increase of traffic on local Carmel Valley streets . Planning for the missing ramps at the western end of SR 56 was under way in 2008 , despite nearby homeowner opposition . Caltrans agreed not to destroy homes in late June 2008 , but concerns about noise and funding remained . On June 13 , 2012 , Caltrans held a public forum to discuss five proposals to address the missing ramps at the western terminus : 
 build the westbound to northbound ramp and the southbound to eastbound ramp , 
 add additional lanes to both SR 56 and I @-@ 5 @,@ 
 only build the westbound @-@ to @-@ northbound ramp and add lanes to southbound I @-@ 5 and eastbound SR 56 @,@ 
 build the westbound @-@ to @-@ northbound ramp and add lanes on SR 56 only , or 
 build nothing at all . 
 A Final Environmental Document is scheduled to be released in the middle of 2016 . In the meantime , Caltrans studies have begun relating to widening the route to three lanes in each direction , as called for by the 2050 regional plan . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in San Diego , San Diego County . 
 = Tropical Storm Nicholas ( 2003 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Nicholas was a long @-@ lived tropical storm in October and November of the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season . Forming from a tropical wave on October 13 in the central tropical Atlantic Ocean , Nicholas slowly developed due to moderate levels of wind shear throughout its lifetime . Deep convection slowly organized , and Nicholas attained a peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on October 17 . After moving west @-@ northwestward for much of its lifetime , it turned northward and weakened due to increasing shear . The storm again turned to the west and briefly restrengthened , but after turning again to the north Nicholas transitioned to an extratropical cyclone on October 24 . As an extratropical storm , Nicholas executed a large loop to the west , and after moving erratically for a week and organizing into a tropical low , it was absorbed by a non @-@ tropical low . The low continued westward , crossed Florida , and ultimately dissipated over the Gulf Coast of the United States on November 5 . 
 Nicholas had no impact as a tropical cyclone , and impact from the low that absorbed the storm was limited to rainfall , gusty winds , and rough surf . Nicholas extended the above average levels of tropical cyclone activity throughout the 2003 season , and was one of fourteen seasons to reach fourteen storms . The low that absorbed the storm nearly developed into a tropical cyclone , which would have been called Odette . However , moderate wind shear prevented further development . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origin of Tropical Storm Nicholas can be traced to a tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on October 9 . It moved westward , and developed a broad area of low pressure along the wave on October 10 . Convection organized around the low early on October 12 while located 800 miles ( 1300 km ) southwest of the Cape Verde islands . As upper level winds became more favorable , the system became better organized , though the circulation center initially remained located to the west of the area of heavy showers . The surface circulation of the large circulation envelope moved towards a position near the western edge of the deepest convection , and it is estimated the system developed into Tropical Depression Nineteen late on October 13 while located 1 @,@ 030 miles ( 1 @,@ 660 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Cape Verde islands . 
 Located within an area of moderate southwesterly wind shear , the depression was slow to organize ; early on October 14 , a clear center was not depicted on Infrared satellite imagery . The depression moved to the west @-@ northwest and gradually strengthened into Tropical Storm Nicholas late on October 14 while located 1 @,@ 200 miles ( 1 @,@ 930 km ) east of the Windward Islands . On October 15 , deep convection became much better organized , though the center of Nicholas remained displaced from the deepest of the shower activity . Despite the shear , the storm continued to strengthen as it moved to the west @-@ northwest , a motion caused by a mid @-@ level ridge to its north . On October 16 , Nicholas transitioned from a sheared , unorganized system to a more organized system , as a result of banding features and improvement in its convective pattern due to lesser amounts of vertical shear and a healthier anticyclone over the storm . Nicholas continued to strengthen , and attained a peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on October 17 while located 875 miles ( 1 @,@ 410 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . Dvorak estimates suggested Nicholas potentially attained hurricane status , though microwave images of the storm showed a sheared system without any evidence of an eye feature . 
 Shortly after peaking in strength , Nicholas weakened due to increasing southwesterly wind shear , and the center of circulation briefly became exposed from the deep convection . In response to a break in the subtropical ridge , the storm turned to the north on October 18 . Nicholas turned more to the west on October 20 , and later on the winds in the storm decreased to minimal storm strength . Convection diminished greatly , though Nicholas unexpectedly re @-@ strengthened as deep convection <unk> . After reaching winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , the storm again weakened due to increasing shear , and after turning to the northwest Nicholas degenerated into a tropical depression on October 23 . Nicholas tracked northward in response to a break in the subtropical ridge , and on October 24 , after degenerating to a remnant low pressure area , Nicholas lost what tropical characteristics it retained and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . The remnant storm executed a large anticyclonic loop , resulting in a westward motion and a brief re @-@ intensification into an extratropical storm on October 29 . The storm continued to the west along a warm front associated with a non @-@ tropical low to its southwest , and executed a second anticyclonic loop to the south . On October 30 , convection increased over the low @-@ level circulation of what was left to Nicholas , and the National Hurricane Center indicated a potential for tropical or subtropical development as it moved towards warmer waters . The system executed a small cyclonic loop , and on October 31 the system organized into a tropical low . It turned westward towards a non @-@ tropical low , and on November 1 the remnants of Nicholas was absorbed by the low . 
 On November 1 , convection increased in the complex system that absorbed the remnants of Nicholas , and the National Hurricane Center indicated the system could develop into a tropical or subtropical cyclone at any time . The low continued quickly westward , generating only sporadic convection , and crossed Florida on November 3 . After entering the Gulf of Mexico , it turned to the west @-@ northwest , and without organizing it made landfall in southeast Louisiana on November 4 . It continued inland , and quickly weakened over Louisiana and Mississippi on November 5 . 
 = = Impact , records , and naming = = 
 The non @-@ tropical low that absorbed Nicholas dropped locally heavy rainfall across the Bahamas and southern Florida , as well as in portions of the northern Gulf Coast . Gusty winds from the low produced heavy surf and rip currents along the east and west coast of Florida , and a wind gust of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) was recorded in Cape Canaveral as a rainband from the system moved ashore . The low also resulted in two to four foot ( 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 2 m ) swells along the East Coast of the United States . Overall , no damage or deaths were associated with Nicholas or the low that absorbed it . 
 Operationally , the National Hurricane Center determined if the non @-@ tropical low that absorbed Nicholas developed into a tropical or subtropical storm , it would be named Odette . In post @-@ season analysis , the center considered classifying the system as an unnumbered tropical depression , though lack of sufficient characteristics of a tropical depression prevented the classification . If Nicholas had attained hurricane status , it would have been one of eight tropical cyclones to reach hurricane status in October in the deep tropical Atlantic since 1900 . 
 = The Boat Race 1975 = 
 The 121st Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on 29 March 1975 . Cambridge won their seventh race in eight years by three @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 19 minutes and 27 seconds . The race was umpired by former Oxford rower Christopher Davidge . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . Cambridge won the 30th Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1974 race by five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 67 victories to Oxford 's 52 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The umpire for the race was Christopher Davidge , who had rowed for Oxford in the 1949 , 1951 and 1952 races , and was a non @-@ rowing Oxford University Boat Club president for the 1950 race . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 In the month leading up to the race , Cambridge 's crew saw some significant changes , including the removal of David Sturge ( who had rowed in the 1973 race ) due to glandular fever . However , the Cambridge boat club president Steve Tourek was circumspect : " Cambridge might be slower than planned but still fast enough to beat Oxford . " On 24 March 1975 , Cambridge beat Oxford 's record time ( set five days earlier ) between Hammersmith Bridge and the Mile Post by two seconds . The following day , Oxford 's coach Dan Topolski revealed that the Oxford reserve crew , Isis , had equalled the record time , downplaying Cambridge 's efforts : " Shows how fast conditions really were yesterday . " Cambridge coach Lou Barry remarked of his charges : " this is a fast crew " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 9 @.@ 75 lb ( 86 @.@ 8 kg ) , 7 pounds ( 3 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained two former Blues in boat club president Nick Tee and stroke Graham Innes , while Cambridge saw Nick Bradley , Henry Clay and Tourek return from the 1974 boat . Although the British international rower David Sturge was replaced through illness prior to the race , the Light Blues also saw international @-@ standard rowers Alistair Christie and James Macleod in the crew , both of whom had withdrawn from selection for the 1974 race to represent Great Britain . Only two competitors in the race were registered as " overseas " Blues , Oxford 's number five John Hutchings and his counterpart and Tourek , both from the United States . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge started as pre @-@ race favourite ; according to the author and former rower Dickie Burnell , although Oxford had some " useful new recruits " no @-@ one " outside their immediate camp thought they could win . " Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . Oxford took an early lead , but by the Mile Post , Cambridge had recovered to lead by two seconds . Extending their lead , the Light Blues gained a clear water advantage by Harrods Furniture Depository and moved in front of the Dark Blue boat . Shooting Hammersmith Bridge five seconds ahead , Cambridge held a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lead which they defended against a number of Oxford pushes . Midway round the Surrey bend , Oxford 's bow man Andrew Baird 's oar came out of its gate , allowing Cambridge to increase their lead by another length . A seven @-@ second lead at Chiswick Steps was extended to nine seconds by Barnes Bridge , and along the final bend , Cambridge pushed their lead further out to nearly four lengths , passing the finishing post in 19 minutes 27 seconds , thirteen seconds ahead of their rivals . It was Cambridge 's seventh victory in the previous eight years , having lost to Oxford in 1974 . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by nine @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , their first win since the 1966 race . In the 30th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge triumphed , winning their 13th consecutive race . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Oxford 's Baird claimed " I might have caught a crab , but I do not really know what happened . " Cambridge number six MacLeod said of the Dark Blues : " They kept coming at us time and time again . I was only sure of victory in the last mile of the race . " Christopher Dodd , writing in The Guardian was impressed : " The contest had a rare element ... it was a race nearly all the way , and was not all over in the first 20 stokes as has so often been the case in recent years . " Burnell suggested it was a race for the aficionados : " This was surely one of those so common Boat Races , which are hard fought all the way , yet never exciting from the point of view of the average spectator . " 
 = Pathala Bhairavi = 
 Pathala Bhairavi ( English : The Goddess of the Netherworld ) is a 1951 Indian bilingual fantasy film written by Pingali Nagendrarao and directed by Kadiri Venkata Reddy . The film was produced by B. Nagi Reddy and Aluri Chakrapani under the banner Vijaya Vauhini Studios . It was co @-@ written by Kamalakara Kameswara Rao and features N. T. Rama Rao , S. V. Ranga Rao and K. Malathi in the lead roles . Pathala Bhairavi is based on Kasi <unk> <unk> , written by <unk> Subbanna <unk> , though it was also partially inspired by the story of Aladdin . 
 The film centres on the lives of two strangers — the son of a gardener named Thota Ramudu who has to amass wealth equal to that of the king of Ujjain to marry his daughter Indumathi , and a sorcerer who has to sacrifice an intelligent and brave young man to Goddess Pathala Bhairavi to gain access to a statuette which can grant any wish . The sorcerer tries to sacrifice Ramudu but gets killed by the latter who wins the statuette and fulfils his goals . When the sorcerer comes back to life and kidnaps Indumathi along with the statuette and all of his wealth , Ramudu fights back for them and kills the sorcerer before marrying Indumathi . 
 Although principal photography only took eight to nine months , the production phase continued for a whole year starting from 5 February 1950 until 8 February 1951 , due to the film being shot simultaneously in Telugu and Tamil . Ghantasala composed the film 's music and Marcus Bartley served as the cinematographer . The film was edited by the duo C. P. Jambulingam and M. S. Money , while Madhavapeddi Gokhale and Kaladhar were the film 's art directors . The Telugu version was released on 15 March 1951 , and the Tamil version on 17 May 1951 . Both the versions were released with a final reel length of 5 @,@ 227 metres ( 17 @,@ 149 ft ) . 
 Upon release , Pathala Bhairavi received critical acclaim and was commercially successful , becoming the first Telugu film to have a direct run of 200 days . It is considered to be a breakthrough film for both Rama Rao and Ranga Rao , and was also the only South Indian film to be screened at the first International Film Festival of India held at Mumbai on 24 January 1952 . On the centenary of Indian cinema in April 2013 , CNN @-@ News18 included Pathala Bhairavi in its list of " 100 greatest Indian films of all time " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The queen of Ujjain is keen for her daughter Indumathi ( alias Indu ) to marry her brother Surasena , a timid and mentally unstable person . When the gardener 's son ' Thota ' Ramudu beats Surasena at a concert for irritating the common people , he is summoned by the king to the court . His boldness leaves a considerable impression , but when Ramudu declares his love for Indu a day before his death sentence for meeting Indu secretly , the king is reminded of the astrologers ' prediction that only a brave man can save her from a wicked sorcerer . He then challenges Ramudu to amass wealth equal to that of his to marry Indu , to which Ramudu agrees . He is released from prison . 
 Ramudu meets a Nepali sorcerer during the latter 's magic show in a street . The sorcerer , who is ordered by Goddess Pathala Bhairavi during his prayers to sacrifice an intelligent and brave young man before her to be granted a statuette which grants any wish , feels that Ramudu is suitable for the sacrifice . While taking a holy bath in the nearby pond , Ramudu kills a crocodile that immediately transforms into a woman after being killed . The woman informs Ramudu that he had freed her from a hermit 's curse and also reveals the sorcerer 's intentions . Just before the sacrifice , Ramudu sacrifices the sorcerer and wins the statuette , consequently amassing the wealth equal to that of the king . In return , the king lives up to his promise and accepts Indu 's wishes to marry Ramudu . 
 The sorcerer 's apprentice <unk> discovers his master dead at the Pathala Bhairavi 's shrine and brings him back to life with the help of Sanjeevani . Upon resurrection , the sorcerer makes a deal with Surasena , who was about to commit suicide , to bring the statuette in exchange of everything Ramudu has , including Indu . Surasena agrees and steals the statuette , then handing it over to the sorcerer which changes the fate of Ramudu and Indu , leaving the former penniless . Ramudu pledges to bring Indu his wealth back and leaves for the sorcerer 's lair along with his cousin , Anji . 
 While they are unable to locate the sorcerer 's lair , Indu refuses the sorcerer 's proposal to marry him . With the help of the statuette , the sorcerer brings Ramudu to his lair and tortures him in front of Indu with a hope that she would succumb to his proposal to marry him . Posing as an assistant , Ramudu shaves the sorcerer 's beard , making him lose his powers . Afterwards , Ramudu finds the statuette and wishes to bring the palace back to Ujjain . In a fight between Ramudu and the sorcerer mid @-@ way in the sky , the latter dies when Ramudu throws him out . The palace is back in Ujjain and Surasena apologises to both Ramudu and Indu before uniting them . While Anji marries Indu 's best friend , the film ends with the marriage of Ramudu and Indu with the elders ' blessing . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Male actors 
 N. T. Rama Rao as Thota Ramudu 
 S. V. Ranga Rao as <unk> <unk> i.e. the Nepali sorcerer 
 Chilakalapudi Seetha Rama Anjaneyulu as the King of Ujjain 
 Relangi Venkata Ramaiah as Surasena 
 Valluri Balakrishna as Anji 
 B. Padmanabham as <unk> 
 Female actors 
 K. Malathi as Indumati 
 T. G. Kamala Devi as a Veera Katha performer 
 <unk> Rao as Indumati 's mother 
 Girija as Pathala Bhairavi 
 Surabhi Kamalabai as <unk> 
 Krishna Kumari as an Angel 
 Savitri as a dancer in the song " <unk> Rane <unk> " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After making their debut with Shavukar ( 1950 ) , B. Nagi Reddy and Aluri Chakrapani of Vijaya Vauhini Studios signed Kadiri Venkata Reddy later in the year to make a folklore film . The film was based on a story from Kasi <unk> <unk> , written by <unk> Subbanna <unk> . Pingali Nagendrarao adapted the content and wrote the film 's story . Kamalakara Kameswara Rao and Venkata Reddy worked on the film 's screenplay . Nagendrarao was also inspired from the story of Aladdin . Vijaya Vauhini Studios team worked for three to four months on the film 's script and Ujjain in the state of Madhya Pradesh was chosen as the story 's backdrop . Pathala Bhairavi was made as a bilingual film , shot in Telugu and Tamil simultaneously with both the versions having the same title . The Tamil version 's dialogues were written by Thanjai N. Ramaiah Dass . 
 <unk> Prakash Rao , who went on to make his directorial debut with <unk> ( 1952 ) , worked as an assistant director for the film . <unk> <unk> also joined the film 's crew as an assistant director , along with K. Raghava as the film 's action choreographer . Marcus Bartley was recruited as the film 's cinematographer and the duo C. P. Jambulingam and M. S. Money edited the film . Madhavapeddi Gokhale and Kaladhar were the film 's art directors . Ghantasala composed the film 's music . Chalapathi Rao and Jagannadham were the production executives . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Initially , Venkata Reddy had Akkineni Nageswara Rao in mind for the lead role . He later wanted to cast Raja Reddy in the lead role but replaced him with N. T. Rama Rao in the last minute , who made his debut by playing a minor character in Mana Desam ( 1949 ) . Rama Rao was eventually signed as a part of his four @-@ film contract with Vijaya Vauhini Studios after Venkata Reddy was impressed with Rama Rao when he met him on the sets of <unk> ( 1950 ) . With this film , Rama Rao became the first actor to have acted in two languages simultaneously . 
 Mukkamala was initially considered for the role of the sorcerer , the film 's antagonist . But with Rama Rao being signed as the protagonist , Venkata Reddy wanted to cast an actor without an image , thus S. V. Ranga Rao was signed . Ranga Rao wore costumes reminiscent of a Shakespeare 's anti @-@ hero and used the catchphrase " <unk> <unk> " ( Be adventurous man ) . He used the same persona that he used for playing Shylock when he was a stage @-@ artist . <unk> <unk> , who joined Vijaya Vauhini Studios in 1945 , helped Ranga Rao take on the appearance of a 105 @-@ year @-@ old man with the use of make @-@ up . Haribabu assisted <unk> in the make @-@ up process . 
 Malathi , who had earlier acted in Venkata Reddy 's Bhakta Potana ( 1942 ) , was signed to play the female lead role — Indumathi , the princess of Ujjain . Girija played the titular role of goddess Pathala Bhairavi . Relangi Venkata Ramaiah and Balakrishna were signed to play supporting roles ; the former playing the role of the brother @-@ in @-@ law of Indumathi 's father played by Chilakalapudi Seeta Rama Anjaneyulu and the latter playing Rama Rao 's sidekick . Padmanabham was signed to play a supporting role as well . Savitri did a short dance sequence in the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Pathala Bhairavi was the first big budget film produced by Vijaya Vauhini Studios . Although principal photography only took eight to nine months , the production phase continued for a whole year starting from 5 February 1950 until 8 February 1951 , due to the film being shot simultaneously in Telugu and Tamil . Pasumarthi Krishnamurthy conducted the choreography for the song sequences . Major portions of the film were shot in large sets and many trick shots were used by Bartley during the process . Both versions were filmed using an Arri 11 CBR Camera . 
 For scenes in the film that featured the moon in the background , a circle was drawn on a screen which was lit to make it look like the moon . Though having other lights were not possible , Bartley made sure that all the characters in such scenes had their shadows away from the moon . Despite this , many of the transformations of elements in this film were shown using dissolve techniques . No lights were hidden behind the painted moon , as a source for lighting . 
 = = Themes = = 
 According to K. N. T. Sastry in his book Alanati Chalana Chitram , the film begins with the theme of <unk> <unk> Lakshmi ( Bravery gives wealth ) which is present throughout the film . While the characters of Rama Rao and Ranga Rao epitomise heroism , the character of the princess played by Malathi epitomises innocence and sensuality . Pathala Bhairavi sets up an opposition between the worship of Rama by the protagonist 's mother and the worship of Pathala Bhairavi by the sorcerer ; the former being a frequent one inhabited in a domestic space while the latter being an uncivilised one . 
 According to Azim <unk> University liberal studies faculty member S. V. Srinivas , Pathala Bhairavi was a blend of folklore and social drama . Srinivas stated that the depiction of the goddess Pathala Bhairavi before Ramudu sacrifices the sorcerer was reminiscent of the representation of <unk> worship by <unk> in the film Mala Pilla ( 1938 ) . He added that Pathala Bhairavi " ratifies certain social relationships by presenting them as natural and given " and " at the same time , some other practices are presented as inhuman and uncivilised " . 
 = = Music = = 
 The official soundtrack of Pathala Bhairavi was composed by Ghantasala , the lyrics of which were written by Pingali Nagendrarao and Thanjai N. Ramaiah Dass for the Telugu and Tamil versions respectively . The sound mixing process was supervised by A. Krishnan and Siva Ram . It was processed by N. C. Sen Gupta and was orchestrated by A. Krishnamurthy . The songs were composed using Mohana , Bhimpalasi and Sindhu Bhairavi ragas , with " Prema <unk> <unk> <unk> " and " <unk> <unk> " notably being modulated on the same raga . The soundtrack was released on 1 December 1950 . Also , a digitally remastered version was released and marketed by HMV in 2003 ; the album cover depicts a still image from the film featuring Rama Rao and Malathi . 
 Relangi Venkata Ramaiah sang the comedy song " <unk> Bala Naa Prema Gola " which was filmed on himself . A costly Hammond organ was specially imported for this film which was played by Master Venu . For the Hindi dubbed version , T. G. Kamala Devi sang the song " <unk> <unk> " ( " <unk> <unk> " in Telugu ) and <unk> sang the song " <unk> <unk> " ( " <unk> <unk> " in Telugu ) . The latter became the first Telugu film singer to record a song for a Hindi film with this Hindi dubbed version of Pathala Bhairavi . The soundtracks of both the versions were critically acclaimed and achieved cult status . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Telugu version of Pathala Bhairavi was released on 15 March 1951 , whereas the Tamil version was released two months later on 17 May 1951 . Both versions were released with a final reel length of 5 @,@ 227 metres ( 17 @,@ 149 ft ) and were given a " U " ( Universal ) certificate by the Central Board of Film Certification with a run time of 195 minutes . Both versions were commercially successful , with the Telugu version completing a theatrical run of 100 days . Pathala Bhairavi became the first Telugu film to run continuously for 175 days , and the first Telugu film to have a direct run of 200 days . It completed the 175th day of its theatrical run in a total of 13 theatres . 
 S. S. Vasan acquired the film 's Hindi dubbing rights and reshot two song sequences – " <unk> <unk> " and " <unk> <unk> " in colour . The Hindi dubbed version was commercially successful . Pathala Bhairavi was the only South Indian film to be screened at the first International Film Festival of India held at Mumbai on 24 January 1952 . Sahitya Surabhi organised a programme at the <unk> Public Library in Vishakhapatnam on 7 March 2015 on the eve of the 64th anniversary of this film 's release and writer <unk> <unk> Sastry attended the programme as the chief guest . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Pathala Bhairavi received positive reviews from critics . <unk> Padam praised the music and technical features of the film and mentioned that the film " has many good features to its credit " . CNN @-@ News18 stated that the film was full of " mysteries and twists " , and " this Telugu film has a screenplay which is not only fast but is also able to engage the audiences " , adding that the way Rama Rao managed to bring out the innocence of the character is a " lesson in acting " . M. L. Narasimham of The Hindu stated that this film 's story was made into a " grand spectacle by the genius that Kadiri Venkata Reddy was , with excellent technical support " adding that he " mesmerised the audience with a smooth narrative " . He also praised the film 's cinematography , sound designing and art direction . 
 In his book Alanati Chalana Chitram , K. N. T. Sastry stated that Venkata Reddy deserves full credit for this film 's excellence and praised the performances of Rama Rao , Malathi and Ranga Rao in particular . In his book The Best of Tamil Cinema , 1931 to 2010 , G. Dhananjayan stated that the film attracted both children and old people for its grandeur and theme and praised the actors ' performances , Ghantasala 's music , Bartley 's cinematography and the art direction . In July 2010 , Hemanth Kumar of South Scope called Pathala Bhairavi a film that " took an entire generation by storm " and praised its special effects in particular , which Kumar felt were ahead of their time . In his book One Hundred Indian Feature Films : An Annotated Filmography , Srivastava Banerjee gave a polarised review of the film by calling it " an extraordinarily meaningless modern myth " . 
 = = Cancelled plans of digitisation and colourisation = = 
 In late November 2007 , a Hyderabad @-@ based company named Goldstone Technologies acquired the film negative rights of 14 Telugu films produced by Vijaya Vauhini Studios , including Mayabazar ( 1957 ) and Pathala Bhairavi , to release their digitally re @-@ mastered versions in colour . After the success of the digitised and colourised version of Mayabazar released in January 2010 , its makers announced that Pathala Bhairavi would be the next film to be remastered and re @-@ released in colour . However Goldstone Technologies decided not to remaster the remaining 14 films including Pathala Bhairavi , saying that most of the producers who sold the rights of the negatives to TV channels lost control over them , adding that there were also a lot of legal issues over ownership and copyright issues whenever other producers try to do something on their own . 
 = = Legacy and impact = = 
 Pathala Bhairavi achieved cult classic status and is remembered for the actors ' performances along with the film 's technical aspects , in particular its cinematography by Bartley and dialogue by Nagendrarao and Ramaiah Dass . The lines " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " Shall I say the truth ? or shall I lie ? " ) , " <unk> <unk> " ( " Be adventurous man ! " ) , " <unk> Yemi Nee <unk> " ( " O Human , what you want ? " ) became popular and phrases such as " <unk> " ( " servant " ) and " <unk> " ( " fool " ) later became a part of Telugu vernacular . The film 's story is regularly staged as a play by Surabhi theatre group , known as Sri Venkateswara Natya <unk> . 
 During a programme Telugu Cinema <unk> organised by the film society of Vishakhapatnam , writer include actor Ravi Kondala Rao placed Pathala Bhairavi among other cult films like Raja Harishchandra ( 1913 ) , Bhakta Prahlada ( 1932 ) , Mala Pilla , Devadasu ( 1953 ) and Lava Kusa ( 1963 ) during a speech on the role of Telugu cinema in the hundred years of Indian cinema . On the centenary of Indian cinema in April 2013 , CNN @-@ News18 included Pathala Bhairavi in its list , " The 100 greatest Indian films of all time " . 
 The film is considered to be a breakthrough film for both Rama Rao and Ranga Rao . Rama Rao later starred in other folklore films like <unk> ( 1953 ) , <unk> ( 1954 ) and Jayasimha ( 1955 ) ; all of which were commercially successful . When the film 's unit was travelling by train to attend the 100th day celebrations of Pathala Bhairavi at Bellary , the then Union Home Minister C. Rajagopalachari was travelling in Madras Mail . When both the trains happened to halt at <unk> , people who had come to greet Rajagopalachari rushed to the other platform to have a glimpse of the film 's unit , which left Rajagopalachari amazed by the popularity that the film had attained . 
 Pathala Bhairavi 's success prompted Vijaya Vauhini Studios to produce the Hindu mythological epic bilingual film Mayabazar , also directed by Venkata Reddy . The entire technical crew of Pathala Bhairavi was selected for Mayabazar . It went on to achieve cult status in Telugu cinema for its use of technology . It also inspired other filmmakers to make films based on fairy tales like <unk> <unk> Deivam ( 1955 ) and Guna Sundari ( 1955 ) in Tamil which were commercially successful . 
 Pathala Bhairavi inspired Vijaya Productions along with its collaborator Chandamama to produce Bhairava <unk> ( 1994 ) directed by Singeetham Srinivasa Rao starring Rama Rao 's son Nandamuri Balakrishna in the lead along with Roja . In the pre @-@ climax sequences of the Telugu film Okkadu ( 2003 ) , when <unk> Reddy ( played by Prakash Raj ) is about to murder Ajay ( played by Mahesh Babu ) , the latter compares the former with Ranga Rao 's character in Pathala Bhairavi who was murdered by Rama Rao 's character . The film 's story was used as a play in the Telugu film Krishnam Vande Jagadgurum ( 2012 ) , which was based on the Surabhi theatre group . 
 = Small shelly fauna = 
 The small shelly fauna or small shelly fossils , abbreviated to SSF , are mineralized fossils , many only a few millimetres long , with a nearly continuous record from the latest stages of the Ediacaran to the end of the Early Cambrian period . They are very diverse , and there is no formal definition of " small shelly fauna " or " small shelly fossils " . Almost all are from earlier rocks than more familiar fossils such as trilobites . Since most SSFs were preserved by being covered quickly with phosphate and this method of preservation is mainly limited to the Late Ediacaran and Early Cambrian periods , the animals that made them may actually have arisen earlier and persisted after this time span . 
 Some of the fossils represent the entire skeletons of small organisms , including the mysterious Cloudina and some snail @-@ like molluscs . However , the bulk of the fossils are fragments or disarticulated remains of larger organisms , including sponges , molluscs , slug @-@ like halkieriids , brachiopods , echinoderms , and <unk> @-@ like organisms that may have been close to the ancestors of arthropods . 
 One of the early explanations for the appearance of the SSFs – and therefore the evolution of mineralized skeletons – suggested a sudden increase in the ocean 's concentration of calcium . However , many SSFs are constructed of other minerals , such as silica . Because the first SSFs appear around the same time as organisms first started burrowing to avoid predation , it is more likely that they represent early steps in an evolutionary arms race between predators and increasingly well @-@ defended prey . On the other hand , mineralized skeletons may have evolved simply because they are stronger and cheaper to produce than all @-@ organic skeletons like those of insects . Nevertheless , it is still true that the animals used minerals that were most easily accessible . 
 Although the small size and often fragmentary nature of SSFs makes it difficult to identify and classify them , they provide very important evidence for how the main groups of marine invertebrates evolved , and particularly for the pace and pattern of evolution in the Cambrian explosion . Besides including the earliest known representatives of some modern phyla , they have the great advantage of presenting a nearly continuous record of Early Cambrian organisms whose bodies include hard parts . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 The term " small shelly fossils " was coined by Samuel Matthews and V. V. <unk> in 1975 . It is quite a misnomer since , as Stefan Bengtson says , " they are not always small , they are commonly not shelly – and the term might equally well apply to Pleistocene <unk> . " Paleontologists have been unable to invent a better term and have vented their frustration in parodies such as " small silly fossils " and " small <unk> " . The term is often abbreviated to " small shellies " or " SSF " . 
 The great majority of all the morphological features of later shelled organisms appear among the SSFs . No @-@ one has attempted a formal definition of " small shelly fauna " , " small shelly fossils " or other similar phrases . 
 Specimens and sometimes quite rich collections of these fossils were discovered between 1872 and 1967 , but no @-@ one drew the conclusion that the Early Cambrian contained a diverse range of animals in addition to the traditionally recognized trilobites , <unk> , etc . In the late 1960s Soviet paleontologists discovered even richer collections of SSFs in beds below and therefore earlier than those containing Cambrian trilobites . Unfortunately the papers that described these discoveries were in Russian , and the 1975 paper by Matthews and <unk> first brought the SSFs to the serious attention of the non @-@ Russian @-@ reading world . 
 There was already a vigorous debate about the early evolution of animals . Preston Cloud argued in 1948 and 1968 that the process was " explosive " , and in the early 1970s Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould developed their theory of punctuated equilibrium , which views evolution as long intervals of near @-@ stasis " punctuated " by short periods of rapid change . On the other hand , around the same time Wyatt Durham and Martin Glaessner both argued that the animal kingdom had a long Proterozoic history that was hidden by the lack of fossils . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Rich collections have been found in China , Mongolia , Kazakhstan , Australia , and Antarctica ; and moderately diverse ones in India , Pakistan , Iran , Europe and North America . There are different views about the time range of the SSFs . The Russian discoveries of the late 1960s were assigned to the Tommotian age of the Cambrian period , and for some time the term " small shelly fauna " was applied only to that age . On the other hand , <unk> includes in " SSF " Ediacaran fossils like Cloudina and post @-@ Tommotian fossils like Microdictyon from the Maotianshan Shales lagerstätte . SSFs have been found in layers that also contain fossil trilobites . The mass extinction at the end of the Cambrian period 's <unk> age was thought to have wiped out most of the SSF , with the exception of the halkieriids , <unk> and Pojetaia . 
 = = Mode of preservation = = 
 Small shelly fossils are typically , although not always , preserved in phosphate . Whilst some shellies were originally phosphatic , in most cases the phosphate represents a replacement of the original calcite . They are usually extracted from limestone by placing the limestone in a weak acid , typically acetic acid ; the <unk> fossils remain after the rock is dissolved away . Preservation of microfossils by phosphate seems to have become less common after the early Cambrian , perhaps as a result of increased disturbance of sea @-@ floors by burrowing animals . Without this fossil @-@ forming mode , many small shelly fossils may not have been preserved – or been impossible to extract from the rock ; hence the animals that produced these fossils may have lived beyond the Early Cambrian – the apparent extinction of most SSFs by the end of the Cambrian may be an illusion . For decades it was thought that halkieriids , whose " armor plates " are a common type of SSF , perished in the end @-@ <unk> mass extinction ; but in 2004 <unk> armor plates were reported from Mid Cambrian rocks in Australia , a good 10 million years more recent than that . 
 = = Minerals used in shells = = 
 Small shelly fossils are composed of a variety of minerals , the most important being silica , calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate . The minerals used by each organism are influenced by the chemistry of the oceans the organism first evolved in , but then continue to be used even if the ocean chemistry changes . For example , in the Ediacaran period and the <unk> – <unk> age of the Cambrian , those animals that used calcium carbonate used the form called aragonite . On the other hand , animals that first appeared in the following Tommotian age used another form , calcite . 
 A recently discovered modern gastropod that lives near deep @-@ sea hydrothermal vents illustrates the influence of both earlier and contemporary local chemical environments : its shell is made of aragonite , which is found in the earliest fossil molluscs ; but it also has armor plates on the sides of its foot , and these are mineralized with the iron sulfides pyrite and greigite , which had never previously been found in any metazoan but whose ingredients are emitted in large quantities by the vents . 
 Methods of constructing shells vary widely among the SSF , and in most cases the exact mechanisms are not known . 
 = = Evolution of skeletons and biomineralization = = 
 <unk> is the production of mineralized parts by organisms . Hypotheses to explain the evolution of biomineralization include physiological adaptation to changing chemistry of the oceans , defense against predators and the opportunity to grow larger . The functions of biomineralization in SSFs vary : some SSFs are not yet understood ; some are components of armor ; and some are skeletons . A skeleton is any fairly rigid structure of an animal , irrespective of whether it has joints and irrespective of whether it is biomineralized . Although some SSFs may not be skeletons , SSFs are biomineralized by definition , being shelly . Skeletons provide a wide range of possible advantages , including : protection , support , attachment to a surface , a platform or set of levers for muscles to act on , traction when moving on a surface , food handling , provision of filtration chambers and storage of essential substances . 
 It has often been suggested that biomineralization evolved as a response to an increase in the concentration of calcium in the seas , which happened around the Ediacaran – Cambrian boundary , and that biomineralization 's main benefit was to store harmlessly minerals that might have disrupted organisms ' internal processes . For example , Mikhail A. Fedonkin suggested that an increase in the length of food chains may have contributed , as animals higher up the food chain accumulate greater amounts of waste products and toxins relative to their size , and biomineralization may have been a way of isolating excess carbonates or silicates consumed with prey . However , <unk> a skeleton is a fairly expensive way to dispose safely of excess minerals , as the main construction cost is the organic matrix , mostly proteins and polysaccharides , with which minerals are combined to form composite materials . The idea that biomineralization was a response to changes in ocean chemistry is also undermined by the fact that small shelly fossils made of calcite , aragonite , calcium phosphate and silica appeared virtually simultaneously in a range of environments . 
 Organisms started burrowing to avoid predation at around the same time . Jerzy <unk> suggested that biomineralization of skeletons was a defense against predators , marking the start of an evolutionary arms race . He cited as another example of hardened defenses from this time the fact that the earliest protective " skeletons " included glued @-@ together collections of inorganic objects — for example the Early Cambrian worm <unk> built a tube covered with mica flakes . Such a strategy required both anatomical adaptations that allowed organisms to collect and glue objects and also moderately sophisticated nervous systems to co @-@ ordinate this behavior . 
 On the other hand , Bernard Cohen argued that biomineralized skeletons arose for " engineering " reasons rather than as defenses . There are many other defensive strategies available to prey animals including mobility and acute senses , chemical defenses , and concealment . Mineral @-@ organic composites are both stronger and cheaper to build than all @-@ organic skeletons , and these two advantages would have made it possible for animals to grow larger and , in some cases , more muscular — in animals beyond a certain size , the larger muscles and their greater leverage produce forces all @-@ organic skeletons are not rigid enough to withstand . The development of modern brachiopods includes a progression from all @-@ organic to mineral @-@ organic composite shells , which may be a clue to their evolutionary development . The evolution of rigid biomineralized exoskeletons may then have started an arms race in which predators developed drills or chemical weapons capable of penetrating shells , some prey animals developed heavier , tougher shells , etc . 
 Fedonkin suggested another explanation for the appearance of biomineralization around the start of the Cambrian : the Ediacara biota evolved and flourished in cold waters , which slowed their metabolisms and left them with insufficient spare energy for biomineralization ; but there are signs of global warming around the start of the Cambrian , which would have made biomineralization easier . A similar pattern is visible in living marine animals , since biomineralized skeletons are rarer and more fragile in polar waters than in the tropics . 
 = = Evolutionary significance = = 
 In some locations , up to 20 % of Cloudina fossils show borings , holes that are thought to have been made by predators . The very similar shelly fossil <unk> , which is often found in the same locations , was not affected by borings . In addition , the distribution of borings in Cloudina suggests selection for size – the largest holes appear in the largest shells . This evidence of selective attacks by predators suggests that new species may have arisen in response to predation , which is often presented as a potential cause of the rapid diversification of animals in the Early Cambrian . 
 The small shellies provide a relatively continuous record throughout the early Cambrian , and thus provide a more useful insight into the Cambrian explosion than instances of exceptional preservation . Although most of the SSFs are difficult to identify , those assigned positions in modern taxa , or in their stem groups of evolutionary " aunts " or " cousins " , enable scientists to assess the pattern and speed of animal evolution on the strength of the small shelly evidence . Such an assessment shows that the earliest small shellies are the most basal . As time goes on , they can be placed in the stem group to an ever smaller clade . In other words , the earliest ( Ediacaran ) small shellies can be tentatively considered diploblastic , in other words made of two main tissue layers . Later shellies are more convincingly triploblastic , as all " higher " animals are . Subsequently the Helcionellids are the first shelly fossils that can be placed in the stem group to a phylum ( <unk> ) . As one looks at more recent SSFs , the arguments for stem group placements become stronger , and by the <unk> , some SSFs can be assigned to the crown group of a modern phylum , echinoderms . This gives the impression that the first SSF animals , from the late Ediacaran , were basal members of later clades , with the phyla subsequently appearing in a " rapid , but nevertheless resolvable and orderly " fashion , rather than as a " sudden jumble " , and thus reveals the true pace of the Cambrian explosion . 
 = = Types of small shelly fossil = = 
 = = = Ediacaran forms = = = 
 The few collections of SSF from the Ediacaran period have a limited range of forms Fully and partially mineralized tubes are common and form a really mixed collection : the structures and compositions of their walls vary widely ; specimens have been classified as members of a wide range of clades including foraminiferans , cnidarians , polychaete and <unk> annelids , sipunculids and others . Cloudina ’ s " tube " , which was 8 to 150 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 31 to 5 @.@ 91 in ) long , consisted of nested cones that were mineralized with calcium carbonate but left unmineralized gaps between the cones . <unk> built long thin tubes that were more flexible but probably had mineralized ridges . 
 <unk> was probably either a sponge or a coral @-@ like organism , and built dwellings up to 1 metre ( 39 in ) across out of calcium carbonate . 
 Spicules are spines or star @-@ like combinations of spines , made of silica , and are thought to be the remains of sponges . 
 <unk> , which may have been a cnidarian , closely related to jellyfish and corals , built goblet @-@ like dwellings with stalks up to 30 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) long . This type of shape is known as a " stalked test " , since " test " in biology means a roughly spherical shell . 
 = = = Cambrian forms = = = 
 In finds from the early Cambrian , tubes and spicules become more abundant and diverse , and new types of SSF appear . Many have been attributed to well @-@ known groups such as molluscs , slug @-@ like halkieriids , brachiopods , echinoderms , and <unk> @-@ like organisms that may have been close to the ancestors of arthropods . A multitude of problematic tubular fossils , such as <unk> , <unk> or <unk> characterize the earliest Cambrian Small Shelly Fossil skeletal assemblages . 
 Most of the Cambrian SSF consists of sclerites , fragments that once made up the external armor of early animals , such as Halkieria or " scale worms " . Fairly complete and assembled sets , which are rare , are called " <unk> " . In many cases the body shapes of sclerites ' creators and the distribution of sclerites on their bodies are not known . The " coat of mail " generally disintegrated once the animal died , and its fragments became dispersed and sometimes fossilized . Reconstructing these elements usually relies upon a fully articulated fossil being found in an exceptionally preserved lagerstätte . Such discoveries may in turn enable paleontologists to make sense of other similar fragments , such as those labelled <unk> . 
 Many sclerites are of the type called " coelosclerites " , which have a mineralized shell around a space originally filled with organic tissue and which show no evidence of accretionary growth . It is not clear whether coelosclerites evolved independently in different groups of animals or were inherited from a common ancestor . <unk> produced <unk> or spine @-@ shaped coelosclerites , and complete specimens show that the animals were slug @-@ shaped , and had cap @-@ shaped shell plates at both ends in addition to the sclerites . <unk> produced star @-@ shaped composite coelosclerites . They are known to have been animals that looked like cacti and have been described as internally like sponges , although they may have been more closely related to halkieriids . 
 Some sclerites are mineralized with calcium phosphate rather than calcium carbonate . <unk> have a wide range of sclerite shapes and internal structures , and may in fact represent a polyphyletic set of lineages , in other words they may have independently developed phosphatic <unk> rather than inheriting them from a common ancestor . On the other hand , they may be closely related to the ancestors of modern brachiopods , animals that at first sight look like bivalve molluscs , but brachiopods stand on fleshy stalks and their internal anatomy is different . Some sclerites and small pieces of " debris " are regarded as the remains of echinoderms . Other phosphatic sclerites include tooth @-@ shaped , hook @-@ shaped and plate @-@ like objects , mostly of unknown origin . However it is known that some , including Microdictyon , were produced by lobopods , animals that looked like worms with legs and are thought to be close to the ancestors of arthropods . 
 <unk> and bivalved shells are fairly common . Some cap @-@ shaped shells are thought to be the only sclerite covering their creators , while others are known to be parts of a more complex armor system like Halkieria ’ s . The Helcionellids are thought to be early molluscs with somewhat snail @-@ like shells . Some have horizontal " exhaust pipes " on the concave edges of their shells , and there is debate about whether these pointed forwards or backwards . <unk> left small conical shells . These animals may have been molluscs or worm @-@ like Sipuncula . Other molluscan <unk> shells have been found in Canada . Some bivalve shells have been found with both parts still joined , and include both brachiopods and bivalve molluscs . Fossils have been found that resemble the opercula ( " lids " ) used by snails to close the openings in their armor , and are attributed to <unk> , small animals that had conical shells and may have been molluscs or worm @-@ like Sipuncula . 
 Small arthropods with bivalve @-@ like shells have been found in Early Cambrian beds in China , and other fossils ( <unk> <unk> ) represent spines that snapped off bivalved arthropod carapaces . 
 = = = Post @-@ Cambrian forms = = = 
 SSFs after the Cambrian start to pick up more recognizable and modern groups . By the mid @-@ Ordovician , the majority of SSFs simply represent larval molluscs , mostly gastropods . 
 = Wyntoon = 
 Wyntoon is the name of a private estate in rural Siskiyou County , California , owned by the Hearst Corporation . Architects Willis Polk , Bernard Maybeck and Julia Morgan all designed structures for Wyntoon , beginning in 1899 . 
 The land , sited at two sharp bends in the McCloud River , was named by financial adviser Edward Clark for the local Native American tribe of the <unk> people . Beginning as a humble fishing resort , the land was improved by a series of people , notably San Francisco attorney Charles Stetson Wheeler , his client Phoebe Apperson Hearst , and her son William Randolph Hearst who disputed with his cousin over ownership . Prominent structures , noted for their architecture , have been built on the land , some lost to fire , while other multimillion @-@ dollar buildings were planned , but not built . Famous visitors to Wyntoon include Clark Gable , Charles Lindbergh , Joseph P. Kennedy , Sr. and his son John F. Kennedy . 
 = = Justin Sisson 's fishing resort = = 
 The earliest known inhabitants of the area of Wyntoon were the <unk> Wintu tribe of Native Americans , a subgroup of the <unk> people . 
 In the 1880s , outdoorsman , guide , hunter and trapper Justin Hinckley Sisson came to the area and established a hotel , restaurant and tavern at the foot of Mount Shasta . He advocated for a railroad line to be extended northward from Redding to his location , and was successful . Construction of the Central Pacific Railroad through the Siskiyou Trail began in the mid @-@ 1880s , and Sisson bought 120 acres ( 49 ha ) in its path . The railroad was completed in 1887 and brought miners , hunters , fishermen , loggers , naturalists and tourists . With his wife , the former Miss Lydia Field , Sisson operated the inn , and he led various groups of hunters , geologists and mountain climbers . With profits from his successful business , Sisson acquired large parcels of land including the tract which would become Wyntoon . He established the town of Sisson surrounding his inn , and he built a fishing resort a half @-@ day 's ride away on the McCloud River , at an elevation between 2 @,@ 700 and 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 820 and 910 m ) , some 16 miles ( 26 km ) distant . Popular with hunters and fishermen , it became known as " Sisson 's @-@ on @-@ the @-@ McCloud " . 
 Justin Sisson died in 1893 . In 1924 the town of Sisson was renamed Mount Shasta , California . 
 = = Charles S. Wheeler 's hunting lodge = = 
 In 1899 , Sisson 's widow sold the McCloud River fishing resort site to Charles Stetson Wheeler , a wealthy attorney from San Francisco . This parcel lay in the Cascade Range of mountains , south by southeast of Mount Shasta . Wheeler called this holding the Wheeler Ranch , and he built a hunting lodge on the river at Horseshoe Bend — its cornerstone was laid in 1899 . The multi @-@ wing lodge , dramatic with its stone walls and slate roof , was designed by San Francisco architect Willis Polk , and included an 800 @-@ book library with room for hundreds of Native American baskets . Wheeler directed Polk to give the lodge a " fish tower " — a high study with a view , and two windows which were aquariums containing local trout . A Latin inscription over the entrance indicated this room was a temple to fishing : <unk> sacrum . Polk 's design was pictured in July 1899 in The American Architect and Building News which described it as a " California Mountain Home " . Sir Banister Fletcher included the building in a list of Shingle Style architecture . The layout of the structure , a " rambling group of masses " , snaked through the trees , curving to follow the bend in the river , the curve creating a courtyard with a circular drive and a central fountain . The dining room enjoyed a three @-@ sided view of the river , and diners could take the air on a wraparound porch . The porch opened to the river in a flight of wooden steps leading down to an octagonal gazebo pierced and supported by a large tree , overhanging the tumbling waters . Massive fireplaces and heavy timbers gave the impression of a medieval estate interior . Polk 's use of stone and wood on the exterior achieved a sense of compatibility with the land , celebrating the setting 's primal beauty . 
 The Wheeler family stayed at the ranch many a summer . In 1900 , Wheeler invited his client Phoebe Hearst to visit Wheeler Ranch with his family for the summer . Hearst asked if she could purchase the land , but Wheeler declined . Insistent , Hearst came to an arrangement whereby she would purchase a 99 @-@ year lease on part of the land , and she also purchased adjoining land held by Edward Clark , her financial adviser , who called it Wyntoon for the local Wintu tribe . Hearst applied the name Wyntoon to the combination of Clark 's former holdings and her new lease , and in 1901 contracted for a magnificent seven @-@ story house to be built . Wheeler was displeased with the extravagant plans , as he and Hearst had previously agreed her building would be modest . However , he did not stop her . 
 Wheeler retained the part of Wheeler Ranch that was not leased to Hearst , including The Bend . In 1911 , Wheeler invited Austro @-@ Hungarian artist and naturalist Edward Stuhl and his wife Rosie to live on the property ; they made extensive studies of plant and animal life in the area , and collected many hundreds of specimens . Stuhl , an avid mountain climber , published Wildflowers of Mount Shasta from his base at Wheeler Ranch . After Wheeler 's death in 1923 , Stuhl served as custodian of the ranch . William Randolph Hearst bought Wyntoon outright from its 99 @-@ year lease in 1929 , and in 1934 bought all of Wheeler Ranch and The Bend , a combined total of 50 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 @,@ 000 ha ) . 
 = = Phoebe Hearst 's castle = = 
 Phoebe Hearst , upon signing the 99 @-@ year lease , decided to build a very grand residence . She hired Bernard Maybeck to design one in the Gothic style of a Rhine River castle . The structure was mainly complete in 1902 , and cost Hearst $ 100 @,@ 000 . Maybeck hired Julia Morgan to assist in the design . 
 The castle 's layout was fitted to the slope of the site , and to a semicircle of six tall conifers . Its footprint was 120 by 56 feet ( 37 by 17 m ) ; an underground cellar was 45 feet ( 14 m ) wide , 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) high , and ran the length of the building , containing stores and a central heating furnace supplying steam throughout the building . The central tower made of stone reached to a height of 75 feet ( 23 m ) . A plumbed room entered from the outside allowed fishermen and hunters to clean their catch and themselves . Six floors of sleeping rooms were contained in the central tower ; each bedroom entered from landings along the main spiral staircase carved of stone . The exterior of the tower was thick load @-@ bearing crowning wall topped with a steeply angled roof to hold the weight of snow , and to shed excess snow . Glazed Paris @-@ green tile from the Netherlands surfaced the roof , providing " a misty color like the holes between the branches in the trees in the forest . " <unk> @-@ gray basalt volcanic stone was quarried from local lava flows ; it supplied the strength of the massive walls . 
 The living room , 80 by 36 feet ( 24 by 11 m ) , had at one end an alcove framing a stained glass window , a copy of the 13th century one in <unk> in Nuremberg , the reproduction fabricated in the Netherlands . The room 's apex was 36 feet high — a meeting of steeply angled wooden beams resting on 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) thick stone walls . A tall fireplace separated the alcove from the majority of the living room ; a large man could stand in its opening . Another fireplace warmed the other end of the living room . Tapestries hung from the stone walls to add a medieval appearance . Frederick Meyer made furniture for this room , and for all Wyntoon , in European vernacular style . 
 Maybeck designed a dining hall much like the living room , with Gothic stone walls and high peaked roof , and two opposing fireplaces , but its Gothic tables were unusually placed against the walls leaving the center area open . Benches were provided for diners to sit . The kitchen wing , 40 by 40 feet ( 12 by 12 m ) , adjoined the dining room , connected through a wide butler 's hall . Staff were provided rooms in the kitchen wing . Its foundation of cut stone reached to the top of the ground floor ; the second story 's wall was of rubble stone . The roof was topped by light gray slate . Initial critical reactions to the kitchen wing 's exterior appearance led Hearst to surround it with shrubbery . 
 Phoebe Hearst also built other structures including The Gables — a storybook dwelling for overflow guests — and a " Honeymoon Cottage " . The castle was habitable in 1902 , completely finished in 1904 . It was featured in American Homes and Gardens in 1906 , a three @-@ page spread ; the same space given the house in Architectural Review in 1904 . The writer in Architectural Review criticized the quaint wooden carvings which gave the impression of " pastry and perfume " , but praised the most important aspects of the structure : 
 " The dark height of the room , the unobstructed archways , the deep blues , reds and yellows of the cathedral window , to which time had given maturity , the tapestries , the little flicker of fire , and the roaring of the river outside ; and you satiated , tired and inspired by the day 's trip among hazel , dogwood , great aged pines , rocks , cascades , great trunks of trees fallen years ago — a disheveled harmony — here you can reach all that is within you . " 
 Hearst summered at Wyntoon and raised her son 's children there when he was not watching them . William Randolph Hearst and his wife Millicent produced five sons from 1904 to 1915 — each one spent summer months at Wyntoon with grandmother . The boys ' father sent instructions about their upbringing , writing after the eldest boy George Randolph Hearst was nearly washed down the McCloud , that the boys needed " a severe warning about the river " . Hearst occasionally entertained her society friends and acquaintances at Wyntoon , bringing selected guests up north from the Panama – Pacific International Exposition of 1915 . At her death in 1919 , she willed Wyntoon to her niece Anne Apperson Flint , along with a Cadillac car and $ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 Flint moved in with her husband , Joseph Marshall Flint , M.D , a former Yale professor of surgery . During this time , architect Julia Morgan designed four structures which were built at Wyntoon : a superintendent 's residence and a separate servant 's quarters in 1924 , and in 1925 , a stables building holding a caretaker 's house erected near a " Swiss Chalet " which was built for higher @-@ status domestic staff . 
 = = William Randolph Hearst 's projects = = 
 From his mother 's will , William Randolph Hearst received the bulk of the family inheritance , including the 270 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 110 @,@ 000 ha ) ranch in San Simeon , the 900 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 360 @,@ 000 ha ) <unk> Ranch in Mexico , a fruit orchard in Butte County , and various mining and industrial stocks , the whole worth around 5 – 10 million dollars . Wyntoon , however , was given to his cousin Anne Apperson Flint in his mother 's will , and Hearst was angered over this . He refused to return to Flint any of the art objects from Wyntoon that had been loaned to the Palace of Fine Arts for an exhibit . In 1925 after years of acrimonious negotiation , he bought Wyntoon from Flint for $ 198 @,@ 000 , but he remained forever embittered toward his cousin . 
 In the winter of 1929 – 1930 , Maybeck 's Wyntoon masterpiece burned down , possibly from a kitchen fire . Time magazine reported Hearst 's losses at $ 300 @,@ 000 to $ 500 @,@ 000 , including portions of his art collection . In early 1930 , Hearst contracted to have Morgan design an even larger castle as replacement . Morgan was already working for Hearst on Hearst Castle in San Simeon and nearly finished with The Hacienda near King City . 
 Morgan collaborated with her early mentor and teacher Maybeck on plans for an eight @-@ story Bavarian Gothic @-@ style castle with two great towers and more minor turrets , some 61 bedrooms proposed for Wyntoon 's largest building project . Hearst instructed Arthur Byne , his art agent based in Madrid , to find likely buildings he could purchase for their stonework , to give Wyntoon an ancient air . In December 1930 , Byne discovered Santa Maria de Ovila , a 700 @-@ year @-@ old Cistercian monastery , and Hearst paid $ 97 @,@ 000 for it . The monastery was taken apart and removed illegally , but the Spanish government was changing hands and was not effective in stopping Hearst 's hired men . Some 10 @,@ 000 stones were shipped to a warehouse in San Francisco at a total cost of about $ 1 million . 
 Another old structure removed from Europe was proposed for Wyntoon : the great tithe barn of <unk> Priory in England . Most of the priory had been used by Hearst to refurbish St Donat 's Castle in Wales in the late 1920s , but the tithe barn had been crated and shipped to San Simeon for possible use there . Hearst proposed that the unused <unk> barn be incorporated into his great castle , and had Morgan study the possibilities . 
 In the Spring of 1931 , Morgan offered several designs for Hearst 's consideration , all of them using the stones of the Spanish monastery on the ground floor , reinforced by steel girders to take the weight of the upper floors . Portions of the monastery were considered as a library , an " armory " , and a living room . The final proposal from Morgan included an indoor swimming pool constructed from the monastery 's old church . The 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) long swimming pool featured changing rooms and lounges in the old side chapels , shallow water for wading in the apse , 11 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) deep water in the central plunge , and a diving board where the altar had been . 
 In July 1931 as a steam shovel was making ready to level enough land to accommodate the great castle , Hearst put a stop to all his construction plans . The Great Depression had greatly diminished his income , and he could not pay for his $ 50 million project at Wyntoon while at the same time indulging his expansion at San Simeon . Abandoning the massive castle idea , Hearst instead asked Morgan to design a " Bavarian Village " with multiple half @-@ timbered buildings in the medieval style of Germany or Austria . Hearst sent Morgan to Europe to study suitable buildings ; she brought fine artist Doris Day with her to investigate architectural inscriptions and painting styles . In 1932 , Morgan put together a master plan for Wyntoon . It described a group of guesthouses with romantic names such as Cinderella House , Fairy House and Bear House , arranged not in a cramped medieval style but symmetrically around a common green in the Beaux @-@ Arts style . These three @-@ story structures with steeply gabled roofs were completed in 1933 . Swiss artisan Jules <unk> and his assistants carved much of the German Gothic decorations . Day painted fine inscriptions and exterior decorative patterns . Hungarian illustrator Willy Pogany painted exterior murals depicting Russian and Germanic fairy tales such as those from the Brothers Grimm , but Pogany 's versions were bright , humorous and cheerful , not dark and grim . 
 Downstream of the Bavarian Village , Morgan 's plan called for a selection of leisure activities . A swimming pool with a pool house was to be near tennis courts and a croquet lawn , and a dining hall called " The Gables " would be equipped to show films . Though San Simeon could house perhaps 30 to 50 guests , the expanded Wyntoon plan could accommodate 100 for a weekend . 
 In 1934 , Hearst bought all of Wheeler Ranch . Polk 's structure " The Bend " was torn down except for one wing containing the master bedroom . This wing held the cornerstone engraved " The Bend – 1899 " . The rest of the building was redesigned by Morgan in Gothic Revival style and rebuilt from 1935 to 1941 using many of its original stones . 
 On January 1 , 1935 , photographer Peter Stackpole 's images of Wyntoon were published in Life magazine , showing Hearst relaxing at Wyntoon with friends . Hearst 's communications office at Wyntoon was shown in the photos ; it was built next to Bear House to keep him abreast of current events . This office was fitted into a shingle @-@ covered bungalow built to house Joe <unk> , Hearst 's private secretary . The structure served as the " nerve center " of Hearst 's publishing empire , with three round @-@ the @-@ clock operators minding the telegraph facilities and the telephone switchboard . 
 In mid @-@ 1937 , Hearst was forced by bankruptcy to sign over all of his holdings to a group of trustees called the Conservation Committee . Wyntoon was included , it was estimated the prior year to be worth $ 300 @,@ 000 . Headed by New York Judge Clarence J. Shearn , the trustees slashed Hearst 's costs and halted the smaller side projects at San Simeon and Wyntoon which had kept so many contractors busy . Wyntoon was maintained only by a skeleton staff paid for by the Hearst Corporation . Hearst never hosted more than 14 guests at Wyntoon after the bankruptcy . From 1938 to 1940 , Hearst 's art collections were cataloged and sold , including items from Wyntoon . Hearst was made to pay rent out of his allowance when he stayed at any of his properties . 
 After the December 7 , 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor , blackout conditions were imposed on San Simeon because of its nearness to the ocean and associated likelihood of Japanese shelling , so before Christmas Hearst moved to Wyntoon with his lover , actress Marion Davies . There , the two lived in Bear House at the river 's edge with their pet <unk> . Davies ' cherished dachshund named Gandhi , 15 years old , fell gravely ill during this time ; a veterinarian was called and the animal put down by injection . Distraught , Davies raged through Bear House , later writing : " I broke everything I could lay my hands on . " Hearst 's favorite dog Helen died in his arms at Wyntoon ; he buried her on a hillside covered with flowers , the spot marked by a stone inscribed , " Here lies dearest Helen – my devoted friend . " 
 During the Wyntoon residency of Hearst and Davies , they received fewer visitors than they had at San Simeon , because it was more remote . They spent much time together , and Davies picked up sewing again after years of no practice . She sewed silk fabric into ties for Hearst . He wrote her a poem or a short note every night , which he slipped under her door for her to see in the morning . Over the 1943 – 1944 winter , with snow and ice transforming the outdoor scenery , Wyntoon hosted actor Clark Gable , film directors Louis B. Mayer and Raoul Walsh , columnist Louella Parsons , cartoonist Jimmy Swinnerton and his wife , aviator Charles Lindbergh and his family , the former president 's daughter Anna Roosevelt and her husband John <unk> ( who worked for Hearst ) , and millionaire industrialist Joe Kennedy who brought his 26 @-@ year @-@ old son " Jack " , the future president . Jack surprised Hearst by swimming in the freezing McCloud . 
 = = Today = = 
 Hearst 's trustees reorganized the Hearst Corporation in 1943 , installing Richard E. Berlin as president . Under Berlin , Wyntoon was made to turn a profit — the old 50 @,@ 000 @-@ acre Wheeler Ranch holding and adjoining parcels adding up to 67 @,@ 000 acres ( 27 @,@ 000 ha ) were logged and replanted with more tree seedlings , the operation generating about $ 2 million annually by 1959 . 
 In the late 1980s , architects <unk> <unk> Associates ( BDA ) began working with the Hearst Corporation to complete the interior of " Angel House " whose construction had been halted in the late 1930s . BDA next began to remodel the one original bedroom wing of Polk 's " The Bend " . There , the second and main bedroom wing ( finished in the 1950s in Tudor style ) burned down on December 30 , 1992 , and BDA was contracted to rebuild it . Sensitive to the problem of recreating the ambiance , BDA used Sugar Pine paneling in keeping with other rooms on site , wrought iron from Poland and from local blacksmiths , stones quarried locally , and Renaissance @-@ era fireplaces . 
 Today , the estate is owned by the Hearst Corporation , and is not open to the public . Wyntoon is located at approximately 41 ° 11 ′ 21 ″ N 122 ° 03 ′ 58 ″ W. It is north of Lake McCloud , a man @-@ made lake completed in 1965 , and about 9 miles ( 14 km ) due east of Dunsmuir , California . Energetic kayakers willing to endure dangerous rapids can view the estate from the Upper McCloud River during spring and summer snowmelt . 
 The estate is grandfathered in the law as a " senior rights holder " to use an unlimited amount of water from the adjoining McCloud River . 
 = 8701 = 
 8701 is the third studio album by American singer Usher ; it was first released on August 7 , 2001 , by Arista Records . Recording was handled by several producers including The Neptunes , Jermaine Dupri , Babyface , Kevin " She 'kspere " Briggs , Mike City , Bryan Michael Cox , Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis . It was intended for an October 31 , 2000 release under the title All About U , the album was delayed numerous times , following the leak of several tracks onto the online music store Napster . Usher subsequently recorded new tracks and released the album under the new title , 8701 , which is derived from Usher singing for the first time in his local church in 1987 and the album 's release date of 2001 . 
 8701 takes inspiration from multiple artists , including Donny Hathaway , Stevie Wonder , Marvin Gaye , and Michael Jackson . It follows the theme of Usher 's relationship experience , along with the emotions of love and heartache . Usher promoted the album by embarking on the supporting tour , Evolution 8701 Tour in 2002 , to which it he performed in forty @-@ four shows across North America . He also made appearances in television shows , including Live ! with Kelly and Total Request Live . 8701 produced two Billboard Hot 100 number one singles – " U Remind Me " and " U Got It Bad " stayed on top for four and fives weeks , respectively . 
 The album debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart , with 210 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . It has sold over 4 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States , receiving a 4 × platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) ; worldwide sales stand at over eight million . 8701 received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised Usher 's vocals and development as an artist , but were ambivalent towards some of the album 's material . The album earned Usher numerous awards , including two Grammy Awards , three Billboard Music Awards and a BET Award . 
 = = Background = = 
 Usher had initially planned to release the album entitled All About U , as his third studio album on October 31 , 2000 . The album was to follow his successful My Way ( 1997 ) which to date , has sold over seven million copies . On March 13 , 2000 , multiple tracks from the album had leaked on to online music store Napster several months prior to its release , including " <unk> " , " U R the One " and " Pop Ya Collar " . Following the event , the album 's release was delayed twice , on December 5 , 2000 to July 17 , 2001 . During the taping of MTV Icon Janet Jackson special , Usher explained that he returned to the studios to record new songs , stating " I didn 't want that to be the way my record was remembered or the way I would present that to my fans [ ... ] It turned out a lot better " while adding that tracks that were available for download on the site were not going to be included on the new album . With new tracks produced , Usher 's publicist announced a new name for the album , under the title 8701 , who claims that it is " practically a new album " . The origin of its new name was initially unknown , with speculation that it subsides with its US release of August 7 , 2001 ( 8 / 7 / 01 ) , though Usher 's publicist claimed that this was purely coincidental , and was not the reasoning for the title . Usher hinted that it was derived after something significant to him , and he would disclose it in the upcoming months . Eventually , his spokesperson revealed that the ' 87 ' segment of the title refers to the year 1987 , when Usher sang in public for the first time at his church in Atlanta , with the ' 01 ' referring to the year 2001 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 8701 was recorded in the United States , in the cities of Los Angeles , New York , Minneapolis and Atlanta . The album 's production was handled by several producers including The Neptunes , Jermaine Dupri , P. Diddy — who had produced the majority of Usher 's previous album , My Way — Babyface , Kevin " She 'kspere " Briggs , Mike City , Bryan Michael Cox and Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis . Both Jam and Lewis were asked by Usher 's mother , and then manager , to contribute to 8701 's production , during the 2000 MTV Music Awards . According to Jam , his mother had said " Oh my God , Usher 's got this track and we thought you guys would be perfect to produce it " . Several months later , Jam and Lewis produced the song " Separated " , to which the producers then turned in to L.A. Reid , who liked the track , and asked them to produce more . Following this , Usher asked both producers to create a song similar to their 1985 " Tender Love " , performed by R & B vocal group Force MDs . Though he wanted it to be his own unique record , which contains a small similarity , to which Jam and Lewis created " Can U Help Me " . Following the completion of 8701 , Jam and Lewis were sent back to the studio by Reid to revamp the album 's second single " U Remind Me " , explaining " we already know he can dance , and he 's got the style and that whole thing . But I want people to just go , he can sing . 
 = = Composition = = 
 In an interview with MTV , Usher commented that lyrically , 8701 represents his " soul " , and elaborated by explaining that he was inspired by love and heartache ; " I listen to a lot of Donny Hathaway 's , Stevie Wonder 's , Marvin Gaye 's and Michael Jackson 's earlier records , those Motown greats . There 's a little bit of all of that in the album . I really appreciate what music was back then as well as in the early ' 90s when you had artists like Troop and Jodeci , and Michael Jackson was in his prime . " Usher explained that the album 's lyrics also reflect on what has been going on with his relationship ; 8701 is predominantly an R & B album . " Can U Help Me " , is about a deep relationship to which Usher experienced . " U Don 't Have to Call " is a hip @-@ hop song inspired by Jackson , while " U Got It Bad " is an R & B slow @-@ jam . About " U Got It Bad " , Kyle Anderson of MTV wrote that it makes use of the acoustic guitar and a " slow @-@ burning bassline " throughout . The album 's lead single " U Remind Me " is also an R & B track , and its lyrics is based on meeting a woman who reminds Usher of an ex @-@ girlfriend , and therefore cannot date her . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Pop Ya Collar " was released from Usher 's previously intended third studio album All About U as the first single . Following the song 's leak on online music store Napster , along with several other tracks , it was added to some editions of 8701 . It entered and peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart , but achieved less success in the United States , with a peak of number sixty on the Billboard Hot 100 and number twenty @-@ five on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 8701 's first official single was " U Remind Me " , released on June 19 , 2001 . The song sold nearly 100 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week ; it received positive reviews from most critics , who cited it as a highlight from the album . The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 , for four consecutive weeks . " U Remind Me " also reached the top five in several countries , including France , Belgium ( Wallonia ) , New Zealand , the United Kingdom and Australia . It has been certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . " I Don 't Know " , featuring rapper @-@ producer P. Diddy , was planned as the album 's second single . It was receiving radio play prior to the release of " U Remind Me " peaking at # 68 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and a video was to be produced in Los Angeles , directed by the latter artist . 
 The album 's second single was instead " U Got It Bad " , released on September 4 , 2001 . The song , like its predecessor , topped the Billboard Hot 100 chart , for five weeks . It remained number one for one week , before being replaced by Nickelback 's " How You Remind Me " for four weeks . The song then returned to the top , replacing the latter for four more weeks . " U Got It Bad " also achieved chart success in other territories , reaching the top five in New Zealand , Australia and the UK . The song has been certified gold by both the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . " U Don 't Have to Call " was released as the third single , on January 12 , 2002 . It impacted the Hot 100 , peaking at number three , and the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , at number two . It was released with P. Diddy 's " I Need a Girl ( Part One ) " in the UK as a B @-@ side single , and reached number four . " U @-@ Turn " was released as the album 's 4th single , on April 30 , 2002 as an international single . It reached the top @-@ ten in Belgium and Australia . " Can U Help Me " was released as the album 's final single , on August 20 , 2002 . It peaked at # 57 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and # 30 on the Rhythmic Top 40 chart . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Usher initially planned to release his third studio album on October 31 , 2000 under the title All About U , but due to the leak of multiple tracks several months prior to the date , it was delayed . First to December 5 , 2000 it was delayed again to July 17 , 2001 . In regards to this , Usher commented that " Pushing the record back was a risk , but I thought it would build anticipation " . 8701 's final release date was August 7 , 2001 , on Arista Records , in the United States , United Kingdom , Australia and Canada . On the day of release of the album in the United States , to which Arista labelled as " Usher day " , Usher performed the album 's lead single " U Remind Me " on the show Live ! with Regis and Kelly . He also performed the single during the 2001 BET Awards and the United We Stand : What More Can I Give concert at RFK Stadium in Washington D.C. , which was held in tribute to the victims of the September 11 , 2001 attacks . Usher appeared on Total Request Live , attended an auto @-@ graph signing session in a Virgin mega store , and a listening session for the album in the Planet Hollywood restaurant . Usher performed " U Got It Bad " at the 2001 American Music Awards , and again on June 16 , 2002 at the Tweeter Center along with " U Don 't Have to Call " during his concert . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 8701 received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 67 , based on 11 reviews . NME 's Lucy O 'Brien commended Usher for producing a more mature album , that " reflects his emotional experience " writing " Versatility is the key here : staccato beats with mellifluous melody , rich slow @-@ jams and edgy harmonies – but woven through with Usher 's own perspective . A winner . " BBC Online 's Christian Hopwood also favoured the album , commenting on how Usher has developed " his producing , singing and song writing skills to a new level " noting his contribution to twelve of the seventeen tracks . Dan Leroy of Yahoo ! Music declared the album an improvement " over Usher 's " old " new album " — All About You — and depicted it as his best work to @-@ date . Leroy credited the production groups The Neptunes and Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis , depicting that they have done " some of their best work " on the album . J. D. Considine of Blender commented that the album " does what it 's supposed to , giving Usher a grown @-@ up R & B sound without reducing his boyish charm " . Kathryn McGuire of Rolling Stone described Usher 's vocals as " velvety " and further wrote that " Amid all the playboy pouting and preening , Usher 's vocals are impressively adaptable [ ... ] . McGuire noted the album 's primary fault is that " Usher never surrenders his meticulously groomed veneer " , with every track being formulaic , or " radio @-@ safe " . 
 Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine noted the distinction between several of the album 's songs with Janet Jackson 's , while comparing Usher 's vocals to that of another Jackson member , Michael Jackson " [ ... ] bring out the other Jackson in Usher , bolstering falsetto vocal bridges on " I Don 't Know " and " U Don 't Have to Call " that are undeniably Pop Royalty . " Vibe 's Jason King complimented some of the material on the album , but was disappointed with the " heavyweight producers " not producing any " masterpieces " . Stephen Erlewine of Allmusic gave a positive opinion on Usher 's development , writing " He looks good , his material is smooth and seductive , and he has a nice voice , even if he tends to favor melisma " . Erlewine also labelled the album as " a classy , seductive affair " but was ambivalent towards its material , due to the lack of memorable tracks . Entertainment Weekly 's Josh Tyrangiel said that the tracks " blend harmlessly together " , but was ambivalent towards the quality of the songs produced after Usher 's four @-@ year hiatus . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The album earned Usher numerous accolades . At the 44th Grammy Awards he won his first Grammy , for Best R & B Vocal Performance Male ( for " U Remind Me " ) . The following year , at the 45th Grammy Awards , he won the award again , for " U Don 't Have to Call " . As an act Usher won several awards , including three Billboard R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Awards in 2002 , for Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles Artist , Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Male Artist and Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Artist , and a BET Award for Best R & B Artist . At the 2002 Soul Train Music Awards , the album earned him an award for Male R & B / Soul Album . In December 2009 , the album and its single , " U Got It Bad " , were ranked as some of the best records of the 2000 – 2009 decade . The former was positioned at number sixty @-@ three and the latter at number fifteen , respectively , on the Billboard 200 and Hot 100 Decade @-@ End Charts . In 2008 , " U Got It Bad " was ranked as one of the all @-@ time Hot 100 songs , positioned at number ninety @-@ nine . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number @-@ four on the US Billboard 200 Chart selling 210 @,@ 000 copies in its first week ; it was the second highest debut of the week , behind Isley Brothers ' Eternal . The album exceeded its predecessor 's sales , My Way ( 1997 ) , which debuted at number fifteen selling 66 @,@ 000 copies in its opening week . Eighteen weeks after the release of 8701 , it had sold 1 @.@ 94 million copies , and was predicted to be on pace to out @-@ sell My Way , which sold 1 @.@ 32 million units during the same period . On the week of February 25 , 2002 8701 's total sales stood at 3 @.@ 2 million and it was charted at number eleven on the Billboard 200 . By March 9 , 2010 the album had sold 4 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States , and had received a 4 × platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 The album debuted atop the Canadian Albums Chart , and spent three weeks on the chart . It topped the UK Albums Chart on the week ending August 21 , 2001 , and remained on it for forty @-@ seven weeks before dropping out . The album was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . On the Australian Albums Chart , 8701 peaked at number seven , and remained on the chart for forty @-@ three weeks . It was certified 2 × platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . The album debuted in the top five on the Danish Albums Chart and Belgium Albums Chart ( Wallonia ) . It debuted in the top ten in several countries , including New Zealand , The Netherlands , Switzerland and Norway . By November 2010 , the album had sold over 8 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 ( * ) Denotes co @-@ producer . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for 8701 adapted from Allmusic . 
 David Ashton – assistant engineer 
 Babyface – guest artist 
 Dave Barry – guest artist 
 Bryan @-@ Michael Cox – instrumentation , producer 
 Jermaine Dupri – guest artist 
 Kevon Edmonds – guest artist 
 Brian Garten – engineer 
 Kevin Guarnieri – assistant engineer , engineer 
 Jimmy Jam – guest artist 
 Kelis – guest artist 
 Terry Lewis – guest artist 
 Puff Daddy – performer , primary artist , featured artist , guest artist 
 David Rideau – engineer 
 Usher – primary artist , vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Armenian Quarter = 
 The Armenian Quarter ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> , Harat al @-@ Arman ; Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , Ha @-@ Rova ha @-@ Armeni ; Armenian : <unk> <unk> , Hayots t <unk> ( traditionally ) ; currently mostly known as <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> t <unk> ) is one of the four quarters of the walled Old City of Jerusalem . Located in the southwestern corner of the Old City , it can be accessed through the Zion Gate and Jaffa Gate . It occupies an area of 0 @.@ 126 km ² ( 126 dunam ) , which is 14 % of the Old City 's total . In 2007 , it had a population of 2 @,@ 424 ( 6 @.@ 55 % of Old City 's total ) . In both criteria , it is comparable to the Jewish Quarter . The Armenian Quarter is separated from the Christian Quarter by David Street ( Suq el @-@ Bazaar ) and by <unk> Street ( Suq el @-@ <unk> ) from the Jewish Quarter . 
 The Armenian presence in Jerusalem dates back to the fourth century AD when Armenia adopted Christianity as a national religion and Armenian monks settled in Jerusalem . It is thus considered the oldest living diaspora community outside the Armenian homeland . The quarter developed gradually around the St. James Monastery — which dominates the quarter — and took its modern shape by the 19th century . The monastery houses the Armenian Apostolic Church 's Jerusalem Patriarchate , which was established as a diocese in the seventh century . The patriarchate is the de facto administrator of the quarter and acts as a " mini @-@ welfare state " for the Armenian residents . The Armenian community has been in decline since the mid @-@ 20th century and according to Bert Vaux , is in immediate danger of disappearing . 
 Although formally separate from Greek Orthodox and Latin ( Catholic ) Christians , the Armenians consider their quarter to be part of the Christian Quarter . The three Christian patriarchates of Jerusalem and the government of Armenia have publicly expressed their opposition to any political division of the two quarters . The central reasons for the existence of a separate Armenian Quarter is the <unk> and distinct language and culture of the Armenians , who , unlike the majority of Christians in Jerusalem ( also in Israel and Palestine ) , are neither Arab nor Palestinian . However , for all intents and purposes , the Armenians living in the Armenian Quarter are considered Palestinians by Israel and the United Nations ( UN ) . They have faced many of the same restrictions on their lives as have the Palestinians . 
 = = Location and borders = = 
 The Armenian Quarter is located in the southwestern corner of Jerusalem 's Old City . The quarter can be accessed through the Zion Gate and Jaffa Gate . According to a 2007 study published by the International Peace and Cooperation Center the quarter occupies an area of 0 @.@ 126 km ² ( 126 dunam ) , which is 14 % of the Old City 's total . The Armenian Quarter is formally separated from the Christian Quarter by David Street ( Suq el @-@ Bazaar ) and by <unk> Street ( Suq el @-@ <unk> ) from the Jewish Quarter . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In the early fourth century Armenia , under king Tiridates III , became the first country to adopt Christianity as a state religion . A large number of Armenian monks are recorded to have settled in Jerusalem as early as the fourth century , after the uncovering of Christian holy places in the city . However , the first written records are from the fifth century . Jerusalem is thus considered the oldest living diaspora community outside the Armenian homeland . Armenian churches were constructed during that period , including the St. James Monastery . The latter was last expanded in the mid @-@ 12th century . An Armenian scriptorium was in operation by the mid @-@ fifth century . A secular community composed of merchants and artisans was established in the sixth century in the Zion Quarter , where an Armenian street existed ( Ruda <unk> ) . 
 = = = Byzantine , Arab , and Mamluk periods = = = 
 In the First Council of Dvin ( 506 ) , the Armenian Church broke off from the rest of Christianity by rejecting the dual nature of Christ , which was agreed upon in the Council of Chalcedon of 451 . Thus the Armenians found themselves in direct confrontation with the Byzantine Empire . Emperor Justinian I persecuted the Monophysite Armenians , forcing them to leave Jerusalem . 
 A seventh @-@ century Armenian chronicler mentioned the existence of seventy Armenian monasteries in Palestine , some of which have been revealed in excavations . The Byzantines ceded Jerusalem to the Rashidun Caliphate after a siege in 637 . Until this point , Jerusalem had a single Christian bishop . In 638 , Armenians established their own archbishop , Abraham I. He was officially recognized by Rashidun Caliph Umar . The foundation of the Armenian migration to Jerusalem thus solidified . In the 12th century , around one thousand Armenians moved to Jerusalem with the Crusaders , presumably mainly from the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia . 
 In 1311 , during Mamluk rule , Archbishop Sarkis ( 1281 – 1313 ) assumed the title of patriarch according to a decree by Sultan al @-@ Nasir Muhammad . In the 1340s , the Armenians were permitted to build a wall around their quarter . This signified that the Mamluk rulers felt that the quarter did not pose a threat . Destroying city walls and fortifications had been a staple of Mamluk governance in order to prevent the Crusaders from returning and reestablishing their rule . The Mamluk government also engraved the following declaration in Arabic on the western entrance to the quarter : 
 The order of our master Sultan Jaqmaq [ has been issued ] which stipulates that the taxes levied [ <unk> ] recently by the town governor ( ? ) regarding the payment by the Armenian enclosure [ <unk> <unk> ] be cancelled , ... and it has been requested that this cancellation be recorded in the Honored Books in the year 854 of the Hijra ( 1451 C.E. ) . Anyone who renews the payment or again takes any tax of extortion is damned , son of the damned , and the curse of Allah will be upon him . 
 Jerusalemite historian Mujir al @-@ Din provided a detailed description of pre @-@ Ottoman Jerusalem in 1495 in which he mentioned Dir el @-@ Arman ( Monastery of the Armenians ) or <unk> Mar Ya 'qub ( St. James Cathedral ) . 
 = = = Ottoman period = = = 
 During Ottoman rule , Jerusalem developed into a cosmopolitan city . There was religious tolerance and an Ottoman administration existed to sort out religious differences between the rival Christian churches and Muslims . Israeli historians Kark and Oren @-@ Nordheim wrote in 2001 : " The Armenian Quarter , although Christian , represented a distinct ethnic group with its particular language and culture , intent on retaining separate identity and unity , minimizing the contacts with Arabs and the Ottoman authorities for fear of persecution . " However , the Armenian community in Jerusalem was Arabic @-@ speaking ( in addition to Armenian or European languages ) and self @-@ identified with Palestinian society . 
 In 1538 , the current walls of Jerusalem were completed on the orders of Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent . These walls , along with the internal walls built by the Armenians , determined the outline of the quarter . In the 1562 – 63 record , only 189 Armenians were counted , whereas 640 were counted by the Ottomans in 1690 , an increase of 239 % . According to the chronicler Simeon <unk> only some twelve Armenian families lived in Jerusalem in 1615 – 16 . The significant increase in the population in 1690 is attributed to urbanization experienced by the Armenians and other Christians . Thus Armenians came to make up 22 @.@ 9 % of Jerusalem 's Christians by 1690 , becoming the second largest Christian community . 
 In the 19th century , most of the Armenian and Christian quarters had " European @-@ style gable roofs " as opposed to the domes preferred in the Muslim and Jewish quarters . In 1833 the Armenians established the city 's first printing press . A seminary was opened in 1857 . In 1855 the first photographic workshop in Jerusalem was founded in the Armenian Quarter . Schools for boys ( 1840 ) and girls ( 1862 ) were united in 1869 under the name Holy Translators ' School and became the first coeducational school in Jerusalem . 
 In 1883 , 102 Armenian families ( 8 % ) constituted the third largest Christian community in the Old City after the Greek Orthodox and Catholic ( Latin ) communities . Besides these residents , in the same year , 46 Armenian priests and monks and 55 servicemen lived within the St. James Monastery . According to the 1905 Ottoman census in the Old City , the Armenian Quarter had a population of 382 , of which Armenians ( 121 ) comprised less than one @-@ third ( 31 @.@ 7 % ) . Jews ( 127 ) made up 33 @.@ 2 % , other Christians ( 94 ) 24 @.@ 6 % and Muslims ( 40 ) 10 @.@ 5 % . The Jews , who numbered a little more than the Armenians , inhabited the eastern part of the Armenian Quarter , which in the second half of the nineteenth century , became the western part of the Jewish Quarter . 
 = = = World War I , British , and Jordanian periods = = = 
 Prior to World War I , there were some 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 Armenians in Palestine , mostly in Jerusalem . Jerusalem was captured by the British in 1917 during the war . Thousands of Armenian Genocide survivors from Cilicia ( Adana Vilayet ) found refuge in the quarter from 1915 and onward . In 1925 , around 15 @,@ 000 Armenians are believed to have lived in all of Palestine , with the majority in Jerusalem . During the British Mandate period , the number of Armenians is estimated to have reached up to 20 @,@ 000 . However , the 1931 British census showed only 3 @,@ 524 Armenians in all of Palestine . 
 In 1947 , around 1 @,@ 500 Armenians from Palestine repatriated to Soviet Armenia as part of the Soviet government 's efforts to boost Armenia 's population by a large @-@ scale repatriation of ethnic Armenians , mostly from the Middle East . This marked the beginning of the long @-@ term decline of the Armenian community of Jerusalem . During the 1948 Arab – Israeli War , the Armenian Quarter was damaged by bombs . It housed many Armenians from around Palestine . An Armenian civil guard , armed with what Der <unk> describes as " makeshift weapons " , was formed to defend the quarter . Over 40 Armenians died during the war . 
 = = = Israeli period = = = 
 Jerusalem 's Old City came under Israeli control in the aftermath of the Six @-@ Day War in 1967 . However , the Armenian patriarchate is the de facto administrator of the quarter and acts as a " mini @-@ welfare state " for the Armenian residents . The Arab @-@ Israeli conflict significantly impacted the quarter 's politically uninvolved Armenian population . A 1992 article published by the Catholic Near East Welfare Association stated that " Armenians in Jerusalem try to maintain good relations with Arabs and Israelis , but they do not deny that their community has been affected by tensions in the city . " 
 = = = = Issues = = = = 
 A major obstacle for the Armenians residing in the Armenian Quarter is their Jordanian citizenship ( from before 1967 ) , because of which the Israeli government considers them " permanent residents " — the same status as Palestinians . The Jerusalem Post wrote in 2005 that the Israeli bureaucracy " considers Jerusalem Armenians to be Palestinians , which means endless delays in getting documents , and hassles at the airport . " A map published by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ( OCHA ) in November 2015 indicated the Armenian Quarter in the color reserved for Palestinian communities . According to Armenian researcher Tamar <unk> , because Armenians are considered Palestinians for all legal purposes they have difficulty obtaining travel and marriage documents . Graham Usher , a Palestine @-@ based foreign correspondent of several Western newspapers , wrote in 2000 in a publication of the Beirut @-@ based Institute for Palestine Studies that the Armenians " were burdened with the status of being Palestinian ' residents ' but ethnically Armenian . And indeed their lives , properties and heritage have been bound by the same Israeli constraints as their Palestinian compatriots . " The Economist also wrote in 2000 that Armenians have faced restrictions on their lives similar to those imposed on the Palestinians , such as prevention of construction of new buildings in the Armenian Quarter . The limited space in the overpopulated district makes housing expensive and according to <unk> , " Most Armenians , given their current income , simply cannot afford to maintain their primary residence there . " 
 = = = = Jewish settlement = = = = 
 During the Jordanian occupation of the eastern Jerusalem ( 1948 @-@ 1967 ) , no Jews were allowed to live in the Old City . Since the start of Israeli occupation of the Old City in 1967 , the Jewish Quarter has expanded by some 40 % and by 2000 , 71 ( 12 % ) or 81 ( 14 % ) of the 581 properties in the Armenian Quarter were owned by Jews . The Armenian community is concerned that the Jewish Quarter " will expand as the number of Jews in the Old City continues to grow while the Armenian population withers . " The location of the Armenian Quarter <unk> the main access roads between the Israeli @-@ controlled West Jerusalem and the holy sites within the Jewish Quarter and the Western Wall has made Armenian properties a prime real estate in Israeli eyes . According to Reuters , the Armenian Patriarchate " share [ s ] a view held by the mostly Muslim Palestinians — that Israel 's designation of the whole city as capital of the Jewish state means its control of residence and building permits is being used to press Arabs and other non @-@ Jews to give up and leave . " Israeli sovereignty over the Armenian Quarter would be , according to Usher , the " worst future imaginable " for the Armenian community . Members of Jerusalem 's Armenian community have voiced concerns about the Israeli government 's policies and commitment to preserving their community 's presence in the Old City . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Writing in 2000 , Graham Usher estimated that the Armenian Quarter had a population of 1 @,@ 200 . According to a 2007 study , the quarter housed 2 @,@ 424 people ( 6 @.@ 55 % of Old City 's total ) . 
 = = = Armenian population = = = 
 = = = = Decline = = = = 
 Armenians began emigrating from Jerusalem 's Old City in the mid @-@ 20th century , since the 1948 Arab – Israeli War due to being in the middle of the conflict between Arabs and Jews , and what Daphne <unk> characterized as " their feeling of loneliness " . The lack of a longstanding political solution to the Israeli – Palestinian conflict for Jerusalem has been cited as the main cause of the decrease in the number of Armenians in the Old City , which fell by almost half from 1 @,@ 598 in 1967 to 790 in 2006 . Meanwhile , the Muslim population increased from 16 @,@ 681 to 27 @,@ 500 and the Jewish population from 0 ( after their expulsion under Jordanian occupation ) to 3 @,@ 089 . The exodus of the Armenians <unk> following the breakout of the First Intifada in 1987 . According to <unk> <unk> , the honorary Armenian consul in Jerusalem , as of 2009 around 600 Armenians lived in the Armenian Quarter ( out of the total 2 @,@ 000 Armenians in all of Jerusalem ) . Two articles , published in 2010 and 2011 , put the number of Armenians in the Armenian Quarter as low as 500 . 
 Despite the drastic decline in the number of Armenians , Israeli scholar Daphne <unk> wrote in 1983 that " the existence of their church headquarters in Jerusalem provides for the continued presence of some clergy and a certain number of laity . " On the contrary , American linguist Bert Vaux argued in 2002 that the Armenian community of Jerusalem is " in immediate danger of disappearing — the wealthy move into other parts of Jerusalem , and the closed environment in the Armenian Quarter spurs many to move to Beirut or the West . " Armenian author Matthew <unk> wrote about the Armenian community of Jerusalem in 2010 as follows : 
 The survival of the community is today in peril . The population is dwindling . ... If the Old City were divided up today , the Armenians might barely command one street . They certainly would not lay claim to an entire Quarter , as they have for centuries . 
 = = = = Subgroups = = = = 
 <unk> identifies three groups subgroups of Armenians living within the Armenian Quarter The first group includes monks and clergymen ( around 50 ) , who live within the monastery . Lay people are divided into two groups : those living within the monastery compound , and those living in the Armenian Quarter , but outside of the monastery walls . Around two @-@ thirds of lay persons reside within the monastery walls . Locally known as <unk> ( <unk> , lit . " those from the convent " ) , they number up to 700 people . They do not pay rent ( or pay symbolic amount ) to the patriarchate . Those living outside of the monastery walls are called <unk> ( <unk> , lit . " city @-@ dwellers " ) . Their ancestry goes back centuries . They only pay municipal taxes . 
 Bert Vaux identifies two subgroups of Armenians : 
 k ‘ ałak ‘ ac ‘ is ( " citizens " or " city dwellers " ) are the indigenous Armenian @-@ speaking inhabitants of the quarter . They live outside the monastery walls , and attend the Church of the Holy Archangels ( <unk> ) . 
 k ‘ <unk> ‘ <unk> ( " [ im ] migrants " ) are ancestors of Armenians from various parts of the Ottoman Empire who moved to Jerusalem following the 1915 genocide . They attend services at the cathedral of St. James . According to Vaux , " In the period immediately after their arrival they were referred to by the k ‘ ałak ‘ ac ‘ is as <unk> , the Arabic word for ‘ visitors ’ . The k ‘ <unk> ‘ <unk> in turn are reported to have labelled the k ‘ ałak ‘ ac ‘ is as p ‘ is arab ‘ dirty Arab ’ . The two groups each remained wary of the other for some time , and in fact did not intermarry on a significant scale until after World War II . Relations subsequently improved . " 
 = = = = Language = = = = 
 The Armenian dialect spoken in Jerusalem is highly distinctive , because it was geographically relatively isolated from the rest of the Armenian @-@ speaking world . Arabic has a significant influence on it , while Hebrew has little to none , having been introduced to the region in the 20th century . Those Armenians whose ancestors came from Turkey following the 1915 genocide speak Turkish @-@ influenced Western Armenian . 
 = = Landmarks and institutions = = 
 = = = Armenian = = = 
 = = = = Religious = = = = 
 Cathedral of St. James ( Սուրբ <unk> վանք , Surb <unk> vank ) is thought to have been founded in the 4th century , but the current structure dates to the 12th century . 
 St. Toros Church ( Սուրբ <unk> եկեղեցի , Surb T <unk> <unk> ) . According to local tradition , the church was built between 1270 and 1289 by Hethum I , the Armenian King of Cilicia in memory of his son , Toros , who was killed in a battle . The church was renovated to its current state in 1727 . 
 Church of the Holy Archangels ( Սրբոց <unk> եկեղեցի , Srbots <unk> <unk> ; Deir Al Zeitoun ) was founded in the 12th century probably on the ruins of an ancient church in the 4th century . 
 = = = = Educational = = = = 
 The Alex and Marie Manoogian Seminary was founded in 1975 through financing of Armenian @-@ American businessman and philanthropist Alex Manoogian . 
 Sts . Holy Translators ' School ( Սրբոց <unk> <unk> , Srbots t <unk> <unk> ) contains a kindergarten , elementary and secondary schools with a total of around 150 students ( as of 2000 ) . 
 = = = = Cultural = = = = 
 The St. James Press ( <unk> Սրբոց <unk> , <unk> Srbots <unk> ) was founded in 1833 . 
 Helen and Edward <unk> Museum of Armenian Art and Culture was opened in 1969 . Its exhibits consist of historical and religious artifacts , such as rugs , coins , copper cauldrons , ceramic tiles , a map , a replica of Johannes Gutenberg 's printing press , etc . 
 Calouste Gulbenkian Library , founded in 1925 through financing of British @-@ Armenian businessman and philanthropist Calouste Gulbenkian , for whom it is named . Officially opened on 23 October 1932 , it is considered " one of the world 's most comprehensive Armenian intellectual resource centers " with its 100 @,@ 000 book collection . On its opening day , it contained 25 @,@ 037 volumes ( 14 @,@ 518 in Armenian and 11 @,@ 519 in other languages ) . Three decades later , in 1963 , the number reached around 50 @,@ 000 . 
 St. Toros Manuscript Library , founded in 1897 , holds 3 @,@ 890 inventoried and cataloged Armenian manuscripts , making it the second largest in the world , after the Matenadaran in Yerevan , Armenia . In 1931 , the number of cataloged manuscripts stood at 2 @,@ 720 . 
 = = = = Other = = = = 
 Armenian Garden 
 = = = Other ( non @-@ Armenian ) = = = 
 Churches 
 The Syriac Orthodox St. Mark 's Monastery is located on Ararat St. The Assyrians / <unk> share the Armenians 's <unk> and " hence tended to prefer to live under the ' umbrella ' of the larger and stronger Armenian community . " 
 The Greek Orthodox Church of Saint George 
 Christ Church , a 19th @-@ century Anglican church 
 The Maronite Church ( also known as St. <unk> 's House ) , the only Maronite place of worship in Jerusalem 
 Other 
 Tower of David ( Citadel ) 
 = = Political status and views = = 
 The international community , namely the United Nations General Assembly , considers East Jerusalem of which the Old City is part , to be " Occupied Palestinian Territory " . 
 = = = Armenian views = = = 
 The " quiet political consensus " among the Armenians of Jerusalem , according to The Economist , is that the Old City should be " neither Palestinian nor Israeli but rather an international ' space ' , governed by representatives of the three faiths ... and protected by the United Nations and other international bodies . " According to Graham Usher , many Armenians cautiously identify with the Palestinian struggle , but few of them " would advocate exclusive Palestinian sovereignty over the Old City . " Furthermore , Armenians consider the Armenian Quarter to be part of the Christian Quarter . This stance was reaffirmed by Armenia 's Foreign Minister Vartan <unk> , who in late 2000 stated that Armenia was against the separation of the Armenian and Christian Quarters . 
 = = = U.S. Old City division proposal = = = 
 At the 2000 Camp David Summit , U.S. President Bill Clinton proposed the division of the Old City , according to which the Armenian Quarter would be put under de jure Israeli sovereignty along with the Jewish Quarter , while the Palestinians would be granted a " certain degree of sovereignty " over the Christian and Muslim Quarters . Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak conditionally embraced the proposal . 
 = = = Palestinian views = = = 
 Palestinian leaders have publicly declared that they consider the Armenian Quarter to be a part of Palestine and will not relinquish it to Israel . Yasser Arafat , rejected the US proposal at the 2000 Camp David Summit for the Old City 's division and stated : " The Armenian quarter belongs to us . We and Armenians are one people . " He told Clinton , " My name is not Yasir Arafat , it is Yasir <unk> , " making his name sound Armenian . " I will not betray my Armenian brothers , " Arafat said about leaving the Armenian Quarter under Israeli rule . Commenting on his statements , historians Barry Rubin and Judith <unk> Rubin wrote that " there was no reason to believe that the Armenians preferred his control [ over Israeli control ] . " 
 In a 2011 , meeting with leaders of various Christian communities in Ramallah Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas stated : " The Palestinian leadership sticks to its position that considers the Armenian Quarter an integral part of east Jerusalem , the capital of the independent Palestinian state . " 
 According to the Palestine Papers , leaked by Al Jazeera in 2011 , chief Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat proposed a geographical division of the Old City at an October 2009 meeting , according to which Israel would acquire sovereignty over the entire Jewish Quarter and " part of the Armenian Quarter . " 
 = = = Israeli and Jewish views = = = 
 Israel maintains that all of Jerusalem ( " complete and united " ) , including the Old City , is its capital according to the 1980 Jerusalem Law . 
 In a 1975 article , Rabbi Yakov Goldman called for Israeli sovereignty over all of Old Jerusalem and wrote of the Armenian Quarter in particular : 
 In the Armenian Quarter only one sector is actually occupied by the Armenian compound . The Armenian compound has a wall around it enclosing the big cathedral and its adjoining buildings . The rest of the quarter had to have a name . It wasn 't Jewish , it wasn 't Moslem , it wasn 't Christian . So they applied to this section the name of its neighbor Armenian — simply a convenient fiction . 
 = = = Christian views = = = 
 The Armenian , Greek Orthodox and Latin Patriarchs of Jerusalem sent a " strongly worded " letter to the negotiators at the 2000 Camp David Summit , stating : " We regard the Christian and Armenian Quarters of the Old City as inseparable and contiguous entities that are firmly united by the same faith . " 
 Pope Benedict XVI , during his 2009 visit to St. James Cathedral , stated : 
 From the first Christian centuries , the Armenian community in Jerusalem has had an illustrious history , marked not least by an extraordinary flourishing of monastic life and culture linked to the holy places and the liturgical traditions which developed around them . This venerable Cathedral Church , together with the Patriarchate and the various educational and cultural institutions attached to it , testifies to that long and distinguished history . 
 = Lynn Hill = 
 <unk> Marie " Lynn " Hill ( born January 3 , 1961 ) is an American rock climber . Widely regarded as one of the leading competitive sport climbers in the world during the late 1980s and early 1990s , she is famous for making the first free ascent of the difficult sheer rock face of The Nose on El Capitan in Yosemite Valley , and for repeating it the next year in less than 24 hours . She has been described as both one of the best female climbers in the world and one of the best climbers of all time . One of the first successful women in the sport , Hill shaped rock climbing for women and became a public spokesperson , helping it gain wider popularity and arguing for gender equality . Hill has publicized climbing by appearing on television shows and documentaries and writing an autobiography , Climbing Free : My Life in the Vertical World . 
 Hill was a gymnast early in life , nearly broke a world record lifting weights , and ran competitively . She took to climbing at a young age , showing a natural aptitude for the activity , and became a part of the climbing community in Southern California and Camp 4 in Yosemite Valley . She traveled around the United States during the early 1980s climbing increasingly difficult routes and setting records for first female ascents and for first ascents . From 1986 to 1992 Hill was one of the world 's most accomplished sport climbers , winning over thirty international titles , including five victories at the Arco Rock Master . This coincided with the era when the leading female climbers caught up with the leading men . In 1992 , Hill left competitive climbing and returned to her first love : traditional climbing . She set for herself the challenge of free climbing The Nose of El Capitan , her greatest climbing feat . Hill continues to climb and has not stopped taking on ambitious climbs . As of 2013 , she was a sponsored athlete for the Patagonia gear and clothing company and owned a small business that offered climbing courses . 
 = = Early years = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Born in Detroit , Michigan , Hill grew up in Fullerton , California . She is the fifth of seven children ; her mother was a dental hygienist and her father an aerospace engineer . She was an active child who climbed everything from trees to street lights . Starting at age eight , she learned gymnastics but disliked the way girls " had to smile and do cutesy little routines on the floor " . Thus , even though she was part of a successful YMCA gymnastics team that competed in southern California and performed in halftime shows for the California Angels , she quit at the age of 12 . In her autobiography , Hill describes feeling " resistant to rules " , an attitude she identified as both normal for her age and influenced by the era in which she grew up : " My awareness of issues like women 's rights and the struggle for racial freedom began to grow " . She even questioned the chores assigned in her family , noting the differences between the boys and girls — the boys had weekly tasks while the girls had daily tasks . During high school , Hill took up gymnastics again and became one of the top gymnasts in her state , a skill that eventually contributed to her climbing success . In particular , the ability to conceptualize a series of complex movements as small , distinct ones and to thrive under pressure gave Hill a significant edge . 
 = = = Introduction to climbing = = = 
 In 1975 , her sister and her sister 's fiancé , Chuck Bludworth , took Hill on her first climbing trip ; she was hooked , leading from the first day . For Hill , this activity became an escape from the emotional turmoil of her parents ' divorce , and " by her late teens she identified less with her imperfect family in Orange County than with an ' imperfect family of friends ' at climbing areas " . Hill took her first trip to Yosemite , a central destination for climbers , at the age of 16 , where she was introduced to the climbers at Camp 4 . There she met Charlie Row , her first boyfriend . Their romance flourished ; with him she climbed her first 5 @.@ 11 and first big wall . 
 As a young teenager , Hill climbed in southern California , primarily in Joshua Tree National Park . She earned money for day trips out to the park by working at a Carl 's Jr . Bludworth initially taught her climbing culture ; he subscribed to magazines and read books which Hill then devoured . She was influenced in particular by Yvon Chouinard 's ethic of " leaving no trace " on the rock . Moreover , the climbing of Beverly Johnson captured her imagination , particularly Johnson 's 10 @-@ day solo of <unk> Wall on El Capitan . As Hill explains in her autobiography , " I was awed , but not just by the know @-@ how and hard work she 'd put into her ascent . It was the courage and confidence that it took to put herself on the line , to do something on the cutting edge — to climb one of the world 's greatest big walls in one of the most challenging ways possible : solo . She had succeeded and she 'd given women climbers like me enormous confidence to be ourselves and not feel limited by being a minority in a male @-@ dominated sport . " 
 Hill attended Fullerton College in the late 1970s , but she did not have a strong interest in any academic subject ; instead she was focused on climbing . In the summers of 1976 – 78 and the early 1980s Hill frequently camped at Camp 4 in Yosemite Valley , becoming part of the climbing community centered there and joining the search and rescue team . In her autobiography , Hill describes the community as " a ragged occupying army , annoying park rangers by eluding camp fees , overstaying their welcome , and <unk> themselves like gypsies " . As Hill describes it , climbing in the late 1970s and early 1980s was " something that people who were outcasts in society did , people who were not conformists " . As she had earlier , Hill worked in order to be able to climb . One summer , she writes , she survived in Camp 4 on only $ 75 . In her autobiography , she describes how climbers eked out a life at the camp , recycling cans to pay for climbing ropes and subsisting on condiments and left @-@ over food from tourists . However , Hill remembers " these dirt @-@ poor days ... [ as ] among the best and the most carefree of my life , and though my friends were often scoundrels , I felt their friendship convincingly . " 
 Beverly Johnson had previously started to bridge the gender gap at Camp 4 , but it remained strongly male @-@ dominated . The community was particularly homosocial ; its major historian calls it " edgy " rather than " oppressive " and argues that there was pressure on women to perform to men 's standards and that " women had to contend with an army of men trying to maintain Camp 4 as a guy 's domain " . There was no coherent female climbing community ; rather , female climbers tended to adopt the masculine attitudes of their compatriots . In her autobiography , Hill writes that climbing " back then was directed by a fraternity of men , and there was little encouragement of , or frankly , inclination for women to participate . Yet women climbers were out there . " For example , from age 18 to 22 , Hill climbed with Mari <unk> every weekend , completing an ascent of The Nose and then the first female @-@ only ascent of The Shield on El Capitan over a period of six days . 
 Hill learned the essence of her climbing technique from the <unk> group during this time . She adopted the attitudes of traditional climbing , a style of climbing which emphasizes using removable protection rather than bolts ( which scar the rock ) and rewards climbers who climb a new route from bottom to top without stopping or starting over . She also became a dedicated free climber , which emphasizes climbing an entire route without hanging on the rope or relying on equipment to skip difficult sections . Early on she was a fearless climber but after " a few death @-@ defying experiences on routes with long run @-@ outs " she learned to be wary of falling . 
 Hill climbed with and became involved with climber John Long at the end of the 1970s . Their relationship began in the summer of 1978 when she heard him recite a poem he had written about a female climber and what kind of man she <unk> and Long climbed together and worked out together , lifting weights and running . It was at his suggestion that she attempted to break the world record for the bench press in her weight class ( 105 pounds ( 48 kg ) ) ; however , while she could easily lift 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) while training , in competition she froze . Hill and Long spent the winter of 1981 in Las Vegas , Nevada climbing during the day and working nights at " dead end jobs " like pizza waitress . 
 The following year Hill and Long moved from Las Vegas to Santa Monica , California where she attended Santa Monica College ( SMC ) and majored in biology . She was recruited by the track coach even though she had no competitive running experience . After training for a few months , she placed third in the 1500 meters and fourth in the 3000 meters at the state meet , helping SMC to win the state championship . To make ends meet , she worked at an outdoor store , as a gym teacher , and occasionally appeared on daredevil television shows . 
 In 1983 , Hill was interviewed by <unk> . They offered her a free flight to New York for the interview and as part of the trip she was taken to the Shawangunks , a famous nearby climbing area . Finding she liked the climbing environment and yearning for some new challenges , she decided to stay and moved to New Paltz , New York . At the same time , Long was preparing for a journey to Borneo and embarking on a career as a writer . The couple went their separate ways but remained friends . After moving to New York , Hill attended the State University of New York at New Paltz and graduated with a degree in biology in 1985 . 
 = = Climbing career = = 
 Hill started to participate in climbing competitions in the mid @-@ 1980s , but one of her first significant accomplishments was in 1979 . She became the first person to free climb Ophir Broke in Ophir , Colorado , which has a difficulty rating of 5.12d and was the hardest route ever climbed by a woman at that time . It was the hardest crack climb in Colorado at the time and there were only one or two harder ones in Yosemite . Long was amazed by her feat . He has said " that 's when I knew for certain that this woman had extraordinary talent " . The regional guidebook credits Long with the first free ascent of the route ; Hill speculates the reason for this is that at the time she was an unknown climber and known only as Long 's partner and protege . In her autobiography , Hill explains that it was during this climb that she realized it is not a person 's size or strength but ability to be creative on the rock that is important : " The big lesson for me ... was to realize that despite what appeared to be a limitation due to my small stature , I could create my own method of getting past a difficult section of rock . John 's size and power enabled him to make long reaches and explosive lunge moves that were completely out of my range . I , on the other hand , often found small intermediate holds that John couldn 't even imagine gripping ... Short or tall , man or woman , the rock is an objective medium that is equally open for interpretation by all . " 
 Living near the Shawangunks during her college years , Hill pioneered many new free climbing routes . In 1984 at The Gunks she performed an on @-@ sight first ascent of Yellow Crack ( 5.12c ) and Vandals ( 5.13a ) ; Vandals was the most difficult route on the East Coast at the time and the area 's first climb of its grade . Her lead of Yellow Crack was a very dangerous ascent , her climbing partner at the time Russ <unk> calling it " one of the boldest leads I 've ever seen ... I had tried leading it . I knew you had to totally commit to doing the moves , otherwise the chance of surviving would be minimal . Those are the moments that really stand out — when you see someone totally on the edge . " It was her climb of Vandals that led Hill to reconsider her climbing style ; rather than begin the climb again every time she fell or leaned on the rope for support , she hung on the rope in her harness to gain more information about the climb . As she writes in her autobiography , " In one moment I had , to some degree , thrown out years of climbing philosophy ... The subtle advantage of hanging on the rope to figure out the crux moves gave me the added information that helped me learn and eventually succeed on the route . The old style of climbing suddenly seemed rigid , limited , and contrived . " That year , she performed a series of impressive feats , leading Tourist Treat on @-@ sight with only one fall , " perhaps the most difficult first ascent in the north country at the time " . She was arguably " the best climber in the Gunks " , as local climbing legend Kevin Bein called her , and " no man was climbing significantly better " than her . 
 = = = Competitive career = = = 
 As a result of Hill 's impressive climbs in The Gunks , she was invited to climb in Europe in 1986 . The French Alpine Club invited a group of elite American climbers to climb in the Verdon Gorge , Fontainebleau , and <unk> . Hill felt an immediate affinity for French culture and climbing . She particularly enjoyed climbing on the limestone common in France because it has many pockets and edges , producing " wildly acrobatic climbs " with low risk . Moreover , these types of climbs are ideal for people of small stature , like Hill . She tried sport climbing in France for the first time that year . Inspired and intrigued by European climbing culture , she returned later and took part in Arco e <unk> <unk> ' 86 , the second edition of the first international sport climbing competition , which later became the Rock Master annual event . The event was divided into two stages , one in Arco and one in <unk> , Italy . She competed against other women on extremely difficult routes , gaining points for style and speed . She lost to Catherine Destivelle in a " disputed ruling " but won in the following year . Destivelle in her autobiography , reckons she won that year because she planned to climb fast from the beginning , as speed was decisive in case of equality , which she doubts Hill was aware of when starting the competition . In an interview , Hill has said that this first competition was " disorienting " because she did not understand the language , the " format " or the " judging " nor did the organizers of the competition . " There were a lot of politics involved , a lot of nationalism and disorganization . The rules seemed to change during the event . I remember asking about the disparity between prize money for men and women . The only response I got was , ' If the women climb without their tops , then we 'll pay them the same . ' " However , she continued with competition climbing because she found it stimulating to climb with " other strong women " . In one interview , Hill said that " if there wasn 't a Catherine Destivelle or Luisa <unk> ... or whoever there , then it would be anticlimactic . " Destivelle became Hill 's main competition in the late 1980s while Isabelle Patissier emerged to challenge her in the early 1990s . 
 She became a professional climber in 1988 and the subsequent interviews , photoshoots and media appearances led to her becoming a spokesperson for climbing . As Hill explained , competition climbing is " such a different activity than going out and climbing on rock ... You 're in front of all these people ... You 're there to perform . " From the beginning of her sport climbing career , Hill was aware that the sport was evolving and growing . For example , she pointed out in an interview that some competition organizers would chop down trees and alter rocks just for the sake of a competition ; she could foresee that competitions would all eventually take place on artificial walls for environmental reasons . 
 Throughout the early 1980s , Hill had remained a traditionalist , but after her 1986 trip to Europe , she started adopting many sport climbing techniques . For instance , she had resisted hang @-@ <unk> ( hanging on the rope at any point during the climb ) , holding with the philosophy that it was cheating , but after experimenting with it during her ascent of Vandals , she found it a useful way to learn challenging climbs . During the mid @-@ 1980s , there was great tension in the climbing community between traditionalists and new sport climbers . There was even a " Great Debate " in 1986 at the American Alpine Club at which a panel of all @-@ star participants — including Hill — were invited to discuss the merits of the two different styles , especially sport climbing that required the insertion of fixed bolts into the rock . Hill has argued that " the purpose of climbing is to adapt yourself to the rock . You work on yourself to overcome the obstacle of the rock ... I believe climbers should leave the rock as unaltered as possible ... you have a responsibility not only to put in safe bolts but to put them in logical places — to do the least possible alteration of the rock to establish the best possible experience for others " . 
 From 1986 to 1992 Hill was one of the world 's top sport climbers , winning over thirty international titles , including five victories at the Arco Rock Master . This coincided with the era when the leading female climbers caught up with the leading men . In 1990 , at the final stage of the World Cup Final , she was one of three competitors and the only woman to reach the top of the wall — and the only climber to complete the hardest move . As Joseph Taylor writes in his history of climbers of Yosemite , " at that moment Lynn Hill was arguably the best climber in the world , male or female " . Hill describes this as her most satisfying win because her competition — Isabelle Patissier — received information on how to do the final climb from the men who had already finished it . Moreover , Hill was starting with zero points in the competition because she had made a mistake in the previous competition , so she had to win big or not at all ( the World Cup consisted of a series of competitions in which the participants were given points for a variety of climbing techniques ) . " It took all of my effort and concentration to pull through the route . The moves I had to make were really spectacular , but I managed to do them . I was so excited to get to the top ... I proved a point about women and what we 're capable of — a lot of the best men had fallen off that route . " As a professional climber , Hill was able during this time to support herself by doing what she loved ; she made approximately half of her income from climbing competitions and half from sponsorships . 
 In January 1990 , Hill set another landmark by becoming the first woman to <unk> a 5 @.@ 14 ( that is , she practiced free climbing the route before she was able to successfully climb it ) , Masse Critique in <unk> , France . J.B. <unk> , who first ascended the route , challenged Hill , saying no woman would ever be able to climb it — Hill completed it in fewer tries than <unk> , after " nine days of exhausting effort " . In 1992 , it was described as the hardest rock climb ever made by a woman . 
 Hill has experienced only one major accident in her climbing career . On May 9 , 1989 , she fell during a climb in <unk> , France ; after forgetting to tie a safety rope , she fell 85 ft ( 25 m ) into a tree , and was knocked unconscious , dislocated her left elbow and broke a bone in her foot . She had been training hard for the World Cup and had to stop competing for a few months to recover ; she was devastated to miss the first World Cup in the sport . However , only six weeks after her fall , she was back climbing . 
 = = = The Nose = = = 
 Hill did not regard sport climbing to be real climbing and felt out of place on the professional indoor climbing World Cup circuit , so she left in 1992 and went back to traditional rock climbing . As she explained in an interview , " the thing I didn 't like too much towards the end was how focused it was on just indoor climbing and training . I didn 't start out training on artificial walls , and that 's not really ever something that I wanted to do as a full @-@ time profession " . In her autobiography , she also comments on the " bad sportsmanship , rule bending , and monumental egos that infested the competitions " . She looked for different challenges and set herself the task of free climbing ( that is , using climbing aids only to protect her from falls ) The Nose , a famous route on El Capitan in Yosemite Valley . 
 Asked why she was motivated to climb The Nose , Hill has said : 
 At the end of my competition career I felt like things were evolving more towards the indoor format and it really wasn 't how I started to climb and it didn 't represent the values of climbing in a complete way and so I decided I would do something like this as a retirement gesture . John Long said ' hey <unk> you should go up and try to free climb The Nose ' . So it just happened to be the perfect goal for me and I liked the fact this climb was in Yosemite because I remember going there and just seeing the valley and it was just mind blowing how beautiful it was . I couldn 't imagine a more beautiful place anywhere in the world . For me The Nose was much bigger than me , it wasn 't about me , it wasn 't about my ego , my gratification it was actually something that I wanted to do . I felt like I had a chance and that if I could do that it would be a really big statement to people to think about . You don 't have to be a man to do something that 's ' out there ' as a first ascent . Obviously people tried to do that route and they failed on it and so if a lot of good climbers have come and tried to do it and failed and a woman comes and does it first it 's really meaningful . That was my underlying motivation . 
 Hill first attempted to free climb the The Nose in 1989 with Simon Nadin , a climber she had met at the World Cup that year . Although he had never climbed big walls , she felt at ease around him and both had a background in traditional climbing ; they both shared a desire to free climb The Nose and agreed within hours of meeting to try the feat together . Their attempt to free climb The Nose failed . Four years later , in 1993 , together with her partner Brooke Sandahl , she became the first person , male or female , to free climb the route . Hill 's original climbing grade for the " Free Nose " was <unk> One of the most difficult pitches — Changing Corners — she rated at a 5.13b / c , but she wrote in her autobiography that " rating the difficulty of such a pitch is almost impossible " and " the most accurate grade would be to call it ' once , or maybe twice , in a lifetime ' " . The rock face is nearly blank and there are next to no holds ; to ascend the section , Hill had to use a " carefully coordinated sequence of opposite pressures between [ her ] feet , hands , elbows , and hips against the shallow walls of the corner " as well as turn her body completely around . 
