 In 1968 , Richard Nixon , the United States Republican Party nominee , won the presidential election , narrowly defeating Democrat Hubert Humphrey by seven @-@ tenths of a percent of the popular vote . Nixon appointed H. R. Haldeman as his Chief of Staff ; this position granted Haldeman a relatively large degree of control over the activities of the presidential administration . Haldeman had first worked for Nixon in 1956 , during Nixon 's successful bid for the vice @-@ presidency under Dwight D. Eisenhower . 
 By 1971 , Nixon 's staff were receiving a cursory intelligence report from Haldeman 's assistant , Gordon C. Strachan ; Strachan 's reports essentially collated information about political rallies and campaign groups that had been already been gathered by the police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Prior to this , Nixon 's initial election bid had already involved the planting of rumours and false information about his opponents as a dedicated strategy ; these tactics had been dubbed " political hardball " by Nixon 's opposition researcher Pat Buchanan . In August of 1971 , Strachan had convinced Jeb Stuart Magruder , a member of the Committee for the Re @-@ Election of the President ( CRP ) — the campaign group for Nixon 's re @-@ election bid — to infiltrate the office of Edmund Muskie . Muskie was a Democratic senator who had been Humphrey 's 1968 vice @-@ presidential candidate , and was a front @-@ runner for his party 's presidential bid for the 1972 campaign . 
 = = Inception = = 
 In late 1971 , John Dean , the White House Counsel , pushed to expand the existing intelligence program ahead of the 1972 re @-@ election campaign . Dean delegated the task to Jack Caulfield , a member of his staff who was a former New York police officer . According to Dean , Caulfield himself was interested in work outside of politics ; he intended to create a private security company , and felt that if the Nixon cabinet were an early client , it would lead to lucrative future clients within the private sector . Fred Emery , a journalist for The Times and BBC , refutes this , claiming in his book Watergate : The Corruption & Fall of Richard Nixon that the idea of a private sector security firm was simply a front for a committed campaign of surveillance working Nixon and the Republican Party , with political donations to the re @-@ election campaign able to be diverted through the company as though they were unrelated transactions . 
 John Ehrlichman , a long @-@ time friend of Haldeman , who had also served as White House Counsel , had been part of the operation 's inception ; at this time he was Nixon 's domestic affairs assistant . Ehrlichman was the one who had initially hired Caulfield in 1969 ; Ehrlichman intended for Caulfield to conduct private investigation while undercover as a private sector employee , it was Caulfield who insisted on working from the White House . Caulfield 's work to this end had already resulted in two wiretaps on phone lines — one on Nixon 's brother Donald , and another on journalist Joseph Kraft . 
 Caulfield prepared a twelve @-@ page draft proposal detailing an intelligence @-@ gathering strategy , aimed at the opposition Democratic Party ; he had worked on this draft for several months and presented it to Nixon 's staff in September of 1971 . The proposal , dubbed " Operation Sandwedge " , called for a budget of $ 500 @,@ 000 , primarily to cover private investigative work and security for the Republican National Convention , however Caulfield intimated privately that it would also include electronic surveillance . 
 = = Planned activities = = 
 The investigations and surveillance would , in part , assess how the anti @-@ Vietnam War movement could damage Nixon 's campaign . Nixon 's staff also anticipated that the Democratic campaign would employ the services of <unk> , a private investigation firm led by former Department of Justice officials who had served under Robert F. Kennedy , a Democrat and former Attorney General . Caulfield noted that this firm had the potential to employ " formidable and sophisticated " intelligence @-@ gathering techniques , and Sandwedge was his attempt to create a Republican counterpart to it . The plan would involve black bag operations , targeting political enemies of the campaign . Electronic surveillance was also an element of the proposal , with plans to scrutinize the private lives of the targets , including their tax records and sexual habits . The Sandwedge proposal also included a list of people willing to work with Caulfield on the project ; these included several investigators and officials of Inland Revenue , and a former sheriff of Cook County , Illinois . 
 Herb Kalmbach , Nixon 's own attorney , transferred $ 50 @,@ 000 to Caulfield at the request of John N. Mitchell . Mitchell had served as Attorney General under Nixon 's first term , and directed the 1972 re @-@ election campaign . Caulfield was also given responsibility for the salary of Tony Ulasewicz , an operative he planned to use for Sandwedge activities . However , Strachan , Dean and other staff members were frustrated at the pace of Caulfield 's development of the project . Strachan directly questioned whether Caulfield was adequately capable for the role in a memo dated from October 1971 , while Haldeman , wishing for a project on a larger scale , pressed Mitchell for an budget of $ 800 @,@ 000 for surveillance and " miscellaneous " activities . 
 During this time , Caulfield recruited James W. McCord , Jr . , a retired CIA officer , to protect the offices of the Republican National Convention and the CRP from electronic bugging . McCord would later be directly employed by CRP from January 1972 . Caulfield also sent Ulasewicz to the campaign offices of Paul McCloskey in New Hampshire . McCloskey was a Republican senator for California , who was running for the party 's presidential nomination against Nixon on a platform opposing the Vietnam War . He was not regarded as a credible threat to Nixon 's campaign , but had made statements calling for Nixon to be impeached . In December 1971 , Ulasewicz masqueraded as a journalist to interview McCloskey 's staff , with Caulfield dubbing the effort a " Sandwedge @-@ engineered penetration " . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 That October , a meeting concerning Sandwedge was arranged between Haldeman , Mitchell , Magruder and Strachan . As a result of this meeting , control of the operation was passed along to G. Gordon Liddy , because Mitchell wished to have a lawyer in charge of the campaign 's intelligence @-@ gathering . Another factor in Caulfield 's removal from the helm was the belief of several White House officials , including Dean , was that Caulfield 's Irish @-@ American , non @-@ college educated background was at odds with " an Administration of WASP professional men " . 
 Liddy built upon the proposals to devise " Operation Gemstone " , a more expansive plan of espionage . Gemstone was an umbrella term for several individual operations , each of which expanded upon elements of the Sandwedge draft or existing CRP activities — Operation Diamond covered breaking up protest demonstrations , Ruby involved undercover infiltration and honeypot traps , Crystal <unk> electronic surveillance and wiretaps , and Sapphire proposed the sabotage of rival political campaigns . Liddy 's initial draft of Operation Gemstone was deemed " too extreme " by campaign officials , but a scaled @-@ down version was later approved in 1972 . Despite Liddy 's restructuring of the project , a request for additional funding for the original Sandwedge proposal was made by Dean in January 1972 , although Mitchell 's rejection of this request signalled the project 's end . 
 Liddy 's revised Gemstone plan included a range of illegal activities , including a proposal to break into Democratic Party offices in the Watergate complex . The Watergate burglaries were initially assumed to have been part of Operation Sandwedge , and the investigation into both the burglaries and the project led to Caulfield 's resignation from his Nixon @-@ appointed position as assistant director of criminal enforcement in the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the wake of the Watergate scandal , 69 people were tried for various crimes , with 48 of these pleading guilty . Among those found guilty for covering up the affair were Haldeman , <unk> , Mitchell , Dean and Magruder , while Liddy was found guilty for his role in the break @-@ ins . All 48 men served time in prison as a result of their convictions . 
 Caulfield has suggested that Sandwedge 's cancellation by the administration was an error in judgement , possibly " the most monumental of the Nixon Presidency " . He believed that , if had Sandwedge been adopted as the campaign 's strategy , " there would have been no Liddy , no Hunt , no McCord " , and the subsequent Watergate scandal would not have occurred . Speaking of the initial proposal , Dean defended its merits , stating that " Caulfield , not the plan itself , had killed Sandwedge " . 
 = William de St @-@ Calais = 
 William de St @-@ Calais ( also Calais or <unk> or <unk> ; died 1096 ) was a medieval Norman monk , abbot of the abbey of Saint @-@ Vincent in Le Mans in Maine , who was nominated by King William I of England as Bishop of Durham in 1080 . During his term as bishop , St @-@ Calais replaced the canons of his cathedral chapter with monks , and began the construction of Durham Cathedral . In addition to his ecclesiastical duties , he served as a commissioner for the Domesday Book . He was also a councilor and advisor to both King William I and his son , King William II , known as William Rufus . Following William Rufus ' accession to the throne in 1087 , St @-@ Calais is considered by scholars to have been the new king 's chief advisor . 
 However , when the king 's uncle , Odo of Bayeux , raised a rebellion against the king in 1088 , St @-@ Calais was implicated in the revolt . William Rufus laid siege to St @-@ Calais in the bishop 's stronghold of Durham , and later put him on trial for treason . A contemporary record of this trial , the De Iniusta Vexacione Willelmi Episcopi Primi , is the earliest surviving detailed contemporary report of an English state @-@ trial . Imprisoned briefly , St @-@ Calais was allowed to go into exile after his castle at Durham was surrendered to the king . He went to Normandy , where he became a leading advisor to Robert Curthose , Duke of Normandy , the elder brother of William Rufus . By 1091 , St @-@ Calais had returned to England and regained royal favour . 
 In England , St @-@ Calais once more became a leading advisor to the king . In 1093 he negotiated with Anselm , Abbot of Bec , concerning Anselm 's becoming Archbishop of Canterbury ; in 1095 it was St @-@ Calais who prosecuted the royal case against Anselm after he had become archbishop . During his bishopric , St @-@ Calais stocked the cathedral library with books , especially canon law texts . He was also active in defending the north of England against Scots raids . Before his death , he had made his peace with Anselm , who blessed and consoled St @-@ Calais on his deathbed . 
 = = Early life = = 
 St @-@ Calais was a Norman , and a native of Bayeux ; he may have been a member of one of its clerical dynasties . His mother 's name , <unk> or <unk> , is given in Durham 's records ; his father , whose name is unknown , became a monk at the monastery of Saint @-@ Calais in Maine , and may previously have been a knight . Although St @-@ Calais is generally referred to as Saint Calais or St @-@ Calais , the main source of information about his life , the monastic chronicle of Symeon of Durham , does not call him such . 
 St @-@ Calais studied under Odo , Bishop of Bayeux , the half @-@ brother of the future William I of England , who was then Duke of Normandy . Other bishops educated at Bayeux around this time included Archbishop Thomas of York and Samson , Bishop of Worcester . Symeon of Durham considered St @-@ Calais to be well @-@ educated in classical literature and the scriptures ; at some point St @-@ Calais also acquired a knowledge of canon law . He became a Benedictine monk at Saint @-@ Calais in Maine , where his father had become a monk , and soon became the prior of that house . He became abbot of St Vincent @-@ des @-@ Prés near Le Mans in Maine , sometime around 1078 . As abbot , his only appearance in historical records is his upholding of the monasteries ' right to some property , and his acceptance of a gift of property in the town . 
 William the Conqueror nominated him to the see of Durham on 9 November 1080 , and he was duly consecrated on either 27 December 1080 or 3 January 1081 . His elevation may have been a reward for diplomatic services he rendered to the king in France , or to help secure the see from further disorder following the death of the previous bishop , William Walcher , during a feud . However , it was most likely in recognition of his administrative ability . Symeon of Durham stated that St @-@ Calais was chosen as a bishop for this reason , describing him as " very well versed in sacred and secular learning , very conscientious in matters of divine and worldly business , and so remarkable for good conduct that he had no equal amongst his contemporaries " . 
 = = Early ecclesiastical affairs = = 
 The chronicler Symeon of Durham asserted that when St @-@ Calais was consecrated bishop by Archbishop Thomas of York , he managed to avoid professing obedience to the archbishop , which , if true , would have freed St @-@ Calais from interference in his diocese . After his appointment , St @-@ Calais decided to replace his cathedral chapter of secular clergy with monks , and consulted the king and Lanfranc , the Archbishop of Canterbury , before going to Rome to receive permission from Pope Gregory VII . These consultations , and the conditions within his diocese , may have kept St @-@ Calais from visiting Durham until some time after his elevation . In 1083 he expelled the married clergy from the cathedral , and moved a small community of monks from Bede 's old monastery at Jarrow to Durham , to form the new chapter . This community had been founded at Jarrow by <unk> , a Norman ex @-@ knight and monk of Evesham Abbey , and Eadwine , an English monk from Winchcombe Abbey . After the community had settled in Durham , St @-@ Calais named Eadwine as prior , and arranged for lands to be set aside to support the monks . The expelled clergy were offered the option of joining the new monastic house , but only one actually joined . 
 St @-@ Calais enjoyed good relations with his cathedral chapter , and they supported him when construction began on a new cathedral in 1093 . He also gave a set of constitutions to the cathedral chapter , modeled on Lanfranc 's rule for Canterbury . Symeon of Durham said that the bishop acted towards the monks of his chapter as a " loving father " , and that the monks fully returned the sentiment . St @-@ Calais is said to have researched exhaustively the pre @-@ Norman Conquest customs of the cathedral , before re @-@ establishing monks in the cathedral . He imposed the Monastic Constitutions of Lanfranc on the community , instead of the older Regularis Concordia . 
 = = Work for William the Conqueror = = 
 During William the Conqueror 's reign , St @-@ Calais was a frequent witness on charters . While it is often difficult to determine who was considered most important on a charter 's witness list , placement near the top of the list is usually understood to mean that the signatory was considered important . Almost always during the Conqueror 's reign , St @-@ Calais is listed right below the royal family and the archbishops . 
 The king sent St @-@ Calais on diplomatic missions to the French royal court and to Rome . After the king 's imprisonment of Odo of Bayeux , Pope Gregory VII complained to him . The pope was also concerned about the king 's refusal to allow the delivery of papal letters to the English bishops unless royal permission was secured . To placate the pope , the king dispatched St @-@ Calais to Rome , possibly with Lanfranc , to explain to the pope the reasons for imprisoning Odo . St @-@ Calais also served as a commissioner in the south @-@ western part of England for the Domesday Book , which aimed to survey the whole of England and record who owned the lands . Some historians , including David Bates , have argued that St @-@ Calais was the driving force behind the organization of the entire Domesday survey , although other candidates have been put forward , including Samson , Bishop of Worcester , before he became bishop . Pierre Chaplais , who argues for St @-@ Calais being the main organizer of the survey , argues the bishop 's exile in 1088 interrupted work on the Little Domesday Book , a subproject of the survey which was left uncompleted . 
 = = Rebellion = = 
 Soon after the accession of William Rufus , St @-@ Calais became one of the king 's most trusted lieutenants , along with the recently released Odo of Bayeux . Later chroniclers often referred to the position that St @-@ Calais held as justiciar , although the formal office did not yet exist . Around Easter 1088 , Odo of Bayeux and many of the nobles revolted against the king and tried to place the king 's elder brother Robert Curthose , Duke of Normandy , on the throne . After the king had set off with St @-@ Calais and some troops to counter Odo in Kent , St @-@ Calais suddenly deserted , shutting himself in Durham Castle . Why St @-@ Calais joined the rebellion , or at least did nothing to aid the king , is unclear . He and Odo had never been close , and despite the fact that St @-@ Calais was educated at Bayeux , there is no evidence that Odo helped St @-@ Calais ' career . Some historians , including W. M. Aird , have suggested that St @-@ Calais felt the division of the Conqueror 's realm between two sons was unwise . It has been suggested that St Calais joined the rebellion to reunite the Normans and English under one ruler . 
 St @-@ Calais was the only bishop who did not actively aid the king ; the rebelling magnates included Roger de Montgomery Earl of Shrewsbury , Robert de Mowbray Earl of Northumbria , and Odo 's brother Robert Count of Mortain . The rebellion had failed by the end of the summer , but St @-@ Calais continued to hold out in Durham , at first claiming he had never actually rebelled . When the king 's army arrived , St @-@ Calais agreed to come out , but only after receiving a safe conduct that would allow him to attend a trial while his men continued to hold the castle . St @-@ Calais 's actions suggest that he did rebel , whatever his claims to the contrary and affirmations of his innocence in northern chronicles . 
 = = Trial = = 
 St @-@ Calais was brought before the king and royal court for trial on 2 November 1088 , at Salisbury , before which the king seized his lands . At the trial , St @-@ Calais held that as a bishop he could not be tried in a secular court , and refused to answer the accusations . Lanfranc presented the king 's case , declaring that the confiscated lands had been held as fiefs , and thus St @-@ Calais could be tried as a vassal , not as a bishop . St @-@ Calais objected , and continued to refuse to answer the allegations . After numerous conferences and discussions , the court held that St @-@ Calais could be tried as a vassal in a feudal court . St @-@ Calais then asked for an appeal to Rome , which was rejected by the king and the judges . Those judging the case held that because St @-@ Calais never answered the formal accusation , and because he appealed to Rome , his fief , or lands , was forfeit . Although St @-@ Calais claimed to be defending the rights of clergy to be tried in clerical courts and to appeal to Rome , his fellow bishops believed otherwise . Lending support to their belief is the fact that St @-@ Calais never pursued his appeal to Rome , and that later , in 1095 , he took the side of the king against Anselm of Canterbury when Anselm tried to assert a right to appeal to Rome . 
 During the course of the trial , Lanfranc is said to have stated that the court was " trying you not in your capacity as bishop , but in regard to your fief ; and in this way we judged the bishop of Bayeux in regard to his fief before the present king 's father , and that king did not summon him to that plea as bishop but as brother and earl . " Unlike the later case of Thomas Becket , St @-@ Calais received little sympathy from his fellow bishops . Most of the bishops and barons that judged the case seem to have felt that the appeal to Rome was made to avoid having to answer an accusation that St @-@ Calais knew was true . The final judgement was only reached after the king lost his temper and exclaimed : " Believe me , bishop , you 're not going back to Durham , and your men aren 't going to stay at Durham , and you 're not going to go free , until you release the castle . " The extant De Iniusta Vexacione Willelmi Episcopi Primi , or Of the Unjust Persecution of the Bishop William I , details the trial of St @-@ Calais before the king . This work is the earliest surviving detailed contemporary report of an English state @-@ trial ; some have doubted its authenticity , however , claiming St @-@ Calais would not have been as knowledgeable in canon law as the work portrays him . The historian Mark Philpott , however , argues that St @-@ Calais was knowledgeable in canon law , since he owned a copy of the canon law , the False Decretals , which still survives . 
 = = Return to favour = = 
 After the court adjourned , St @-@ Calais was held as a prisoner at Wilton Abbey until his followers in Durham relinquished the castle . Once the castle was back under the king 's control , St @-@ Calais was released , and left for Normandy , and no more was heard of his appeal to Rome . Pope Urban II did write to the king in 1089 requesting that St @-@ Calais be restored to his see , but nothing came of it . In Normandy , St @-@ Calais quickly became one of Duke Robert 's principal advisors and his chief administrator . On 14 November 1091 he regained the favour of William Rufus , and was restored to his see . Duke Robert had persuaded the king to allow Bishop William 's return , perhaps in recognition of a service St @-@ Calais performed for the king by brokering the end of a siege in Normandy that the king 's forces were about to lose . The end of the siege prevented the loss of the castle . 
 St @-@ Calais returned to Durham on 11 September 1091 , with a large sum of money and gifts for his church . Thereafter he remained in the king 's favour . In fact , in 1093 his lands were restored without the need to perform feudal services . For the rest of his life , St @-@ Calais remained a frequent advisor to the king . It was St @-@ Calais , along with Robert , Count of Meulan who negotiated with Anselm , the abbot of Bec , in 1093 over the conditions under which Anselm would allow himself to be elected Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 St @-@ Calais managed the king 's case against Anselm at Rockingham in 1095 , when Anselm wished to go to receive his pallium from Pope Urban II . At that time St @-@ Calais opposed Anselm 's attempt to appeal to Rome over the issue , and steadfastly maintained the king 's position against Anselm , even advocating that the archbishop be deprived of his lands and sent into exile . Later , when the king was negotiating with Walter of Albano , the papal legate sent by Urban to convey the pallium to Anselm and to secure the king 's recognition of Urban as pope , St @-@ Calais was the king 's chief negotiator . The clerical reformers , Eadmer among them , who supported Anselm in these quarrels , later tried to claim that St @-@ Calais had supported the king out of a desire to succeed Anselm as archbishop if Anselm was deposed , but it is unlikely that St @-@ Calais seriously believed that Anselm would be deposed . St @-@ Calais secured grants from the king in return for his services . His efforts on behalf of the king earned him hostile accounts in Eadmer 's later writings . 
 = = Diocesan affairs = = 
 Durham 's location in the north left it insecure , as Malcolm Canmore , King of Scots , raided and invaded the north of England on a number of occasions . Malcolm claimed Northumbria , in which Durham was located , as part of his kingdom . St @-@ Calais managed to befriend Malcolm , and secured his support for the patron saint of Durham , Saint Cuthbert . Malcolm and his wife helped lay the foundation stone of the new cathedral dedicated to Cuthbert . Respect for the saint did not mean that Malcolm refrained entirely from raiding the north ; he was killed in 1093 while once more raiding Northumbria . Both the English king and St @-@ Calais did all in their power to support Malcolm 's sons , who had been educated in England , in their attempts to secure the Scottish throne . 
 Later , in 1095 , an English noble , Robert de Mowbray , who was Earl of Northumbria , challenged the bishop 's authority in the north . When Mowbray rebelled again in 1095 , St @-@ Calais helped the king put down the rebellion , and Mowbray was captured . The death of Malcolm and the capture of Mowbray did much to make the north more secure . 
 In St @-@ Calais ' time as bishop , a long @-@ running dispute began between the monks of the cathedral chapter and successive bishops . This arose because St @-@ Calais did not make a formal division of the diocesan revenues between the bishop 's household and the monks of the chapter . Nor had he allowed free elections of the prior . He may have promised these things to the monks before his death , but nothing was in writing . Thus , when a non @-@ monk was selected to replace St @-@ Calais , the monks began a long struggle to secure what they felt had been promised to them , including the forging of charters ascribed to St @-@ Calais that supported their case . These forged charters date from the second half of the 12th century . 
 St @-@ Calais also ordered the destruction of the old cathedral that had been built by <unk> , to make way for the construction of a new , larger cathedral , the current Romanesque @-@ style Durham Cathedral . The construction of the new cathedral began on 29 July 1093 , when St @-@ Calais led his cathedral chapter in dedicating the site . The first stones were laid shortly afterwards , on 11 August 1093 . However , St @-@ Calais ' exile after his trial as well as his employment in the royal service meant that he was often absent from his bishopric , and this probably is the cause of the medieval chronicler Symeon of Durham 's comparatively neutral treatment of St @-@ Calais in his works . There is no evidence of St @-@ Calais performing any of the normal episcopal functions , including consecrating priests or churches . 
 Probably dating from St @-@ Calais ' time is the confraternity relationship between the monks of Durham and the monks of the monastery of Saint Calais in Maine . The cult of Saint Calais appears to have been confined to the region around the monastery which the saint had founded . St @-@ Calais appears to have been a devotee of the cult , and the most likely date for the creation of the confraternity link between the two houses is during St @-@ Calais ' time as bishop . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Shortly before Christmas 1095 , one of St @-@ Calais ' knights , Boso , fell ill and dreamed he was transported to the afterlife , where he found a large house with gates made of iron . Suddenly , St @-@ Calais emerged from the gates , asking the knight the whereabouts of one of his servants . Boso 's guide in the dream then informed Boso that this was a warning that St @-@ Calais would soon die . Boso recovered and warned St @-@ Calais of the dream . 
 St @-@ Calais died on 2 January 1096 after falling gravely ill on the previous Christmas Day . Before his death he was consoled by Anselm and was blessed by his former opponent . He was buried on 16 January 1096 in the chapter house at Durham . The king had summoned St @-@ Calais shortly before Christmas to answer an unknown charge , and it is possible that the stress of this threat caused his death . In 1796 St @-@ Calais ' grave was supposedly found during the demolition of the chapter house at Durham Cathedral . Found in the grave were a pair of sandals , which still survive , and fragments of a gold embroidered robe . 
 While in office as bishop , St @-@ Calais gave a copy of the False Decretals to his cathedral library . The manuscript was an edition that had been collected or prepared by Lanfranc for the use of the chapter of Canterbury . St @-@ Calais may have used this copy in his trial . His plea for an appeal to Rome was grounded in the False Decretals , whether or not it was based on this particular manuscript . The manuscript itself is now in the Peterhouse Library . St @-@ Calais also gave a copy of Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum to his cathedral chapter ; this copy still survives . Other works that St @-@ Calais gave to the cathedral library were copies of Augustine of Hippo 's De <unk> Dei and Confessions ; Gregory the Great 's Pastoral Care , Moralia , and Homilies ; and Ambrose 's De <unk> . 
 St @-@ Calais was known to his contemporaries as an intelligent and able man . He had an excellent memory . Frank Barlow , a historian , describes him as a " good scholar and a monk of blameless life " . Besides his copy of the Decretals , he left at his death over fifty books to the monks of Durham , and the list of those volumes still exists . His best @-@ known legacy is the construction of Durham Cathedral , although the nave was not finished until 1130 . The construction technique of combining a pointed arch with another rib allowed a six @-@ pointed vault , which enabled the building to attain a greater height than earlier churches . This permitted larger <unk> windows , and let more light into the building . The technique of the six @-@ pointed vault spread to Saint @-@ Etienne in Caen from which it influenced the development of early Gothic architecture near Paris . The system of rib vaulting in the choir was the earliest use of that technique in Europe . The historian Frank Barlow called the cathedral " one of the architectural jewels of western Christendom " . 
 = Deep Throat ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 Deep Throat is a fictional character on the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . He serves as an informant , leaking information to FBI Special Agent Fox Mulder to aid Mulder 's investigation of paranormal cases , dubbed X @-@ Files . Introduced in the series ' second episode , also named " Deep Throat " , the character was killed off during the first season finale " The Erlenmeyer Flask " ; however , he later made several appearances in flashbacks and visions . 
 The character of Deep Throat was portrayed by Jerry Hardin in all his appearances . After the character was killed , Steven Williams was introduced in the second season episode " The Host " to portray his successor , X. The creation of Deep Throat was inspired by the historical Deep Throat , Mark Felt , who leaked information on the Watergate scandal , and by Donald Sutherland 's character X in the film JFK . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 Series creator Chris Carter has stated that the character of Deep Throat was " of course " inspired by the historical Deep Throat . The real Deep Throat was an informant leaking information on the FBI 's investigation of the Watergate scandal to journalists Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward . After the conclusion of The X @-@ Files , this Deep Throat was later revealed to be FBI Associate Director Mark Felt . Also cited as an influence on the fictional Deep Throat was X , the character portrayed by Donald Sutherland in the 1991 Oliver Stone film JFK . In the film , Sutherland 's X reveals information about the possibility that the assassination of John F. Kennedy was orchestrated by elements within the American government . Carter felt he needed to create a character who would bridge the gap between FBI agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and the shadowy conspirators who were working against them ; he conceived of a character " who works in some level of government that we have no idea exists " . 
 Carter was drawn to actor Jerry Hardin after seeing him in 1993 's The Firm . Hardin believed his initial appearance would be a one @-@ time role , although he soon found himself regularly commuting to the series ' Vancouver filming location on short notice . Producer Howard Gordon has spoken of the elusiveness of the character 's allegiances , stating that during production , it was often left ambiguous whether he was " ally or foe " . After filming the character 's death in the first season finale , " The Erlenmeyer Flask " , Hardin was toasted with champagne , and told by Carter that " no one ever really dies on X @-@ Files " . As such , Hardin made several more appearances as Deep Throat after this — seen in visions in the third season 's " The Blessing Way " and the seventh season 's " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " , in flashbacks in the fourth season 's " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " , and as one of the guises assumed by a shapeshifting alien in the third season 's finale , " Talitha Cumi " . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 During the first season of The X @-@ Files , Deep Throat provided Mulder and Scully with information they would have been otherwise unable to obtain . As a member of the then @-@ unseen Syndicate , he was in a position to know a great deal of information . Deep Throat felt that the truth the Syndicate kept secret from the public needed to be known , and believed Mulder to be the one person capable of exposing this knowledge . However , during the disappearance of Max Fenig , Deep Throat provided Mulder with false information in order to divert him , later explaining that he believed the public was just not ready to know some truths . 
 During the Vietnam War , Deep Throat worked for the Central Intelligence Agency . When a UFO was shot down over Hanoi by US Marines , the surviving extraterrestrial was brought to Deep Throat , who executed it . He later claimed that his assisting Mulder was his way of atoning for his actions . He also stated that he was " a participant in some of the most insidious lies and witness to deeds that no crazed man could imagine " . 
 In the first season finale of The X @-@ Files , " The Erlenmeyer Flask " , Mulder was taken hostage by a group of Men in Black operatives , following his investigation into an alien @-@ human hybrid program . Fearing for Mulder 's life , Deep Throat helped Scully gain access to a high containment facility , where she managed to secretly remove a cryogenically @-@ preserved alien fetus for use as collateral in saving Mulder . In the subsequent meeting between the operatives and Deep Throat , he was gunned down by an assassin , the Crew Cut Man . Deep Throat was buried at the Arlington National Cemetery . The character later appeared in dreams and visions experienced by Mulder during his recuperation on a Navajo reservation , and again years later while being experimented on by The Smoking Man . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Deep Throat has been well received by critics and fans . Entertainment Weekly described Hardin 's performance as " world @-@ weary and <unk> " , and listed his appearance in the character 's eponymous début episode as the 37th greatest television moment of the 1990s . However , they felt at times that his presence in episodes such as " Ghost in the Machine " seemed " gratuitous " . Reviewing the character 's début episode , the San Jose Mercury News called Deep Throat " the most interesting new character on television " . Chris Carter has stated that Hardin 's performance gave the series an element of " believability " that it needed ; and felt that the episode " E.B.E. " was a great opportunity to expand the character 's role . Writing for the A.V. Club , Zack Handlen called Deep Throat 's death " a shocking moment , even when you know it 's coming " , praising the " desperation " evident in Hardin 's performance , although lamenting the " curse of continuity " that led to the character being quickly replaced with Steven Williams ' X. Ben Rawson @-@ Jones , writing for Digital Spy , felt that Deep Throat 's tenure on The X @-@ Files was " arguably the show 's peak " , and praised Hardin 's acting in the role . Brian Lowry , in his book The Truth Is Out There , has noted that the character " helped establish a tone and undercurrent of gravity on The X @-@ Files that was to provide the spine of the series " . 
 = Decline and fall of Pedro II of Brazil = 
 The decline and fall of Pedro II of Brazil occurred over the course of the 1880s , with the underlying factors accumulating and coming increasingly into focus after 1881 . This period paradoxically coincided with a time of unparalleled economic and social stability and progress for Brazil , during which the nation had achieved a prominent place as an emerging power within the international arena . 
 The roots of the collapse of the monarchy can be traced as far back as 1850 , upon the death of Pedro II 's youngest male child . From that point onward , the Emperor ceased to believe in the monarchy as a viable form of government for Brazil 's future , as his remaining heir was a daughter . Although constitutionally permitted , a female ruler was considered unacceptable by both Pedro II and the ruling circles . This issue was deferred for decades , during which the country became more powerful and prosperous . So long as the Emperor enjoyed good health , the matter of succession could be ignored . 
 From 1881 Pedro II 's health began failing . He gradually withdrew from public affairs as time passed . Weary of being tied to a throne which he doubted would survive his death , he persevered out of duty and because there seemed no immediate alternative . Nor did his daughter and heir , Isabel , exhibit a desire to assume the crown . Both , however , were overwhelmingly beloved by the Brazilian people , who still supported the monarchy . The indifference towards the Imperial system by the Emperor and his daughter allowed a discontented republican minority to grow more audacious and to eventually launch the coup that overthrew the Empire . 
 Pedro II of Brazil may be considered a rare instance of a head of state who , despite being overwhelmingly beloved by his people , despite international admiration and acclamation , despite having been instrumental in driving forward major liberal social and economic reforms , despite overseeing a period of outstanding prosperity and influence during a reign covering nearly six decades , and despite being considered a highly successful ruler to the end , ultimately was subjected to overthrow and exile . The republican revolution which replaced the Empire led to decades of disruption and dictatorship . 
 = = Decline = = 
 During the 1880s , Brazil continued to prosper and social diversity increased markedly , including the first organized push for women 's rights . The country had greatly changed in the five decades since Pedro II 's accession to the throne . The liberalism adopted by successive Government cabinets favored private initiatives and resulted in decades of economic prosperity . It " had an economy that was rapidly developing in 1880s " . Brazil 's international trade reached a total value of Rs 79 @.@ 000 : 000 $ 000 ( see Brazilian currency ) between 1834 and 1839 . This continued to increase every year until it reached Rs 472 @.@ 000 : 000 $ 000 between 1886 and 1887 ( an annual growth rate of 3 @.@ 88 % since 1839 ) . Brazilian economic growth , especially after 1850 , compared well with that of the United States and European nations . The national revenue , which amounted to Rs 11 @.@ 795 : 000 $ 000 in 1831 , rose to Rs 160 @.@ 840 : 000 $ 000 in 1889 . By 1858 , it was the eighth largest in the world . To give an idea of the economic potential of the country during the Empire , if " it had been able to sustain the level of productivity achieved in 1780 and managed to increase exports at a pace equal to that verified in the second half of 19th century , its per capita income in 1950 would be comparable to the average per capita income of the Western European nations " . 
 Development on an immense scale occurred during this period , which anticipated similar initiatives in European countries . In 1850 , there were 50 factories valued at more than Rs 7 @.@ 000 : 000 $ 000 . At the end of the Imperial period in 1889 , Brazil had 636 factories ( representing an annual rate of increase of 6 @.@ 74 % from 1850 ) valued at approximately Rs 401 @.@ 630 : 600 $ 000 ( annual growth rate of 10 @.@ 94 % since 1850 ) . The " countryside echoed with the clang of iron track being laid as railroads were constructed at the most furious pace of the nineteenth century ; indeed , building in the 1880 's [ sic ] was the second greatest in absolute terms in Brazil 's entire history . Only eight countries in the entire world laid more track in the decade than Brazil . " The first railroad line , with only 15 kilometers , was opened on 30 April 1854 at a time when many European countries had no rail service . By 1868 , there were 718 kilometers of railroad lines , and by the end of the Empire in 1889 , this had grown to 9 @,@ 200 kilometers ( with another 9 @,@ 000 kilometers under construction ) , making it the country with " the largest rail network in Latin America " . 
 " Factories also sprang throughout the Empire in the 1880s at an <unk> rate , and its cities were beginning to receive the benefits of gas , electrical , sanitation , telegraph and tram companies . Brazil was entering the modern world . " It was the fifth country in the world to install modern sewers in cities , the third to have sewage treatment , and one of the pioneers in installing telephone lines . Beyond these , it was the first South American nation to adopt public electric illumination ( in 1883 ) and the second in the Americas ( behind the United States ) to establish a telegraph line connecting it directly to Europe ( in 1874 ) . The first telegraph line appeared in 1852 in Rio de Janeiro . By 1889 , there were 18 @,@ 925 kilometers of telegraph lines connecting the country 's capital to distant Brazilian provinces such as Pará , and even linking to other South American countries such as Argentina and Uruguay . 
 The Brazilian Empire was admired internationally for its democratic system and for its respect for freedom of speech . In politics there were " solid and competitive parties , an active parliament , a free press , open debate " . The Argentine President Bartolomé Mitre called the country a " crowned democracy " and Venezuelan President Rojas <unk> after learning of the Emperor 's fall said , " It has ended the only republic that existed in [ South ] America : the Empire of Brazil . " The Brazil of the last year of Pedro II 's reign was a " prosperous and [ internationally ] respected " nation which held unchallenged leadership in Latin America . Its navy was the fifth or sixth most powerful in the world in 1889 with the most powerful battleships in the western hemisphere . The Emperor was beloved by the Brazilian people and was regarded with " respect , almost veneration " in North America and Europe due to his democratic , liberal and progressive ideals and actions . The remarks made by a former U.S. consul at Rio de Janeiro , who met Pedro II in late 1882 , tells much of the general view that foreigners had of Brazil and its Emperor by the end of the 1880s : 
 Dom Pedro II , Emperor of Brazil … has an intellectual head , eyes a grayish blue … beard full and gray , hair well trimmed , also gray , complexion florid , and expression sober . He is erect , and has a manly bearing … During this long period [ of his rule ] there have been some provincial rebellions and some local turmoil , but the Emperor has always shown a tact , energy , and humanity that helped much to restore order , quite , and good feeling . Thus , while he has held the scepter his country has continued to prosper . Its vast area has been held intact , and it has become an important Empire . As I have looked at his gray head , when he has been driving in his carriage through the streets of Rio , I have said to myself , ' There certainly is an august and venerable <unk> 
 The British Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone said that Pedro II was " a model to the Sovereigns of the world " and held him as being a " great and good Sovereign " . Brazilian writer Machado de Assis would later remember him as " a humble , honest , well @-@ learned and patriotic man , who knew how to make of a throne a chair [ for his simplicity ] , without diminishing its greatness and respect . " When he became Emperor in 1831 , Brazil was on the verge of fragmentation . Fifty @-@ eight years later , the country had been at peace for more than four decades , slavery had been extinguished , the representative system was consolidated , and the leadership of the military was in civilian hands ( something not seen in the Spanish @-@ American countries ) . Indeed , for " the longevity of his government and the transformations which occurred during its course , no other Head of State has marked more deeply the history of the nation . " Even though Brazil was richer and more powerful than ever , though it enjoyed an excellent international reputation , and though Pedro II himself was still extremely popular among his subjects , the Brazilian monarchy itself was dying . 
 = = = A tired emperor = = = 
 Beginning in late 1880 , letters from Pedro II to the Countess of Barral reveal a man grown world @-@ weary with age and having an increasingly alienated and pessimistic outlook . In them he frequently expresses " his loneliness and his desire to escape into her company . " The Emperor entertained a fantasy of leaving everything behind and realizing his cherished ambition of taking up a life in Europe , as he expressed it : " and I , were I to enjoy my total independence , where would I be ? Guess . " This strong desire to retire to a less circumscribed life abroad was a constant presence throughout the 1880s . Despite the dichotomy between reverie and reality , he remained respectful of his duty and was meticulous in performing the tasks demanded of the Imperial office , albeit often without enthusiasm . 
 Pedro II was also undergoing physical decline , which only served to exacerbate his mental state . In younger days , he was admired for his ability to work long hours and rapidly bounce back from setbacks . But " lack of exercise and very poor eating habits also took their toll . " By the 1880s he had to rely on pince @-@ nez spectacles for reading due to deterioration of his eyesight , and on dentures for eating , as sugar had caused his teeth to decay . A tendency to doze off unexpectedly began to be exhibited , including falling asleep " in the middle of important meetings and during public engagements . " The cause was what is known today as type 2 diabetes ( non @-@ insulin @-@ dependent ) , with which the Emperor was diagnosed sometime around 1882 . Throughout the following years , the monarch was afflicted with several sudden illnesses , ranging from stomach pains to fevers . In 1884 he received a laceration on his left leg which became infected and , complicated by his diabetes , took longer than expected to completely heal . He also began suffering from " urinary problems due to the damage done by diabetes to his kidneys . " 
 Tired of the emperorship and beset by frequent ailments , Pedro II increasingly withdrew from government business , often behaving more like a bystander . He was observed walking around dressed in tailcoat and carrying an umbrella in the streets , sometimes surrounded by cheerful children ; sampling fruits in the local market ; and tasting the students ' food in the kitchens on visits to schools . He tried to live as an ordinary person , successfully " mixing with the people in the streets " . He abolished several rituals related to the monarchy , such as hand @-@ kissing in 1872 and the guarda dos <unk> ( Archers 's Guard ) in 1877 , " the palace guard clad in multicolored uniforms and armed with halberds . " The City Palace , where the government met , was practically abandoned as also was the Imperial residence at the Palace of São Cristóvão , now devoid of courtiers . An Austrian diplomat , summarized well the situation in late 1882 : 
 I found the palace of São Cristóvão the same as ever . It is the bewitched castle of the fairy tales . A sentinel at the door and beside him not a living soul . I wandered alone through the corridors which surrounded the patio . I met nobody but I heard the tinkle of glasses in a neighboring room where the Emperor was dining alone with the Empress without their suite composed of a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting and a chamberlain . 
 Pomp , ritual and luxury were discarded . These caused Pedro II to be viewed as " a great citizen " in the popular imagination , but at the same time his image as a monarch , as a living symbol and authority figure diminished . As a German journalist remarked in 1883 : " It is a rare thing , in the Emperor 's situation : he has no personal fortune and his civil list , already by itself insufficient , is almost all expended on charity , in a way that he cannot afford any pomp in the court , nor do anything to give any gleam to his residences [ … ] It undoubtedly does great honor to the man , but contributes little to the necessary prestige of the Emperor . " But the society in which the Emperor lived put great store in ceremonials and customs , and the Emperor had discarded much of the symbolism and aura with which the Imperial system was imbued . 
 = = = The monarchy 's fate : heirless = = = 
 After their experience of the perils and obstacles of government , the political figures who had arisen during the 1830s became wary of taking on a greater role in ruling the nation . They looked to the Emperor as providing a fundamental and useful source of authority essential both for governing and for national survival . Pedro II 's natural ability and proficiency as a ruler encouraged greater deference as time passed . The political establishment " perceived him as the key to the successful working of the [ political ] system , someone whose reputation and authority protected him from all discussion . " These elder statesmen began to die off or retire from government until , by the 1880s , they had almost entirely been replaced by a younger generation of politicians who had no experience of the Regency and early years of Pedro II 's reign , when external and internal dangers threatened the nation 's existence . They had only known a stable administration and prosperity . In sharp contrast those of the previous era , the young politicians saw no reason to uphold and defend the Imperial office as a unifying force beneficial to the nation . Pedro II 's role in achieving an era of national unity , stability and good government now went unremembered and unconsidered by the ruling elites . By his very success , " Pedro II had made himself redundant as emperor " . 
 The lack of an heir who could feasibly provide a new direction for the nation also diminished the long @-@ term prospects for continuation of the Brazilian monarchy . The Emperor loved his daughter Isabel , and respected her strong character . However , he considered the idea of a female successor as antithetical to the role required of Brazil 's ruler . " Destiny had spoken in the loss of his two male heirs and the lack , after their death , of any more sons . " That view was also shared by the political establishment , who continued to harbor reservations when it came to any thought of accepting a female ruler . Isabel 's children were also discounted as heirs . Pedro II had not raised them as possible successors to the throne , but rather in hopes that they would become worthy citizens . The consensus was that a suitable successor " had to be a man " , that is , a male of the Braganza line . 
 The Emperor 's great @-@ grandmother , Maria I of Portugal , had been a queen regnant . However , she had been married to her uncle , Pedro III of Portugal who was a Braganza . This meant that her offspring would continue to belong to the House of Braganza . Emperor Pedro II was the last of the direct male line in Brazil descended from Dom Afonso I , first king of Portugal and founder , in 1139 , of the dynasty which headed the Brazilian Empire . There were two other male <unk> , albeit living abroad : Pedro II 's half @-@ brother Rodrigo <unk> Pereira and his cousin Miguel , Duke of Braganza . Both were barred from the line of succession , however . The former because he was an illegitimate son , and the latter because he was a foreigner and not a descendant of the first Brazilian Emperor , Pedro I. 
 None of these issues bothered Isabel , who did not imagine herself taking on the position of monarch . Her public roles gave no indication of preparations for assuming a greater part in government . She seemed content in supporting her father 's position and made no effort to assemble her own faction of supporters within the political establishment . Her views and beliefs held no attraction for disaffected politicians , so no independent movement formed to adopt her as champion . She " was content with the life of an aristocratic lady , devoting herself to family , religion , charitable works , theater , opera , painting and music . " Her husband , the Count of Eu , was equally disliked . He was shy , humble and eschewed displays of pomp and luxury . Since his marriage to Isabel in 1864 , his behavior was described as " exemplary " . But the count 's private virtues did not become a part of his public image . To those outside his immediate circle , he came to be characterized as a greedy foreign interloper . <unk> rumors of questionable business dealings also circulated , such as one which portrayed him as a Rio de Janeiro slum @-@ lord . The prospect of the Count becoming consort detracted from the prospect of Isabel becoming Empress . The couple offered " to Brazilians no alternative center of loyalty or competing vision of the monarchy " . 
 A weary emperor who no longer cared for the throne , an heir who had no desire to assume the crown , discontent among ruling circles who were dismissive of the Imperial role in national affairs : all seemed to presage the monarchy 's impending doom . Nevertheless , Pedro II was unconcerned that times and conditions were changing . After more than five decades on the throne , he had become complacent in a belief that the devotion and support of his subjects was immutable . Because of these factors , and the lack of an energetic response on the part of Pedro II , it has been argued that prime responsibility for the monarchy 's overthrow rested with the Emperor himself . 
 = = = Republicanism = = = 
 Republicanism — either support for a presidential or parliamentary republic — as an enduring political movement appeared in Brazil during December 1870 in Rio de Janeiro with the publishing of a manifesto signed by 57 people and with the creation of the Republican Club . It represented an " insignificant minority of scholars . " There was no repudiation of or desire for eliminating slavery in the manifesto . In 1873 , the Republican Party of São Paulo was created , and it affirmed that slavery would have to be resolved by the monarchist ( Conservative and Liberal ) parties . The reason for this was because many of the republicans from São Paulo were themselves slave @-@ owning farmers . The objective of most republicans was to wait until the death of Pedro II and by a plebiscite or other peaceful means , prevent Princess Isabel from ascending the throne . Republicanism did not envisage any " social readjustment " ( such as improving the quality of life for former @-@ slaves ) , and they " were not revolutionaries in the deep meaning of the word . " The republican movement " had a slow and irregular evolution , concentrated in the provinces south of Bahia " — more precisely in the provinces of São Paulo , Rio de Janeiro , Minas Gerais and Rio Grande do Sul . 
 It was " an extremely small group " with a " precarious organization in the provinces " and no cohesion or connection among themselves . The only republican faction to achieve political clout was the Republican Party of São Paulo , which managed to elect two deputies to the Chamber of Deputies in 1884 , though none were elected to the Empire 's last legislature in 1889 . In the 1880s " it attracted sympathy in lesser numbers than [ slavery ] abolitionism , and at a slower pace . " Its numbers only increased after 1888 , adding new adherents consisting of farmers who had been slave owners and who perceived themselves victims of an unjust abolition of slavery that had not included any type of indemnity to them . Even so , in 1889 the " avowed republicans were probably a small minority " as the " republican ideals , in reality , had never managed to seduce the people . Its dissemination was restricted to the intellectual and military fields . " 
 As " the republicans themselves recognized , the party did not have size , organization and popular support enough to overthrow the monarchy . " Republicanism " did not manage , at any moment of its development , to spur the national soul . It never had the stature to provoke a strong enthusiasm or enlist all forces that were divorcing from the throne . " Even with radical propaganda and little interference from the authorities , the Republican Party in existence from the beginning of the 1870s was a small one . It praised republics such as the United States , France and Argentina , while conveniently ignoring progressive monarchies such as the United Kingdom and the Scandinavian countries . In 1889 , its members were " spokesmen in public squares and writers of periodicals . They were far from having the power to develop a propaganda that could shake the foundations of the throne . " In the " political process of the second empire [ reign of Pedro II ] , the republican party had such a dull and secondary role that it might even have been forgotten ; it was unable to influence rationales advocating the regime 's dissolution . " It was the crisis between the military and the Government , " of very diverse origin and evolution " from the republicanism , which was to prove the main factor in the fall of the monarchy . 
 Pedro II showed no interest in the republican manifesto of 1870 . The Marquis of São Vicente , then President of the Council of Ministers , suggested to the Emperor that republicans be forbidden to enter into public service , a practice then common in monarchies . Pedro II answered , " Mr. São Vicente , allow the nation to govern itself and decide whatever [ monarchy or republic ] they want . " The President reprimanded the monarch , " Your Majesty does not have a right to think in that way . The Monarchy is a constitutional doctrine which Your Majesty swore to maintain ; it is not incarnate in the person of Your Majesty . " But the Emperor did not care and simply answered : " Well , if the Brazilians do not want me as their Emperor , I shall become a teacher instead ! " 
 The Emperor not only always refused to forbid republicans from becoming public servants , but also hired the republican military officer Benjamin Constant as a professor of mathematics to his grandsons . He allowed open republican activities , including newspapers , assemblies , meetings and political parties , and exempted republican deputies elected to the Chamber of Deputies from swearing allegiance to the crown . The freedom of the Press , " one of the foundations of the regime , kept allowing fierce criticisms and vile caricatures opposing the regime and its public personalities . " Pedro II was intransigent in his defense of the unrestricted freedom of speech which had existed in Brazil since independence in 1822 . He was accused of being excessively tolerant towards the republicans , but " he did not pay attention to several warnings stating that his behavior undermined the political foundation of the monarchy . " In 1889 , Pedro II said to José Antonio Saraiva that he would not mind if Brazil became a republic . The " Emperor 's indifference towards the fate of the regime was also one of the main factors in the fall of the Monarchy . " 
 = = = Military deterioration = = = 
 A serious problem began to become evident during the 1880s . This was a weakening of discipline within Brazil 's military . The older generation of officers were loyal to the monarchy , believed the military should be under civilian control , and had a great aversion to the militaristic <unk> against which they had earlier fought . But these elders were no longer in control and many had since died , including the Duke of Caxias , the Count of Porto Alegre , the Marquis of Erval , and others . It was accepted that military officers could participate in politics while staying on active duty . However , most did so as members of the Conservative Party and Liberal Party . This meant that their political careers were apt to come into conflict with their duty as officers to act in subordination to the civilian government , which could be in the hands of their political opponents . Earlier involvement in politics by members of the military had not threatened the stability of Brazil 's institutions , due to pervasive loyalty to the monarchy and constitution . The conflict of interest in mixing military and political spheres became more obvious and threatening as support for the constitutional establishment eroded among some elements within the military , although neither the Emperor or government seem to have grasped the extent and implications of the increasing involvement of members of the military as political dissidents . Until this point Brazilians , both civilians and military , shared a sense of pride in the nation 's political stability and for having avoided the caudillos , coups , military dictatorships and rebellions that characterized neighboring countries . Their perception of the superiority of the Brazilian political system was attributed to an established tradition of civilian control over the military . And the ministers who held the War and Navy portfolios in the cabinet were , with rare exceptions , civilians . 
 1882 saw the first signs of insubordination among the army corps when a group of officers assassinated a journalist in broad daylight . He had published an article which they considered an offence to their honor . However , the participants were not subjected to punishment for this act . Records from 1884 show that , out of a peacetime army of 13 @,@ 500 men , more than 7 @,@ 526 had been jailed for insubordination . The military were badly paid , inadequately equipped , ill @-@ instructed , and thinly spread across the vast Empire , often in small " garrisons of 20 , 10 , 5 and even 2 men . " Most of the non @-@ officer corps consisted of men recruited from the poor sertão ( hinterland ) in the northeast , and later from former slaves . These were volunteers seeking some means of subsistence , as there was no conscription . They were completely unprepared for the military life , had little education or concept of civic responsibility and government . A poor Brazilian from the northeast viewed his military commanders in the same light as he viewed the henchmen of the political bosses at home . An ex @-@ slave would saw his harsh superior officer as differing little from his former owner and taskmasters . They had no means of understanding that they were being used to effect a coup , that their orders put them in rebellion against the Emperor , or that their actions would lead to a dictatorship . The average recruit blindly followed orders and hoped to avoid punishment by his superiors for any mistake . 
 In 1886 a colonel renowned for lack of discipline published newspaper articles criticizing the Minister of War , an act of insubordination forbidden by law . Instead of being punished , the colonel was supported by his commander , Field Marshal ( nowadays Divisional General ) Deodoro da Fonseca . The minister , as well as the conservative cabinet headed by João Maurício Wanderley , decided not to penalize the colonel in an attempt to quiet dissention . However , the cabinet went further and removed any constraint on military officers broadcasting their views . In consequence of this policy , subordinates were thenceforth able to publicly criticize their superiors , thus undermining both military and political authority , including that of the cabinet itself . 
 At the beginning of 1888 a drunken officer was arrested by the police for causing disturbance in the street . Several officers , including Deodoro , were outraged by the arrest and insisted that the chief of police be dismissed . Wanderley , who was still heading the cabinet , refused to bow to this demand . But Princess Isabel , acting regent on behalf of her father who was in Europe , instead opted to dismiss the entire cabinet and support the so @-@ called " undisciplined military faction " . Her motive was to use this incident as a pretext to replace Wanderley , who was openly against the abolition of slavery , an issue before the Parliament at the time . Although she gained a new cabinet composed of politicians who supported the end of slavery , Isabel 's decision held unintended and dire consequences for the monarchy . Instead of placating an unruly military faction , it only opened the way for more audacious demands and more widespread insubordination , while exposing the weakness of the civilian power . Several officers began to openly conspire against the government , expecting that in a republic they would no longer be exposed to the " harassment " which they believed they were suffering under the monarchy . One of them , Floriano Peixoto , advocated adoption of a " military dictatorship " . 
 Another important influence which appeared during the 1880s was the dissemination of Positivism among the army 's lower and medium officer ranks , as well as among some civilians . Brazilian Positivists believed that a republic was superior to monarchy . However , they also saw representative democracy and freedom of speech as threats . They also opposed religions , especially Catholicism ( though excepting Positivism itself ) . They advocated the establishment of a dictatorship , with a dictator @-@ for @-@ life who would name his own successor , along with a strong centralized government and " the incorporation of the proletariat into society through the end of bourgeois privileges . " Positivism shared many features with later Bolshevism , Marxism and Leninism . However , and remarkably , the Positivists wanted Pedro II to assume the first dictatorship , and hoped to use him to smooth the transition from monarchy towards their new republic . 
 One of the most influential Positivists in Brazil was Lieutenant @-@ colonel <unk> Constant , a professor in the Military Academy . Although admired to the point of veneration by the young cadets , he was completely unknown to the public . Constant and other Positivist instructors inculcated students with his ideology . Gradually consigned to the background of the Academy 's curriculum were military exercises and military studies of Antoine @-@ Henri Jomini and Colmar Freiherr von der Goltz , replaced by a focus on political discussions and readings from Auguste Comte and Pierre Lafitte . The cadets soon became insubordinate political agitators . Even so , Positivists still expected to make a peaceful transition to their fantasy of a republican dictatorship and Constant , who had also taught the Emperor 's grandsons , met with Pedro II and tried to convince him join their cause . Unsurprisingly , given Pedro II 's character , this proposal was steadfastly refused , and Constant began to believe that there was no remaining alternative to a coup d 'état . 
 As a result , a coalition between the undisciplined Army faction headed by Deodoro and the Positivist faction headed by Constant would be formed and directly lead to 15 November 1889 republican coup . According to one of the seditious leaders , only around 20 % of the Brazilian army participated in or actively supported the monarchy 's fall . 
 = = = Third trip to Europe and end of slavery in Brazil = = = 
 The Emperor 's health had considerably worsened by 1887 and fever attacks had become common . His personal doctors suggested a trip to Europe for medical treatment . When embarking , he was greeted by a crowd which cried out , " Long live His Majesty the Emperor of Brazil ! " He left on 30 June 1887 along with his wife and his grandson Pedro Augusto . Once more his daughter Isabel became regent in his place . He remained for a short time in Portugal and traveled on to Paris , where he stayed in the Grand Hotel as usual . There he received Louis Pasteur , Ambroise Thomas , Pierre Émile Levasseur , François Coppée , Alexandre Dumas , fils , Arsène Houssaye , Guerra <unk> , and two of Victor Hugo 's grandsons , among others . In a conversation with Houssaye the Emperor again lamented what he considered a " crown of thorns " he had to bear . Pedro II also saw his old friend Michel Eugène Chevreul , who was by then 102 years old . 
 The monarch was examined by the French doctors Charles @-@ Édouard Brown @-@ Séquard , Jean @-@ Martin Charcot and Michel Peter who recommended a visit to the spas at Baden @-@ Baden . He remained there for two months and met with old acquaintances , including Wilhelm I of Germany and Leopold II of Belgium . He also visited the tomb of his daughter Leopoldina in Coburg . He returned to Paris on 8 October 1887 and met his sisters Januária and Francisca . From there he traveled to Italy where he was invited by the King of Italy to a dinner along with Victoria of the United Kingdom and Natalija Obrenović , Queen of Serbia . In Florence he unveiled the painting Independence or Death by the Brazilian painter Pedro Américo in the presence of the British Queen , the Serbian queen and Charles I , King of Württemberg . In Milan he met with Cesare <unk> . There his health worsened on 3 May 1888 , and he passed two weeks between life and death , even being anointed . The doctor Charcot came from Paris to assist and administered caffeine by <unk> injection , resulting in an improvement in the Emperor 's health . On 22 May he received news that slavery had been abolished in Brazil by a law sanctioned by his daughter . Lying in bed with a weak voice and tears in his eyes , he said , " Great people ! Great people ! " 
 Pedro II returned to Brazil and disembarked in Rio de Janeiro on 22 August 1888 . The " whole country welcomed him with an enthusiasm never seen before . From the capital , from the provinces , from everywhere , arrived proofs of affection and veneration . The emotion from those who saw him disembark , frail , thin , with bent body , weak legs , was one most profound . " The cadets from the Military Academy climbed Sugarloaf Mountain and placed a gigantic banner on which was written " Hail . " Such popular enthusiasm directed toward the Emperor was not matched even by the celebrations of his majority in 1840 , in the Christie Affair of 1864 , upon his departure to Rio Grande do Sul in 1865 , or even after the victory in the Paraguayan War in 1870 . " To judge from the general manifestations of affection that the Emperor and the Empress had received on the occasion of their arrival from Europe , in this winter of 1888 , no political institution seemed to be so strong as the monarchy in Brazil . " Even former slaves displayed loyalty towards the monarchy and vehemently opposed the republicans , whom they called " the Paulistas . " The " monarchy seemed to be at the height of its popularity . " Pedro II had reached the pinnacle of his prestige among Brazilians . 
 = = Fall = = 
 = = = The last year = = = 
 1889 seemed to have begun well for both the monarchy and for Brazil . During a three @-@ month tour of the northeast and north , the enthusiastic reception given the Count of Eu " demonstrated that monarchism remained powerful there " . In late July , the Emperor traveled to Minas Gerais , demonstrating both that he was still actively engaged and the depth of support for the monarch in the province . Along with the successful appearances made by Eu and Isabel in São Paulo , Paraná , Santa Catarina , and Rio Grande do Sul provinces from November 1884 to March 1885 , there was every indication of broad backing for the monarchy among the Brazilian population . 
 The nation enjoyed great international prestige during the final years of the Empire . Predictions of economic and labor disruption caused by the abolition of slavery failed to materialize and the 1888 coffee harvest was successful , both of which boosted Princess Isabel 's popularity . José do <unk> , a " leading abolitionist journalist , an inveterate republican notable for his disrespect for the Imperial Family , not only renounced his former views " but also " took a leading role in organizing a ' Black Guard ' . " This was an association of former slaves dedicated to the monarchy 's defense , and which also harassed republican meetings . 
 The cabinet responsible for enacting the law abolishing slavery suffered a vote of no confidence on 3 May 1889 and was forced to resign . Pedro II called José Antônio Saraiva to form a new cabinet . Saraiva , a highly pragmatic politician , cared neither for monarchy nor republic , so long as he held power . He frankly warned the Emperor that Isabel had little chance of reigning as empress and that the government itself should take an active role in facilitating a peaceful transition to a republic . The Emperor accepted this proposal , without bothering to inform his daughter and heiress . Pedro II 's behavior in this meeting revealed how little commitment he had to the monarchy . He gave little consideration to his daughter 's opinion , or that of the Brazilian people who overwhelmingly supported the imperial system . The reason , unknown to but a very few , was that Pedro II was very sympathetic towards the idea of a republican system . Through action and inaction , consciously and unconsciously , he had been sabotaging both the monarchy and the prospects of his daughter 's future reign for nearly a decade . A quite astonished historian Heitor Lyra remarked : " Was he not the head of the Brazilian monarchy , it would be said that he had been allied with the Republic 's advertisers ! " Saraiva , however , changed his mind and declined the office . Pedro II instead appointed Afonso Celso de Assis <unk> , viscount of Ouro Preto , in his place . 
 Unlike Saraiva , Ouro Preto was a staunch monarchist who was determined to save the regime at any cost . His program of reforms was highly ambitious and aimed at resolving festering issues about which politicians had long been complaining . An item notably missing from his agenda was any move to address the military indiscipline and the urgent necessity of restoration of government authority over the corps . This would prove to be a fatal mistake . Among the reforms proposed were the expanding of voting rights by abolishing the income requisite , the end of lifelong senate tenures and , most important of all , increased decentralization which would turn the country into a full federation by allowing the election of town mayors and provincial presidents ( governors ) . 
 The end of slavery had resulted in an explicit shift of support to republicanism by rich and powerful coffee farmers who held great political , economic and social power in the country . The Republican faction also attracted others disaffected by the liberation of slaves , which they regarded as confiscation of their personal property . " Traditionalist to the core , long the backbone of the monarchism , they viewed the regent 's action as the grossest betrayal of their long loyalty . What attracted the planters to the republicanism beside its opposition to monarchy was the movement 's promise of indemnification for the lost slaves [ … ] Republicanism for this group was less a creed than a weapon . " 
 To avert a republican backlash , Ouro Preto exploited the ready credit available to Brazil as a result of its prosperity . He made available massive loans at favorable interest rates to plantation owners and lavishly granted titles and lesser honors to curry favor with influential political figures who had become disaffected . He also indirectly began to address the problem of the recalcitrant military by revitalizing the moribund National Guard , by then an entity which existed mostly only on paper . As the Count of <unk> , a noted politician , remarked : " I call your attention especially to the reorganization of the National Guard , in order to possess this force with which in past times the government suppressed military revolts . If we had had the National Guard reorganized , the <unk> and other ignorant military men would have been quiet . " Pedro II also asked Salvador Mendonça , who was leaving to the U.S. to represent Brazil at the First International Conference of American States , to carefully study the U.S. Supreme Court with the goal of creating a similar tribunal in Brazil and transferring his constitutional prerogatives to it . This would have made the monarch a mere figurehead . It is not known if he intended to constrain his daughter 's powers as empress and make her thus more palatable to the politicians , or whether he had something else in mind . 
 The reforms proposed by the government alarmed republican and seditious factions in the military corps . The republicans saw that Ouro Preto 's plans would undercut support for their own aims , and were emboldened to further action . The reorganization of the National Guard was begun by the cabinet in August 1889 , and the creation of a rival militia caused the dissidents among the officer corps to consider desperate steps . For both groups , republicans and military , it had become a case of " now or never " . Although there was no desire in Brazil among the majority of the population to change the form of government , republicans began pressuring the rebellious faction to overthrow the monarchy . 
 On 9 November 1889 , a large number of officers gathered in the Military Club and decided to stage a coup d 'état aimed at the overthrow of the monarchy . Two days later in the house of Rui Barbosa a plan to execute the coup was drawn up by officers who included Benjamin Constant and Marshal Deodoro da Fonseca , plus two civilians : Quintino <unk> and Aristides Lobo . It was the only significant meeting in which civilian republicans participated , as Deodoro wished to exclude them from what he considered to be a strictly military matter . Deodoro still hesitated : " I wanted to follow the Emperor 's coffin , who is old and whom I deeply respect . " But he eventually yielded to pressure : " He [ Benjamin Constant ] wants it thus , let us make the Republic . Benjamin and I will take care of the military action ; Mr. Quintino and his friends will organize everything else . " 
 = = = Republican coup = = = 
 At 11 p.m. on 14 November , Deodoro took command of 600 men , the majority of whom either had no idea of what was occurring or believed that they were organizing a defence against the National Guard or the Black Guard . A few republicans yelled " Hail to the Republic " but Deodoro ordered them to be silent . 
 Upon learning of the revolt , the Viscount of Ouro Preto and the other Cabinet ministers went to Army Headquarters , located at the Field of Santana in the heart of the capital . The supposedly loyal troops there outnumbered and were better equipped than the rebel force . The adjutant @-@ general ( Commander ) of the Army , Field Marshal Floriano Peixoto guaranteed his men 's loyalty to Ouro Preto , but he was secretly in alliance with the rebels . Floriano and the Minister of the War Rufino <unk> , Viscount of <unk> ( a cousin of Deodoro ) ignored repeated orders from Ouro Preto to attack the rebels who were approaching the headquarters . He tried to convince them , recalling the acts of bravery by the Brazilian military in the Paraguayan War . But Floriano replied to him that , " in front of us there were enemies , and here we are all Brazilians " , which finally brought him to a realization of how far the mutiny had spread among the officer corps . 
 The ostensibly loyal troops opened the headquarters gates to Deodoro , who cried out : " Long live His Majesty the Emperor ! " He met with Ouro Preto , and undertook to personally present the Emperor with a list of the names of those to be included in a new cabinet . To the disillusionment of civilian and military republicans , Deodoro did not proclaim a republic , and it seemed that he would only topple the cabinet . He was unsure whether he wanted to act against Pedro II , and the rebels themselves did not believe the coup would succeed . The few people who witnessed what occurred did not realize that it was a rebellion , and according to the republican Aristides Lobo , the populace was " stunned " . " Rarely has a revolution been so minor . " 
 On the morning of 15 November , Pedro II was in Petrópolis when he received the first telegram from Ouro Preto informing him of the rebellion . However , he did not assign much import to the news . At 11 a.m. as he left a mass in honor of the 45th anniversary of his sister Maria II 's death , the monarch received a second telegram and decided to return to Rio de Janeiro . His wife expressed concern , but he told her , " On what ma 'am ? When I arrive there it will be over ! " He travelled by train , reading periodicals and scientific magazines . Not imagining the gravity of the situation , he arrived at the city palace at 3 p.m. André <unk> suggested that he go to the countryside to organize resistance . The Marquis of Tamandaré asked for his permission to lead the Armada ( navy ) and suppress the rebellion . He dismissed all the ideas put forward and said , " This is nothing . I know my countrymen . " The Emperor asked the Conservative senator Manuel Francisco Correia what he thought of the situation . Correia answered that he believed that it was the end of the monarchy . Pedro II showed no emotion , as if unconcerned about the possibility . 
 Ouro Preto arrived at the palace at 4 p.m and suggested that Pedro II nominate senator Gaspar da Silveira Martins , who would arrive in the city two days later , as the new President . Deodoro avoided meeting personally with Pedro II , but once he heard that the Emperor had chosen a personal enemy of his for the office , he finally decided on the inauguration of the Republic . The recently elected Chamber of Deputies was only to be called into session on 20 November , and the Senate was in recess . For this reason , Princess Isabel insisted that her father convoke the Council of State to deal with the situation . But she was given the reply , " Later on . " The princess , on her own initiative , called the council members . The Council assembled at 11 p.m , and after two hours recommended that the Emperor appoint Antônio Saraiva instead of Silveira Martins . After accepting the office , this politician sent an emissary to negotiate with Deodoro . But Deodoro responded that it was too late to change his mind . Upon hearing the reply , Pedro II commented , " If it is so , it will be my retirement . I have worked too hard and I am tired . I will go rest then . " 
 = = = Departure to exile = = = 
 On Saturday 16 November , the Imperial Family were confined in the palace , surrounded by a cavalry regiment . Pedro II continued reading scientific magazines and appeared calm throughout the day . At 3 p.m , Major Frederico Solón Sampaio Ribeiro informed the Imperial Family that the Republic had been proclaimed and that they must leave the country for exile within 24 hours . The " republicans had no courage to meet the Emperor , whom they secretly admired , face to face " and therefore sent low @-@ ranking officers to communicate with him . Solón , when complimenting the Emperor , called him first " Your Excellency " , then " Your Highness " and lastly " Your Majesty " . Although clearly deposed , the Emperor was still much respected by those around him , as illustrated by the parley between him and Solón . The notice of banishment caused the women to weep , while the men struggled to remain calm — with the exception of Pedro II , who remained impassive . The monarch resolved to travel the afternoon of the following day and sent a written message to the Provisional Government stating that he agreed to leave the country . 
 The republican Government feared that demonstrations in favor of the Emperor might erupt on Monday 17 November . The Lieutenant Colonel João Nepomuceno de Medeiros Mallet was sent at dawn to inform the Imperial Family that it must leave immediately . A commotion arose among those present until Pedro II himself appeared in the room . Mallet respectfully told him that the Government had asked them to depart at once . The Emperor refused to leave immediately , claiming that he was not a slave trying to escape in the middle of the night . Mallet tried to persuade him , alleging that republican students would launch violent demonstrations against him . The Emperor seemed skeptical : " Who gives credence to students ? " At that moment , shots were heard outside . Mallet left the palace to find out what had happened . Fifteen Imperial sailors had attempted to land in support of the Emperor but were overpowered and imprisoned by republican troops . Mallet returned to the building and deceived Pedro II by saying that militant republicans had tried to attack him and his family . Astonished , the Emperor agreed to leave . 
 When Pedro II left the palace , the soldiers who were standing guard outside instinctively presented arms , and he responded by raising his hat . A few close friends voluntarily accompanied the Imperial Family into exile , including André <unk> and Franklin <unk> , baron of Loreto . Very few were on hand to witness the departure . They were taken to the steamship <unk> and after that to the ship Alagoas , in which they sailed the next day to Europe . Before the final departure , Pedro II sent a short message to his faithful friend the Marquis of Tamandaré , who had remained at his side until embarkation : " What is done , is done . It remains to all of you to establish order and to consolidate your institutions . " After learning that the Emperor had left , Benjamin Constant spoke : " It is fulfilled , the most painful of our duties . " Major Carlos Nunes de Aguiar later recalled saying to Rui Barbosa , who had been at his side witnessing the departure from afar : " You were right to weep when the Emperor left . " Historian Lilia Moritz <unk> said that it was " the end of the monarchy , but not of myth , called d . Pedro . " 
 The government headed by Deodoro " was little more than a military dictatorship . The army dominated affairs both at Rio de Janeiro and in the states . Freedom of the press disappeared and elections were controlled by those in power . " The republican regime which followed the overthrow of the monarchy revealed itself to be highly unstable . In " a little more than a century of existence , the Brazilian Republic faced twelve states of emergency , seventeen Institutional Acts , the National Congress dissolved six times , nineteen military revolutions , two presidential resignations , three presidents prevented from assuming office , four presidents deposed , seven different Constitutions , four dictatorships , and nine authoritarian governments . " 
 = Cotton @-@ top tamarin = 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin ( Saguinus oedipus ) is a small New World monkey weighing less than 0 @.@ 5 kg ( 1 @.@ 1 lb ) . One of the smallest primates , the cotton @-@ top tamarin is easily recognized by the long , white sagittal crest extending from its forehead to its shoulders . The species is found in tropical forest edges and secondary forests in northwestern Colombia , where it is arboreal and diurnal . Its diet includes insects and plant exudates , and it is an important seed disperser in the tropical ecosystem . 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin displays a wide variety of social behaviors . In particular , groups form a clear dominance hierarchy where only dominant pairs breed . The female normally gives birth to twins and uses pheromones to prevent other females in the group from breeding . These tamarins have been extensively studied for their high level of cooperative care , as well as altruistic and spiteful behaviors . Communication between cotton @-@ top tamarins is sophisticated and shows evidence of grammatical structure , a language feature that must be acquired . 
 Up to 40 @,@ 000 cotton @-@ top tamarins are thought to have been caught and exported for use in biomedical research before 1976 , when CITES gave them the highest level of protection and all international trade was banned . Now , the species is at risk due to large @-@ scale habitat destruction , as the lowland forest in northwestern Colombia where the cotton @-@ top tamarin is found has been reduced to 5 % of its previous area . It is currently classified as critically endangered and is one of the rarest primates in the world , with only 6 @,@ 000 individuals left in the wild . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 Saguinus <unk> the common names " cotton @-@ top tamarin " and " cotton @-@ headed tamarin " in English . Its name comes from the white hair that spans its head and flows down past the neck . In Spanish , S. oedipus is commonly called <unk> , tití <unk> , " tití blanco , tití <unk> <unk> , or tití <unk> . In German @-@ speaking areas , the cotton @-@ top tamarin is commonly known as <unk> ( literally " Liszt monkey " ) most likely due to the resemblance of its hairstyle with that of Hungarian composer and piano virtuoso Franz Liszt . 
 The species was first described by Linnaeus in 1758 as Simia oedipus . Linnaeus chose the species name oedipus , which means swollen foot , but as the species does not have particularly large feet , it is unknown why he chose this name . ( Linnaeus often selected names from mythology without any particular rationale , and he may have used the name of Oedipus , the mythical Greek king of Thebes , more or less arbitrarily . ) In 1977 , Philip Hershkovitz performed a taxonomic analysis of the species based on fur coloration patterns , cranial and mandibular morphology , and ear size . He classified Geoffroy 's tamarin S. geoffroyi as a subspecies of S. oedipus . Subsequent analyses by Hernández @-@ Camacho and Cooper ( 1976 ) , Mittermeier and Coimbra @-@ Filho ( 1981 ) , and later Grooves ( 2001 ) consider the S. oedipus and S. geoffroyi types to be separate species . 
 Some researchers , such as <unk> ( 1976 ) , posit that S. oedipus is more closely related to the white @-@ footed tamarin ( S. leucopus ) than to S. geoffroyi . This view is supported by <unk> and <unk> 's analysis of toothcomb dental morphology ( 1987 ) and by Skinner ( 1991 ) , who found similarities between S. oedipus and S. leucopus in 16 of 17 morphological traits considered . 
 This species of white @-@ headed tamarin is thought to have diverged from the other Amazonian forms such as S. leucopus . This is supported by morphological considerations of the transition from juvenile to adulthood , during which the fur coloration patterns change significantly and are similar between the two species . Hershkovitz proposed that the separation of the two species happened in the Pleistocene at the height of the Atrato River , where it intersected the Cauca @-@ Magdalena . At that time , the area was covered by a sea , which created a geographic barrier that caused the species to diverge through the process of allopatric speciation . Today , the two species are principally separated by the Atrato River . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin is part of the most diminutive family of monkeys , Callitrichidae , the marmosets and tamarins ; it weighs 432 g ( 15 @.@ 2 oz ) on average . Its head – body length is 20 @.@ 8 – 25 @.@ 9 cm ( 8 @.@ 2 – 10 @.@ 2 in ) , while its tail — which is not prehensile — is slightly longer at around 33 – 41 cm ( 13 – 16 in ) . The species is not sexually dimorphic , the male and female are of a similar size and weight . Members of the <unk> subfamily ( including this species ) have sharp nails ( tegulae ) on all digits except the big toes , which have the flat nails ( <unk> ) common to other primates . <unk> resemble a squirrel 's claws and help with movement through trees . 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin has a long sagittal crest , consisting of white hairs , from forehead to nape flowing over the shoulders . The skin of the face is black with gray or white bands located above the eyes . These bands continue along the edge of the face down to the jaw . Tamarins are generally divided into three groups by their facial characteristics : hairy @-@ faced , mottled @-@ faced , and bare @-@ faced . The cotton @-@ top tamarin has fine white hairs covering its face , but they are so fine as to appear naked , thus is considered a bare @-@ faced tamarin . Its lower canine teeth are longer than its incisors , creating the appearance of tusks . Like other <unk> , the cotton @-@ top tamarin has two molar teeth on each side of its jaw , not three like other New World monkeys . 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin has fur covering all of the body except the palms of the hands and feet , the eyelids , the borders of the nostrils , the nipples , the anus , and the penis . The back is brown , and the underparts , arms and legs are whitish @-@ yellow . The rump and inner thighs and upper tail are reddish @-@ orange . The fur is distributed with varying densities throughout the body : the genital region ( scrotum and pubic zone ) , axilla , and the base of the tail have lower densities , while the forward region is much higher . Many individuals have stripes or whorls of fur of striking coloration on their throats . The cotton @-@ top also has whiskers on its forehead and around its mouth . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin is restricted to a small area of northwest Colombia , between the Cauca and Magdalena Rivers to the south and east , the Atlantic coast to the north , and the Atrato River to the west . They mostly live Brazil , 2 / 3 of there habitat has been destroyed . Historically , the entirety of this area was suitable for the cotton @-@ top tamarin , but due to habitat loss through deforestation , it survives in fragmented parks and reserves . One of the most important areas for the cotton @-@ top is the <unk> National Park , which consists of 460 @,@ 000 hectares ( 1 @,@ 800 sq mi ) of primary and secondary forest . 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin is found in both primary and secondary forests , from humid tropical forests in the south of its range to tropical dry forests in the north . It is seldom found at altitudes above 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) , but has been encountered up to 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) . It prefers the lower levels of the tropical forests , but may also be found foraging on the ground and anywhere between the understory and the canopy . It can adapt to forest fragments and can survive in relatively disturbed habitats . In the dry forests are pronounced seasons . Between December and April , it is dry , while heavy rainfall occurs between August and November which can flood the forest floor . Across its range , annual rainfall varies between 500 and 1 @,@ 300 mm ( 20 and 51 in ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin has a diet of mainly fruit ( 40 % ) and animal material ( 40 % ) . This includes insects , plant exudates such as gum and sap , nectar , and occasionally reptiles and amphibians . Due to its small body size and high food passage rate , its diet must be high @-@ quality and high @-@ energy . <unk> is common in the cotton @-@ top and the species hunts for insects using a variety of methods : stealth , pouncing , chasing , exploring holes , and turning over leaves . 
 Tamarins act as seed dispersers in tropical ecosystems . While larger primates eat larger seeds , tamarins eat the smaller ones . The expelled seeds have a higher germination rate than others and ingesting larger seeds may help to dislodge and expel intestinal parasites . 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin is diurnal and sleeps with its social group in trees with foliage cover . The group leaves the sleeping tree together an hour after dawn and spends the day foraging , resting , travelling , and grooming . The species is thought to rise late and increases the speed of its foraging and travelling before dusk to avoid crepuscular and nocturnal predators . Its main predators include raptors , mustelids , felids , and snakes . The cotton @-@ top tamarin is extremely vigilant , always looking for potential predators . When the group is resting , one individual moves apart and acts as a lookout to alert the group if it sees a threat . 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin can live as long as 24 years in captivity , while its lifespan in the wild averages 13 years . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Social systems = = = 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin is a highly social primate that typically lives in groups of two to nine individuals , but may reach up to 13 members . These small familial groups tend to fluctuate in size and in composition of individuals and a clear dominance hierarchy is always present within a party . At the head of the group is the breeding pair . The male and female in this pair are typically in a monogamous reproductive relationship , and together serve as the group 's dominant leaders . 
 Dominant pairs are the only breeding pair within their groups , and the female generally has authority over the breeding male . While nonbreeding group members can be the leading pair 's offspring , immigrant adults may also live with and cooperate in these groups . This social grouping in cotton @-@ top tamarins is hypothesized to arise from predation pressure . Cotton @-@ top tamarins exhibit prosocial behavior that benefits other members of the group , and are well known for engaging in cooperative breeding whereby the group 's subordinate adults help in rearing the offspring of the dominant pair . The dominant female is more likely to give birth to nonidentical twins than a singleton , so it would be too energetically expensive for just one pair to raise the young . 
 To prevent younger , subordinate females within the group from breeding , the dominant female uses pheromones . This suppresses sexual behavior and delays puberty . Unrelated males that join the group can release the females from this reproductive suppression ; this may result in more than one female of the group becoming pregnant , but only one of the pregnancies will be successful . 
 = = = = Cooperation = = = = 
 In cooperative breeding , the effort put into caring for the dominant breeders ' offspring is shared by the group members . Parents , siblings , and immigrant adults share young rearing duties for the breeding pair 's young . These duties include carrying , protecting , feeding , comforting , and even engaging in play behavior with the group 's young . Cotton @-@ top tamarins display high levels of parental investment during infant care . Males , particularly those that are paternal , show a greater involvement in caregiving than do females . Despite this , both male and female infants prefer contact and proximity to their mothers over their fathers . Males may invest additional support in rearing offspring as a form of courtship to win favor of the group 's dominant female . However , evidence indicates that time spent carrying infants does not correlate with a male 's overall copulation frequency . 
 Since only one female in a group breeds , heavy investment in infant care ensures that all offspring survive until independence . Accordingly , cotton @-@ top tamarins bear excessive costs to care for the group 's young . Male carriers , especially paternal carriers , incur large energetic costs for the sake of the group 's young . This burden may cause some male cotton @-@ tops to lose up to 10 @-@ 11 % of their total body weight . The large weight loss may occur from reduced food intake as infant @-@ carrying inhibits foraging ability for a carrier . The trend of male @-@ carrier weight loss and decreased food intake is in contrast to the dominant female 's <unk> period , when she gains weight after increasing her own food intake and relinquishing much of her infant @-@ carrying duties . 
 = = = = Altruism = = = = 
 While caregiving by males appears to be altruistic , particularly in cotton @-@ top sires , the costs of infant care may in fact be tolerated for selfish reasons . Namely , the costs to male weight and foraging ability may in turn promote consecutive pregnancies in dominant females , thereby providing more offspring bearing the sire 's genes . Additionally , the cooperative breeding structure of cotton @-@ tops can change with group size and parental experience . First @-@ time sires spend a greater amount of time carrying the infant than experienced ones , and in smaller groups , sires do a greater proportion of carrying and feeding the infant than in larger groups , where helpers take on more of the work . Total care for infants remains constant with varying group size , and infant outcome is not significantly different in groups that have differing levels of experience in raising offspring . 
 The cooperative breeding hypothesis predicts that cotton @-@ top tamarins engage with this young @-@ rearing paradigm , and in turn naturally embrace patterns of prosocial behavior . These monkeys engage in such behavior by acting altruistically within their groups in caring for infants , vocalizing alarm calls , and in sharing food . Though some studies indicate that cotton @-@ top tamarins have the psychological capacity to participate in reciprocally mediated altruism , it is unclear whether the cotton @-@ top tamarin acts solely using judgements on reinforcement history . 
 Other studies involving cotton @-@ top tamarins have hinted that positive reciprocity and reciprocal altruism are irrelevant in the <unk> of these primates . Some researchers believe these primates tend to cooperate for selfish reasons and in situations where they incur some benefit for themselves . That is , cooperation in cotton @-@ top tamarins can be better described by mutualism than by true altruism . 
 Tamarins in captivity have shown the ability to distinguish other individuals based on cooperative tendencies and past behavior . Cotton @-@ tops ultimately use this information to guide future cooperation . Brief periods of defection tend to cause swift , irreparable breakups between these primates and their cooperators . To avoid this , cotton @-@ top tamarins may make economically driven decisions based on the projected incentives of a potential <unk> . 
 = = = = Spite and aggression = = = = 
 Despite an expansive array of altruistic behaviors , cotton @-@ top tamarins engage in great bouts of spite through negative reciprocity and punishment . They have been observed to immediately start denying cooperation with monkeys that deny them benefits . Further , in captivity , these primates are not observed to increase altruistic behavior with fellow primates that are committed fully to cooperation . Based on this , researchers believe that repeated interactions in a cooperative society like that of the cotton @-@ top tamarin can heighten the chances that an individual will designate behavioral punishments to others in its group . This reaction has also been observed in other species . However , these reciprocal punishments , or relative lack of altruistic actions , may alternatively happen as a result of response facilitation that increases the chances of a cotton @-@ top punishing another primate after watching that individual perform a similar action . 
 Another way to look at punishment in cotton @-@ top tamarins is by observing their aggressive behavioral responses within and between groups , as well as between species . The cotton @-@ top tamarin , like many marmosets , other tamarins , and specifically those in the genus Saguinus , stages aggressive displays almost exclusively towards fellow monkeys that belong to the same gender . These intrasexual displays of aggression are more frequent in females , and are vital when a breeding female is forcing both subadult and adult females to emigrate out of a familial group . 
 Though aggression can occur within groups , the response towards intruders of another species is much more drastic and can involve a sexual dimorphism in displays . Females typically employ scent @-@ marking intruder response tactics , whereas males are more prone to vocalizing threats , physical aggression , and piloerection . Scent @-@ marking in cotton @-@ top tamarins is done in two ways : either using anogenital scent @-@ marking , or <unk> scent @-@ marking . The ability to use both of these separate glandular fields for threat signals may indicate females have developed diverging evolutionary threats through differential use of these markings . These variable signals may be used to sign a territorial encounter , or serve as a reproductive signal . The intensity of female threats are generally comparable when directed at intruders of either genders . In contrast , male cotton @-@ tops are considerably more threatening towards fellow males than towards females . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin vocalizes with bird @-@ like whistles , soft chirping sounds , high @-@ pitched trilling , and staccato calls . Researchers describe its repertoire of 38 distinct sounds as unusually sophisticated , conforming to grammatical rules . Jayne Cleveland and Charles Snowdon performed an in @-@ depth feature analysis to classify the cotton @-@ top 's repertoire of vocalizations in 1982 . They concluded that it uses a simple grammar consisting of eight phonetic variations of short , frequency @-@ modulated " chirps " — each representing varying messages — and five longer constant frequency " whistles " . They hypothesize that some of these calls demonstrate that the cotton @-@ top tamarin uses phonetic syntax , while other calls may be exemplars of lexical syntax usage . Each type of call is given a letter signifier ; for example , C @-@ calls are associated with finding food and D @-@ calls are associated with eating . Further , these calls can be modified to better deliver information relevant to auditory localization in call @-@ recipients . Using this range of vocalizations , the adults may be able to communicate with one another about intention , thought processes , and emotion , including curiosity , fear , dismay , playfulness , warnings , joy , and calls to young . 
 = = = = Language acquisition = = = = 
 Over the first 20 weeks after a cotton @-@ top tamarin is born , it is not fully capable of producing the range of vocalizations that an adult monkey can . Despite this limitation on speech <unk> , researchers believe that language acquisition occurs early on with speech comprehension abilities arising first . Infants can at times produce adult @-@ like chirps , but this is rarely done in the correct context and remains inconsistent across the first 20 weeks of life . Regardless , infant cotton @-@ tops are able to respond in behaviorally appropriate ways to varying contexts when presented with adult chirps . This indicates that verbal perception is a quickly acquired skill for offspring , followed closely by auditory comprehension , and later by proper vocal <unk> . 
 Castro and Snowdon ( 2000 ) observed that aside from inconsistent adult @-@ like chirping , cotton @-@ top infants most often produce a prototype chirp that differs in vocalization structure from anything seen in the full adult range of vocalizations . Infants are thought to imitate adult speakers , which use differing calls in various contexts , but by using solely the infant prototypical chirp . For instance , adult cotton @-@ tops are known to significantly reduce the amount of general alarm calling in the presence of infants . This is likely adapted so that adults in close proximity to the group 's young do not attract attention of predators to infant @-@ dense areas . Additionally , infants reduce their prototype chirping in the presence of predators . Whether infants are shadowing the calling behavior of adults or they are comprehending danger remains unclear . However , researchers argue that young cotton @-@ top tamarins are able to represent semantic information regardless of immature speech production . 
 To confirm the notion that language acquisition occurs as a progression of comprehension before production , Castro and Snowdon ( 2000 ) showed that infants respond behaviorally to vocalizing adults in a fashion that indicates they can comprehend auditory inputs . When an adult produces a C @-@ call chirp , used to indicate food preference and when navigating to a food source , an infant approaches the adult caller to be fed , but do not use the prototype calling as a proxy for C @-@ calls . This finding argues for the idea that infants are able to understand vocalizations first , and later acquire the ability to communicate with adult vocalizations . 
 = = = = General calling = = = = 
 Among the typical cotton @-@ top tamarin communicative vocalizations , the combination long call ( CLC ) and the alarm call ( AC ) are the most heavily represented in the literature . CLCs encompass a range of contact calls that are produced by isolated individuals using chirps and whistles . This type of call is also used for seemingly altruistic alarm calls , thus adding to its range of cooperative behaviors . It is issued in the presence of kin when a threatening llamas predator is seen . Predators of the cotton @-@ top tamarin include snakes , <unk> , <unk> , and most notably , hawks . Early observations by Patricia <unk> even showed that cotton @-@ tops produce diverse sets of alarm calls that can discriminate the presence of birds of prey versus ground @-@ based predators . 
 CLCs involve the production of complex sequence <unk> vocalizations . Researchers have argued that long calls exhibit individual differences , thus can carry information sufficient for recipients to determine caller identity . Using habituation @-@ discrimination paradigms in language experiments , this theory has been confirmed multiple times in literature . However , the individual syllables within a complete CLC vocalization in isolation of each other do not transfer sufficient information to communicate messages between monkeys . Scientists thus consider the whole , intact string of vocalizations to be the unit of perception for CLCs in the cotton @-@ top tamarin . These examinations may confirm that cotton @-@ tops incorporate a lexical syntax in areas of their communication . 
 Since tamarins can discriminate between predatory threats using varying vocalizations , recipients of an AC are thought to extract various complex signals from this form of communication . Primarily , cotton @-@ tops are able to glean the identity of the cooperating tamarin through differences in individuals ' alarm calls . Further , adults are able to discriminate the gender of callers from their <unk> and determine the range of calls within a related tamarin 's alarm calling repertoire . Alarm call @-@ based identification is postulated to play a number of functional roles in the cotton @-@ top tamarin . Firstly , an AC recipient is able to identify a cooperating tamarin , and by recognizing which in their group it is , be able to judge the reliability of the AC from past experience . This may arise from a selective pressure for being able to statistically determine the amount of risk present , and how endangered an individual and its group are . 
 Additionally , being able to localize auditory signals may help determine predator location , especially in the presence of a second AC from a different tamarin in the group . This can help confirm predator presence , type ( e.g. flying versus ground @-@ based ) , and support the recipient in triangulating a predator 's location . In the context of the cotton @-@ top 's cooperative breeding groups , this is postulated as being adaptive for determining the variable risk to one 's group members . For example , a call recipient is able to determine which of its kin are and are not at risk ( e.g. young offspring , mates , subordinates , relatives , carriers , etc . ) and plan subsequent actions accordingly . 
 = = = = Food calls = = = = 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin makes selective , specialized vocalizations in the presence of food . These include the C @-@ call , produced when a cotton @-@ top approaches and sorts through food , and the D @-@ call , which is associated with food retrieval and is exhibited while eating . 
 C @-@ call chirping is believed to be an honest signal for communicating food preference , and a cotton @-@ top tamarin more often and more rapidly vocalizes with these chirps when approaching a highly favored food source . Functionally , this behavior may inform other tamarins of the actions the caller will take in a feeding context and whether a preferable food source is available . Despite this research indicating that food calls may be informative to fellow group mates , other observations of cotton @-@ tops show that quantity and distribution of food and audience do not significantly alter a caller 's food @-@ centered vocalizations . 
 The cotton @-@ top tamarin is seen to produce food calls both in the presence and absence of group members . Additionally , response to food calls are directed back to an original caller independent of visual confirmation of a food source . While this may appear to be a result from a very primitive form of communication , Roush and Snowdon ( 2005 ) maintain that the food @-@ calling behavior confers some mentally representable information about food to recipient tamarins . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The wild population is estimated at 6 @,@ 000 individuals , with 2 @,@ 000 adults . This species is critically endangered , and was listed in the " The World 's 25 Most Endangered Primates between 2008 and 2012 . " The publication lists highly endangered primate species and is released every two years by the International Union for Conservation of Nature Species Survival Commission Primate Specialist Group . The cotton @-@ top tamarin was not selected for the 2012 – 2014 publication . 
 Habitat destruction through forest clearing is the main cause of this collapse , and the cotton @-@ top has lost more than three @-@ quarters of its original habitat to deforestation , while the lowland forest in which it lives has been reduced to 5 % of its historical range . This land is then used for large @-@ scale agricultural production ( i.e. cattle ) and farming , logging , oil palm plantations , and hydroelectric projects that fragment the cotton @-@ top tamarin 's natural range . 
 The illegal pet trade and scientific research have also been cited as factors by the IUCN . While biomedical studies have recently limited their use of this species , illegal capture for the pet trade still plays a major role in endangering the cotton @-@ top . Before 1976 , when CITES listed the species under Appendix I banning all international trade , the cotton @-@ top tamarin was exported for use in biomedical research . 
 In captivity , the cotton @-@ top is highly prone to colitis , which is linked to an increased risk of a certain type of colon cancer . Up to 40 @,@ 000 individuals were caught and exported for research into those diseases , as well as Epstein @-@ Barr virus , for the benefit of humans . The species is now protected by international law . Although enough individuals are in captivity to sustain the species , it is still critically endangered in the wild . 
 The Proyecto <unk> ( " Project <unk> " ) was started in 1985 to provide information and support in conservation of the cotton @-@ top tamarin and its habitat in northern Colombia . Proyecto <unk> 's programs combine field research , education , and community programs to spread awareness about this endangered species and encourage the public to participate in its protection . It now has partner status with the Wildlife Conservation Network . 
 In January 2015 , two captive cotton @-@ top tamarins at the Alexandria Zoological Park in Alexandria , Louisiana , died when a caretaker left them outside overnight in temperatures as low as 30 ° F. One other individual survived . 
 = Take a Bow ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Take a Bow " is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna for Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded ( 2008 ) , the re @-@ release of her third studio album Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) . The song was written and produced by Tor Erik Hermansen , Mikkel Eriksen , and Shaffer Smith under their stage names StarGate and Ne @-@ Yo . " Take a Bow " was released as the first single from the re @-@ release and the fifth single overall from the two releases . It is an R & B song that contains elements of dance @-@ pop . Critical reception of " Take a Bow " was mixed , with some critics praising the song 's lyrics and powerful balladry impact , while others criticized the lack of originality with regard to StarGate 's production . 
 In the US , the song peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and became Rihanna 's third song to do so . " Take a Bow " also peaked at number one on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and US Pop Songs chart , and has been certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . The song reached number one in Canada , Denmark , Ireland , Slovakia and the United Kingdom , and attained top five positions in Australia , New Zealand and Norway . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Anthony Mandler and presents Rihanna as the female protagonist who leaves her boyfriend because of his infidelity . " Take a Bow " has been performed on " AOL Music Sessions " and was included in the set lists of the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2008 – 09 ) , Last Girl on Earth ( 2010 – 11 ) , Loud Tour ( 2011 ) and Diamonds World Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Take a Bow " was written and produced by StarGate and Ne @-@ Yo . The song premiered on February 14 , 2008 , on the KIIS @-@ FM radio show On Air with Ryan Seacrest . " Take a Bow " was released as the fifth overall single from Good Girl Gone Bad , but the first from the re @-@ release of the album , entitled Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded . " Take a Bow " was made available to purchase in media outlets , via Def Jam Recordings ' website , on the same day as its radio premiere in the United States later being made available to download via iTunes on May 6 , 2008 . The song is written in the key of E major and is set in simple time with a metronome of 82 beats per minute . Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of E3 to the high note of C ♯ 5 . Musically , the song draws influence from the musical genre of R & B and also incorporates elements of dance @-@ pop , whilst lyrically , " Take a Bow " tells of how the female protagonist expresses disinterest in rekindling her relationship with an dishonorable and unfaithful ex @-@ boyfriend . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Take a Bow " received mixed reviews from music critics . Upon the song 's release as an official single , Nick Levine of Digital Spy commented its choice for the promotion of Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded , writing that the singer could have chosen " Breakin ' Dishes " which served as a promotional single for Good Girl Gone Bad and charted at number four on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart in February 2008 — but had opted for " Take a Bow " due to it being new and more likely to find a receptive audience . Levine continued in his review to write that although the ballad succeeds in its mission of telling of a failed relationship , he noted that the song was not at the same level as the singer 's previous single , " Don 't Stop the Music " ( 2007 ) . Levine cited that his reason for this was that " ' Take a Bow ' does what it sets out to do very well , but it 's an underwhelming follow @-@ up to the dancefloor rush of ' Don 't Stop The Music ' " . Levine also commented on the song with regard to the other new songs included on the re @-@ release , " Disturbia " and " If I Never See Your Face Again " ( a collaboration with Maroon 5 ) , as part of his review of Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded , writing that " Take a Bow " is inferior to the former , but superior to the latter . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , the song leaped 52 positions from number 53 to number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart on May 14 , 2008 , with digital download sales of 267 @,@ 000 copies , which prompted the song to debut at number one on the US Hot Digital Songs chart . With " Take a Bow " jumping fifty @-@ two positions to number one , this marked the second largest leap to number one in the history of the chart as of May 2008 , second only to Maroon 5 's " Makes Me Wonder " , which leaped from number 64 to number one in May 2007 . Additionally , at the time of release , Rihanna held two of the top three opening week download tallies , with " Take a Bow " selling 267 @,@ 000 copies , the lead single from Good Girl Gone Bad " Umbrella " selling 277 @,@ 000 copies in May 2007 , which held the record for having the largest opening digital sales tally , until Mariah Carey 's " Touch My Body " opened with sales of 286 @,@ 000 copies in April 2008 . The song became Rihanna 's third number one single on the Hot 100 , after " SOS " and " Umbrella " . " Take a Bow " stayed on the Hot 100 chart for 27 weeks , and also peaked at number one on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , Mainstream Top 40 and Radio Songs charts , respectively . However , the song was less successful on the US Hot Dance Club Songs and Adult Contemporary charts , peaking at numbers 14 and 21 , respectively . The song has been certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America and has sold 3 million copies in the United States as of June 2015 . It also ranked at number 3 on Billboard 's Songs of Summer 2008 . In Canada , the song leaped 69 positions from number 70 to number one on May 24 , 2008 , becoming the largest jump to number one in the history of the chart at the time . 
 In Australia , " Take a Bow " debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number 30 on May 15 , 2008 , and jumped to number 13 the following week . The song peaked at number three in its eighth week on the chart , after having spent four weeks fluctuating in the top ten . In total the song spent 11 weeks in the top ten and 22 weeks on the chart . " Take a Bow " has since been certified Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association , denoting shipments of over 70 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , the song debuted on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number four on May 5 , 2008 , and peaked at number two for five non @-@ consecutive weeks . In total , the song spent 10 weeks inside the top five and 15 weeks in total on the chart . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Take a Bow " debuted at number two on the UK Singles Chart on May 24 , 2008 , behind The Ting Tings " That 's Not My Name " . The following week , the two songs switched positions , with " Take a Bow " ascending to number one and " That 's Not My Name " descending to number two ; " Take a Bow " spent a total of two weeks atop the chart . On November 12 , 2010 , the song was certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry , denoting shipments of over 400 @,@ 000 copies . As of January 2016 , it has sold over 499 @,@ 900 copies in the UK . 
 In Denmark , the song debuted at number 13 on the Danish Singles Chart on June 6 , 2008 , and peaked at number one in its third week . After fluctuating in the top ten for three weeks , the song ascended to number two in its seventh and eighth weeks , and went on to stay in the top ten for a further five weeks . " Take a Bow " spent 12 weeks in the top ten and 20 weeks on the chart in total . In Norway , the song debuted at number eight on the Norwegian Singles Chart and peaked at number five the following week . " Take a Bow " stayed in the top ten for four weeks and spent six weeks on the chart in total . In Austria , the song debuted at number 16 on the Austrian Singles Chart on June 6 , 2008 , and peaked at number six in its fourth week on the chart for six non @-@ consecutive weeks . " Take a Bow " spent 10 weeks inside the top ten and a 25 weeks on the chart in total . In Switzerland , the song debuted at number 29 on the Swiss Singles Chart on May 18 , 2008 , and peaked at number seven for one week . " Take a Bow " spent a total of 29 weeks on the chart . Elsewhere in Europe , however , the song did not experience the same degree of success . " Take a Bow " peaked at numbers 10 , 12 and 12 in The Netherlands , France and Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Anthony Mandler , who had previously directed Rihanna videos for " Hate That I Love You " and " Shut Up and Drive " . The video was shot in Venice , Los Angeles on April 3 , 2008 . The video begins with Rihanna standing in front of a black backdrop for the opening of the song . As the first verse starts , the scene is intercut with another of Rihanna looking out the window at her boyfriend and standing behind the front door as he approaches and asks to come in . As Rihanna walks way from the door singing the lyrics " Don 't tell me you 're sorry cos you 're not " , the viewer realizes that her boyfriend has perhaps done something wrong and been unfaithful . During the first chorus and second verse , Rihanna is shown in a different outfit , this time sitting in a silver Porsche in a garage . As Rihanna pulls out of the garage and onto the street , her ex @-@ boyfriend walks alongside the car as she drives and begs her to forgive him ; she pulls away . For the bridge , Rihanna is shown sitting on a bed as well as in front of the black backdrops as she reads a text message from her ex @-@ boyfriend , who asks to meet her . During the last chorus , Rihanna appears in a different outfit and walks into a lounge , where she puts some clothes on a table and then sits on a sofa . As her ex @-@ boyfriend walks in , the singer gets up and walks over to the clothes , where she withdraws some matches and strikes one , dropping it on what is made aware to be some of her ex @-@ boyfriend 's clothes . As the song comes to and end , Rihanna walks out of the room whilst he tries to put out the fire . 
 Erika Brooks Adickman of Idolator commented that Rihanna had once again changed her hair style and was wearing a red jacket which looked similar to the one Michael Jackson 's video " Beat It " . Adickman continued to compare the content of the video to Beyoncé 's " Irreplaceable " , writing that it was her first video to contain a plot , but , in actuality , the videos of " Unfaithful " ( 2006 ) and " Hate That I Love You " ( 2007 ) both contain a plot . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 To promote Rihanna 's fourth studio album , Rated R ( 2009 ) in the United Kingdom , Rihanna performed " Take a Bow " at the launch of the Nokia X6 smartphone at Brixton Academy in London . Other songs on the set list were " Russian Roulette " and " Wait Your Turn " from Rated R , and " Don 't Stop the Music " , " Disturbia " , and with Jay @-@ Z , " Umbrella " from Good Girl Gone Bad . During the promotion of Rated R , Rihanna also recorded video performances of her songs for " AOL Music Sessions " ; these videos were made available to watch on AOL 's website on February 23 , 2010 . The set included " Take A Bow " , as well as " Russian Roulette , " Hard " , " Rude Boy " and a stripped down version of " Disturbia " . " Take a Bow " has been included on four of Rihanna 's arena tours : the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour , Last Girl on Earth , Loud Tour and Diamonds World Tour . The song was featured in the encore section of the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour , along with " Umbrella " . For the Last Girl on Earth and Loud Tours , the song was featured as the last to be performed before the encore section . A minimal version of the song was also included on her Diamonds World Tour during the fourth act . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 " Take a Bow " was released on CD and 12 " vinyl commercially and as " Take a Bow : Remixes " promotionally and digitally . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded . 
 Robyn " Rihanna " Fenty – Vocals 
 Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , Shaffer Smith – Songwriting 
 Stargate , Ne @-@ Yo – Production 
 Mikkel S. Eriksen – Vocal production 
 Phil Tan – Mixing 
 Josh Houghkirk – Assistant Mixer 
 Stargate – Instrumentation 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Sales and certifications = = 
 Since May 2013 RIAA certifications for digital singles include on @-@ demand audio and / or video song streams in addition to downloads . 
 = Maryland Route 170 = 
 Maryland Route 170 ( MD 170 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 12 @.@ 98 miles ( 20 @.@ 89 km ) from MD 175 in Odenton north to MD 2 in Brooklyn Park . MD 170 connects the western Anne Arundel County communities of Odenton and Severn and the North County communities of Linthicum , Pumphrey , and Brooklyn Park with Baltimore / Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport ( BWI Airport ) . The highway connects BWI Airport with Interstate 695 ( I @-@ 695 ) and MD 100 and forms part of the Airport Loop , a circumferential highway that connects the airport and I @-@ 195 with many airport @-@ related services . 
 MD 170 originally served as the main highway between Baltimore and Fort George G. Meade . This highway , which included part of modern MD 174 west of Severn , was mostly constructed shortly after Camp Meade was established during World War I in the late 1910s . The Odenton – Severn portion of MD 170 was originally built as MD 554 in the 1930s , but became part of MD 170 in the mid @-@ 1940s . MD 170 went through another round of upgrades in the early 1940s due to its strategic importance during World War II . The highway originally passed through the area now occupied by BWI Airport . MD 170 was relocated north of MD 176 in the late 1940s during the construction of the airport and south of MD 176 in the late 1950s . The highway has been expanded to four lanes around its interchanges with I @-@ 195 , I @-@ 695 , MD 32 , and MD 100 and along the perimeter of BWI Airport since the 1960s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 170 begins at an intersection with MD 175 ( Annapolis Road ) in Odenton . The highway continues south as county @-@ maintained Piney Orchard Parkway , which leads to the Odenton station on MARC 's Penn Line and the Piney Orchard community . MD 170 heads north on Telegraph Road , which begins as a four @-@ lane divided highway but reduces to a two @-@ lane road and passes through an industrial area . The state highway expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway again shortly before its diamond interchange with MD 32 ( Patuxent Freeway ) . MD 170 continues north as a two @-@ lane road with a center turn lane that crosses Severn Run . The center turn lane ends as the highway approaches the center of Severn . There , the highway intersects MD 174 , which heads west as Reese Road and east as Donaldson Avenue . MD 170 expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway as it approaches its single @-@ point urban interchange with MD 100 ( Paul T. Pitcher Memorial Highway ) . The highway becomes an undivided four @-@ lane road between MD 100 and its intersection with MD 176 ( Dorsey Road ) at <unk> . The long ramp from westbound MD 176 to northbound MD 100 is unsigned MD 170A . 
 MD 170 continues north as Aviation Boulevard and joins the Airport Loop . The highway parallels the Amtrak Northeast Corridor , which carries MARC 's Penn Line , and the hiker @-@ biker BWI Trail . MD 170 meets the eastern end of Stoney Run Road , which heads east and immediately loops back west and crosses over the state highway and the railroad on its way to the BWI Car Rental Facility . The highway intersects unsigned MD 995 ( Amtrak Way ) , which leads to the BWI Rail Station , as it gradually curves to the east . MD 170 crosses Kitten Branch immediately before its partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 195 ( Metropolitan Boulevard ) . The highway passes under the BWI Trail and expands to a divided highway before its intersection with Terminal Road and an at @-@ grade intersection with the Baltimore Light Rail . Access to the rail line 's BWI Business District station is via Elkridge Landing Road at the next intersection . MD 170 leaves the Airport Loop at its intersection with MD 162 ( Aviation Boulevard ) , where the highway turns north onto Camp Meade Road . 
 MD 170 intersects the Baltimore Light Rail again and begins to parallel it as a two @-@ lane road with a center turn lane . The light rail veers away to the east shortly before the highway 's intersection with MD 762 ( Andover Road ) , where the center turn lane ends . MD 170 enters Linthicum and intersects the light rail line a third time and begins to parallel it again shortly before the Linthicum station in the center of the community . The highway intersects MD 169 ( Maple Road ) and expands to a four @-@ lane divided highway shortly before its partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 695 ( Baltimore Beltway ) . There is no access from MD 170 to eastbound I @-@ 695 or from westbound I @-@ 695 to MD 170 . The highway reduces to a two @-@ lane road again and passes the North Linthicum station just south of MD 648 ( Baltimore – Annapolis Boulevard ) in the center of Pumphrey . MD 170 continues northeast as Belle Grove Road , which veers away from the light rail line . The highway parallels the Patapsco River and passes under I @-@ 895 Spur ( Harbor Tunnel Thruway ) before entering Brooklyn Park . There , MD 170 reaches its northern terminus at a five @-@ way intersection with MD 2 , Jack Street , and Hanover Street at the Baltimore city limits . MD 2 heads south as Governor Ritchie Highway toward Glen Burnie and north into the city as Potee Street . 
 MD 170 is a part of the National Highway System from its southern terminus in Odenton to I @-@ 695 in Linthicum . Within that stretch , there are two sections that serve as intermodal passenger transport links : from its southern terminus to MD 32 in Odenton , and from MD 176 to MD 162 along the perimeter of BWI Airport . The portions from MD 32 in Odenton to MD 176 in Severn and from MD 162 to I @-@ 695 within Linthicum are National Highway System principal arterials . 
 = = History = = 
 When the Maryland State Roads Commission applied numbers to state highways , they assigned MD 170 to its current corridor from Severn to Brooklyn Park and to what is now MD 174 from Severn to Fort Meade . The portion of the modern highway from Odenton to Severn was originally MD 554 . Much of what was to become MD 170 was constructed along the Old Annapolis Road between Pumphrey and Severn . A portion of this road ran through the hamlet of Wellham Crossroads in the middle of what is now BWI Airport . The highway was paved in macadam from the Baltimore – Annapolis Boulevard in Pumphrey to Hammonds Ferry Road in Linthicum by 1910 . A second section of improved highway was planned by 1910 from Linthicum south to Wellham Crossroads . A section of highway from the current MD 170 – MD 174 intersection in Severn west to the Pennsylvania Railroad ( now Amtrak Northeast Corridor ) was built as a 14 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) concrete road by 1915 . 
 Construction on the highway from Severn to Linthicum became a high priority with the United States ' entrance into World War I ; the remainder of the Severn – Linthicum highway and the highway from the railroad at Severn southwest to newly established Camp Meade , now collectively called the Camp Meade Road , were paved in 14 @-@ to @-@ 16 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 3 to 4 @.@ 9 m ) concrete between 1916 and 1919 . Belle Grove Road from Pumphrey to Brooklyn Park was also paved in concrete in this period of time . A poorly constructed portion of the Camp Meade Road between Wellham Crossroads and Dorsey Road was repaved with asphalt in 1919 . MD 170 was relocated at the railroad crossing when the highway 's overpass of the Pennsylvania Railroad was completed in 1931 . The old road , which is now Severn Station Road west of the tracks and Old Camp Meade Road to the east , became MD 483 . 
 Telegraph Road from Severn to Odenton was built as a concrete road in three sections . The highway was constructed from the right @-@ angle turn in the Camp Meade Road in Severn south to Evergreen Road in 1932 and 1933 . Another section of MD 554 was completed from Odenton Road ( then MD 180 and later MD 677 ) in Odenton to a point north of Old Mill Road in 1936 . The gap in MD 554 was filled in or shortly after 1940 . MD 170 was widened to 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) from Brooklyn Park to Pumphrey in 1940 . With the outbreak of World War II , MD 170 was designated a road of strategic importance to connect Baltimore with Fort Meade ; the highway was reconstructed as a 24 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) asphalt @-@ surfaced concrete road in 1942 . By 1946 , MD 170 and MD 554 had swapped numbers , with the former now the road from Severn to Odenton . 
 MD 170 was relocated as a 24 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) road from MD 176 north to what is now the MD 170 – MD 162 junction in 1947 and 1948 to make way for the construction of Friendship International Airport . The highway 's interchange with the Friendship International Airport Access Road , which was designated MD 46 and later became I @-@ 195 , was started in 1950 , the same year the airport opened , and completed in 1954 . South of the airport , MD 170 ran concurrently with MD 176 from the current MD 176 – MD 652 intersection west to current MD 170A , which the highway used to connect with the modern alignment of MD 170 . The stub of MD 170 north from MD 176 to Friendship Cemetery on the airport reservation became MD 652 . MD 170 assumed its present alignment west of MD 170A when the highway was relocated from MD 176 south to the site of the MD 100 interchange as the first carriageway of an ultimate divided highway between 1958 and 1960 . The old alignment became much of current MD 652 and the portion of MD 652 north of MD 176 was transferred to county maintenance . 
 When the expressway spur between MD 168 and U.S. Route 301 ( now MD 648 ) was built between 1951 and 1954 , the expressway , which became part of the Baltimore Beltway , included an at @-@ grade intersection with MD 170 between Linthicum and Pumphrey . This junction was replaced with the present interchange in 1967 ; MD 170 was expanded to a divided highway on either side of the interchange in 1968 . MD 170 's grade separation with Stoney Run Road on the west side of the airport was built in 1982 . The state highway was expanded to a four @-@ lane divided highway from north of I @-@ 195 to MD 162 when the adjacent east – west portion of MD 162 was built in 1988 . MD 170 was expanded to a four @-@ lane divided highway through its interchange with MD 100 when the single @-@ point urban interchange was built in 1995 . MD 170 had been expanded to four lanes through its interchange with MD 32 and from MD 176 through the I @-@ 195 interchange , and had its southern terminus rolled back from MD 677 to MD 175 , by 1999 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Anne Arundel County . 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD 170A is the designation for the 0 @.@ 29 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 47 km ) one @-@ way ramp from westbound MD 176 to northbound MD 170 southwest of BWI Airport . The ramp is included in the clockwise direction of the Airport Loop and has a spur near its southern end . MD 170A , which has the official designation of MD 170 Spur , was assigned by 1999 . 
 = L 'Histoire d 'une fée , c 'est ... = 
 " L 'Histoire d 'une fée , c 'est ... " ( English : " The Story of a Fairy Is ... " ) is a 2001 song recorded by French singer @-@ songwriter Mylène Farmer . It was one of the singles from the soundtrack album for the film Rugrats in Paris : The Movie ( known in France as Les <unk> à Paris ) . Written by Farmer , with music composed by her long @-@ time songwriting collaborator Laurent Boutonnat , the song was released on 27 February 2001 . The song deals with Melusine the fairy 's life , with lyrics which seem to be innocent and childish but in fact use many double entendres and puns which refer to sexual practices . Although it had no promotion from the singer , no music video and no regular broadcast on radio , the song managed to reach the top ten in France and in Belgium . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Rugrats in Paris : The Movie was the second in a trilogy of films based on the children 's animated television series Rugrats , which features the adventures of a group of toddlers . After filming , the producers wanted to record a soundtrack for the movie with mainly French songs , as well as a few in English . Several singers were contacted , including TLC member Tionne Watkins , the 1990s boys band <unk> , Sinéad O 'Connor , Cyndi Lauper and Mylène Farmer . Persistent but unconfirmed rumours claimed that Madonna , as the founder of the Maverick company producing the soundtrack , had expressly asked Farmer to participate in the album . Farmer accepted , but preferred to produce a new song instead of licensing the rights to one of her old compositions . The recording label Maverick signed a contract for an unreleased song , with lyrics written by Farmer and music composed by her songwriting partner Laurent Boutonnat . This was the first time that the singer had recorded a song especially for a movie . An English version was canceled in favour of a French version , and eventually the song only played for about 15 seconds in the movie . The first title chosen , " <unk> @-@ moi " , was also quickly abandoned as it was too similar to the Pokémon 's cry of " <unk> @-@ les tous " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " L 'Histoire d 'une fée , c 'est ... " is a synthpop song . It tells the story of a mischievous and malicious fairy , <unk> , here embodied by Farmer . Lyrically , the song uses words referring to magic , baffling several of Farmer 's fans as the lyrics seem to be closer to the themes found in songs by young singers such as Alizée . The lyrics also contain several double entendres and puns which refer to sexual practices . The song 's title itself is ambiguous and can be deemed sexually suggestive as it contains a pun in French alluding to spanking : in French , the title " L 'Histoire d 'une fée , c 'est ... " could be phonetically understand as meaning " L 'Histoire d 'une <unk> ... " ( translation : " The Story of a Spanking " ) . 
 = = Release = = 
 In Europe the soundtrack release was postponed until 7 February 2001 because Farmer had bought the song 's royalties and finally decided to release it as a single , 14 days later . It was only released as a digipack CD single , in which the song 's lyrics are written inside , and there was no promotional format . For the second time in the singer 's career – after the song " XXL " — the single cover does not show her , but a drawing of a fairy from the film by Tom Madrid . The song began circulating online a month before the soundtrack 's release and was well received by many fans who felt that it could be a hit . The song did not receive much radio airplay , with only Europe 2 playing it regularly . " L 'Histoire d 'une fée , c 'est ... " was also released on the soundtrack of the film in a longer version than the CD single version , and was later included on Mylène Farmer 's greatest hits album Les Mots . It was also released as the third track on the European CD maxi " Les Mots " , released in the Switzerland on 4 September 2002 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song was generally well received by critics , who particularly noted the puns . According to author Erwan Chuberre , the lyrics are " as funny as disillusioned " and Farmer uses puns that " highlight her immoderate pleasure for impolite pleasures " , with a music he deemed " effective " . Author Thierry <unk> said that the song appears to be a childish fairly tale , but is actually structured in a perverse enough way to address the adult public , as the allusions to the spanking can be seen as references to sadomasochism . Journalist Benoît Cachin wrote that her puns are " of the funniest " and that the singer included in the lyrics " some very personal thoughts " , including sadness ; he added that Farmer appears to be " fun , dynamic and delightfully mischievous " on this song . 
 = = Chart performances = = 
 On 3 March 2001 , the single debuted at a peak of number nine on the French SNEP Singles Chart , providing Farmer her 22nd top ten hit . In the following weeks , the song fell steadily and remained in the top 50 for nine weeks and a total of 15 weeks on the chart . This chart performance was surprising given that the song was aired little on radio , the film met a mixed commercial success in France and there was no music video , no promotion on television , and only one format . According to Instant @-@ Mag the beauty of the single 's cover undoubtedly helped increase sales . In Belgium , the single started at number 23 on 15 March 2001 , climbed to number 11 , then peaked at number 10 . Thereafter , it dropped and fell off the Ultratop 50 after 13 weeks . On the 2001 Belgian singles year @-@ end chart , " L 'Histoire d 'une fée , c 'est ... " ranked at number 89 . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of single releases of " L 'Histoire d 'une fée , c 'est ... " : 
 CD single – <unk> 
 = = Official versions = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 These are the credits and the personnel as they appear on the back of the single : 
 Mylène Farmer – lyrics 
 Laurent Boutonnat – music , producer 
 John Eng – artistic director 
 Gena <unk> – stylist 
 Tom Madrid – drawings 
 Requiem Publishing – editions 
 Polydor – recording company 
 Henry Neu – design 
 Bertrand <unk> – mixing 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = MTV Unplugged : Los Tigres del Norte and Friends = 
 MTV Unplugged : Los Tigres del Norte and Friends is a live album by Mexican recording artists Los Tigres del Norte . It was recorded before a live audience at the Hollywood Palladium in Los Angeles , California , on February 8 , 2011 and released by Fonovisa Records on May 24 , 2011 . The album includes featured performances by Andrés Calamaro , Calle 13 , Zack de la Rocha , Juanes , Paulina Rubio and Diego Torres . 
 The album became a commercial success peaking at the top of the Mexican Albums Chart , entering the top five on the Billboard Top Latin Albums in the United States , and also being the twenty @-@ third number 1 album by the band in the Regional Mexican Albums chart . It was certified Diamond + Gold by the Mexican Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas . To promote the album , Los Tigres del Norte released " Golpes en el Corazón " , first included in their album El Ejemplo ( 1995 ) , and re @-@ recorded for the live album with fellow Mexican singer Paulina Rubio . " La Jaula de Oro " ( featuring Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Juanes ) and " América " ( featuring René Pérez of the band Calle 13 ) , were released as second and third singles , respectively . 
 Hailed as the first MTV Unplugged recording for the Regional Mexican genre and as a significant release for the Mexican music scene , the album earned a Latin Grammy Award for Best Norteño Album at the 12th Latin Grammy Awards , and a Grammy Award for Best Banda or Norteño Album . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 2010 , Jason Lipshutz of Billboard magazine reported that Los Tigres del Norte was set to record a MTV Unplugged album for MTV Tr3s . The album was to be taped in the first quarter of 2011 , and would feature special guests including Juanes , Calle 13 , Andrés Calamaro and Zack de la Rocha . By February 2011 , it was announced that Paulina Rubio and Diego Torres would join the band for the album recording session . For the band this presented a unique opportunity to re @-@ invent their music and share the stage with talented performers . " When MTV invited us to record the show , we were a little tense , this was something different for us because Unplugged albums on MTV are usually recorded by artists from different genres from us , " the band said about the recording . Jesús Lara of MTV Tr3s called the production " historic " , since the band has been culturally a part of the life of the Hispanic community in Mexico and the US . 
 = = Recording , repertoire and release = = 
 Los Tigres del Norte recorded their performance on February 8 , 2011 , at the Hollywood Palladium in Los Angeles , California . Invitations to the event were issued to fans through MTV 's website starting January 27 , 2011 . The audience waited four hours before the show started . In preparation to the show , the band sent a list of their songs to the featured performers and asked them to choose the song that better fit their own repertoire . The band performed twenty songs during the show , releasing only twelve on the standard edition of the album , and thirteen on the deluxe version . 
 The first song was " Jefe de <unk> " , followed by " <unk> La <unk> " , " Señor <unk> " , " <unk> y <unk> " and " Cuestión <unk> " . When the band started to play " Mi <unk> " and " Una <unk> Gris " , Jorge Hernandez , the band lead member , asked the audience to clap their hands . Paulina Rubio was the first guest to appear and perform " Golpes en el Corazón " , with an orchestral arrangement . Diego Torres joined afterwards to share lead vocals on " Mi Buena Suerte " . " La Puerta Negra " , " <unk> de Amor " and " Lágrimas del Corazón " followed . 
 The band and Andrés Calamaro recorded two tracks : " La Mesa del Rincón " and " Quiero <unk> Contigo " , the former to the rhythm of tango ( with three violins and a cello ) , and for the latter , Calamaro played marimba and changed the original rhythm of the song to cha @-@ cha @-@ cha . This performance had to be re @-@ taped since there was a technical failure . Zack de la Rocha performed " Somos Más Americanos " , while Juanes played guitar on " La Jaula de Oro " , a song he had to " rehearse many times " . De la Rocha recorded his part twice , incorporating more Spanish lyrics on the second take . Juanes and De la Rocha were the only featured performers selected for their work for immigration rights in the United States , a social cause important to the band . The final song recorded was " América " ; the band shared the stage with Calle 13 who , by request of their lead member René Pérez , changed the instrumentation , quickened the tempo and added trumpets and violins . The costumes the band wore on the show were donated to the Hard Rock Cafe in Los Angeles after the show . 
 = = Singles = = 
 The new recorded version of the song " Golpes en el Corazón " , featuring Paulina Rubio , was selected as the first single from the album and was released on April 19 , 2011 . The original version of the track can be found on the Tigres ' studio album El Ejemplo ( 1995 ) . Upon release it peaked at number 2 in the Billboard Top Latin Songs . The version featuring Rubio was named " one of the most pleasant songs " included on MTV Unplugged by About.com. The Los Angeles Times referred to it as a " sea of lush Latin pop " , with Rubio sounding like Julieta Venegas in a " parallel universe " . This version became very successful in Mexico , peaking atop the Monitor Latino general charts and the Mexican Airplay Chart from Billboard International . The track also reached number 39 on the Billboard Top Latin Songs , number 31 on the Regional / Mexican Airplay , and was the first song by the band to appear on the Latin Pop Airplay chart , reaching number 29 . At the 12th Latin Grammy Awards , the song received a nomination for Record of the Year , losing to Calle 13 's " Latinoamérica " . Rubio joined the band at the Latin Grammy ceremony to perform the song . 
 " La Jaula de Oro " was selected as the second single from the album . The track , recognized as one of the band 's signature songs , features Colombian singer Juanes performing and playing guitar and was named " one of the best tracks and guest performances in the whole album " by About.com. With this release the record label sought to reach a younger audience for Los Tigres del Norte . " América " was the third single released which reached number five on the Monitor Latino general chart . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 An advance copy of the performance was sent to the media a few days before the first showing on MTV Tr3s . Spanish news agency EFE announced that the band was celebrating " Latino pride more vigorously than ever . " Another positive review came from the Los Angeles Times , which awarded the album three out of four stars . At the review , the newspaper named the album " one of the most anticipated Latin albums of the year " , highlighting that it is the first MTV Unplugged album of the Regional @-@ Mexican genre . They also praised the band for their performance on the first track , " Jefe de <unk> " . About the guest performances by Andrés Calamaro , Juanes and Diego Torres , stated that they were " intriguing " . Carlos Quintana of About.com hailed the show as an important music event for the Latin music , emphasizing that this recording would allow Regional @-@ Mexican music to gain new audiences around the world . Allmusic reviewer Mariano Prunes named bassist Hernán Hernández , the " musical heart of the band " , especially when joining Zack de la Rocha , playing the riff of Rage Against the Machine 's " Killing in the Name " . He also praised " América " for the participation of Calle 13 with their " razor @-@ sharp rap " intervention . Prunes also stated that MTV Unplugged would get Los Tigres a deserved recognition outside their own community . The participation by De La Rocha was also subject of a negative review by Oscar Barajas of The Young Folks . Barajas noted that De La Rocha sounded " out of place " on " Somos Mas Americanos " , trying to turn the track into a rendition of his own song " Bulls on Parade " . Barajas also was critical of the song selection , but eventually lauded the album for being " lean and mean " , with a musical urgency almost comparable to the Ramones . 
 MTV Unplugged : Los Tigres del Norte and Friends earned the Latin Grammy Award for Best Norteño Album at the 2011 ceremony . The album also was awarded the Grammy Award for Best Banda or Norteño Album at the 54th Grammy Awards , and the awards for Best Popular Album and Best Norteño Album at the Mexican Premios Oye ! . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 This track listing adapted from the liner notes . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted and peaked at number 3 on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , behind Maná 's Drama y Luz and Prince Royce 's self @-@ titled debut album . MTV Unplugged became the band 's twenty @-@ third number 1 album in the Regional Mexican Albums chart . In the Mexican Albums Chart the album debuted at number 92 , before jumping to number 2 , behind Lady Gaga 's Born This Way . The following week the album surpassed Gaga 's set and peaked at number 1 in Mexico and also reached the top of the charts in Colombia . The album spent seventeen consecutive weeks at the top of the Mexican chart , received a Diamond + Gold certification by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas and ended the year as the best @-@ selling album of 2011 in Mexico . The album was certified gold in Colombia by the Asociación Colombiana de Productores de Fonogramas . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Los Tigres del Norte – main performers , producers , vocals 
 Gustavo Borner – producer , recording engineer , mixing , mastering 
 Ezequiel Alara – musical director , piano 
 Miguel Ramirez – percussion 
 Karl <unk> – percussion 
 Enzo <unk> – trumpet 
 Arturo Solar – trumpet 
 Roberto <unk> – sax 
 <unk> Ruiz – trombone 
 Edwin Blas – trombone 
 Peter Kent – violin 
 Sharon Jackson – violin 
 Jessica <unk> – viola 
 Giovanna Clayton – cello 
 Ricky Perry – graphic design 
 Source : 
 = En passant = 
 En passant ( from French : in passing ) is a move in chess . It is a special pawn capture , that can only occur immediately after a pawn moves two ranks forward from its starting position and an enemy pawn could have captured it had the pawn moved only one square forward . Note that the capturing pawn must be on its fifth rank prior to executing this maneuver . The opponent captures the just @-@ moved pawn " as it passes " through the first square . The resulting position is the same as if the pawn had moved only one square forward and the enemy pawn had captured it normally . 
 The en passant capture must be made at the very next turn or the right to do so is lost . It is the only occasion in chess in which a piece is captured but is not replaced on its square by the capturing piece . Like any other move , if an en passant capture is the only legal move available , it must be made . En passant capture is a common theme in chess compositions . 
 The en passant capture rule was added in the 15th century when the rule that gave pawns an initial double @-@ step move was introduced . It prevents a pawn from using the two @-@ square advance to pass an adjacent enemy pawn without the risk of being captured . 
 A pawn on its fifth rank may capture an enemy pawn on an adjacent file that has moved two squares in a single move , as if the pawn had moved only one square . The conditions are : 
 the capturing pawn must be on its fifth rank ; 
 the captured pawn must be on an adjacent file and must have just moved two squares in a single move ( i.e. a double @-@ step move ) ; 
 the capture can only be made on the move immediately after the opposing pawn makes the double @-@ step move ; otherwise the right to capture it en passant is lost . 
 En passant is a unique privilege of pawns : pieces cannot capture en passant . It is the only occasion in chess in which the capturing piece does not replace the captured piece on its square . 
 = = Examples = = 
 = = = In the opening = = = 
 There are some examples of en passant in chess openings . In this line from Petrov 's Defence , White can capture the pawn on d5 en passant on his sixth move . 
 1 @.@ e4 e5 
 2 . Nf3 Nf6 
 3 @.@ d4 exd4 
 4 @.@ e5 Ne4 
 5 . Qxd4 d5 ( diagram ) 
 6 @.@ <unk> 
 Another example occurs in the French Defense after 1.e4 e6 2.e5 , a move once advocated by Wilhelm Steinitz . If Black responds with 2 ... d5 , White can capture the pawn en passant with <unk> Likewise , White can answer 2 ... f5 with <unk> 
 An example is from this game by Steinitz and Bernhard <unk> . 
 1 @.@ e4 e6 
 2 @.@ e5 d5 
 3 @.@ <unk> 
 = = = Unusual examples = = = 
 Black has just moved his pawn from f7 to f5 in this game between Gunnar Gundersen and Albert H. Faul . White could capture the f @-@ pawn en passant with his e @-@ pawn , but instead played : 
 13 @.@ h5 + Kh6 
 14 . <unk> + 
 Note that the bishop on c1 effects the check , via a discovered check . 14 ... Kh7 results in <unk> # . 
 14 ... g5 
 15 @.@ <unk> # 
 The en passant capture and discovered checks place Black in checkmate ( from White 's rook on h1 , even without help from White 's bishop ; an en passant capture is the only way a double check can be delivered without one of the checking pieces moving , as in this position ) . 
 The largest known number of en passant captures in one game is three , shared by three games ; in none of them were all three captures by the same player . The earliest known example is a 1980 game between Alexandru Sorin Segal and Karl Heinz <unk> . 
 = = = In chess compositions = = = 
 En passant captures have often been used as a theme in chess compositions , as they " produce striking effects in the opening and closing of lines " . In the 1938 composition by Kenneth S. Howard , the key move 1 @.@ d4 introduces the threat of <unk> + cxd5 <unk> # . Black may capture the d4 @-@ pawn en passant in either of two ways : 
 The capture 1 ... <unk> shifts the e4 @-@ pawn from the <unk> to the d @-@ file , preventing an en passant capture after White plays 2 @.@ f4 . To stop the threatened mate ( <unk> # ) , Black may advance 2 ... f5 , but this allows White to play 3 @.@ <unk> # with checkmate due to the decisive opening of the e @-@ file . 
 If Black plays 1 ... <unk> , White exploits the newly opened a2 – g8 diagonal with 2 . <unk> + d5 3 @.@ <unk> # 
 An example showing the effect en passant captures have on pins is this 1902 composition by <unk> : 
 The key move 1 @.@ d4 ! threatens 2 . Qf2 # . The black e @-@ pawn is now simultaneously pinned and unpinned , as 1 ... <unk> + is illegal , but 1 ... e3 + is not . This however removes the black king 's access to e3 , allowing 2 @.@ d5 # . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Allowing the en passant capture , together with the introduction of the two @-@ square first move for pawns , was one of the last major rule changes in European chess , and occurred between 1200 and 1600 . Other relatively recent rule changes were castling , the unlimited range for queens and bishops ( Spanish master Ruy López de Segura gives the rule in his 1561 book Libro de la <unk> liberal y arte del juego del <unk> . , ) and a change to the rules on pawn promotion . In most places the en passant rule was adopted at the same time as allowing the pawn to move two squares on its first move , but it was not universally accepted until the Italian rules were changed in 1880 . 
 The motivation for en passant was to prevent the newly added two @-@ square first move for pawns from allowing a pawn to evade capture by an enemy pawn . Asian chess variants , because of their separation from European chess prior to that period , do not feature any of these moves . 
 = = Notation = = 
 In either algebraic or descriptive chess notation , en passant captures are sometimes denoted by " e.p. " or similar , but such notation is not required . In algebraic notation , the capturing move is written as if the captured pawn advanced only one square , for example , <unk> ( or <unk> ) in this example . 
 = = Threefold repetition and stalemate = = 
 The possibility of an en passant capture is relevant to claims of a draw by threefold repetition . Two positions whose pieces are all on the same squares , with the same player to move , are for this purpose considered different if there was an opportunity to make an en passant capture in the first position , and of course that opportunity no longer exists the second time the same configuration of pieces occurs . 
 In his book on chess organization and rules , International Arbiter Kenneth Harkness wrote that it is frequently asked if an en passant capture must be made if it is the only legal move . This point was debated in the 19th century , with some arguing that the right to make an en passant capture is a " privilege " that one cannot be compelled to exercise . In his 1860 book Chess Praxis , Howard Staunton wrote that the en passant capture is mandatory in that instance . The rules of chess were amended to make this clear . Today , it is settled that the player must make that move ( or resign ) . The same is true if an en passant capture is the only move to get out of check . 
 = My Love : Essential Collection = 
 My Love : Essential Collection is a greatest hits album by Canadian recording artist Celine Dion . It was released by Columbia Records on October 24 , 2008 as the follow up to her previous English @-@ language compilation , All the Way ... A Decade of Song ( 1999 ) . Before releasing My Love : Essential Collection , Dion had already sold over 200 million albums worldwide . In the album 's liner notes , she dedicated this collection of songs , recorded between 1990 and 2008 , to her fans who supported her throughout the years . My Love : Essential Collection was released as a single disc , consisting of Dion 's most successful singles , including : " My Heart Will Go On " , " Because You Loved Me " and " The Power of Love " . The two @-@ disc edition , entitled My Love : Ultimate Essential Collection has been further expanded to include rare songs that have not previously appeared on her albums . Both editions include one new track , " There Comes a Time " . The album wasn 't released in Japan because Sony Music Entertainment decided to issue different compilation there , Complete Best . 
 My Love : Essential Collection received a positive response . It topped the albums charts in the Netherlands , Belgium and Ireland , as well as the compilation album chart in France . My Love : Essential Collection debuted at number two in Canada , number five in the United Kingdom and number eight in the United States , and was certified double @-@ Platinum in Canada and Ireland , Platinum in Belgium and Gold in Mexico , Finland , New Zealand and Hungary . The first single from the album , " My Love " , was a semi @-@ autobiographic song written for Dion by Linda Perry , originally available on Taking Chances ( 2007 ) . In France , " I 'm Alive " ( Remix ) was released as a promotional single instead . In July 2011 , My Love : Ultimate Essential Collection was re @-@ issued with the same track listings as part of Sony 's The Essential line . 
 = = Background = = 
 Dion took the stage for her final performance of A New Day ... on December 15 , 2007 . The Las Vegas show that had been viewed by nearly three million spectators at 717 performances since its premier in March 2003 had come to an end . On February 14 , 2008 , she embarked on her first worldwide concert tour in over nine years . Dion performed her biggest hits along with songs from her new album , Taking Chances . The Taking Chances World Tour played to sold @-@ out stadiums and arenas throughout 2008 . By its completion , at the end of February 2009 , it had crossed five continents , twenty @-@ three countries , and ninety @-@ three cities , en route to playing for an audience of over three million people . On August 27 , 2008 , Dion 's official website announced that a new greatest hits album would be released in October 2008 . On September 5 , 2008 , it was revealed that the album will be available in two formats : a one @-@ disc edition called My Love : Essential Collection as well as a two @-@ disc edition called My Love : Ultimate Essential Collection , with the track listing posted on September 11 , 2008 . " My Love " , originally from Taking Chances , was confirmed as the first single in an official press release on September 22 , 2008 . My Love : Essential Collection features a live version of the song , which premiered on September 17 , 2008 and the live music video was released seven days later . The lyrics to the only new track on the album , " There Comes a Time " were posted on October 7 , 2008 on Dion 's official website and an excerpt of the song was posted on October 23 , 2008 . 
 The artwork for My Love : Essential Collection features a close @-@ up shot of Dion , wearing a white blouse with a black camera hanging from her neck . The cover 's background is blurred white and purple imagery , with the singer 's name and the album title written in white letters . The photography was done by Denise <unk> , and shot in a studio in Los Angeles in 2007 . Dion was very grateful working with <unk> , and described their professional experience positively : " Out of all the people I 've worked with , she 's the absolute best . I 've worked with her for six years , and she 's always kind to everybody . Super , super kind . " 
 = = Content = = 
 My Love : Essential Collection features seventeen songs on the US version and eighteen songs on the European version of the album . The US version includes the Billboard Hot 100 number one singles : " The Power of Love " , " Because You Loved Me " , " My Heart Will Go On " and " I 'm Your Angel , " and the European version contains the UK number one single , " Think Twice . " 
 The two @-@ disc edition , entitled My Love : Ultimate Essential Collection was released simultaneously . It is a twenty @-@ seven song set on the US version and thirty @-@ six song set on the European version . My Love : Ultimate Essential Collection released in the United States contains three rare songs not released on a Dion record : " ( You Make Me Feel Like ) A Natural Woman " ( from Tapestry Revisited : A Tribute to Carole King ) , " Dance with My Father " ( from So Amazing : An All @-@ Star Tribute to Luther Vandross ) , and " I Knew I Loved You " ( from We All Love Ennio Morricone ) . The European version also includes singles successful in Europe . 
 In July 2011 , the album was re @-@ issued as part of The Essential series , featuring either the US or European track listing ( depending on the country of release ) . A limited edition , titled The Essential 3 @.@ 0 , was released exclusively in the United States on August 29 , 2011 . It was expanded with a bonus third CD with seven tracks , including alternate versions of " Think Twice " and " Only One Road . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The performance of " My Love " was aired for the very first time on television on August 31 , 2008 , during the 43rd annual MDA Labor Day Telethon . On October 28 , 2008 , an episode of The Oprah Winfrey Show was dedicated to Dion , as well as several inspirational journeys of parents and their young children , who suffered from many diseases . Dion was featured throughout the special titled , Miracle Children with Celine Dion due to the personal struggles and difficulties she was facing at the time with childbirth . Towards the end of the special , she performed a live rendition of " My Love . " The following day , Dion was forced to reschedule her concert of October 30 in Minneapolis , as well many others in November 2008 , citing illness as the cause for the postponements . On December 1 , 2008 , she performed " My Love " on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . On December 13 , 2008 , her official website posted a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes clip of Dion in the recording sessions for the song , " There Comes a Time . " The Taking Chances World Tour ended on February 26 and on March 1 , 2009 , Dion gave her last public performance on Star Académie in Canada , singing a medley of her popular French and English @-@ language songs alongside the contestants . Following the performance , Dion began her temporary retirement from the music industry , in order to focus time on her family and conceiving another child . Aside from the several televised appearances , " My Love " was performed throughout Dion 's Taking Chances World Tour , beginning with her concert in Seoul on March 18 , 2008 . " My Love " was included later on the Taking Chances World Tour : The Concert , released on DVD and CD in April 2010 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 My Love : Essential Collection was released while Dion was on her Taking Chances World Tour . During her concert in Stockholm , Sweden on June 7 , 2008 , Dion recorded a live version of " My Love , " which was confirmed to be the first single from the compilation . The song premiered on the radio on September 22 , 2008 and a digital single was released the next day , accompanied by a live music video . Chuck Taylor , senior editor of Billboard , said that " My Love " was an inspired choice from the album and complimented Linda Perry 's composition and Dion 's delivery of the song , calling it highly emotive ballad about ache and uncertainty . After " My Love " debuted on the US Adult Contemporary chart , Dion became the artist with the most adult contemporary hits in the 2000s , with " My Love " being her sixteenth entry of the decade . The song peaked at number fifteen . The next single , " I 'm Alive " was remixed by Laurent Wolf and released in October 2008 to radio to promote the album in France , instead of " My Love . " In January 2009 , new remixes of " I 'm Alive " by Maurice Joshua were sent to the US clubs . They reached number thirty @-@ five on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . " I 'm Alive " was originally released as a single from A New Day Has Come in 2002 and peaked at number seven in France and number six on the US Adult Contemporary chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine , senior editor of AllMusic , called My Love : Essential Collection an <unk> for how All the Way ... A Decade of Song ( 1999 ) , concentrated on newer recordings at the expense of hits . According to him , My Love : Essential Collection " fits the bill well " for those listeners who are looking for an overview of Celine Dion 's two decades as an international superstar , as it has all her big adult contemporary hits . Erlewine also noted that although Dion has had more hits in the ten years since All the Way ... A Decade of Song , apart from her cover of Roy Orbison 's " I Drove All Night , " almost none of her new @-@ millennium hits are as memorable as her singles from the ' 90s . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 My Love : Essential Collection debuted at number eight on the US Billboard 200 , becoming Dion 's eleventh top ten album on the chart , with first week sales of 57 @,@ 000 copies . On the Canadian Albums Chart , My Love : Essential Collection debuted at number two , with sales of 17 @,@ 700 copies , and the following week , the album dropped to number three , selling another 11 @,@ 000 copies . By its third week on the chart , My Love : Essential Collection sank another three spots to number six , and by January 2009 , was certified double @-@ Platinum by CRIA , denoting shipments of 160 @,@ 000 copies . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted at number five , selling 42 @,@ 411 copies and was certified three @-@ times Platinum for sales of over 900 @,@ 000 units . In Ireland , it peaked at number one and was certified double @-@ Platinum in 2008 . My Love : Essential Collection proved to be very popular in these two countries , as it re @-@ entered the charts in 2009 , 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 and 2016 . It debuted at number one in France and the Netherlands , occupying the top for two weeks in both countries . My Love : Essential Collection also topped the chart in Belgium Flanders and peaked inside the top ten in many European countries , reaching number six on the European Top 100 Albums . The album also peaked inside top ten in New Zealand and Mexico , and was also certified Platinum in Belgium , Gold in Mexico , Finland , New Zealand and Hungary . Worldwide , it became the forty @-@ second best selling album of 2008 , according to the IFPI . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = My Love : Essential Collection = = = 
 North American version 
 European version 
 French version 
 = = = My Love : Ultimate Essential Collection = = = 
 North American version 
 European version 
 French version 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits taken from AllMusic . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Samuel King Allison = 
 Samuel King Allison ( November 13 , 1900 – September 15 , 1965 ) was an American physicist , most notable for his role in the Manhattan Project , for which he was awarded the Medal for Merit . He was director of the Metallurgical Laboratory from 1943 until 1944 , and later worked at the Los Alamos Laboratory — where he " rode herd " on the final stages of the project as part of the " Cowpuncher Committee " , and read the countdown for the detonation of the Trinity nuclear test . After the war he was involved in the " scientists ' movement " , lobbying for civilian control of nuclear weapons . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Samuel King Allison was born in Chicago , Illinois , on November 13 , 1900 , the son of Samuel Buell Allison , an elementary school principal . He was educated at John Fiske Grammar School and Hyde Park High School . He entered the University of Chicago in 1917 , and participated in varsity swimming and water basketball , while majoring in mathematics and chemistry . He graduated in 1921 , and then embarked on his PhD in chemistry under the supervision of William Draper Harkins , writing his thesis on " Atomic Stability III , the Effects of Electrical Discharge and High Temperatures " , a topic closely related to experimental physics . 
 Allison was a research fellow at Harvard University from 1923 until 1925 and then at the Carnegie Institution from 1925 until 1926 . From 1926 until 1930 he taught physics at University of California , Berkeley as an instructor , and then as an associate professor . While there he met and married Helen Campbell . They had two children , a son , Samuel , and a daughter , Catherine . 
 = = X @-@ Rays = = 
 In 1930 Allison returned to the University of Chicago , where he became a professor in 1942 , and the Frank P. Hixon Distinguished Service Professor of Physics in 1959 . He studied the Compton effect and the dynamical theory of x @-@ ray diffraction . At the time x @-@ rays were an important means of investigating atomic structures , but the concept that light had both wave and particle properties , as demonstrated by Arthur Compton , was not universally accepted . William Duane from Harvard spearheaded an effort to prove that Compton 's interpretation of the Compton effect was wrong , and Allison became part of this effort . Duane carried out a series of meticulous experiments to disprove Compton , but instead found overwhelming evidence that Compton was correct . To his credit , Duane conceded that this was the case . 
 One outcome of this was that he co @-@ authored a textbook with Compton , X @-@ rays in Theory and Experiment ( 1935 ) , which became widely used . He developed a high resolution x @-@ ray spectrometer with a graduate student , John Harry Williams . In 1935 , Allison won a Guggenheim Fellowship to study at the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge in England , where he studied under John Cockcroft . He published a paper in the Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society on his " Experiments on the <unk> of Production and the Half @-@ Lives of Radio @-@ Carbon and Radio @-@ Nitrogen " . He was so impressed by the Cavendish Laboratory 's Cockcroft – Walton accelerator that after returning to Chicago he built one . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 During World War II , Allison became involved in defence @-@ related work . He was a consultant to the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) from October 1940 to January 1941 . In January 1941 the NDRC let him a contract to study the possibility of using beryllium as a neutron moderator . The team he assembled in Chicago would grow into the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory . 
 In September 1941 , Allison joined the S @-@ 1 Uranium Committee , which coordinated the early investigations into the feasibility of an atomic bomb . He began building a reactor in the squash courts under the disused stands of Stagg Field . He became head of the Metallurgical Laboratory 's chemistry section in January 1942 , and in March , his small experimental reactor using beryllium came closer to criticality than the graphite @-@ moderated design of Enrico Fermi 's group at Columbia University . During 1942 , Compton brought all the research groups working on plutonium and nuclear reactor design at Columbia University , Princeton University and the University of California together at the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago . Allison was placed in charge of the experimental work . 
 By October 1942 , the Metallurgical Laboratory had to consider how it would proceed with designing large production reactors when they had yet to get an experimental reactor to work . Fermi favored taking small steps , while Allison and Eugene Wigner argued that larger steps were necessary if atomic bombs were to be developed in time to affect the course of the war . The Director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , told them that time was more important than money , and if two approaches looked promising , they should build both . In the end , this was what was done . Allison was one of 49 scientists who watched the project take a leap forward when Chicago Pile @-@ 1 went critical at Stagg Field on December 2 , 1942 . As Compton 's reactor project began to spread outside Chicago in 1943 , Allison became director of the Metallurgical Laboratory in June 1943 . 
 By late 1944 , the locus of the Manhattan Project had shifted to the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico , and Allison went there in November 1944 as the chairman of the Technical and Scheduling Committee . He was able to inform Groves in March 1945 that an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon would be ready for testing in July . Allison formed part of the " Cowpuncher Committee " that " rode herd " on the implosion project , ensuring that it stayed on track and on schedule . Fittingly , he was the one who read the countdown over the loudspeakers at the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945 . Groves presented Allison with the Medal for Merit for his work on the Manhattan Project in a ceremony at the University of Chicago on January 12 , 1946 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the war , Allison was director of the Enrico Fermi Institute of Nuclear Studies from 1946 until 1957 , and again from 1963 until 1965 . He was the chairman of the Physics Section of the National Research Council from 1960 to 1963 , and chairman of its Committee on Nuclear Science from 1962 to 1965 . He was active in the " scientist 's movement " for the control of atomic weapons . The scientists successfully lobbied for nuclear weapons to be under civilian rather than military control , which was eventually written into the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 . He was a strong opponent of secrecy in science , and , in an influential speech announcing the creation of the Enrico Fermi Institute said : 
 We are determined to return to free research as before the war . If secrecy is imposed on scientific research in physics , we will find all first @-@ rate scientists working on subjects as innocuous as the colors of butterfly wings . 
 Allison rebuilt his accelerator , which he called the " <unk> " , because it could accelerate particles to energies of 400 <unk> . The name was a reference to the massive <unk> being built at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory , which was planned to accelerate particles to billions of electron volts . Allison still believed that there were useful results still to be found with low energies . He became a pioneer of what became known as " heavy ion physics " , accelerating protons and deuterons , and using lithium and beryllium as targets . The data on these reactions of light elements would subsequently prove useful in the study of stellar nucleosynthesis . 
 Later , Allison acquired a 2 MeV Van de Graaff generator , and he recalled an old paper on producing lithium ions from minerals like <unk> . This allowed him to produce a 1 @.@ 2 MeV lithium ion beam . He created hitherto unknown isotopes of boron and other light elements , and measured their neutron capture cross sections . A side effect of this work was a method to analyze surface materials where chemical analysis was unavailable . His colleague Anthony L. <unk> subsequently used this to analyze the makeup of the Moon on the later Surveyor program missions . Allison continued to take on Ph.D. candidates , some of whom , such as James Cronin went on to distinguished careers . 
 Allison died of complications following an aortic aneurism on September 15 , 1965 while attending the Plasma Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research Conference in Culham , England . His papers are kept at the American Institute of Physics . 
 = SMS Wiesbaden = 
 SMS Wiesbaden was a light cruiser of the Wiesbaden class built for the Imperial German Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) . She had one sister ship , SMS Frankfurt ; the ships were very similar to the previous Karlsruhe @-@ class cruisers . The ship was laid down in 1913 , launched in January 1915 , and completed by August 1915 . Armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns , Wiesbaden had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) and displaced 6 @,@ 601 t ( 6 @,@ 497 long tons ; 7 @,@ 276 short tons ) at full load . 
 Wiesbaden saw only one major action , the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . The ship was badly damaged by gunfire from the battlecruiser HMS Invincible . <unk> between the two battle fleets , Wiesbaden became the center of a hard @-@ fought action that saw the destruction of two British armored cruisers . Heavy fire from the British fleet prevented evacuation of the ship 's crew . Wiesbaden remained afloat until the early hours of 1 June and sank sometime between 01 : 45 and 02 : 45 . Only one crew member survived the sinking ; the wreck was located by German Navy divers in 1983 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Wiesbaden was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Gefion " and was laid down at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Stettin in 1913 and launched on 20 January 1915 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 23 August 1915 , after being rushed through trials . The ship was 145 @.@ 30 meters ( 476 ft 8 in ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 90 m ( 45 ft 7 in ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 76 m ( 18 ft 11 in ) forward . She displaced 6 @,@ 601 t ( 6 @,@ 497 long tons ; 7 @,@ 276 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Marine steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 11 ft ) propellers . They were designed to give 31 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 23 @,@ 000 kW ) . These were powered by twelve coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers and two oil @-@ fired double @-@ ended boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Wiesbaden carried 1 @,@ 280 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 260 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 470 tonnes ( 460 long tons ) of oil that gave her a range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Wiesbaden had a crew of 17 officers and 457 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , four were located amidships , two on either side , and two were placed in a superfiring pair aft . The guns could engage targets out to 17 @,@ 600 m ( 57 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 024 rounds of ammunition , for 128 shells per gun . The ship 's antiaircraft armament initially consisted of four 5 @.@ 2 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) L / 44 guns , though these were replaced with a pair of 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . She was also equipped with four 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes . Two were submerged in the hull on the broadside and two were mounted on the deck amidships . She could also carry 120 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Commanded by Captain Fritz Reiss , Wiesbaden was assigned to the II Scouting Group of light cruisers under Konteradmiral Friedrich Boedicker , which took part in the Battle of Jutland on 30 May and 1 June 1916 . Wiesbaden 's sister ship Frankfurt served as Boedicker 's flagship . The unit was assigned to screen for the battlecruisers of Vizeadmiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group . At the start of the battle , Wiesbaden was cruising to starboard , which placed her on the disengaged side when Elbing , Pillau , and Frankfurt first engaged the British cruiser screen . 
 At around 18 : 30 , Wiesbaden and the rest of the II Scouting Group encountered the cruiser HMS Chester ; they opened fire and scored several hits on the ship . As both sides ' cruisers disengaged , Rear Admiral Horace Hood 's three battlecruisers intervened . His flagship HMS Invincible scored a hit on Wiesbaden that exploded in her engine room and disabled the ship . Konteradmiral Paul Behncke , the commander of the leading element of the German battle line , ordered his dreadnoughts to cover the stricken Wiesbaden . Simultaneously , the light cruisers of the British 3rd and 4th Light Cruiser Squadrons attempted to make a torpedo attack on the German line ; while steaming into range , they battered Wiesbaden with their main guns . The destroyer HMS Onslow steamed to within 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) of Wiesbaden and fired a single torpedo at the crippled cruiser . It hit directly below the conning tower , but the ship remained afloat . In the ensuing melee , the armored cruiser HMS Defence blew up and HMS Warrior was fatally damaged . Wiesbaden launched her torpedoes while she remained immobilized , but with no success . 
 Shortly after 20 : 00 , the III Flotilla of torpedo boats attempted to rescue Wiesbaden 's crew , but heavy fire from the British battle line drove them off . Another attempt to reach the ship was made , but the torpedo boat crews lost sight of the cruiser and were unable to locate her . The ship finally sank sometime between 01 : 45 and 02 : 45 . Only one crew member survived the sinking ; he was picked up by a Norwegian steamer the following day . Among the 589 killed was the well @-@ known writer of poetry and fiction dealing with the life of fishermen and sailors , Johann Kinau , known under his pseudonym of Gorch Fock , who has since then been honored by having two training <unk> of the Kriegsmarine and the German Navy , respectively , named after him . The wreck of Wiesbaden was found in 1983 by divers of the German Navy , who removed both of the ship 's screws . The ship lies on the sea floor upside down , and was the last German cruiser sunk at Jutland to be located . 
 = SM U @-@ 15 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 15 or U @-@ XV was a U @-@ 10 @-@ class submarine or U @-@ boat of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) during World War I. U @-@ 15 was constructed in Germany and shipped by rail to Pola where she was assembled and launched in April 1915 . She was commissioned in October 1915 . U @-@ 15 was the most successful boat of the U @-@ 10 class , sinking six ships totaling more than 8 @,@ 000 gross register tons ( GRT ) . The boat survived the war and was handed over to Italy as a war reparation and scrapped in 1920 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 U @-@ 15 was constructed at AG Weser in Bremen for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy and then shipped by rail in sections to Pola , where the sections were riveted together . Though there is no specific mention of how long it took for U @-@ 15 's sections to be assembled , a sister boat , the German Type UB I submarine UB @-@ 3 , shipped to Pola from Germany in mid @-@ April 1915 , was assembled in about two weeks . U @-@ 15 was launched in April . 
 U @-@ 15 was a small , coastal submarine that displaced 125 @.@ 5 long tons ( 127 @.@ 5 t ) surfaced and 140 @.@ 25 long tons ( 142 @.@ 50 t ) submerged . She featured a single shaft , a single 59 bhp ( 44 kW ) Daimler diesel engine for surface running , and a single 119 shp ( 89 kW ) electric motor for submerged travel . U @-@ 15 was capable of up to 6 @.@ 5 knots ( 12 @.@ 0 km / h ; 7 @.@ 5 mph ) while surfaced and 5 @.@ 5 knots ( 10 @.@ 2 km / h ; 6 @.@ 3 mph ) while submerged at a diving depth of up to 50 metres ( 160 ft ) . She was designed for a crew of 17 officers and men . 
 U @-@ 15 was equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes located in the front and carried a complement of two torpedoes . In October 1916 , U @-@ 15 's armament was supplemented with a 37 mm / 23 ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) quick @-@ firing ( QF ) gun . This gun was replaced by a 47 mm / 23 ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) QF gun in November 1917 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 SM U @-@ 15 was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy on 6 October under the command of Linienschiffsleutnant Friedrich Schlosser . On 28 November , Linienschiffsleutnant Friedrich Fähndrich was assigned to the first of two stints in command of the boat . On 18 December , Fähndrich and U @-@ 15 attacked and sank two Albanian sailing vessels near Lezhë . The <unk> , of 25 GRT , and the <unk> <unk> , of 80 GRT , were both sunk at position 41 ° 47 ′ N 19 ° 31 ′ E. After being relieved by Linienschiffsleutnant Franz <unk> von <unk> from late March to early May 1916 , Fähndrich resumed command on 10 May . One week later , on 17 May , U @-@ 15 torpedoed and sank the 2 @,@ 237 GRT Italian steamer Stura in the Adriatic some 18 nautical miles ( 33 km ) east of Brindisi . 
 The following month , Fähndrich and the crew of U @-@ 15 scored their second double kill when they sank the Italian auxiliary cruiser Cittá di Messina ( 3 @,@ 495 GRT ) and the French destroyer Fourche ( 745 GRT ) . While about 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ) east of Otranto on 23 June , U @-@ 15 torpedoed and sank Cittá di Messina . The escorting destroyer Fourche began a depth charge attack on U @-@ 15 and assumed success when an oil slick appeared on the surface . After the captain of Fourche turned his attentions to the rescue Cittá di Messina 's survivors , U @-@ 15 launched a single torpedo that struck Fourche amidships and sank her . 
 On 25 October , U @-@ 15 , back under the command of von <unk> , sank the 2 @,@ 207 GRT Italian steamer <unk> , a sister ship to Stura ( sunk by U @-@ 15 in May ) . <unk> was the last ship sunk by U @-@ 15 . 
 From October 1916 to the end of the fighting in November 1918 , U @-@ 15 's activities are unknown . U @-@ 15 was at Pola at the end of the war when Austria @-@ Hungary handed her over to Italy . U @-@ 15 was scrapped at Pola by 1920 . 
 = RAAF Transport Flight ( Japan ) = 
 Transport Flight ( Japan ) was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) transport unit that operated in the aftermath of the Korean War . It was formed in March 1955 at Iwakuni , Japan , and equipped with three Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas and a CAC Wirraway . The flight 's main duty was flying a regular courier service between Japan and South Korea in support of Commonwealth military units based on the peninsula . Transport Flight ( Japan ) ceased operations in June 1956 and disbanded in September that year . 
 = = History = = 
 Transport Flight ( Japan ) traced its lineage to a transport contingent that the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) maintained in Japan prior to the Korean War . When the war broke out in June 1950 , No. 77 ( Fighter ) Squadron was based at Iwakuni as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force . Equipped primarily with North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs , the squadron also operated a communications flight of two Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas and two Austers . No. 91 ( Composite ) Wing was established at Iwakuni in October 1950 to administer all RAAF units during the war . This included No. 77 Squadron , the newly formed No. 391 ( Base ) Squadron and No. 491 ( Maintenance ) Squadron , and No. 30 Communications Flight , formerly the No. 77 Squadron Communications Flight . It was designated No. 30 Communications Unit in November . By then it had a complement of eight Dakotas and two Austers . No. 30 Communications Unit was redesignated No. 30 Transport Unit in November 1951 . By the end of 1952 , its strength was eight Dakotas and one CAC Wirraway , and fifty @-@ nine personnel . 
 In March 1953 , No. 30 Transport Unit re @-@ formed as No. 36 ( Transport ) Squadron , which had disbanded the previous day at RAAF Base Richmond , New South Wales . Elements of No. 36 Squadron began returning to Australia in January 1955 , and by the end of the month its strength was four Dakotas and one Wirraway , and fifty @-@ eight personnel . No. 36 Squadron ceased flying on 13 March , after which its remaining strength left Iwakuni for Australia . RAAF Transport Flight ( Japan ) was formed at Iwakuni the next day under the control of No. 91 Wing . The unit was equipped with three Dakotas and one Wirraway , which had been left behind when the last members of No. 36 Squadron departed for Australia . Transport Flight ( Japan ) ' s personnel , consisting of eight officers and sixty @-@ six other ranks by the end of month , were drawn mainly from No. 36 Squadron , including its commanding officer , Squadron Leader G.L. Waller , as well as from No. 391 ( Base ) Squadron . 
 The flight 's regular duty consisted of a courier service to Pusan and Kimpo in South Korea five days a week — Wednesdays and Sundays were excluded — to support Commonwealth forces on the peninsula . It became known in the process as " Japan – Korea Airlines " . Generally carrying freight on the outbound journey , the aircraft often ferried casualties back to Iwakuni , and two nurses formerly of No. 391 Squadron were attached to the flight to assist with this task . The unit was also responsible for transporting VIPs . No. 391 Squadron and No. 91 Wing were disbanded at Iwakuni on 30 April 1955 . Transport Flight ( Japan ) flew its last courier missions on 28 June 1956 , and shortly after handed over its base facilities to the United States Navy . The flight 's last Dakota — the last RAAF aircraft to be based in Japan — took off for Australia from Iwakuni on 8 July . It left behind some ground staff and Flight Lieutenant Raleigh , a small yellow dog that had accompanied No. 81 ( Fighter ) Wing — parent formation of No. 77 Squadron at the time — to Japan as its mascot in 1945 and had remained with the RAAF contingent at Iwakuni ever since . Raleigh , a keen flyer but considered too old to return to Australia , was to be given over to the care of a US service family when the last RAAF personnel departed Iwakuni . Transport Flight ( Japan ) was disbanded on 28 September 1956 . It was reported to have carried 4 @,@ 400 passengers and 610 @,@ 000 pounds ( 280 @,@ 000 kg ) of cargo between its first flight in March 1955 and its last in July 1956 , including 690 Commonwealth troops in April 1956 alone , and to have only missed one scheduled service , owing to a typhoon . 
 = John Hancock = 
 John Hancock ( January 23 , 1737 [ O.S. January 12 , 1736 ] – October 8 , 1793 ) was an American merchant , smuggler , statesman , and prominent Patriot of the American Revolution . He served as president of the Second Continental Congress and was the first and third Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts . He is remembered for his large and stylish signature on the United States Declaration of Independence , so much so that the term " John Hancock " has become , in the United States , a synonym for a signature . 
 Before the American Revolution , Hancock was one of the wealthiest men in the Thirteen Colonies , having inherited a profitable mercantile business from his uncle , himself a prominent smuggler . Hancock began his political career in Boston as a protégé of Samuel Adams , an influential local politician , though the two men later became estranged . As tensions between colonists and Great Britain increased in the 1760s , Hancock used his wealth to support the colonial cause . He became very popular in Massachusetts , especially after British officials seized his sloop Liberty in 1768 and charged him with smuggling . Although the charges against Hancock were eventually dropped , as Professor Peter Andreas , author of Smuggler Nation : How Illicit Trade Made America explains , " It is perhaps appropriate that the first signer of the Declaration of Independence was Boston 's most well known merchant @-@ smuggler , John Hancock . " 
 Hancock was one of Boston 's leaders during the crisis that led to the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War in 1775 . He served more than two years in the Continental Congress in Philadelphia , and as president of Congress , was the first to sign the Declaration of Independence . Hancock returned to Massachusetts and was elected governor of the Commonwealth , serving in that role for most of his remaining years . He used his influence to ensure that Massachusetts ratified the United States Constitution in 1788 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 According to the Gregorian calendar , John Hancock was born on January 23 , 1737 ; according to the Julian calendar then in use , the date was January 12 , 1736 . He was born in Braintree , Massachusetts , in a part of town that eventually became the separate city of Quincy . He was the son of the Reverend John Hancock of Braintree and Mary Hawke Thaxter ( widow of Samuel Thaxter Junior ) , who was from nearby Hingham . As a child , Hancock became a casual acquaintance of young John Adams , whom the Reverend Hancock had baptized in 1735 . The Hancocks lived a comfortable life , and owned one slave to help with household work . 
 After Hancock 's father died in 1744 , John was sent to live with his uncle and aunt , Thomas Hancock and Lydia ( Henchman ) Hancock . Thomas Hancock was the proprietor of a firm known as the House of Hancock , which imported manufactured goods from Britain and exported rum , whale oil , and fish . Thomas Hancock 's highly successful business made him one of Boston 's richest and best @-@ known residents . He and Lydia , along with several servants and slaves , lived in Hancock Manor on Beacon Hill . The couple , who did not have any children of their own , became the dominant influence on John 's life . 
 After graduating from the Boston Latin School in 1750 , Hancock enrolled in Harvard College and received a bachelor 's degree in 1754 . Upon graduation , he began to work for his uncle , just as the French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) had begun . Thomas Hancock had close relations with the royal governors of Massachusetts and secured profitable government contracts during the war . John Hancock learned much about his uncle 's business during these years and was trained for eventual partnership in the firm . Hancock worked hard , but he also enjoyed playing the role of a wealthy aristocrat and developed a fondness for expensive clothes . 
 From 1760 to 1761 , Hancock lived in England while building relationships with customers and suppliers . Upon returning to Boston , Hancock gradually took over the House of Hancock as his uncle 's health failed , becoming a full partner in January 1763 . He became a member of the Masonic Lodge of St. Andrew in October 1762 , which connected him with many of Boston 's most influential citizens . When Thomas Hancock died in August 1764 , John inherited the business , Hancock Manor , two or three household slaves , and thousands of acres of land , becoming one of the wealthiest men in the colonies . The household slaves continued to work for John and his aunt , but were eventually freed through the terms of Thomas Hancock 's will ; there is no evidence that John Hancock ever bought or sold slaves . 
 = = Growing imperial tensions = = 
 After its victory in the Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 1763 ) , the British Empire was deep in debt . Looking for new sources of revenue , the British Parliament sought , for the first time , to directly tax the colonies , beginning with the Sugar Act of 1764 . The earlier Molasses Act of 1733 , a tax on shipments from the West Indies , had produced hardly any revenue because it was widely bypassed by smuggling , which was seen as a victimless crime . 
 Not only was there little social stigma attached to smuggling in the colonies , but in port cities , where trade was the primary generator of wealth , smuggling enjoyed considerable community support , and it was even possible to obtain insurance against being caught . Colonial merchants developed an impressive repertoire of evasive maneuvers to conceal the origin , nationality , routes and content of their illicit cargoes . This included the frequent use of fraudulent paperwork to make the cargo appear legal and authorised . And much to the frustration of the British authorities , when seizures did happen local merchants were often able to use sympathetic provincial courts to reclaim confiscated goods and have their cases dismissed . For instance , Edward Randolph , the appointed head of customs in New England brought 36 seizures to trial from 1680 to the end of 1682 – and all but two of these were acquitted . Alternatively merchants sometimes took matters into their own hands and stole illicit goods back while impounded . 
 The Sugar Act provoked outrage in Boston , where it was widely viewed as a violation of colonial rights . Men such as James Otis and Samuel Adams argued that because the colonists were not represented in Parliament , they could not be taxed by that body ; only the colonial assemblies , where the colonists were represented , could levy taxes upon the colonies . Hancock was not yet a political activist ; however , he criticized the tax for economic , rather than constitutional , reasons . 
 Hancock emerged as a leading political figure in Boston just as tensions with Great Britain were increasing . In March 1765 , he was elected as one of Boston 's five selectmen , an office previously held by his uncle for many years . Soon after , Parliament passed the 1765 Stamp Act , a tax on legal documents , such as wills , that had been levied in Britain for many years but which was wildly unpopular in the colonies , producing riots and organized resistance . Hancock initially took a moderate position : as a loyal British subject , he thought that the colonists should submit to the act , even though he believed that Parliament was misguided . Within a few months , Hancock had changed his mind , although he continued to disapprove of violence and the intimidation of royal officials by mobs . Hancock joined the resistance to the Stamp Act by participating in a boycott of British goods , which made him popular in Boston . After Bostonians learned of the impending repeal of the Stamp Act , Hancock was elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in May of 1766 . 
 Hancock 's political success benefited from the support of Samuel Adams , the clerk of the House of Representatives and a leader of Boston 's " popular party " , also known as " Whigs " and later as " Patriots " . The two men made an unlikely pair . Fifteen years older than Hancock , Adams had a somber , Puritan outlook that stood in marked contrast to Hancock 's taste for luxury and extravagance . Apocryphal stories later portrayed Adams as masterminding Hancock 's political rise so that the merchant 's wealth could be used to further the Whig agenda . Historian James Truslow Adams portrayed Hancock as shallow and vain , easily manipulated by Adams . Historian William M. Fowler , who wrote biographies of both men , argued that this characterization was an exaggeration , and that the relationship between the two was symbiotic , with Adams as the mentor and Hancock the protégé . 
 = = Townshend Acts crisis = = 
 After the repeal of the Stamp Act , Parliament took a different approach to raising revenue , passing the 1767 Townshend Acts , which established new duties on various imports and strengthened the customs agency by creating the American Customs Board . The British government believed that a more efficient customs system was necessary because many colonial American merchants had been smuggling . Smugglers violated the Navigation Acts by trading with ports outside of the British Empire and avoiding import taxes . Parliament hoped that the new system would reduce smuggling and generate revenue for the government . 
 Colonial merchants , even those not involved in smuggling , found the new regulations oppressive . Other colonists protested that new duties were another attempt by Parliament to tax the colonies without their consent . Hancock joined other Bostonians in calling for a boycott of British imports until the Townshend duties were repealed . In their enforcement of the customs regulations , the Customs Board targeted Hancock , Boston 's wealthiest Whig . They may have suspected that he was a smuggler , or they may have wanted to harass him because of his politics , especially after Hancock snubbed Governor Francis Bernard by refusing to attend public functions when the customs officials were present . 
 On April 9 , 1768 , two customs employees ( called tidesmen ) boarded Hancock 's brig Lydia in Boston Harbor . Hancock was summoned , and finding that the agents lacked a writ of assistance ( a general search warrant ) , he did not allow them to go below deck . When one of them later managed to get into the hold , Hancock 's men forced the <unk> back on deck . Customs officials wanted to file charges , but the case was dropped when Massachusetts Attorney General Jonathan Sewall ruled that Hancock had broken no laws . Later , some of Hancock 's most ardent admirers would call this incident the first act of physical resistance to British authority in the colonies and credit Hancock with initiating the American Revolution . 
 = = = Liberty affair = = = 
 The next incident proved to be a major event in the coming of the American Revolution . On the evening of May 9 , 1768 , Hancock 's sloop Liberty arrived in Boston Harbor , carrying a shipment of Madeira wine . When custom officers inspected the ship the next morning , they found that it contained 25 pipes of wine , just one fourth of the ship 's carrying capacity . Hancock paid the duties on the 25 pipes of wine , but officials suspected that he had arranged to have more wine unloaded during the night to avoid paying the duties for the entire cargo . Hancock had earlier been heard refuting the authority of the customs officials , although two tidesmen who had stayed on the ship overnight gave a sworn statement that nothing had been unloaded . 
 One month later , while the British warship HMS Romney was in port , one of the tidesmen changed his story , saying that he had been forcibly held on the Liberty on the orders of John Hancock while it had been illegally unloaded . When released , the tidesmen were subjected to " such threats and denunciation of vengeance , death and destruction in case they divulged the affair . " The following day the Liberty was again boarded and seized when officials found 20 barrels of tar and 200 barrels of oil on board for which no bond had been posted and no permit to load obtained . 
 On June 10 , customs officials seized the Liberty . Bostonians were already angry because the captain of the Romney had been impressing colonists , and not just deserters from the Royal Navy , an arguably illegal activity . A riot broke out when officials began to tow the Liberty out to the Romney . The confrontation escalated when sailors and marines coming ashore to seize the Liberty were mistaken for a press gang . After the riot , customs officials relocated to the Romney , and then to Castle William ( an island fort in the harbor ) , claiming that they were unsafe in town . Whigs insisted that the customs officials were exaggerating the danger so that London would send troops to Boston . 
 British officials filed two lawsuits stemming from the Liberty incident : an in rem suit against the ship , and an in <unk> suit against Hancock , who had previously been heard dismissing the authority of British Customs officials . The first suit , filed on June 22 , 1768 , resulted in the confiscation of the Liberty in August . Customs officials then used the ship for anti @-@ smuggling operations until it was burned by angry colonists in Rhode Island the following year . 
 The second trial began in October 1768 , when charges were filed against Hancock and five others for allegedly unloading 100 pipes of wine from the Liberty without paying the duties . If convicted , the defendants would have had to pay a penalty of triple the value of the wine , which came to £ 9 @,@ 000 . With John Adams serving as his lawyer , Hancock was prosecuted in a highly publicized trial by a vice admiralty court , which had no jury and did not always allow the defense to cross @-@ examine the witnesses . After dragging out for nearly five months , the proceedings against Hancock were dropped without explanation . 
 Although the charges against Hancock were dropped , many writers later described him as a smuggler . The accuracy of this characterization has been questioned . " Hancock 's guilt or innocence and the exact charges against him " , wrote historian John W. Tyler in 1986 , " are still fiercely debated . " Historian Oliver Dickerson argued that Hancock was the victim of an essentially criminal racketeering scheme perpetrated by Governor Bernard and the customs officials . Dickerson believed that there is no reliable evidence that Hancock was guilty in the Liberty case , and that the purpose of the trials was to punish Hancock for political reasons and to plunder his property . Opposed to Dickerson 's interpretation were <unk> Wroth and Hiller Zobel , the editors of John Adams 's legal papers , who argued that " Hancock 's innocence is open to question " , and that the British officials acted legally , if unwisely . Lawyer and historian Bernard <unk> concluded that the customs officials had the right to seize Hancock 's ship , but towing it out to the Romney had been illegal . Legal historian John Phillip Reid argued that the testimony of both sides was so politically partial that it is not possible to objectively reconstruct the incident . 
 Aside from the Liberty affair , the degree to which Hancock was engaged in smuggling , which may have been widespread in the colonies , has been questioned . Given the clandestine nature of smuggling , records are scarce . If Hancock was a smuggler , no documentation of this has been found . John W. Tyler identified 23 smugglers in his study of more than 400 merchants in revolutionary Boston , but found no written evidence that Hancock was one of them . Biographer William Fowler concluded that while Hancock was probably engaged in some smuggling , most of his business was legitimate , and his later reputation as the " king of the colonial smugglers " is a myth without foundation . 
 = = Massacre to Tea Party = = 
 The Liberty affair reinforced a previously made British decision to suppress unrest in Boston with a show of military might . The decision had been prompted by Samuel Adams 's 1768 Circular Letter , which was sent to other British American colonies in hopes of coordinating resistance to the Townshend Acts . Lord Hillsborough , secretary of state for the colonies , sent four regiments of the British Army to Boston to support embattled royal officials , and instructed Governor Bernard to order the Massachusetts legislature to revoke the Circular Letter . Hancock and the Massachusetts House voted against rescinding the letter , and instead drew up a petition demanding Governor Bernard 's recall . When Bernard returned to England in 1769 , Bostonians celebrated . 
 The British troops remained , however , and tensions between soldiers and civilians eventually resulted in the killing of five civilians in the Boston Massacre of March 1770 . Hancock was not involved in the incident , but afterwards he led a committee to demand the removal of the troops . Meeting with Bernard 's successor , Governor Thomas Hutchinson , and the British officer in command , Colonel William Dalrymple , Hancock claimed that there were 10 @,@ 000 armed colonists ready to march into Boston if the troops did not leave . Hutchinson knew that Hancock was bluffing , but the soldiers were in a precarious position when garrisoned within the town , and so Dalrymple agreed to remove both regiments to Castle William . Hancock was celebrated as a hero for his role in getting the troops withdrawn . His reelection to the Massachusetts House in May was nearly unanimous . 
 After Parliament partially repealed the Townshend duties in 1770 , Boston 's boycott of British goods ended . Politics became quieter in Massachusetts , although tensions remained . Hancock tried to improve his relationship with Governor Hutchinson , who in turn sought to woo Hancock away from Adams 's influence . In April 1772 , Hutchinson approved Hancock 's election as colonel of the Boston Cadets , a militia unit whose primary function was to provide a ceremonial escort for the governor and the General Court . In May , Hutchinson even approved Hancock 's election to the Council , the upper chamber of the General Court , whose members were elected by the House but subject to veto by the governor . Hancock 's previous elections to the Council had been vetoed , but now Hutchinson allowed the election to stand . Hancock declined the office , however , not wanting to appear to have been co @-@ opted by the governor . Nevertheless , Hancock used the improved relationship to resolve an ongoing dispute . To avoid hostile crowds in Boston , Hutchinson had been convening the legislature outside of town ; now he agreed to allow the General Court to sit in Boston once again , to the relief of the legislators . 
 Hutchinson had dared to hope that he could win over Hancock and discredit Adams . To some , it seemed that Adams and Hancock were indeed at odds : when Adams formed the Boston Committee of Correspondence in November 1772 to advocate colonial rights , Hancock declined to join , creating the impression that there was a split in the Whig ranks . But whatever their differences , Hancock and Adams came together again in 1773 with the renewal of major political turmoil . They cooperated in the revelation of private letters of Thomas Hutchinson , in which the governor seemed to recommend " an abridgement of what are called English liberties " to bring order to the colony . The Massachusetts House , blaming Hutchinson for the military occupation of Boston , called for his removal as governor . 
 Even more trouble followed Parliament 's passage of the 1773 Tea Act . On November 5 , Hancock was elected as moderator at a Boston town meeting that resolved that anyone who supported the Tea Act was an " Enemy to America " . Hancock and others tried to force the resignation of the agents who had been appointed to receive the tea shipments . Unsuccessful in this , they attempted to prevent the tea from being unloaded after three tea ships had arrived in Boston Harbor . Hancock was at the fateful meeting on December 16 , where he reportedly told the crowd , " Let every man do what is right in his own eyes . " Hancock did not take part in the Boston Tea Party that night , but he approved of the action , although he was careful not to publicly praise the destruction of private property . 
 Over the next few months , Hancock was disabled by gout , which would trouble him with increasing frequency in the coming years . By March 5 , 1774 , he had recovered enough to deliver the fourth annual Massacre Day oration , a commemoration of the Boston Massacre . Hancock 's speech denounced the presence of British troops in Boston , who he said had been sent there " to enforce obedience to acts of Parliament , which neither God nor man ever empowered them to make " . The speech , probably written by Hancock in collaboration with Adams , Joseph Warren , and others , was published and widely reprinted , enhancing Hancock 's stature as a leading Patriot . 
 = = Revolution begins = = 
 Parliament responded to the Tea Party with the Boston Port Act , one of the so @-@ called Coercive Acts intended to strengthen British control of the colonies . Hutchinson was replaced as governor by General Thomas Gage , who arrived in May 1774 . On June 17 , the Massachusetts House elected five delegates to send to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia , which was being organized to coordinate colonial response to the Coercive Acts . Hancock did not serve in the first Congress , possibly for health reasons , or possibly to remain in charge while the other Patriot leaders were away . 
 Gage soon dismissed Hancock from his post as colonel of the Boston Cadets . In October 1774 , Gage canceled the scheduled meeting of the General Court . In response , the House resolved itself into the Massachusetts Provincial Congress , a body independent of British control . Hancock was elected as president of the Provincial Congress and was a key member of the Committee of Safety . The Provincial Congress created the first minutemen companies , consisting of militiamen who were to be ready for action on a moment 's notice . 
 On December 1 , 1774 , the Provincial Congress elected Hancock as a delegate to the Second Continental Congress to replace James Bowdoin , who had been unable to attend the first Congress because of illness . Before Hancock reported to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia , the Provincial Congress unanimously reelected him as their president in February 1775 . Hancock 's multiple roles gave him enormous influence in Massachusetts , and as early as January 1774 British officials had considered arresting him . After attending the Provincial Congress in Concord in April 1775 , Hancock and Samuel Adams decided that it was not safe to return to Boston before leaving for Philadelphia . They stayed instead at Hancock 's childhood home in Lexington . 
 Gage received a letter from Lord Dartmouth on April 14 , 1775 , advising him " to arrest the principal actors and abettors in the Provincial Congress whose proceedings appear in every light to be acts of treason and rebellion " . On the night of April 18 , Gage sent out a detachment of soldiers on the fateful mission that would spark the American Revolutionary War . The purpose of the British expedition was to seize and destroy military supplies that the colonists had stored in Concord . According to many historical accounts , Gage also instructed his men to arrest Hancock and Adams ; if so , the written orders issued by Gage made no mention of arresting the Patriot leaders . Gage apparently decided that he had nothing to gain by arresting Hancock and Adams , since other leaders would simply take their place , and the British would be portrayed as the aggressors . 
 Although Gage had evidently decided against seizing Hancock and Adams , Patriots initially believed otherwise . From Boston , Joseph Warren dispatched messenger Paul Revere to warn Hancock and Adams that British troops were on the move and might attempt to arrest them . Revere reached Lexington around midnight and gave the warning . Hancock , still considering himself a militia colonel , wanted to take the field with the Patriot militia at Lexington , but Adams and others convinced him to avoid battle , arguing that he was more valuable as a political leader than as a soldier . As Hancock and Adams made their escape , the first shots of the war were fired at Lexington and Concord . Soon after the battle , Gage issued a proclamation granting a general pardon to all who would " lay down their arms , and return to the duties of peaceable subjects " — with the exceptions of Hancock and Samuel Adams . Singling out Hancock and Adams in this manner only added to their renown among Patriots . 
 = = President of Congress = = 
 With the war underway , Hancock made his way to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia with the other Massachusetts delegates . On May 24 , 1775 , he was unanimously elected President of the Continental Congress , succeeding Peyton Randolph after Henry Middleton declined the nomination . Hancock was a good choice for president for several reasons . He was experienced , having often presided over legislative bodies and town meetings in Massachusetts . His wealth and social standing inspired the confidence of moderate delegates , while his association with Boston radicals made him acceptable to other radicals . His position was somewhat ambiguous , because the role of the president was not fully defined , and it was not clear if Randolph had resigned or was on a leave of absence . Like other presidents of Congress , Hancock 's authority was mostly limited to that of a presiding officer . He also had to handle a great deal of official correspondence , and he found it necessary to hire clerks at his own expense to help with the paperwork . 
 In Congress on June 15 , 1775 , Massachusetts delegate John Adams nominated George Washington as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the army then gathered around Boston . Years later , Adams wrote that Hancock had shown great disappointment at not getting the command for himself . This brief comment from 1801 is the only source for the oft @-@ cited claim that Hancock sought to become commander @-@ in @-@ chief . In the early 20th century , historian James Truslow Adams wrote that the incident initiated a lifelong estrangement between Hancock and Washington , but some subsequent historians have expressed doubt that the incident , or the estrangement , ever occurred . According to historian Donald Proctor , " There is no contemporary evidence that Hancock harbored ambitions to be named commander @-@ in @-@ chief . Quite the contrary . " Hancock and Washington maintained a good relationship after the alleged incident , and in 1778 Hancock named his only son John George Washington Hancock . Hancock admired and supported General Washington , even though Washington politely declined Hancock 's request for a military appointment . 
 When Congress recessed on August 1 , 1775 , Hancock took the opportunity to wed his fiancée , Dorothy " Dolly " Quincy . The couple was married on August 28 in Fairfield , Connecticut . John and Dorothy would have two children , neither of whom survived to adulthood . Their daughter Lydia Henchman Hancock was born in 1776 and died ten months later . Their son John was born in 1778 and died in 1787 after suffering a head injury while ice skating . 
 While president of Congress , Hancock became involved in a long @-@ running controversy with Harvard . As treasurer of the college since 1773 , he had been entrusted with the school 's financial records and about £ 15 @,@ 000 in cash and securities . In the rush of events at the onset of the Revolutionary War , Hancock had been unable to return the money and accounts to Harvard before leaving for Congress . In 1777 , a Harvard committee headed by James Bowdoin , Hancock 's chief political and social rival in Boston , sent a messenger to Philadelphia to retrieve the money and records . Hancock was offended , but he turned over more than £ 16 @,@ 000 , though not all of the records , to the college . When Harvard replaced Hancock as treasurer , his ego was bruised , and for years he declined to settle the account or pay the interest on the money he had held , despite pressure put on him by Bowdoin and other political opponents . The issue dragged on until after Hancock 's death , when his estate finally paid the college more than £ 1 @,@ 000 to resolve the matter . 
 Hancock served in Congress through some of the darkest days of the Revolutionary War . The British drove Washington from New York and New Jersey in 1776 , which prompted Congress to flee to Baltimore , Maryland . Hancock and Congress returned to Philadelphia in March 1777 , but were compelled to flee six months later when the British occupied Philadelphia . Hancock wrote innumerable letters to colonial officials , raising money , supplies , and troops for Washington 's army . He chaired the Marine Committee , and took pride in helping to create a small fleet of American frigates , including the USS Hancock , which was named in his honor . 
 = = = Signing the Declaration = = = 
 Hancock was president of Congress when the Declaration of Independence was adopted and signed . He is primarily remembered by Americans for his large , flamboyant signature on the Declaration , so much so that " John Hancock " became , in the United States , an informal synonym for signature . According to legend , Hancock signed his name largely and clearly so that King George could read it without his spectacles , but the story is apocryphal and originated years later . 
 Contrary to popular mythology , there was no ceremonial signing of the Declaration on July 4 , 1776 . After Congress approved the wording of the text on July 4 , the fair copy was sent to be printed . As president , Hancock may have signed the document that was sent to the printer John Dunlap , but this is uncertain because that document is lost , perhaps destroyed in the printing process . Dunlap produced the first published version of the Declaration , the widely distributed Dunlap broadside . Hancock , as President of Congress , was the only delegate whose name appeared on the broadside , although the name of Charles Thomson , secretary of the Continental Congress , but not a delegate , was also on it as " Attested by " implying that Hancock had signed the fair copy . This meant that until a second broadside was issued six months later with all of the signers listed , Hancock was the only delegate whose name was publicly attached to the treasonous document . Hancock sent a copy of the Dunlap broadside to George Washington , instructing him to have it read to the troops " in the way you shall think most proper " . 
 Hancock 's name was printed , not signed , on the Dunlap broadside ; his iconic signature appears on a different document — a sheet of parchment that was carefully handwritten sometime after July 19 and signed on August 2 by Hancock and those delegates present . Known as the engrossed copy , this is the famous document on display at the National Archives in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Return to Massachusetts = = 
 In October 1777 , after more than two years in Congress , President Hancock requested a leave of absence . He asked George Washington to arrange a military escort for his return to Boston . Although Washington was short on manpower , he nevertheless sent fifteen horsemen to accompany Hancock on his journey home . By this time Hancock had become estranged from Samuel Adams , who disapproved of what he viewed as Hancock 's vanity and extravagance , which Adams believed were inappropriate in a republican leader . When Congress voted to thank Hancock for his service , Adams and the other Massachusetts delegates voted against the resolution , as did a few delegates from other states . 
 Back in Boston , Hancock was reelected to the House of Representatives . As in previous years , his philanthropy made him popular . Although his finances had suffered greatly because of the war , he gave to the poor , helped support widows and orphans , and loaned money to friends . According to biographer William Fowler , " John Hancock was a generous man and the people loved him for it . He was their idol . " In December 1777 , he was reelected as a delegate to the Continental Congress and as moderator of the Boston town meeting . 
 Hancock rejoined the Continental Congress in Pennsylvania in June 1778 , but his brief time there was unhappy . In his absence , Congress had elected Henry Laurens as its new president , which was a disappointment to Hancock , who had hoped to reclaim his chair . Hancock got along poorly with Samuel Adams , and missed his wife and newborn son . On July 9 , 1778 , Hancock and the other Massachusetts delegates joined the representatives from seven other states in signing the Articles of Confederation ; the remaining states were not yet prepared to sign , and the Articles would not be ratified until 1781 . 
 Hancock returned to Boston in July 1778 , motivated by the opportunity to finally lead men in combat . Back in 1776 , he had been appointed as the senior major general of the Massachusetts militia . Now that the French fleet had come to the aid of the Americans , General Washington instructed General John Sullivan of the Continental Army to lead an attack on the British garrison at Newport , Rhode Island , in August 1778 . Hancock nominally commanded 6 @,@ 000 militiamen in the campaign , although he let the professional soldiers do the planning and issue the orders . It was a fiasco : French Admiral d 'Estaing abandoned the operation , after which Hancock 's militia mostly deserted Sullivan 's Continentals . Hancock suffered some criticism for the debacle but emerged from his brief military career with his popularity intact . He was a charter member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1780 . 
 After much delay , the new Massachusetts Constitution finally went into effect in October 1780 . To no one 's surprise , Hancock was elected Governor of Massachusetts in a landslide , garnering over 90 % of the vote . In the absence of formal party politics , the contest was one of personality , popularity , and patriotism . Hancock was immensely popular and unquestionably patriotic given his personal sacrifices and his leadership of the Second Continental Congress . James Bowdoin , his principal opponent , was cast by Hancock 's supporters as unpatriotic , citing among other things his refusal ( which was due to poor health ) to serve in the First Continental Congress . Bowdoin 's supporters , who were principally well @-@ off commercial interests from Massachusetts coastal communities , cast Hancock as a foppish demagogue who pandered to the populace . 
 Hancock governed Massachusetts through the end of the Revolutionary War and into an economically troubled postwar period , repeatedly winning reelection by wide margins . Hancock took a hands @-@ off approach to governing , avoiding controversial issues as much as possible . According to William Fowler , Hancock " never really led " and " never used his strength to deal with the critical issues confronting the commonwealth . " Hancock governed until his surprise resignation on January 29 , 1785 . Hancock cited his failing health as the reason , but he may have become aware of growing unrest in the countryside and wanted to get out of office before the trouble came . Hancock 's critics sometimes believed that he used claims of illness to avoid difficult political situations . Historian James Truslow Adams wrote that Hancock 's " two chief resources were his money and his gout , the first always used to gain popularity , and the second to prevent his losing it " . The turmoil that Hancock avoided ultimately blossomed as Shays 's Rebellion , which Hancock 's successor James Bowdoin had to deal with . After the uprising , Hancock was reelected in 1787 , and he promptly pardoned all the rebels . Hancock was reelected to annual terms as governor for the remainder of his life . 
 = = Final years = = 
 When he had resigned as governor in 1785 , Hancock was again elected as a delegate to the Continental Congress , known as the Confederation Congress after the ratification of the Articles of Confederation in 1781 . Congress had declined in importance after the Revolutionary War , and was frequently ignored by the states . Congress elected Hancock to serve as its president , but he never attended because of his poor health and because he was not interested . He sent Congress a letter of resignation in 1786 . 
 In an effort to remedy the perceived defects of the Articles of Confederation , delegates were first sent to the Annapolis Convention in 1786 and then to the Philadelphia Convention in 1787 , where they drafted the United States Constitution , which was then sent to the states for ratification or rejection . Hancock , who was not present at the Philadelphia Convention , had misgivings about the new Constitution 's lack of a bill of rights and its shift of power to a central government . In January 1788 , Hancock was elected president of the Massachusetts ratifying convention , although he was ill and not present when the convention began . Hancock mostly remained silent during the contentious debates , but as the convention was drawing to close , he gave a speech in favor of ratification . For the first time in years , Samuel Adams supported Hancock 's position . Even with the support of Hancock and Adams , the Massachusetts convention narrowly ratified the Constitution by a vote of 187 to 168 . Hancock 's support was probably a deciding factor in the ratification . 
 Hancock was put forth as a candidate in the 1789 U. S. presidential election . As was the custom in an era where political ambition was viewed with suspicion , Hancock did not campaign or even publicly express interest in the office ; he instead made his wishes known indirectly . Like everyone else , Hancock knew that George Washington was going to be elected as the first president , but Hancock may have been interested in being vice president , despite his poor health . Hancock received only four electoral votes in the election , however , none of them from his home state ; the Massachusetts electors all voted for another Massachusetts native , John Adams , who received the second @-@ highest number of electoral votes and thus became vice president . Although Hancock was disappointed with his performance in the election , he continued to be popular in Massachusetts . 
 His health failing , Hancock spent his final few years as essentially a figurehead governor . With his wife at his side , he died in bed on October 8 , 1793 , at 56 years of age . By order of acting governor Samuel Adams , the day of Hancock 's burial was a state holiday ; the lavish funeral was perhaps the grandest given to an American up to that time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite his grand funeral , Hancock faded from popular memory after his death . According to historian Alfred Young , " Boston celebrated only one hero in the half @-@ century after the Revolution : George Washington . " As early as 1809 , John Adams lamented that Hancock and Samuel Adams were " almost buried in oblivion " . In Boston , little effort was made to preserve Hancock 's historical legacy . His house on Beacon Hill was torn down in 1863 after both the city of Boston and the Massachusetts legislature decided against maintaining it . According to Young , the conservative " new elite " of Massachusetts " was not comfortable with a rich man who pledged his fortune to the cause of revolution " . In 1876 , with the centennial of American independence renewing popular interest in the Revolution , plaques honoring Hancock were put up in Boston . In 1896 , a memorial column was finally erected over Hancock 's essentially unmarked grave in the Granary Burying Ground . 
 No full @-@ length biography of Hancock appeared until the 20th century . A challenge facing Hancock biographers is that , compared to prominent Founding Fathers like Jefferson and John Adams , Hancock left relatively few personal writings for historians to use in interpreting his life . As a result , most depictions of Hancock have relied on the voluminous writings of his political opponents , who were often scathingly critical of him . According to historian Charles Akers , " The chief victim of Massachusetts historiography has been John Hancock , the most gifted and popular politician in the Bay State 's long history . He suffered the misfortune of being known to later generations almost entirely through the judgments of his detractors , Tory and Whig . " 
 Hancock 's most influential 20th @-@ century detractor was historian James Truslow Adams , who wrote negative portraits of Hancock in Harper 's Magazine and the Dictionary of American Biography in the 1930s . Adams argued that Hancock was a " fair presiding officer " but had " no great ability " , and was prominent only because of his inherited wealth . Decades later , historian Donald Proctor argued that Adams had uncritically repeated the negative views of Hancock 's political opponents without doing any serious research . Adams " presented a series of disparaging incidents and anecdotes , sometimes partially documented , sometimes not documented at all , which in sum leave one with a distinctly unfavorable impression of Hancock " . According to Proctor , Adams evidently projected his own disapproval of 1920s businessmen onto Hancock , and ended up misrepresenting several key events in Hancock 's career . Writing in the 1970s , Proctor and Akers called for scholars to evaluate Hancock based on his merits , rather than on the views of his critics . Since that time , historians have usually presented a more favorable portrait of Hancock , while acknowledging that he was not an important writer , political theorist , or military leader . 
 Many places and things in the United States have been named in honor of John Hancock . The U.S. Navy has named vessels USS Hancock and USS John Hancock ; a World War II Liberty ship was also named in his honor . Ten states have a Hancock County named for him ; other places named after him include Hancock , Massachusetts ; Hancock , Michigan ; Hancock , New Hampshire ; Hancock , New York ; and Mount Hancock in New Hampshire . John Hancock University is named for him , as was the John Hancock Financial company , founded in Boston in 1862 ; it had no connection to Hancock 's own business ventures . The financial company passed on the name to the John Hancock Tower in Boston , the John Hancock Center in Chicago , as well as the John Hancock Student Village at Boston University . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In the 2015 miniseries Sons of Liberty , Hancock , one of the major characters , is portrayed by Rafe Spall . 
 He is portrayed in the HBO miniseries John Adams by actor Justin Theroux . 
 In the 1969 musical 1776 ( which was made into a film three years later ) , David Ford played John Hancock as a decent and fair man , sympathetic to the rebel cause but willing to give all sides respect . 
 In the 2008 American superhero comedy film Hancock , starring Will Smith , a reference is made to the American slang term for a signature ' John Hancock ' . The slang also becomes the reason for Will Smith 's character to receive the name Hancock , as after suffering amnesia he is asked for his ' John Hancock ' ( or signature ) by a nurse . He ends up thinking that John Hancock is his name . 
 In the 2015 video game Fallout 4 , A " Ghoul " named John <unk> finds a red Frock Coat in the Old State House and adopts John Hancock 's name . Inspired by his ideas of freedom , he starts a militia and takes the town of <unk> ( A town modeled after Scollay Square ) from Vic , a local Mob boss . Later on , after completing a quest for him , Hancock ( The name of the NPC ) can be recruited by the player as a follower . 
 = Sleeping Dogs ( video game ) = 
 Sleeping Dogs is a 2012 open world action @-@ adventure video game by United Front Games and Square Enix London for PlayStation 3 , Windows , and Xbox 360 platforms . Set in contemporary Hong Kong , the single @-@ player story follows Wei Shen , an undercover Hong Kong @-@ American police officer on assignment to infiltrate the Sun On Yee Triad organization . Gameplay focuses on Shen 's fighting , shooting and parkour abilities , and on gadgets that can be used for combat and exploration . Players must complete missions to unlock content and continue the story , but they may instead wander the game 's open world and engage in both legal and criminal activities . The latter may incite a police response , the intensity of which is controlled by a " heat " system . Actions such as fighting , driving and racing grant Shen statistical rewards and earn the player achievements . 
 Sleeping Dogs ' difficult and prolonged development began in 2008 . The game was announced in 2009 as part of the True Crime series but was canceled by Activision Blizzard in 2011 , as a result of the project 's delays and budget issues . Six months later , Square Enix bought the publishing rights and renamed the game Sleeping Dogs , without the True Crime license , but considered a spiritual successor . During development , United Front staff visited Hong Kong to conduct field research for the visual environments and sound . 
 Upon its release in 2012 , the game received positive reviews for its combat , voice acting , experience system and depiction of the city ; but its graphics , camera , and animations were criticized . Within one year , the game had sold over 1 @.@ 5 million copies . New outfits , missions and add @-@ ons , as well as three expansion packs , were released as downloadable content in the six months following the game 's debut . A remastered version , subtitled Definitive Edition , was released in October 2014 for Windows , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One . It features improved gameplay , setting and audiovisual quality based on community feedback . A spin @-@ off , Triad Wars , was canceled mid @-@ development in 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Sleeping Dogs is an action @-@ adventure video game that takes place from a third @-@ person perspective . The player controls Wei Shen , a Chinese @-@ American police officer who goes undercover and infiltrates the Sun On Yee Triad organization . The first missions of the game are a linear tutorial for controlling the character . After these missions , the player is allowed to explore the game 's world and take part in side missions and other activities . Shen navigates the world by running , jumping , climbing over obstacles , swimming , and driving cars , boats and motorcycles . The heads @-@ up display ( HUD ) interface features a mini @-@ map that indicates targets , key locations ( safe houses and contact points ) and Shen 's current position . The mini @-@ map incorporates two meters : one shows Shen 's health and the other his face . When the face meter fills , upgrades are unlocked such as health regeneration , improved combat abilities and reduced equipment costs . The HUD also displays the weapon carried and its ammunition count . 
 The game features role @-@ playing mechanics based on three types of experience points ( XP ) : Triad , Face and Police <unk> . Triad XP is obtained through melee combat and violent actions such as " environmental kills " . Face XP , obtained in civilian side missions , fills Shen 's face meter and unlocks cosmetic items such as clothes and vehicles . When it is full , Shen gains health regeneration , increased attack damage and other benefits . Police XP is gained by minimizing civilian casualties and property damage in missions and by completing police side missions . Gaining XP unlocks abilities such as hot @-@ wiring cars and disarming opponents . The clothes , accessories and vehicles purchased by Shen affect non @-@ player characters ' reactions toward him . Players may also collect jade statues used to unlock melee combat skills . 
 Sleeping Dogs ' melee combat has been compared to that of Batman : Arkham Asylum : it consists of attack , grapple and counter @-@ moves and can be performed with or without weapons . These three basic commands are chained together with the character 's movement to execute attacks . The player 's face meter fills up faster when enemies are defeated with different moves in rapid succession or with environmental attacks . Environmental attacks are performed by dragging enemies to certain objects , which Shen uses to eliminate opponents . Melee weapons such as knives and tyre irons are available , but they break with extended use . Players can perform " action hijacks " while driving vehicles . These cause Shen to leap from his vehicle to steal another in motion . In combat , Shen loses health as he takes damage . This can be mitigated by taking cover where available . If the health bar is depleted , the character will respawn at a hospital . 
 If players direct Shen to commit crimes , police response is indicated by a " heat " meter on the HUD . The meter displays the current wanted level ; if it reaches 5 , the police will aggressively pursue Shen . The meter recedes when Shen is hidden from the cops ' line of sight . Police officers continue to search for Shen even if he leaves the wanted vicinity , and they will resume the chase if he is sighted . If Shen is arrested or killed by officers during missions , players can restart from the last checkpoint . 
 Some areas in the world remain inaccessible until milestones in the story are achieved . Although players must complete missions to unlock content and continue the story , they may also wander the game 's open world and participate in activities such as visiting a karaoke bar , carjacking , street racing and joining a fight club . There are several potential girlfriends for Shen : successfully dating them awards collectibles and bonus content . The completion of side missions rewards the player with new missions , vehicles , and outfits , among other things . 
 The game has no multiplayer component , but online leaderboards are available for players to compare scores . Many activities that are not central to the story grant Stat Awards in three tiers : bronze , silver and gold . These unlock achievements and trophies . 
 As the game progresses , the players acquire various safe houses to save progress in , but at certain times is required to go there to progress further . Like other houses , the player can survey unlocked areas ( i.e. if they unlock the hack boxes given ) , change outfits , and a parking spot is accessible in which they can use unlocked vehicles . 
 The Face Meter also plays a vital role . By reaching a higher level , the player can freely buy vehicles or clothing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Sleeping Dogs is set in a fictionalized contemporary Hong Kong , which is split into four districts named after regions of the city . The game reveals the story of Wei Shen ( Will Yun Lee ) , a former San Francisco police officer who was transferred to the Hong Kong Police Force and assigned the task to infiltrate and destroy a Triad organization known as the Sun On Yee ( based on the Sun Yee On ) . The main storyline features two sub @-@ plots : Shen 's balance between completing his police mission whilst committing crimes to prove himself to the Triads , and missions assigned by a Triad lieutenant , including assassination of Triad members loyal to other lieutenants . 
 Shen 's mission is coordinated by Police Superintendent Thomas Pendrew ( Tom Wilkinson ) , and progress made by Shen is reported to his handler , Raymond Mak ( Byron Mann ) . Shen infiltrates the Sun On Yee via his childhood friend Jackie Ma ( Edison Chen ) , a low @-@ level Triad member ; and his loyalty is tested by the Triad boss " Red Pole " Winston Chu ( Parry Shen ) . Other characters in the game include the head of the Sun On Yee , David Wai @-@ Lin " Uncle " Po ( James Hong ) ; Shen 's love interest Amanda Cartwright ( Emma Stone ) ; Winston 's right @-@ hand man , Conroy Wu ( Robin Shou ) ; singer Vivienne Lu ( Lucy Liu ) ; and Shen 's girlfriend Not Ping ( Celina Jade ) . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The game begins in Victoria Harbour , where Wei Shen is arrested after a drug deal goes wrong . In jail , Shen meets an old friend , Jackie Ma , who offers to introduce Shen to the members of a Triad gang once they are released . It is later revealed that Shen 's arrest was part of a police operation , headed by Superintendent Thomas Pendrew and Raymond Mak , to infiltrate the Water Street branch of a criminal organization , the ' Sun On Yee ' Triad gang . Shen joins the gang and is sent on various assignments by the leader , Winston Chu , against a rival branch known as the Jade Gang led by Sam " Dogeyes " Lin . 
 Retaliatory attacks on each other 's properties culminate in the killing of Winston and his fiancée at their wedding by <unk> gang members . The group leader of the Sun On Yee Triads , David Wai @-@ Lin " Uncle " Po , is also critically wounded in the attack but is saved by Shen . As a reward , Shen is promoted to leader of the Water Street branch and hunts down Winston 's killer who reveals that Dogeyes was the instigator of the attack . Shen then captures Dogeyes who is killed by Winston 's mother . Po later dies in the hospital . 
 As a branch leader , Shen becomes embroiled in a power struggle over the leadership of Sun On Yee , siding with " Broken Nose " Jiang ( Elizabeth Sung ) against another branch leader , Henry " Big Smile " Lee ( Tzi Ma ) . Shen also refuses Pendrew 's order to get off the case out of fear of Lee taking over the leadership . Pendrew then leaks Shen 's identity to Lee , who attempts to use this information to disgrace Jiang prior to the upcoming election . After Jackie is killed at the hands of Lee 's gang , Shen escapes his captors and kills Lee . With the deaths of many senior ranking gang members , Shen is commended on his work but is informed by Mak that Pendrew has since been reassigned and is out of his reach . Shen later receives evidence from Jiang that Pendrew was responsible for the death of Uncle Po . Pendrew is imprisoned for his crime while Shen returns to the police force . 
 = = Development = = 
 Towards the end of 2007 , Activision approached the newly founded United Front Games , which consisted of only ten members , to develop an open @-@ world game . United Front accepted and Activision provided sufficient funding for 180 employees . Early designs for the game , named Black Lotus at the time , incorporated dark tones with elements of humour similar to an " HBO crime drama " . The project advanced to full production in early 2008 . 
 A year into development , Activision proposed that Black Lotus be made part of an existing franchise and highlighted similarities to the True Crime series ; both games were set in open worlds with plots centred on an undercover cop in a criminal organization . Sales of previous True Crime games had been disappointing , but Activision felt the innovations in Black Lotus could revitalize the franchise and make the game successful in its own right . Activision attached the game to the series and revealed it to the public as True Crime : Hong Kong in November 2009 . They delayed the game until 2010 to allow further refinement . During this period Hollywood action editor Tony Ciccone was hired to consult on the game 's visual identity and animations . 
 Despite progress in game development , at the release of the financial report for the last quarter of 2010 on February 9 , 2011 , Activision announced the cancelation of True Crime : Hong Kong . The publisher said that due to " quality issues " further investment would not make the game competitive in the genre even with their most optimistic projections . Although United Front Games shared this sentiment , executive producer Stephen Van Der <unk> expressed in an interview that " True Crime : Hong Kong was playable from start to finish and virtually complete in terms of content " prior to Activision 's cancelation of the project . Van Der <unk> said the game " stood apart " from the competition . 
 On June 22 , 2011 , Activision CEO Eric Hirshberg explained that the budget and development delays were contributing factors in its cancelation . According to Hirshberg , the increase in budget and subsequent delays meant that the game would have to be " pretty incredible success " for Activision to have an acceptable return on investment . Due to competition posed by other titles , particularly Grand Theft Auto and Red Dead Redemption , Activision 's view was that True Crime : Hong Kong was not at the level of quality that it could compete . 
 United Front Games cut 120 staff with the company 's solvency in doubt until August when Square Enix acquired the publishing rights to the game . Square Enix did not buy the True Crime intellectual property , and renamed the game Sleeping Dogs . Square Enix London Studios general manager Lee Singleton said he recognized the game 's playability and potential . United Front Games ' President Stefan Wessels stated he was excited to work with Square Enix London . Sixty people were added to the development team and the game was released in late 2012 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 During development of the game the combat system was one of the key focuses . Mike <unk> , the Design Director , said that the combat was refined using feedback from Square Enix , with references drawn from Tony Jaa 's The Protector . The system was designed to emphasize multi @-@ directional combat , strike @-@ based gameplay and environmental interaction . It started as " one big violent sandbox " and progressed to a playable demo . <unk> was pleased with how well the game kept the qualities of the original demo . 
 The game 's designers performed extensive research in Hong Kong to create an accurate portrayal of the city . Art designers spent seven days in Hong Kong , where they studied the city 's environment , and took more than 20 @,@ 000 photos as references for the physical environment in the game . They travelled on foot to various locales , such as clubs and malls , and interviewed ex @-@ Triad members and retired members of the Hong Kong Police Force Anti @-@ Triad unit , which inspired narratives and character design . The sound designers spent ten days in the city overseeing the dialogue sessions on weekdays and capturing ambient noises around the city at weekends . 
 During the early stages of development , in @-@ game dialogue was recorded in Los Angeles by local Asian actors , but much of the audio was then re @-@ recorded in Hong Kong through Drum Music , a specialist recording company . Audio design was complicated ; scripting was handled in Vancouver and the recording was in Hong Kong . There were reservations among the developers about the language for the background dialogue ; the sound design team eventually prevailed in using Hong Kong Cantonese over English . 
 In @-@ game radio music was handled by Joe Best and sourced from various music labels . Tracks were licensed from Tsunami Music , Warp , Ninja Tune , and Roadrunner Records which also lent their names to the in @-@ game radio stations . Through Tsunami Music , voice actors were auditioned and recruited to provide presenters for each of the radio stations in the game . DJs from companies such as Kerrang ! also provided voices for the in @-@ game radio presenters . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 United Front Games relied on viral marketing , such as Internet advertisements and TV trailers , prior to Sleeping Dogs 's release . The production team promoted the game with regular communication on social networking websites . They also promoted it at video game conventions such as Game Developers Conference , PAX East , MCM London Comic Con , E3 , Comic Con , and Gamescom . 
 Square Enix revealed North American pre @-@ order bonuses for Best Buy , GameStop and Amazon customers in April 2012 ; each retailer offered its own exclusive in @-@ game content pack . A United Kingdom limited edition release contained two such packs , and an Australian special edition , sold through EB Games and JB Hi @-@ Fi , included all three packs at no added cost . 
 Further marketing of Sleeping Dogs was via cross @-@ promotion on different platforms ; players who bought the game through Steam received an eight item pack for Team Fortress 2 , which was later made available for separate purchase , and a Hong Kong @-@ themed Team Fortress 2 level , Kong King . Owners of Just Cause 2 on Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , or PC received automatic access to a Sleeping Dogs character outfit in the style of Just Cause 2 protagonist Rico Rodriguez . The outfit increases the player 's action hijack statistics and increases the range from which the player can perform stunt takeovers of enemy vehicles . 
 The game was released on August 14 , 2012 in North America , August 16 in Australia , and August 17 in Europe . September 27 Japanese release was titled Sleeping Dogs : Hong Kong Secret Police ( <unk> <unk> ) and was censored to pass the classification by the Japanese ratings board CERO . Differences include penalties for attacking civilians , lack of a street race <unk> and a less explicit sex scene . 
 An enhanced version , subtitled Definitive Edition , was released on October 10 , 2014 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . It includes all the 24 previously released downloadable contents ( DLCs ) and features improved graphical resolution and gameplay , setting and audiovisual quality changes based on community feedback . 
 = = Downloadable content = = 
 Square Enix announced six months of downloadable content to follow the game 's release . Packs included new content such as outfit items , vehicles , experience point boosts , new tasks including money hidden around the city for players to find , vehicle races , weapons , missions and fight movesets . Square Enix released a total of five content packs along with various pre @-@ order bonuses , such as the Dragon Master Pack which was released in November 2012 . The last downloadable content for Sleeping Dogs was the " Wheels of Fury " supercar expansion , released in February 2013 . 
 The first story @-@ driven game expansion , Nightmare in North Point , was released in October 2012 . Its theme is based on Chinese horror and folklore , and features Chinese vampires known as the jiangshi . In the expansion 's plot , Shen 's girlfriend is abducted by the ghost of Smiley Cat , a former gangster killed by Uncle Po , who has risen up from the underworld as a ghost to take his vengeance on the Sun On Yee . Shen fights Smiley Cat 's army of jiangshi , <unk> and possessed gangsters , as well as the ghosts of Dogeyes , Johnny <unk> and Ponytail , who reveals that Wei can defeat Smiley Cat by burning the last remnant of his original body . After incinerating his little finger , Cat returns to the underworld and Shen 's girlfriend is freed . 
 The second story @-@ based expansion , Zodiac Tournament , was released in December 2012 . The expansion adds a new island to the game , with new fight arenas , enemies , bosses and outfits . In the expansion 's story , Shen is invited to an exclusive fighting tournament held away from Hong Kong . Inspector Teng asks Shen to investigate an illegal fighting tournament . After defeating several fighters in lethal matches , Shen wins and chases the Tournament Master , who offers to share his earnings in return for his life . Shen declines his offer and snaps the master 's neck , killing him . 
 The third and final story @-@ based expansion , Year of the Snake , was released in March 2013 . It adds six missions set after the game 's story . The additional missions feature Shen investigating terror attacks around Hong Kong stemming from a cultist group who believe that they will achieve spiritual salvation through the cleansing of Hong Kong residents . Shen must the sabotage the cult 's activities , ultimately ending in the arrest of the cult master . The DLC also adds the ability for Shen to <unk> and arrest civilians and criminals around Hong Kong , as well as additional collectibles , side missions , <unk> police vehicles , and new clothing . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Sleeping Dogs received " generally favorable " reviews upon release , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . It was nominated for " Action Game of the Year " and " Outstanding Achievement in Story " at the 2013 D.I.C.E. Interactive Achievement Awards . 
 Eurogamer writer Dan Whitehead called the combat system " robust and intuitive " . IGN 's Colin Moriarty compared the combat to that of Batman : Arkham City and compared it favorably with Grand Theft Auto IV despite its simplicity and repetitiveness . Hollander Cooper from GamesRadar praised the combat , especially the unique melee attacks . Andy Kelly of Computer and Video Games welcomed the slower @-@ paced missions . Carolyn Petit from GameSpot and Ben Wilson from PlayStation Official Magazine found the combat enjoyable and highlighted the environmental attacks as " empowering and effective " . Cooper , Allistair Pinsof from Destructoid , and Edge found the missions generic and linear , a sentiment reserved by Dan Ryckert of Game Informer for the shooting missions . Petit disagreed , saying that the missions were varied and enjoyable . Whitehead and Ryckert complained that there is too little to spend mission earnings on . 
 The leveling system was described by Ryckert as " stand [ ing ] out from the open @-@ world pack " . Moriarty praised the system for its use of the Face system and the ability to replay missions if unsatisfied . Petit agreed and enjoyed the " pleasant sense of growth " given to Shen by the experience system during the campaign . Pinsof called the system " one of the greatest innovations Sleeping Dogs brings to the genre " . Jon Blyth of Official Xbox Magazine liked the " pleasingly absurd " missions needed to gain Face . 
 Moriarty lauded the game 's depiction of Hong Kong as " alive and well @-@ populated " and also liked the AI , the setting , and the voice acting , in particular the use of Cantonese and English . Edge gave similar praise : " Offering a view of Asia through the filter of its action film industry , this is a depiction of Hong Kong that could have come straight from the reel . " Pinsof acclaimed the city 's scale and AI . 
 Shen and the other characters were mostly well received . Cooper applauded the conflicted nature of Shen 's personality as a result of being in an overwhelming situation , arguing that this detail solidified him as a developed and likeable protagonist . Cooper found the Triad members unsatisfactory by comparison , comparing them unfavorably with Grand Theft Auto characters . Edge called Shen an engaging protagonist and also complimented the other characters , whose voice actors brought life to the characters . Blyth described the cast , aside from Shen , as " brilliantly recognizable stereotypes that have been given enough extra edge for you to care about them " , and felt the attitude shifts of some characters were distracting and unrealistic . Wilson said that the characters were " fleshed out brilliantly " . Pinsof claimed that the game 's premise " grants a perfect excuse for Shen to do terrible things while remaining a sympathetic , level @-@ headed lead . " Kelly thought Shen 's two @-@ faced nature was the main entertainment factor of the missions . Whitehead found the player 's ability to switch allegiances as needed to wear away at " the already fragile grasp the narrative has on Shen 's conflicted loyalties . " 
 Moriarty criticized the game 's draw distance and texture loading and Whitehead noted some framerate and environmental glitches . Petit said that , in spite of generally convincing non @-@ player character design , " character models look like plastic dolls when viewed up close , and some gestures characters make are rigid and unnatural . " Edge stated that character animations in a variety of contexts look " robotic " , and Kelly said that " everything in the distance looks like it 's been smeared in Vaseline . " Pinsof described the graphics as " gorgeous " and conducive to an immersive experience in Hong Kong . Moriarty noted that the game 's camera was particularly problematic when driving and less so during combat . Cooper and Edge also criticized the camera . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In the UK , Sleeping Dogs was the best @-@ selling game in the week of its release , and had the fifth @-@ highest first @-@ week sales of any game released in 2012 . It retained the top spot during its second week , despite sales dropping by 15 % . It returned to the top spot after four weeks on sale . Sleeping Dogs sales rose by 8 % , despite five weeks in the chart , defeating new release Tekken Tag Tournament 2 . Sleeping Dogs was the 20th best selling title of 2012 in the UK , and the best selling original game . According to NPD Group , Sleeping Dogs was the sixth @-@ best selling game in the US in August 2012 , at 172 @,@ 000 copies . PC sales for Sleeping Dogs were not counted , as it is only available by download in the US . 
 According to Square Enix , Sleeping Dogs sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies by the end of September 2012 . Square Enix president Yoichi Wada defended the game 's sales and said that the firm might have had unreasonably high expectations for the game . He saw Sleeping Dogs as a strong new intellectual property and said that titles such as Sleeping Dogs tend to sell better over long periods of time in the West , unlike in Japan where most lifetime sales are achieved in the first months . On March 26 , 2013 , Square Enix announced that the game was expected to sell about 1 @.@ 75 million copies in 2013 . On September 10 , 2013 , the company announced that Sleeping Dogs , alongside Tomb Raider and Hitman : Absolution , had been successful in their game development , but did not meet sales expectations , and were considered by the publisher " failures " . 
 = = Spin @-@ off = = 
 Triad Wars is a canceled spin @-@ off to Sleeping Dogs which was scheduled to be released in 2015 . The game was initially planned to be released as a PC online game with more massively multiplayer online ( MMO ) elements . However , it was canceled by the United Front Games with the statement " We ’ ve loved seeing how you ’ ve played Triad Wars but we know it wasn ’ t right for many of you " . 
 = Lusia Harris = 
 Lusia " Lucy " Harris @-@ Stewart ( born Lusia Harris ; February 10 , 1955 ) is a former American basketball player . Harris is considered to be one of the pioneers of women 's basketball . She played for Delta State University and won three consecutive Association for Intercollegiate Athletics for Women ( AIAW ) National Championships , the predecessors to the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) championships , from 1975 to 1977 . In international level , she represented the United States ' national team and won the silver medal in the 1976 Olympic Games , the first ever women 's basketball tournament in the Olympic Games . She played professional basketball with the Houston Angels of the Women 's Professional Basketball League ( <unk> ) and was the first and only woman ever officially drafted by the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , a men 's professional basketball league . For her achievements , Harris has been inducted to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame and Women 's Basketball Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harris was born in Minter City , Mississippi to Ethel and Willie Harris , a vegetable farmer . She is the tenth of eleven children and the fourth of five daughters . All of her brothers and one of her older sisters , Janie , also played basketball . Harris and her siblings attended Amanda Elzy High School in Greenwood , Mississippi . 
 Harris played basketball under coach Conway Stewart in high school . She won the most valuable player award three consecutive years , served as team captain and made the state All @-@ Star team . She scored a school record 46 points in one game and led her school to the state tournament in Jackson , Mississippi . 
 After her high school graduation , she planned to attend Alcorn State University , which did not have a women 's basketball team . However , she was asked by Melvin Hemphill , the recruiter for coach Margaret Wade , who was restarting a collegiate women 's team , if she would attend Delta State University in Cleveland , Mississippi . This was before Title IX , so there were no sports scholarships for women . She attended school on a combination of academic scholarships and work study funds . 
 = = College career = = 
 In her first year in Delta State , Harris helped the Lady Statesmen to a 16 – 2 record . However , they finished third in the regional tournament and failed to qualify to the national tournament . The following year , the Lady Statesmen qualified to the national tournament at Harrisonburg , Virginia . They went all the way to the final where they met the Mighty Macs of Immaculata University who had won the last three consecutive AIAW championships . In the final , Harris scored 32 points and recorded 16 rebounds to lead Delta State past Immaculata 90 – 81 . The 1975 championship game was televised nationally ( albeit delayed ) . This is the first year that women 's basketball games were nationally televised by a major network . That season , Delta State went undefeated in with a 28 – 0 record , the only undefeated college season that year ( men or women ) . Harris scored a total of 138 points and 63 rebounds in four games at the national tournament and was named as the tournament 's most valuable player . 
 In the 1975 – 76 season , Delta State and Immaculata met again in the national tournament final . Harris again led Delta State with 30 points and 18 rebounds in a 69 – 64 victory . That season , she led the nation in scoring with 1 @,@ 060 points and a 31 @.@ 2 points per game average , including a 58 @-@ point game against Tennessee Tech . In her senior season , Delta State played a game in the Madison Square Garden , in which Harris scored 47 points . This was one of the first women 's basketball game ever played there . Delta State then went to the national tournament final for the third year in a row . In the final , Harris scored 23 points and recorded 16 rebounds as Delta State defeated Louisiana State University 68 – 55 for their third consecutive title . 
 Harris was named as the national tournament 's most valuable player and to the All @-@ American first team during Delta State 's three winning seasons . Her college career record was 109 – 6 , and included victories over later NCAA Division I powerhouses such as Immaculata University , University of Tennessee , Baylor University , University of Mississippi , Louisiana State University and Louisiana Tech University . Harris finished her college career with 2 @,@ 981 points and 1 @,@ 662 rebounds , averaging 25 @.@ 9 points and 14 @.@ 5 rebounds per game . She also graduated with fifteen of eighteen Delta State 's team , single game , and career records . In 1977 , she won the inaugural Honda Sports Award for basketball , as well as the Broderick Cup , an award for outstanding female athletes in college . 
 = = National team career = = 
 In 1975 , Harris was selected to represent the United States ' national team in the FIBA World Championship for Women in Colombia and the Pan American Games in Mexico City , Mexico . She teamed up with high school star Nancy Lieberman and fellow college stars Ann Meyers and Pat Head . In the FIBA World Championship , the United States compiled a 4 – 3 record and finished in eighth place . In the Pan American Games , the United States team went unbeaten in seven games to win the gold medal , their first win since 1963 . They averaged 86 @.@ 7 points per game with an average winning margin of 34 @.@ 4 . 
 The following year , Harris was selected to represent the United States in the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal , Canada , the first ever women 's basketball tournament in the Olympic Games . She used the number seven on her Olympics jersey . She teamed up with most of her teammates in the 1975 Pan American Games , including Lieberman , Meyers and Head . In the opening game against Japan , Harris scored the first ever points in women 's Olympic basketball tournament . The United States team won three games and lost two games against Japan and the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union team went undefeated and won the gold medal , while the United States team won the silver medal . Harris played in all five games , averaging 15 @.@ 2 points and 7 @.@ 0 rebounds per game . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 In the seventh round of the 1977 NBA Draft , the New Orleans Jazz selected Harris with the 137th pick overall . She became the second woman ever drafted by an NBA team , after Denise Long , who was selected by the San Francisco Warriors in the 1969 Draft . However , the league voided the Warriors ' selection , thus Harris became the first and only woman ever officially drafted . Harris did not express an interest to play in the NBA and declined to try out for the Jazz . It was later revealed that she was pregnant at the time , which made her unable to attend the Jazz 's training camp . She was selected ahead of 33 other male players , including the Jazz 's eighth round selection , Dave Speicher from the University of Toledo . 
 Harris never played in the NBA or any other men 's basketball league but played professional basketball briefly in the 1979 – 80 season with the Houston Angels of the Women 's Professional Basketball League ( <unk> ) . She was initially picked as the number one free agent by the Angels in 1978 , the league 's inaugural season . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Harris graduated from Delta State University with a bachelor 's degree in health , physical education and recreation in 1977 . After graduation , she worked for Delta State as an admissions counselor and assistant basketball coach . She earned a master 's degree in education from Delta State in 1984 . After leaving the assistant coaching post in Delta State , she served as the head coach at Texas Southern University in Houston for two years . She then returned to her native Mississippi where she worked as a high school teacher and coach at her alma mater Amanda Elzy High School in Greenwood , at the Greenville Public School District , and at <unk> Central High School . Harris married George E. Stewart on February 4 , 1977 . They have four children , two sons and twin daughters . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 For her achievements and contributions to the Delta State University , Harris was inducted to the Delta State 's Hall of Fame in 1983 . In 1992 , Harris and former player <unk> White became the first two women ever inducted to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame . She also became the first African @-@ American woman inductee . In 1998 , Harris , along with her college coach , Margaret Wade , and her teammates in the national team , Nancy Lieberman , Ann Meyers and Pat Head , were named among the 26 inaugural inductees to the Women 's Basketball Hall of Fame . She has also been named to the International Women 's Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = Battlefield Germany = 
 Battlefield Germany is a turn @-@ based strategy video game developed and published by Personal Software Services for the Commodore 64 released in April 1987 . It was also ported to the Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum later that year . It is the eighth instalment to the Strategic Wargames series . The game is set during a fictional scenario in which the powers of NATO and the Warsaw Pact engage in a conventional war throughout Europe , mostly centring in West and East Germany . 
 The game is a turn @-@ based strategy and focuses on the player building and training units that are used to attack the opposing side . The game was released for 8 @-@ bit consoles as well as 16 @-@ bit consoles . Battlefield Germany received mixed reviews upon release . Reviewers mainly criticised the tempo of the gameplay and lack of innovation from the original . Some critics , however , praised the graphics and viewed the hard difficulty favourably . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a turn @-@ based strategy and revolves around a fictional conflict between the powers of NATO and the Warsaw Pact . The player has the choice of choosing to control either NATO or Warsaw Pact forces at the beginning of the game . The player will begin the game on either side of Europe depending on which side was chosen ; if NATO was picked , the player will start at western European countries ( France , West Germany , Denmark ) whereas if the player sides with the Warsaw Pact , the game will begin in eastern Europe . The map is hexagon @-@ shaped and allows the player to move their units in six directions . Each side has a variety of units ; infantry move at a slower pace than mechanised infantry however armoured units are able to withstand more damage than regular units . The game displays two maps on screen ; the larger , central map displays the current situation whereas a smaller map to the corner of the screen displays a mini @-@ map of Europe , which runs north from Denmark to southern France . 
 There are seven types of units in the game . Each unit has a set of statistics which is displayed in the interface once selected . The statistics range from combat strength , fatigue , efficiency , supply and movement points . During the game , both sides have the option to request air support that can be used to attack enemy units . If the other side uses their air support , the player will be given a warning of an oncoming air strike and will have the option to retreat . The game has two endings depending on the side chosen . If playing as NATO , the main objective is to stall Soviet forces long enough until American reinforcements arrive . However , if playing as the Warsaw Pact , the objective is to destroy all NATO forces . 
 = = Setting = = 
 The events leading up the stand @-@ off between NATO and the Warsaw Pact are detailed in a pre @-@ game text ; Iran declares war on Iraq and subsequently invades the latter nation , whilst Egypt succumbs to a civil war and establishes Islamic law over the country , culminating in an Egyptian invasion of Israel . The events in the Middle East prompt the superpowers of the United States and the British Empire to intervene , leading up to a conventional war in Europe against the Eastern bloc . The game is set in 1989 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Personal Software Services was founded in Coventry , England , by Gary Mays and Richard Cockayne in 1981 . The company were known for creating games that revolved around historic war battles and conflicts , such as Theatre Europe , Bismark and Falklands ' 82 . The company had a partnership with French video game developer ERE Informatique , and published localised versions of their products to the United Kingdom . In 1986 , Cockayne took a decision to alter their products for release on 16 @-@ bit consoles , as he found that smaller 8 @-@ bit consoles such as the ZX Spectrum lacked the processing power for larger strategy games . The decision was falsely interpreted as " pull @-@ out " from the Spectrum market by a video game journalist . Following years of successful sales throughout the mid 1980s , Personal Software Services experienced financial difficulties , in what Cockayne admitted in a retrospective interview that " he took his eye off the ball " . The company was acquired by Mirrorsoft in February 1987 , and was later dispossessed by the company due to strains of debt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mixed reviews upon release . Richard Blaine of Your Sinclair praised the graphics as " wonderful " and the gameplay as " tough " , adding that the game should be aimed at advanced players . Philippa Irving of Crash criticised the graphics as repetitively " dull " , despite admitting that they were " clear enough " visually . Gary Rook of Sinclair User heralded the graphics as " superb " , adding that the game was one of the " best looking " wargames he had ever seen at that time . A reviewer of Computer and Video Games criticised the presentation , stating that the screen was too small and the lack of visual understanding made the game " completely unplayable " . Mark Reed of Computer Gamer praised the graphics as being superior compared to Theatre Europe , heralding it as " much more detailed " . However , Reed criticised the originality of the game and the lack of manual for the ZX Spectrum version . 
 A reviewer of ZX Computing praised the game 's difficulty , suggesting that it was " recommended " for advanced gamers in the wargame genre . Irving criticised the game 's value for money and playability , stating that £ 12 @.@ 95 was " a lot " of money to spend on a game that the player would most likely dislike . However , Rook heralded the gameplay as " smooth " and " challenging " , contrary to other critics . 
 = Tytila of East Anglia = 
 Tytila ( died around 616 ) was a semi @-@ historical pagan king of East Anglia , a small Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom which today includes the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . Early sources , including Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People , identify him as an early member of the Wuffingas dynasty who succeeded his father Wuffa . A later chronicle dates his reign from 578 , but he is not known to have definitely ruled as king and nothing of his life is known . He is listed in a number of genealogical lists . 
 A number of later mediaeval sources recorded that in about 616 , Tytila was succeeded by his son Rædwald . 
 = = The Wuffingas dynasty = = 
 The peoples known to us as the Angles , Saxons , Jutes and Frisians , began to arrive in Britain in the 5th century . By 600 , a number of kingdoms had begun to form in southern and eastern Britain , and by the beginning of the seventh century , southern England was almost entirely under their control . Tytila was a member of the Wuffingas family , the ruling dynasty of the Kingdom of the East Angles that was named after his father Wuffa . The Wuffingas may have been descendants of an earlier Scandinavian dynasty . Both he and his father are semi @-@ historical figures . 
 The Victorian ethnologist John Beddoe noted the similarity between the name Tytila and that of Totila , an Ostrogoth king . 
 Tytila is included in a number of different tallies . In the Ecclesiastical History of the English People , which was completed in Northumbria by Bede in 731 , Tytila is named as the father of Rædwald and the son of Wuffa : ' Erat autem <unk> rex <unk> <unk> nobilis , <unk> <unk> <unk> , filius <unk> , cuius pater fuit <unk> ... ' . The 9th century Welsh monk Nennius , in his Historia Brittonum , also lists Tytila , naming him as the father of Eni of East Anglia : ' ... Uffa , who begat <unk> , who begat Eni , ... ' whilst relating the origin of the kings of East Anglia . Tytila is included in an East Anglian royal tally that lists the ancestors of Ælfwald and that names many , but not all , of the early East Anglian kings . The tally , which forms part of the Anglian collection , comes from the 12th century Textus Roffensis . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Nothing is known of Tytila 's life or his rule , as no written records have survived from this period in East Anglian history . The mediaeval chronicler Roger of Wendover dated Tytila 's reign from 578 , but his source of information is unknown and the accession date may have been a guess on the part of the chronicler . Tytila 's son and successor , Rædwald , the greatest of the Wuffingas monarchs , is the first East Anglian king who is more than a semi @-@ historical figure , although much information about him , including the year of his death , is conjectural . The finds from the excavations of the two separate cemeteries at Sutton Hoo in Suffolk and at other sites in East Anglia point to close connections at this time between south @-@ eastern Britain , the Frankish <unk> , the Eastern Mediterranean and of growing royal prestige and authority , reflected by the magnificent grave @-@ goods discovered in the main burial @-@ ship at Sutton Hoo . 
 The date that <unk> died is unknown , but he is thought to have been succeeded by his son Rædwald in about 616 . 
 The descendants of Tytila 's ancestor Wehha 
 See Wuffingas for a more complete family tree . 
 = Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? = 
 " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " is the twenty @-@ fourth and final episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on August 27 , 1992 . It was originally supposed to be the series première for the next season , but Fox decided to air it earlier , to promote the series première of Martin . Consequently , it became the unofficial finale of season three . 
 In the episode , Homer is awarded a US $ 2 @,@ 000 compensation after the radiation from the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant causes him to become infertile . Meanwhile , Homer 's half @-@ brother , Herb , now living on the streets , comes to the Simpsons ' house with a plan on how to regain his wealth . He reluctantly turns to Homer for help , and asks for the $ 2 @,@ 000 so that he can develop a new product that will translate baby babbling into speech . The product becomes hugely successful and Herb regains his fortune . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Rich Moore . Danny DeVito guest starred in it as Herb , while Joe Frazier guest starred as himself . " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " was the second time Herb appeared on the show ; he had previously appeared in the season two episode " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " , in which Homer causes him to become bankrupt . The producers decided to create this episode in part because many fans were unhappy about the sad ending to " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " . " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " received positive reviews from critics and DeVito was praised for his guest performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A routine physical exam at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant reveals that safety inspector Homer Simpson has become sterile after being exposed to radiation . Fearing a lawsuit , plant owner Mr. Burns awards Homer with the " First Annual Montgomery Burns Award for Outstanding Achievement in the Field of Excellence " and a US $ 2 @,@ 000 prize in exchange for a legal waiver freeing the nuclear plant of all liability . Joe Frazier is the host of the award ceremony , which features extraordinary extravagance in order to trick Homer into believing that it is a real ceremony . 
 The Simpsons cannot decide on what to do with the money ( suggesting an encyclopedia subscription , a new washing machine and dryer and a machine gun ) , especially Homer , who wishes to buy the Spinemelter 2000 ; an expensive vibrating chair . Herb , Homer 's half @-@ brother , now living on the streets , was the owner of a successful car manufacturer before he was ruined by Homer . After observing a mother unable to discern what her baby wants , Herb comes up with an idea to help regain his wealth : to create a machine that will translate baby babbling into actual English . Upon seeing a newspaper about Homer 's award ceremony , he decides to visit Homer . After getting cleaned up by the Flanders family , he requests the money to finance his project , though not before a slight loss of inhibition through punching Homer in the face , as Herb is still mad at him . He builds the translator and presents it at a trade show , which proves to be a huge success . 
 Along with returning the $ 2 @,@ 000 to Homer , Herb buys several gifts for the Simpson family , including a new washer and dryer for Marge , a subscription to the Greater Books of Western Civilization for Lisa , and a lifetime membership to the NRA for Bart ( since he is too young to have the machine gun he mentioned earlier ) . Herb then tells Homer that his gift to him is forgiveness for ruining him in the first place , and he and Homer re @-@ establish a brotherly relationship . Finally , Homer is rewarded for his generosity and faith when Herb has a truck pull in with the " damn chair " , the Spinemelter , which Homer is ecstatic to receive . The episode ends with the family relaxing in the living room while Homer happily relaxes on the vibrating chair . The final shot is of Homer 's sperm , clearly jiggling , suggesting Homer 's sterility may eventually be cured with the massage chair . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Rich Moore . The reason for the late broadcast on August 27 , 1992 ( the season usually ends in May ) was because the Fox network decided to add an additional episode to the season and show it during the summer to become " the biggest network " on television . As a result , the writers , animators , and producers had to work longer hours than normal to be able to finish the extra episode , which became " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " The idea for the scenes involving the Spinemelter 2000 originated when one of the writers bought a vibrating chair to relax after working 20 hours a day on the episode . 
 The decision to make another episode with Herb was reached due to many viewers being unhappy about the sad ending to the previous episode " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " ( season two , 1991 ) , in which Homer causes Herb to become bankrupt . It was decided that an episode would be created in which he regains his fortune . Originally the producers were going to end the original Herb episode with Herb saying " I have an idea ! " at the end of it , but they decided to flesh this out into a full story , which resulted in " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " In addition , the producers decided that they enjoyed Danny DeVito 's guest starring as Herb in " Oh Brother , Where Art Thou ? " , so they brought him back . Cast member Hank Azaria noted that DeVito was less enthusiastic in his second performance as Herb : " Some people come in and you can tell they kind of regretted doing it . The second time , Danny DeVito was like ' Yeah , yeah , yeah , let 's get it over with . ' He did a great job , but he didn 't enjoy the process . " 
 In part because the writers had so many ideas for what Herb would invent , the original script of " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " ended up being too long at fifty @-@ three pages . During the same time as the voices were being recorded , the writers cut some of the material . One of the cut scenes featured Herb running after a train in order to ask which Springfield it was going to ; the writers , however , decided to include a similar scene in a later episode , " Burns , Baby Burns " ( season eight , 1996 ) . There was originally a joke in the script that predicted the breakup of the Soviet Union ; however , as the Soviet Union already broke up between the writing of the script and the air time , the joke was scrapped . 
 Boxer Joe Frazier guest starred in the episode as himself . Show runner Al Jean has stated that Frazier was hard to record , especially him saying the word " excellence " in the title of Mr. Burns ' award . George Meyer , who directed Frazier , commented that he got the pronunciation right after almost 20 takes . The original script for " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " included a scene in which town drunk Barney Gumble knocked out Frazier , who is a Heavyweight Boxing Champion . Frazier 's son , however , objected to this scene : " Yes , I suggested that they change that . [ Frazier ] was a world champion , and a world champion does not get knocked out . My dad has only been knocked down twice , and that was by George Foreman . " Originally , the producers wanted Foreman to appear instead of Frazier , but he was unavailable . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode and the plot , to a certain extent , is a reference to the common expression " Brother , Can You Spare a Dime ? " , a song of the Great Depression that has been recorded multiple times by artists since . The Walt Disney Company is referenced at the beginning of the episode when a homeless bum mutters to Herb : " Yeah , I used to be rich . I owned Mickey Mouse Massage <unk> , then those Disney <unk> shut me down . " While Homer relaxes in the Spinemelter chair at the store he sees images in his head that are a reference to the penultimate scenes of the film 2001 : A Space Odyssey . In one scene , Homer reminisces about sitting on his old couch while watching Dallas , the Hands Across America charity event , the Berlin Wall coming down , and Gomer Pyle , <unk> .. The last scene where Herb presents the Simpsons family with gifts for their trust in him is a reference to the film The Wizard of Oz , in which the Wizard presents Dorothy , the Lion , the Scarecrow , and the Tin Man with gifts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " finished 31st in the ratings for the week of August 24 – 30 , 1992 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 9 @.@ 76 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week following the 44th Primetime Emmy Awards . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide were positive of the episode , particularly praising the scenes involving Homer 's fixation for vibrating chairs and Maggie speaking to the family through the baby translator . The Guardian 's David <unk> said episodes such as " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " , " Lisa 's Pony " and " Stark Raving Dad " make season three " pretty much the best season of any television show , ever . " The episode 's reference to 2001 : A Space Odyssey was named the 27th greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 Herb 's reappearance was praised by reviewers of the episode . Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed stated that Herb is " a perfect sibling for [ ... ] Homer , with the two characters having a harmonious give @-@ and @-@ take comedic style . Indeed there isn 't a great deal of substance in John Swartzwelder 's script , but it is a great deal of fun with plenty of laughs to more than make up for this flaw . There is also a humorous cameo by Joe Frazier that puts a nice accent on the show . " Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict gave " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " a near @-@ perfect score of 99 / 100 , praising it for " the jokes about what the money could be spent on ( including one of the best bits ever in a Simpsons episode — Homer sitting on a high @-@ tech vibrating chair ) and a good impetus to reintroduce Herb . " 
 Several critics have praised DeVito 's appearance . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said he enjoyed seeing what happened to Herb , " and DeVito 's performance helps make the show more successful ; they really need to bring him back one of these days . " Tom Adair of The Scotsman considers " Brother , Can You Spare Two Dimes ? " to be a classic episode of the show , in part because of DeVito 's performance . Gibron also liked the choice of DeVito as the voice of Herb as he is " almost the antithesis of everything Dan Castellaneta does with Homer vocally . " Ditum ranked DeVito 's performance as the tenth best guest appearance in the show 's history . 
 = Norwegian Forest cat = 
 The Norwegian Forest cat ( Norwegian : Norsk skogkatt or Norsk <unk> ) is a breed of domestic cat originating in Northern Europe . This natural breed is adapted to a very cold climate , with top coat of glossy , long , water @-@ shedding hairs , and a woolly undercoat for insulation . Although this is uncertain , the breed 's ancestors may have been a landrace of short @-@ haired cats brought to Norway by the Vikings around 1000 AD , who may also have brought with them long @-@ haired cats , like those ancestral to the modern Siberian and Turkish Angora breeds . During World War II , the breed became nearly extinct until efforts by the Norwegian Forest Cat Club helped the breed by creating an official breeding program . It was registered as a breed with the European Fédération Internationale <unk> in the 1970s , when a local cat fancier , Carl @-@ Fredrik <unk> , took notice of the breed and made efforts to register it . Currently , the Norwegian Forest breed is very popular in Norway , Sweden , Iceland and France . 
 It is a big , strong cat , similar to the American Maine Coon breed , with long legs , a bushy tail and a sturdy body . The breed is very good at climbing , since they have strong claws . The lifespan is usually 14 to 16 years , though kidney and heart diseases have been reported in the breed . Specifically in this breed , complex rearrangements of glycogen branching enzyme ( <unk> ) can cause a perinatal <unk> collapse and a late @-@ juvenile @-@ onset neuromuscular degeneration in glycogen storage disease type IV . 
 = = History = = 
 The Norwegian Forest cat is adapted to survive Norway 's cold weather . Its ancestors may include black and white <unk> cats brought to Norway from Great Britain some time after 1000 AD by the Vikings , and longhaired cats brought to Norway by Crusaders . These cats could have reproduced with farm and feral stock and may have eventually evolved into the modern @-@ day Norwegian Forest breed . The Siberian and the Turkish Angora , longhaired cats from Russia and Turkey , respectively , are also possible ancestors of the breed . Norse legends refer to the skogkatt as a " mountain @-@ dwelling fairy cat with an ability to climb sheer rock faces that other cats could not manage . " Since the Norwegian Forest cat is a very adept climber , author Claire Bessant believes that the skogkatt folktale could be about the ancestor of the modern Norwegian Forest breed . The name Norse skogkatt is used by some breeder and fancier organisations for the modern breed . 
 Most likely the ancestors of the Norwegian Forest cat served as ships ' cats ( <unk> ) on Viking ships . The original landrace lived in the Norwegian forests for many centuries , but were later prized for their hunting skills and were used on Norwegian farms , until they were discovered in the early twentieth century by cat enthusiasts . 
 In 1938 the first organisation devoted to the breed , the Norwegian Forest Cat Club , was formed in Oslo , Norway . The club 's movement to preserve the breed was interrupted by World War II . Owing to cross @-@ breeding with free @-@ ranging domestic cats during the war , the Norwegian Forest cat became endangered and nearly extinct until the Norwegian Forest Cat Club helped the breed make a comeback by developing an official breeding program . Since the cat did not leave Norway until the 1970s , it was not registered as a breed in the Fédération Internationale <unk> ( <unk> ) , the pan @-@ European federation of cat registries , until Carl @-@ Fredrik <unk> , a Norwegian cat fancier , took notice of the breed , and made efforts to register it . The breed was registered in Europe by the 1970s , and in the American Cat Fanciers Association in 1994 . In 1978 , it was recognized in Sweden , and in 1989 , they were accepted as a breed in the United Kingdom by the Norwegian Cat Club of Britain . 
 The Norwegian Forest breed is very popular in Norway and Sweden . Since 2003 , it has been the fifth most popular cat breed in France , where there are about 400 to 500 births per year . 
 = = Breed description = = 
 The Norwegian Forest Cat is strongly built and larger than an average cat . The breed has a long , sturdy body , long legs and a bushy tail . The coat consists of a long , glossy , thick and water @-@ repellent top layer and a woolly undercoat and is thickest at the legs , chest and head . The profile of the breed is generally straight . 
 The head is long with an overall shape similar to an equilateral triangle , a strong chin , and a muzzle of medium length ; a square or round @-@ shaped head is considered to be a defect . The eyes are almond shaped and oblique , and may be of any colour . The ears are large , wide at the base , and high set , have a tufted top , are placed in the extension of the triangle formed by the head , and end with a tuft of hair like the ears of the lynx . All coat colors are accepted except chocolate and lilac and the dilutions fawn and cinnamon . Since the cats have very strong claws , they are very good climbers , and can even climb rocks . 
 Norwegian Forest cats have a quiet voice but can develop a loud voice if kept in a house with a dog . They are friendly , intelligent , and generally good with people . The Norwegian Forest cat has a lot of energy and can be very demanding of attention . Those cats that live primarily outdoors become swift and effective hunters , but the breed can also adapt to indoor life . If bought from a registered breeder in the USA , they tend to cost from $ 550 to $ 800 . The cats usually live to be 14 to 16 years old . As they are heavy @-@ boned and tall , they require more food than most other domestic breeds . Males are considerably heavier and larger @-@ boned than females . 
 = = = Health issues = = = 
 There have been kidney and heart diseases reported in the breed . In an experiment directed by John C. <unk> , Rebeccah L. <unk> , and others , it was concluded that a complex rearrangement in the breed 's <unk> branching enzyme ( <unk> ) can cause both a perinatal hypoglycemic collapse and a late @-@ juvenile @-@ onset neuromuscular degeneration in glycogen storage disease type IV in the breed . This disorder , while rare , can prove fatal to cats that have it . There are DNA tests available for GSD IV , and it is highly recommended ( some cat associations obligate their Norwegian Forest cat breeder members ) to carry out the DNA test before using such animals for breeding . <unk> provide a pedigree database which comes together with health programmes , through publishing each single cat 's test result , to provide useful information for breeders to make a well @-@ informed breeding decision . The breed has also been known to suffer from hip dysplasia , which is a rare , partially hereditary disease of the hip joint . 
 = = = Breed societies and clubs = = = 
 Norsk <unk> Society , UK 
 Norwegian Forest Cat Club , UK 
 Viking Cat Club , UK 
 = Bobby Singer = 
 Robert Steven " Bobby " Singer is a fictional character in The CW Television Network 's drama / horror television series Supernatural portrayed by Jim Beaver . Chosen due to his working relationship with executive producer Robert Singer , Beaver made his initial appearance in the first season finale " Devil 's Trap " . The actor believed the role would merely be a " one @-@ shot deal " , but has since become a recurring guest on the series , having appeared in more episodes than anyone besides the two leads . As of season 11 , he is currently the only recurring character to appear in all seasons . Despite also starring in the series Harper 's Island , Beaver was able to maintain his quota for Supernatural 's fourth season , with the role expanding even further for the fifth season 's apocalyptic storyline . The character , a " rough but warmhearted " working @-@ class man who hunts supernatural creatures , has evolved over time into a father @-@ figure for series protagonists Sam and Dean Winchester . Critics have responded highly favorably to the character . 
 = = Plot = = 
 <unk> and proprietor of Singer Salvage Yard , Bobby Singer was first introduced to the supernatural world when his wife Karen became possessed by a demon . As detailed in the third @-@ season episode " Dream a Little Dream of Me " , he was uncertain of how to save her , and instead ended up being forced to kill her . Her death prompted him to dedicate his life to hunting supernatural creatures . The later episode " Death 's Door " expanded on this by revealing that Bobby 's last conversation with his wife was an argument about his reluctance to have children , also revealing that his father was an abusive man who Bobby shot when he was a child ( His mother subsequently telling him that God would punish him for this ) , Bobby reflecting that his father 's example left him afraid of becoming one himself in case he became a parent as bad as his father . 
 Bobby makes his debut in the first season finale " Devil 's Trap " , and is revealed to be an old friend of the Winchester family . Sam and Dean Winchester seek his help when their father John is kidnapped by demons . From his extensive collection of supernatural @-@ related literature and resources , Bobby shows the brothers how to create a devil 's trap — mystical symbols capable of rendering a demon powerless — and later assists in the exorcism of the demonic Meg Masters . After John 's death in the second @-@ season premiere , Bobby allows the brothers to stay at his home to rest up and rebuild the recently @-@ crippled Impala . He continues to assist them when they require additional expertise in their hunts , rescuing a demonically @-@ possessed Sam and dealing with a Trickster . In the second @-@ season finale , Bobby helps Dean to locate a missing Sam , but they both watch in horror as he is fatally stabbed in the back . Bobby begs Dean to bury Sam , and is distraught when he learns that Dean has sold his soul to a demon for Sam 's resurrection . When the hunters learn of the demon Azazel 's plan to open a Devil 's Gate — a gateway to Hell — they rush to stop him . The gateway is temporarily opened , releasing hundreds of other demons into the world , before Bobby and Ellen Harvelle close it again . 
 Bobby assists the Winchesters throughout the third season in their war against the recently @-@ escaped demons , starting with helping them defeat the Seven Deadly Sins in the premiere , as well as repairing the Colt so that they can make new bullets for it with the help of the demon Ruby in the episode " Sin City " . The Winchesters save Bobby 's life when he is put into a coma by a teenager using <unk> to enter the minds of others , but this results in Bela Talbot — a thief who takes supernatural artifacts that the brothers called for help finding the <unk> — stealing the Colt while they are unconscious . Bobby helps them track down Lilith — a powerful demon who holds the contract to Dean 's deal — the night before his contract runs out . However , they are unable to stop her , and Dean is sent to Hell . 
 When Dean mysteriously returns to life four months later in the fourth season premiere " Lazarus Rising " , Bobby at first believes him to be a demon or some other type of supernatural creature . After first attempting to kill Dean and then putting him through numerous tests , Bobby helps him to reunite with his brother . While Sam later sneaks away to secretly hone his new @-@ found demonic abilities , Bobby and Dean perform a ritual to summon whatever creature resurrected him . The being , revealed to be the angel Castiel , incapacitates Bobby before informing Dean that he was saved from Hell because Heaven has work for him to do . The subsequent episode , " Are You There , God ? It 's Me , Dean Winchester " , reveals that Dean must stop Lilith from breaking the 66 mystical seals keeping Lucifer imprisoned . 
 In " The Rapture " , Dean discovers that Sam 's abilities have been amplified due to a recent addiction to demon blood ; he has Bobby lock Sam inside his <unk> and demon @-@ proof panic room — located in Bobby 's basement — to recover from his dependence on demon blood . Sam escapes in the subsequent episode , and , faced with the choice of either shooting him or letting him go , Bobby chooses the latter . In the fourth season finale , " Lucifer Rising " , Dean is furious that Sam has chosen to side with Ruby — she has been feeding Sam her blood to make him strong enough to kill Lilith — over him . Despite Dean 's declaration that if Sam should leave , he should never come back , Sam chooses to go with Ruby . When Bobby learns of the ultimatum , he compares Dean 's actions to those of John Winchester — years prior , John made a similar statement to Sam , which prompted him to abandon hunting and alienated him from his family . Although Bobby 's words eventually convince Dean to try to reach out to Sam , he is prevented by the angels ; they want to start the Apocalypse to bring paradise to the world when Lucifer is defeated , and the death of Lilith is the final seal holding the fallen angel in place . Not knowing this , Sam kill her , thus unleashing Lucifer . Bobby meets up with the brothers in the fifth season premiere " Sympathy for the Devil " , to help them research ways to defeat Lucifer . When Sam confesses that he broke the final seal , an angry Bobby tells him to " lose [ his ] number " when the Apocalypse is over . After Dean comes across a lead on the sword 's location , Bobby attacks him and is revealed to be demonically possessed . However , Bobby temporarily retakes control , and stabs himself with Ruby 's demon @-@ killing knife . Although the demon dies , Bobby survives , although he is left paraplegic by his injury . At the end of the episode , he tells Sam that his earlier comments were made by the demon , and that he could never cut Sam out of his life . 
