 With Castiel 's now @-@ weakened powers leaving him unable to heal injuries , being in a wheelchair begins to take its toll on Bobby . When the brothers come across a poker @-@ playing witch in " The Curious Case of Dean Winchester " , he sees it as a chance to regain his mobility and wagers 25 years of his lifespan . Although he loses and begins to age rapidly , Sam and Dean manage to restore his lost years . In " Dead Men Don 't Wear Plaid " , Bobby 's wife — and many other people buried in the local cemetery — suddenly rises from her grave and appears to be completely normal . Sam and Dean try to convince him to kill her because she is a zombie , but he refuses and orders them to leave . Over time , the other zombies begin to turn evil , and Bobby is forced to kill his wife again to prevent her from changing , too . After all the zombies are dealt with , Bobby reveals that Death orchestrated the situation ; because he is one of the reasons why Sam has not yet agreed to be Lucifer 's vessel , the Horseman attempted to break Bobby 's spirit . Although Dean tries to comfort him by pointing out that he got to see his wife again , Bobby notes that it only made her death a thousand times worse . 
 The brothers eventually learn that the rings of the Four Horsemen can be used to re imprison Lucifer , and they manage to collect three by the episode " Two Minutes To Midnight " . Still in need of Death 's ring , Bobby sells his soul to Crowley — a powerful demon who also wants to stop Lucifer — in exchange for the knowledge of the final Horseman 's location . Crowley promises to return his soul When the Apocalypse has been prevented , keeping it in the meantime to guarantee his safety from the Winchesters . When the deal has been made , the demon reveals that he added in a secret clause to restore Bobby 's mobility . An ecstatic Bobby then joins Sam and Castiel on a mission to stop nation @-@ wide distribution of the <unk> virus . In the fifth season finale , Sam decides to consent to Lucifer , hoping that he can maintain control long enough to throw himself into Lucifer 's prison . However , the fallen angel instantly overwhelms his new vessel , and teleports away with the rings . Bobby and Castiel lose faith in their goal , but Dean convinces them to keep fighting . They learn the location of the destined battleground from the prophet Chuck , and arrive just as Lucifer and Michael prepare to fight . An angry Lucifer kills Bobby and Castiel when they interfere , and then sets his sight onto Dean . Sam is able to reassert control over his body , and uses the rings to imprison himself and Michael . With the Apocalypse over , God resurrects Castiel , who in turn brings Bobby back to life . 
 The sixth season episode " Weekend At Bobby 's " is centered on Bobby ; Sam and Dean are largely relegated to a side @-@ plot while the episode focuses on Bobby 's constant working to cover other hunters while also trying to reclaim his soul from Crowley . After a year 's research into Crowley 's human life — allowing them to track down his mortal remains , whose destruction would ' kill ' Crowley in the same manner as exorcising a ghost — Bobby eventually regains his soul by threatening to burn Crowley 's human remains . Although the restored but soulless Sam attempts to kill Bobby in " Appointment in Samarra " as part of a ritual to prevent his soul returning to him — Sam being concerned about reports that the psychological damage his soul will have sustained while being tortured by Lucifer will destroy him — Bobby easily forgives Sam after his soul is restored , recognizing that Sam was not responsible though he is awkward around him at first due to his actions . Bobby then collaborates with the Winchesters in tracking down Eve , the mother of all monsters , when she is released from Purgatory by a ritual performed by dragons , even after their first attempt results in Bobby being possessed by a brain @-@ controlling slug Eve has created and the death of his old friend and mentor Rufus in " And Then There Were None " . 
 During a temporary change in the timeline caused by angel Balthazar saving the Titanic , Bobby is married to a still @-@ living Ellen in " My Heart Will Go On " , but this timeline is undone with only Sam , Dean and the angels remembering it . 
 After a time @-@ travel mission results in the brothers and Bobby acquiring the phoenix ash needed to kill Eve , they eliminate her in " Mommy Dearest " . They also realize that Castiel has been deceiving them and in " The Man Who Would Be King " deduce that he has collaborating with Crowley to open Purgatory in an attempt to acquire the power of the souls within it to use in the civil war in Heaven . Despite their best efforts , Dean , Sam and Bobby fail to stop Castiel , who uses the Purgatory souls to elevate himself to a god @-@ like level in the sixth season finale . 
 Although he initially helps the Winchesters in Season 7 in their struggle against the Leviathans — God 's original creations , trapped for millennia in Purgatory until they were unintentionally released by Castiel — despite the destruction of his house , even determining their new foes ' vulnerability to the chemical Borax , Bobby is eventually shot in the head by Dick Roman in " How to Win Friends and Influence Monsters " . He spends the next episode , " Death 's Door " , in a coma , trying to reawaken to reveal the Leviathan 's plot . Despite efforts to save him , Bobby flatlines from his injuries ; his last word being " <unk> " ( sic , idiots ) to Sam and Dean after passing on a sequence of numbers . The episode ends with a reaper asking Bobby if he is going to become a ghost or move on to the afterlife . It 's indicated that he stayed as a ghost to help the boys as there have been times since his death when the information they need inexplicably makes itself known to them , but they were initially unable to confirm or deny Bobby 's possible presence . During " Party On , Garth , " Sam reveals that he tried to use a talking board to contact him if he is still around , but received no response . However , Garth registers high readings on an EMF detector around Bobby 's old flask , and when Dean needed a sword to slay a demon , it inexplicably slid across the ground to him , leading him to believe that Bobby had helped him . At the end of the episode , Bobby 's spirit can be seen in the brother 's motel room , and he is annoyed when Dean comes in , looks right at him , and does not see him , instead grabbing his flask . 
 In " Of Grave Importance " , the audience is fully aware of Bobby 's ghostly existence and the episode revolves around his own parallel investigation with the Winchesters of a haunted house . When Annie Hawkins , a hunter friend of the three , calls for assistance before being killed by the house 's ghost , Bobby follows the Winchesters via the flask and discovers Annie dead with a myriad of other ghosts unable to move on from their place of death . Determined to get out information , Bobby learns to manipulate physical objects and points Dean and Sam in the right direction , and they are able to destroy the ghost haunting the house before the ghost could destroy Bobby . At the end of the episode , having accepted Bobby 's return , Bobby is now fully visible to the Winchesters and explains to them how he chose to remain behind ; a choice Dean finds hard to accept . 
 Following their reunion , Bobby explains Dick Roman 's endgame for humanity ; cure humanity of all its diseases before herding them as livestock for the Leviathans to feed on . In the midst of his explanation , the brothers receive an email from a dead Frank Devereaux , who informs them that his hard drive , in Roman 's possession at his headquarters , is currently being cybernetically attacked and will lead to their new aliases and safe houses being compromised . While Bobby attempts to convince the Winchesters to send in his flask , the brothers are concerned his hatred for Roman will compromise the operation and leave him out . The hacker responsible of cracking Devereaux 's hard drive , Charlene Bradbury , witnesses a Leviathan eating and cloning her boss and is quickly able to be recruited to help the brothers against the Leviathans . While the operation is successful — wiping the hard drive , hacking Roman 's email account and intercepting an important package — Charlene is unable to escape the building in time . Bobby , having snuck his flask into her bag , cracks the doors and begins to attack the Leviathans , breaking Charlene 's arm in the process , leading to a concerned discussion between the brothers as to Bobby 's self @-@ control . Bobby later returns after having to recharge for a while and describes himself as " stronger than ever . " Bobby becomes increasingly frustrated in " There Will Be Blood " , which only feeds his fast @-@ growing rage and turns him more into a vengeful spirit , culminating in his possession of a maid , whom he uses to go seek vengeance on Dick . In the seventh season finale , " Survival of the Fittest , " Sam tries to stop him , but Bobby is no longer completely in control of himself and nearly strangles Sam to death . Realizing what he is doing , he regains control and leaves the maid 's body . Now knowing the danger of him losing control again , Bobby requests that Sam and Dean burn his flask . They reluctantly do so , causing his ghost to disappear . 
 Bobby next appears in eighth season episode " Taxi Driver , " in which Sam and Dean learn from rogue Reaper Ajay that instead of going to Heaven when his flask was burned , Bobby was taken to Hell on Crowley 's orders . Needing to rescue an innocent soul and release it into Heaven to complete the second trial to close the Gates of Hell , Sam travels into Hell and finds Bobby who initially believes he is a demon as he is being tormented by demons pretending to be Sam and Dean all the time , but Sam convinces him with personal information only he and Dean know . The two escape into Purgatory , but find the Reaper that Ajay is missing ( having been questioned and killed by Crowley ) . With the help of Dean 's vampiric friend Benny , Sam returns to Earth with Bobby 's soul , but when Bobby goes to ascend to Heaven , he is trapped by Crowley , who wants to take him back to Hell to punish him for the " damage " he has done to demons in his hunting career . However , the angel Naomi intervenes , drives Crowley off , and allows Bobby to ascend to his rightful place in Heaven , thus completing the second trial . 
 When Sam is in a coma and dying in the ninth season premiere " I Think I 'm Gonna Like It Here " , his subconscious desire to give up and die manifests in the form of Bobby . " Bobby " takes Sam away from the Impala and talks to him about moving on being a good thing and something he should do before taking him to a house in the woods where he says what Sam needs is . The part of Sam 's mind that wants to live promptly manifests as Dean and kills " Bobby " to try to convince Sam one last time to live , but Sam decides to go with " Bobby 's " advice . 
 During the tenth season episode " Inside Man " , Bobby is relaxing in Heaven when Sam and Castiel contact him through a séance to help break Metatron out of Heaven 's prison . Though he feels himself to be rusty , Bobby agrees and escapes his Heaven , releasing all the other Bobby Singer 's to create a distraction . Bobby gets Castiel into Heaven and helps him free Metatron before returning to his own Heaven . He leaves a note with Castiel for Sam , telling him not to stop searching for a cure for the Mark of Cain but to stop lying to Dean about it . He also states that helping again was the most fun he had in Heaven and he will accept any punishment for his actions . After returning to his Heaven , Bobby looks at a picture of him , Sam and Dean at his old salvage yard as Hannah and a few other angels come after him for punishment . 
 In season eleven 's Safe House , Sam and Dean investigate a house where Bobby and Rufus had worked a case in around 2008 or 2009 while the Winchesters were hunting Lilith to stop the Apocalypse . During the case , the two men faced off with a monster that was causing people to drop into mysterious comas and die while acting like a ghost . Bobby eventually recognized the monster as a Soul Eater , a monster that steals people 's souls and takes them to its nest in a pocket dimension . Bobby had faced and trapped a Soul Eater before and he and Rufus are able to trap the one in the house they are investigating . However , Bobby briefly falls victim to the monster and is transported to its nest while his body is possessed by the monster to attack Rufus who is able to complete the trap . In the present , the trap is accidentally broken during renovations of the house and the Winchesters face the Soul Eater themselves . The Winchesters are able to kill the Soul Eater , but Dean 's soul is also taken to the nest , a place outside of time and space . Moments before the souls are released from the nest by the Soul Eater 's death , Dean and Bobby briefly see each other and are left wondering if the experience was real in their respective time periods . After killing the Soul Eater Bobby and Rufus had faced , the Winchesters return to the house Bobby had previously trapped a Soul Eater in and slay that monster as well to finish Bobby 's old case for him . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Actor Jim Beaver described Bobby as a " rough but warmhearted " working @-@ class man with the outlook that " sometimes there are things that need to be done and they 're not fun to do , but they gotta be done anyway " . When the " usually level @-@ headed " hunter must use a wheelchair in the fifth season , he becomes " frustrated and angry " ; instead of being able to join the battles , he is " stuck at home manning the telephones " . This feeling of uselessness eventually leads to thoughts of suicide , though he deems himself too much of a coward to go through with it . On the situation , Beaver commented , " Bobby lives in a world where all kinds of strange things are possible . Somewhere along the line , he has a hope that one of these strange , miraculous things might happen to him . I think he is also a realist . He understands that even when you have friends that come back from the dead , not everything that you want to happen is going to happen . " 
 Though Bobby is " fairly content , at least on the surface , to be alone in the world " , he slowly comes to be a surrogate father for Sam and Dean . On this relationship , Beaver feels that " Bobby 's concerned about them both , with Dean 's sense of self , but there 's a sort of undercurrent of worry about Sam . Sam seems to have more of the heart of darkness about him than Dean does ... I just sense that there 's this ongoing watchful eye that Bobby 's got on Sam . " Although he loves each of them " like a son " , Bobby is willing to allow the brothers to put themselves in harm 's way if it is absolutely necessary . For example , when Dean wants to detoxify Sam from his addiction to demon blood in " When the Levee Breaks " , Bobby instead points out that Sam giving in to his demonic abilities could help him to prevent Lucifer 's return , even though the amount of blood required to kill Lilith would " change [ him ] forever " . Beaver noted , " Bobby is old enough that he 's fairly clear @-@ headed about what the priorities ought to be . Bobby 's position is , more or less , ' if you have a family member with a drinking problem and you want to stage an intervention , you might not want to do it in New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina . ' " 
 = = Development = = 
 Beaver had previously worked with executive producer Robert Singer on the television series Reasonable Doubts , and Singer gave him the part without viewing his audition tape . The character is named after Singer , though how this came to be is uncertain . Singer himself claimed Kripke secretly slipped the name into the script for " Devil 's Trap " ; contradicting this was Beaver , who claimed that the surname was not in the script but was rather jokingly added onto a salvage @-@ yard sign — " Singer Auto Parts " — by the set designers . The actor thought his initial appearance would be a " one @-@ shot deal " , and was surprised when he was asked to return . Beaver feels that his longevity on the show is due to his chemistry with Ackles and Padalecki . 
 The first episode to delve into Bobby 's backstory was the third season 's " Dream a Little Dream of Me " . Because the writers always knew his history would be " grounded in family " , the episode 's teaser initially depicted the supernatural deaths of his children . However , the writers could not determine where to go from there . Following writer Cathryn Humphris ' earlier pitch of Bobby being an expert exorcist because of a previous failed exorcism , the focus changed to Bobby 's torment about killing his demonically @-@ possessed wife . 
 During production of the fourth season , Beaver joined the limited series Harper 's Island . Although he initially feared that it would prevent future appearances of Bobby , he was able to maintain his Supernatural " quota " with seven episodes . The character 's role increased for the fifth season , which made sense for the actor due to the apocalyptic storyline . The season also introduced a new story arc for Bobby : his use of a wheelchair . Series creator Eric Kripke explained that it " [ made ] the Apocalypse matter " ; the writers wanted " real stakes and real loss and real obstacles thrown in our heroes ' way " to differentiate it from prior seasons . Though he found it to be a challenge , Beaver enjoyed the experience because he could perform tricks on set that his wheelchair @-@ using college roommate had taught him . However , the actor did " [ take it ] very seriously " , and commented , " I can get out of the chair at the end of the day and go home and I recognize that , so many people can 't and I have to be considerate to them and respect that . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character 's portrayal has received wide acclaim from critics . John Kubicek of BuddyTV ranked Beaver fourteenth on his list of the best supporting actors in a drama series from the 2009 @-@ 2010 TV season , believing that the actor " did his best acting work ever " as Bobby . Likewise , Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune suggested , " May his trucker cap get its own star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . " 
 Tina Charles of TV Guide feels that Bobby " totally rocks " , and " wouldn 't mind him in every [ episode ] . OK , every other one " . She pointed out Beaver 's chemistry with Ackles , and wrote , " I have always loved any scene we get that involves [ Bobby and Dean ] — they 're unexpectedly emotional . When Bobby finally realized he wasn 't talking to a Dean shapeshifter or revenant [ in ' Lazarus Rising ' ] , that this was the real deal , it was just awesome . " Charles was surprised by Bobby 's paralysis storyline , but became " really interested " in finding out how it would affect him . However , she posited , " The guy 's a spitfire ... and it probably won 't change him much . " IGN 's Diana Steenbergen also praised Beaver , calling Bobby " a valuable member of the team " that " broadens [ the Winchesters ' ] tight @-@ knit unit , reminding them that there is more to family than just blood ties " . She found the actor to be " fantastic as the broken Bobby " in the fifth season , " despondent over his situation and feeling useless " . Steenbergen noted , " Bobby has been through a lot this season , and Jim Beaver has done an outstanding job portraying his journey . Not solely a surrogate father figure and keeper of random supernatural knowledge , this season Bobby has run the gamut of sacrifice , loss , anger , and determination to keep fighting . " After watching Bobby confess his suicidal thoughts to Dean in " The Curious Case of Dean Winchester " , she felt that " Beaver conveys all of Bobby 's vulnerability and also the shame that comes from being reprimanded by Dean for wanting to give up " . 
 Despite universal praise of Bobby by critics , Beaver commented on his blog that a minority of fans dislike the character . Don Williams of BuddyTV , however , defended him — he believes Bobby to be the show 's " most important recurring guest star " — and noted that " people will complain about anything " . In his response to the criticism — an article entitled " Why We Love Bobby Singer " — Williams wrote , " I think it 's a shame when people like Jim Beaver or Eric Kripke have to step forward to address this vocal minority , especially when the minority is just a handful of people gathering at a certain TV website that 's known for being snarky and negative about everything . The complaints of these supposed fans aren 't even worth addressing , in my opinion . " 
 = Japanese cruiser Nisshin = 
 Nisshin ( <unk> ) , also transliterated as Nissin , was a Kasuga @-@ class armored cruiser of the Imperial Japanese Navy , built in the first decade of the 20th century by Gio . Ansaldo & C. , Sestri Ponente , Italy , where the type was known as the Giuseppe Garibaldi class . The ship was originally ordered by the Argentine Navy during the Argentine – Chilean naval arms race , but the lessening of tensions with Chile and financial pressures caused the Argentinians to sell her before delivery . At this time tensions between the Empire of Japan and the Russian Empire were rising , and the ship was offered to both sides before she was purchased by the Japanese . 
 During the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 , Nisshin participated in the Battle of the Yellow Sea and was damaged in the subsequent Battle of Tsushima . In addition she frequently bombarded the defenses of Port Arthur . The ship played a limited role in World War I and was used to escort Allied convoys and search for German commerce raiders in the Indian Ocean and Australasia . In 1918 , Nisshin was deployed to the Mediterranean and then escorted the surrendered German submarines allocated to Japan from Britain to Japan after the war . She became a training ship in 1927 and was sunk as a target ship in 1936 . Her wreck was later refloated and used as a target again in 1942 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Nisshin was the last of the 10 Giuseppe Garibaldi @-@ class armored cruisers to be built . The first ship had been completed in 1895 and the class had enjoyed considerable export success , with the base design being gradually improved over the years . The last two ships of the class were ordered on 23 December 1901 by the Argentine Navy in response to the order by Chile for two second @-@ class battleships . The possibility of war between Argentina and Chile , however , abated before the vessel was completed , and a combination of financial problems and British pressure forced Argentina to dispose of Mariano Moreno and her sister ship Bernardino Rivadavia . The Argentine government attempted to sell the ships to Russia , but negotiations failed over the price demanded by the Argentinians . The Japanese government quickly stepped in and purchased them due to increasing tensions with Russia despite the high price of ¥ 14 @,@ 937 @,@ 390 ( £ 1 @,@ 530 @,@ 000 ) for the two sisters . Already planning to attack Russia , the government delayed their surprise attack on Port Arthur that began the Russo @-@ Japanese War until the ships had left Singapore and could not be delayed or interned by any foreign power . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Nisshin had an overall length of 111 @.@ 73 meters ( 366 ft 7 in ) , a beam of 18 @.@ 71 meters ( 61 ft 5 in ) , a molded depth of 12 @.@ 1 meters ( 39 ft 8 in ) and a deep draft ( ship ) of 7 @.@ 35 meters ( 24 ft 1 in ) . She displaced 7 @,@ 700 metric tons ( 7 @,@ 600 long tons ) at normal load . The ship was powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , using steam from 8 coal @-@ fired Scotch marine boilers . Designed for a maximum output of 13 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 100 kW ) and a speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , Nisshin barely exceeded this , reaching a speed of 20 @.@ 15 knots ( 37 @.@ 32 km / h ; 23 @.@ 19 mph ) during her sea trials on 6 November 1903 despite 14 @,@ 896 ihp ( 11 @,@ 108 kW ) produced by her engines . She had a cruising range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her complement consisted of 560 officers and enlisted men . 
 Her main armament consisted of four 8 @-@ inch / 45 Type 41 guns , in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . Ten of the quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 6 @-@ inch / 40 Type 41 guns that comprised her secondary armament were arranged in casemates amidships on the main deck ; the remaining four guns were mounted on the upper deck . Nisshin also had ten QF 3 @-@ inch / 40 Type 41 guns and six QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns to defend herself against torpedo boats . She was fitted with four submerged 457 mm ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , two on each side . 
 The ship 's waterline armor belt had a maximum thickness of 150 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) amidships and tapered to 70 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) towards the ends of the ship . Between the main gun barbettes it covered the entire side of the ship up to the level of the upper deck . The ends of the central armored citadel were enclosed by transverse bulkheads 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick . The forward barbette , the conning tower , and gun turrets were also protected by 150 @-@ millimeter armor while the aft barbette only had 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) of armor . Her deck armor ranged from 20 to 40 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the six @-@ inch guns on the upper deck were protected by gun shields . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship 's keel was laid down on 29 March 1902 with the temporary name of San Roca and she was launched on 9 February 1902 and renamed Mariano Moreno by the Argentinians . The vessel was sold to Japan on 30 December 1903 and renamed Nisshin on 1 January 1904 . Nisshin and her newly renamed sister Kasuga were formally turned over to Japan and commissioned on 7 January . The sisters departed Genoa on 9 January under the command of British captains and manned by British seamen and Italian stokers . When they arrived at Port Said , Egypt , five days later , they encountered the Russian protected cruiser Aurora and reached Suez on the 16th , accompanied by the British armored cruiser King Alfred . The Japanese ships reached Singapore on 2 February where they were slightly delayed by a coolie strike . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 Nisshin and Kasuga reached Yokosuka on 16 February just as Japan initiated hostilities with its surprise attack on Port Arthur , and began working up with Japanese crews . The sisters were assigned to reinforce the battleships of the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet under the overall command of Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō on 11 April . In an effort to block the Russian ships in Port Arthur , Togo ordered a minefield laid at the mouth of the harbor on 12 April and Kasuga and Nisshin were tasked to show themselves " as a demonstration of our power " . Tōgō successfully lured out a portion of the Russian Pacific Squadron , including Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov 's flagship , the battleship Petropavlovsk . When Makarov spotted the five Japanese battleships and Kasuga and Nisshin , he turned back for Port Arthur and his flagship ran into the minefield just laid by the Japanese . The ship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded , and Makarov was one of the 677 killed . In addition to this loss , the battleship Pobeda was damaged by a mine . Emboldened by his success , Tōgō resumed long @-@ range bombardment missions , making use of the long @-@ range capabilities of Nisshin and Kasuga 's guns to blindly bombard Port Arthur on 15 April from Pigeon Bay , on the southwest side of the Liaodong Peninsula , at a range of 9 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) . The engagements were not entirely one @-@ sided as the battleship Peresvet scored a hit on Nisshin that same day . In early May , the sisters fired at ranges up to 18 kilometers ( 11 mi ) although this proved to be ineffective . 
 On 15 May , the battleships Yashima and Hatsuse were sunk by Russian mines . With a third of Japan 's battleships lost , Tōgō decided to use Nisshin and Kasuga in the line of battle together with his four remaining battleships . The first test of this decision would have occurred on 23 June when the Pacific Squadron sortied in an abortive attempt to reach Vladivostok , but the new squadron commander , Rear Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft , ordered the squadron to return to Port Arthur when it encountered the Japanese battleline ( including Nisshin and Kasuga ) shortly before sunset , as he did not wish to engage his numerically superior opponents in a night battle . On 27 July , the sisters forced a Russian force of one battleship and several cruisers and gunboats to return to port because of long @-@ range gun fire after they sortied to provide fire support to the Russian Army . 
 They participated in the Battle of the Yellow Sea on 10 August , but only played a minor role as they were generally in the rear of the Japanese battleline . For the brief amount of time when Tōgō reversed course , Nisshin was at the head of the battleline and was hit three times during the battle , losing 14 crewmen killed and 25 wounded . After the battle the sisters returned to Pigeon Bay where they engaged the Russian fortifications . 
 At the subsequent Battle of Tsushima on 26 May 1905 , Nisshin was flagship of Vice @-@ Admiral Misu Sotarō , and was sixth and last in the line of battle , following Kasuga . At about 14 : 10 , Nisshin opened fire on the Oslyabya , the lead ship in the second column of the Russian fleet at a range of 7 @,@ 000 yards ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) . At 14 : 40 Nisshin received her first hit as a Russian 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) shell cut her forward right 8 @-@ inch gun in half . Between 14 : 57 and 15 : 05 , the Japanese fleet reversed course to block the Russian northward movement , which put Nisshin as the first ship in the battle line . At 15 : 00 , a 12 @-@ inch shell punched through the armor belt of Nisshin one foot below the waterline and flooded a coal bunker . Another 12 @-@ inch shell hit the belt about three feet above the waterline but did not penetrate . At 15 : 06 , the Russian protected cruiser Zhemchug attempted to close for a torpedo attack but was driven off by fire from Nisshin , Kasuga and the armored cruiser Iwate at 3 @,@ 300 yards ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) . At 15 : 30 , the Japanese line again reversed course , placing Nisshin at the rear again . Another 12 @-@ inch hit struck the ship but without any significant damage . At 16 : 05 , a 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) hit on the forward turret sent splinters into the conning tower , wounding Misu . Nisshin was hit again at 17 : 20 by another 12 @-@ inch shell , which cut the left 8 @-@ inch gun of her aft turret in half . As daylight was dying , Nisshin was hit yet again at 19 : 00 by another 12 @-@ inch shell that severed the barrel of her forward left 8 @-@ inch gun , leaving only a single gun operable . The surviving Russian ships were located near the Liancourt Rocks by the Japanese the following morning and Tōgō reached them about 10 : 00 . Heavily outnumbering the Russians , he opted for a long @-@ range engagement to minimize any losses and Kasuga opened fire at the obsolete Imperator Nikolai I at a range of 9 @,@ 100 meters ( 10 @,@ 000 yd ) and the Russians surrendered shortly afterwards . 
 Nisshin fired 181 eight @-@ inch shells during the battle . In return she received the second largest number of hits after Tōgō 's flagship , the battleship Mikasa , which was struck over 40 times . Nisshin was hit by 13 shells , including 6 twelve @-@ inch , 1 nine @-@ inch , 2 six @-@ inch and 4 unidentified . During the battle , the newly commissioned Ensign Isoroku Yamamoto , later Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Combined Fleet in World War II , was badly wounded and lost two fingers on his left hand . 
 Shortly after the battle , Nisshin was assigned to the 3rd Fleet for the invasion and occupation of Sakhalin in July – August . On 2 September 1911 , the ship escorted the ex @-@ Russian hospital ship <unk> to Vladivostok to be returned to the Russians . In November 1912 , a boiler exploded aboard the ship , killing 20 crewmen . At the start of 1914 , she was overhauled with her boilers replaced by 12 Kampon Type 1 water @-@ tube boilers . 
 = = = World War I and subsequent history = = = 
 As part of the search for the German East Asia Squadron and other commerce raiders the British Admiralty requested in mid @-@ September 1914 that the Japanese forces in the South Pacific be reinforced to deal with the threats posed by the Germans and the cruiser was ordered south . Nisshin struck an uncharted rock off Sandakan on 12 October and was forced to put into Singapore for repairs . After their completion the ship was assigned to the Second South Seas Squadron based at Truk . In February 1915 , the ship visited the occupied colonies of German Samoa and German New Guinea . <unk> served as the flagship of Destroyer Squadron ( Suiraisentai ) 1 from 13 December 1915 to 13 May 1916 , 12 September to 1 December 1916 and then of Suiraisentai 2 from 28 March to 13 April 1917 . After the incursion of the German commerce raider SMS Wolf into the Indian Ocean in March 1917 , the Admiralty requested that the Japanese government reinforce its ships already present , there and in Australian waters . Nisshin was sent south in response and escorted Allied shipping between Colombo , Ceylon and Freemantle , Australia in April – May . 
 In 1918 , the ship was sent to the Mediterranean to reinforce the Second Special Mission Squadron as it escorted Allied troop convoys across the Mediterranean . In November , she became the flagship of Rear Admiral Kōzō Satō , the squadron commander , as the bulk of the squadron sailed to Constantinople , arriving on 6 December . The ship then sailed to Portland to escort the surrendered German submarines allocated to Japan back home . She arrived on 5 January 1919 and the squadron departed for Malta at the end of March . After refitting some of the submarines there , the squadron arrived at Yokosuka on 18 June . 
 In 1924 two of her 3 in / 40 guns were removed , as were all of her QF 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns , and a single 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft gun was added . Nisshin became a training vessel and depot ship in 1927 at Yokosuka Naval District until stricken from the naval register on 1 April 1935 . Renamed Hai @-@ Kan No. 6 , she was sunk as a target ship during live @-@ fire exercises at the <unk> Naval Proving Ground off Kure in the Inland Sea in 1936 . Her wreck was later raised , and , on 18 January 1942 , it was towed by the battleship Mutsu as a target for the battleship Yamato with her new 18 @.@ 1 inch guns off Kurahashi , Hiroshima . The hulk was sunk for a second , and final , time during this exercise . 
 = Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge = 
 Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge ( English : The Big @-@ Hearted Will Take Away the Bride ) , also known by the initialism DDLJ , is an Indian romance film written and directed by Aditya Chopra and produced by Yash Chopra . Released on 20 October 1995 , the film stars Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol . The plot revolves around Raj and Simran , two young non @-@ resident Indians , who fall in love during a vacation through Europe with their friends . Raj tries to win over Simran 's family so the couple can marry , but Simran 's father has long since promised her hand to his friend 's son . The film was shot in India , London and Switzerland , from September 1994 to August 1995 . 
 Earning ₹ 1 @.@ 06 billion ( valued at about US $ 32 @,@ 766 @,@ 000 in 1995 ) in India and ₹ 160 million ( valued at about US $ 4 @,@ 946 @,@ 000 in 1995 ) overseas , Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge became the highest grossing Bollywood film of the year , and one of the most successful Indian films of all time . It won 10 Filmfare Awards , the most for a single film at that time , and won the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment . Its soundtrack album became one of the most popular of the 1990s . 
 Many critics praised the film , which connected with different segments of society by simultaneously promoting strong family values and the following of one 's own heart . Its success led other film makers to target the non @-@ resident Indian audience , which was deemed more lucrative for them . It spawned many imitations of its story and style , and homages to specific scenes . Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge was one of only three Hindi films in the reference book 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die , and was placed twelfth on the British Film Institute 's list of top Indian films of all time . It is the longest @-@ running film in the history of Indian cinema . As of 2016 , over 20 years after its first release , it is still being shown at the Maratha Mandir theatre in Mumbai . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Raj Malhotra ( Shah Rukh Khan ) and Simran Singh ( Kajol ) are non @-@ resident Indians living in London . Simran was raised by her strict and conservative father , Baldev Singh ( Amrish Puri ) , while Raj 's father ( Anupam Kher ) was very liberal . Simran always dreams of meeting her ideal man . Her mother Lajjo ( Farida Jalal ) warns her against this , saying dreams are good but one should not blindly believe they come true . One day , Baldev receives a letter from his friend Ajit ( Satish Shah ) , who lives in Punjab . Ajit wants to keep a promise he and Baldev made to each other 20 years ago — to have Simran marry his son Kuljeet ( Parmeet Sethi ) . Simran is disappointed — she does not want to marry someone whom she has never met . 
 One evening , Raj enters Baldev 's shop after closing time to buy beer . Baldev refuses and Raj grabs a case of beer , throws the money on the counter and runs away . Baldev , infuriated , calls Raj a disgrace to India . Meanwhile , Raj 's father has agreed to his request to go on a train trip across Europe with his friends , and Simran 's friends have invited her to go on the same trip . Simran asks her father to let her see the world before her marriage , and he reluctantly agrees . 
 On the trip , Raj and Simran meet . Raj constantly flirts with Simran , much to her irritation . The two miss their train to Zurich and are separated from their friends . They start to travel with one another and become friends . Raj falls in love with Simran on the journey ; when they part ways in London , Simran realises she is in love with him too . Simran tells her mother about the boy she met ; Baldev overhears the conversation and becomes furious with Simran . He says the family will move to India the next day . Meanwhile , Raj tells his father about Simran and that she will soon be getting married . When Raj says he believes Simran loves him too , his father encourages him to go after her . 
 In India , Baldev is reunited with his relatives and his friend Ajit . Simran and her younger sister <unk> take an instant dislike to Simran 's fiancé Kuljeet because of his arrogance . Simran cannot forget Raj and is miserable about having to marry Kuljeet . Her mother tells her to forget Raj because she knows Baldev will never accept their relationship . The next morning , Simran is reunited with Raj when he arrives outside of the house where she is staying . She begs him to run away with her . Raj refuses and says he will only marry Simran with her father 's consent . Raj befriends Kuljeet and is quickly accepted by both families . Later , Raj 's father arrives in India and also becomes friends with Simran 's and <unk> 's families . Eventually Lajjo and <unk> discover that Raj is the boy Simran fell in love with in Europe . Lajjo also tells Raj and Simran to run away , but he still refuses . Baldev recognises Raj from the beer incident , but eventually accepts him . However , after he discovers a photograph of Raj and Simran together in Europe , he insults and slaps Raj and tells him to leave . 
 As Raj and his father are waiting at the railway station , Kuljeet , who is angry on hearing of Raj 's love for Simran , arrives with his friends and attack them . Eventually Baldev and Ajit arrive and stop the fight . Raj boards the departing train with his father . Simran then arrives with her mother and sister ; she tries to join Raj on the train but Baldev stops her . Simran begs him to let her go , saying she cannot live without Raj . Baldev realises nobody can love his daughter more than Raj does . He lets her go , and she runs and catches the train as it departs . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Credits adapted from British Film Institute . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origin and scripting process = = = 
 Aditya Chopra assisted his father , director and producer Yash Chopra , during the making of Chandni ( 1989 ) , Lamhe ( 1991 ) and Darr ( 1993 ) . During this time , Aditya wrote several of his own scripts , including one he assumed would be his first film , but eventually became his second , Mohabbatein ( 2000 ) . For three years , he worked on the story that would become Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge before approaching his father to direct it . Yash did not want to , and tried to persuade Aditya to do it himself . As they were discussing ideas for the script , Aditya conceived the notion that Raj would seek permission for marriage from Simran 's stern father , rather than eloping with her . He then became excited about the possibility of directing the film himself . After his mother , the playback singer Pamela Chopra , agreed that the idea was sound , he decided to make this his directorial debut . Aditya wanted to make a wholesome film that people could watch repeatedly . He wanted to diverge from the typical plot line of the time , in which lovers run away when their parents object , and show that if their love was strong enough , the parents would eventually understand . 
 In May 1994 , Aditya read the first draft of the script to several members of the Yash Raj Films production team assigned to work with him , including a cinematographer , an art director and a dialogue writer . They were not impressed , but Aditya held fast to his ideas . He was given total editorial control by his father , the producer , and made the film according to his own tastes and sensibilities . Aditya struggled with both the dialogue writer Javed Siddiqui and the song lyricist Anand Bakshi to develop words that were " young @-@ sounding " . There were personal clashes over writing credits on the final script . Pamela 's friend Honey Irani believed she deserved a writing credit that she did not receive , and Siddiqui believed Aditya did not deserve partial credit for the dialogue . After Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge , neither of them ever worked with Yash Raj Films again . After approving the script , Yash was consulted about the songs , but mostly left the creative process to his son , and has firmly denied that he was a ghost director on the project . He did not shoot a single frame , and did not even view some portions of the film until it was nearly completed . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Aditya originally wanted the film to be about a relationship between an Indian and an American . He wanted Tom Cruise for the role of Raj but was dissuaded by Yash , who did not want to use a foreign star . They decided their characters would be non @-@ resident Indians ( NRIs ) . Aditya approached Shah Rukh Khan to play the role of Raj . Shah Rukh was initially not interested because of the romantic nature of the role , having had success playing villainous roles . Aditya then asked Saif Ali Khan to play the lead role because he was having problems persuading Shah Rukh to do it . Saif declined for unknown reasons , causing Aditya to continue pursuing Shah Rukh . Aditya and Shah Rukh had four meetings over several weeks ; he finally persuaded Shah Rukh by telling him he could never be a superstar unless he became " every woman 's dream man , and every mother 's dream son " . Since then , Shah Rukh has expressed his gratitude to Aditya for helping to make him a star with this film . Shah Rukh said that fellow actor Salman Khan also encouraged him to do the role , saying that he thought the film would be very successful . Shah Rukh has also noted the similarities in the film 's script to his own relationship with Gauri Khan before their marriage . 
 Kajol was the first choice to play Simran , to which she quickly agreed ; she was a good friend of Aditya . She and Shah Rukh had previously worked together in the successful films Baazigar ( 1993 ) and Karan Arjun ( 1995 ) . Kajol said her character was very difficult for her to relate to , whereas Shah Rukh said Raj 's personality was very similar to his own . Aditya chose the name Raj for the character , and the mandolin that he played , based on his admiration for the actor Raj Kapoor . After a successful screen test , Parmeet Sethi was chosen over Armaan Kohli for the role of Kuljeet Singh . In addition to his assistant director Sameer Sharma , Aditya asked for two additional assistants , his brother Uday Chopra and his friend Karan Johar . Johar also played a small role in the film as Raj 's friend . Sharmishta Roy was the film 's art director and Manish Malhotra was its costume designer . While Malhotra had many new ideas , Aditya wanted to keep the clothing style simple ; he did not want it to distract from the story . Despite this , Malhotra was responsible for the idea of Simran wearing a green dress in the song " Mehndi Laga Ke Rakhna " , an unusual colour for a Punjabi bride . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge was filmed in several 5 , 10 and 20 @-@ day schedules between September 1994 and August 1995 . The first sequence filmed was for the song " Ho Gaya Hai <unk> " with Kajol and Shah Rukh in Switzerland . The European journey scenes and songs were mainly filmed in <unk> , <unk> and Gstaad , Switzerland . Other scenes were shot in England , at locations including Trafalgar Square , King 's Cross railway station and Angel tube station . Film 's cinematographer Manmohan Singh , a regular collaborator with Chopra , shot the song " Tujhe Dekha To " , including the iconic mustard fields scenes with Shah Rukh and Kajol in the mustard fields in Gurgaon on the outskirts of the National Capital Region Delhi . 
 Saroj Khan was the choreographer throughout most of the production , but after several disputes between her and Aditya , she was replaced by Farah Khan near the end of the shoot . After the film 's eventual success , Saroj apologised to Aditya for underestimating him , but she never worked with him again . Farah choreographed the song " <unk> Ja O Dil Deewane " , during which Aditya did not tell Kajol that Shah Rukh was going to drop her , as he wanted to capture her genuine reaction . The film 's title was suggested by actress Kirron Kher ; it came from the song " Le Jayenge Le Jayenge " , in the film Chor <unk> Shor ( 1974 ) . The Raj character sings parts of this song during the story , and it recurs at the end . Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge is believed to be the only Bollywood film with a " Title suggested by " credit . The film has since become universally known by the acronym DDLJ . 
 Towards the end of the principal photography , Shah Rukh had to split his time between this film and Trimurti ( 1995 ) , spending half of his day on each film . In early August 1995 , when filming on Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge was not yet finished , a release date in October around the time of the Diwali festival was decided upon . Composers Jatin and Lalit Pandit were given only 10 days to complete the background score , and the first copies were printed on 30 September . After filming was complete , Aditya decided to make a Hollywood @-@ style documentary of the film @-@ making process , which had not been done before in India . Karan Johar and Uday were put in charge because they had already been recording some of the process . On 18 October , two days before the film 's release , the 30 @-@ minute special Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge , The Making was broadcast on television by Doordarshan . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge repeats the usual conservative agenda of family , courtship and marriage , but it proposes that Indian family values are portable assets that can be upheld regardless of country of residence . To prove this , Raj , an NRI who was brought up in London , is portrayed as the story 's " good guy " , whereas Kuljeet , raised in India , is portrayed as the villain . This is a reversal of the roles in typical Indian films , which usually portray Indians as being morally superior to Westerners . Here , NRIs are validated as potential model Indians citizens . 
 The story aims to capture the struggle between traditional family values and the modern value of individualism . Although Raj and Simran want to be together regardless of her father 's plans for her , Raj tries to win over his girlfriend 's father rather than simply eloping with her . In this and other Indian stories , family values are ultimately considered more important than the romantic plot . Moral values and rules of conduct take precedence over individual desires . The film implies that " Indianness " can be defined by the importance of family life ; whether at home or abroad , it is the Indian family system that is recognised as the social institution that most defines Indian identity . 
 In Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge , the purity / sanctity of women is being related that of the nation . In the scene after Raj and Simran spend the night together , and Simran is concerned that something happened , Raj tells her : " You think I am beyond values , but I am a Hindustani , and I know what a Hindustani girl 's <unk> ( honour ) is worth . Trust me , nothing happened last night . " This speaks to the Indian diaspora and their need to try and sustain their value system , and the man 's responsibility to protect the Indian woman 's sexual purity . In The Routledge Encyclopedia of Films , Ranjani Mazumdar says the film has a running theme of unfulfilled desires , which is exemplified by Raj 's father telling him to enjoy life because his own was a struggle , and Simran 's mother telling her to run away with Raj because she was unable to live her own dreams . 
 Scott Jordan Harris , writing for Roger Ebert 's website , says the film 's popularity lies in its ability to effectively convey two opposing themes appealing to different portions of society . He said , " It argues that we should follow our hearts and chase happiness wherever it leads , regardless of the obstacles in our paths , while simultaneously suggesting we should respect the ways of our elders , particularly our parents , and do nothing that challenges their will " . Rachel Dwyer said the film was important for presenting marriage as an understanding between parents and children . While fighting the old tradition of the arranged marriage , it still encouraged the importance of seeking parental consent , even for a love marriage . According to Patricia <unk> , Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge reiterates the theme of Hum Aapke Hain Koun .. ! ( 1994 ) in a self @-@ conscious manner while also linking it explicitly to the fact that the protagonists tend to remind themselves and each other of what it means to be an Indian . 
 = = Music = = 
 The Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge soundtrack features seven songs composed by Jatin Lalit , a duo consisting of the brothers Jatin and Lalit Pandit . Anand Bakshi wrote the lyrics and Lata Mangeshkar , Asha Bhosle , Kumar Sanu , Abhijeet Bhattacharya and Udit Narayan performed the vocals . Jatin Lalit was considered for the job when singer Asha Bhosle contacted Yash Chopra after meeting the duo . It was their first collaboration with Yash Raj Films . They secured the job after singing " Mehndi Laga Ke Rakhna " for Yash . In return , they ensured she sang one song , " Zara Sa Jhoom Loon Main " . Pamela Chopra helped them select tunes and instruments to give some of the songs a Punjabi flavour . Bhasker Gupta , writing for AllMusic , said the soundtrack was the best of Jatin Lalit 's career , and that it " marked the beginning of the fifth wave in Indian cinema ... " . 
 The soundtrack became the best @-@ selling Bollywood soundtrack of the year , with 9 – 12 million units sold according to HMV , although it is estimated the same number or more copies were pirated . More than 1 million of those sales occurred prior to the film 's release . In 2005 , the album was judged the top Hindi soundtrack of all time by voters on the BBC Asian Network website . Anand Bakshi won his third Filmfare Best Lyricist award after 14 years , having two nominations for this film . The wedding song " Mehndi Laga Ke Rakhna " from the film became an all @-@ time hit ; it is played at weddings across the South Asian diaspora . The following is the track listing . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge opened on 20 October 1995 to sold @-@ out shows worldwide . Every show in every theatre in Mumbai — save one — was completely full for the first week . The film was popular among both resident Indians and NRIs . At San Francisco 's 720 @-@ seat Naz theatre , 1 @,@ 000 people arrived for the first showing , and the theatre staff were forced to run another show late that night . In the UK , the film ran for over a year , and as of 2015 , the Maratha Mandir cinema hall in Mumbai has been showing it for more than 19 years . 
 The film earned ₹ 1 @.@ 06 billion ( valued at about US $ 32 @,@ 766 @,@ 000 in 1995 ) in India and ₹ 160 million ( valued at about US $ 4 @,@ 946 @,@ 000 in 1995 ) overseas ; it became the biggest Bollywood grosser of the year , and the second highest @-@ grossing film of the 1990s behind Hum Aapke Hain Koun .. ! . It was the second Bollywood film to gross over ₹ 1 billion worldwide , and one of the biggest Bollywood earners of all time . Adjusted for inflation , Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge is believed to be among the five highest @-@ grossing Hindi films ; its adjusted gross is approximately ₹ 2 @.@ 93 billion ( US $ 44 million ) . As of 2009 , the film had generated over ₹ 60 million ( US $ 890 @,@ 000 ) in revenues for the Maratha Mandir since its release . In later years , that theatre ran one matinee show per day at reduced ticket prices , which averaged about 50 % occupancy . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge received many favourable reviews . An initial review by weekly magazine Screen said of Aditya Chopra , " A young master arrives " . Tom Vick , reviewing the film for Allmovie , said , " An immensely likeable movie , Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge performs the rarely achieved feat of stretching a predictable plot over three hours and making every minute enjoyable . " When the film toured the U.S. in 2004 as part of the Cinema India showcase , " The Changing Face of Indian Cinema " , Charles Taylor reviewed the film for Salon and said , " It 's a flawed , contradictory movie — aggressive and tender , stiff and graceful , clichéd and fresh , sophisticated and naive , traditional and modern . It 's also , I think , a classic . " 
 Writing for NDTV , Anupama Chopra said , " Perhaps the innocence of Raj and Simran 's romance in which they can spend the night together without sex because Raj , the <unk> NRI understands the importance of an Indian woman 's honor . Perhaps it 's the way in which the film artfully reaffirms the patriarchal status quo and works for all constituencies — the NRI and the local viewer . Or perhaps it 's the magic of Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol who created a template for modern love , which was hip and cool but resolutely Indian . " She also called the film a milestone that shaped Hindi cinema through the 1990s , and one of her personal favourites . In 2004 , <unk> <unk> of The Malay Mail called the film a " must watch " for Bollywood fans , and also for those seeking an introduction to Bollywood . 
 Raja Sen gave a reflective review for Rediff.com in 2005 , calling the film one of the best Hindi films made in the previous 20 years . He said " Shah Rukh Khan gives a fabulous performance , redefining the Lover for the 1990s with great panache " , and called Kajol a " real @-@ as @-@ life actress bringing warmth and credulity " to her role . Sen called the film well balanced and said only the fight scene and some mother @-@ daughter dialogue can wear after multiple viewings . Omer M. <unk> , writing for Roger Ebert 's website in 2012 , likened the film to a Disney Princess story , saying , " the young princess feeling trapped by the traditional patriarchy , seeking freedom through discovering the world , but finally finding it through silent , but inappropriate love . The Little Mermaid . Beauty ( of the Beast ) . Jasmine ( friends with Aladdin ) . Pocahontas . Aurora ( Sleeping Beauty ) . And here , Simran . " Scott Jordan Harris , also writing for Roger Ebert in 2014 , called it " one of the world 's favorite films " , and said it plays as a masterful soap opera , with one of the best screen couples ever seen . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge was ranked among The Times of India 's list of the " 10 Bollywood movies you must see before you die " . It was one of three Hindi films in the film reference book 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die , the others being Mother India ( 1957 ) and Deewaar ( 1975 ) . It was placed twelfth on the British Film Institute 's list of top Indian films of all time . It is one of the films on Box Office India 's list of " Biggest Blockbusters Ever in Hindi Cinema " . The film won a National Film Award and 10 Filmfare Awards , setting the record at the time for the most Filmfare trophies . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historic box office run = = = 
 In 2001 , Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge overtook Sholay ( 1975 ) , which had run for over five years at the Minerva theatre , as the longest @-@ running film in Indian cinema history . It has been showing at the Maratha Mandir theatre ( which was famous for having shown Mughal @-@ e @-@ Azam ( 1960 ) for three years ) since its original release in 1995 . There are often people in the audience who have seen the film 50 or more times , but still clap , cheer , mouth the dialogues and sing along with the songs , raising comparisons with The Rocky Horror Picture Show ( 1975 ) , the longest running film in America . 
 When a theatre strike in early 2011 threatened the film 's uninterrupted run , the producer Yash Chopra contacted theatre owners to try and ensure the film would continue . He hoped the film would continue to run for at least 1 @,@ 000 weeks , which it achieved in December 2014 . To commemorate the event , cast members including Shah Rukh Khan , Kajol , Anupam Kher , Farida Jalal , Mandira Bedi and Pooja <unk> appeared on the television show Comedy Nights with Kapil . Shah Rukh Khan , Kajol and director Aditya Chopra also attended a live chat with fans and a black tie event at the theatre on 12 December . The same day , they launched a coffee table book written by Aditya Chopra about the making of the film . Also in December , Yash Raj Films announced the availability of a collection of commemorative , licensed merchandise from various suppliers to mark the event . The Maratha Mandir 's management ended the film 's run after 1 @,@ 009 weeks on 19 February 2015 because of low attendance ( the last show was viewed by 210 people ) . However , after an outpouring of support from fans , and talks with the production company , they decided to reinstate the film . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge spawned many imitators of its story and style , especially throughout the 1990s . According to the Encyclopaedia of Hindi Cinema , it and a handful of other films and young directors started a trend for " designer " films . The authors said that these were " a carefully packaged and branded product in which every little visual and physical detail ... is of utmost importance " . In Bollywood 's Top 20 : Superstars of Indian Cinema , Namrata Joshi said Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge " reinvented Bollywood romances so decisively that we can neatly divide them into two eras — before DDLJ and after DDLJ " . 
 Yash Raj Films was previously known for using locations outside India for item numbers in its films . Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge started the trend for films designed to appeal to the Indian diaspora , which have foreign locations as integral parts of the story . The characters are themselves diaspora and tend to be able to move with ease between India and the West . Some later films that followed this trend include Pardes ( 1997 ) , Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( 2001 ) , Kal Ho Naa Ho ( 2003 ) , Salaam Namaste ( 2005 ) , Neal ' n ' Nikki ( 2005 ) and Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna ( 2006 ) . Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge became the first Hindi film blockbuster to feature NRIs as main characters . It helped to establish the diaspora market as a vital source of revenue for the industry ; that market was seen as a safer financial investment than the desi market . 
 Several later films have paid homage to Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge . The Karan Johar @-@ produced Humpty Sharma Ki Dulhania ( 2014 ) was directly inspired by it . The films Jab We Met ( 2007 ) , Bodyguard ( 2011 ) , Chalo Dilli ( 2011 ) , Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani ( 2013 ) and Chennai Express ( 2013 ) include scenes similar to the climactic train sequence , wherein a woman is running to catch a moving train and is helped aboard by a man with his outstretched arm . The British film Slumdog Millionaire ( 2008 ) contained a similar train scene , and its final dance sequence was partially shot at the same railway station as the Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge finale . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Audiences appreciated the screen chemistry between Shah Rukh Khan and Kajol , who later worked together in several successful films including Kuch Kuch Hota Hai ( 1998 ) , Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( 2001 ) , My Name Is Khan ( 2010 ) , and Dilwale ( 2015 ) , and are often referred to as Indian cinema 's most loved on @-@ screen couple . Shah Rukh Khan credits this film with making him a star , and says it " changed the entire scene for romantic movies of the 90s " . During an interview in 2002 , he said " Whatever I 'll stand for as an actor , in the whole of my career , whenever it ends , it will start with and end at Dilwale " . The actress Farida Jalal said the film gave her career a boost , saying she got many offers and " could quote any price " . It also helped the young careers of Pooja <unk> , who received advertising offers , and of <unk> Roy . 
 The British Film Institute ( BFI ) commissioned a book about Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge . It was the first Hindi film chosen for a series of studies on international films , called " BFI Modern Classics " . The author was Anupama Chopra and the book was released in 2002 . It was reissued in paperback by Harper @-@ Collins as Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge : The Making of a Blockbuster in 2004 . After an unexpectedly long delay , the film was released on DVD by Yash Raj Films in 2002 . The release included The Making and 300 Weeks Celebration documentaries , Success Story ( highlights from the film 's premiere ) , clips from the 41st Filmfare Awards ceremony and other interviews . 
 In 2006 , members of the film crew were honoured at a dinner event to celebrate the film 's 500th week since release . It was hosted by the Consulate General of Switzerland in Mumbai and by Switzerland Tourism . In 2010 , Yash Raj Films signed an agreement with Indian and Swiss tour companies to provide a tour package called " YRF Enchanted Journey " , to allow visitors to Switzerland to view filming locations used for famous Yash Raj films including Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge . In 2014 , Yash Raj Films released Aditya Chopra <unk> ... Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge ( As Told to Nasreen Munni Kabir ) , an attractive but expensive book about the making of the film . In response to Indian prime minister Narendra Modi quoting the line " May the force be with you " from the American film franchise Star Wars during a visit to the U.S. , President Barack Obama decided to quote a line from a Hindi film during his visit to India in January 2015 . He chose a line from this film , " Senorita , bade bade <unk> mein ... " ( Miss , in large countries ... ) , and added " you know what I mean " . 
 = United States v. Cotterman = 
 United States v. Cotterman , ( 9th <unk> en banc 2013 ) , is a United States court case in which the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that property , such as a laptop and other electronic storage devices , presented for inspection when entering the United States at the border may not be subject to forensic examination without a reason for suspicion , a holding that weakened the border search exception of the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution . 
 = = Background = = 
 On April 6 , 2007 at approximately 10 AM , Howard and Maureen Cotterman drove from Mexico to the Lukeville Port of Entry ( POE ) . Upon arrival , the inspector checked the U.S. Customs and Border Protection electronic database and found a computer @-@ generated alert , based upon Howard Cotterman 's prior conviction for child sex crimes in 1992 . The alert advised the inspector to be on the lookout for child pornography and due to the warning , the Cottermans were sent to a secondary inspection area . 
 During the vehicle search , two CBP officers discovered two laptops and three digital cameras . The officers were unable to find any contraband , but did discover a number of password protected files . During this time , the ICE case was assigned to Agent Riley , who then drove with her supervisor Agent Brisbane from Sells , Arizona to Lukeville . During the drive , the two agents decided that they would detain the laptops for forensic examination . 
 After arriving at Lukeville POE at 3 or 3 : 30 PM , the two agents interviewed Howard and Maureen Cotterman separately . Howard Cotterman offered to help the agents with the computer , but the offer was declined . At 6 PM , the two agents left with both laptops and one digital camera . The devices were taken to Tucson and delivered to John Owens , an ICE Computer Forensic Examiner at 11 PM that night . The camera was returned to the Cottermans as there was no evidence of contraband found . However , on April 8 , Agent Owens ' forensic examination turned up approximately 75 images of child pornography on Howard Cotterman 's computer . Agent Owens called the Cottermans that night , asking Howard Cotterman for assistance opening the password protected files . Howard Cotterman agreed to come in the next day , but only his wife showed up to pick up the other laptop . 
 It was later discovered that Howard Cotterman boarded a flight to Mexico on April 9 , 2007 , with a final destination of Sydney , Australia . On April 11 , 2007 , Agent Owen was able to break the computer security and discovered 378 more images of child pornography . Cotterman was indicted on June 27 , 2007 for several charges related to child pornography and unlawful flight to avoid prosecution . He was arrested by Australian law officials and delivered to the U.S. Marshals Service on March 31 , 2008 . 
 Cotterman filed a motion to suppress all evidence seized by Customs officials and argued that the search of his laptop 170 miles from the port of entry over a period of four days was a non @-@ routine border search requiring reasonable suspicion . " The motion was granted by the District Court in Cotterman 's favor . The government appealed , and stated that the border search doctrine justified the initial search and the transport of the computer to Tucson to adequately conduct the search . The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals overturned the lower court 's ruling , in favor of the Government . 
 = = Opinion en banc = = 
 Reversing the reasoning of the panel , the Ninth Circuit held that forensic examination of a computer seized at the border requires reasonable suspicion . The court also held that there was reasonable suspicion in this case because there was an alert informing the seizing officer of the possibility of child pornography . 
 = = Opinion of the Ninth Circuit panel = = 
 In the majority opinion , Judge Tallman agreed with the Government that border search doctrine allowed property to be transported to a secondary site for examination . However , he also stated that the Government cannot seize property and hold it for " weeks , months , years on a whim " - effectively allowing the courts to continue to determine whether searches and seizures are reasonable on a case @-@ to @-@ case basis . 
 = = = Arguments = = = 
 When appealing the District Court 's decision , the government did not argue that there was reasonable suspicion . Instead , the government argued that the border search doctrine supported both the initial search and the transportation of the laptop to Tucson for examination . 
 = = = Judgment = = = 
 The majority found that time and distance did not matter in this instance . In the opinion , Judge Tallman stated the need to control entry at the border . If the government was unable to remove property away from the border , they would have to fully staff and equip each border crossing or be content with blindly shutting its eyes , with both positions being unreasonable . Since the defendant 's property was never cleared for entry , it was functionally still at the border at the time of the forensic search . In the opinion , Judge Tallman stated : 
 Time and space are only relevant to this initial inquiry to the extent that they inform us whether an individual would reasonably expect to be stopped and searched at a geographic point beyond the international border . 
 The majority also found that reasonable suspicion was not needed since they considered the inspection as a routine search . There was no body search nor was property destroyed . Finally , the Court ruled that they did not consider the two @-@ day delay particularly offensive . 
 = = = Dissent = = = 
 Judge Fletcher dissented with the majority . She argued that the " sticking point " was not whether the government could transport property from the border to another location for inspection , but whether the government could seize property for inspection for an unknown amount of time with no reason to suspect the property contained contraband . 
 I would hold that officers must have some level of particularized suspicion in order to conduct a seizure and search like the one at issue here , because ( 1 ) seizing one ’ s personal property deprives the individual of his valid possessory interest in his property , and ( 2 ) authorizing a generalized computer forensic search ( untethered to any particularized suspicion ) permits the Government to engage in the type of generalized fishing expeditions that the Fourth Amendment is designed to prevent . 
 = = Supreme Court Appeal = = 
 A petition for Writ of Certiorari was filed with the United States Supreme Court on August 5 , 2013 , after several time extensions . 
 Did the Ninth Circuit violate the Constitution , create circuit splits , contravene this Court ’ s decisions , and subvert the appellate process by replacing the question presented by the parties with an issue that the prosecution deliberately abandoned , and by making a factual finding ( i.e. that reasonable suspicion existed ) for the first time on appeal that disregarded the factual findings of the district court and agents at the scene , and then by holding that a citizen ’ s personal belongings may be seized at the border with no suspicion of wrongdoing ? 
 On January 13 , 2014 , the Court denied the petition for Certiorari . In March of 2014 , the Court denied a Petition for <unk> filed in February of 2014 , letting the Ninth Circuit 's decision stand , along with the reasonable suspicion standard it created . 
 = LW6 / 8 = 
 LW6 / 8 is a para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic standing skiing sport class , a classification defined by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) for people with an upper extremity issue who have paralysis , motor paresis affecting one arm , a single upper arm amputation or CP8 classified cerebral palsy . LW6 / 8 skiers use two skis and one pole in both para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic skiing . 
 Skiers in this class include 2006 New Zealand Winter Paralympian Anthony Field , Germany 's Thomas Oelsner and Australia 's Mitchell Gourley . 
 = = Definition = = 
 This classification is used in para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic standing skiing , where LW stands for Locomotor Winter . Designed for people with an upper extremity issue , a skier may be classified as LW6 / 8 if they have paralysis , motor paresis affecting one arm , or a single upper arm amputation . 
 The International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) defined this classification for para @-@ Alpine as " Competitors with disabilities in one upper limb , skiing with two normal skis and one pole ... " The disability shall be such that the functional use of more than one pole is not possible . Typical disability profile of the class is single @-@ arm amputation . " In 2002 , the Australian Paralympic Committee described this classification as a standing skiing classification with " Two skis , one pole , disability in one arm or hand . " For para @-@ Nordic skiing , the IPC defines this class as for " those with impairment in one entire limb . " 
 For international para @-@ Alpine skiing competitions , classification is done through IPC Alpine Skiing . A national federation such as Alpine Canada handles classification for domestic competitions . For para @-@ Nordic skiing events , classification is handled by IPC Nordic Skiing Technical Committee on the international level and by the national sports federation such as Cross @-@ Country Canada on a country by country level . When being assessed into this classification , a number of things are considered including reviewing the skiers medical history and medical information on the skier 's disability , having a physical and an in person assessment of the skier training or competing . 
 = = = LW6 = = = 
 LW6 is used in para @-@ Nordic skiing for skiers with above the elbow amputations for paralysis affecting the whole arm . Cross Country Canada described LW6 as " Impairment in one entire upper limb . The athlete must not use a prosthesis . " in 2012 . 
 = = = LW8 = = = 
 LW8 is for skiers with below the elbow amputations or lacking functional use below the elbow . Cross Country Canada described LW8 as " Impairment in one upper limb below the elbow . The athlete must not use a prosthesis or use the affected arm to aid in poling in any way . " 
 = = Equipment and technique = = 
 LW6 / 8 skiers use two skis and one pole in both para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic skiing . The two types of skiing differ in that in para @-@ Nordic a skier cannot use a prosthesis while use prostheses or orthoses are allowed in para @-@ Alpine . FIS rules for ski boots and binding heights are followed for this class . Socks and other materials are used to pad and protect the stump of the arm as the use of a prosthesis is not allowed . Sometimes , a mitten or cork is used to protect the stump . If the limb is not properly protected , it may get frostbitten . 
 Lateral balance is an issue for LW6 / 8 skiers resulting from the missing arm , so skiing techniques are worked on by the skier to correct this . One technique used compensates for balance issues by using knee drives or hip motions . Unlike other para @-@ Alpine disciplines , in slalom skiers are more likely to use a partial ski pole or a prosthetic to hold a ski pole . 
 In the Biathlon , all Paralympic athletes shoot from a prone position . Athletes with amputations can use a rifle support while shooting . 
 = = Sport = = 
 A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . The factoring system works by having a number for each class based on their functional mobility or vision levels , where the results are calculated by multiplying the finish time by the factored number . The resulting number is the one used to determine the winner in events where the factor system is used . 
 In para @-@ Nordic skiing , which includes the cross @-@ country skiing and biathlon events , this classification is grouped with other standing classes . For the 2003 / 2004 para @-@ Nordic skiing season , the percentage for LW6 using the classic technique was 91 % and percentage for free was 96 % , and for LW8 using the classic technique was 92 % and percentage for free was 97 % . The percentage for the 2008 / 2009 and 2009 / 2010 ski seasons was 92 % for classic and 97 % for free . The percentage for LW6 the 2012 / 2013 par @-@ Nordic ski season was 91 % for classic and 96 % for free , and for LW8 was 92 % for classic and 97 % for free . 
 In para @-@ Alpine skiing events , this classification is grouped with standing classes , who are seeded to start after visually impaired classes and before sitting classes in the slalom and giant slalom . In downhill , Super @-@ G and Super Combined , this same group competes after the visually impaired classes and sitting classes . For alpine events , a skier is required to have their ski poles or equivalent equipment planted in the snow in front of the starting position before the start of the race . The IPC advises event organisers to run the men 's standing ski group after the blind men 's group and before the blind women 's group . Women 's standing classes are advised to go last . During the 2005 / 2006 para @-@ Alpine ski season , the giant slalom had a factor of 1 @.@ 000 . The 2011 / 2012 alpine @-@ skiing season factoring for LW6 / 8 @.@ 1 was 0 @.@ 9902 for Slalom , 0 @.@ 995 for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ 998 for downhill , and for LW6 / 8 @.@ 2 was 0 @.@ <unk> for slalom , 1 for giant slalom , 1 for Super @-@ G and 1 for downhill . 
 If a skier in this class has an arm that is not functional , the rules require the limb be strapped to their body during competition . For Nordic events , LW8 skiers are not allowed to use the stump of their arm for paddling or to help in poling . In the biathlon , the skier is required to make sure " that the rifle touches the support in between the marked zone ( <unk> in front of / behind the balance point ) . " If a skier has partial use of their other arm or hand , the rules do not allow them to use it to site or support the rifle . The skier is not permitted to move the support from its upright position . 
 = = Events = = 
 At the 1984 Winter Olympics Exhibition Competition , 1986 World Disabled Ski Championships , 1988 World Winter Games for the Disabled , 1990 Disabled Alpine World Championships and 2002 Winter Paralympics , disciplines included on the programme were downhill and giant slalom and LW6 / 8 skiers were not grouped with others classes for medal events for men . At the 1998 Winter Paralympics , the women 's LW1 , LW3 , LW4 , LW5 and LW6 classes competed in one group . At the 2004 IPC Alpine World Championships , LW3 , LW6 / 8 and LW9 classified women all skied in the same group against each other during the downhill event . At the 2005 IPC Nordic Skiing World Championships , this class was grouped with other standing skiing classifications . In cross country , this class was eligible to compete in the men and women 's 5 km , 10 km and 20 km individual race . In the men and women 's biathlon , this classification was again grouped with standing classes in the 7 @.@ 5 km race with two shooting stages , and the 12 @.@ 5 km race , which had four shooting stages . At the 2009 IPC Alpine World Championships , there were four women and nine men from this class in the standing downhill event . 
 = = Competitors = = 
 Paralympic skiers in this class include 2006 New Zealand 's Anthony Field , Germany 's Thomas Oelsner , and Australia 's Mitchell Gourley . 
 = 3rd Parachute Brigade ( United Kingdom ) = 
 The 3rd Parachute Brigade was an airborne forces brigade raised by the British Army during the Second World War . The brigade was initially part of the 1st Airborne Division , but remained in Britain when that division was sent overseas , and became part of the 6th Airborne Division , alongside 5th Parachute Brigade and 6th Airlanding Brigade . 
 The brigade first went into action on 5 June 1944 during Operation Tonga , part of the Normandy landings . The objective was to destroy the Merville Gun Battery and the bridges over the River Dives . The brigade achieved all its objectives , and remained defending the left flank of the invasion zone until mid August . They then crossed the River Dives and advanced as far as the River Seine before they were withdrawn . While recovering in England , the brigade was moved to Belgium in December 1944 , to counter the German attack in the Ardennes . The brigade remained on the border between Belgium and the Netherlands carrying out patrols until March 1945 . Their next airborne mission was Operation Varsity , the assault crossing of the River Rhine in Germany . After this , the brigade advanced towards the Baltic Sea , arriving just ahead of the Red Army . 
 Still part of the 6th Airborne Division , the brigade was sent to the British mandate of Palestine in October 1945 after the end of the war . Carrying out an internal security role with the rest of 6th Airborne Division , it remained in Palestine until it was disbanded in 1947 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Impressed by the success of German airborne operations during the Battle of France , the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , directed the War Office to investigate the possibility of creating a force of 5 @,@ 000 parachute troops . As a result , on 22 June 1940 , No. 2 Commando assumed parachute duties , and on 21 November was re @-@ designated the 11th Special Air Service Battalion , with a parachute and glider wing . 
 On 21 June 1940 the Central Landing Establishment was formed at Ringway airfield near Manchester . Although tasked primarily with training parachute troops , it was also directed to investigate the use of gliders to transport troops into battle . At the same time , the Ministry of Aircraft Production contracted General Aircraft Ltd to design and produce a glider for this purpose . The result was the General Aircraft Hotspur , an aircraft capable of transporting eight soldiers , that was used for both assault and training purposes . 
 The success of the first British airborne raid , Operation Colossus , prompted the War Office to expand the airborne force through the creation of the Parachute Regiment , and to develop plans to convert several infantry battalions into parachute and glider battalions . On 31 May 1941 , a joint army and air force memorandum was approved by the Chiefs @-@ of @-@ Staff and Winston Churchill ; it recommended that the British airborne forces should consist of two parachute brigades , one based in England and the other in the Middle East , and that a glider force of 10 @,@ 000 men should be created . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The 3rd Parachute Brigade was raised on 7 November 1942 , under the command of Brigadier Sir Alexander Stanier Bart. Stanier was soon replaced by Brigadier Gerald Lathbury , who in turn was replaced in May 1943 by Brigadier James Hill , previously of the 1st Parachute Brigade . Hill remained in command through the remaining war years until July 1945 , when Lathbury once again assumed command . The last commander of the brigade was Brigadier Francis Rome , who took over on 15 November 1946 . 
 The brigade was initially composed of the 7th ( Light Infantry ) Parachute Battalion , the 8th ( Midlands ) Parachute Battalion and the 9th ( Eastern and Home Counties ) Parachute Battalion . On 11 August 1943 the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion arrived in England and was assigned to the brigade , and the 7th Battalion was transferred to the 5th Parachute Brigade which was in the process of forming . At the end of the Second World War , the 1st Canadian Battalion returned to Canada , and was replaced in the brigade by the 3rd Parachute Battalion , which had previously been part of the 1st Parachute Brigade . 
 The brigade 's other units were the 3rd Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery from the Royal Artillery , the 3rd Parachute Squadron of the Royal Engineers and the 224th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance from the Royal Army Medical Corps . During operations the artillery support available to the brigade would also include a battery of howitzers from the 53rd ( Worcester Yeomanry ) Airlanding Light Regiment , although it was not part of the brigade . 
 On formation the brigade was assigned to the 1st Airborne Division , and as such had to supply reinforcements to make the 1st Parachute Brigade up to strength before they left to take part in Operation Torch . When the 1st Airborne Division left England for operations in the Mediterranean , the 3rd Parachute Brigade remained behind , and was assigned as the first unit of the newly raised 6th Airborne Division . The brigade would remain part of the 6th Airborne Division until 1947 , when it was disbanded . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 From June to December 1943 , the brigade prepared for operations as part of the 6th Airborne Division , training at every level from section up to division by day and night . Airborne soldiers were expected to fight against superior numbers of the enemy , who would be equipped with artillery and tanks . Training was therefore designed to encourage a spirit of self @-@ discipline , self @-@ reliance and aggressiveness , with emphasis given to physical fitness , marksmanship and fieldcraft . A large part of the training consisted of assault courses and route marching . Military exercises included capturing and holding airborne bridgeheads , road or rail bridges and coastal fortifications . At the end of most exercises , the troops would march back to their barracks , usually a distance of around 20 miles ( 32 km ) . An ability to cover long distances at speed was expected ; airborne platoons were required to cover a distance of 50 miles ( 80 km ) in 24 hours , and battalions 32 miles ( 51 km ) . 
 In April 1944 , under the command of 1st Airborne Corps , the brigade took part in Exercise Mush , in the counties of Gloucestershire , Oxfordshire and Wiltshire . This was an airborne military exercise spread over three days involving the 1st and 6th Airborne Divisions . Unknown to the 6th Airborne , it was a full @-@ scale rehearsal for the division 's involvement in the imminent Normandy invasion . In the invasion , the division 's two parachute brigades would land just after midnight on 6 June , while the 6th Airlanding Brigade arrived later in the day just before dark . The division 's objective was to secure the left flank of the invasion area by dominating the high ground in the area between the rivers Orne and Dives . For their part in the operation , the 3rd Parachute Brigade had to destroy the Merville Gun Battery , whose guns were in range of the Sword beach landings , and to demolish bridges across the River Dives to hamper the arrival of German reinforcements from the east . 
 = = = D @-@ Day = = = 
 Just after midnight on 6 June 1944 , Albermarle aircraft arrived , carrying the brigade 's pathfinders , a company from the 1st Canadian Battalion to clear the drop zone ( DZ ) of obstructions , a group from each battalion , and brigade headquarters . Some planes got lost and failed to reach the DZ or arrived late . Others were damaged before dropping all their paratroops and turned back , and one returned to base after failing to find the drop zone at all . 
 From around 00 : 50 the rest of the brigade arrived in Normandy after crossing the English Channel , transported in 108 C @-@ 47 Dakotas , along with 17 Horsa gliders carrying their heavy equipment . The 8th Parachute Battalion , landing on DZ @-@ K along with the brigade headquarters , was tasked with destroying the bridges over the River Dives at Bures and Troarn . The 1st Canadian Battalion , landing on DZ @-@ V , was required to destroy the bridges at Varaville and Robehomme . The 9th Battalion , also landing on DZ @-@ V , had arguably the hardest task ; neutralising the Merville Gun Battery . Due to a combination of poor navigation , heavy cloud cover , and several of the drop zones not being marked correctly , the parachute drop was widely scattered . One group of paratroops landed 10 miles ( 16 km ) away , and another landed on the wrong side of the River Orne , only 1 @,@ 200 yards ( 1 @,@ 100 m ) from the invasion beaches . Less than half of each battalion gathered at their individual assembly areas . 
 In the south , at DZ @-@ K , only 141 men of the 8th Parachute Battalion had assembled . Divided into two groups , they headed for their objectives . One group demolished the two bridges at Bures without opposition . The other group , while on their way to Troarn , intercepted and ambushed a convoy of six armoured vehicles belonging to the 21st Panzer Division . When they reached Troarn , they discovered it was defended by the Germans . A platoon , including engineers , managed to fight their way to the bridge . They found that it had already been damaged , so the engineers planted their explosives and enlarged the gap to around 70 feet ( 21 m ) . 
 The 1st Canadian Battalion successfully destroyed the bridges at Varaville and Robehomme after landing on the northern DZ . They then withdrew to defend Le Mesnil , where the brigade headquarters and the field ambulance were located . Meanwhile , by 02 : 50 only 150 men of the 9th Parachute Battalion had gathered at their assembly area , with virtually no heavy weapons or supplies . Unable to wait any longer , they headed for the Merville Gun Battery . The battalion captured the battery , but without explosives , could only damage two of its four guns . The battle had been costly , and only 85 men were left to head for their secondary objective , the village of Le Plein . The village was defended in strength by the Germans , and the weakened battalion could only dig in and wait the arrival of commandos from the 1st Special Service Brigade later that day . By nightfall the brigade was deployed facing east , along the ridge of high ground from Le Plein in the north to the Bois de Bavent in the south . 
 = = = Orne bridgehead = = = 
 On 7 June the 9th Parachute Battalion , relieved by the Special Service Brigade commandos , moved southwards to the Bois de Mont near Bréville , shortening the front held by the 3rd Parachute Brigade . The 6th Airborne Division 's deployments now had the 6th Airlanding Brigade in the south , holding a line between Longueval and Herourvillette , the 5th Parachute Brigade to the rear just to the east of the River Orne bridge , the attached 1st Special Service Brigade to the north with troops in Sallenelles and Franceville @-@ Plage , and finally the 3rd Parachute Brigade holding the ridge of high ground to the east . 
 The Germans still held the village of Bréville , between the 3rd Parachute and 1st Special Service Brigades , which gave them a vantage point to observe the airborne division 's positions . On 8 June the Germans launched a two pronged attack from Bréville , against the commandos and against the 9th Parachute Battalion . The German force , comprising elements of the 857th Grenadier Regiment , 346th Infantry Division , were only driven back by a counterattack led by the 9th Parachute Battalion 's Regimental Sergeant Major . The next morning the 9th Parachute Battalion was the target for a heavy mortar bombardment , followed by two further infantry attacks . Later the same morning , the 3rd Parachute Brigade 's headquarters was attacked by German troops who had infiltrated the lines . The brigade defence platoon managed to hold out until a counterattack by the 9th Parachute Battalion cleared the enemy away . On 10 June , 31 men who had landed in the wrong locations joined the battalion , bringing their numbers up to 270 all ranks . The fighting was now concentrated around the Château Saint Come , which was occupied by a German infantry company supported by two self propelled guns . One of the self @-@ propelled guns was blown up by Vickers machine gun fire , but the Germans then mounted a determined infantry assault , and the battalion had to call for support from HMS Arethusa . The leading German troops were undaunted by the naval bombardment , and reached the battalion 's lines before they were stopped . One of the German prisoners was a battalion commander , who informed his captors that the 875th Grenadier Regiment had been virtually destroyed in the previous day 's fighting . That evening the 9th Parachute Battalion captured the Château Saint Come , and was involved in skirmishes throughout the night . The following day , 11 June , the 5th Battalion Black Watch was attached to the brigade to assist in their attempt to capture Bréville , but their attacks were repulsed by the Germans with heavy losses . They tried again on the 12th , and the German response was an attack by infantry supported by armour , which not only drove the Black Watch back , but almost overran the 9th Parachute Battalion 's position . The situation was only saved by a counterattack by ' A ' Company 1st Canadian Battalion under the command of Brigadier Hill . 
 During this time the 8th Battalion , located in the thick forest of the Bois de <unk> , were under an almost constant mortar bombardment . Not being directly attacked , the battalion concentrated on night time patrols to harass the Germans , some going as far as the German occupied villages of Troan and Bures . 
 On 7 June the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion at Le Mesnil was attacked by units from the 857th and 858th Grenadier Regiments , supported by tanks and self @-@ propelled guns . The battalion inflicted heavy casualties on the Germans , but only managed to drive them back with a bayonet charge by ' B ' Company . The next day the battalion was involved in several small battles , and on the 9 June sent a reconnaissance patrol to check if the Germans were still occupying Bavent . The patrol was driven back by a strong German force , but that night another patrol entered the village and planted explosive charges on weapons and in buildings . Attacks by German infantry and armour continued until the night of the 12 / 13 June , when Bréville was finally captured by the division 's only reserves , a mixed force from the 12th Parachute Battalion and 12th Devonshire Battalion supported by a troop of tanks from the 13th / 18th Royal Hussars . On 13 June the 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division crossed the River Orne from the west , and took over responsibility for the southern sector of the Orne bridgehead . At the same time the 4th Special Service Brigade was attached to the 6th Airborne Division , which gave them the ability to rotate one brigade at a time out of the front line to allow them to rest . The 3rd Parachute Brigade , having suffered more casualties than the division 's other brigades , was the first formation relieved . 
 = = = Advance to the Seine = = = 
 With the capture of Breville the division was not attacked in force again , apart from an almost continuous artillery bombardment between 18 and 20 June . Further reinforcements arrived east of the River Orne on 20 July ; the 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division moved into the line between the 6th Airborne and the Highland Division . Then on 7 August , the 6th Airborne Division was ordered to prepare to move over to the offensive , with its objective being the mouth of the River Seine . The three divisions east of the Orne now became I Corps , and when issuing his orders Lieutenant General John Crocker , aware that the 6th Airborne had almost no artillery , vehicles or engineer equipment , did not expect them to advance very quickly . To reach the Seine the division would have to cross three major rivers , and there were only two main lines of advance ; one road running along the coast and another further inland from Troarn to Pont Audemer . 
 On 17 August the Germans started to withdraw northwards . The divisional commander had already decided that the 3rd Parachute Brigade would lead the advance along the interior road . Their objective was to capture Bures , cross the River Dives and secure the area between there and Dozulé . At 03 : 00 the brigade attacked the retreating Germans . By 08 : 00 the 8th and 9th Battalions had captured Bures , and the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion moved through the Bois de <unk> . The bridges in Bures had been blown up previously , and it took the brigade 's engineers until the afternoon to build a crossing . By 21 : 00 the brigade had crossed the Dives and halted with the 8th Parachute Battalion out in front at Goustranville . The 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion was behind them , and the 9th Parachute Battalion in reserve . The next day the brigade met heavy resistance just beyond Goustranville , on the Dives Canal and at Dozulé train station . The 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion had taken over the advance and were ordered to seize four bridges crossing the canal . The assault began at 22 : 00 ; at 22 : 35 the railway bridge in the north had been captured , and by midnight all four bridges were secured with 150 prisoners taken . The 9th Parachute Battalion then passed through the Canadians and crossed the next water obstacle without boats , as they found the water was only 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) deep . At 01 : 00 on 19 August they reached Dozulé . It was not until 07 : 00 on 21 August that the advance restarted , with the objective of Pont @-@ l 'Evêque on the River Touques . After a hard battle the 8th Parachute Battalion captured Annebault , and the 5th Parachute Brigade then took over as the division 's lead unit . On 24 August the 3rd Parachute Brigade and 4th Special Service Brigade captured Beuzeville , and the 5th Parachute Brigade reached Pont Audemer , which was the division 's last objective . On 27 August the division was ordered to concentrate in the area between Honfleur and Pont Audemer and prepare to return to England . 
 In nine days of fighting the 6th Airborne Division had advanced 45 miles ( 72 km ) , despite , as the divisional commander Major @-@ General Richard Gale put it , his infantry units being " quite inadequately equipped for a rapid pursuit " . They had captured 400 square miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km2 ) of territory and taken over 1 @,@ 000 German prisoners . Since landing on 6 June , the division 's casualties were 4 @,@ 457 , of which 821 were killed , 2 @,@ 709 wounded and 927 missing . The 3rd Parachute Brigade had 207 killed . The division was withdrawn from France and embarked for England at the beginning of September . 
 = = = Ardennes = = = 
 In England the brigade went into a period of recruitment and training , concentrating on house @-@ to @-@ house street fighting in the bombed areas of Southampton and Birmingham . The training programme culminated in Exercise Eve , an assault on the River Thames , which was intended to simulate the River Rhine in Germany . 
 By December the brigade was preparing for Christmas leave , when news of the German offensive in the Ardennes broke . As part of the First Allied Airborne Army , 6th Airborne Division was available as a component of the strategic reserve for the Allied forces in northwest Europe . The other two divisions available in reserve , the American 82nd and 101st Airborne , were already at Rheims in northern France , and the 6th Airborne was sent by sea to Belgium to assist the defence . With 29 German and 33 Allied divisions involved , the Battle of the Bulge was the largest single battle on the Western Front during the war . On Christmas Day the division moved up to take position in front of the spearhead of the German advance ; by Boxing Day they had reached their allocated places in the defensive line between Dinant and Namur . The 3rd Parachute Brigade were on the left , 5th Parachute Brigade on the right , and the 6th Airlanding Brigade in reserve . Over the next days the German advance was halted and forced back , until at the end of January 1945 , the brigade crossed into the Netherlands . Here the division was made responsible for the area along the River Maas , between Venlo and Roermond . The brigade carried out patrols , on both sides of the river , against their opponents from the German 7th Parachute Division . Near the end of February the division returned to England to prepare for another airborne mission , to cross the River Rhine into Germany . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 Whereas all other Allied airborne landings had been a surprise for the Germans , the Rhine crossing was expected , and their defences were reinforced in anticipation . The airborne operation was preceded by a two @-@ day round @-@ the @-@ clock bombing mission by the Allied air forces . Then on 23 March , 3 @,@ 500 artillery guns targeted the German positions . At dusk Operation Plunder , an assault river crossing of the Rhine by the 21st Army Group , began . For their part in Operation Varsity , the 6th Airborne Division was assigned to the American XVIII Airborne Corps alongside the United States 17th Airborne Division . 
 In the British sector the 3rd Parachute Brigade would be the first unit to arrive in Germany . Their initial objective was to secure the western edge of the Schneppenberg woods . Brigade headquarters was fully aware of the expected opposition to the landings , and the commander of the 224th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance was warned to prepare for around 600 casualties ; almost a third of the brigade 's manpower . On 24 March 1945 at 07 : 00 the 122 C @-@ 47 Dakotas transporting the brigade took off from England in three waves . The first wave carried brigade headquarters and the 8th Parachute Battalion , the second carried the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion , and the 9th Parachute Battalion came last . The gliders carrying the brigade 's heavy equipment were scheduled to arrive 40 minutes after the third wave . Nine minutes ahead of schedule , the brigade started landing at their DZs . Their premature arrival stopped the Allied artillery and fighter bombers which were engaging targets in the area , especially anti @-@ aircraft gun emplacements . The descending parachutists were met with heavy fire from the German defenders , causing several casualties . One of the dead was the commanding officer of the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion . It was during the landing that one of the Canadian medics , Corporal Frederick Topham , won a Victoria Cross , becoming the division 's only recipient of the award during the war . By 11 : 00 the 8th Parachute Battalion had secured the DZ , and the other two battalions headed for the Schneppenberg woods , which were secured by 14 : 00 . The 9th Parachute Battalion dug in within the woods , and the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion on the outskirts . At 15 : 00 the first troops of the Royal Scots arrived after completing their assault crossing of the Rhine . The day 's fighting had cost the brigade 80 dead and 190 wounded , however they had taken around 700 prisoners . 
 On 27 March the division started advancing further into Germany . The 8th Parachute Battalion was the first to reach Lembeck , which was defended by two Panzer Grenadier companies . A hand @-@ to @-@ hand battle ensued , lasting 18 hours and eventually drawing in all three battalions ; by midnight the town was secured , with around 300 prisoners taken . The brigade 's next objective was Greven and the bridge across the River Ems . At 21 : 30 the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion were about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away from the town . Leaving what vehicles they had behind , they attempted to approach the bridge unseen on foot , and by 23 : 00 had successfully secured the town and bridge . The 9th Parachute Battalion was called forward to continue the advance , but just as they approached the bridge it was blown up by the Germans . In the early hours of the morning , a footbridge across the river was discovered , and the 9th Battalion prepared to carry out an assault . ' A ' Company crossed the footbridge under fire just before dawn , and after a short fight had secured the crossing . After a few hours ' rest the advance continued with the 8th Battalion in the lead , and by nightfall they had reached their next objective , the Dortmund – Ems Canal . Resting overnight , the battalion crossed the half @-@ empty canal at 10 : 30 the next day . Over the next 36 hours the brigade advanced 70 miles ( 110 km ) to Minden . 
 The 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division then took over from the 6th Airborne Division as the lead formation until 30 April when the Airborne Division once more resumed the advance , crossing the River Elbe over a bridge captured by the Scottish division . The division 's objective was Wismar on the Baltic Sea ; the two parachute brigades advanced on separate routes to <unk> , aware that the brigade to arrive first would continue as the division 's lead formation . By this stage of the war the advance was hampered more by refugees fleeing westwards than by any organised opposition . The 3rd Parachute Brigade won the race and led the division to Wismar , arriving on 1 May only 30 minutes before the lead troops of the Soviet Red Army advancing from the east . 
 = = = Palestine = = = 
 At the end of May 1945 , the division was pulled out of Germany and returned to England . It was initially intended to send them to India to form an airborne corps with the 44th Indian Airborne Division . The division ’ s advance party , formed around the 5th Parachute Brigade , had already arrived in India . Following the Japanese surrender , all these plans changed . The post @-@ war British Army only needed one airborne division , and the 6th Airborne was chosen to remain on strength . Reinforced by the 2nd Parachute Brigade , the division was sent to the Middle East as the Imperial Strategic Reserve . 
 The 3rd Parachute Brigade was the first unit of the Airborne Division to arrive in Palestine , disembarking at Haifa on 3 October 1945 . The brigade then moved to Gaza to acclimatise and regain their fitness after the voyage from England . On 21 October the brigade was deployed around the Lydda district , with responsibility for Tel Aviv and Jaffa . The first incident involving the brigade came on 14 November 1945 , when the Jewish National Council called for a 12 @-@ hour strike , which resulted in rioting in Tel Aviv . By 18 : 15 the Palestine Police Force was unable to cope and sent for reinforcements from the 8th Parachute Battalion . The complete battalion was deployed and the riot was under control by 21 : 40 and a curfew imposed for the rest of the night . Early the following day the curfew was broken by large crowds gathering to loot and burn buildings , so the remainder of the brigade was deployed to the city under the codename Operation Bellicose . Night time curfews remained in place until 05 : 20 on 20 November , when all troops returned to their barracks . All was quiet in the brigade area until the night of 26 / 27 December , when police stations in Jaffa and Tel Aviv , the railway at Lydda and an armoury at Tel Aviv were attacked . The brigade again imposed a curfew around Tel Aviv . This was followed by cordon and search operations : Pintail on 29 December , Heron on 8 January , and Pigeon on 30 January . 
 Over the night of 2 / 3 April 1946 , there were several attacks on railway installations around the country . One at Yibna occurred at the same time as a patrol from the 9th Parachute Battalion was entering the village . The patrol 's leading two vehicles exploded mines that had been laid on a bridge , wounding three men . At daylight the tracks of around 30 men were found , and a section from the 8th Parachute Battalion eventually cornered 24 armed men . In the firefight that followed , 14 of them were wounded and the remainder surrendered , with no British casualties . On 29 June Operation Agatha started ; the brigade had been rotated to cover the south of Palestine , and were to search for arms and arrest any members of the Palmach in Givat Brenner and No 'ar <unk> . On 22 July the King David Hotel in Jerusalem was bombed , which was the catalyst for Operation Shark , the searching of every house and property in Tel Aviv . For this operation the brigade had all the divisional artillery and the 3rd The King 's Own Hussars under their command . The brigade 's next tasks were Operations Bream and Eel between 28 August and 4 September , which entailed the search of Dorot and Ruhama in the Negev . For the first time army dogs trained in metal detecting were used during the operations , and they located a large arms cache in both settlements . 
 In January 1947 , the 6th Airborne Division was moved to northern Palestine , swapping locations with the 1st Infantry Division . The 3rd Parachute Brigade took over responsibility for Haifa , which was considered a problem area . The brigade had to guard the docks and port of Haifa , which were the main entry point for immigrants arriving in the country . In addition , the many oil pipelines and installations in the region were a potential target for sabotage . The brigade 's first operation was imposing a curfew on the Jewish quarter after the kidnapping of two Britons in retaliation for the death sentence imposed on Dov Gruner . The next major operation was in July , when an indefinite night time curfew was imposed , in response to several attacks in and around the city . The curfew lasted until the end of the month . 
 In October 1947 , the War Office announced its intention to reduce the division 's strength by one brigade . The 3rd Parachute Brigade , being more recently established than the other units , was selected to be disbanded . However , instead of disbanding its battalions , it was decided to amalgamate them . The 3rd Parachute Battalion joined with the 2nd Parachute Battalion and was renumbered the 2nd / 3rd Parachute Battalion , and the brigade 's other two battalions were amalgamated to become the 8th / 9th Parachute Battalion . Both of these new units would serve in the 1st Parachute Brigade . The amalgamation of the 2nd and 3rd Parachute Battalions was completed in December , and the 8th and 9th Parachute Battalions in early January . Finally , the brigade headquarters was disbanded at the end of January . During their service in Palestine , nine men from the brigade had been killed . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Commanding officers 
 Brigadier Sir Alexander Stanier , Bt 
 Brigadier Gerald Lathbury 
 Brigadier James Hill 
 Brigadier Francis Rome 
 Units 
 7th ( Light Infantry ) Parachute Battalion 
 8th ( Midlands ) Parachute Battalion 
 9th ( Eastern and Home Counties ) Parachute Battalion 
 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion 
 3rd Parachute Battalion 
 224th ( Parachute ) Field Ambulance – Royal Army Medical Corps 
 3rd Airlanding Anti @-@ Tank Battery – Royal Artillery 
 3rd Parachute Squadron – Royal Engineers 
 = James Garrard = 
 James Garrard ( January 14 , 1749 – January 19 , 1822 ) was a farmer and Baptist minister who served as the second governor of Kentucky from 1796 to 1804 . Because of term limits imposed by the state constitution adopted in 1799 , he was the last Kentucky governor elected to two consecutive terms until the restriction was eased by a 1992 amendment , allowing Paul E. Patton 's re @-@ election in 1999 . 
 After serving in the Revolutionary War , Garrard moved west to the part of Virginia that is now Bourbon County , Kentucky . He held several local political offices and represented the area in the Virginia House of Delegates . He was chosen as a delegate to five of the ten statehood conventions that secured Kentucky 's separation from Virginia and helped write the state 's first constitution . Garrard was among the delegates who unsuccessfully tried to exclude guarantees of the continuance of slavery from the document . In 1795 , he sought to succeed Isaac Shelby as governor . In a three @-@ way race , Benjamin Logan received a plurality , but not a majority , of the electoral votes cast . Although the state constitution did not specify whether a plurality or a majority was required , the electors held another vote between the top two candidates – Logan and Garrard – and on this vote , Garrard received a majority . Logan protested Garrard 's election to state attorney general John Breckinridge and the state senate , but both claimed they had no constitutional power to intervene . 
 A Democratic @-@ Republican , Garrard opposed the Alien and Sedition Acts and favored passage of the Kentucky Resolutions . He lobbied for public education , militia and prison reforms , business subsidies , and legislation favorable to the state 's large debtor class . In 1798 , the state 's first governor 's mansion was constructed , and Garrard became its first resident . Due in part to the confusion resulting from the 1795 election , he favored calling a constitutional convention in 1799 . Because of his anti @-@ slavery views , he was not chosen as a delegate to the convention . Under the resulting constitution , the governor was popularly elected and was forbidden from succeeding himself in office , although Garrard was personally exempted from this provision and was re @-@ elected in 1799 . During his second term , he applauded Thomas Jefferson 's purchase of Louisiana from France as a means of dealing with the closure of the port at New Orleans to U.S. goods . Late in his term , his Secretary of State , Harry Toulmin , persuaded him to adopt some doctrines of Unitarianism , and he was expelled from the Baptist church , ending his ministry . He also clashed with the legislature over the appointment of a registrar for the state land office , leaving him embittered and unwilling to continue in politics after the conclusion of his term . He retired to his estate , Mount Lebanon , and engaged in agricultural and commercial pursuits until his death on January 19 , 1822 . Garrard County , Kentucky , created during his first term , was named in his honor . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 James Garrard was born in Stafford County , Virginia , on January 14 , 1749 . He was second of three children born to Colonel William and Mary ( Naughty ) Garrard . [ a ] Garrard 's mother died sometime between 1755 and 1760 ; afterward , his father married Elizabeth Moss , and the couple had four more children . William Garrard was the county lieutenant of Stafford County , by virtue of which he held the rank of colonel and was in command of the county militia . The Garrard family was moderately wealthy , and the Stafford County courthouse was built on their land . During his childhood , James worked on his father 's farm . He was educated in the common schools of Stafford County and studied at home , acquiring a fondness for books . Early in life , he associated himself with the <unk> Baptist Church near Fredericksburg , Virginia . 
 On December 20 , 1769 , Garrard married his childhood sweetheart , Elizabeth Mountjoy . Shortly thereafter , his sister Mary Anne married Mountjoy 's brother , Colonel John Mountjoy . Garrard and his wife had five sons and seven daughters . One son and two daughters died before reaching age two . Of the surviving four sons , all participated in the War of 1812 and all served in the Kentucky General Assembly . A number of his grandsons served in the Civil War , including Union Generals Kenner Garrard and Theophilus T. Garrard . Another grandson , James H. Garrard , was elected to five consecutive terms as state treasurer , serving from 1857 until his death in 1865 . 
 Garrard served in the Revolutionary War as a member of his father 's Stafford County militia , although it is not known how much combat he participated in . While on board a schooner on the Potomac River , he was captured by British forces . His captors offered to free him in exchange for military information , but he refused the offer and later escaped . 
 While serving in the militia in 1779 , Garrard was elected to represent Stafford County the Virginia House of Delegates , and he assumed his seat for the 1779 legislative session . His major contribution to the session was advocating for a bill that granted religious liberty to all residents of Virginia ; passage of the bill ended persecution by citizens who associated with the Church of England upon followers of other faiths and countered an effort by some to establish the Church of England as Virginia 's official church . After the session , he returned to his military duties . In 1781 , he was promoted to the rank of colonel . 
 = = Resettlement in Kentucky = = 
 Following the revolution , Garrard faced the dual challenges of a growing family and depleted personal wealth . Acting on favorable reports from his former neighbor , John Edwards , Garrard and Samuel Grant headed west into the recently created Kentucky County . By virtue of his military service , Garrard was entitled to claim any vacant land he surveyed and recorded at the state land office . Beginning in early 1783 , Garrard made claims for family and friends , as well as 40 @,@ 000 acres ( 160 km2 ) for himself . Later in 1783 , he moved his family to the land he had surveyed in Fayette County , which had been created from Kentucky County since his last visit to the region . Three years later , he employed John Metcalfe , a noted stonemason and older half @-@ brother of future Kentucky Governor Thomas Metcalfe , to build his estate , Mount Lebanon , on the Stoner Fork of the Licking River . There , he engaged in agriculture , opened a grist mill and a lumber mill , and distilled whiskey . In 1784 , he enlisted in the Fayette County militia . 
 In 1785 , Garrard was elected to represent Fayette County in the Virginia legislature . He was placed on a legislative committee with Benjamin Logan and Christopher Greenup to draft recommendations regarding the further division of Kentucky County . The committee recommended the creation of three new counties , including Madison , Mercer , and Garrard 's county of residence , Bourbon . On his return from the legislature , Garrard was chosen county surveyor and justice of the peace for the newly formed county . At various times , he also served as magistrate and colonel of the county militia . 
 Although some historians have identified Garrard as a member of the Danville Political Club , a secret debating society that was active in Danville , Kentucky , from 1786 to 1790 , his name is not found in the Club 's official membership records . Garrard 's biographer , H. E. Everman , concludes that these historians may have mistaken Garrard 's membership in the Kentucky Society for the Promotion of Useful Knowledge for membership in the Danville Political Club . The groups had similar aims , were active at about the same time , and had several members in common . Other notable members of the Kentucky Society for the Promotion of Useful Knowledge included Isaac Shelby , Christopher Greenup , and Thomas Todd , all future Kentucky governors or gubernatorial candidates . 
 Garrard 's Mount Lebanon estate was designated as the temporary county seat of Bourbon County ; the county court first convened there on May 15 , 1786 , and continued to meet there for many years . In 1789 , the Virginia legislature established a permanent county seat named Hopewell , and Garrard was part of the committee chosen to survey the area for the city . He and John Edwards were among the new settlement 's first trustees . Upon Garrard 's recommendation , the city 's name was changed to Paris in 1790 . Soon after , he resigned as county surveyor to focus on more pressing needs of defense for the fledgling settlement . At his behest , the Bourbon County Court expanded its militia from one battalion to two at its meeting in August 1790 . 
 = = Religious leadership = = 
 As early as June 25 , 1785 , Garrard and his friend Augustine Eastin attended meetings of the Elkhorn Baptist Association . In 1787 , he helped organize the Cooper 's Run Baptist Church near his estate . He was chosen as one of the church 's elders and served the congregation there for ten years . Soon after its formation , the church joined the Elkhorn Baptist Association , and in 1789 , it issued Garrard a license to preach . Although he owned as many as 23 slaves to work on his vast agricultural and industrial works , Garrard condemned slavery from the pulpit , calling it a " horrid evil " . Whites and blacks participated equally in worship at Cooper 's Run . 
 Garrard and the other elders of the church started numerous congregations in the state , including one as far away as Mason County . In 1789 , Garrard and Eastin began working to reunite the more orthodox Regular Baptists in the area with the more liberal Separatist Baptists . Garrard 's former church in Virginia had been a Regular Baptist congregation , and Garrard was considered a Regular Baptist despite his clear advocacy for religious toleration and his open expression of liberal views . Although he never succeeded in uniting the two factions , he was chosen moderator of the Elkhorn Baptist Association 's annual meetings in 1790 , 1791 , and 1795 in recognition of his efforts . 
 From 1785 to 1799 , Garrard served as a trustee of Transylvania Seminary ( now Transylvania University ) . In 1794 , the Baptist and more liberal trustees united against the orthodox Presbyterian members of the board to elect the seminary 's first non @-@ Presbyterian president . That president was Harry Toulmin , a Unitarian minister from England . Toulmin 's daughter Lucinda would later marry Garrard 's son Daniel . As a result of Garrard 's relationship with Toulmin , he began to accept some tenets of Unitarianism , specifically the doctrines of Socinianism . By 1802 , Garrard and Augustine Eastin had not only adopted these beliefs , but had indoctrinated their Baptist congregations with them . The Elkhorn Baptist Association condemned these beliefs as heretical and encouraged Garrard and Eastin to abandon them . When that effort failed , the Association ceased correspondence and association with both men . This event ended Garrard 's ministry and his association with the Baptist church . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Residents of what is now Kentucky called a series of ten conventions in Danville to arrange their separation from Virginia . Garrard was a delegate to five of these conventions , held in May and August 1785 and in 1787 , 1788 , and 1792 . At the August 1785 convention , the delegates unanimously approved a formal request for constitutional separation . As a member of the Virginia legislature , Garrard then traveled to Richmond for the legislative session and voted in favor of the act specifying the conditions under which Virginia would accept Kentucky 's separation . 
 Before the final convention in 1792 , a committee composed of Garrard , Ambrose Dudley , and Augustine Eastin reported to the Elkhorn Baptist Association in favor of forbidding slavery in the constitution then being drafted for the new state . Slavery was a major issue in the 1792 convention that finalized the document . Delegate David Rice , a Presbyterian minister , was the leading voice against the inclusion of slavery protections in the new constitution , while George Nicholas argued most strenuously in favor of them . Garrard encouraged his fellow ministers and Baptists to vote against its inclusion . The motion to delete Article 9 of the proposed document , which protected the rights of slave owners , failed by a vote of 16 – 26 . Each of the seven Christian ministers who served as delegates to the convention ( including Garrard ) voted in favor of deleting the article . Five Baptist laymen defied Garrard 's instructions and voted to retain Article 9 ; their votes provided the necessary margin for its inclusion . Historian Lowell H. Harrison wrote that the anti @-@ slavery votes of the ministers may have accounted for the adoption of a provision that forbade ministers from serving in the Kentucky General Assembly . Garrard and the other ministers apparently expressed no dissent against this provision . 
 Aside from his opposition to slavery , Garrard did not take a particularly active role in the convention 's proceedings . His most notable action not related to slavery occurred on April 13 , 1792 , when he reported twenty @-@ two resolutions from the committee of the whole that provided the framework for the new constitution . 
 = = = Gubernatorial election of 1795 = = = 
 Following the constitutional convention , it appeared that Garrard 's political career was drawing to a close . He resigned all of his county offices to focus on his work in the Elkhorn Baptist Convention and his agricultural pursuits . He was pleased , however , when his son William was chosen to represent the county in the state legislature in 1793 . In 1795 , William Garrard was reelected , and the other four state legislators from Bourbon County were close associates of Garrard 's , including John Edwards , who had recently been defeated for reelection to the U.S. Senate . 
 When Governor Isaac Shelby announced he would not seek reelection , Garrard 's friends encouraged him to become a candidate . The other announced candidates were Benjamin Logan and Thomas Todd . Logan was considered the favorite in the race due to his military heroism while helping settle the Kentucky frontier . However , his oratory was unpolished , and his parliamentary skills were weak , despite his considerable political experience . Todd , who had served as secretary of all ten Kentucky statehood conventions , had the most political experience , but his youth was considered a disadvantage by some . Garrard benefited from his political connections in Bourbon County , and many held him in high regard due to his work in the Baptist church . 
 Under the new constitution , each of Kentucky 's legislative districts chose an elector , and these electors voted to choose the governor . Both Logan and Garrard were chosen as electors from their respective counties . On the first ballot , Logan received the votes of 21 electors , Garrard received 17 , and Todd received 14 . A lone elector cast his vote for John Brown , a Frankfort attorney who would soon be elected to the U.S. Senate . Some speculated that Garrard 's moral character prevented him from voting for himself , but his political acumen prevented him from voting for a rival , so he voted for Brown , who had not declared his candidacy . No proof exists that this was the case , however . 
 The constitution did not specify whether a plurality or a majority vote was required to elect the governor , but the electors , following a common practice of other states , decided to hold a second vote between Logan and Garrard in order to achieve a majority . Most of Todd 's electors supported Garrard on the second vote , giving him a majority . In a letter dated May 17 , 1796 , Kentucky Secretary of State James Brown certified Garrard 's election , and Governor Shelby sent him a letter of congratulations on his election on May 27 . 
 Although he did not believe Garrard had personally done anything wrong , Logan formally protested the outcome of the election to Kentucky Attorney General John Breckinridge . Breckinridge refused to render an official decision on the matter , claiming that neither the constitution nor the laws of the state empowered him to do so . Privately , however , he expressed his opinion that Logan had been legally elected . Logan then appealed to the state senate , which was given the authority to intervene in disputed elections . In November 1796 , the Senate opined that the law giving them that authority was unconstitutional because it did not promote the " peace and welfare " of the state . State senator Green Clay was the primary proponent of this line of reasoning . By this time , Garrard had been serving as governor for five months , and Logan abandoned the quest to unseat him . 
 = = = First term as governor = = = 
 Garrard was regarded as a strong chief executive who surrounded himself with knowledgeable advisors . His friend , John Edwards , and his son , William Garrard , were both in the state senate and kept him abreast of issues there . He showed that he was willing to continue with Shelby 's direction for the state by re @-@ appointing Secretary of State James Brown , but the aging Brown retired in October 1796 , only a few months into Garrard 's term . Garrard then appointed Harry Toulmin , who had resigned the presidency of Transylvania Seminary in April due to opposition from the institution 's more conservative trustees . Although he did not retain outgoing Attorney General John Breckinridge , who had sided with Logan in the disputed gubernatorial election , Garrard still frequently consulted with him on complex legal questions . 
 During Governor Shelby 's term , the General Assembly had passed laws requiring that the governor , auditor , treasurer , and secretary of state live in Frankfort and allocating a sum of 100 pounds to rent living quarters for the governor . Shortly after Garrard took office , the state commissioners of public buildings reported to the legislature that it would be more financially sensible to construct a house for the governor and his large family than to rent living quarters for them for the duration of his term . On December 4 , 1796 , the General Assembly passed legislation appropriating 1 @,@ 200 pounds for the construction of such a house . The state 's first governor 's mansion was completed in 1798 . Garrard incited considerable public interest when , in 1799 , he commissioned a local craftsman to build a piano for one of his daughters ; most Kentuckians had never seen such a grand instrument , and a considerable number of them flocked to the governor 's mansion to see it when it was finished . Kentucky historian Thomas D. Clark also relates that Garrard 's addition of carpeting to the mansion – a rare amenity at the time – drew many visitors and was described by one as " the envy and pride of the community " . 
 Among the other acts passed during the first year of Garrard 's term were laws establishing the Kentucky Court of Appeals and a system of lower district courts . For the first time , lawyers in the state were required to be licensed . Six new counties – including one named in Garrard 's honor – were created , along with several new settlements . Garrard approved enabling acts creating twenty @-@ six counties ; no other Kentucky governor oversaw the creation of as many . 
 Left undone , however , was extending the laws dealing with surveying and registering land claims with the registrar of the state land office . Cognizant that the old law would expire November 30 , 1797 , Garrard issued a proclamation on November 3 calling the legislature into special session . The legislators convened on November 28 , and Garrard , drawing on his experience as a surveyor , addressed them regarding the urgency of adopting a new law and forestalling more lawsuits related to land claims , which were already numerous . Although a wealthy landowner himself , Garrard advocated protecting Kentucky 's large debtor class from foreclosure on their lands . Garrard supported pro @-@ squatting legislation , including measures that forbade the collection of taxes from squatters on profits they made from working the land they occupied and that required landowners to pay squatters for any improvements they made on their land . Despite opposition from some aristocratic legislators like John Breckinridge , most of the reforms advocated by Garrard were approved in the session . 
 Garrard was a member of the Democratic @-@ Republican Party and agreed with party founder Thomas Jefferson 's condemnation of the Alien and Sedition Acts . In an address to the General Assembly on November 7 , 1798 , he denounced the Alien Act on the grounds that it deterred desirable immigration ; the Sedition Act , he claimed , denied those accused under its provisions freedom of speech and trial by jury , rights – he pointed out – that he and the other soldiers of the Revolutionary War had fought to secure . He advocated the nullification of both laws , but also encouraged the legislature to reaffirm its loyalty to the federal government and the U.S. Constitution . He was supportive of the Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 and 1799 . 
 Among the other issues addressed in the 1798 General Assembly was the adoption of penal reforms . Garrard was supportive of the reforms – which included the abolition of the death penalty for all crimes except murder – and lobbied for the education of incarcerated individuals . He also secured the passage of laws reforming and expanding the militia . Among the reforms were the imposition of penalties upon " <unk> " in the militia , provisions for citizens ' hiring of substitutes to serve in the militia on their behalf , and the exemption of jailers , tutors , printers , judges , ministers , and legislative leaders from service . Garrard opposed lowering taxes , instead advocating increased spending on education and business subsidies . To that end , he signed legislation combining Transylvania Seminary and Kentucky Academy into a single institution . 
 = = = A new constitution = = = 
 The difficulties with Garrard 's election over Benjamin Logan in 1795 added to a litany of complaints about the state 's first constitution . Some believed that it was undemocratic because it required electors to choose the governor and state senators and many offices were appointive rather than elective . Others opposed life terms for judges and other state officials . Still others wanted slavery excluded from the document , or to lift the ban on ministers serving in the General Assembly . In the aftermath of the disputed 1795 election , all parties involved agreed that changes were needed . The present constitution provided no means for amendment , however . The only remedy was another constitutional convention . 
 Calling a constitutional convention required the approval of a majority of voters in two successive elections or a two @-@ thirds majority of both houses of the General Assembly . In February 1797 , the General Assembly voted to put the question before the electorate in the upcoming May elections . Of the 9 @,@ 814 votes cast , 5 @,@ 446 favored the call and 440 opposed it , but 3 @,@ 928 had not voted at all , and several counties recorded no votes on the issue either way . This cast doubt in the minds of many legislators regarding the true will of the people . Opponents of the convention claimed that the abstentions should be counted as votes against the call ; this position had some merit , as it was well known that many Fayette County voters had abstained as a protest against the convention . When all of the irregularities were accounted for , the General Assembly determined that the vote had fallen short of the required majority . 
 On February 10 , 1798 , Garrard 's son William , still serving in the state senate , introduced a bill to hold another vote on calling a constitutional convention . In May 1798 , 9 @,@ 188 of the 16 @,@ 388 votes were in favor of calling a convention . Again , almost 5 @,@ 000 of the ballots contained no vote either way . On November 21 , 1798 , the House of Representatives voted 36 – 15 in favor of a convention , and the Senate provided its requisite two @-@ thirds majority days later . No official tally of the Senate 's vote was published . The Assembly 's vote rendered moot any doubts about the popular vote . 
 Delegates to the July 22 , 1799 , convention were elected in May 1799 . Neither Garrard nor his son William were chosen as delegates , mostly due to their anti @-@ slavery views . Garrard had been a more active governor than his predecessor , frequently employing his veto and clashing with the county courts . As a result , the delegates moved to reign in some of the power given to the state 's chief executive . Under the 1799 constitution , the governor was popularly elected , and the threshold for overriding a gubernatorial veto was lowered from a two @-@ thirds majority of each house of the legislature to an absolute majority . Although the governor retained broad appointment powers , the state senate was given the power to approve or reject all gubernatorial nominees . New term limits were imposed on the governor , making him ineligible for reelection for seven years following the expiration of his term . The restriction on ministers serving in the legislature was retained and extended to the governor 's office . Historian Lowell Harrison held that this restriction was " a clear snub to Garrard " , but Garrard biographer H. E. Everman maintained that it was " definitely not a blow aimed at Garrard " . Garrard was personally exempted from both the succession and ministerial restrictions , clearing the way for him to seek a second term . 
 = = = 1799 gubernatorial election = = = 
 Confident that the results of the 1795 election would be reversed , Benjamin Logan was the first to declare his candidacy for the governorship in 1799 . Garrard and Thomas Todd declared their respective candidacies soon after . Former U.S. Representative Christopher Greenup also sought the office . Many of the recent settlers in Kentucky were unaware of his illustrious military record and unimpressed with his unsophisticated speaking skills . Although the candidates themselves rarely spoke negatively of each other , opponents of each candidate independently raised issues that they felt would hurt that candidate . John Breckinridge , Garrard 's long @-@ time political nemesis , tried to goad Garrard into making another impassioned plea for emancipation of slaves , which was a minority position in the state , but Garrard recognized Breckinridge 's tactics and refused to express any bold emancipationist sentiments during the campaign . The fact that the slavery protections in the new constitution were even stronger than those in the previous document ensured that the incumbent 's previous anti @-@ slavery sentiments were not a major concern to most of the electorate . The family of Henry Field , a prominent leader in Frankfort , attacked Garrard for not issuing a pardon for Field , who was convicted of murdering his wife with an ax . After examining the evidence in the case , Garrard concluded that the verdict was reached justly and without undue outside influence , but the charge was raised so late in the campaign that Garrard 's defense of his refusal to issue a pardon could not be circulated widely . 
 With the advantages of incumbency and a generally popular record , Garrard garnered large majorities in the state 's western counties , Jefferson County , and the Bluegrass region of central Kentucky . Surprisingly , he even found support among some voters who had favored Logan four years earlier . The final voting showed Garrard the winner with 8 @,@ 390 votes , followed by Greenup with 6 @,@ 746 , Logan with 3 @,@ 996 , and Todd with 2 @,@ 166 . Due to the term limits imposed by the new constitution , Garrard was the last Kentucky governor elected to succeed himself until a 1992 amendment to the state constitution loosened the prohibition on gubernatorial succession , and Paul E. Patton was reelected in 1999 . In 1801 , Garrard nominated Todd to fill the next vacancy on the Kentucky Court of Appeals after the election . Similarly , he appointed Greenup to a position on the Frankfort Circuit Court in 1802 . 
 = = = Second term as governor = = = 
 The first two years of Garrard 's second term were relatively uneventful , but in the 1802 General Assembly , legislators approved two bills related to the circuit court system that Garrard vetoed . The first bill expanded the number of courts and provided that untrained citizens could sit as judges in the court system . Garrard questioned the cost of the additional courts and the wisdom of allowing untrained judges on the bench ; he also objected to the bill 's circumvention of the governor 's authority to appoint judges . The second bill allowed attorneys and judges in the circuit court system to reside outside the districts they served . The General Assembly overrode Garrard 's second veto , marking the first time in Kentucky history that a gubernatorial veto was overridden and the only time during Garrard 's eight @-@ year tenure . 
 On October 16 , 1802 , Spanish <unk> Don Juan Ventura Morales announced the revocation of the U.S. right of deposit at New Orleans , a right that had been guaranteed under Pinckney 's Treaty . The closure of the port to U.S. goods represented a major impediment to Garrard 's hopes of establishing a vibrant trade between Kentucky and the other states and territories along the Mississippi River . He urged President Thomas Jefferson to act and publicly declared that Kentucky had 26 @,@ 000 militiamen ready to take New Orleans by force if necessary . Jefferson was unaware , however , that the secret Treaty of San Ildefonso had ceded control of Louisiana to the French dictator Napoleon Bonaparte in 1800 , although a formal transfer had not yet been made . As Jefferson deliberated , Napoleon unexpectedly offered to sell Louisiana to the United States for approximately $ 15 million . Robert R. Livingston and James Monroe , Jefferson 's envoys in France , accepted the offer . The purchase delighted most Kentuckians , and Garrard hailed it as a " noble achievement " . Soon after the agreement , the Spanish government claimed that the French had not performed their part of the Treaty of Ildefonso and , as a result , the treaty was nullified and Louisiana still belonged to Spain . Jefferson ignored the Spanish protest and prepared to take Louisiana by force . He instructed Garrard to have 4 @,@ 000 militiamen ready to march to New Orleans by December 20 , 1803 . The Kentucky General Assembly quickly passed a measure guaranteeing 150 acres of land to anyone who volunteered for military service , and Garrard was soon able to inform Jefferson that his quota was met . Spain then reversed course , relinquishing its claims to Louisiana , and the territory passed into U.S. control two months later . 
 The last months of Garrard 's second term were marred by a dispute with the General Assembly over naming a new registrar of the state 's land office . Garrard first named Secretary of State Harry Toulmin , but the Senate rejected that nomination on December 7 , 1803 . Next , Garrard nominated former rival Christopher Greenup , but Greenup had designs on succeeding Garrard and asked Garrard to withdraw the nomination , which he did . The Senate then rejected Garrard 's next nominee , John Coburn , and accused the next , Thomas Jones , of " high criminal offense " and barred him from any further appointive office . 
 Following Jones ' rejection , Garrard vetoed a bill that would have allowed the legislature to select the state 's presidential and vice @-@ presidential electors ; despite the fact that the law ran contrary to the state constitution , Garrard 's veto further strained his relations with the Senate . After the Senate rejected nominee William Trigg , the state 's newspapers openly talked of an executive @-@ legislative feud and claimed the Senate had its own favorite candidate for the position and would not accept anyone else . When the Senate rejected Willis Green in January 1804 , Garrard declared that he would make no more nominations for the position . Accusations of bad faith were exchanged between the governor and the Senate , after which Garrard nominated John Adair , the popular Speaker of the House . The Senate finally confirmed this choice . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 His dispute with the General Assembly over the naming of a land registrar left Garrard embittered , and he retired from politics at the expiration of his second term . He privately backed Christopher Greenup 's bid to succeed him in 1804 , and Bourbon County 's vote broke heavily for Greenup in the election . Although his sons William and James would continue running for public office into the 1830s , Garrard never indicated a desire to run again . 
 Garrard returned to Mount Lebanon , where he developed a reputation as a notable <unk> . His son James oversaw the day @-@ to @-@ day operation of the farm and frequently won prizes for his innovations at local agricultural fairs . The Mount Lebanon estate was badly damaged by one of the New Madrid earthquakes in 1811 , but Garrard insisted on repairing the damage as thoroughly as possible in order to reside there for the rest of his life . He imported fine livestock – including thoroughbred horses and cattle – to his farm and invested in several commercial enterprises , including several saltworks , which passed to his sons upon his death . He died on January 19 , 1822 , following several years of feeble health . He was buried on the grounds of his Mount Lebanon estate , and the state of Kentucky erected a monument over his grave site . 
 = The Man with the Iron Fists = 
 The Man with the Iron Fists is a 2012 American martial arts film directed by RZA and written by RZA and Eli Roth . The film stars RZA , Russell Crowe , Cung Le , Lucy Liu , Byron Mann , Rick Yune , Dave Bautista , and Jamie Chung . Set in 19th century China , the story follows a series of lone warriors who are forced to unite to defeat a common foe and save their home of Jungle Village . 
 Development began in 2005 when RZA shared his idea for the film with Roth . After nearly two years of development , Roth and RZA secured financial backing in May 2010 . Filming began in December 2010 on a $ 20 million budget and concluded by March 2011 . The film was shot in Shanghai and at other locations in China . RZA and Howard Drossin composed the film 's musical score , and RZA produced its soundtrack , which featured several new songs by various artists . A series of concerts featuring music from the soundtrack were held to promote the film . 
 The film was released in North America on November 2 , 2012 . Critics were divided over the film 's homage to martial arts films , considering it well @-@ choreographed and representative of the genre , but offering nothing original , and the direction was criticized for a lack of refinement . The performances of Crowe and Mann were well received . The film earned over $ 20 million at the box office . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In nineteenth century China , Jungle Village is home to several warring clans . The village blacksmith creates deadly weapons for the clans , intending to use his payments to purchase the freedom of his lover Lady Silk , and leave the village . The region 's governor tasks the Lion Clan 's leader Gold Lion with protecting a large shipment of gold that must pass through the village . Gold is betrayed by his lieutenants Silver Lion and Bronze Lion , who plan to steal the gold . They use the chaos ensuing from a fight with the Hyena Clan to allow their co @-@ conspirator Poison Dagger — the governor 's aide — to assassinate Gold , after which Silver becomes the Lions ' leader . Gold 's son Zen @-@ Yi learns of his father 's murder and sets off to the village to seek revenge . 
 The Emperor 's undercover emissary Jack Knife arrives in the village to monitor the gold and takes up residence in the Pink Blossom , a brothel run by Madam Blossom , Lady Silk 's madame . Silver sends members of the Rodent clan to kill Zen @-@ Yi before he can reach the village , but Zen @-@ Yi kills them . The mercenary Brass Body arrives in the village and meets with Silver ; he is sent to kill Zen @-@ Yi . The blacksmith meets with Silk in the brothel and delivers the final payment needed to free her . After arriving in the village , Zen @-@ Yi and his men are confronted by Brass and find that they cannot physically harm him because his skin turns to metal on impact . Brass beats Zen @-@ Yi and destroys his blade @-@ laden armor . Zen @-@ Yi 's last surviving man sacrifices himself to pull a canopy support beam loose , burying Brass under heavy stone . The blacksmith is watching the fight ; he rescues Zen @-@ Yi and helps him recover as penance for crafting the weapon that killed Zen @-@ Yi 's father . 
 Meanwhile , the gold shipment arrives in the village , accompanied by two skilled warriors , the Geminis . The Lions soon confront the Geminis and their men , and in the ensuing fight , Poison Dagger assassinates the Geminis and the Lions capture the gold . Jack later arrives to investigate the incident and learns that the Geminis were poisoned with mercury @-@ tipped weapons , leading him to the blacksmith . The Lions ' theft prompts the governor to send his Jackal troops to recover the shipment or destroy the village . Zen @-@ Yi asks the blacksmith to craft him a new suit of weaponized armor . The Lions suspect that the blacksmith is helping Zen @-@ Yi and have him tortured for information . The blacksmith refuses to talk , and Brass cuts off his forearms . Jack , who had been following the blacksmith , saves him from bleeding to death . While the blacksmith recovers , he tells Jack of his past as an emancipated American slave who accidentally killed a white man who refused to let him go . He fled America by boat and went to China , where monks trained him to use his body 's energy to perform superhuman feats . Jack and the blacksmith craft his greatest weapon : a pair of iron forearms that he can animate using this energy . 
 Zen @-@ Yi recovers and joins Jack and the blacksmith . Meanwhile , Blossom offers to let Silver hide the gold in a secret tomb beneath the brothel in return for payment . The gold is stored in a coffin which is raised up to the rafters . That night , Blossom has her girls serve the Lions , and Silk serves Brass . At Blossom 's signal , the girls use weapons hidden in their mouths to poison many of the Lions , and they join with Blossom as the Black Widows . When Silk tries to poison Brass , his skin protects him , and he beats and almost kills her . Zen @-@ Yi , Jack , and the blacksmith arrive and join with the Black Widows to fight the remaining Lions while Blossom and Bronze fight and kill each other . While fighting Jack , Poison Dagger is crushed between large moving gears . Silver and Zen @-@ Yi fight in the tomb ; Zen @-@ Yi cuts the coffin free , and it crushes Silver . The blacksmith finds Silk , who dies in his arms . He confronts Brass , and his iron fists prove capable of inflicting damage on Brass ' seemingly invincible body . While Brass is in metal form , a powerful punch from the blacksmith shatters him to pieces . Jack runs outside in time to stop the Jackals from decimating the building with a Gatling gun . 
 Ultimately , Jack leaves the village to accompany the gold , and Zen @-@ Yi tells the blacksmith that he has gained a brother . With the clans destroyed and the village safe , the blacksmith vows to keep it that way and destroys the sign pointing to his weapon shop . During the credits , Zen @-@ Yi 's pregnant fiancee is kidnapped by a bird clan , prompting Zen @-@ Yi to seek the blacksmith 's aid . 
 = = Cast = = 
 RZA as Blacksmith / The Man with the Iron Fists : 
 An emancipated slave from America who becomes the blacksmith of Jungle Village . He channels an ancient energy to turn himself into a living weapon . His name is Thaddeus Henry Smith . RZA wrote the role specifically for himself , and trained in Hung Ga for 1 – 2 hours a day over 2 months in preparation . 
 Rick Yune as Zen @-@ Yi , The X @-@ Blade : 
 The son of the murdered Lion Clan leader who goes to Jungle Village to avenge his father 's death . RZA said that he had Yune in mind for the role before the script had been completed . 
 Russell Crowe as Jack Knife : 
 An opium @-@ addicted British soldier named after his signature weapon . The character was partly inspired by RZA 's late cousin Ol ' Dirty Bastard . Crowe based his performance on Clint Eastwood in Dirty Harry ( 1971 ) and The Outlaw Josey Wales ( 1976 ) . Crowe agreed to join the cast because of his previous working relationship with RZA . Crowe was only able to spend 10 days filming his scenes . 
 Lucy Liu as Madam Blossom : 
 The owner of the Pink Blossom brothel , whom Liu described as the queen of the village . Liu wanted to emphasize Blossom 's strength against all the male fighters and convinced RZA to give the character a fight sequence with Cung Le 's Bronze Lion . 
 David Bautista as Brass Body : 
 A mercenary capable of turning his body to metal , making him invulnerable . Bautista described the character as a " good guy " who " made a lot of bad choices in his life . He doesn ’ t really understand the difference between right and wrong . " RZA auditioned Bautista for the role after seeing him " moving as fast as lightning " during a stick @-@ fighting training video . 
 Jamie Chung as Lady Silk : 
 A prostitute in the Pink Blossom and the blacksmith 's girlfriend . 
 Cung Le as Bronze Lion : 
 A member of the Lion Clan . Le came to RZA 's attention following his 2008 mixed martial arts fight against Frank Shamrock . Bronze Lion 's fighting style incorporates elements of Tiger Kung @-@ Fu and Le 's own training in kicks and scissor kicks . 
 Byron Mann as Silver Lion : 
 The leader of the Lion Clan after he kills the previous leader . Mann was initially cast for a smaller role but after his successful audition , he was given the bigger role of Silver Lion . 
 The cast also includes Pam Grier as the blacksmith 's mother Jane , Osric Chau as Blacksmith 's assistant , MC Jin as Zen @-@ Yi 's ally Chan , Daniel Wu as Poison Dagger , and Andrew Lin and Grace Huang as The Geminis . Co @-@ writer Eli Roth appears in a cameo . Several veteran martial arts actors — including Chen Kuan @-@ tai as Golden Lion , Bryan Leung as Hyena Chief , Telly Liu as Iron Lion , Xue Jing Yao as Copper Lion , Zhu Zhu as Zen @-@ Yi 's fiancee Chi Chi , Terence Yin as the Governor , and Gordon Liu as The Abbot — appeared in the film . Liu 's role was written for RZA 's Shaolin teacher Shi Yan Ming , but Ming could not obtain permission to return to China for filming . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Development of the film began in 2003 when RZA produced the soundtrack for Quentin Tarantino 's film Kill Bill . RZA set himself a $ 50 @,@ 000 budget and flew to the Kill Bill set in Beijing , where he spent approximately thirty days taking notes on the way Tarantino directed the film . In 2005 , RZA met Eli Roth in Iceland , and they traveled together to LA . During the journey , RZA told Roth of his idea for a kung fu genre film , which attracted Roth 's interest , but no further progress was made . RZA completed the story for the film , but Roth convinced him that he would need a completed screenplay for the project to gain any support . In 2007 , after Roth 's Hostel : Part II was released , Roth and RZA agreed to seriously pursue the project . The pair took the project to several studios and met with their preferred producer , Edward R. Pressman . One of the studios suggested setting the film in a post @-@ apocalyptic situation , which RZA considered . They took the project to Strike Entertainment , which considered that it needed more development and assigned several writers to rewrite the script , which began to depart from RZA 's initial idea . 
 RZA continued to work with Strike Entertainment 's writers , but Roth , who returned from filming Inglourious Basterds , was disappointed with the rewritten screenplay and he and RZA spent a year developing and finalizing it . In total , they spent between 18 months and 2 years developing the screenplay in between other projects , and turned RZA 's 90 @-@ page story into a 130 @-@ page screenplay . Citing the specificity of the fictional universe in the Star Wars series , Roth said that the pair tried to fully define the aspects of The Man with the Iron Fists to make it interesting without fight scenes . Roth said that RZA had " imagined every tribe , every fighting style , every costume " . The original script focused on several animal @-@ themed clans fighting over territory , in particular Jungle Village , which acted as a center for shipments . As the script developed , several of the clans were removed , and the focus shifted to commerce and the transportation of government gold , which also introduced the government as a higher power over the clans . RZA and Roth approached fights in the script by introducing a new character , fighting style or weapon to avoid monotony ; if a fight did not advance the story , they removed it . 
 RZA then financed and directed a short martial arts film called Wu @-@ Tang vs. the Golden Phoenix featuring Hong Kong @-@ based , kung @-@ fu @-@ trained actors . When he and Roth pitched The Man with the Iron Fists to producers , RZA used the short film to prove that he could handle the martial arts action and be trusted to take on his first directing role . On May 7 , 2010 , Universal Pictures announced it had agreed to finance and distribute the film , which Roth and Strike Entertainment 's Marc Abraham and Eric Newman would produce . The producers gave RZA a $ 20 million budget . 
 During the development process , Tarantino agreed to lend his name to the film with a " presented by " credit . In October 2012 , RZA said that he and Tarantino had intended to cross over The Man with the Iron Fists with Tarantino 's 2012 Western Django Unchained . The crossover would have included a younger version of RZA 's blacksmith character in a slave auction , but scheduling conflicts prevented RZA 's participation . The Man with the Iron Fists spent 14 weeks in pre @-@ production including four to six weeks on location scouting . RZA insisted that six weeks of pre @-@ production would be sufficient , but Marc Abraham told him to take 14 weeks , for which RZA was later thankful after he reached week 13 and still needed more time . During filming , RZA and Roth discussed the potential for a sequel if the film was successful . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography took place over approximately 10 weeks on a $ 20 million budget . Filming began in China in December 2010 in locations including the city of Shanghai and <unk> World Studios , and continued until March 2011 . Corey Yuen was the film 's action choreographer . To compensate for time lost to filming issues , some scenes were filmed in a single take . Approximately 6 weeks into filming , RZA began pushing the crew to work faster to remain on schedule . His assistant director eventually informed RZA that because of the push , some stunt workers were injured and being sent to hospital . After this , RZA abandoned some of his intended shots and replaced them with Computer Generated Images ( CGI ) . Roth also directed some shots for RZA . Crowe and Le were originally scripted to fight each other , but because of Crowe 's limited shooting schedule , he did not have the time to rehearse the fight , and instead Le was scripted to fight Liu . 
 The first cut of the film was four hours long and RZA suggested splitting it into two films , but Roth disagreed . It was edited to 96 minutes to meet the studio 's requirements and to excise graphic content that would cause it to receive a restrictive rating , limiting its audience . RZA abandoned the editing process for two weeks , feeling disgust at having to cut the film . In October 2012 , he said that he intended to release a " director 's cut " of the film for home viewing , and would reinsert at least 13 minutes of the cut footage . RZA described the film as an homage to the martial art films of the Hong Kong @-@ based Shaw Brothers . 
 The film used mostly practical special effects in preference to CGI . An effect in which Yune 's character kills six opponents whose airborne blood spray spells out " revenge " in Chinese , was specifically written to use CGI . RZA declined to subtitle the message for English audiences . The action scenes resulted in several injuries , and Bautista suffered raw and bleeding arms from RZA 's sandpaper @-@ like prop iron fists during their fight scene . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 RZA launched an 11 @-@ date music concert called " The Iron Fists Tour " to promote the film in association with Rock the Bells and Guerilla Union . It featured performances by members of Wu @-@ Tang Clan and other artists . The tour began on October 3 , 2012 , and visited several North American cities including New York City , Baltimore , Chicago , Los Angeles , and Las Vegas . An animated short film about the blacksmith 's journey to China and his first meeting with Brass Body , which RZA narrated , was released on October 20 , 2012 , as a prequel to the film . 16 heavily stylized posters , each by a different artist , were placed in outdoor locations in several North American cities and were designed to allow pedestrians to remove and keep them . 
 The marketing campaign sponsored the 2012 BET Hip Hop Awards , star Bautista 's debut mixed martial arts debut fight at Classic Entertainment and Sports : Real Pain in October 2012 , and the release of the video game Assassin 's Creed III . The film premiered in Los Angeles and New York City , and directly targeted minority demographics . RZA promoted the film at the Hispanic @-@ owned Martial Arts History Museum in Burbank , California and an original Spanish @-@ dub viral video was also released . RZA targeted African @-@ American audiences by promoting the film on rapper Snoop Dogg 's YouTube channel . An online awareness campaign included partnerships with Machinima Inc . , hip @-@ hop news site Global Grind , Ultimate Fighting Championship , IGN and Spotify . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film features music from The Black Keys , Kanye West , Wiz Khalifa , My Chemical Romance , John Frusciante and Chinese singer Sally Yeh . RZA also developed new tracks based on excerpts from Wu @-@ Tang Clan master tracks provided by Sony Music , and songs performed by William Bell , Isaac Hayes and Mable John , which Stax Records provided . Composer Howard Drossin wrote the original musical cues for the film . 
 RZA had not initially set out to score the film ; he inserted temporary tracks of songs he wanted to use . After watching the temporary @-@ track cut of the film , the music was found to be unsuitable , and it was suggested that RZA provide the music . RZA sought Tarantino 's help with the score after he helped Tarantino with the score for Kill Bill . Tarantino also suggested RZA entirely produce the score . RZA and Drossin developed and finalized the score . They then developed the film 's soundtrack , which was scheduled for release on October 23 , 2012 and features 15 songs from the film including original songs by Kanye West , the Wu @-@ Tang Clan , Talib Kweli , Ghostface Killah , Pusha T , Raekwon , and collaborations by RZA with The Black Keys and Flatbush Zombies . The character Jack Knife , who was influenced by rapper Ol ' Dirty Bastard , has a theme tune featuring a jaw harp cue reminiscent of the artist 's song " Shimmy Shimmy Ya . " The blacksmith is represented by cues from Isaac Hayes ' music . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Man with the Iron Fists premiered on October 25 , 2012 , at Mann 's Chinese 6 theater in Hollywood . David Bautista attended in a yellow spandex suit , which he wore as a tribute to Bruce Lee , who wore a similar outfit in Game of Death ( 1972 ) . The film was released in North America on November 2 , 2012 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Man with the Iron Fists grossed $ 15 @,@ 634 @,@ 090 from North America and $ 4 @,@ 621 @,@ 223 from markets elsewhere , for a worldwide total of approximately $ 20 @,@ 255 @,@ 313 . Pre @-@ release tracking in North America for the week before release estimated that the film would attract a mostly male audience and would earn between $ 7 million and $ 10 million during its opening weekend . The Man with the Iron Fists earned $ 3 million during its opening day , and during its opening weekend the film earned $ 7 @.@ 9 million from 1 @,@ 868 theaters – an average of $ 4 @,@ 235 per theater — finishing fourth behind holdover Argo ( $ 10 @.@ 2 million ) , and fellow new releases Flight ( $ 25 million ) and Wreck @-@ It Ralph ( $ 49 @.@ 1 million ) . The largest demographic of the opening weekend audience was under 30 ( 53 % ) and male ( 64 % ) . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received mixed reviews from critics . It has garnered a 49 % approval rating from 84 critics — an average rating of 5 @.@ 1 out of 10 — on the review @-@ aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , which said , " Messy kung @-@ fu homage The Man with the Iron Fists demonstrates a slavish affection for the genre it mimics , for better or worse . " Metacritic provides a score of 51 out of 100 from 18 critics , which indicates " mixed or average " reviews . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade moviegoers gave the film was " C + " on an A + to F scale . 
 Variety 's Andrew Barker called the film endearing and engagingly enthusiastic , and said it is " more fun than it ought to be " . Barker considered RZA 's on @-@ screen role to be too withdrawn to carry the central character role , but praised the supporting performances , especially those of Le 's crime lord and Crowe , who Barker said " <unk> goes for broke to an extent that viewers haven 't seen from him since , well ... ever . " Barker also praised the film 's score , but was critical of the script 's uneven tone . The New York Times 's Manohla Dargis called it an erratically enjoyable product of a deep cinephile passion for the martial arts genre . Dargis praised Crowe 's performance and Byron Mann 's " gaudy baddie with heavy @-@ metal hair and a psycho grin " , but considered RZA 's central role a mistake , saying " with his sleepy eyes and an affect so laid @-@ back ... [ he ] is too recessive a screen presence to make the character pop , much less hold your interest " . The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin credited RZA 's conceptualization of the " rich , bloody , dense universe he created down to the most insignificant details " , and praised RZA 's " powerful inner calm " and Crowe 's " defiantly theatrical turn " . 
 The Los Angeles Times ' Betsy Sharkey called it a martial @-@ arts spectacle that " may just be one of the best bad movies ever . " Sharkey said that some uneven performances and lack of refinement were the result of RZA 's lack of directing experience , but appreciated the choreography of the " extreme action " and the film 's visual aesthetic , which she described as " a blend of French Baroque and ancient China " . Sharkey said that the plot " goes seriously off @-@ course " when expanding on the Blacksmith 's history . The Hollywood Reporter 's Todd McCarthy said that the film is " sufficiently well done and amusing enough to satisfy the appetites of fans who mainline this sort of thing , " but considered that in directly acting as an homage to the genre , it lacked any stylistic inspiration or imaginative flair to reinvent it . McCarthy however praised the imaginative weapon designs , and the performances of Lucy Liu and Crowe . The Village Voice 's Nick Pinkerton said " the action scenes are often too cluttered for legibility , and , curious to say of a movie made by a musician , the film has broad swaths without tempo " , and added that it has a homemade charm that he found " curiously touching " . 
 USA Today 's Scott Bowles was critical of the film , awarding it 1 @.@ 5 stars out of 4 . He said that the film is " heavy on bloody kung fu action ... and light on just about everything else " , that it " doesn 't have enough tension to be taken seriously , or enough laughs to be taken lightly " , and called it " slick and hip " . Bowles wrote that the film has " beautifully choreographed moments , and the action sequences won 't disappoint any fans of slow @-@ motion fistfights and arteries that gush like fire hydrants " . Independent film critic Emanuel Levy wrote that Crowe 's " commanding performance " and his chemistry with Liu lift the film slightly above the routine . Levy said that the film is an " ultra @-@ violent movie that blends thrilling martial arts sequences , orchestrated and executed by some of the masters of this specific milieu , with a semi @-@ involving tale " that would be appreciated by a young , <unk> audience . Leonard Maltin of IndieWire said that " RZA 's understated performance isn 't bad , but his staging of action leaves something to be desired " , and that the film imitates earlier kung @-@ fu films , which it fails to improve upon . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Man with the Iron Fists was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray and digital download on February 12 , 2013 in North America . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray editions contain the theatrical release version of the film , an unrated cut containing approximately twelve minutes of additional footage , deleted scenes and three featurettes : " A Look Inside The Man with the Iron Fists " , " A Path to the East " , and " On the Set with RZA " . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel was announced by RZA in an interview with the title The Man with the Iron Fists : Sting of the Scorpion but revealed that he 's not directing the sequel , instead <unk> Reine will direct the film as RZA , Rick Yune , Zhu Zhu , Andrew Lin and Grace Huang will reprise their roles as the Blacksmith , X @-@ Blade , Chi Chi and The Gemini Twins , joining the cast are Dustin Nguyen , Cary Tagawa , Carl Ng and Simon Yin . The sequel was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on April 14 , 2015 . 
 = Delaware Route 34 = 
 Delaware Route 34 ( DE 34 ) , also known as Faulkland Road , is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from an intersection with unnumbered Duncan Road , just west of DE 41 , north of Prices Corner to DE 100 near Elsmere . Along the way , the route intersects DE 41 and DE 141 as it passes through suburban areas to the west of Wilmington . The road was paved in the 1930s and designated DE 34 in the 1970s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 34 begins at an intersection with Duncan Road north of Prices Corner and heads east on two @-@ lane undivided Faulkland Road through wooded areas and homes . The route intersects DE 41 before it crosses Red Clay Creek and the Wilmington and Western Railroad . The road continues east through suburban neighborhoods , crossing Centerville Road . Farther east , DE 34 runs through residential and commercial areas as it comes to an intersection with DE 141 . Past this junction , the route passes to the south of DuPont 's Chestnut Run Plaza research facility . DE 34 crosses an East Penn Railroad line and heads between two cemeteries before ending at DE 100 north of Elsmere , just west of the western city limit of Wilmington . 
 DE 34 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 10 @,@ 744 vehicles at the DE 100 intersection to a low of 3 @,@ 874 vehicles at the DE 41 intersection . None of DE 34 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now DE 34 originally existed as a county road by 1920 . By 1936 , the road was paved . DE 34 was designated between Duncan Road and DE 100 by 1976 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Greek ironclad Psara = 
 Psara ( Greek : Θ / Κ <unk> ) was a steel @-@ built ironclad warship named for one of the Aegean Sea islands that played a key role in the war at sea during the Greek War of Independence . The final vessel of the Hydra class , she was ordered in 1885 in response to a crisis in the Balkans and Ottoman naval expansion . The ship was launched in 1889 and delivered to Greece by 1902 . She was armed with a main battery of three 10 @.@ 8 in ( 270 mm ) guns and five 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) guns , and had a top speed of 17 kn ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . 
 Psara and her sisters saw extensive service with the Greek Navy . They participated in the Greco – Turkish War in 1897 until the Great Powers intervened and prevented the Greek Navy from capitalizing on their superiority over the Ottoman Navy . Psara saw action in the First Balkan War at the Naval Battle of Elli and was present at the Naval Battle of Lemnos , but was too slow to actively engage the Ottoman forces . She did not see action during World War I , and was reduced to a training ship for stokers after the end of the war . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1932 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In 1885 , Greece ordered three new ironclads of the Hydra class . Psara was ordered from the Société Nouvelle des Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée shipyard in Le Havre , France during the premiership of Charilaos Trikoupis . The ship , named for the island of Psara , was launched in 1890 , and by 1892 , she and her sister @-@ ships Spetsai and Hydra were delivered to the Greek fleet . The ship was 334 feet 8 inches ( 102 @.@ 01 m ) long between perpendiculars and had a beam of 51 ft 10 in ( 15 @.@ 80 m ) and a mean draft of 18 ft ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) . She displaced 4 @,@ 808 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 732 long tons ; 5 @,@ 300 short tons ) as built . She was powered by a pair of steam engines of unknown type ; they were rated at 6 @,@ 700 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 000 kW ) and provided a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . Coal storage amounted to 500 t ( 490 long tons ; 550 short tons ) . 
 Psara 's main battery consisted of three 10 @.@ 8 in ( 270 mm ) guns . Two guns were mounted forward in barbettes on either side of the forward superstructure ; these were L / 34 guns . The third gun , a L / 28 gun , was placed in a turret aft . The secondary battery consisted of four 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) L / 36 guns in casemates were mounted below the forward main battery , and a fifth 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch gun was placed on the centerline on the same deck as the main battery . A number of smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included four 3 @.@ 4 in ( 86 mm ) L / 22 guns , four 3 @-@ pounder guns , four 1 @-@ pounder guns , and six 1 @-@ pounder revolver cannons . The ship was also armed with three 14 in ( 360 mm ) torpedo tubes . The ship was armored with a mix of Creusot and compound steel . The main belt was 12 in ( 300 mm ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 14 in ( 360 mm ) of armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Psara saw limited action in the Greco – Turkish War in 1897 , as the Royal Hellenic Navy was unable to make use of its superiority over the Ottoman Navy . The Ottoman Navy had remained in port during the conflict , but a major naval intervention of the Great Powers prevented the Greeks from capitalizing on their superiority . The conflict was centered on the island of Crete , which was the object of an international naval demonstration in 1897 – 1898 ; the Great Powers mediated a solution to the conflict that saw Crete returned to Ottoman control , but with a Greek prince . In 1897 – 1900 , Psara and her sister @-@ ships were partially rearmed ; Psara was modified at the La Seyne shipyard . Their small @-@ caliber guns were replaced with one 3 @.@ 9 in ( 99 mm ) gun forward , eight 9 @-@ pounder guns , four 3 @-@ pounders , and ten 1 @-@ pounder revolver cannon . One of the 14 @-@ inch torpedo tubes was replaced with a 15 in ( 380 mm ) weapon . In 1908 – 1910 , the old 5 @.@ 9 in guns were replaced with new , longer L / 45 models . 
 The Balkan League , of which Greece was a member , declared war on the Ottoman Empire in October 1912 . Two months later , the Ottoman fleet attacked the Greek navy , in an attempt to disrupt the naval blockade surrounding the Dardanelles . The Ottoman fleet , which included Turgut Reis , Barbaros Hayreddin , the outdated ironclad battleships Mesudiye and Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik , nine destroyers , and six torpedo boats , sortied from the Dardanelles at 9 : 30 . The smaller ships remained at the mouth of the straits while the battleships sailed north , remaining near to the coast . The Greek flotilla , which included the armored cruiser Georgios Averof and Psara and her sisters , had been sailing from the island of Imbros to the patrol line outside the straits . When the Ottomans were sighted , the Greeks altered course to the northeast in order to block the advance of their opponents . In the ensuing Naval Battle of Elli , the Ottoman ships opened fire first , at 9 : 50 , from a range of about 15 @,@ 000 yards ; the Greeks returned fire ten minutes later , by which time the range had decreased significantly to 8 @,@ 500 yards . At 10 : 04 , the Ottoman ships completed a 16 @-@ point turn , which reversed their course , and steamed for the safety of the straits in a disorganized withdrawal . Within an hour , the routed Ottoman ships had withdrawn into the Dardanelles . 
 The Naval Battle of Lemnos resulted from an Ottoman plan to lure the faster Georgios Averof away from the Dardanelles . The protected cruiser Hamidiye evaded the Greek blockade and broke out into the Aegean sea ; the assumption was that the Greeks would dispatch Georgios Averof to hunt down Hamidiye . Despite the threat to Greek lines of communication posed by the cruiser , the Greek commander refused to detach Georgios Averof from her position . Georgios Averof appeared approximately 12 miles from Lemnos ; when the powerful Greek ship was spotted , the Ottomans turned to retreat with Georgios Averof in pursuit . She scored several hits on the fleeing Ottoman ships before breaking off the chase . Psara and her sisters were too slow to keep up with Georgios Averof , and played no part in the engagement . Since Georgios Averof was needed to keep the blockade , Psara and four destroyers were detached to hunt down Hamidiye . Psara was much slower than the Turkish cruiser , and had no real chance of catching her , and Hamidiye remained at large until the end of the war in May 1913 . 
 By 1914 , Psara had been withdrawn from active duty to serve as a training ship for engine room personnel . At the outbreak of World War I at the end of July 1914 , Greece 's pro @-@ German monarch , Constantine I , decided to remain neutral . The Entente powers landed troops in Salonika in 1915 , which was a source of tension between France and Greece . Ultimately , the French seized the Greek Navy on 19 October 1916 ; the heavy units of the Greek fleet were disarmed and placed in reserve for the remainder of the war . After the end of the war , Psara became a school for quartermasters and later a school for junior boys at Poros , until she was sold for scrap in 1932 . 
 = New Jersey Route 167 = 
 Route 167 is a short , 0 @.@ 77 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 24 km ) long unsigned state highway in Atlantic and Burlington Counties in New Jersey . The route is one of the few discontinuous state highways in New Jersey , split by wetlands , the Garden State Parkway and the Mullica River . Although the alignment is registered by the New Jersey Department of Transportation as 2 @.@ 76 miles ( 4 @.@ 44 km ) highway , the amount of roadway is considerably shorter . The route begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 9 in Port Republic , where it continues along Old New York Road to an end of roadway at the Parkway embankment . Across the Mullica River , Route 167 continues at a gate for wetlands , heading northward to an intersection with U.S. Route 9 in Bass River Township . 
 The route originated as part of New Jersey Route 4 during construction of a new state highway in 1917 . Route 4 was built northward to the current Route 167 northern terminus in 1926 , which was designated as part of U.S. Route 9 that year . The highway was 2 @.@ 64 miles ( 4 @.@ 25 km ) long along an iron truss bridge . The route remained intact until construction of the Garden State Parkway and a new bridge over the Mullica River in 1948 . When the bridge was finished , Route 9 was realigned off the roadway and the prior alignment became Route 167 during the New Jersey state highway renumbering . The route was split twice since 1953 , first by the removal of the old Mullica River bridge in 1962 as part of a sale to the National Park Service for a refuge in Virginia , then the northern portion was dismantled except for a 0 @.@ 12 miles ( 0 @.@ 19 km ) long alignment for a wetland mitigation project . Today , the route remains in half and the road is still maintained by the state . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 167 's southern terminus is located at an intersection with U.S. Route 9 ( New York Road ) in the city of Port Republic . The route then intersects with the original alignment of New York Road , now known today as Old New York Road . Route 167 crosses over a stream , intersecting with a privately maintained roadway soon after . The route approaches the Garden State Parkway , but ends at a gate just nearby . The purpose of the gate is to block off the roadway , which previously crossed underneath . 
 After a 1 @.@ 99 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 20 km ) gap in the roadway , which consists of a former bridge over the Mullica River dismantled and moved to Virginia and bridges removed for wetlands mitigation in the marshes just north , and the orphaned roads in between , which are visible from the Garden State Parkway to the west , Route 167 resurfaces in Bass River Township as a short dead @-@ end street only approximately 800 ft ( 0 @.@ 24 km ) long , serving only a few homes . The route intersects with Bogan Lane and comes to an end at an intersection with U.S. Route 9 . The route 's official speed limit , which is not signed , is 25 mph ( 30 km / h ) at its southern segment and 50 mph ( 70 km / h ) in its northern segment . However the Straight Line Diagrams produced by the Department of Transportation list both segments as 50 mph ( 70 km / h ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 167 originates as a part of New Jersey Route 4 from Absecon to Rahway , designated in the 1920s . The route remained intact for several years , receiving the co @-@ designation of U.S. Route 9 in 1926 , when the nationwide system was assigned . In 1927 , the New Jersey State Highway Department had a statewide state highway renumbering , extending Route 4 in both directions . The two routes remained intact until the construction of the Garden State Parkway 's tenth section from New Jersey Route 43 in Absecon to Dover Road in 1948 . That year , a bridge over the Mullica River for the Parkway , in which Routes 4 and 9 were realigned onto , was constructed , replacing the alignment over the old structure . During construction , Route 4 and Route 9 was realigned onto a temporary alignment to the older structure , <unk> the old one remained unnumbered . The bridge was finished in 1954 , and Route 9 was realigned onto the new bridge . ( Route 4 was truncated back to Bergen County during the 1953 state highway renumbering . ) 
 Upon the realignment of U.S. Route 9 , the State Highway Department renumbered the former alignment as Route 167 . The route , originally 55 feet ( 17 m ) wide , was shortened during the construction of the new alignments , which also involved taking homes and properties from the highway . The former portion became a gravel road upon completion in Port Republic . Route 167 now continued along the former alignment , using the iron truss bridge built in 1917 for Route 4 to the intersection with U.S. Route 9 in Bass River Township . The old iron truss bridge lasted several years after the realignment , lasting past 1960 . The truss bridge was dismantled in 1962 , and sold to the state of Virginia and the National Park Service for the National Wildlife Refuge . The route remained intact for a couple decades , with a gap in the highway . The State Highway Department registered the alignment of Route 167 in 1969 as 2 @.@ 64 miles ( 4 @.@ 25 km ) long , although there was a gap in the roadway . 
 The route 's northern half from the Mullica River , constructed in 1926 as part of Route 4 , was dismantled in 1984 for Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge . As of 2007 , Route 167 is unsigned , running from U.S. Route 9 in Port Republic to the bank of the Garden State Parkway at the Mullica River Bridge on its south side and from U.S. Route 9 to a gate on the north side . The straight line diagrams also mention the length of the roadway being 2 @.@ 76 miles ( 4 @.@ 44 km ) long , although only 0 @.@ 77 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 24 km ) is still roadway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Yamashita Yoshiaki = 
 Yamashita Yoshitsugu ( <unk> <unk> , 16 February 1865 – 26 October 1935 , also known as Yamashita Yoshiaki ) , was the first person to have been awarded 10th degree red belt ( <unk> ) rank in Kodokan judo . He was also a pioneer of judo in the United States . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Yamashita was born in Kanazawa , then the capital of the powerful Kaga Domain . His father was of the samurai class . As a boy , Yamashita trained in the traditional ( <unk> ) Japanese martial arts schools of Yōshin @-@ ryū and Tenjin Shin 'yō @-@ ryū jujutsu . In August 1884 , he joined the Kodokan judo dojo of Kano Jigoro ( <unk> <unk> Kanō Jigorō , 1860 – 1938 ) , as its nineteenth member . He advanced to first degree black belt ( <unk> ) rank in three months , fourth degree ( <unk> ) ranking in two years , and sixth degree ( <unk> ) in fourteen years . He was a member of the Kodokan team that competed with Tokyo Metropolitan Police jujutsu teams during the mid @-@ 1880s , and during the 1890s , his jobs included teaching judo at the Imperial Japanese Naval Academy and Tokyo Imperial University ( modern University of Tokyo ) . 
 = = The Four Guardians of Kōdōkan = = 
 When Kanō Jigorō began to develop judo from jiu @-@ jitsu , his efforts were met with fierce opposition from jiu @-@ jitsu practitioners . However , Kano drew a loyal following that included exceptional fighters . Hence the term " Four Guardians of Kōdōkan " came into existence , referring to Yamashita Yoshiaki along with <unk> Tomita , Yokoyama <unk> , and Saigō Shirō . 
 = = Introducing judo to America = = 
 In February 1902 , Seattle @-@ based railroad executive Samuel Hill decided that his 9 @-@ year @-@ old son , James Nathan , should learn judo , which he had apparently seen or heard about while on a business trip to Japan . In Hill 's words , the idea was for the boy to learn " the ideals of the Samurai class , for that class of men is a noble , high @-@ minded class . They look beyond the modern commercial spirit . " Hill spoke to a Japanese American business associate , Masajiro Furuya , for advice . Furuya referred Hill to Kazuyoshi Shibata , who was a student at Yale University . Shibata told Hill about Yamashita , and on 21 July 1903 , Hill wrote a letter to Yamashita , asking him to come to Seattle at Hill 's expense . On 26 August 1903 , Yamashita replied , writing that he , his wife , and one of his students ( Saburo Kawaguchi ) would leave for Seattle on 22 September 1903 . 
 The ship carrying the Yamashita party docked in Seattle on 8 October 1903 . A week later , on 17 October 1903 , Yamashita and Kawaguchi gave a judo exhibition at a Seattle theater that Hill had rented for the evening . Attendance was by invitation only , and guests included Sam Hill 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , Mary Hill ( wife of <unk> J.J. Hill ) , Senator Russell Alger , and assorted Sportswriters . Afterwards , Hill took the Yamashita party east to Washington , D.C. , where Mrs. Hill and young James Nathan were then living . Meanwhile , the favorable publicity surrounding the event caused Japanese Americans living in Seattle to start their own judo club , known as the Seattle Dojo . 
 Soon after arriving in the District of Columbia , Yamashita visited the Japanese Legation , and in March 1904 , the Japanese naval attaché , Commander Takeshita Isamu , took Yamashita to the White House to meet President Theodore Roosevelt . Roosevelt practiced wrestling and boxing while in the White House , and he had received jujutsu jackets from William Sturgis Bigelow and jujutsu lessons from J. J. O 'Brien , a Philadelphia police officer who had studied jujutsu while living in Nagasaki . Roosevelt was impressed with Yamashita 's skill , and during March and April 1904 , Yamashita gave judo lessons to the President and interested family and staff in a room at the White House . Subsequently , at other locations , Yamashita and his wife <unk> gave lessons to prominent American women , to include Martha Blow Wadsworth ( sister of Kindergarten pioneer Susan Blow ) , Hallie Elkins ( wife of Senator Stephen Benton Elkins ) , and Grace Davis Lee ( Hallie Elkins ' sister ) , and their children . 
 In January 1905 , Yamashita got a job teaching judo at the U.S. Naval Academy . There were about 25 students in his class , including a future admiral , Robert L. Ghormley . The position ended at the end of the school term , and Yamashita was not rehired for the following year . When President Roosevelt heard of this , he spoke to the Secretary of the Navy , who in turn told the Superintendent of the Naval Academy to rehire Yamashita . Consequently , Yamashita 's judo was taught at the Naval Academy throughout the first six months of 1906 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 At the end of the 1906 academic year , Yamashita left the United States for Japan . On 24 July 1906 , he participated in a conference in Kyoto that had been called for the purpose of standardizing judo forms ( kata ) that could be taught in Japanese public schools . 
 From the 1910s to the 1930s , Yamashita worked as a judo teacher at Tokyo Higher Normal School ( <unk> , Tōkyō Kōtō <unk> <unk> ) . In this capacity , he often attended judo tournaments and exhibitions . He also taught judo to the Tokyo Municipal Police . Thus , from September 1924 to April 1926 , Yamashita was part of a committee that developed a new kata for Japanese police . 
 An example of Yamashita 's teaching method is the advice : 
 Yamashita 's last major public appearance was probably the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the establishment of the Kodokan , an event which took place in November 1934 . British judoka Sarah Mayer described Yamashita 's participation as follows : 
 His ultimate promotion to 10th dan was posthumous . 
 = = Video footage = = 
 Koshiki no kata Yoshiaki Yamashita with Jigoro Kano 
 = Mladen Stojanović = 
 Mladen Stojanović ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ; 7 April 1896 – 1 April 1942 ) was a Bosnian Serb physician who led a detachment of Partisans on and around Mount Kozara in northwestern Bosnia during World War II in Yugoslavia . He was posthumously bestowed the Order of the People 's Hero . 
 At fifteen , Stojanović became an activist in a group of student organizations called Young Bosnia , which strongly opposed Austria @-@ Hungary 's occupation of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . In 1912 , Stojanović was inducted into Narodna Odbrana , an association founded in Serbia with the goal of organizing guerrilla resistance to Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina 's annexation by Austria @-@ Hungary . Stojanović was arrested by the Austro @-@ Hungarian authorities in July 1914 , and although he was sentenced to 16 years ' imprisonment , he was pardoned in 1917 . He graduated as a Doctor of Medicine after World War I , and in 1929 , opened a private practice in the town of Prijedor . In September 1940 , he became a member of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia ( KPJ ) . 
 Following the invasion of Yugoslavia by the Axis powers and their creation of the Independent State of Croatia , Stojanović was arrested at the behest of the Ustaše , Croatia 's fascist ruling party . He escaped prison and went to Kozara , where he joined fellow communists that had escaped from Prijedor . The KPJ chose Stojanović to lead the communist uprising in Prijedor . The uprising began on 30 July 1941 , although neither Stojanović nor any of the other communists had much control over it at this stage . The Serb villagers of the district seized control of a number of villages and threatened Prijedor , which was defended by the Germans , Ustaše , and Croatian Home Guards . In August 1941 , Stojanović was recognised as the principal leader of the Kozara insurgents , who were then organised into Partisan military units . Under Stojanović 's direction , the Kozara Partisans began attacking the fascists from the end of September 1941 . In early November 1941 , all Partisan units in Kozara were merged into the 2nd Krajina National Liberation Partisan Detachment , commanded by Stojanović . By the end of the year , most of Kozara — covering about 2 @,@ 500 square kilometres ( 970 sq mi ) — was controlled by Stojanović 's detachment . 
 On 30 December 1941 , Stojanović arrived in the Grmeč district , which was in the zone of responsibility of the 1st Krajina National Liberation Partisan Detachment . The Italian troops operating in that area portrayed themselves as protectors of the Serb people . Stojanović 's tasks was to counter such propaganda and mobilise the Partisans of the 1st Krajina Detachment to fight against the Italians . He stayed in the area until mid @-@ February 1942 , by which time the Partisan leadership of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina considered he had completed his tasks successfully . At the end of February 1942 , Stojanović was appointed chief of staff of the Operational Headquarters for Bosanska Krajina — a unified command of all Partisan forces in the regions of Bosanska Krajina and central Bosnia . The Operational Headquarters ' main task was to counter the rising influence of the Serb nationalist Chetniks in those regions . On 5 March 1942 , Stojanović was severely wounded in a Chetnik ambush . He was taken to a field hospital in the village of Jošavka . Members of the Jošavka Partisan Company defected to the Chetniks on the night of 31 March , and took Stojanović prisoner . The next night , a group of Chetniks killed him . In April 1942 , the 2nd Krajina Detachment was named " Mladen Stojanović " in his honour , and a few months later he was posthumously awarded the Order of the People 's Hero . After the war , his service to the Partisan cause was commemorated by the construction of a memorial in Prijedor , the naming of streets , public buildings and a park after him , in song and in film . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stojanović was the third child and the first son of Serbian Orthodox priest Simo Stojanović and his wife Jovanka . He was born in Prijedor on 7 April 1896 . Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina was then occupied by Austria @-@ Hungary ; Prijedor was located in Bosanska Krajina , the north @-@ western region of the province . Stojanović 's father was the third generation of his family to serve as a Serbian Orthodox priest . He had graduated from a theology faculty , becoming the first in the family to attain a higher level of education . Simo was active in the political struggle for ecclesiastical and educational autonomy for the Serbs in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . Mladen Stojanović 's maternal grandfather was a Serbian Orthodox priest from Dubica , Teodor <unk> ; he had participated in <unk> 's revolt against the Ottoman Empire . 
 Stojanović completed his elementary education at the Serbian Elementary School in Prijedor in 1906 . In 1907 , he finished the first grade of his secondary education at the gymnasium in Sarajevo , before he entered the gymnasium in Tuzla , where he would complete the remaining seven grades . His brother Sreten Stojanović — who would become a prominent sculptor — joined him at the Tuzla gymnasium in 1908 . 
 = = Young Bosnia activist = = 
 Austria @-@ Hungary annexed Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina on 6 October 1908 , which caused the Annexation Crisis in Europe . The Kingdom of Serbia protested and mobilised its army , but then on 31 March 1909 , it formally accepted the annexation . In 1911 , Mladen Stojanović became a member of the secret association of students of the Tuzla gymnasium called <unk> <unk> ( National Unity ) ; its members described it as a youth society of nationalists . It was one of a group of diverse student organisations later called Young Bosnia , which strongly opposed Austria @-@ Hungary 's rule over Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . The activists of Young Bosnia were Bosnian Serbs , Muslims , and Croats , though most were Serbs . The first organisation regarded to be part of this group was established in 1904 by Serb students of the Mostar gymnasium . 1905 saw considerable political unrest among the Serb and Croat students of the Tuzla gymnasium . Although the provincial government imposed the name " Bosnian " on the language of the province ( Serbo @-@ Croatian ) , the students demonstratively termed it as Serbian or Croatian depending on their ethnic affiliation . 
 Young Bosnia 's activists regarded literature as indispensable to revolution , and most of them wrote poems , short stories , or critiques . Stojanović wrote poems , and read the works of Petar Kočić , Aleksa Šantić , Vladislav Petković Dis , Sima <unk> , Milan Rakić , and later the works of Russian authors . In his final years at the gymnasium , he read Plato , Aristotle , Rousseau , Bakunin , Nietzsche , Jaurès , Le Bon , Ibsen , and Marinetti . National Unity held meetings at which its members presented lectures and discussed current issues concerning the Serbian people of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . All members of the association were Serbs . Generally , Stojanović 's lectures were about educating people on practical issues of health and the economy . During the summer break of 1911 , Stojanović travelled across Bosanska Krajina lecturing in villages . One of the aims of Young Bosnia was to eliminate the backwardness of their country . 
 In early @-@ to @-@ mid 1912 , Stojanović and his schoolmate Todor Ilić joined Narodna Odbrana ( National Defence ) , an association founded in Serbia in December 1908 on the initiative of Branislav Nušić . It aimed to organise a guerrilla resistance to the Austrian annexation of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , and to spread nationalist propaganda . National Defence soon established a network of local committees throughout Serbia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . Its members from the latter territory gathered intelligence on the Austrian army and passed it to the Serbian secret service . 
 Stojanović and Ilić travelled illegally to Serbia during the summer break of 1912 to receive military training that National Defence organised for its members . They stayed for several days in Belgrade , the capital of Serbia , where they met Gavrilo Princip , another activist of Young Bosnia who was also a member of National Defence . Stojanović and Ilić then spent a month at army barracks in <unk> in southern Serbia , undergoing military training under the command of Vojin Popović , a famous Chetnik guerrilla fighter . When they returned to school , they resumed their activities with National Unity . Its members decided that Muslims should also be drawn into the association . After Trifko Grabež was expelled from the Tuzla gymnasium for slapping a teacher during a quarrel , the association organised a school strike . Most of the students who participated were Serbs ; the strike gained little support among students of other ethnicities . The school took disciplinary measures against Ilić and Stojanović , who were regarded as the main organisers of the strike , and Ilić lost his scholarship . 
 In the autumn of 1913 , Stojanović commenced the final year of his secondary education . National Unity was visited that year by a group of activists of Young Bosnia who were university students in Prague , Vienna , and Switzerland . They held a series of lectures for the members of the association , explaining their views on the current political situation , and promoting the unity of South Slavic peoples in their struggle to liberate themselves from Austria @-@ Hungary . These lectures influenced Stojanović to adopt a <unk> stance . At the beginning of 1914 , Ilić and Stojanović became , respectively , the president and the vice @-@ president of National Unity , which numbered 34 members , including four Muslims and four Croats . At that time , National Unity was one of the most active groups of Young Bosnia . 
 According to Vid <unk> , who was a member of National Unity in 1914 , Stojanović was an ambitious and talented young man . He was determined that his voice would be heard and he liked being the centre of attention . He was severe to younger members of the association , whom he sometimes sharply criticised . Nevertheless , younger students liked being around him . <unk> described him as a tall and handsome man who greatly cared about his appearance ; he wore a bow tie and a broad @-@ brimmed hat . 
 On the morning of 28 June 1914 , in Sarajevo , Princip assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria — heir presumptive to the throne of Austria @-@ Hungary — and his wife Sophie . Princip was a member of a group of conspirators , which included Trifko Grabež ; the whole group was arrested by the Austrian police after the assassination . Blaming Serbia for the attack , Austria @-@ Hungary declared war a month later , initiating World War I. Shortly after the assassination , Stojanović wrote in his notebook a quote from Giuseppe Mazzini : " There is no more sacred thing in the world than the duty of a conspirator , who becomes an avenger of humanity and the apostle of permanent natural laws . " On 29 June , Stojanović took his final exams at the Tuzla gymnasium . Soon afterwards , he and Ilić wrote a draft of their manifesto to South Slavic youth , referring to Young Bosnia in a sentence : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> Југославије , да у <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> и да је <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> да <unk> <unk> Босна , да <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> је <unk> да <unk> . 
 Vojislav Vasiljević , a close friend of Princip 's , was a member of National Unity , and when the Austrian police searched his notebooks they found a list of members . Vasiljević kept this information as evidence of the payment of membership fees . All those on the list , including Stojanović , were arrested on 3 July 1914 . Soon after , Stojanović 's younger brother Sreten was arrested for anti @-@ Austrian revolutionary correspondence between himself and Ilić . Beside the conspirators behind the assassination , six groups of activists of Young Bosnia were arrested . The group containing the members of National Unity was called the Tuzla group . The criminal investigation against them began on 9 July , and lasted for more than a year . They were kept in prisons in Tuzla , Banja Luka , and Bihać . In the Banja Luka prison , they were all kept in the same room , enabling them to organise political and literary discussions . They issued a comic and satirical magazine , called " Mala paprika " ( Little Paprika ) , the copies of which they made using carbon paper . A number of copies found their way out of the prison . 
 In the Bihać prison , the Tuzla group created a literary magazine named " <unk> " ( Almanac ) . In its first and only issue , Mladen contributed several poems and an essay . Its editor @-@ in @-@ chief was Ilić , while Sreten Stojanović and Kosta <unk> contributed illustrations . The Stojanović brothers and Ilić learned French during their incarceration . The trial of the Tuzla group was held between 13 and 30 September 1915 in Bihać . Ilić was sentenced to death , Mladen to sixteen years ' imprisonment , and the other members of the group received sentences between ten months and fifteen years . Especially aggravating for Ilić and Mladen was their participation in the 1912 military training in Serbia . The Austrians became aware of this because their army temporarily took Loznica in western Serbia at the beginning of World War I , and there they found National Defence documents containing records of all Bosnians that attended the training . 
 Mladen and other members of the Tuzla group were sent to the prison in Zenica . Three months after they were sentenced they were joined by Ilić , whose death penalty had been commuted to 20 years ' imprisonment . In the Zenica prison , each convict had to spend the first three months in solitary confinement . This was very hard on Mladen , who became mentally unwell and became so emaciated that Ilić could hardly recognise him . He recovered and took a course in shoe @-@ making which was given in the prison . Afterwards , he fell seriously ill and had to undergo surgery in the prison hospital . In late 1917 , the Austrian authorities pardoned all convicts of the Tuzla group except Ilić . Mladen went to his family in Prijedor . After a medical examination , he was declared unfit for army service due to his surgery and as a result was not drafted into the Austrian army . He entered the School of Medicine , University of Zagreb , shortly before the disintegration of Austria @-@ Hungary in November 1918 . 
 = = Interwar period = = 
 The Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes — renamed Yugoslavia in 1929 — was created on 1 December 1918 , and incorporated Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . Stojanović continued studying medicine in Zagreb . As a former activist of Young Bosnia , he was offered a King 's scholarship but he refused it . In Zagreb , he reunited with his former schoolmate Nikola Nikolić , who had also been a member of National Unity . After his release from the Zenica prison , Nikolić was drafted into the Austrian army and sent to the Russian front where he surrendered to the Russians and participated in the October Revolution . Nikolić 's account of the revolution influenced Stojanović to adopt a more leftist stance . During this period , Stojanović 's favourite authors were Maksim Gorky and Miroslav Krleža . His professor of anatomy , Drago Perović , arranged for him to visit an anatomical institute in Vienna . Stojanović went there several times in 1921 and 1922 and befriended members of a leftist association of Yugoslav students at the Vienna University . When they held a protest against the king and government of Yugoslavia , Stojanović took part and delivered a speech . Behind the protest stood the Communist Party of Yugoslavia ( Komunistička partija Jugoslavije , KPJ ) . 
 Stojanović graduated as a Doctor of Medicine in 1926 , and he worked for two years as a trainee physician in Zagreb and Sarajevo . He then opened a private practice in <unk> on the Adriatic island of Brač . In 1929 , he returned to Prijedor , where he opened a practice on the first floor of the Stojanović family house , where his mother had lived alone since his father 's death in 1926 . Stojanović soon became a popular figure in Prijedor ; his patients said that simply talking with him was curative . He treated poor people for free ; he once sent a homeless man to a hospital in Zagreb and paid for his surgery . Stojanović earned well and had a good standard of living . People from other areas of Bosanska Krajina also went to him for medical treatment . In villages around Prijedor , where brawls were common , rowdies sang about him : 
 In 1931 , Stojanović was contracted to the Prijedor branch of the state railway company to provide healthcare for its employees . In 1936 , he was contracted to an iron ore mining company in Ljubija , a town near Prijedor , and would visit the mining company clinic twice a week . He also taught hygiene at the gymnasium in Prijedor . Together with other intellectuals from the town , he gave lectures to the miners at their club in Ljubija . His lectures were usually about medical issues , but he also described the economic and social position of workers in more advanced countries . He socialised with the miners and treated their family members for free . He was very active socially , and also participated in sports . In 1932 , he founded the tennis club of Prijedor , which continues to bear his name . Stojanović once bought new kit for all members of the Rudar Ljubija football club . His contracts with the railway company and the mining company were both terminated in 1939 . The railway employees protested in Prijedor , and Stojanović 's contract with that company was subsequently renewed . 
 The Ljubija miners were on strike between 2 August and 8 September 1940 . Some of the leaders of the strike were members of a secret KPJ cell in Ljubija , which was formed in January 1940 . The KPJ had been outlawed in Yugoslavia since 1921 . The KPJ organisation of Banja Luka sent its experienced member Branko Babič to help the strike leaders . According to Babič , a communist from Prijedor introduced him to Stojanović at the beginning of September 1940 . Babič stayed for several days at the doctor 's house , running the strike . Seeing Stojanović as a communist sympathiser , Babič proposed that he join the KPJ . Stojanović at first declined , saying that he still had bourgeois habits , though he had read much of the Marxist literature . After further conversations with Babič , Stojanović agreed to become a member of the party . 
 At the end of September 1940 , Babič and all five members of the Ljubija cell held a meeting at which they unanimously decided to admit Stojanović into the KPJ . Babič held him in high esteem and regarded him as ardently devoted to the communist cause . Some communists , however , continued to refer to Stojanović as a communist sympathiser , and some regarded him as a " salon communist " . 
 = = Onset of World War II = = 
 On 6 April 1941 , Yugoslavia was invaded from all sides by the Axis powers , led by German forces . Stojanović was assigned as a physician to an infantry battalion based in Banja Luka . For several days after the invasion this battalion moved toward Dalmatia , before it completely disintegrated without fighting the enemy , and Stojanović returned to Prijedor . The Royal Yugoslav Army capitulated on 17 April , and the Axis powers proceeded to dismember Yugoslavia . Almost all of modern @-@ day Croatia , all of modern @-@ day Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , and parts of modern @-@ day Serbia were combined into a puppet state called the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska , NDH ) . It was an " Italian @-@ German quasi @-@ protectorate " , which was controlled by the fascist Ustaše led by Ante Pavelić . One of its policies was to eliminate the ethnic Serb population of the NDH through mass killings , expulsions and forced assimilation , and many Serbs fled from the NDH to the German @-@ occupied territory of Serbia . 
 These repressive measures included taking prominent Serbs hostage against Serb attacks . To avoid being taken as a hostage , Stojanović paid 100 @,@ 000 dinars to the Ustaše in Prijedor . Resistance began to emerge in occupied Yugoslavia ; royalists and Serbian nationalists under the leadership of then @-@ Colonel Draža Mihailović founded the Ravna Gora Movement , whose members were called Chetniks . The KPJ , led by Josip Broz Tito , prepared to rise to arms at a favourable moment . In the view of the KPJ , the fight against the Axis and its domestic collaborators would be a common fight of all Yugoslav peoples . 
 Operation Barbarossa , the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union , began on 22 June 1941 . On the same day , the Ustaše began arresting communists and their known sympathisers in the towns of Bosanska Krajina , including Prijedor . The communists had predicted this , and most of them avoided capture by escaping to the villages or hiding in the towns . Stojanović was one of the few communists arrested in Prijedor . He was imprisoned with the Serb hostages on the second floor of a school in the town . They were subjected to forced labour , being led each morning through the town to repair the road to Kozarac . The column of hostages was usually headed by Stojanović carrying a shovel on his shoulder . The Croatian Home Guards guarding the prison treated him well . While detained , Stojanović lectured a group of hostages about Marxism . 
 On the day of the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union , the Executive Committee of the Communist International — headquartered in Moscow — telegraphed the Central Committee of the KPJ to take all measures to support and alleviate the struggle of the Soviet people , and to organise partisan detachments to fight the Axis in Yugoslavia . The Executive Committee also stressed that the fight , at the current stage , should not be about socialist revolution , but about the liberation from the Axis occupiers . In response to this appeal , the leaders of the KPJ decided on 4 July in Belgrade to launch a nationwide armed uprising , which began three days later in western Serbia . The members of the KPJ @-@ led forces were called Partisans , and their supreme commander was Tito . On 13 July , in Sarajevo , the KPJ Provincial Committee for Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina , headed by Svetozar Vukmanović , organised the province into military regions : Bosanska Krajina , Herzegovina , Tuzla , and Sarajevo . 
 The Prijedor communists were keen to rescue Stojanović from his imprisonment , but their attempts to bribe the Ustaše to release him failed . They also considered storming the school in which he was kept . On 17 July , just after midnight , Stojanović asked a guard to let him go to the toilet on the first floor of the school . The guard let him go and followed closely behind him . When they were halfway down the stairs , Stojanović shouted " Fire ! " as smoke came from a room on the second floor . During the commotion of the guards and hostages extinguishing the fire , Stojanović entered the toilet and escaped through the window . He went to the village of <unk> , several kilometres from Prijedor , where he was accompanied by Rade Bašić — a young communist who had earlier escaped from the town . Bašić escorted Stojanović toward Mount Kozara ( 978 m ( 3 @,@ 209 ft ) high ) , north of the Prijedor plain . 
 After Stojanović 's escape , the Ustaše arrested his wife , Mira . His son , Vojin , born in 1940 , was cared for by Mira 's former husband . Mira was released from prison after several months , and she and Vojin went to Dubrovnik . Stojanović 's brothers and sisters had lived in Belgrade since before the war . 
 = = Yugoslav Partisan = = 
 = = = Kozara area = = = 
 = = = = July – August 1941 = = = = 
 On the morning of 19 July 1941 , Stojanović and Bašić arrived at the camp of the communists and their sympathisers who escaped from Prijedor , situated at <unk> Kosa above the village of Malo <unk> . The news of Stojanović 's escape soon spread throughout the Prijedor district . The group , mostly in the early twenties , enjoyed an increase in their credibility and esteem since a well @-@ known and respected doctor had joined their camp . People from surrounding Serb villages brought food and other supplies to Stojanović and his young comrades . Stojanović gave speeches to the villagers , telling them to be prepared for an impending uprising and urging them to bring him rifles they were hiding in their homes . The camp at <unk> Kosa was the first Partisan camp in the Kozara area . 
 Kozara , located in northern Bosanska Krajina and centred around Mount Kozara , covers about 2 @,@ 500 square kilometres ( 970 square miles ) . In 1941 , the area had a population of nearly 200 @,@ 000 people . The villagers were mostly Serbs , and the towns in the area — the biggest of which was Prijedor — had a mixed Bosnian Muslim , Serb , and Croat population . Several villages were inhabited by ethnic Germans or Volksdeutsche . The economy of Kozara was dominated by agriculture , but there were about 6 @,@ 000 workers employed in a coal mine and several plants . The first communist cells in the area were established shortly before the Axis invasion , mostly in the towns . Kozara had seen four uprisings against the Ottomans during the 19th century . 
 On the night of 25 July 1941 , at <unk> , Stojanović and seven other leading communists of Kozara had a meeting with Đuro Pucar , the head of the KPJ Regional Committee for Bosanska Krajina . Pucar told the assembled communists that military actions against the enemy should start as soon as possible . The actions should be of a guerrilla type , for which purpose Partisan detachments should be formed . Stojanović and Osman Karabegović were appointed to lead the uprising in the Prijedor district . On 27 July , in western Bosanska Krajina , Partisans took the town of Drvar , marking the beginning of the uprising in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . At this stage , the insurgents in Kozara were still not organised into military units . In the district of Prijedor , Stojanović and Karabegović had little control over the men from the villages who took up arms . Pucar referred to the district 's insurgents as the " Prijedor Company " , the bulk of which were villagers , numbering several hundred men . Many of them had no firearms . 
 According to Pucar , the Prijedor Company was directed to attack Ljubija . On 30 July , contrary to Stojanović 's direct order , the insurgents attacked Veliko <unk> and rescued fifteen hostages held by the Ustaše . The insurgents then advanced toward Prijedor and developed a position facing the town , which was defended by Croatian Home Guards , Ustaše , and German forces . A front line stabilised after three days of fighting , leaving the Prijedor Company in control of seven villages . Railway traffic between Ljubija and Zagreb was disrupted , stopping the export of iron ore from Ljubija to Germany . The uprising in Kozara also involved the districts of Dubica and Novi . By mid @-@ August , five detachments of Partisans had been formed within the territory held by the Kozara insurgents . These detachments , including the Prijedor Detachment commanded by Stojanović , together held the front line facing Kozarac , Prijedor , <unk> , <unk> , Kostajnica , and Dubica . 
 The leaders of the uprising in Kozara met on 15 August 1941 in the village of <unk> . At the conference , Stojanović was recognised as the principal leader in Kozara ; this recognition mostly resulted from his pre @-@ war social status and good reputation among the people . It was concluded that forming a front line was a mistake because it was not consistent with guerrilla warfare . At some point during the conference , Stojanović stressed the importance of keeping as many enemy troops as possible in the area , so that they could not be sent to the Russian front to fight the Red Army . As the five detachments in the area were tied to their specific territories , it was decided that another detachment — which could operate anywhere in Kozara — should be formed . It was decided that Stojanović would command this new Kozara Detachment , and Karabegović would be the political commissar . It was promptly formed with about forty men . Carrying a red banner , the Kozara Detachment paraded for a couple of days through villages in the Partisan @-@ held territory . The villagers gathered and Stojanović delivered speeches . 
 Croatian Home Guards , Ustaše , and a German battalion from Banja Luka — about 10 @,@ 000 soldiers — attacked the Partisan @-@ held territory in Kozara on 18 August 1941 . The enemy troops broke through the Partisan front line and penetrated into the area . They burnt houses and looted cattle and grain in the villages . Some of the villagers became demoralised , and blamed the Partisans for their losses ; some placed white flags on their houses . The Partisan units retreated deeper into forested areas in the mountains . Stojanović led the Kozara Detachment toward Lisina , the highest peak of Kozara . In the evening , he assembled his men and told them that they were in the army of the KPJ and all peoples of Yugoslavia , so they could not allow themselves to be attached to any specific village or area . He advised those who could not detach themselves from their homes to lay down their weapons and leave . Several men left the detachment , which then moved toward Lisina where they organised a camp and spent some time in military training and political indoctrination . The attack of 18 August was the first counter @-@ insurgency operation in Kozara , and the Partisans emerged from it without significant losses . 
 = = = = September – December 1941 = = = = 
 The leaders of the Kozara uprising assembled again on 10 September 1941 , at the foot of Lisina . The five detachments of the Kozara Partisans were re @-@ arranged into three companies , possessing 217 rifles altogether . At the end of September , the Kozara Partisans began attacking NDH and German troops , initially targeting weaker elements . These operations gave them military experience and they also captured weapons and ammunition from the enemy . More men joined the Partisans , and two more companies had been formed in Kozara by the end of October . The Partisans gained control over a number of villages . After a reorganization , Partisan units in Kozara were merged into the 2nd Krajina National Liberation Partisan Detachment in early November 1941 . Stojanović was appointed commander of this detachment . By mid @-@ November , it consisted of 670 men organised in six companies and armed with 510 rifles , 5 light machine guns , and a heavy machine gun . 
 Between the end of September and the end of December 1941 , the Kozara Partisans conducted around forty military operations against the enemy . Stojanović helped plan and execute the major operations , including the battles of Podgradci , <unk> , and Turjak . Stojanović argued that the village of Podgradci should be captured because it was situated deep within Kozara , because the enemy could easily disrupt the Partisans ' advance toward other villages of the district of Gradiška , and because there was a sawmill in Podgradci which supplied the NDH and Germans . On 23 October 1941 , Partisans under Stojanović 's command took Podgradci after five hours of fighting . The sawmill and its stored products — including a large quantity of railroad ties , with which the Germans were allegedly planning to repair railways destroyed by Soviet partisans in occupied Ukraine — were burnt down . Stojanović saw this action as a symbolic collaboration with the Red Army . A number of Ustaše and Croatian Home Guards were captured in Podgradci . The Ustaše were promptly executed , and the Home Guards were given a speech by Stojanović before the Partisans gave them food and escorted them across the Una River . 
 The third counter @-@ insurgency operation in Kozara was undertaken at the end of November 1941 by about 19 @,@ 000 Croatian Home Guards , Ustaše , and Germans . The Partisans emerged from the operation without significant losses , though NDH propaganda claimed that the rebels in Kozara were destroyed and that Stojanović had been killed . The Kozara Partisans never repeated the mistake of frontal resistance . When stronger enemy forces advanced toward them , they manoeuvred to position themselves behind the attackers , thus avoiding battles they could not win . The Partisans therefore did not defend villages . During the third counter @-@ insurgency operation , the Ustaše and Germans killed hundreds of Serb civilians in the villages , resulting in a loss of support for the Partisans among the population . Stojanović thought that a significant victory over the enemy would be the best way to restore the lost support . 
 After the third counter @-@ insurgency operation , a battalion of the Croatian Home Guard was stationed on <unk> , a peak in Kozara . Stojanović ordered an attack by five companies of the 2nd Krajina Detachment on the battalion , which began on 5 December 1941 at 5 : 30 am . The battle ended by 9 : 30 am with a decisive victory to the Partisans . They lost five men , while 78 Home Guards were killed and around 200 were captured . The Partisans seized 155 rifles , 12 light and 6 heavy machine guns , 4 mortars , 120 mortar rounds , and 19 @,@ 000 rounds of small arms ammunition . The last action of the 2nd Krajina Detachment under Stojanović 's command was the battle of Turjak . Four companies of the detachment attacked and captured the village on 16 December 1941 , taking 134 Home Guards prisoner . Letters written by the Home Guards to their families revealed their extremely low morale . The capture of Turjak opened up the district of Gradiška to the Kozara Partisans . The Home Guards retreated from Podgradci without significant resistance . Soon , most of the district was under Partisan control and Stojanović 's detachment controlled most of Mount Kozara and the surrounding <unk> region . 
 More men joined Stojanović 's detachment , and at the end of 1941 it had over one thousand well @-@ armed soldiers organised in three battalions of three companies each . The detachment established good relations with the Muslim population of the area , with a number of Muslims from Kozarac joining the Partisans . On 21 December at Lisina , Pucar held a meeting with the communists of Kozara . At the meeting , Stojanović presented a short history of the uprising in Kozara . Pucar stated that the 2nd Krajina was the best @-@ organised detachment in Bosanska Krajina . 
 On 24 December , the Home Guard 's Banja Luka headquarters offered a reward for Stojanović . A Home Guard document described him as the most intelligent and dangerous rebel leader , who planned and carried out attacks in a highly systematic manner . The headquarters was especially concerned about Stojanović 's treatment of captured Home Guards : he would give them a communist propaganda speech , offer them food and cigarettes , dress their wounds , and let them go home . According to the headquarters , this treatment rendered these particular Home Guards useless in future operations against the Partisans . According to Drago <unk> , the courage and fighting spirit of the Kozara Partisans became famous in Bosanska Krajina , in other parts of Bosnia and in the areas of the NDH bordering on Bosnia . In the villages of Kozara , people sang about Stojanović : 
 = = = Grmeč area = = = 
 On 29 or 30 December 1941 , Stojanović arrived in the area of Grmeč in western Bosanska Krajina , which was in the zone of responsibility of the 1st Krajina National Liberation Partisan Detachment . This zone also included Drvar , where the uprising in Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina began . The military activities of the Partisans there diminished after the capture of Drvar by Italian troops on 25 September 1941 . In the Italians ' propaganda , they presented themselves as protectors of the Serbian people against the Ustaše . Groups of Serbs collaborated with the Italians . According to Karabegović , the Partisans of the 1st Krajina Detachment became more active after Pucar held a conference with their commanders on 15 December 1941 , but this activity was still weak in northern parts of Grmeč . Stojanović went there to counter the Italian propaganda and to mobilise the Partisans against the Italians and their collaborators ; he was accompanied by Karabegović . 
 According to the writer Branko Ćopić , who was a Partisan in Grmeč , Stojanović was greeted by a crowd of villagers and welcomed with the traditional bread and salt ceremony when he crossed the Sana River . Prominent villagers shook hands with him , and they compared him with Miloš Obilić — a famous Serbian epic hero from the medieval Battle of Kosovo . Several women approached Stojanović to kiss his hands ; he declined this mark of respect , saying that he was not a priest but a communist . 
 Stojanović visited the villages in the area , inspecting individual companies and platoons of the 1st Krajina Detachment . His visits were accompanied by parades of Partisan units and by mass gatherings . Partisan songs were sung , slogans were shouted , and banners were waved . Stojanović gave speeches to the villagers and soldiers . He said that the Italian troops in the area were not protectors of the Serbs , but occupiers and enemies . He branded those who collaborated with the Italians as traitors to the Serbian people . Stojanović 's speeches were not well received by some people , who spread rumours that he was not Mladen Stojanović , but a " Turk " ( Muslim ) impersonator . According to them , Stojanović had been killed by the Ustaše in August 1941 and the communists were using an impersonator to deceive the people . Few people gave credence to these rumours . 
 On 22 January 1942 , at the headquarters of the 1st Krajina Detachment in the village of <unk> Japra , Stojanović presided over a conference of the detachment staff and political activists of Grmeč . He criticised the detachment headquarters because it had no division of functions and there was no personal accountability among its members . He also stated the headquarters had no communication with the companies of the detachment , did not act as a military @-@ political leadership , and there were no designated couriers available at all times at the headquarters . Stojanović was generally pleased with the Grmeč Partisans , describing them as courageous , enthusiastic , firm , and trustworthy but somewhat inexperienced . However , he said that the platoons of the detachment were dispersed in villages and had no contact with each other . In this way , according to Stojanović , the Partisans were losing their soldierly characteristics and becoming more like peasants . Stojanović criticised the views of some Partisans that political commissars should be abolished . He warned that the Partisans who wore emblems other than the red star would be punished for indiscipline . 
 At the conference , Stojanović installed Milorad Mijatović — a Partisan from Kozara — as the new commander of the 1st Krajina and Petar Vojnović as deputy commander , while Velimir Stojnić and Salamon " Moni " Levi remained as commissar and deputy commissar , respectively . Levi was an acquaintance of Stojanović 's from his visits to Vienna in 1921 and 1922 . During his tour of Grmeč , Stojanović met the young writer Branko Ćopić , and encouraged him to write poetry about the fight of the Partisans . Stojanović said poetry was more acceptable for the Partisans than prose . " Poetry and revolution , " he remarked , " always go hand in hand . " He stayed in the area until mid @-@ February 1942 . The Partisan leadership of Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina considered that Stojanović had successfully countered the Italian propaganda and improved the condition of the 1st Krajina Detachment during his tour . 
 = = = North @-@ west central Bosnia = = = 
 Stojanović left Grmeč and went to Skender Vakuf in northwest central Bosnia to participate in the first regional conference of the KPJ in Bosanska Krajina , which was held from 21 to 23 February 1942 . In the Partisan territorial structure , the military @-@ political region of Bosanska Krajina included central Bosnia . At the Skender Vakuf conference , presided over by Pucar , Stojanović and Karabegović , the participants analysed the military and political situation in the region . The increase of Chetnik influence — which was strongest in southeastern Bosanska Krajina and northwest central Bosnia in the zones of responsibility of the 3rd and 4th Krajina Detachments — was a big problem for the KPJ . A number of Partisans of these detachments joined the Chetnik side . Only in Kozara had Chetnik influence been held at bay . At the conference , Stojanović was appointed to lead a unified command of Partisan forces in Bosanska Krajina , but on 24 February he was replaced with Kosta Nađ . The unified command was named the Operational Headquarters for Bosanska Krajina , and Stojanović became its chief of staff and deputy commander . 
 According to Nađ , the split between the Partisans and the Chetniks in Bosanska Krajina and central Bosnia began on 14 December 1941 in the village of <unk> . Lazar Tešanović , the schoolteacher in <unk> , influenced members of the local Partisan unit to join the Chetnik side . Tešanović then organised a Chetnik unit of about 70 to 80 men , and at the beginning of March 1942 he and his men were in the village of Lipovac . On 5 March , Stojanović , Nađ , and Danko Mitrov ( the commander of the 4th Krajina Detachment ) set out for Lipovac with the Kozara Proletarian Company , an assault unit formed in February 1942 . According to some sources , they went to Lipovac for pre @-@ arranged negotiations with Tešanović , while other sources state that they intended to disarm Tešanović and his Chetniks . When the column of the Partisans approached the school in Lipovac , they were ambushed by Chetniks , and Stojanović was severely wounded in the head . The Partisans remained pinned down by Chetnik fire until evening ; thirteen were killed and eight beside Stojanović were wounded . At nightfall , he and the other wounded were transported to the Partisan field hospital in Jošavka . 
 Stojanović was in the field hospital for about 10 days before he was moved to a house around 800 metres ( 870 yards ) away . At the end of March 1942 , the Operational Headquarters for Bosanska Krajina and the headquarters of the 4th Krajina Detachment were both located in Jošavka . The two headquarters and the field hospital were attacked on the night of 31 March by members of the Jošavka Partisan Company , who had joined the Chetnik side under the influence and leadership of Radoslav " Rade " Radić , the deputy commissar of the 4th Krajina Detachment . That night , the Chetniks killed 15 Partisans in Jošavka . According to Danica Perović , the physician who attended Stojanović , the Chetniks took his weapons and posted a sentry outside the house . Through a messenger , Radić told Stojanović to write a letter ordering Danko Mitrov to remove all Partisan units from the area around Jošavka . Stojanović , however , wrote a letter encouraging Mitrov to continue the Partisan fight . The next night , a group of Chetniks came to Stojanović , placed him on a blanket , and carried him out of the house . When they approached a nearby stream called <unk> Rijeka , one of them shot Stojanović twice , killing him . 
 On 2 April , local villagers buried Stojanović on a steep , wooded hillside . By the end of April 1942 , most of the companies of the 4th Krajina National Liberation Partisan Detachment had joined the Chetnik side or disintegrated . Rade Radić became the commander of the Chetnik detachments in Bosanska Krajina . After the war , Radić was sentenced to death by the Supreme Court of Yugoslavia ; he was executed by firing squad in 1945 . Stojanović 's remains were exhumed and reburied at Prijedor in November 1961 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On 19 April 1942 , the headquarters of the 2nd Krajina Detachment changed its name to the 2nd Krajina National Liberation Partisan Detachment " Mladen Stojanović " . The Kozara Partisans vowed to avenge Stojanović 's death on all the " enemies of the people " . The 2nd Krajina Detachment and four companies of the 1st Krajina Detachment liberated Prijedor on 16 May 1942 . On 7 August 1942 , the Partisans ' supreme headquarters proclaimed Stojanović a People 's Hero of Yugoslavia . 
 A monument to Stojanović was created by his brother Sreten after the war and erected in Prijedor . Streets , firms , schools , hospitals , pharmacies , and associations were named after Stojanović throughout socialist Yugoslavia , and songs were composed celebrating him as a hero . A Partisan film about him , titled Doktor Mladen , was released in Yugoslavia in 1975 . Stojanović was played by Ljuba Tadić , who received an award for his performance at the Pula Film Festival . 
 Each year in April , Stojanović is commemorated in Prijedor and wreaths are laid at his monument . At the 2012 commemoration , the president of the Partisan War Veterans ' Association of Republika Srpska declared : 
 Mladen je bio <unk> za <unk> , <unk> od <unk> <unk> pa do <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> na <unk> , <unk> i <unk> <unk> i <unk> od <unk> <unk> i <unk> <unk> <unk> . Zato je <unk> je lik <unk> da <unk> u <unk> <unk> sa <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Poetry = = 
 In his youth , Stojanović wrote poems , only one of which is published — in a 1918 issue of the literary magazine <unk> jug , whose editor was future Nobel Prize winner Ivo Andrić . For this poem , Stojanović was inspired by the Serbian epic hero <unk> <unk> . A number of Stojanović 's poems are preserved in a notebook that belonged to his closest school friend Todor Ilić . According to the poet Dragan Kolundžija , Stojanović 's poems are lyrical miniatures composed in free verse , focused on man and nature , and filled with melancholy . Kolundžija finds that what inspired Stojanović to write poetry is reflected in his verse <unk> je bol ( Pain is bloody ) . According to poet Miroslav Feldman , who first met Stojanović in 1919 in Zagreb , his poems were sad and permeated with a yearning for a brighter , more joyous life . 
 Stojanović wrote an essay , which is published as the foreword to a 1920 book of poetry by Feldman , titled <unk> <unk> ( Behind the Sun ) . In 1925 , Stojanović initiated the creation of an anthology of Yugoslav lyric poetry . On this project , he worked with Feldman and Gustav <unk> . The poets completed the anthology , but for an unknown reason it was never published . Stojanović 's poetic inclinations were manifested in his letters to his wife Mira Stojanović , especially when he writes about his patients : 
 I , <unk> se <unk> i <unk> <unk> snage i <unk> u <unk> <unk> ja <unk> da <unk> <unk> , <unk> me <unk> <unk> i ja <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ; <unk> <unk> i <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 = Harajuku Lovers Live = 
 Harajuku Lovers Live is the first live long @-@ form video by American recording artist Gwen Stefani . It was released on DVD on December 4 , 2006 , by Interscope Records . The DVD was directed by Sophie Muller and produced by Oil Factory Productions . It is a recording of one of Stefani 's concerts during her Harajuku Lovers Tour 2005 in late 2005 to promote her first album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby . , released in November 2004 . The performance was recorded in November 2005 , in Anaheim , California . The concert features performances of all twelve songs from Love . Angel . Music . Baby. and two new songs from her second studio album , The Sweet Escape , as well as interviews with the musicians and dancers and a documentary of tour preparation . 
 Harajuku Lovers Live was released in conjunction with the promotion for The Sweet Escape , which was also released on December 5 , 2006 . The DVD received mixed reviews , with reviewers praising Stefani 's musical performances and stage presence , but criticizing the lack of material and the long costume changes . The DVD was certified gold in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association and platinum in Canada by the Canadian Recording Industry Association . 
 = = Background = = 
 During her hiatus from the band No Doubt , Gwen Stefani recorded and released her first solo studio album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby. on November 23 , 2004 . Between September 2004 and January 2006 , Stefani released six of the album 's twelve tracks as singles : " What You Waiting For ? " , " Rich Girl " , " Hollaback Girl " , " Cool " , " Luxurious " and " Crash " . The album was a commercial success , selling seven million copies worldwide ; it was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , triple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry , five times platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association and four times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association . The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry certified Love . Angel . Music . Baby. platinum at the May 2005 Platinum Europe Awards . 
 Between October and December 2005 , Stefani toured North America in her Harajuku Lovers Tour 2005 to promote Love . Angel . Music . Baby . , performing 37 shows in the United States and five in Canada . Her opening acts included Ciara , M.I.A. and The Black Eyed Peas . Her performances received mixed reviews from critics , with criticism about her lack of musical material , frequent costume changes and perceived inability to dance , but praise for her stage presence and elaborate costumes . Stefani finished the recording of her second album , The Sweet Escape , in late 2006 , having recorded some of the material in 2005 , suspended the project due to pregnancy , and resumed recording in summer 2006 . 
 = = Content and release = = 
 Harajuku Lovers Live was released on December 5 , 2006 , the same day as the release of Stefani 's second album , The Sweet Escape . Both Harajuku Lovers Live and The Sweet Escape were released a day early in the UK , on December 4 , 2009 . The DVD carries a Parental Advisory sticker for profanity , although a clean version of the DVD is also available . The cover image of Stefani sitting in a throne imitates the cover image of Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ; both images were photographed by Nick Knight . It was directed by Sophie Muller , who has also produced music videos for Stefani 's singles " Cool " , " Luxurious " and " Crash " from Love . Angel . Music . Baby. and would later produce music videos for " Wind It Up " , " 4 in the Morning " and " Early Winter " from The Sweet Escape . The DVD was produced by Oil Factory Productions . 
 The DVD contains a recording of one of the concerts in Stefani 's " Harajuku Lovers Tour 2005 " . The concert was performed in late November 2005 in the Honda Centre in Anaheim , California , where Gwen Stefani was raised . The concert 's set list includes all twelve of the songs from Love . Angel . Music . Baby . , plus two new tracks , " Wind It Up " and " Orange County Girl " , from The Sweet Escape . " Wind It Up " and " Orange County Girl " were two of the four songs written and recorded in summer 2005 by Stefani during her sessions with Pharrell Williams and had been previewed at the finale of New York 's Olympus Fashion Week for the 2006 collection of Stefani 's line of clothing , L.A.M.B , in September 2005 . " Wind It Up " was later released as the lead single from The Sweet Escape . 
 The DVD includes extra features : a " Countdown to Tour " documentary of behind @-@ the @-@ scenes preparation footage with Stefani , a series of interviews with Stefani 's five band members and eight dancers ( including the four Harajuku Girls ) called " Meet the Band and Dancers " , a photo gallery of images from the concert and a video of an alternative performance of the song " The Real Thing " , called " The Real Thing Camera Remix " . " Countdown to Tour " was described by one reviewer as " boring " , but by another as " fascinating for anyone interested in how massive stadium tours develop " , praising how Stefani " shares how she works her strengths " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales and accreditations = = = 
 The DVD was certified gold in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association , indicating sales of at least 7 @,@ 500 copies ; and platinum in Canada by the Canadian Recording Industry Association , indicating sales of over 10 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Chart Attack reviewer Jodi Goulart gave Harajuku Lovers Live two out of five stars , criticising the DVD for being " no frills " and an " essentially word @-@ for @-@ word , dance @-@ move @-@ for @-@ dance @-@ move " copy of a performance fans saw a year earlier . Goulart comments that " concert experience doesn 't translate well " , notes the long gaps for costume changes and calls the extra features " boring " . Shawn Revelle , in the Mid @-@ Atlantic Edition of EXP magazine , gave Harajuku Lovers Live four stars , describing the DVD as " spectacular " and Stefani 's performance as " energetic " . He complimented the performances of " Rich Girl " , " Long Way to Go " and " Hollaback Girl " , calling them " <unk> " and the " highlights " of the DVD . 
 Manchester Evening News reviewer Glenn Meads gave the DVD three out of five stars and compared Stefani to Madonna . Meads described the show as " stunning " and " polished to perfection " , praising Stefani for " [ involving ] the audience on every level " and " [ bringing ] an assertiveness back to pop music " . He compliments the performances of the songs " What You Waiting For ? " , " Crash " , " Hollaback Girl " and " The Real Thing " , calling the former the " strongest " of all the songs and its performance " infectious " . However , he criticised Stefani 's wide variety of musical styles and the long gaps between songs needed for costume changes . DJ <unk> Benji of the San Francisco Bay Times reviewed the DVD , calling it a " wet @-@ dream to any Gwen fan " and describing Stefani as " a fashion icon , a blond threat and visionary artist " and her music as " delicious dance " and full of " pop insta @-@ classics " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Bonus content = = = 
 " Meet the Band and Dancers " 
 Photo gallery 
 " Countdown to Tour " documentary 
 " The Real Thing " camera remix 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Gwen Stefani – vocals 
 Gail Ann Dorsey , Warren Fitzgerald , Gabrial McNair , Kristopher Pooley – backing vocals 
 Zachary Alford – drums 
 Gail Ann Dorsey , Warren Fitzgerald – guitar 
 Gabrial McNair , Kristopher Pooley – keyboard 
 Director – Sophie Muller 
 Producer – Oil Factory Productions 
 Programming – Kristopher Pooley 
 Cover image – Nick Knight 
 Back cover – Pete Black 
 = Kiss & Cry ( song ) = 
 " Kiss & Cry " is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Hikaru Utada for her seventh studio and fifth Japanese album , Heart Station ( 2007 ) . It was written , composed , and arranged by Utada , whilst production was handled by Utada , her father Teruzane Utada , and Akira Miyake . The single premiered on May 31 , 2007 as the third single from the album in Japan . It was re @-@ released as a double A @-@ side single with " Beautiful World " , which also appeared on the parent album on August 29 in Japan , and digitally worldwide . Musically , " Kiss & Cry " is an R & B song , influenced by pop and hip @-@ hop music . Lyrically , it discusses both Utada 's upbringing and social beliefs between both Western and oriental regions . 
 Upon its release , the track garnered generally favorable reviews from music critics . Many critics agreed that it was one of the better singles from the album , and complimented its R & B composition . Charting as an A @-@ side single , it achieved success in Japan , peaking at number two on the Oricon Singles Chart . The single has been certified within four different categories by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) . An accompanying music video was shot by Toshitaka Shinoda ; it features animation in the style of Nissin 's Freedom Project , including major characters such as the protagonist Takeru lip @-@ synching to the song . The song had been promoted through several Japanese commercials and television shows . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 On April 23 , 2007 , American website Jame World confirmed the release of a new single , entitled " Kiss & Cry " . The song 's original working title was " Dancing Leah " , which is a reference to Filipina American model Leah <unk> . It was written , composed , and arranged by Utada , whilst production was handled by Utada , her father Teruzane Utada , and Akira Miyake . For the song , Hikaru had played the keyboards and synthesizers , and provided backing vocals . It was originally recorded for her studio album Ultra Blue by Atsushi Matsui at Bunkamura Studios and EMI Music Japan Studios , Shibuya , Tokyo in 2007 , but the idea was scrapped for unknown reasons . The finished composition was then mastered by American music engineer Ted Jensen at Sterling Studios , New York City , New York . The single also included the A @-@ side track " Beautiful World " , which also appeared on Utada 's seventh studio and fifth Japanese album , Heart Station ( 2007 ) . 
 It premiered as a promotional single on April 20 , 2007 , and debuted on Japanese radio on May 21 . It was served as the third single from the album on May 31 . Both singles were then released as a physical single on August 29 in Japan , and digitally worldwide . The CD single contains both " Beautiful World " and " Kiss & Cry " , plus their instrumental versions . It also contains a remixed version of Utada 's 1999 cover version of the 1954 Kaye Ballard song , " Fly Me to the Moon ( In Other Words ) " ; its instrumental version was also included on the CD format . Utada 's 1999 cover was originally included on her single " Wait & See ( Risk ) " . The artwork to " Kiss & Cry " features Utada sitting on a ledge at the bottom of a concrete garage building , while motion @-@ blurred school children walk past her . The CD features an extra lyric booklet , printed on plain white paper . The song was used as the theme song for the Nissin Cup Noodles product , which was released in Japan . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , " Kiss & Cry " is an R & B song , influenced by pop and electronic music . According to the sheet music published at <unk> @-@ <unk> , the song is written in the key of F minor . During the first and second verse and pre @-@ chorus , the song follows a key sequence of F minor . Through the first , second and third chorus , the song has a sequence of A # m7 – D # m7 – E – D # m7 . During the bridge section , the key sequence changes to A # m7 – C7 – F minor . It opens with a percussion section that includes a drum machine and cymbals ; it then carries on with Palm Products GmbH synthesizers and keyboards , as described by a member at Selective Hearing . In an interview with MSN Hotmail in 2008 , Utada said about the song ; " I wanted to write quite a lively song and after writing it , I still feel that this has the most energetic feeling to it and that it ’ s probably the most polished song too . " She personally enjoyed the end result of the song , as she described the arrangement and lyrical content , and cited it one of her favorite songs form the album . A reviewer from Selective Hearing said that the song " sound [ s ] like throw backs to her R & B days . " The editor analyzed the song 's music structure , and said that the " sample at the beginning sounds like it might be from a Godzilla movie . " 
 John Alroy and David Bertrand Wilson , American music editors writing from their own website , compared the production and composition to the work of Utada 's studio album Ultra Blue ( 2006 ) ; they labeled it " blissful formlessness " . Amanda <unk> from Audrey Magazine felt that , while the song had a " danceable beat " , " it ’ s not exactly club material . " CD Journal staff members noted elements of hip hop music , and identified instrumentation of horns , keyboards and a drum machine . She described the lyrical content as a tie between both her " Western and oriental beliefs " , and believed that people surrounded by Western culture tend to " follow their destiny " , whilst people growing up around Asian culture believe that destiny is " pre @-@ determined " . CD Journal staff members felt the lyrical delivery expressed both " joy " and " sorrow " topics . The title also references the ice skating area of the same name , where " Kiss " expresses " joy " , and " cry " expresses " sorrow " . The second chorus of the single 's lyrics references the Nissin Noodle product ( " Tonight I 'll have Nissin Cup Noodle " ) . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Kiss & Cry " received positive reviews from music critics . A reviewer from Selective Hearing was positive in their review , labeling it a " very catchy track " . They also selected it as one of the best track on the album . CD Journal reviewers noted the song 's " surprising introduction " , and described the song as an " impressive R & B tune with a heavy beat " . Tomoyuki Mori from Amazon was positive in his review , complimenting Utada 's songwriting and production . He also praised the " gorgeous atmospheric " composition , and labelled it " charming " . Tetsuo Hiraga from Hot Express described the song as " fun " , and highlighted its composition as a strong factor to its overall delivery . However , Daniel Robson , who wrote for The Japan Times , felt its inclusion into Heart Station was disappointing as he quoted , " [ After opening track " Fight the Blues " ] it ’ s followed by a run of five previous singles and a short , dull interlude track , which just feels so lazy . " He felt the inclusion , alongside other singles , made him question the value of the overall album . 
 " Kiss & Cry " has achieved several accolades from several different publications and organisations . Amanda <unk> from Audrey Magazine ranked the song at number four on her " Top 5 Hikaru Utada Songs " , praising the composition and " danceable beat " . In December 2015 , in honor of Utada 's comeback into the music business , Japanese website Goo.ne.jp hosted a poll for fans to rank their favorite songs by Utada out of 25 positions ; the poll was held in only twenty @-@ four hours , and thousands submitted their votes . As a result , " Kiss & Cry " was ranked at number 24 . In October 2007 , Utada became the highest selling digital artist in Japan , based on the sales of " Kiss & Cry " , and two other album singles " Flavor of Life " and " Beautiful World " ; she sold over 10 million digital units according to Listen Japan . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Charting together as an A @-@ side single , " Beautiful World " and " Kiss & Cry " debuted at number three on Japan 's Oricon Singles Chart on the chart week of September 10 , 2007 ; it sold 93 @,@ 518 units in its first week of sales . The following week , it rose to its peak position of number two ; it sold 51 @,@ 637 units . It stayed in the top ten for two more weeks , until it fell to number 12 on June 1 . It stayed in the top 40 for eight weeks , and charted at number 100 during the two week New Years entries ; it sold 1 @,@ 689 for its two week accumulation of sales . In total , the A @-@ side singles stayed in the Top 200 chart for 26 weeks , one of her longest charting singles according to Oricon . By the end of 2007 , the single was ranked at number 20 on Oricon 's Annual 2007 chart ; it sold 230 @,@ 287 units by the end of the year . This became Utada 's second highest entry in that annual chart , behind " Flavor of Life " at number two , and both entries made her the highest selling female artist . As of April 2016 , the A @-@ side single has sold 245 @,@ 050 units in Japan , and is her 18th best selling single according to Oricon Database . 
 The single was certified platinum in September 2007 by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 250 @,@ 000 units in Japan . Although it failed to chart on any digital charts in Japan , or on Billboard 's Japan Hot 100 and competent charts , the song was certified gold by the RIAJ for digital sales of 100 @,@ 000 units . " Kiss & Cry " charted at number 11 on the RIAJ Reco @-@ kyō Singles Chart , during the chart week of October 20 , 2007 . It then received a double platinum certification in November 2007 by the RIAJ for ringtone downloads from Chaku @-@ Uta stores , exceeding sales of 500 @,@ 000 units . The song received a gold certification by the RIAJ for full ringtone purchases of 100 @,@ 000 units , and tallied the overall sales of the single to 935 @,@ 000 units in Japan . 
 = = Music video and promotion = = 
 An animated music video was produced for the song , directed by Toshitaka Shinoda . It was unveiled on August 2 , 2007 , when it was uploaded to Utada 's EMI Music Japan website . The video featured animation in the style of Nissin 's Freedom OVA and commercials , including major characters such as the protagonist Takeru lip @-@ synching to the song . The project was a joint collaboration for the Freedom project and Nissin Cup Noodle as a celebration of their 35th year anniversary . The music video received negative reviews from critics . A review from <unk> Realms criticized the production of the video , stating " The so called ' rough cut ' was a grotesquely put together , random collection of footages lifted from the Freedom series , with lip movement from the characters eerily synced to Utada ’ s vocals ... " For promotional activities , Utada performed the song live on Japanese music television series Music Station on August 31 , 2007 . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the Heart Station album . 
 Recording and management 
 Recorded by Atsushi Matsui at Bunkamura Studios and EMI Music Japan Studios , Shibuya , Tokyo , 2007 . 
 Credits 
 Hikaru Utada – arrangement , keyboards , programming , production , songwriting , vocals 
 Goetz B. for 365 Artists – mixing 
 Atsushi Matsui – recording 
 Akira Miyake – production 
 Yuzuru Tomita – additional programming 
 Ted Jensen – engineer 
 Teruzane Utada – production 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Constance of Antioch = 
 Constance of Antioch ( 1128 – 1163 ) was the ruling Princess of Antioch from 1130 to 1163 . She was the only child of Bohemond II of Antioch by his wife , Alice of Jerusalem . Constance succeeded her father , who fell in battle , at the age of two , although his cousin , Roger II of Sicily , laid claim to Antioch . Her mother assumed the regency , but the Antiochene noblemen replaced her with her father ( Constance 's grandfather ) , Baldwin II of Jerusalem . After he died in 1131 , Alice again tried to take control of the government , but the Antiochene barons acknowledged the right of her brother @-@ in @-@ law , Fulk of Anjou , to rule as regent for Constance . 
 Constance was given in marriage to Raymond of Poitiers in 1136 . During the subsequent years , Raymond ruled Antioch while Constance gave birth to four children . After Raymond was murdered after a battle in 1149 , Fulk of Anjou 's son , Baldwin III of Jerusalem , assumed the regency . He tried to persuade Constance to remarry , but she did not accept his candidates . She also refused to marry a middle @-@ aged relative of the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I <unk> . Finally , she found a love interest and was married to Raynald of Châtillon , a knight from France , in 1153 . 
 After her second husband fell into captivity around 1160 – 1161 , Constance wanted to rule Antioch alone , but Baldwin III of Jerusalem declared her fifteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Bohemond III , the lawful prince . Constance disregarded this declaration and took control of the administration of the principality with the assistance of Emperor Manuel . Constance was dethroned in favor of her son shortly before her death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Constance who was born in 1128 was the only child of Bohemond II of Antioch and Alice of Jerusalem . Her mother , Alice , was the second daughter of Baldwin II of Jerusalem . Bohemond was killed in a battle at the Ceyhan River in February 1130 . After his death , Alice assumed the regency for Constance . According to rumors spreading in Antioch , Alice was planning to send Constance to a monastery or to marry her off to a commoner . Bohemond 's cousin , Roger II of Sicily , regarded himself as Bohemond 's lawful successor because he was the senior member of the House of Hauteville . 
 The Antiochene noblemen sent envoys to Baldwin II , urging him to come to the principality . Alice decided to resist and sought assistance from Imad ad @-@ Din Zengi , Atabeg of Aleppo . However , Baldwin II 's soldiers , who had meanwhile reached Antioch , captured Alice 's envoy . Before long , Alice was forced to beg for mercy from her father . He removed Alice from the regency , ordering her to leave Antioch . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 The Antiochene noblemen acknowledged Baldwin II as regent , swearing fealty to him and Constance . He made Joscelin I , Count of Edessa , her guardian to rule the principality until her marriage . Baldwin II died on August 21 , 1131 , and Joscelin I died a week later . 
 Alice again laid claim to the regency . However , most Antiochene lords remained hostile to the idea of a female ruler and sent envoys to Baldwin II 's successor , Fulk of Anjou , who was Alice 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . Alice made an alliance with Joscelin II , Count of Edessa , and Pons , Count of Tripoli , in early 1132 . Fulk had to travel to Antioch by sea , because Pons did not allow him to march through the County of Tripoli . Fulk landed at St. Symeon where the Antiochene barons acknowledged him as regent . He appointed Reynald <unk> , Constable of Antioch , to administer the principality . 
 Fulk returned to Antioch when Zengi dispatched <unk> , governor of Aleppo , to invade the principality in 1132 or 1133 . After defeating the invaders , Fulk entered Antioch . Since the principality needed a firm government , the Antiochene noblemen approached Fulk to select a husband for Constance . He chose Raymond of Poitiers , the younger son of William IX , Duke of Aquitaine . He did not announce his decision in public because he wanted to prevent Alice and Roger II of Sicily from intervening . 
 Alice 's sister , Melisende , Fulk 's wife , persuaded Fulk to allow Alice to return to Antioch in 1135 . Alice wanted to tighten the relationship of the principality and the Byzantine Empire ; therefore , she offered Constance 's hand to Manuel , a son of the Byzantine Emperor , John II Komnenos . To prevent the Byzantine marriage , Fulk sent his envoy France to Raymond of Poitiers to urge him to come to Antioch , which he did , traveling in disguise , because Roger II of Sicily wanted to capture him in southern Italy . 
 = = = First marriage = = = 
 Raymond of Poitiers arrived at Antioch in April 1136 . Ralph of Domfront , Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem , made Alice believe that Raymond came to Antioch to marry her instead of her nine @-@ year @-@ old daughter . However , Constance was kidnapped from the palace , and Ralph of Domfront blessed her marriage to Raymond in the cathedral . With the marriage , Raymond became the ruler of the principality , and Alice retired to <unk> . 
 In early 1147 Roger II of Sicily extended an offer to Louis VII of France to transport the French crusaders to the Holy Land during the Second Crusade . Fearing that Roger only wanted to assert his claim to Antioch , Louis VII and his wife Eleanor of Aquitaine ( niece of Raymond of Poitiers ) declined . Louis and his crusaders came to the principality in March 1148 . Before long , rumors spread among the crusaders about a love affair between Raymond and Eleanor . The crusaders tried to convince her husband to launch a campaign against Aleppo , the capital of Nur ad @-@ Din , but Louis VII decided to leave Antioch to Jerusalem , forcing Eleanor to accompany him . 
 = = = Widowhood = = = 
 Raymond was killed in the Battle of Inab during an expedition against Nur ad @-@ Din Zangi on June 29 , 1149 . Since Raymond and Constance 's four children were still underage , there was no one to " perform the duties of a prince and raise the people from despair " , according to William of Tyre . Nur ad @-@ Din invaded the principality and seized all Antiochene territories to the east of the Orontes River . Aimery of Limoges , Latin Patriarch of Antioch , directed the defense , but most noblemen preferred a secular ruler . After learning of Raymond 's fate , Constance 's cousin , Baldwin III of Jerusalem , hurried to Antioch and assumed the regency . He also concluded a truce with Nur ad @-@ Din . 
 Baldwin III returned to Antioch in summer 1150 . He wanted to persuade Constance to remarry , proposing three candidates ( Yves , Count of Soissons , Walter of Saint Omer , and Ralph of Merle ) , but she declined . Urged by Baldwin III , Constance went to Tripoli in early 1152 to meet him and her two aunts , Melisende and Hodierna . The two ladies tried to persuade Constance to choose among the three candidates , but she returned to Antioch without making a promise to remarry . According to William of Tyre , Patriarch Aimery convinced Constance to resist , because he wanted to control the government of the principality . The Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos sent his widowed brother @-@ in @-@ law , the middle @-@ aged John <unk> Dalassenos , to Antioch to marry Constance . However , because of his age , she " regarded him with displeasure " , according to the contemporaneous John Kinnamos , and refused to marry him . 
 Historian Steven Runciman says that Constance may have refused the candidates proposed by Baldwin III and Manuel I because she had met Raynald of Châtillon , a knight from France . Even though William of Tyre described Raynald as a " knight of common sort " , Constance decided to marry Raynald . Their betrothal was kept secret because Constance wanted to obtain Baldwin III 's permission for the marriage . 
 = = = Second marriage = = = 
 After Baldwin sanctioned the marriage , Constance and Raynald married in early 1153 . Raynald took charge of the administration of the principality . However , he was unpopular because his subjects regarded him as an upstart . His frequent attempts to raise funds brought him into conflict with Patriarch Aimery and Emperor Manuel I during the subsequent years . The emperor forced Raynald to pay homage to him in the spring of 1159 . Raynald was captured and imprisoned by Majd al @-@ Din , governor of Aleppo , during a plundering raid in November of 1160 or 1161 . 
 After her husband fell into captivity , Constance announced her intention to administer the principality , but most Antiochene noblemen preferred a male ruler . Baldwin III of Jerusalem hurried to Antioch and declared Constance 's fifteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Bohemond III , the lawful prince , charging Patriarch Aimery with the administration of the principality . Constance did not accept Baldwin 's decision and protested against it to Emperor Manuel . 
 Manuel dispatched his nephew , Alexios Bryennios Komnenos , and John Kamateros to Antioch to begin negotiations about his marriage to Constance 's daughter , Maria . The marriage contract was signed and the emperor 's delegates confirmed Constance 's position as the ruler of the principality . Baldwin III , who came to Antioch to meet the imperial envoys , did not protest . 
 Constance 's son , Bohemond , reached the age of majority in 1163 . To strengthen her position against her son , Constance sought assistance from Constantine Kalamanos , Byzantine governor of Cilicia . However , the Antiochene barons made an alliance with Thoros II of Cilician Armenia and forced her to leave Antioch . After Constance 's removal , Bohemond III took control of the principality . Before long , Constance died , probably in <unk> or <unk> , according to Steven Runciman . 
 = = Family = = 
 Constance 's first husband , Raymond of Poitiers , was the second son of William IX , Duke of Aquitaine and his second wife , Philippa of Toulouse . He was born in 1114 . According to William of Tyre , Constance was left with " two sons and as many daughters still underage " when her husband died in 1149 . Their elder son , Bohemond , was five at the time of Raymond 's death . He seized Antioch from his mother in 1163 . Constance and Raymond 's eldest daughter , Maria , who was born in the late 1140s , was famed for her beauty . She married the Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos in the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople on Christmas Day 1161 . Her younger sister , Philippa of Antioch , was given in marriage to Humphrey II of Toron in the late 1160s . 
 Whether the father of Constance 's second son , Baldwin , was Raymond of Poitiers or Raynald of Châtillon cannot be determined with certainty . Baldwin died fighting at the head of a Byzantine cavalry regiment in the Battle of Myriokephalon on September 17 , 1176 . It is certain that Raynald fathered Agnes , who became the wife of Béla III of Hungary . Raynald and Constance 's second daughter , Alice , became the third wife of <unk> VI of Este in 1204 . 
 = Maurice Douglass = 
 Maurice Gerrard " Mo " Douglass ( born February 12 , 1964 ) is a high school football head coach at Springfield High School and former American football safety who played eleven seasons in the National Football League for the Chicago Bears and the New York Giants . Douglass played college football at the University of Kentucky after transferring from Coffeyville Community College . 
 Douglass played nine seasons with the Bears on special teams and as a nickel back . He then played two seasons with the Giants . In his early years , he was a witness in a federal trial involving illegal activities by a pair of sports agents . 
 In high school , he had played for Trotwood @-@ Madison High School and graduated in 1982 . He returned to coach the team in 2001 . In 2006 , he led the team to the playoffs for the first time in 25 years . That year , he was accused of luring players from other teams and found guilty the following year , which was met with a brief suspension . 
 = = Early life and amateur career = = 
 Born in Muncie , Indiana , Douglass graduated from Trotwood @-@ Madison High School in 1982 and then played defensive back for Kentucky . In 1984 , he was a junior college transfer from Coffeyville Community College and earned the starting job for Kentucky after two games . He made an interception on his first play from scrimmage against the Rutgers Scarlet Knights team on October 6 . Two weeks later he had an interception that set up a 36 @-@ yard field goal against LSU . He totalled three interceptions in his two @-@ year career at Kentucky . On November 3 , he recovered a fumble against North Texas State . That season Kentucky got off to a 5 – 0 start , but they lost to all three ranked Southeastern Conference schools that they faced and finished the season 9 – 3 . 
 In September 1985 , he suffered from a pinched nerve and was notable for having blown his defensive coverage on two plays in a 27 – 7 victory over Cincinnati Bearcats . The last of his interceptions occurred on November 16 , 1985 against the Florida Gators when his 43 @-@ yard return set up Kentucky 's touchdown that gave them a 13 – 12 lead . However , in the waning seconds as they clung to a 13 – 12 lead , his attempt at a second interception on an errant halfback option pass by future Bears teammate Neal Anderson slipped away and Florida was able to execute the winning field goal in their 15 – 13 victory . Douglass was selected to play for the Gray team in the 1985 Blue – Gray Football Classic . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Chicago Bears = = = 
 With the last pick of the eighth round of the 1986 NFL Draft and 221st overall selection , the Bears drafted Douglass . He was the third of four defensive backs selected by the Bears in that draft ( <unk> Jackson 2nd round , Bruce Jones 7th round and Barton Hundley 10th round ) . The 1986 Bears signed Douglass in mid @-@ July . In training camp , Douglas was switched from cornerback to safety and recovered a fumble in the first exhibition game against the Cowboys . He was described by bears scout Rod Graves as " built more like a fullback and could possibly help us inside as a strong @-@ safety type " . The Chicago Tribune listed him at 5 feet 10 inches ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) and 202 pounds ( 92 kg ) , and the Chicago Sun @-@ Times reported him at 5 feet 10 @.@ 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 79 m ) and 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) with the description that " Big , strong , tough hitter who likes to play . A little too slow to play cornerback . Makes some mistakes because of overeagerness . " 
 Douglass was one of the final five players cut during training camp by the Bears at the beginning of September , but they re @-@ signed him in late November when they put Jim McMahon on injured reserve . He did not play much in 1986 , but was described as a favorite of coach Mike Ditka by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times . Chicago Tribune writers noted that Ditka got a kick out of his big earring and fashion sense . In the 1987 – 88 NFL playoffs , although had only one previous start in his two @-@ year career , he started for the Bears in place of five @-@ year veteran Mike Richardson at left cornerback against the Redskins in their January 10 , 1988 Divisional playoff game . The following season , when Shaun Gayle suffered a season @-@ ending injury for the 1988 Bears , he took over the starting free safety assignment . 
 In March 1989 , he testified against sports agents Norby Walters of New York and Lloyd Bloom of California in United States District Court in Chicago in a trial about " inducing college athletes to sign professional contracts in violation of National Collegiate Athletic Association rules , and of threatening bodily harm " . He told the jury that Bloom threatened that " somebody might break my legs " if he attempted to break his contract . In April , the agents were convicted of five counts of racketeering and fraud . 
 In August 1989 , he was one of thirteen athletes issued a four @-@ game suspension for using steroids . Following the suspension , the Bears activated him in October . 
 In September 1994 , New York Jets fullback Richie Anderson dislocated an index finger punching Douglass in the head , while Douglass was wearing a football helmet , in reaction to what he believed was a late hit on teammate Adrian Murrell . Anderson was ejected from the game . In his nine seasons with the Bears , he earned a reputation as an excellent special teams player . 
 = = = New York Giants = = = 
 Prior to his time with the Giants , he worked as a male stripper . Following the 1994 NFL season , Douglass signed with the New York Giants in April . The two @-@ year contract was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 4 million . Douglass was impaired by a quadriceps injury in 1995 Giants training camp . The injury recurred during the season . He had performed well as the nickel back as a Giant . However , in October , he fractured his left fibula and was out for the rest of 1995 NFL season . 
 Douglass appeared to be a likely roster cut during the 1996 Giants training camp final selection of its 53 @-@ man roster of players , but he made the final roster cut . In the second game of the 1996 NFL season , he made a fourth @-@ and @-@ one goalline stop against the Cowboys . Later that season , he scored his only career touchdown when he intercepted a Scott Mitchell pass and returned it 32 yards against the Detroit Lions on October 27 . Late in the season he was affected by a hamstring injury . 
 Douglass re @-@ signed for the 1997 New York Giants season . Douglass was in competition with Sam Garnes and Rodney Young for the starting strong safety position for the 1997 NFL season . However , in training camp he was hampered by a deep thigh bruise . Despite the injury , he was projected as the starter . The injury caused him to miss an exhibition game . When he returned to practice he was soon also dealing with a sprained elbow . He lost the job to Garnes after missing a lot of exhibition time and allowing the latter to see plenty of action . In addition to the injury , Douglass had had a poor exhibition showing . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 In 2001 he became the football coach at his alma mater Trotwood . He transformed the program by spending time creating player highlight reels , responding to college recruiters and taking his athletes on college tours . Subsequently , the athletes began getting college scholarship offers . In his first seven years nearly 100 of his players went on to play college football and over one @-@ third at Division I programs . He is said to have a relaxed mentoring style of coaching and is known as Coach Doug . In 2007 , the team made the playoffs for the first time since 1982 . That year , he was charged with illegally recruiting athletes to play for his team . Upon review by the Ohio High School Athletic Association , he and his staff were found guilty of the charge . In 2008 , he was placed on suspension for three weeks and his offensive coordinator resigned . The school was placed on two @-@ year probation . 
 In 2014 , Douglass left Trotwood and became the head coach at Springfield High School . Before taking the position at Springfield , Douglass turned down an opportunity to coach defensive backs for Vanderbilt under new head coach Derek Mason . 
 = SS Minnesotan = 
 SS Minnesotan was a cargo ship built in 1912 for the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company . During World War I she was known as USAT Minnesotan in service for the United States Army and USS Minnesotan ( ID @-@ <unk> ) in service for the United States Navy . She ended her career as the SS Maria Luisa R. under Italian ownership . She was built by the Maryland Steel Company as one of eight sister ships for the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company , and was employed in inter @-@ coastal service via the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and the Panama Canal after it opened . 
 In World War I , USAT Minnesotan carried cargo and animals to France under charter to the U.S. Army from September 1917 . When transferred to the U.S. Navy in August 1918 , USS Minnesotan continued in the same duties , but after the Armistice she was converted to a troop transport and returned over 8 @,@ 000 American troops from France . Returned to American @-@ Hawaiian in 1919 , Minnesotan resumed inter @-@ coastal cargo service , and , at least twice , carried racing yachts from the U.S. East Coast to California . 
 During World War II , Minnesotan was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration and initially sailed between New York and Caribbean ports . In the latter half of 1943 , Minnesotan sailed between Indian Ocean ports . The following year the cargo ship sailed between New York and ports in the United Kingdom , before returning to the Caribbean . In July 1949 , American @-@ Hawaiian sold Minnesotan to Italian owners who renamed her Maria Luisa R. ; she was scrapped in 1952 at Bari . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 In September 1911 , the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company placed an order with the Maryland Steel Company of Sparrows Point , Maryland , for four new cargo ships — Minnesotan , Dakotan , Montanan , and Pennsylvanian . The contract cost of the ships was set at the construction cost plus an 8 % profit for Maryland Steel , but with a maximum cost of $ 640 @,@ 000 per ship . The construction was financed by Maryland Steel with a credit plan that called for a 5 % down payment in cash with nine monthly installments for the balance . Provisions of the deal allowed that some of the nine installments could be converted into longer @-@ term notes or mortgages . The final cost of Minnesotan , including financing costs , was $ 65 @.@ 65 per deadweight ton , which totaled just under $ 668 @,@ 000 . 
 Minnesotan ( Maryland Steel yard no . 124 ) was the first ship built under the original contract . She was launched on 8 June 1912 , and delivered to American @-@ Hawaiian in September . Minnesotan was 6 @,@ 617 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 428 feet 9 inches ( 130 @.@ 68 m ) in length and 53 feet 7 inches ( 16 @.@ 33 m ) abeam . She had a deadweight tonnage of 10 @,@ 175 LT DWT , and her cargo holds had a storage capacity of 490 @,@ 838 cubic feet ( 13 @,@ 899 @.@ 0 m3 ) . Minnesotan had a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) , and was powered by a single quadruple @-@ expansion steam engine with oil @-@ fired boilers , that drove a single screw propeller . 
 = = Early career = = 
 When Minnesotan began sailing for American @-@ Hawaiian , the company shipped cargo from East Coast ports via the Tehuantepec Route to West Coast ports and Hawaii , and vice versa . Shipments on the Tehuantepec Route would arrive at Mexican ports — Salina Cruz , Oaxaca , for eastbound cargo , and Coatzacoalcos , Veracruz , for westbound cargo — and would traverse the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on the Tehuantepec National Railway . Eastbound shipments were primarily sugar and pineapple from Hawaii , while westbound cargoes were more general in nature . Minnesotan sailed in this service on the east side of North America . 
 After the United States occupation of Veracruz on 21 April 1914 ( which found six American @-@ Hawaiian ships in Mexican ports ) , the Huerta @-@ led Mexican government closed the Tehuantepec National Railway to American shipping . This loss of access , coupled with the fact that the Panama Canal was not yet open , caused American @-@ Hawaii to return in late April to its historic route of sailing around South America via the Straits of Magellan . With the opening of the Panama Canal on 15 August , American @-@ Hawaiian ships switched to taking that route . 
 In October 1915 , landslides closed the Panama Canal and all American @-@ Hawaiian ships , including Minnesotan , returned to the Straits of Magellan route again . Minnesotan 's exact movements from this time through early 1917 are unclear . She may have been in the half of the American @-@ Hawaiian fleet that was chartered for transatlantic service . She may also have been in the group of American @-@ Hawaiian ships chartered for service to South America , delivering coal , gasoline , and steel in exchange for coffee , nitrates , cocoa , rubber , and manganese ore . 
 = = World War I = = 
 On 11 September 1917 , some five months after the United States declared war on Germany , the United States Army chartered Minnesotan for transporting animals to Europe in support of the American Expeditionary Force . Although there is no information about the specific conversion of Minnesotan , for other ships this typically meant that passenger accommodations had to be ripped out and replaced with ramps and stalls for the horses and mules carried . 
 On 23 August 1918 , Minnesotan was transferred to the United States Navy at Norfolk , Virginia . She was commissioned into the Naval Overseas Transportation Service the same day , with Lieutenant Commander E. L. Smith , USNRF , in command . Minnesotan was refitted and rearmed and made a brief roundtrip to New York . After taking on a general cargo , Minnesotan sailed 4 September to join a convoy from New York . After passing Gibraltar on 21 September , the cargo ship sailed on to Marseille and unloaded . Departing there on 21 October , she sailed for Newport News via Gibraltar , arriving back in the United States on 7 November . 
 Minnesotan next took on a load of 798 horses and sailed on 30 November for Bordeaux , where she arrived on 13 December . Stopping at Saint @-@ Nazaire the following day , Minnesotan departed for Norfolk on 21 December . After making port at Norfolk on 3 January 1919 , the cargo ship sailed for New York , where she was inspected and found to be suitable for use as a troop transport . She was transferred to the Cruiser and Transport Force on 7 January and fitted with bunks and living facilities over the next three months . 
 Sailing from New York on 30 March , Minnesotan began the first of her four voyages returning American servicemen from France . On 16 April at Saint @-@ Nazaire , Minnesotan began her first homeward journey with troops , embarking several companies of the 111th Infantry Regiment of the U.S. 28th Infantry Division . George W. Cooper , historian of the 2nd Battalion of the 111th Infantry , reported that even though the fighting had been over for some five months , the fear of striking floating mines necessitated that the men wear life jackets for the first three days at sea . Minnesotan landed her 1 @,@ 765 troops in New York on 28 April . 
 On her next journey , Minnesotan loaded some 2 @,@ 000 men of the 304th Ammunition Train and the U.S. 24th Infantry Division , for what turned out to be a rough passage with widespread seasickness . The men on board were greatly relieved when land was spotted , and the ship docked at Charleston , South Carolina , on 29 May . 
 Details of Minnesotan 's third journey are not available , but her final journey began by sailing from Brest on 23 July with elements of the U.S. 4th Infantry Division and ended upon arrival at Philadelphia on 3 August . In total , she carried 8 @,@ 038 troops in four voyages from France . By 15 August , Minnesotan had entered dry dock at the Philadelphia Navy Yard to prepare for decommissioning , which took place six days later . She was then returned to American @-@ Hawaiian . Leslie White , later a noted American anthropologist , was a crewman aboard USS Minnesotan . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 Minnesotan resumed cargo service with American @-@ Hawaiian after her return from World War I service . Though the company had abandoned its original Hawaiian sugar routes by this time , Minnesotan continued inter @-@ coastal service through the Panama Canal . Hints at cargos she carried during this time can be gleaned from contemporary news reports from the Los Angeles Times . In March 1928 , for example , the newspaper reported that Minnesotan sailed from Los Angeles with a $ 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 cargo that included raw silk and 1 @,@ 000 long tons ( 1 @,@ 000 t ) of copper bullion . The 1 @,@ 000 bales of silk , picked up in Seattle , were worth $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on their own , while the load of copper was reportedly the largest water shipment of Arizona copper to that time . Canned goods , grape juice , and locally grown cotton completed the load . The Los Angeles Times also reported that Minnesotan delivered a then @-@ record 3 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 3 @,@ 000 t ) cargo from the East Coast to Los Angeles in October 1930 . Minnesotan also carried some less @-@ traditional cargo . In February 1928 , she delivered one R @-@ class and four six @-@ meter ( twenty @-@ foot ) sloops to Los Angeles . The five racing yachts , all from East Coast yacht clubs , arrived to sail in the national championships of six @-@ meter and R @-@ class sloops held 10 – 18 March . Minnesotan delivered two other six @-@ meter sloops for new owners in November 1938 . 
 Minnesotan did have one mishap during the interwar period . On 3 May 1936 , The New York Times reported that the day before , a receding tide had stranded Minnesotan about a half @-@ mile ( 800 m ) off of <unk> Point , Massachusetts . Any damage the freighter sustained must have been minor ; the cargo ship sailed from New York for San Francisco two weeks later . 
 = = = Labor difficulties = = = 
 Minnesotan played a part in several labor difficulties in the interwar years . In March 1935 , the crew of Minnesotan called a wildcat strike that delayed the ship 's sailing from Los Angeles by a day , but ended the strike after they were ordered back to work by their union . In October 1935 , the deckhands and firemen of Minnesotan and fellow Hawaiian @-@ American ships Nevadan and Golden Tide walked out — this time with the sanction of their union , the Sailors ' Union of the Pacific ( SUP ) — after American @-@ Hawaiian had suspended a member of the International Seamen 's Union . In that same month , Minnesotan 's deck engineer , Otto Blaczinsky , was murdered while the ship was in Los Angeles Harbor . The Industrial Association of San Francisco , an organization of anti @-@ union businessmen and employers , believed that Blaczinsky was killed because he opposed union policies , and offered a $ 1 @,@ 000 reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of Blaczinsky 's killer . Threats of another Pacific coast strike in late 1936 caused west coast shippers to squeeze as much cargo as possible into Minnesotan and other ships ; when Minnesotan arrived at Boston in October , The Christian Science Monitor reported that the ship had arrived " literally laden to her Plimsoll line " . 
 In September 1941 , Minnesotan played a peripheral part in a larger protest by union sailors over war bonuses for sailing in the West Indies . The SUP struck on Minnesotan and fellow American @-@ Hawaiian ship Oklahoman on 18 September in sympathy with the Seafarers International Organization , which had called a strike on eleven ships a week before . Both of the American @-@ Hawaiian ships were idled while docked in New York . President Franklin D. Roosevelt called on the unions to end the strike three separate times during his press conference on 24 September . Roosevelt 's admonition was heeded and both unions ended their strike after the National Mediation Board agreed to address the wartime bonus dispute . 
 = = World War II = = 
 By January 1941 , Minnesotan , though still operated by American @-@ Hawaiian , was engaged in defense work for the U.S. government , sailing to ports in South Africa . After the United States entered World War II , Minnesotan was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration and frequently sailed in convoys . Though complete records of her sailings are unavailable , partial records indicate some of the ports Minnesotan visited during the conflict and some of the cargo she carried . From July 1942 to April 1943 , Minnesotan sailed between New York and Caribbean ports , calling at Trinidad , Key West , Hampton Roads , Guantánamo Bay , and Cristóbal . 
 In June 1943 , Minnesotan called at Bombay . She sailed in the Indian Ocean between Calcutta , Colombo , and Bandar Abbas through August . On her last recorded sailing in the Indian Ocean , Minnesotan carried steel rails between Colombo and Calcutta . Minnesotan was back in New York by early December , and sailed to Florida and back by the end of the month . 
 On 29 December , Minnesotan , loaded with a general cargo that included machinery and explosives , sailed as part of convoy HX 273 from New York for Liverpool . Minnesotan developed an undisclosed problem and returned to St. John 's , Newfoundland , where she arrived on 13 January 1944 . Thirteen days later , she sailed from St. John 's to join convoy HX 276 for Liverpool , where she arrived with the convoy on 7 February . After calling at Methil and Loch Ewe , Minnesotan returned to New York in mid March . 
 Minnesotan sailed on another roundtrip to Liverpool in May , but was back in New York by early June . Her last recorded World War II sailings were from New York to Key West , Guantánamo Bay , and Cristóbal , where she arrived in late July 1944 . Sources do not reveal where or in what capacity Minnesotan spent the remainder of the war . 
 = = Later career = = 
 After the war 's end , American @-@ Hawaiian continued operating Minnesotan for several more years , but in mid @-@ July 1949 , the company announced the sale of Minnesotan to Italian owners in a move approved by the United States Maritime Commission several days later . The sale of Minnesotan was protested by the Congress of Industrial Organizations which urged the United States Congress to intervene and to help retain American Merchant Marine jobs . Nevertheless , Maria Luisa R. , the new name of the former Minnesotan , remained in Italian hands until she was scrapped in 1952 at Bari . 
 = Washington State Route 509 = 
 State Route 509 ( SR 509 ) is a 35 @.@ 17 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 56 @.@ 60 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , connecting Tacoma in Pierce County to Seattle in King County . The highway travels north from Interstate 705 ( I @-@ 705 ) in Tacoma to SR 99 south of downtown Seattle . It serves cities along the Puget Sound and west of Seattle – Tacoma International Airport in south King County , including Federal Way , Des Moines , and Burien . SR 509 is part of the National Highway System and is a limited @-@ access highway near the Port of Tacoma and from Burien to its northern terminus in Seattle . Prior to the 1964 highway renumbering , the highway was part of Secondary State Highway 1V ( SSH 1V ) from Tacoma to Des Moines and SSH 1K from Des Moines to Seattle . SR 509 was re @-@ aligned onto the Burien Freeway in 1968 and the Port of Tacoma bypass in 1997 , coinciding with the opening of its interchange with I @-@ 705 and the cable @-@ stayed 21st Street Bridge . Various proposals since 1988 have recommended building a freeway extension of SR 509 within the city of SeaTac , connecting the Burien Freeway to I @-@ 5 , that remains unbuilt . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 509 begins as South 21st Street at a single @-@ point urban interchange with I @-@ 705 in downtown Tacoma in Pierce County , providing access to the Tacoma campus of the University of Washington and the Tacoma Link light rail line on Pacific Avenue . The highway travels east over the Thea Foss Waterway on the cable @-@ stayed 21st Street Bridge into the Port of Tacoma as a four @-@ lane limited @-@ access highway , intersecting Portland Avenue in a half @-@ diamond interchange before crossing the Puyallup River . SR 509 continues east , parallel to a City of Tacoma rail line through a partial cloverleaf interchange with Port of Tacoma Road before the divided highway ends at Taylor Way . The highway turns northwest along the <unk> Waterway as Marine View Drive through the neighborhood of Northeast Tacoma towards Browns Point . SR 509 passes through Dash Point and its state park along the Puget Sound into King County and the city of Federal Way . The highway travels east as Dash Point Road through Federal Way past Decatur and Federal Way high schools before a junction with SR 99 west of I @-@ 5 . The concurrent SR 99 and SR 509 travel north as the Pacific Highway past Highline Community College to an intersection with SR 516 in western Kent . SR 509 turns west to form a concurrency with SR 516 , heading past Mount Rainier High School and into Des Moines , where SR 516 ends . 
 SR 509 continues north onto Marine View Drive through the city of Normandy Park and into SeaTac . The highway turns southeast onto <unk> Boulevard and Des Moines Memorial Drive to a trumpet interchange , the southern terminus of a limited @-@ access freeway section of SR 509 . The four @-@ lane freeway travels west of Seattle – Tacoma International Airport through a closed half @-@ diamond interchange with South 176th Street and a partial cloverleaf interchange with South 160th Street before entering the city of Burien . SR 509 passes Highline High School before reaching a partial cloverleaf interchange with Southwest 148th Street and the western terminus of SR 518 . The freeway continues north into the West Seattle neighborhood of Seattle and intersects South 128th Street in a diamond interchange and South 112th Street in a half @-@ diamond interchange . SR 509 enters the Industrial District of Seattle and heads through an interchange with Cloverdale Street and Myers Way before ending at a partial cloverleaf interchange with SR 99 south of the First Avenue South Bridge over the Duwamish Waterway . The roadway continues north as the SR 99 divided highway toward downtown Seattle and the Alaskan Way Viaduct . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of SR 509 was the limited @-@ access highway between Burien and its northern terminus in Seattle , serving 54 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busiest section was within Dash Point and Dash Point State Park , serving 2 @,@ 600 vehicles . SR 509 between SeaTac and Seattle is designated as part of the National Highway System , which includes roadways important to the national economy , defense , and mobility . The highway from Tacoma to Federal Way and from SeaTac to Seattle are designated as part of WSDOT 's Highways of Statewide Significance , which includes highways that connect major communities in the state of Washington . 
 = = History = = 
 The present route of SR 509 from Des Moines to Seattle roughly follows a wagon road constructed in the late 1890s by King County along the Puget Sound . The highway between Federal Way and Kent was codified in 1923 as part of State Road 1 and in 1937 as Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) . During the creation of the primary and secondary state highways in 1937 , the highway between Tacoma and Federal Way was designated as SSH 1V and the highway between Des Moines and Seattle was designated as SSH 1K . SSH 1V traveled 19 @.@ 54 miles ( 31 @.@ 45 km ) north from PSH 1 in Tacoma through the Port of Tacoma on the 11th Street Bridge and the Blair Bridge , opened in 1913 and 1951 respectively , to Federal Way , ending at an intersection with SSH 1K . SSH 1K traveled 12 @.@ 76 miles ( 20 @.@ 54 km ) south from PSH 1 at the First Avenue South Bridge in Seattle through Burien and east through Des Moines to PSH 1 in Midway . The two highways were combined during the 1964 highway renumbering to become SR 509 and was codified into law in 1970 . SR 509 was realigned onto the newly constructed north – south Burien Freeway in 1968 , extending from Seattle to SeaTac . The highway was originally routed through Saltwater State Park on Marine View Drive until 1991 , when SR 509 was moved to two concurrencies with SR 99 in Federal Way and SR 516 in Des Moines . 
 The freeway was planned to be extended south to SR 516 in the 1970s after a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) right @-@ of @-@ way was acquired by WSDOT before the project was canceled . The King County Department of Public Works recommended extending SR 509 southeast from South 188th Street to I @-@ 5 in 1988 , with construction planned to begin in 1999 at an estimated cost of $ 252 million in 1996 , raised to $ 1 @.@ 4 billion a decade later . A freeway bypass of the Port of Tacoma was opened in 1997 and the highway was truncated to its current southern terminus , a single @-@ point urban interchange with I @-@ 705 in downtown Tacoma near the 21st Street Bridge . No major revisions to the route of SR 509 have occurred since 1997 , however , WSDOT is proposing a freeway extension to SR 509 to I @-@ 5 along with interchange improvements and new arterial streets . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars = 
 Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars is a crossover fighting game developed by Eighting and published by Capcom . The game features characters from both Capcom 's video game franchises and various anime series produced by Tatsunoko Production . The game was originally released in Japan for arcades and the Wii video game console in December 2008 as Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Cross Generation of Heroes ( <unk> VS . CAPCOM CROSS <unk> OF <unk> ) . Following high demand from international fans , Capcom worked with Tatsunoko to resolve international licensing issues and a second version , Ultimate All @-@ Stars , was released for the Wii in North America , Japan , and Europe in January 2010 , featuring additional characters and an online mode . 
 In Tatsunoko vs. Capcom , players engage in combat with a team of two characters or with a single giant character and attempt to knock out their opponents . It is the seventh Capcom @-@ designed installment in their Vs. fighting game series , which includes the Marvel vs. Capcom and Capcom vs. SNK series , and the first to be fully rendered in 3D graphics . The game is set in a 2.5D environment ; characters fight in a two @-@ dimensional arena , but character models and backgrounds are rendered in three @-@ dimensional graphics . The game is designed around a simplified three @-@ button attack system , which was inspired by the simplistic control schemes commonly used by both the Vs. series and the Wii . 
 The game received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised its approachable gameplay for newcomers and depth for veteran players . However , reviewers had mixed experiences with its online component , and found Arcade mode lacking in replay value . According to the game 's producer , Ryota Niitsuma , development difficulties and a lack of Wii fighting games were the reasons for its platform exclusivity ; however , multiple critics questioned if that was the best choice . Capcom announced in April 2010 that the game was a commercial success . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Tatsunoko vs. Capcom is a tag team @-@ based fighting game in which players control characters with different attacks and fighting styles , and engage in combat to deplete their opponent 's life gauge . The gameplay is set in a 2.5D environment where the characters are rendered in three @-@ dimensional graphics , but their movements are restricted to a two dimensional plane ; they may only move left and right , and upward through the air . Each player may select a team of two characters and can switch between them during combat . Alternatively , players may select one of two " giant " characters , who cannot be played as part of a team . When characters switch , the incoming one performs a special attack upon entry , and the previous one can regenerate health . Characters not in play may be used to assist , and to perform powerful team moves . A match ends when a team has no characters left , or when the timer reaches zero — in which case , the team with the most remaining life wins . 
 The arcade release of Cross Generation of Heroes has a control scheme consisting of a joystick and four buttons . Wii versions of Tatsunoko vs. Capcom have five control options : the Classic Controller , Nintendo GameCube controller , third @-@ party arcade sticks , and two simplified control schemes — intended for inexperienced players — for the Wii Remote . Players use controller inputs to perform attacks ; the most basic attacks are executed by pressing one of three attack buttons : light , medium , or strong . Players may augment basic attacks with joystick or control pad directional inputs ; for example , a standard strong attack can become a sweep when the down input is added . Basic attacks can be strung together to perform combos . 
 Each character has unique " universal techniques " — special attacks that are more powerful than normal moves — that require complex control inputs . Similar inputs are used to perform even stronger versions of special moves called Hyper Combos and Team Hyper Combos ; these deal damage relative to the size of the player 's Hyper Combo gauge , which increases when the character does or receives damage . Certain universal techniques are usable by all characters ; for example , each character possesses one that launches opponents upward , rendering them vulnerable to an " air combo " . Other common universal techniques include the " Baroque Combo " , which sacrifices the <unk> portion of a character 's life gauge , but allows players to extend combos and deal more damage ; and the " Mega Crash " , which creates a temporary barrier around the character to knock back opponents , but partially drains their Hyper Combo and life gauges . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 Cross Generation of Heroes , the 2008 Wii version of Tatsunoko vs. Capcom , has an Arcade game mode : the player fights against artificial intelligence ( AI ) -controlled opponents to reach the final boss character , Yami from Ōkami . Time attack and Survival modes are also available , and require the player to defeat every character in the game . While Survival limits health regeneration , Time attack challenges players to win in the shortest time possible . Other modes include Vs . Mode , in which two players engage in combat , and Original Games , which sees up to four players competing in character @-@ specific minigames . Using money obtained throughout the game , the player may purchase unlockable characters , alternate character costumes , minigames , character profiles , movies , illustrations , and background music . Once purchased , the latter four are viewable in a gallery . The arcade release of Cross Generation of Heroes omits the game modes , and instead features a character selection screen from which a player may compete against either AI opponents or a second player . 
 Ultimate All @-@ Stars has largely the same features as the Wii version of Cross Generation of Heroes , with the exception of Original Games ; instead , it features a top @-@ down shooter minigame called " Ultimate All @-@ Shooters " . Unique to Ultimate All @-@ Stars is Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection support for Vs . Mode competition over the Internet . Online multiplayer matches may be played either with registered friends or opponents , or randomly selected participants . Players can choose from randomly selected opponents to be of a rank similar to their own . Rank is decided by battle points , which fluctuate when a ranked match is won or lost . Once a match is completed , players can add a consenting opponent to a Rival Roster for future matches . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Ultimate All @-@ Stars contains 26 playable characters from Capcom video game franchises like Street Fighter , Mega Man , and Viewtiful Joe and Tatsunoko Production anime franchises such as Science Ninja Team Gatchaman , Yatterman , and Neo @-@ Human Casshern . The original arcade version of Cross Generation of Heroes features 18 characters , which was increased to 22 for its Wii release . The rosters of both Ultimate All @-@ Stars and Cross Generation of Heroes are evenly divided between Tatsunoko and Capcom characters . The game 's two largest and most powerful characters , Tatsunoko 's Gold <unk> and Capcom 's PTX @-@ 40A , cannot have partners ; by extension , they cannot perform universal techniques that require a partner . Non @-@ playable characters , derived from Capcom and Tatsunoko intellectual properties , make cameo appearances during certain attacks ; for example , <unk> is assisted by his robotic dog , <unk> , while <unk> is accompanied by her lackeys <unk> and <unk> . 
 † Wii @-@ exclusive character 
 ‡ Exclusive to Cross Generation of Heroes 
 § Exclusive to Ultimate All @-@ Stars 
 = = Development = = 
 Tatsunoko vs. Capcom was conceived when Tatsunoko Production asked Capcom to develop a game with Tatsunoko characters . In @-@ company discussions at Capcom about it started in mid @-@ 2006 ; Capcom producer Ryota Niitsuma was interested in producing a fighting game , and agreed with other Capcom employees that Tatsunoko 's characters would be better suited for a Vs. game than a Street Fighter game . The resulting project was the seventh Capcom @-@ designed entry in the Vs. series and the first in over seven years . In the 2000s decade , fighting games were less popular and plentiful than in the mid @-@ 1990s , with multiplayer competition shifting towards other genres . 
 The research and development team started work in parallel with Street Fighter IV . " Capcom [ hoped to ] bring back the fighting genre into the mainstream market [ ... ] with a serious fighting game for very hardcore fans , and another with a slightly lowered barrier to entry , " Niitsuma said . Eighting , Capcom 's hired developer , took on the job in early 2007 . Tatsunoko vs. Capcom 's design was a departure from the complex attack systems of the Street Fighter series , and of certain Vs. titles . The game is built around a simplified three @-@ button attack system ( light , medium , and strong ) ; it was inspired by the control systems commonly used by both the Vs. series and the Wii , which allows intricate moves to be performed with basic control inputs . 
 On May 22 , 2008 , Capcom announced the game , titled Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Cross Generation of Heroes , for release in Japanese arcades . The arcade cabinets ' system board was proprietary hardware based on the Wii . Beta units were sent to test locations in Tokyo ( July 10 – 13 ) and Osaka ( July 25 – 27 ) . By September , the game was 70 % complete , and a Wii version was announced for Japanese release . Capcom gradually revealed the game 's cast until release . It was released in Japan on the Wii on December 11 , 2008 , and an arcade version followed in mid @-@ December 2008 . 
 When choosing candidates for the Tatsunoko and Capcom character rosters , the development team was free to nominate any character it wished . However , the team faced limitations on its Tatsunoko candidates ; Niitsuma explained , " [ We ] had to consider licensing issues . Once we had that list we had to figure out how to make a balanced fighting game . On top of that we wanted a good balance between male and female characters . " Selection emphasis was placed on main characters , rather than on villains . Certain characters were denied by Tatsunoko Production without explanation to Capcom . " We weren 't privy to a lot of their decision making process . They didn 't share a lot of reasons with us . When they said no and we asked why , they wouldn 't tell us , but would give us another suggestion , " Niitsuma said . They disallowed characters from Genesis Climber <unk> or Samurai Pizza Cats , despite the high number of fan requests for the latter . The eponymous characters of Tatsunoko 's <unk> , The Dashing Warrior and Nurse Witch Komugi were among those planned for inclusion , but were eventually scrapped . The finalized Tatsunoko cast consists of characters that the team enjoyed in their youth . The development team hoped to include Capcom 's Phoenix Wright and Franziska von Karma from the Ace Attorney series , but , while the latter 's use of a whip made her easy to incorporate , the team struggled to find appropriate attacks for Phoenix . Since Phoenix doesn 't move from the waist down in his original game environment , the team considered adding tires to his desk and having the entirety move as a single character . However , this was abandoned due to potential collision issues . Though they envisioned an attack that used his catch @-@ phrase " Objection ! ( <unk> ! , <unk> ! ) " , with the letters themselves used to attack the opponent , they found that localization would have changed the Japanese four @-@ character phrase ( in kanji ) to a ten @-@ letter word in English , unbalancing the game . Arthur from Ghosts ' n Goblins , and Ingrid from Capcom Fighting Evolution were also scrapped . 
 The game is the first Capcom @-@ designed Vs. installment to be rendered fully in 3D . Tatsunoko vs. Capcom and its graphical characteristics were optimized for the Wii , which prevents the game from being ported to other consoles without completely re @-@ building the game . Niitsuma explained that its Wii exclusivity was also due to a lack of Capcom fighting games for the console , and because the Wii 's casual quality matches the Vs. series trait of accessibility . The producer suggested that porting a sequel would be easier , but that Capcom would gauge the reception of the Wii game before making such plans . On November 7 , 2012 , Capcom USA 's senior vice president Christian Svensson revealed that Capcom 's rights with Tatsunoko have lapsed , meaning Capcom is no longer authorized to sell Tatsunoko vs. Capcom physically or digitally . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 On May 6 , 2009 , Capcom listed two " mystery games " as part of their Electronic Entertainment Expo 2009 ( E3 2009 ) lineup . Nintendo Power magazine revealed " Capcom Mystery Game # 1 " to be the North American localization of Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Cross Generation of Heroes , with the new subtitle " Ultimate All @-@ Stars " . It was playable at the company 's E3 booth . European and Australian releases were announced on later dates . The game was originally unintended for release outside Japan , but was localized by Capcom due to positive fan reception . Tatsunoko Production assisted Capcom with its character licensing issues ; while Tatsunoko Production holds such rights in Japan , they are licensed to companies such as Time Warner in other countries . Niitsuma said that acquiring character licenses was difficult , as it was largely done one at a time , and characters cleared in North America had to be checked separately in Europe . Another issue was the possibility that Eighting would be occupied with other projects . Time constraints led Niitsuma to replace the character @-@ specific minigames of Cross Generation of Heroes with " Ultimate All @-@ Shooters " , an expansion of PTX @-@ 40A 's minigame . Artwork by UDON replaced the animated character @-@ specific endings . 
 A Capcom press release in June 2009 stated that the North American release would have more mini @-@ games , an " enhanced " story mode , and support for online play . The roster would be expanded by five characters , but would lose one unnamed Tatsunoko character . However , Capcom later revised this press release , as it was incorrect , with the statement that they were " looking into adding new features to the game , including possible additions of several new characters from both Capcom and Tatsunoko and [ ... ] exploring the option of online gameplay . " 
 On September 9 , 2009 , Capcom announced the Japanese release of Ultimate All @-@ Stars . Starting on that day , the company periodically revealed the game 's new characters ; however , the full cast was leaked through JavaScript code on the game 's official Japanese site . With the exception of <unk> Daimaō , who was removed due to unspecified licensing issues , every playable character from the original Wii release was included . <unk> Daimaō was also removed in Ultimate All @-@ Stars ' Japanese release , due to both his unpopularity with players , and the game 's status as a localization of the North American version . The new characters encompassed Frank West from Dead Rising , Zero from Mega Man X , Yatterman @-@ 2 from Yatterman , Joe the Condor from Gatchaman , and the title character from <unk> Blade . Shinji Ueda served as a director along with Hidetoshi <unk> . <unk> admitted that , just as Cross Generation of Heroes was not initially planned to be released internationally , neither was Ultimate All @-@ Stars planned to be released in Japan . However , fan appeals and the research and development team 's own hopes resulted in the game 's Japanese localization . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 An official launch event for Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All Stars was held at the Nintendo World Store in the Rockefeller Center on January 23 , 2010 , featuring autograph signings by Niitsuma , giveaways , competitions , and playable demo kiosks . Hundreds of fans were expected to attend between 11 pm and 3 pm . The game was released in North America on January 26 , in Japan on January 28 , and in Europe on January 29 . Capcom 's Community Manager Seth Killian expressed satisfaction with the North American sales of Ultimate All @-@ Stars . " [ Tatsunoko Vs Capcom ] certainly beat the initial expectations . It didn 't set any land speed records , but it was a success , " Killian stated . " And that 's really saying something considering that we 're talking about a game that was not only never coming out , but has a title that most people can 't even pronounce . " In Japan , Ultimate All @-@ Stars sold 18 @,@ 913 units as of January 2 , 2011 , and , as of December 27 , 2009 , Cross Generation of Heroes has sold 62 @,@ 805 units . 
 Certain versions of Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars are bundled with a Mad Catz arcade stick , whose artwork was produced by Japanese artist Shinkiro . Pre @-@ orders from GameStop included eight of thirteen lenticular trading cards . As a buying incentive , Capcom 's Japanese online store offered a Secret File compilation book of concept art , illustrations and design notes ; it is the twenty @-@ seventh volume of the Secret File series , which was originally published between 1996 and 1999 as a supplement to Capcom games of the time . The store also included an audio CD with four vocal tracks from the game : the opening song from Cross Generation of Heroes , " Across the Border " , sung by Asami Abe ; Ultimate All @-@ Stars ' English re @-@ recording of this song , sung by Anna Gholston , with rap by James C. Wilson ; and the Japanese and English versions of Roll 's theme song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Famitsu 's four reviewers each gave Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Cross Generation of Heroes a score of 8 / 10 . They believed that its variety of characters and its fighting system were strong points , but found its gameplay to be slightly flat , as skilled players are obligated to use Baroque Combos repeatedly . Licensing and resource issues made GameSpot 's Ricardo Torres , IGN 's John Tanaka , GamesRadar and other critics doubtful that the game would see an international release . Describing the game 's cast of licensed characters , Adam Sessler of X @-@ Play stated that " clearing the American rights to show them all in one game would be a logistical nightmare . " He also pointed out the largely unknown cast to non @-@ Japanese audiences — a notion IGN 's Mark Bozon agreed with . When Ultimate All @-@ Stars debuted at E3 2009 , it garnered numerous genre @-@ specific awards , and won the Game Critics Award for " Best Fighting Game " . 
 Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars received positive reviews , with an average score of 85 % on review aggregate sites Metacritic and GameRankings . Critics praised its balance between accessibility and depth ; Adam Sessler called it the perfect game for the Wii 's demographic , and remarked that it allows " <unk> , kiddies and junkies " to perform intricate combos , while including deeper gameplay mechanics for the " more refined palate " . Contrasting the game with previous Vs. titles , GameSpot reviewer Randolph Ramsay stated that its use of fewer buttons " may seem less complex [ ... ] , but this simplicity belies the depth of each character 's move set . " Eurogamer 's Matt Edwards believed that , compared to the separate buttons for punches and kicks in Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes , Tatsunoko vs. Capcom 's streamlined approach was moderately easy to learn . Edwards claimed that the game is a " slightly slower and more user @-@ friendly Marvel , without losing the ability to pull @-@ off crazy 50 + hit combos . " 
 Reviewers lauded the variety of Tatsunoko vs. Capcom 's graphical presentation and character playstyles . Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica wrote that its over @-@ the @-@ top attacks can be " huge , colorful , screen @-@ filling blasts of light and movement , " and that combos " flash across the screen , claiming you landed billions of points of damage . " Adam Sessler and 1UP.com 's Richard Li found that each character played in a vastly different way ; Li explained that there are characters who take advantage of sheer speed and long range moves , others who use momentum to apply pressure to opponents and those who rely on a single opportune moment to deal vast amounts of damage . Heidi Kemps of GamePro contrasted the game with Marvel vs. Capcom 2 , and noted that " every combatant in Tatsunoko feels carefully designed to be unique , intriguing , and most importantly , worth investing time into mastering . " Bozon , Edwards , and VideoGamer.com 's Wesley Yin @-@ Poole believed that the characters were well @-@ animated , and chained attacks together seamlessly . 
 Li criticized Capcom for not providing an easy alternative to unlock characters since the multiple Arcade mode playthroughs needed to unlock them could be frustrating . Nintendo World Report 's Neal Ronaghan mentioned it can get tedious , and echoing Li 's sentiment , Ryan Scott of GameSpy complained that " arcade mode needs to be left to die , " as multiplayer is the primary reason for playing fighting games . Both Scott and Ramsay thought many of the other unlockables obtainable through Arcade mode didn 't offer sufficient value . Reviewers had mixed experiences with its online component ; GameDaily 's Robert Workman reported that it ran fluidly , but Scott said that the game lagged often enough to be unplayable . Edwards thought " the netcode hasn 't shown itself to be particularly sturdy , " but the situation may improve as the number of local players increase . Both Bozon and GameTrailers said that performance depends on each player 's connection ; the latter explained that lag is more likely to occur when playing against a distant opponent . 
 The game 's soundtrack was lauded , with Robert Workman of GameDaily highlighting its " fantastic mix of strong techno tunes and dramatic battle themes . " Ramsay cited its " convincing battle effects " and " catchy music " ; he believed that the latter complemented the game 's dynamic nature and presentation . Bozon and Official Nintendo Magazine 's Chris Scullion expressed annoyance with the voice work of the top @-@ down shooter minigame . Bozon explained that three of the four playable characters yell every time they fire . 
 Critics speculated on the commercial risk of localizing Tatsunoko vs. Capcom for the Wii . Kemps considered it a risky undertaking for Capcom , as the console isn 't renowned for fighting titles , and as the game abandons the three @-@ on @-@ three matches of the Marvel titles — which popularized the Vs. series — in favor of the two @-@ on @-@ two formula used in the older , more obscure Vs. games . Kemps and Bozon pointed out that the game 's Tatsunoko characters are largely unknown to non @-@ Japanese audiences ; this caused Bozon to liken the game to a dark horse , as he considered it to be one of the Wii 's best titles . Li reported that " Many wondered why Capcom chose Nintendo 's Wii as the exclusive platform [ ... ] , a multiplatform release would reach a broader audience , critics argued . " The game 's quality led Yin @-@ Poole to question whether it would stay exclusive to the Wii ; he speculated , " Perhaps <unk> is a test , then . If it sells even remotely well , maybe we 'll see a sequel on Microsoft and Sony 's consoles . Or maybe , fingers crossed , it 'll add further weight to the case for [ Marvel vs. Capcom 3 ] . " 
 = Gregorian mission = 
 The Gregorian mission or Augustinian mission was sent by Pope Gregory the Great in AD 596 to convert Britain 's Anglo @-@ Saxons . Headed by Augustine of Canterbury , by the death of the last missionary in 635 the mission had established Christianity in southern Britain . Along with the Irish and Frankish missions it converted other parts of Britain as well and influenced the Hiberno @-@ Scottish missions to Continental Europe . 
 By the time the Roman Empire recalled its legions from the province of Britannia in 410 , parts of the island had already been settled by pagan Germanic tribes who , later in the century , appear to have taken control of Kent and other coastal regions . In the late 6th century Pope Gregory sent a group of missionaries to Kent to convert Æthelberht , King of Kent , whose wife , Bertha of Kent , was a Frankish princess and practising Christian . Augustine was the prior of Gregory 's own monastery in Rome and Gregory prepared the way for the mission by soliciting aid from the Frankish rulers along Augustine 's route . 
 In 597 the forty missionaries arrived in Kent and were permitted by Æthelberht to preach freely in his capital of Canterbury . Soon the missionaries wrote to Gregory telling him of their success and that conversions were taking place . The exact date of Æthelberht 's conversion is unknown but it occurred before 601 . A second group of monks and clergy was dispatched in 601 bearing books and other items for the new foundation . Gregory intended Augustine to be the metropolitan archbishop of the southern part of the British Isles , and gave him power over the clergy of the native Britons , but in a series of meetings with Augustine the long @-@ established Celtic bishops refused to acknowledge his authority . 
 Before Æthelberht 's death in 616 a number of other bishoprics had been established but after that date , a pagan backlash set in and the see , or bishopric , of London was abandoned . Æthelberht 's daughter , Æthelburg , married Edwin , the king of the Northumbrians , and by 627 Paulinus , the bishop who accompanied her north , had converted Edwin and a number of other Northumbrians . When Edwin died , in about 633 , his widow and Paulinus were forced to flee to Kent . Although the missionaries could not remain in all of the places they had evangelised , by the time the last of them died in 653 , they had established Christianity in Kent and the surrounding countryside and contributed a Roman tradition to the practice of Christianity in Britain . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the 4th century the Roman province of Britannia was converted to Christianity and had even produced its own heretic in Pelagius . Britain sent three bishops to the Synod of Arles in 314 , and a Gaulish bishop went to the island in 396 to help settle disciplinary matters . Lead baptismal basins and other artefacts bearing Christian symbols testify to a growing Christian presence at least until about 360 . 
 After the Roman legions withdrew from Britannia in 410 the natives of Great Britain were left to defend themselves , and non @-@ Christian Angles , Saxons , and Jutes — generally referred to collectively as Anglo @-@ Saxons — settled the southern parts of the island . Though most of Britain remained Christian , isolation from Rome bred a number of distinct practices — Celtic Christianity — including emphasis on monasteries instead of bishoprics , differences in calculation of the date of Easter , and a modified clerical tonsure . Evidence for the continued existence of Christianity in eastern Britain at this time includes the survival of the cult of Saint Alban and the occurrence of <unk> — from the Latin for church — in place names . There is no evidence that these native Christians tried to convert the Anglo @-@ Saxon newcomers . 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon invasions coincided with the disappearance of most remnants of Roman civilisation in the areas held by the Anglo @-@ Saxons , including the economic and religious structures . Whether this was a result of the Angles themselves , as the early medieval writer Gildas argued , or mere coincidence is unclear . The archaeological evidence suggests much variation in the way that the tribes established themselves in Britain concurrently with the decline of urban Roman culture in Britain . The net effect was that when Augustine arrived in 597 the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms had little continuity with the preceding Roman civilisation . In the words of the historian John Blair , " Augustine of Canterbury began his mission with an almost clean slate . " 
 = = Gregory the Great and his motivations = = 
 = = = Immediate background = = = 
 In 595 , when Pope Gregory I decided to send a mission to the Anglo @-@ Saxons , the Kingdom of Kent was ruled by Æthelberht . He had married a Christian princess named Bertha before 588 , and perhaps earlier than 560 . Bertha was the daughter of Charibert I , one of the Merovingian kings of the Franks . As one of the conditions of her marriage she had brought a bishop named Liudhard with her to Kent as her chaplain . They restored a church in Canterbury that dated to Roman times , possibly the present @-@ day St Martin 's Church . Æthelberht was at that time a pagan but he allowed his wife freedom of worship . Liudhard does not appear to have made many converts among the Anglo @-@ Saxons , and if not for the discovery of a gold coin , the Liudhard medalet , bearing the inscription <unk> <unk> ( <unk> is an abbreviation of <unk> , the Latin word for bishop ) his existence may have been doubted . One of Bertha 's biographers states that , influenced by his wife , Æthelberht requested Pope Gregory to send missionaries . The historian Ian Wood feels that the initiative came from the Kentish court as well as the queen . 
 = = = Motivations = = = 
 Most historians take the view that Gregory initiated the mission , although exactly why remains unclear . A famous story recorded by Bede , an 8th @-@ century monk who wrote a history of the British Church , relates that Gregory saw fair @-@ haired Anglo @-@ Saxon slaves from Britain in the Roman slave market and was inspired to try to convert their people . Supposedly Gregory inquired about the identity of the slaves , and was told that they were Angles from the island of Great Britain . Gregory replied that they were not Angles , but Angels . The earliest version of this story is from an anonymous Life of Gregory written at Whitby Abbey about 705 . Bede , as well as the Whitby Life of Gregory , records that Gregory himself had attempted to go on a missionary journey to Britain before becoming pope . In 595 Gregory wrote to one of the papal estate managers in southern Gaul , asking that he buy English slave boys in order that they might be educated in monasteries . Some historians have seen this as a sign that Gregory was already planning the mission to Britain at that time , and that he intended to send the slaves as missionaries , although the letter is also open to other interpretations . 
 The historian N. J. Higham speculates that Gregory had originally intended to send the British slave boys as missionaries , until in 596 he received news that Liudhard had died , thus opening the way for more serious missionary activity . Higham argues that it was the lack of any bishop in Britain which allowed Gregory to send Augustine , with orders to be consecrated as a bishop if needed . Another consideration was that cooperation would be more easily obtained from the Frankish royal courts if they no longer had their own bishop and agent in place . 
 Higham theorises that Gregory believed that the end of the world was imminent , and that he was destined to be a major part of God 's plan for the apocalypse . His belief was rooted in the idea that the world would go through six ages , and that he was living at the end of the sixth age , a notion that may have played a part in Gregory 's decision to dispatch the mission . Gregory not only targeted the British with his missionary efforts , but he also supported other missionary endeavours , encouraging bishops and kings to work together for the conversion of non @-@ Christians within their territories . He urged the conversion of the heretical Arians in Italy and elsewhere , as well as the conversion of Jews . Also pagans in Sicily , Sardinia and Corsica were the subject of letters to officials , urging their conversion . 
 Some scholars suggest that Gregory 's main motivation was to increase the number of Christians ; others wonder if more political matters such as extending the primacy of the papacy to additional provinces and the recruitment of new Christians looking to Rome for leadership were also involved . Such considerations may have also played a part , as influencing the emerging power of the Kentish Kingdom under Æthelberht could have had some bearing on the choice of location . Also , the mission may have been an outgrowth of the missionary efforts against the Lombards . At the time of the mission Britain was the only part of the former Roman Empire which remained in pagan hands and the historian Eric John argues that Gregory desired to bring the last remaining pagan area of the old empire back under Christian control . 
 = = = Practical considerations = = = 
 The choice of Kent and Æthelberht was almost certainly dictated by a number of factors , including that Æthelberht had allowed his Christian wife to worship freely . Trade between the Franks and Æthelberht 's kingdom was well established , and the language barrier between the two regions was apparently only a minor obstacle as the interpreters for the mission came from the Franks . Another reason for the mission was the growing power of the Kentish kingdom . Since the eclipse of King Ceawlin of Wessex in 592 , Æthelberht was the leading Anglo @-@ Saxon ruler ; Bede refers to Æthelberht as having imperium , or overlordship , south of the River Humber . Lastly , the proximity of Kent to the Franks allowed for support from a Christian area . There is some evidence , including Gregory 's letters to Frankish kings in support of the mission , that some of the Franks felt they had a claim to overlordship over some of the southern British kingdoms at this time . The presence of a Frankish bishop could also have lent credence to claims of overlordship , if Liudhard was felt to be acting as a representative of the Frankish Church and not merely as a spiritual adviser to the queen . Archaeological remains support the notion that there were cultural influences from Francia in England at that time . 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
