 In 595 , Gregory chose Augustine , prior of Gregory 's own monastery of St Andrew in Rome , to head the mission to Kent . Gregory selected monks to accompany Augustine and sought support from the Frankish kings . The pope wrote to a number of Frankish bishops on Augustine 's behalf , introducing the mission and asking that Augustine and his companions be made welcome . Copies of letters to some of these bishops survive in Rome . The pope wrote to King Theuderic II of Burgundy and to King Theudebert II of Austrasia , as well as their grandmother <unk> of Austrasia , seeking aid for the mission . Gregory thanked King Chlothar II of Neustria for aiding Augustine . Besides hospitality , the Frankish bishops and kings provided interpreters and were asked to allow some Frankish priests to accompany the mission . By soliciting help from the Frankish kings and bishops , Gregory helped to ensure a friendly reception for Augustine in Kent , as Æthelbert was unlikely to mistreat a mission which enjoyed the evident support of his wife 's relatives and people . The Franks at that time were attempting to extend their influence in Kent , and assisting Augustine 's mission furthered that goal . Chlothar , in particular , needed a friendly realm across the Channel to help guard his kingdom 's flanks against his fellow Frankish kings . 
 = = Arrival and first efforts = = 
 = = = Composition and arrival = = = 
 The mission consisted of about forty missionaries , some of whom were monks . Soon after leaving Rome , the missionaries halted , daunted by the nature of the task before them . They sent Augustine back to Rome to request papal permission to return , which Gregory refused , and instead sending Augustine back with letters to encourage the missionaries to persevere . Another reason for the pause may have been the receipt of news of the death of King <unk> II , who had been expected to help the missionaries ; Augustine may have returned to Rome to secure new instructions and letters of introduction , as well as to update Gregory on the new political situation in Gaul . Most likely , they halted in the Rhone valley . Gregory also took the opportunity to name Augustine as abbot of the mission . Augustine then returned to the rest of the missionaries , with new instructions , probably including orders to seek consecration as a bishop on the Continent if the conditions in Kent warranted it . 
 In 597 the mission landed in Kent , and it quickly achieved some initial success : Æthelberht permitted the missionaries to settle and preach in his capital of Canterbury , where they used the church of St. Martin 's for services , and this church became the seat of the bishopric . Neither Bede nor Gregory mentions the date of Æthelberht 's conversion , but it probably took place in 597 . 
 = = = Process of conversion = = = 
 In the early medieval period , large @-@ scale conversions required the ruler 's conversion first , and large numbers of converts are recorded within a year of the mission 's arrival in Kent . By 601 , Gregory was writing to both Æthelberht and Bertha , calling the king his son and referring to his baptism . A late medieval tradition , recorded by the 15th @-@ century chronicler Thomas Elmham , gives the date of the king 's conversion as Whit Sunday , or 2 June 597 ; there is no reason to doubt this date , but there is no other evidence for it . A letter of Gregory 's to Patriarch Eulogius of Alexandria in June 598 mentions the number of converts made , but does not mention any baptism of the king in 597 , although it is clear that by 601 he had been converted . The royal baptism probably took place at Canterbury but Bede does not mention the location . 
 Why Æthelberht chose to convert to Christianity is uncertain . Bede suggests that the king converted strictly for religious reasons , but most modern historians see other motives behind Æthelberht 's decision . Certainly , given Kent 's close contacts with Gaul , it is possible that Æthelberht sought baptism in order to smooth his relations with the Merovingian kingdoms , or to align himself with one of the factions then contending in Gaul . Another consideration may have been that new methods of administration often followed conversion , whether directly from the newly introduced church or indirectly from other Christian kingdoms . 
 Evidence from Bede suggests that , although Æthelberht encouraged conversion , he could not compel his subjects to become Christians . The historian R. A. Markus feels that this was due to a strong pagan presence in the kingdom that forced the king to rely on indirect means including royal patronage and friendship to secure conversions . For Markus this is demonstrated by the way in which Bede describes the king 's conversion efforts which , when a subject converted , were to " rejoice at their conversion " and to " hold believers in greater affection " . 
 = = = Instructions and missionaries from Rome = = = 
 After these conversions , Augustine sent Laurence back to Rome with a report of his success along with questions about the mission . Bede records the letter and Gregory 's replies in chapter 27 of his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum , this section of the History is usually known as the Libellus responsionum . Augustine asked for Gregory 's advice on some issues , including how to organise the church , the punishment for church robbers , guidance on who was allowed to marry whom , and the consecration of bishops . Other topics were relations between the churches of Britain and Gaul , childbirth and baptism , and when it was lawful for people to receive communion and for a priest to celebrate mass . Other than the trip by Laurence , little is known of the activities of the missionaries in the period from their arrival until 601 . Gregory mentions the mass conversions , and there is mention of Augustine working miracles that helped win converts , but there is little evidence of specific events . 
 According to Bede , further missionaries were sent from Rome in 601 . They brought a pallium for Augustine , gifts of sacred vessels , vestments , relics , and books . The pallium was the symbol of metropolitan status , and signified that Augustine was in union with the Roman papacy . Along with the pallium , a letter from Gregory directed the new archbishop to ordain twelve suffragan bishops as soon as possible , and to send a bishop to York . Gregory 's plan was that there would be two metropolitan sees , one at York and one at London , with twelve suffragan bishops under each archbishop . Augustine was also instructed to transfer his archiepiscopal see to London from Canterbury , which never happened , perhaps because London was not part of Æthelberht 's domain . Also , London remained a stronghold of paganism , as events after the death of Æthelberht revealed . London at that time was part of the Kingdom of Essex , which was ruled by Æthelberht 's nephew <unk> of Essex , who converted to Christianity in 604 . The historian S. Brechter has suggested that the metropolitan see was indeed moved to London , and that it was only with the abandonment of London as a see after Æthelberht 's death that Canterbury became the archiepiscopal see , contradicting Bede 's version of events . The choice of London as Gregory 's proposed southern archbishopric was probably due to his understanding of how Britain was administered under the Romans , when London was the principal city of the province . 
 Along with the letter to Augustine , the returning missionaries brought a letter to Æthelberht that urged the king to act like the Roman Emperor Constantine I and force the conversion of his followers to Christianity . The king was also urged to destroy all pagan shrines . However , Gregory also wrote a letter to Mellitus , the Epistola ad Mellitum of July 601 , in which the pope took a different tack in regards to pagan shrines , suggesting that they be cleansed of idols and converted to Christian use rather than destroyed ; the pope compared the Anglo @-@ Saxons to the ancient Israelites , a recurring theme in Gregory 's writings . He also suggested that the Anglo @-@ Saxons build small huts much like those built during the Jewish festival of Sukkot , to be used during the annual autumn slaughter festivals so as to gradually change the Anglo @-@ Saxon pagan festivals into Christian ones . 
 The historian R. A. Markus suggests that the reason for the conflicting advice is that the letter to Æthelberht was written first , and sent off with the returning missionaries . Markus argues that the pope , after thinking further about the circumstances of the mission in Britain , then sent a follow @-@ up letter , the <unk> ad Mellitum , to Mellitus , then en route to Canterbury , which contained new instructions . Markus sees this as a turning point in missionary history , in that forcible conversion gave way to persuasion . This traditional view that the Epistola represents a contradiction of the letter to Æthelberht has been challenged by George <unk> who argues that the letter to Æthelberht was mainly meant to encourage the king in spiritual matters , while the Epistola was sent to deal with purely practical matters , and thus the two do not contradict each other . Flora Spiegel , a writer on Anglo @-@ Saxon literature , suggests that the theme of comparing the Anglo @-@ Saxons to the Israelites was part of a conversion strategy involving gradual steps , including an explicitly proto @-@ Jewish one between paganism and Christianity . Spiegel sees this as an extension of Gregory 's view of Judaism as halfway between Christianity and paganism . Thus , Gregory felt that first the Anglo @-@ Saxons must be brought up to the equivalent of Jewish practices , then after that stage was reached they could be brought completely up to Christian practices . 
 = = = Church building = = = 
 Bede relates that after the mission 's arrival in Kent and conversion of the king , they were allowed to restore and rebuild old Roman churches for their use . One such was Christ Church , Canterbury , which became Augustine 's cathedral church . Archaeological evidence for other Roman churches having been rebuilt is slight , but the church of St Pancras in Canterbury has a Roman building at its core , although it is unclear whether that older building was a church during the Roman era . Another possible site is <unk> , in Kent , where a religious site dating to 300 was found underneath an abandoned church . 
 Soon after his arrival , Augustine founded the monastery of Saints Peter and Paul , which later became St Augustine 's Abbey , on land donated by the king . This foundation has often been claimed as the first Benedictine abbey outside Italy , and that by founding it Augustine introduced the Rule of St. Benedict into England , but there is no evidence that the abbey followed the Benedictine Rule at the time of its foundation . 
 = = Efforts in the south = = 
 = = = Relations with the British Christians = = = 
 Gregory had ordered that the native British bishops were to be governed by Augustine and , consequently , Augustine arranged a meeting with some of the native clergy some time between 602 and 604 . The meeting took place at a tree later given the name " Augustine 's Oak " , probably around the present @-@ day boundary between Somerset and Gloucestershire . Augustine apparently argued that the British church should give up any of its customs not in accordance with Roman practices , including the dating of Easter . He also urged them to help with the conversion of the Anglo @-@ Saxons . 
 After some discussion , the local bishops stated that they needed to consult with their own people before agreeing to Augustine 's requests , and left the meeting . Bede relates that a group of native bishops consulted an old hermit who said they should obey Augustine if , when they next met with him , Augustine rose when he greeted the natives . But if Augustine failed to stand up when they arrived for the second meeting , they should not submit . When Augustine failed to rise to greet the second delegation of British bishops at the next meeting , Bede says the native bishops refused to submit to Augustine . Bede then has Augustine proclaim a prophecy that because of lack of missionary effort towards the Anglo @-@ Saxons from the British church , the native church would suffer at the hands of the Anglo @-@ Saxons . This prophecy was seen as fulfilled when Æthelfrith of Northumbria supposedly killed 1200 native monks at the Battle of Chester . Bede uses the story of Augustine 's two meetings with two groups of British bishops as an example of how the native clergy refused to cooperate with the Gregorian mission . Later , Aldhelm , the abbot of Malmesbury , writing in the later part of the 7th century , claimed that the native clerks would not eat with the missionaries , nor would they perform Christian ceremonies with them . Laurence , Augustine 's successor , writing to the Irish bishops during his tenure of Canterbury , also stated that an Irish bishop , Dagan , would not share meals with the missionaries . 
 One probable reason for the British clergy 's refusal to cooperate with the Gregorian missionaries was the ongoing conflict between the natives and the Anglo @-@ Saxons , who still were encroaching upon British lands at the time of the mission . The British were unwilling to preach to the invaders of their country , and the invaders saw the natives as second @-@ class citizens , and would have been unwilling to listen to any conversion efforts . There was also a political dimension , as the missionaries could be seen as agents of the invaders ; because Augustine was protected by Æthelberht , submitting to Augustine would have been seen as submitting to Æthelberht 's authority , which the British bishops would have been unwilling to do . 
 Most of the information on the Gregorian mission comes from Bede 's narrative , and this reliance on one source necessarily leaves the picture of native missionary efforts skewed . First , Bede 's information is mainly from the north and the east of Britain . The western areas , where the native clergy was strongest , was an area little covered by Bede 's informants . In addition , although Bede presents the native church as one entity , in reality the native British were divided into a number of small political units , which makes Bede 's generalisations suspect . The historian Ian Wood argues that the existence of the Libellus points to more contact between Augustine and the native Christians because the topics covered in the work are not restricted to conversion from paganism , but also dealt with relations between differing styles of Christianity . Besides the text of the Libellus contained within Bede 's work , other versions of the letter circulated , some of which included a question omitted from Bede 's version . Wood argues that the question , which dealt with the cult of a native Christian saint , is only understandable if this cult impacted Augustine 's mission , which would imply that Augustine had more relations with the local Christians than those related by Bede . 
 = = = Spread of bishoprics and church affairs = = = 
 In 604 , another bishopric was founded , this time at Rochester , where Justus was consecrated as bishop . The king of Essex was converted in the same year , allowing another see to be established at London , with Mellitus as bishop . Rædwald , the king of the East Angles , also was converted , but no see was established in his territory . Rædwald had been converted while visiting Æthelberht in Kent , but when he returned to his own court he worshiped pagan gods as well as the Christian god . Bede relates that Rædwald 's backsliding was because of his still @-@ pagan wife , but the historian S. D. Church sees political implications of overlordship behind the vacillation about conversion . When Augustine died in 604 , Laurence , another missionary , succeeded him as archbishop . 
 The historian N. J. Higham suggests that a synod , or ecclesiastical conference to discuss church affairs and rules , was held at London during the early years of the mission , possibly shortly after 603 . Boniface , an Anglo @-@ Saxon native who became a missionary to the continental Saxons , mentions such a synod being held at London . Boniface says that the synod legislated on marriage , which he discussed with Pope Gregory III in 742 . Higham argues that because Augustine had asked for clarifications on the subject of marriage from Gregory the Great , it is likely that he could have held a synod to deliberate on the issue . Nicholas Brooks , another historian , is not so sure that there was such a synod , but does not completely rule out the possibility . He suggests it might have been that Boniface was influenced by a recent reading of Bede 's work . 
 The rise of Æthelfrith of Northumbria in the north of Britain limited Æthelbertht 's ability to expand his kingdom as well as limiting the spread of Christianity . Æthelfrith took over Deira about 604 , adding it to his own realm of Bernicia . However , the Frankish kings in Gaul were increasingly involved in internal power struggles , leaving Æthelbertht free to continue to promote Christianity within his own lands . The Kentish Church sent Justus , then Bishop of Rochester , and Peter , the abbot of Sts Peter and Paul Abbey in Canterbury , to the Council of Paris in 614 , probably with Æthelbertht 's support . Æthelbertht also promulgated a code of laws , which was probably influenced by the missionaries . 
 = = = Pagan reactions = = = 
 A pagan reaction set in following Æthelbert 's death in 616 ; Mellitus was expelled from London never to return , and Justus was expelled from Rochester , although he eventually managed to return after spending some time with Mellitus in Gaul . Bede relates a story that Laurence was preparing to join Mellitus and Justus in Francia when he had a dream in which Saint Peter appeared and whipped Laurence as a rebuke for his plans to leave his mission . When Laurence woke whip marks had miraculously appeared on his body . He showed these to the new Kentish king , who promptly was converted and recalled the exiled bishops . 
 The historian N. J. Higham sees political factors at work in the expulsion of Mellitus , as it was Sæberht 's sons who banished Mellitus . Bede said that the sons had never been converted , and after Æthelberht 's death they attempted to force Mellitus to give them the Eucharist without ever becoming Christians , seeing the Eucharist as magical . Although Bede does not give details of any political factors surrounding the event , it is likely that by expelling Mellitus the sons were demonstrating their independence from Kent , and repudiating the overlordship that Æthelberht had exercised over the East Saxons . There is no evidence that Christians among the East Saxons were mistreated or oppressed after Mellitus ' departure . 
 Æthelberht was succeeded in Kent by his son Eadbald . Bede states that after Æthelberht 's death Eadbald refused to be baptised and married his stepmother , an act forbidden by the teachings of the Roman Church . Although Bede 's account makes Laurence 's miraculous flogging the trigger for Eadbald 's baptism , this completely ignores the political and diplomatic problems facing Eadbald . There are also chronological problems with Bede 's narrative , as surviving papal letters contradict Bede 's account . Historians differ on the exact date of Eadbald 's conversion . D. P. Kirby argues that papal letters imply that Eadbald was converted during the time that Justus was Archbishop of Canterbury , which was after Laurence 's death , and long after the death of Æthelberht . Henry Mayr @-@ Harting accepts the <unk> chronology as correct , and feels that Eadbald was baptised soon after his father 's death . Higham agrees with Kirby that Eadbald did not convert immediately , contending that the king supported Christianity but did not convert for at least eight years after his father 's death . 
 = = Spread of Christianity to Northumbria = = 
 The spread of Christianity in the north of Britain gained ground when Edwin of Northumbria married Æthelburg , a daughter of Æthelbert , and agreed to allow her to continue to worship as a Christian . He also agreed to allow Paulinus of York to accompany her as a bishop , and for Paulinus to preach to the court . By 627 , Paulinus had converted Edwin , and on Easter , 627 , Edwin was baptised . Many others were baptised after the king 's conversion . The exact date when Paulinus went north is unclear ; some historians argue for 625 , the traditional date , whereas others believe that it was closer to 619 . Higham argues that the marriage alliance was part of an attempt by Eadbald , brother of the bride , to capitalise on the death of Rædwald in about 624 , in an attempt to regain the <unk> his father had once enjoyed . According to Higham , Rædwald 's death also removed one of the political factors keeping Eadbald from converting , and Higham dates Eadbald 's baptism to the time that his sister was sent to Northumbria . Although Bede 's account gives all the initiative to Edwin , it is likely that Eadbald also was active in seeking such an alliance . Edwin 's position in the north also was helped by Rædwald 's death , and Edwin seems to have held some authority over other kingdoms until his death . 
 Paulinus was active not only in Deira , which was Edwin 's powerbase , but also in Bernicia and Lindsey . Edwin planned to set up a northern archbishopric at York , following Gregory the Great 's plan for two archdioceses in Britain . Both Edwin and Eadbald sent to Rome to request a pallium for Paulinus , which was sent in July 634 . Many of the East Angles , whose king , Eorpwald appears to have converted to Christianity , were also converted by the missionaries . Following Edwin 's death in battle , in either 633 or 634 , Paulinus returned to Kent with Edwin 's widow and daughter . Only one member of Paulinus ' group stayed behind , James the Deacon . After Justus ' departure from Northumbria , a new king , Oswald , invited missionaries from the Irish monastery of Iona , who worked to convert the kingdom . 
 About the time that Edwin died in 633 , a member of the East Anglian royal family , Sigeberht , returned to Britain after his conversion while in exile in Francia . He asked Honorius , one of the Gregorian missionaries who was then Archbishop of Canterbury , to send him a bishop , and Honorius sent Felix of Burgundy , who was already a consecrated bishop ; Felix succeeded in converting the East Angles . 
 = = Other aspects = = 
 The Gregorian missionaries focused their efforts in areas where Roman settlement had been concentrated . It is possible that Gregory , when he sent the missionaries , was attempting to restore a form of Roman civilisation to England , modelling the church 's organisation after that of the church in Francia at that time . Another aspect of the mission was how little of it was based on monasticism . One monastery was established at Canterbury , which later became St Augustine 's Abbey , but although Augustine and some of his missionaries had been monks , they do not appear to have lived as monks at Canterbury . Instead , they lived more as secular clergy serving a cathedral church , and it appears likely that the sees established at Rochester and London were organised along similar lines . The Gaulish and Italian churches were organised around cities and the territories controlled by those cities . Pastoral services were centralised , and churches were built in the larger villages of the cities ' territorial rule . The seat of the bishopric was established in the city and all churches belonged to the diocese , staffed by the bishop 's clergy . 
 Most modern historians have noted how the Gregorian missionaries come across in Bede 's account as colourless and boring , compared to the Irish missionaries in Northumbria , and this is related directly to the way Bede gathered his information . The historian Henry Mayr @-@ Harting argues that in addition , most of the Gregorian missionaries were concerned with the Roman virtue of gravitas , or personal dignity not given to emotional displays , and this would have limited the colourful stories available about them . 
 One reason for the mission 's success was that it worked by example . Also important was Gregory 's flexibility and willingness to allow the missionaries to adjust their liturgies and behaviour . Another reason was the willingness of Æthelberht to be baptised by a non @-@ Frank . The king would have been wary of allowing the Frankish bishop Liudhard to convert him , as that might open Kent up to Frankish claims of overlordship . But being converted by an agent of the distant Roman pontiff was not only safer , it allowed the added prestige of accepting baptism from the central source of the Latin Church . As the Roman Church was considered part of the Roman Empire in Constantinople , this also would gain Æthelberht acknowledgement from the emperor . Other historians have attributed the success of the mission to the substantial resources Gregory invested in its success ; he sent over forty missionaries in the first group , with more joining them later , a quite significant number . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The last of Gregory 's missionaries , Archbishop Honorius , died on 30 September 653 . He was succeeded as archbishop by Deusdedit , a native Englishman . 
 = = = Pagan practices = = = 
 The missionaries were forced to proceed slowly , and could not do much about eliminating pagan practices , or destroying temples or other sacred sites , unlike the missionary efforts that had taken place in Gaul under St Martin . There was little fighting or bloodshed during the mission . Paganism was still practised in Kent until the 630s , and it was not declared illegal until 640 . Although Honorius sent Felix to the East Angles , it appears that most of the impetus for conversion came from the East Anglian king . 
 With the Gregorian missionaries , a third strand of Christian practice was added to the British Isles , to combine with the Gaulish and the Hiberno @-@ British strands already present . Although it is often suggested that the Gregorian missionaries introduced the Rule of Saint Benedict into England , there is no supporting evidence . The early archbishops at Canterbury claimed supremacy over all the bishops in the British Isles , but their claim was not acknowledged by most of the rest of the bishops . The Gregorian missionaries appear to have played no part in the conversion of the West Saxons , who were converted by a missionary sent directly by Pope Honorius I. Neither did they have much lasting influence in Northumbria , where after Edwin 's death the conversion of the Northumbrians was achieved by missionaries from Iona , not Canterbury . 
 = = = Papal aspects = = = 
 An important by @-@ product of the Gregorian mission was the close relationship it fostered between the Anglo @-@ Saxon Church and the Roman Church . Although Gregory had intended for the southern archiepiscopal see to be located at London , that never happened . A later tradition , dating from 797 , when an attempt was made to move the archbishopric from Canterbury to London by King Coenwulf of Mercia , stated that on the death of Augustine , the " wise men " of the Anglo @-@ Saxons met and decided that the see should remain at Canterbury , for that was where Augustine had preached . The idea that an archbishop needed a pallium in order to exercise his archiepiscopal authority derives from the Gregorian mission , which established the custom at Canterbury from where it was spread to the Continent by later Anglo @-@ Saxon missionaries such as Willibrord and Boniface . The close ties between the Anglo @-@ Saxon church and Rome were strengthened later in the 7th century when Theodore of Tarsus was appointed to Canterbury by the papacy . 
 The mission was part of a movement by Gregory to turn away from the East , and look to the Western parts of the old Roman Empire . After Gregory , a number of his successors as pope continued in the same vein , and maintained papal support for the conversion of the Anglo @-@ Saxons . The missionary efforts of Augustine and his companions , along with those of the Hiberno @-@ Scottish missionaries , were the model for the later Anglo @-@ Saxon missionaries to Germany . The historian R. A. Markus suggests that the Gregorian mission was a turning point in papal missionary strategy , marking the beginnings of a policy of persuasion rather than coercion . 
 = = = Cults of the saints = = = 
 Another effect of the mission was the promotion of the cult of Pope Gregory the Great by the Northumbrians amongst others ; the first Life of Gregory is from Whitby Abbey in Northumbria . Gregory was not popular in Rome , and it was not until Bede 's <unk> History began to circulate that Gregory 's cult also took root there . Gregory , in Bede 's work , is the driving force behind the Gregorian mission , and Augustine and the other missionaries are portrayed as depending on him for advice and help in their endeavours . Bede also gives a leading role in the conversion of Northumbria to Gregorian missionaries , especially in his Chronica <unk> , in which no mention is made of any Irish missionaries . By putting Gregory at the centre of the mission , even though he did not take part in it , Bede helped to spread the cult of Gregory , who not only became one of the major saints in Anglo @-@ Saxon England , but continued to overshadow Augustine even in the afterlife ; an Anglo @-@ Saxon church council of 747 ordered that Augustine should always be mentioned in the liturgy right after Gregory . 
 A number of the missionaries were considered saints , including Augustine , who became another cult figure ; the monastery he founded in Canterbury was eventually rededicated to him . Honorius , James the Deacon , Justus , Lawrence , Mellitus , Paulinus , and Peter , were also considered saints , along with Æthelberht , of whom Bede said that he continued to protect his people even after death . 
 = = = Art , architecture , and music = = = 
 A few objects at Canterbury have traditionally been linked with the mission , including the 6th @-@ century St Augustine Gospels produced in Italy , now held at Cambridge as Corpus Christi College MS 286 . There is a record of an illuminated and imported Bible of St Gregory , now lost , at Canterbury in the 7th century . Thomas of Elmham , in the late 15th century , described a number of other books held at that time by St Augustine 's Abbey , believed to have been gifts to the abbey from Augustine . In particular , Thomas recorded a psalter as being associated with Augustine , which the antiquary John Leland saw at the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 1530s , but it has since disappeared . 
 Augustine built a church at his foundation of Sts Peter and Paul Abbey at Canterbury , later renamed St Augustine 's Abbey . This church was destroyed after the Norman Conquest to make way for a new abbey church . The mission also established Augustine 's cathedral at Canterbury , which became Christ Church Priory . This church has not survived , and it is unclear if the church that was destroyed in 1067 and described by the medieval writer Eadmer as Augustine 's church , was built by Augustine . Another medieval chronicler , Florence of Worcester , claimed that the priory was destroyed in 1011 , and Eadmer himself had contradictory stories about the events of 1011 , in one place claiming that the church was destroyed by fire and in another claiming only that it was looted . A cathedral was also established in Rochester ; although the building was destroyed in 676 , the bishopric continued in existence . Other church buildings were erected by the missionaries in London , York , and possibly Lincoln , although none of them survive . 
 The missionaries introduced a musical form of chant into Britain , similar to that used in Rome during the mass . During the 7th and 8th centuries Canterbury was renowned for the excellence of its clergy 's chanting , and sent singing masters to instruct others , including two to Wilfrid , who became Bishop of York . <unk> , the first Bishop of Rochester , had a reputation for his skill at chanting , which he was said to have learned from the Gregorian missionaries . One of them , James the Deacon , taught chanting in Northumbria after Paulinus returned to Kent ; Bede noted that James was accomplished in the singing of the chants . 
 = = = Legal codes and documents = = = 
 The historian Ann Williams has argued that the missionaries ' familiarity with the Roman law , recently codified by the Emperor Justinian in the Corpus Iuris Civilis promulgated in 534 , were an influence on the English kings promulgating their own law codes . Bede specifically calls Æthelberht 's code a " code of law after the Roman manner " . Another influence , also introduced by the missionaries , on the early English law codes was the Old Testament legal codes . Williams sees the issuing of legal codes as not just laws but also as statements of royal authority , showing that the kings were not just warlords but also lawgivers and capable of securing peace and justice in their kingdoms . It has also been suggested that the missionaries contributed to the development of the charter in England , for the earliest surviving charters show not just Celtic and Frankish influences but also Roman touches . Williams argues that it is possible that Augustine introduced the charter into Kent . 
 = Russ Christopher = 
 Russell Ormand Christopher ( September 12 , 1917 – December 5 , 1954 ) was an American right @-@ handed pitcher in Major League Baseball who played for seven seasons in the American League with the Philadelphia Athletics and Cleveland Indians . In 241 career games , Christopher pitched 999 ⅔ innings and posted a win @-@ loss record of 54 – 64 , with 46 complete games , three shutouts , and a 3 @.@ 37 earned run average ( ERA ) . 
 A 6 ' 3 , 180 lb. player from Richmond , California , he played minor league baseball in the New York Yankees organization before being acquired by the Athletics in the rule 5 draft . Christopher joined the Athletics ' major league roster in 1942 and played six seasons for them , and made his only All @-@ Star appearance in 1945 . He was traded to the Indians before the 1948 season , and played one year of baseball with them . After the season ended , he retired due to health concerns and worked at an aircraft plant until his death in 1954 . 
 = = Early life and minor leagues = = 
 Christopher was born in Richmond , California . His brother , Loyd Christopher , went on to become a major league outfielder . Loyd was the one first interested in becoming a professional baseball player , but would not sign a contract unless Russ signed one as well . As a child , Christopher had a case of rheumatic fever , which damaged his heart . 
 He had his first taste of professional baseball in 1938 , when he signed with the Clovis Pioneers of the West Texas – New Mexico League . He pitched in 13 games for the pioneers , posting a 7 – 5 record , 106 innings pitched and a 4 @.@ 50 ERA . The following year , Christopher joined the El Paso Texans , the rookie @-@ level minor league team of the New York Yankees farm system . In 32 games with the Texans , he posted an 18 – 7 record , pitched 225 innings and had an ERA of 3 @.@ 68 . He was promoted in 1940 to the Wenatchee Chiefs of the Western International League , where he finished the year with an 8 – 8 record and a 4 @.@ 72 ERA in 20 games . At the end of the season , he was promoted to the Newark Bears of the International League along with seven other minor league players . 
 In his lone season with the Bears , Christopher pitched in 31 games . Among those games was a four @-@ hit shutout against the Rochester Red Wings in the International League playoffs to put the Bears up two games to none . In the championship series against the Montreal Royals , Christopher pitched seven solid innings in a victory for the Bears , but injured his back and did not play another game that season . He finished the season with a 16 – 7 record , a 2 @.@ 82 ERA and 12 complete games . At the conclusion of the season , Christopher was considered the top prospect in the rule 5 draft , and the Philadelphia Athletics selected him with the first pick of the draft . 
 = = Philadelphia Athletics = = 
 After pitching with the Athletics in spring training , manager Connie Mack placed Christopher on the major league roster , and he made his debut on April 14 , 1942 . On May 5 , Christopher made his first appearance as a starting pitcher against the Detroit Tigers . The Athletics won the game , 2 – 1 , and he got his first major league win . After another win five days later , he began a long losing streak . Many of the games he did pitch were in relief , including a game in June against the Cleveland Indians where he only allowed one hit in three innings . He got his third win of the season three months after his second on August 20 in a 2 – 1 victory over the Washington Nationals . He finished the season with a 4 – 13 record , a 3 @.@ 82 ERA , 30 total games , 58 strikeouts and 99 walks . The following season , Christopher re @-@ signed with the Athletics , and was one of the few remaining pitchers from the previous year on the team , the rest having been called to serve in World War II . He began the season in the starting rotation , winning his first start of the season against the Boston Red Sox in a 5 – 0 shutout . Over the course of the season , he converted to a sidearm pitching delivery , which led to three victories in a row for him . After a July 9 loss to the Tigers brought his record to 4 – 6 , Christopher did not pitch again until August 24 , and spent the rest of the season pitching in relief . He finished the season with a 5 – 8 record and a 3 @.@ 45 ERA . 
 Christopher began the 1944 Philadelphia Athletics season as a member of the starting rotation along with Don Black , Lum Harris and Bobo Newsom . However , he did split time in the first half of the year between the starting rotation and the bullpen . Among those appearances was a 16 @-@ inning match against the Chicago White Sox ; Christopher pitched the final four innings , losing 4 – 2 after Hal <unk> stole home plate . On July 14 , he pitched a 4 – 3 victory against the Senators , helping his team defeat Hall of Fame pitcher Early Wynn for the first time in three years . After starting the season with a 4 – 10 record , on July 22 Christopher went on a seven @-@ game winning streak that culminated with a 5 – 1 complete game victory over the White Sox . He finished the season with a 14 – 14 record , 84 strikeouts and an ERA of 2 @.@ 97 . After the season ended , Christopher and others went on a barnstorming tour throughout the United States , ending in Wenatchee , Washington . 
 The following season , Christopher was part of an optimistic 1945 Athletics team , so much so that coach Earle Mack felt that Christopher , Black , Newsom and Jesse Flores were the best quartet of starting pitchers in the league . He spent most of spring training holding out for a new contract , which was eventually agreed on in the middle of March . He missed the first couple weeks of the season due to injury , and won his season debut on April 18 , a 12 @-@ inning shutout against the Senators . He followed that up with a victory over the Boston Red Sox , allowing only one earned run in his first 21 innings of the season . In mid @-@ June , Christopher had won ten games , which not only led the league , but was more than the seven the rest of the Athletics pitching staff had combined . On July 21 , Christopher was part of a 24 @-@ inning game against the Tigers that ended in a 1 – 1 tie ; he went 13 innings in the game while Joe Berry pitched the other 11 . Although Christopher had a strong start to the season , he struggled during the second half . He lost seven straight games over a two @-@ month period before winning another on August 19 against the Tigers . He finished the year with a 13 – 13 record and a 3 @.@ 17 ERA . He was selected to the American League All @-@ Star team , however the game was canceled as a result of World War II . 
 The 1946 Philadelphia Athletics season began with Christopher the subject of a possible trade . The Athletics tried to obtain Johnny Lindell from the Yankees , but they wanted Christopher in return . Mack refused to give him up , and as a result the trade never materialized . He began the season in the starting rotation , and was the opening day starting pitcher in a 5 – 0 loss against the Yankees . Over the first part of the season , Christopher again split time between the rotation and the bullpen . In a 7 – 3 loss to the Indians on July 18 , Christopher could not get out of the second inning , allowing five earned runs . After this , he did not pitch for a month , and spent the rest of the season as an occasional reliever . He finished the season with five wins , seven losses and a 4 @.@ 30 ERA . After the season ended , Christopher began contemplating retirement from baseball . He had lost 10 pounds in the final months of the season and was light to begin with , and decided that he would retire if he could not gain the weight back over the winter . 
 Christopher gained the weight back and rejoined the Athletics for the 1947 season . While there was talk of keeping him in the rotation , he ended up becoming a full @-@ time reliever for the team . Despite this , Christopher was still able to contribute with his bat ; he drove in the winning run in a May 29 game against the Red Sox . Over the course of the season , Christopher evolved into the Athletics ' closer , finishing the games when the team 's pitchers could not go the distance . He finished the season having played 44 games , finishing 38 of them and getting 12 saves in the process . He also had 10 wins , seven losses , and a 2 @.@ 90 ERA . At the end of the season , Christopher was holding out on his contract , wanting either a starting role in the rotation or more money to remain a reliever . The two sides agreed to a deal at the end of February , and he looked to be a starting pitcher during the 1948 season . 
 = = Cleveland Indians = = 
 While Christopher was holding out for a new deal from the Athletics , he was also trying to gain weight . He went to around 40 banquets on behalf of Connie Mack during the offseason , and despite his eating habits , he remained at 170 pounds , not gaining an ounce . After apparently reaching an agreement with the Athletics , Christopher was purchased by the Cleveland Indians on April 3 , 1948 . While the deal was made between Mack and Indians owner Bill Veeck , Mack said he would not have made it unless Christopher consented to it , which he did not expect to happen . Indians manager Lou Boudreau reacted positively to the trade and felt that he was the missing piece for a pennant run . He said of the trade , " With Christopher on out staff , we 're definitely contenders . " 
 While Christopher was hoping to start , the Indians felt , like the Athletics , that he would be better as a relief pitcher for them . Early in the season , Christopher told Veeck that 1948 would be his final year , as his wife joined the doctors ' side , wanting him to retire and noting that he was playing on " borrowed time " already . He spent the season as the Indians ' chief relief pitcher alongside Ed Klieman , both of whom were considered two of the best relievers in the league that season . Christopher finished the season with 45 games played , a 3 – 2 record , a 2 @.@ 90 ERA , and 17 saves , which led the league . In the 1948 World Series , he pitched in game five , facing Mike McCormick and Eddie Stanky . He allowed singles to both hitters and allowed two runs to score , and was relieved by Satchel Paige , ending his only playoff appearance . 
 After the World Series ended , Christopher mulled over retirement , and in January 1949 , he made it official . However , at the start of February , he reconsidered and signed a contract with the Indians , deciding to play for one more year . A month later , as spring training began , he decided to retire for good , ending his career in baseball . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After retiring , Christopher moved to San Diego , where he lived with his wife and three children . In December 1950 , Christopher underwent heart surgery , and afterward felt optimistic about the possibility of pitching again . After a tryout with the Indians in 1951 , he joined the San Diego Padres for a salary of $ 1 a year . He spent several weeks training with the team , but was eventually released at the end of April , ending his comeback attempt . 
 When his final attempt at a comeback failed , Christopher went on to work in an aircraft plant in San Diego . He died in his hometown of Richmond , California , at the age of 37 on December 5 , 1954 and is interred at Chapel of the Chimes in Oakland , California . 
 Russ ' youngest daughter , Lynn Mary Christopher , born August 10 , 1950 , lives 6 months in San Diego County , and 6 months in Prescott , Arizona . 
 = Washington Park Race Track = 
 Washington Park Race Track was a popular horse racing venue in the Chicago metropolitan area from 1884 until 1977 . It had two locations during its existence . It was first situated in what is the current location of the Washington Park Subdivision of the Woodlawn community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . This is located immediately south of both the current Washington Park community area and Washington Park . The track was later relocated to Homewood , Illinois , which is also in Cook County . 
 The original track and its accompanying Jockey Club were social draws in the late 19th century , but modern developments and changes in the law led to the decline of both . In its prime , the track was an especially important social gathering place on opening day and the day of the American Derby , which ranked as one of horse racing 's highest purses . The Jockey club , designed by Solon Spencer Beman , hosted a social gathering led by General Philip Sheridan who was an early leader of the track and club . The track was closed and reopened according to the contemporary state and local laws on gambling and eventually waned in popularity and social importance . 
 Over the years , numerous famous horses and jockeys appeared at the track . In the 19th century , notable horses of the time , such as Emperor of Norfolk and Domino raced . In the 20th century , some of the most notable Thoroughbreds to race at Washington Park included Triple Crown winners Citation and Whirlaway . Other notable horses included Native Dancer and Swaps , who each won legs of the Triple Crown . Jockey Eddie Arcaro won both the 1948 and 1953 American Derby races at the track . In addition to the American Derby , several other notable graded stakes races were run at the track such as the Stars and Stripes Turf Handicap and the Washington Park Handicap . In addition , notable match races were held at the track . 
 = = Original track = = 
 In 1883 , a group of about 500 Chicagoans , led by General Philip Sheridan , banded together to create the Washington Park Jockey Club . Selecting a location at 61st and Cottage Grove , the Club opened and operated the Washington Park Race Track , valued at $ 150 @,@ 000 , the following year , claiming it to be " the Midwest ’ s preeminent track . " The track was part of the long tradition of constructing special facilities for sporting events and public assembly in the Chicago parks . At that time it was fashionable for the social elite to maintain close ties to equestrian sports . Some owned Thoroughbreds and thus were members of the Washington Park Jockey Club . The track 's clubhouse , which was completed in 1896 , was designed by Solon Spencer Beman , and C. B. McDonald built a short nine @-@ hole club members ' golf course in the infield of the track . 
 = = = Major races = = = 
 Each June , the track sponsored the American Derby , which had a purse ranked among the highest in the country . When Washington Park Race Track first organized the American Derby in 1883 , General Philip Sheridan served as its first President . By 1893 , the American Derby was the 2nd richest American race in the 19th century . Both The American Derby and Opening Day ( the first race of the season ) became important social calendar dates . Residents of elite late 19th century neighborhoods organized a number of related public activities outside the track grounds , including the annual Washington Park Race Track opening day parade . 
 Horse racing was not the only draw of the track . In 1900 , a race was staged at the track between a gasoline @-@ powered automobile and an electrically powered automobile . At the time , there were more electric cars in the country than gasoline powered ones . The race in Chicago was the first time a gasoline @-@ powered car beat an electric @-@ powered one in a race . 
 = = = Decline and closure of the original track = = = 
 The track ran into difficulties when Hempstead Washburne was elected Mayor of Chicago in 1892 . In 1893 , he began a gambling reform campaign , which included a goal of closing all race tracks in Chicago . His campaign eventually resulted in the 1894 closure of Washington Park Race Track , although the track reopened in 1898 . It remained open until 1905 , when the state of Illinois banned gambling and stopped all horse racing . By that time , the prestige of the club had declined , independently of Washburne 's reform movement , because more modern and spacious golf courses drew the members to other locations , and the residential dispersion of elite members from the community area made the club less important . However , the stables used by the track were not torn down and currently form a portion of the DuSable Museum of African @-@ American History . 
 = = New track = = 
 In 1926 , a second Washington Park Race Track opened up in south suburban Homewood . The new Washington Park Race Track was located west of Halsted Street just outside Homewood village bounds . The Illinois Central Railroad built a spur line directly between Chicago and the newly relocated track . The relocated track continued to be a famous and popular attraction . The inaugural meeting of organizers was July 3 , 1926 . The new track was constructed amongst a construction boom of racetracks in the United States during the 1920s , which included fifteen new large racetracks constructed during the decade . Others constructed at this time were Arlington Park nearby in Chicago and Hialeah Park in Florida . 
 Benjamin F. Lindheimer purchased Washington Park Race Track in 1935 and owned it until his death in 1960 . Long involved with the business , adopted daughter Marjorie Lindheimer Everett then took over management of the racetracks . 
 The American Derby was also reborn at the new track , and was run at Washington through 1957 , when it was moved to Arlington Park , in northwest suburban Arlington Heights . However , racing venues had previously shifted between Chicago @-@ area tracks . For example , in 1943 , Arlington Park shifted its major races to Washington Park as a result of curtailed racing due to World War II . 
 Another significant race run at the new track was the Grade 2 stakes Washington Park Handicap for three @-@ year @-@ olds and up . It was first held at Washington Park in 1926 , and continued to be held there until 1958 , when it was moved to Arlington Park , where it continues to be held to the present day and commemorates the Washington Park racetrack . 
 The new track hosted a number of special races between famous horses of the day . On August 29 , 1945 a match race between Busher and <unk> was held at the racetrack . The distance was one mile , with a purse of $ 25 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 . Busher won by almost two lengths , after the lead changed several times during the race . On August 31 , 1955 , Washington Park hosted a match race between Nashua and Swaps with a distance of a mile and a quarter . The purse was $ 100 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 . Nashua won by several lengths , having led the entire race . The race was well attended , and attracted reporters from across the country . Nashua went on to be named Horse of the Year for 1955 . 
 However , in spite of popular events , the track was not without scandals and allegations of misdeeds . For example , in 1970 , Marge Lindheimer Everett , manager of both Arlington and Washington Park , confessed to having bribed Illinois Governor Otto Kerner to gain premium racing dates . 
 Washington Park Race Track 's grandstand burned on the night of February 5 , 1977 , putting the track out of business . The property was sold and redeveloped in 1992 for commercial and residential use . 
 = = Horses who raced at Washington Park = = 
 Emperor of Norfolk won the 1888 American Derby 
 Domino won the 1893 Hyde Park Stakes 
 Whirlaway won the 1941 American Derby 
 Citation won the 1948 American Derby in the same year he won the Triple Crown , with Eddie Arcaro up 
 Coaltown won the 1949 Whirlaway Stakes , setting a new world mile mark while doing so 
 Native Dancer won the 1953 American Derby , with Eddie Arcaro up 
 Swaps won the 1956 Washington Park Handicap and the 1955 American Derby , where he set the record for that race that still stood in 2006 . 
 T. V. Lark won the American Derby and Washington Park Handicap in 1961 
 = = Other stakes races run at the racetrack = = 
 Sheridan Stakes began in 1884 , ran at the old and new racetracks 
 Washington Park Handicap began 1926 , moved to Arlington Park in 1958 
 Washington Park Futurity Stakes - inaugurated in 1937 , it was a race for two @-@ year @-@ olds . In 1959 , the race was moved to Chicago 's Arlington Park race track , and in 1962 was merged with the Arlington Futurity Stakes to create the Arlington @-@ Washington Futurity Stakes . It is now the Arlington @-@ Washington Breeders ' Cup Futurity . 
 Stars and Stripes Handicap only ran at second Washington Park in 1943 , 1944 and 1945 and again in 1958 and 1959 
 Arlington Handicap ran at Washington Park in 1943 , 1944 and 1945 
 Queen Elizabeth Handicap began in 1946 ( ran as the Misty Isle Handicap from 1946 to 1958 ) 
 = Elwood Haynes = 
 Elwood Haynes ( October 14 , 1857 – April 13 , 1925 ) was an American inventor , metallurgist , automotive pioneer , entrepreneur and industrialist . He invented the metal alloys stellite and martensitic stainless steel and designed one of the earliest automobiles made in the United States . He is recognized for having created the earliest American design that was feasible for mass production and , with the Apperson brothers , he formed the first company in the United States to produce automobiles profitably . He made many advances in the automotive industry . 
 Early in his career , while serving as a field superintendent at gas and oil companies during Indiana 's gas boom , Haynes invented several devices important to the advance of the natural gas industry . When working for the Indiana Natural Gas and Oil Company , he oversaw the construction of the first long @-@ distance natural gas pipeline in the United States , connecting Chicago with the Trenton Gas Field 150 miles ( 240 km ) away . He began to formulate plans for a motorized vehicle in the early 1890s ; he successfully road tested his first car , the Pioneer , on July 4 , 1894 — eight years after the first automobile was patented in Germany . He formed a partnership with Elmer and Edgar Apperson in 1896 to start Haynes @-@ Apperson for the commercial production of automobiles , and he renamed it Haynes Automobile Company in 1905 , following the loss of his partners . 
 Working in his laboratory to develop new corrosion @-@ resistant metals for auto parts , Haynes discovered that mixing tungsten with chromium , steel and iron resulted in the formation of strong and lightweight alloys that were impervious to corrosion and could withstand very high temperatures . In 1912 , he formed Haynes Stellite Company to produce one of the new alloys and received lucrative contracts during World War I , making Haynes a millionaire in 1916 . He sold his patent for stainless steel to the American Stainless Steel Company in exchange for enough stock to gain a seat at the company 's board of directors , a position he held for twelve years . He merged the Haynes Stellite company with Union Carbide in 1920 , and after passing through different owners , the company was renamed and is now called Haynes International . Haynes returned his focus to his automotive company , but in the economic recession of the 1920s the business went bankrupt and was liquidated . 
 An outspoken advocate of prohibition , he made substantial donations to the Prohibition Party and Indiana 's prohibitionist leader Frank Hanly . Haynes ran an unsuccessful campaign in Indiana for the U.S. Senate in 1916 as a prohibition candidate and remained active in the party until prohibition became law . Later , he became a philanthropist and served two terms as president of the YMCA , five years on the Indiana Board of Education , and was an active member of the Presbyterian church . After his death from complications arising from influenza , his Kokomo mansion was converted into the Elwood Haynes Museum and is open to the public where many of his original inventions and automobiles are on display . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and background = = = 
 Haynes was born on October 14 , 1857 , in Portland , Indiana , the fifth of ten children of Jacob M. Haynes and <unk> S. Haines Haynes . His family was of English descent ; he was a ninth @-@ generation descendant of Walter Haynes who immigrated from Wiltshire , England to Sudbury , Massachusetts in 1638 . His father was Jay County 's school commissioner , a lawyer , Whig politician , and a judge of the Jay and Randolph County common pleas court . Both of Haynes ' parents were dedicated Presbyterians and outspoken prohibitionists and educated their children from a young age to avoid liquor . His mother was the founder of a local Women 's Temperance Movement Union . His paternal grandfather Henry Haynes was a gunsmith and mechanic , and tutored Haynes about metallurgy . In 1866 , the family moved from their two @-@ room house in Portland into the countryside outside of town where they purchased a larger home to better accommodate their growing number of children . 
 At age 12 , Haynes built his first vehicle from scrap railroad car parts and operated it on the county 's railroad tracks . The local railroad foreman did not approve and later seized the vehicle and destroyed it . As a child , Haynes had an interest in chemistry and metallurgy and when he was 15 he built a smelting furnace and began working with copper , bronze , and iron . Haynes was also interested in nature and spent considerable time in the forest cataloging and observing plants , insects , and animals . Because he spent so much time there , his family nicknamed him " Wood " , a nickname they used for most of his life . As he grew older , he became an avid reader of books , including Principles of Natural Philosophy and Chemistry by William Wells . His early experiments and studies interested him in the fundamental properties of matter , and he was intrigued by how mixing compounds could create completely different alloys . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Haynes attended public schools through eighth grade and received a basic education . He had not determined a career path for himself and his parents often criticized him for lacking ambition ; they insisted that he seek employment . He began by working as a custodian at a local church and later for the railroad , hauling ballast to construction sites . At the church , he joined the choir where he met and began to court Bertha Lanterman . When Portland 's first public high school was opened in 1876 , Haynes returned to school at age 19 and completed two more years . Bertha and her family moved to Alabama during the spring of 1877 , and Haynes began a regular correspondence with her . During the summer of that year , a series of revival meetings were held in Indiana by Francis Murphy , a leader of a national temperance organization known as the Murphy Movement . Haynes attended the meetings , probably at his parents ' urging , and became interested in temperance . He took two of Murphy 's pledge cards and carried one for most of his life ; the other he mailed to Bertha . 
 Haynes ' father attended the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition in 1876 where he learned of a school that would fit his son 's interests . Using the money he had saved , Haynes decided to attend the college and enrolled in the Worcester Technical Institute in Worcester , Massachusetts , in September 1878 . The school was revolutionary for its time , combining technical training with a classical liberal arts education . Although he easily passed the difficult entrance exam , he found that he was ill @-@ prepared for some of his college courses , and he struggled with mathematics . To earn an income while away from home , he worked as a custodian and night guard at the local public library . He cleaned the building overnight and used his spare time to read books and study . During his final year at the school , boarding rates were increased beyond what Haynes could afford so with no other option , he lived in the library for several months . He could not afford to return home during his stay at the institute , so during the holidays he spent time with his family and friends in New England . 
 During his first term , he was required to receive a grade of 60 to remain in the school . Although he only achieved a 59 @.@ 2 after completing his final exams , he was permitted to remain because of his " recent progress . " Older than the other students in his class , he often spoke out against their use of alcohol . In his final year he took courses in metallurgy , ore analysis and assaying , and participated in a research project developing razors . His graduation thesis was entitled " The effects of Tungsten on Iron and Steel " . It laid out the basic principles of what would later become his two greatest advances in metallurgy . Haynes spent many hours in the institute 's laboratory working with tungsten and other metals before graduating in 1881 ; he was fourteenth out of twenty @-@ one graduates — twenty did not pass . 
 Haynes took a job teaching at the Jay County public school after returning home . Soon his income allowed him to buy a home near Portland High School where he worked and was promoted to principal in 1882 . That summer he took a week @-@ long trip to visit Bertha in Chattanooga , Tennessee , where he became sick with a cold and spent most of his time in bed nursed by Bertha , learning that her family would be returning to live in Portland in 1883 . After returning from the trip , he continued saving money and in 1884 he decided to continue his education by enrolling at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore , Maryland . He chose the school because , as it was only eight years old , it had one of the most modern laboratories available . He took courses in chemistry and biology and learned advanced metallurgic techniques . His mother died in May 1885 and he decided to leave the university without completing his second year , as he was not working to attain a degree but only taking courses of interest . After he had returned home again , he took a position at the newly established Eastern Indiana Normal School and Commercial College ( now Ball State University ) and served as the head of the chemistry department . 
 = = = Gas boom = = = 
 Natural gas was first found in Indiana in 1876 but it was not until 1886 that the magnitude of the discovery was known ; the Trenton Gas Field was the largest deposit of natural gas discovered in the 19th century and the first giant oil reserve found in the United States . As a professor at a university in the Trenton Field , Haynes offered his services to the drillers and worked to analyze soil samples , determine well pressure , and give estimates on the amount of energy that could be created by the gas . He delivered several lectures to large crowds about the importance of the gas discovery and the many possible applications of this new source of fuel . He began a petition to have the local citizens create a corporation to pump the fuel from the ground and pipe it to area homes and businesses . His promotion was successful and Portland Natural Gas and Oil Company was formed ; Haynes ' father was named to the new company 's board of directors . 
 In the fall of 1886 , the board hired Haynes as superintendent to manage the company and oversee the creation of wells and piping . The company was one of the first in the Trenton Field , and many of the others which soon followed modeled themselves on the Portland company . As a fuel and industry , natural gas was in its earliest stages . Haynes invented several devices that became important to the success of the industry . One of his first inventions was a device capable of measuring the amount of gas being pumped from wells . Haynes ' reputation as an industry leader grew out of his operations at Portland and the Kokomo Democrat referred to him as " the only infallible authority on natural gas in eastern Indiana " in an 1889 article . 
 Haynes married Bertha Lanterman in October 1887 after a ten @-@ year relationship . The ceremony was held at her parents ' Portland home and the couple honeymooned in Cincinnati . Their first child , Marie , was born on January 28 , 1889 , but she soon succumbed to illness and died when six months old . Their second child , a son born in 1890 , also died in infancy . The deaths saddened the family and caused them to turn more to their religion . Haynes became increasingly active in the Presbyterian church and became an elder . In December 1892 , the Haynes ' third child , Bernice , was born . A second son , March , was born 1896 . The two children were well educated and grew up to assist their father in his enterprises . 
 A primary pipeline was laid between Portland and a neighboring town during 1889 . Haynes oversaw construction of the ten @-@ mile ( 16 km ) long pipeline and the creation of the wells for pumping the gas . During his numerous buggy rides between the two towns , he first began to conceive of a novel form of motorized transportation . His thoughts on the topic were spurred by his need to regularly change horses because of their inability to endure the long distances and sandy roads he frequently traveled . He theorized that a motorized vehicle would be more economical than horse @-@ and @-@ buggy transportation , and could potentially move at a faster rate of speed . 
 The Indiana Natural Gas and Oil Company , headquartered in Chicago , hired Haynes as their field superintendent in 1890 after the company 's board of directors " discovered that Elwood Haynes knew more about natural gas than anyone in the state " . He and his wife moved to Greentown where he oversaw the construction of the company 's first pumping wells . The company planned to construct a natural gas line from eastern Indiana to Chicago , a distance of over 150 miles ( 240 km ) , which would be the first long @-@ distance natural gas pipeline built in the United States . Haynes supervised the design and construction phases of the project . Because of the length of the line and the temperature changes between the two points , moisture in the natural gas condensed on the pipe , and during colder times would freeze the pipes in some locations . The problem was a significant setback to the operation , which had to stop pumping during the winter months . Haynes solved the problem by creating a refrigeration device that would cause the moisture ( which was a diluted form of gasoline ) to condense , freeze , and fall into a reservoir . These devices were installed between the main lines and pumping stations and effectively removed all the moisture from the natural gas before it was pumped into the lines . This prevented water buildup in the pipes and allowed the pipes to be used year round . The concept was a significant advance in early refrigeration technology and was further developed by others in later years . 
 Haynes was offered a higher ranking position within Indiana Gas at the Chicago headquarters , but by then he had become aware of the business 's connection to the corrupt and disgraced monopolist Charles T. Yerkes . A deeply religious man who feared involvement in any corruption , Haynes entertained the offer only briefly ; Bertha 's advice to refuse the position persuaded him and he declined the offer and instead sought a position more removed from the company 's Chicago leadership . After the pipeline became fully operational in 1892 , Haynes moved to Kokomo where he was made a supervisor of the Indiana Gas 's local operations . The Indiana General Assembly began attempts to regulate the gas industry and accused the field operations of various companies of gross waste ; Indiana Gas became the primary target of scathing reports . Haynes helped the company compile reports and offered opinions on the validity of their claims . He was disturbed to find that many of the claims proved true , and advocated that the gas be used more conservatively . He specifically recommended that the <unk> ( the flames fed by natural gas to show that the gas was flowing ) be extinguished , as they were found to be the largest source of waste . He calculated that the company daily wasted $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 240 @,@ 000 in 2009 chained dollars ) worth of gas by burning <unk> , a figure that shocked the company 's leaders . Despite his support of the governmental anti @-@ waste regulations , he was steadfastly against other rules that regulated pressure and hindered productivity . He personally filed lawsuits against the regulations a month after their passage , claiming that the government had no right to regulate artificial increases in well pressure . The court case continued until 1896 , when the Indiana Supreme Court ruled that the regulations were unconstitutional . The entire set of regulations was repealed , including the anti @-@ waste measures . The gross waste continued among other companies and the field 's wells began to run dry by 1905 — modern experts estimate as much as 90 % of the one trillion cubic feet ( 30 km3 ) of natural gas in the field was lost into the atmosphere or misused . 
 = = Enterprises = = 
 = = = 1894 First Haynes car = = = 
 According to Haynes , he began laying out " plans for the construction of a mechanically propelled vehicle for use on highways " in 1891 . His first idea was for a steam @-@ powered vehicle , but after careful consideration he decided the use of a furnace on the device would be too dangerous . His second plan was to use electrical power , but after research he found that no practical means existed to store the electricity required for operation . He continued to develop his plans until the summer of 1893 when he attended the Chicago World 's Fair , where he first witnessed a gasoline engine . The demonstration of the newly invented engine inspired him to decide that an internal combustion engine would be the most practical method to propel his vehicle . A gasoline powered European automobile built by German inventor Karl Benz ( who patented the first automobile in 1886 ) also was on display during the fair , although it is unknown if Haynes witnessed this vehicle during his visit . 
 Haynes ordered a one @-@ horsepower marine upright , two @-@ cycle engine from <unk> Gas Engine Company in Grand Rapids , Michigan for $ 225 . Although the engine was intended for use on a small boat , Haynes believed it could be adapted for his purposes . The 180 lb ( 82 kg ) engine arrived in the fall of 1893 . Haynes soon had the device attached to a carriage he built in his kitchen . He found when he started the engine that its vibrations were too severe for the harness it was in , and before he could stop the engine it had done considerable damage to the carriage and the floor of his kitchen , and filled the room with smoke . 
 Haynes decided he needed a different facility to continue the experiment after his wife told him she would not abide his destruction of the family kitchen . He contacted Elmer Apperson , the operator of the Riverside Machine Works , and arranged to use a space in his shop for the continued development . He agreed to work on his vehicle only after @-@ hours , pay 40 cents per hour for the help of Elmer and his brother Edgar , and to not hold them responsible should his project fail . He started building a new carriage , this time with a heavier steel harness . He described the appearance of the vehicle as a " small truck " . The wheel axles were also made of steel and the entire front axle was constructed to swivel . A central column was built of steel and laid across the axles in such a way as to allow it move in all directions within a small radius to accommodate any sudden movements by the motor or vehicle . 
 Because the traction of rubber tires was unknown , Haynes completed a series of tests with a bicycle on paved roads . He used a wagon built to the weight of his automobile and a horse to pull a device that would cause the wheels to turn , thereby providing traction . With this , he was able to determine the ratio of weight to gear sizes needed to enable the tires to provide sufficient traction for propulsion . Once completed , his vehicle weighed about 820 pounds ( 370 kg ) . 
 He named his car the Pioneer and first test drove the vehicle on July 4 , 1894 . The Apperson brothers had notified the Kokomo townspeople of the test drive and a crowd gathered to witness the event . Haynes was concerned that his vehicle could injure someone in the crowd , so he had the vehicle towed by a horse and buggy to <unk> Pike , away from the crowd . The car started with Haynes driving and Elmer Apperson riding as a passenger , and traveled at 7 mph ( 11 km / h ) . He traveled for 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) and then stopped the vehicle to manually turn it around with Elmer 's help . He proceeded to drive it several more miles back into town without stopping . His trip convinced him that the vehicle was worthwhile and could become a valuable enterprise , although he was disappointed in the vehicle 's handling and decided he needed to improve the steering system and find a way to divert the motor 's exhaust smoke away from the carriage . 
 Haynes ' car is believed to be the second gasoline @-@ engine powered vehicle successfully road tested in the United States , according to its exhibit information at the Smithsonian Institution . It was built two years before Henry Ford 's <unk> , and preceded only by Charles Duryea 's Motorized Wagon less than a year earlier . Unlike Duryea 's car , which was an adapted buckboard wagon that was designed to run under its own power but still able to be pulled by horse , Haynes ' car was designed only to run on its own . Some automotive historians use this difference to determine that Haynes ' car was the first true American automobile . The <unk> company continued to be intrigued by Haynes ' use of their motor and sent representatives to photo his vehicle and published the images as an advertisement for one of their engine 's possible uses . The publicity spurred the creation of numerous other automobiles across the American midwest . 
 Haynes continued to drive his car as he added improvements to the vehicle , and constructed the Pioneer II in 1895 to incorporate his improved steering designs and an exhaust pipe . He built the new car with the intention of running it in the 1895 Chicago Times @-@ Herald Race , the first automobile race in the United States . Although over seventy @-@ five cars were entered in the race , most of their owners did not have them completed in time for race so only three cars and six early motorcycles showed up . While driving to the race , Haynes had a confrontation with a Chicago policeman who insisted that Haynes had no right to drive his vehicle on public roads , forcing him to requisition a horse to pull the car the rest of the way . Similar incidents happened with the other race 's entries so the city passed an ordinance a few days later to clear up any ambiguity in the laws and allow automobiles equal access to the city streets , allowing the postponed race to take place . While giving his car a ride around the town on the following day Haynes was involved in what is believed to be the first automobile accident after swerving to miss a street car and striking a sharp curb , busting a tire and damaging the axle . Without a spare tire , Haynes was unable to run in the race . The race was held on November 28 , and thousands of spectators turned out . Duryea 's car won first place and a German Benz came in second . Another contest was held in which Haynes won a prize for most intuitive design . 
 = = = Haynes @-@ Apperson = = = 
 Haynes continued to perfect his auto design , and in late 1895 he began his work to create a new hard alloy for use as a crankcase and other auto parts . His intent was to make a metal that would be resistant to rusting . He experimented with the use of aluminum and found that when used , it significantly deadened the noise produced by the engine parts . As his designs progressed , he decided to form a partnership for the manufacture of his vehicles . At the end of 1894 , Haynes joined with Elmer and Edgar Apperson to create an automobile company and began producing cars that year . Their company is recognized as being the first viable automotive company in the United States , and the second company to produce autos commercially . The Duryea Motor Wagon Company had formed a year earlier , but went out of business after producing only thirteen vehicles . Haynes became involved in a dispute with the Duryea company over the advertisements Haynes @-@ Apperson ran , claiming to have created the first automobile . The Haynes @-@ Apperson advertisement was clearly false , but after Duryea 's company went bankrupt in 1898 , there was no one to continue to dispute the claim . " America 's First Car " remained the company 's motto for the rest of its existence . 
 By 1896 , the company produced one new car every two to three weeks and built vehicles on order for $ 2 @,@ 000 . As the orders increased , the company formally incorporated as Haynes @-@ Apperson on May 5 , 1898 , with $ 25 @,@ 000 in capital from stock issued to Portland and Kokomo businessmen . At the end of that year the company relocated to a large factory it had built in Kokomo . Two new models were designed and the workforce expanded as production increased . Haynes @-@ Apperson ran advertisements in area newspapers and demonstrated cars at county fairs and other exhibitions . Demand for the vehicles grew rapidly from five cars produced in 1898 to thirty in 1899 , 192 in 1900 , and 240 in 1901 . The work kept the factory open 24 hours a day , and two shifts totaling more than 350 workers were needed to keep the factory running at capacity by 1902 . Sales totaled over $ 400 @,@ 000 that year . 
 Haynes @-@ Apperson automobiles were known for their long @-@ distance running capability . The company 's cars regularly competed and won prizes in endurance races that demonstrated the distance and terrain over which the cars could travel . Haynes had soon designed superior methods of achieving traction and his car could climb hills easier than his competitors in the early races . The last model designed under the Haynes @-@ Apperson name had three speeds and was capable of 24 mph on pneumatic tires . In 1901 , a Haynes car was entered in the first Long Island Non @-@ Stop endurance race . The Haynes car took first place in the race , adding to the company 's publicity and helping to feed a large jump in sales . 
 Another event to gain the company significant publicity was the sale of a car to Dr. Ashley A. Webber in New York City . Webber refused to buy any car unless the seller could prove the car 's endurance by driving it to his home . Haynes and Edgar Apperson readily agreed to the demand and drove the car from Kokomo to Webber 's New York home , the first time an automobile traveled over 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) . The trip took over a month ; after driving several days in the rain , the two decided to install a roof on future models . 
 Haynes began to have disagreements with the Apperson brothers for reasons that were never made public but were probably over money and design plans . Haynes wanted to produce luxury cars because much of the company 's early clientele was wealthy , while the <unk> wanted to produce utilitarian vehicles that could be marketed to businesses . The disagreement led the two brothers to split from Haynes and start a company of their own in 1902 . The loss of his partners necessitated that Haynes leave his position at Indiana Gas to devote more time to his growing business . Haynes was most interested in working on development , and turned over daily management to Victor <unk> in 1903 . Haynes spent most of his research efforts developing metals in an attempt to discover lighter and stronger alloys for automobile parts . He also investigated other areas and published a 1906 paper on the impurities in gasoline and recommended that the sulfur content in the fuel be lowered to increase engine performance . 
 = = = Haynes Automobile Company = = = 
 In 1905 , three years after the Apperson brothers split from Haynes , Haynes @-@ Apperson was renamed the Haynes Automobile Company and Haynes launched a series of publicity campaigns . A parade of 2 @,@ 000 cars was organized in New York City during 1908 and Haynes , whom many recognized as the inventor of the American automobile , led the parade down Broadway riding in the Pioneer . He was followed by ten Haynes cars , a model from each year to display the advancement in technology . On his way to the parade , Haynes was unaware of the city 's newly established speeding laws and was arrested for driving too fast — in a car with a top speed of 15 mph ( 17 km / h ) — and taken to jail . He was soon able to see a magistrate who released him after learning that he was Elwood Haynes and had come to lead the parade . The celebration was intended to be a ten @-@ year commemoration of the invention of the automobile , although earlier self @-@ vehicles dated back nearly twenty years in Europe . Haynes donated the Pioneer to the United States Government in 1910 to be placed in the Smithsonian Institution where it is still on display in the National Museum of American History as the second oldest motorized vehicle in the United States . 
 Haynes ' Model L was his most popular vehicle . First designed in 1905 , the three @-@ speed car could travel at 35 mph ( 58 km / h ) and carry four passengers ; the company sold over 4 @,@ 300 . Haynes expanded the company significantly in 1908 to accommodate ever @-@ increasing sales . More stock was issued and more capital raised to build a new and larger factory . By 1909 the company was producing 650 cars annually with models priced between $ 2 @,@ 500 and $ 5 @,@ 500 . In 1910 , Haynes Auto became the first company to build a car with a roof , windshield , headlights , and a speedometer as standard on each vehicle to continue their goal of producing the best luxury vehicles . 
 More than 1 @,@ 000 autos were built by Haynes Automobile Company in 1910 and the company continued to experience growth , until a devastating fire swept the company factory in 1911 and killed one employee . Recovery from the blaze was slow , and it was not until 1913 that the company was able to resume its growth . To continue the promotion of his cars , Haynes organized a trip in which he crossed the country by automobile in 1914 . The trip gained considerable attention from the press and gave his company publicity and a much needed sales boost in the wake of the fire . Almost every town he visited printed newspaper stories on his invention and many hailed him as the " Father of the Automobile " . 
 = = = Haynes Stellite Company = = = 
 Haynes continued his research into ways to produce corrosion resistant metals . While working on alloys for use in spark plugs , he created a metal he named stellite . Realizing the value of his discovery , he patented his first version in 1907 . The metal was very resistant to corrosion and had immediate application in tool making and numerous other implementations . He continued to experiment with it until 1910 when he published his findings in a paper to the International Congress of Applied Chemistry and the American Institute of Metals , where he held memberships . His final version was completed in 1912 and his patent issued on June 20 . 
 He applied for another patent on an alloy he called stainless steel , now known as martensitic stainless steel . The Patent Office rejected his application saying that it was not a new alloy . Haynes conceded their point , but submitted a second application and supplied a sample showing the <unk> of his alloy when created using his exact proportions of metals , and it was granted . At the urging of his wife , he created the first set of stainless steel silverware for her personal use . The first piece of stainless steel was forged by Homer Dan Farmer in Haynes laboratory . It was a large meat knife and was donated to the Haynes Museum by the family of Dan Heflin , grandson of Homer Dan Farmer . In later years he claimed to have created stainless steel because she did not enjoy polishing their silver tableware . British metallurgist Harry Brearley independently produced an identical alloy around the same time and applied for an American patent and found that one already existed . Brearley had also created other innovations for the metal , but they were of little value without the stainless steel patent . He sought out Haynes and the two decided to pool their findings in a single company to produce the alloy . Haynes sold his stainless steel patent in 1918 to the American Stainless Steel Company , a company Brearley had created with the assistance of investors in Pennsylvania . In exchange he and his estate received royalties on its production until the patent expired in 1930 . The stock he received as payment allowed him to gain a seat among the company 's board of directors and he installed his son , March , to represent him . The income from the transaction led Haynes to begin the accumulation of a large fortune . 
 Seeing stellite as a far more valuable metal , he decided to keep its patent for himself and founded the Haynes Stellite Company in Kokomo to produce the metal in September 1912 . Many of his initial requests for the metal were from medical tool manufacturers who saw the alloy as the best for surgical tools . Because his company could not produce enough of the metal to satisfy demand , Haynes issued licenses to several companies in the United States , Canada , and Europe to produce the alloy and pay him royalties . Haynes strictly controlled production , and did not permit the other licensees to sell stellite in its raw form , but to only sell it as specific finished products . In that way , he remained the only vendor who could sell sheets of the metal . As World War I broke out , his company received large government contracts for use of the material . Stellite was found to have excellent applications in airplanes , and because it was non @-@ corrosive and could protect its contents indefinitely , it proved to be the best metal available for ammunition casing . In 1916 alone , the company registered $ 1 @.@ 3 million in sales . The rapid growth of the business made Haynes increasingly wealthy and he became a millionaire that year . Despite his large income , he refused to provide his employees a year @-@ end bonus , causing a significant stir in the factory . When a foreman demanded to know the reason that their wages were not raised , he told him , " It doesn 't pay to give the working man too much money — it makes him too independent . " His statement was widely repeated and , although he claimed to have made it in jest , it alienated a large part of his workforce and began a period of labor problems . 
 After the war , Haynes Stellite moved to producing tableware , jewelry , and pocket knives . The employees of the company unionized and began to demand wage increases beyond what Haynes believed was fair . The threat of labor strikes and Haynes ' desire to avoid the problem led him to sell the company to Union Carbide on April 10 , 1920 , in exchange for 25 @,@ 000 shares of Union Carbide stock valued at $ 2 million . He later made an additional half million from dividends . Other details of the deal were never made public , and Haynes may have made as much $ 4 million on the sale . After a series of owners , the company is now called Haynes International and is again independent . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Prohibition = = = 
 Haynes was an avid supporter of prohibition and spoke several times on behalf of prohibitionist leader Frank Hanly , lending him both personal and financial support . Hanly advocated the passage of a local option law that allowed most of Indiana to ban liquor sales in 1909 . He continued in his support of the Prohibition Party and donated it thousands of dollars and an automobile nicknamed the " Prohibition Flyer " . He became increasingly involved in the organization and in 1916 he ran for the United States Senate on the prohibition ticket , making many speeches and stumping across the state . He was overwhelmingly defeated , receiving only 15 @,@ 598 votes out of nearly one million cast . Harry Stewart New , the Republican candidate narrowly won the election by plurality , and Haynes was accused of costing Incumbent Democratic Senator John W. Kern 's re @-@ election . Despite his personal electoral failure , liquor sales were completely banned in Indiana by a 1918 law that went into effect in 1919 . With his goals achieved , Haynes switched to join the Republican Party , but was significantly less active in politics thereafter . 
 Although Haynes was a prohibitionist , he was a critic of the Indiana Branch of the Ku Klux Klan , which was in the height of its power during the 1910s and 1920s . In letters to friends and fellow prohibitionists , he ridiculed the organization for using violent and illegal tactics to achieve prohibition , and accused them of hypocrisy for supporting many anti @-@ prohibition Democratic politicians . Kokomo politics was dominated by the Klan during that period and it is unknown if Haynes spoke publicly against the organization . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Haynes purchased a new home on Webster Street in Kokomo in 1915 . The home , known as the Haynes Mansion , was large enough to house a personal laboratory for Haynes to work in . As he grew older and became less involved in his businesses , Haynes became increasingly philanthropic . He made regular large donations to the Presbyterian church and became a patron of the Worcester Institute he had attended , providing scholarships and donating funds for expansion . 
 He funded the formation of a Young Men 's Christian Association in Kokomo where he and his son became active . Haynes taught swimming classes and regularly took underprivileged young boys to movies and bought them dinners . After several years of active membership at the local level , he was elected president of the national YMCA in 1919 and served two one @-@ year terms . His primary focus during his tenure was the launching of several successful membership drives . In 1920 , he was appointed to the Indiana State Board of Education by Governor James P. Goodrich where he advocated increased state funding for vocational education . 
 The United States economy went into a recession in the early 1920s and automobile sales decreased . Coupled with increasing competition , Haynes Automobile Company began running into debt problems . Haynes had to use his personal savings to rescue the company in 1921 and pay off some outstanding accounts . A bond drive was launched to raise $ 1 million to help fund the company through the period , but it fell significantly short of raising enough money . Haynes was the primary purchaser of the bonds . Unlike the other large auto companies like Ford and General Motors , Haynes Auto did not have the widespread dealership agreements that were able to sustain their companies through the hard times ; his company relied on customer 's ordering directly from the factory . Haynes Auto sales quickly began to slip from a peak of nearly 6 @,@ 000 cars sold in 1922 . In 1923 sales dropped to 4 @,@ 300 , and 1 @,@ 500 in 1924 . The situation continued to be bleak for the company , and it was forced to declare bankruptcy in October 1924 . Haynes sought a merger with multiple other auto companies , including Henry Ford , but partners were not forthcoming and Haynes was forced to agree to a liquidation in 1925 . He was held personally responsible for about $ 95 @,@ 000 of the company 's debt . In addition , he lost $ 335 @,@ 700 in stock he held in the company and a substantial amount in investment bonds . In total , the loss cost Haynes an estimated quarter of his net worth . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 On January 6 , 1925 , Haynes , the Apperson brothers , and other automotive pioneers were awarded gold medals by the National Automobile Chamber of Commerce at a New York City auto exhibition for their contributions to the industry . On his return trip home , he contracted influenza and his health began to deteriorate rapidly . In March , he asked his son to take over his business interests while he traveled to Florida to seek rest in the warmer climate . His condition steadily worsened , causing him to cancel his planned trip to Cuba and return to Kokomo . He remained in his home , attended by his personal physician and a nurse until his death from congestive heart failure on April 13 , 1925 . Haynes ' funeral was held in Kokomo before his interment at the city 's Memorial Park cemetery . 
 Haynes ' fortune had shrunk considerably with the collapse of his auto company . He still held an estimated $ 2 @.@ 85 million ( $ 35 million in 2009 chained dollars ) in stocks , bonds , and other assets , but almost all of his cash savings were gone . He had already been forced to borrow money using future dividends and royalties as collateral , leaving his family with some difficulty in coming up with funds to maintain his home . Haynes ' estate was left to his wife who continued to live in the family mansion until her own death from a stroke in August 1933 . The family assets were distributed between Bernice and March who separately oversaw their portion of the family 's interests . March inherited the family mansion , but sold it in 1957 to Martin J. <unk> , General Manager of the Delco Electronics Division of the General Motors Company who lived there until he was transferred to Detroit in 1964 . General Motors purchased the house from <unk> at that time so that he could purchase a home in Detroit . GM maintained ownership for about a year ( it was vacant ) and then sold the mansion in 1965 to Bernice , who donated it to the city of Kokomo . The city converted it into the Elwood Haynes Museum and it has been open to the public since 1967 . In January 1944 the SS Elwood Haynes , a Liberty Ship built during World War II , was named in Haynes ' honor . 
 Haynes is remembered as a pioneer of the American automobile , and as the creator of the first automobile design viable for mass production . He is credited as being one of those primarily responsible for the rapid growth of the natural gas industry in Indiana , a boom that made northern Indiana one of the leading industrial regions of the United States . He is also remembered for his development of stainless steel and stellite , materials that are commonly used across the world today . Stellite remains an important metal , as its ability to withstand high temperatures has made it a component in American spacecraft . In July 2015 , he was inducted into the 75th class of the Automotive Hall of Fame in Detroit , Michigan . 
 Haynes is the grandfather of Margaret Hillis , founder and director of the Chicago Symphony Chorus , and Elwood Hillis , an eight term Congressman representing Indiana 's 5th District . 
 = Gemini ( 2002 Tamil film ) = 
 Gemini is a 2002 Indian Tamil @-@ language action film written and directed by Saran and produced by AVM Productions . The film features Vikram in the title role of a small @-@ time criminal and aspiring don who , after falling in love , decides to refrain from crime ; Kiran Rathod plays his love interest . Murali stars as Singaperumal , a police officer who inspires and guides Gemini in his attempts to reform . The cast includes Kalabhavan Mani as the principal antagonist while Vinu Chakravarthy , Manorama and Thennavan portray significant roles . Based on gang wars in Chennai , the film delves into the lives of outlaws and the roles the police and society play in their rehabilitation and acceptance . 
 In early 2001 , rival gangsters " Vellai " Ravi and Chera reformed themselves with the patronage of a police officer . Saran was inspired by this incident and scripted a story based on it . The film was initially entitled <unk> with Ajith Kumar intended to play the lead role , but the project was shelved after a week 's shoot when Ajith lost interest and left . Saran reworked the script , retitled the production Gemini and cast the new leads . The revived project was announced in August 2001 . Production began shortly afterwards in December the same year and was completed by March 2002 . The film was shot mainly at the AVM Studios in Chennai , while two song sequences were filmed in Switzerland . The film had cinematography by A. Venkatesh and editing by Suresh Urs while the soundtrack was scored by Bharathwaj . 
 The film 's soundtrack was well received , with the song " O Podu " becoming a sensation in Tamil Nadu . Gemini was released two days ahead of the Tamil New Year on 12 April 2002 and received mixed reviews from critics , with praise directed towards the performances of Vikram and Mani but criticism towards Saran 's script . Made at an estimated cost of ₹ 40 million ( US $ 590 @,@ 000 ) , the film earned ₹ 210 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 1 million ) at the box office and became the highest @-@ grossing Tamil film of the year . The film 's success , largely attributed to the popularity of " O Podu " , resurrected the Tamil film industry , which was experiencing difficulties after a series of box office failures . The film won three Filmfare Awards , three <unk> Awards and four Cinema Express Awards . Later that same year , Saran remade the film in Telugu as <unk> . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Teja ( Kalabhavan Mani ) is a high @-@ profile gangster in North Madras , who often imitates the behaviour characteristic of different animals for sarcastic effect . Accompanied by his gang , he arrives at a magistrate 's court for a hearing . His animal antics are mocked at by " <unk> " Jeeva , another accused . Teja and his gang retaliate and kill Jeeva within the court premises . Jeeva was a member of a rival gang headed by Gemini ( Vikram ) , an aspiring goon from <unk> who aspires to dethrone Teja and take his place . To avenge Jeeva 's death , Gemini hunts down the murderer Pandian while Isaac , one of Gemini 's men , kills him . This incident leads to a feud between Gemini and Teja , and a fight for supremacy ensues . Pandian 's mother Annamma ( Manorama ) , a destitute woman , locates the whereabouts of her son 's murderers . She approaches Gemini , becomes the gang 's cook and awaits a chance to poison them . 
 Gemini meets and falls in love with Manisha Natwarlal ( Kiran Rathod ) , a Marwari woman . To pursue her , he joins an evening class at the college that she attends and she falls in love with him , unaware of his true identity . Two businessmen approach Gemini to evict traders from a market so that a shopping complex can be built in its place . As the market is in his control , Gemini refuses the offer and the businessmen hire Teja to execute the job . Feigning an altercation with Gemini , his sidekick Kai ( Thennavan ) joins Teja 's gang , acts as the inside man and foils the plan . Teja becomes enraged at being outsmarted by Gemini . 
 Singaperumal ( Murali ) , an astute police officer , is promoted to the position of Director General of Police ( DGP ) . Keen on eradicating crime , he arrests both Gemini and Teja and the arrests are made " off the record " owing to their political influence . Aware of the rivalry between them , Singaperumal puts them in a private cell so they can beat each other to death . While Teja tries to exact revenge for the market issue , Gemini does not fight back but persuades Teja to trick Singaperumal by pleading guilty and requesting a chance to reform . Gemini 's trick works and they are released . 
 Since Gemini was arrested at the college , Manisha discovers his identity and resents him . To regain her attention , Gemini reforms his ways . Though his gang initially disapprove of it , they relent . As Gemini and his gang regret their actions , Annamma reveals her true identity and forgives them . Singaperumal helps Gemini to get back into college and reunite with Manisha . Teja returns to his gang and continues his illegal activities . He pesters Gemini to help him in his business . Gemini informs Singaperumal of Teja 's activities ; Teja is caught smuggling narcotics , is prosecuted and serves a term in prison . 
 A few months later , Singaperumal is transferred and a corrupt officer ( Vinu Chakravarthy ) takes his place . The current DGP releases Teja and together , they urge Gemini to work for them and repay for the losses they incurred but Gemini refuses . To force him to return to his old ways , Teja persuades Isaac to conspire against Gemini . With Isaac 's help , Teja plots and kills Kai . Gemini is infuriated and confronts Teja to settle the issue . During the fight , Gemini beats up Teja and swaps their clothes , leaving Teja bound and gagged . The new DGP arrives and shoots Gemini dead ; he later realises that he had actually shot Teja who was in Gemini 's clothes . While the DGP grieves over Teja 's death , he receives news that he has been transferred to the Sewage Control Board . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Vikram as Gemini , an aspiring don who reforms later 
 Kiran Rathod as Manisha Natwarlal , a free @-@ spirited Marwari woman 
 Kalabhavan Mani as Teja , a don who mimics animals 
 Vinu Chakravarthy as a power @-@ obsessed and corrupt police officer 
 Murali as Singaperumal , a sincere and dignified police officer 
 Charle as Chinna Salem , a pimp operating a mobile brothel 
 Ramesh Khanna as Gopal M.A. , a professor at the evening college 
 Dhamu as Ram , the chief mechanic at Auto Hospital , the auto workshop from where the gang operates 
 Vaiyapuri as Oberoi , Dawood 's sidekick 
 Rani as Kamini , a divorcée and Gemini 's classmate who lusts for him 
 Thennavan as Kai , Gemini 's loyal deputy 
 Isaac Varghese as Isaac , Gemini 's gang member who betrays him later 
 Thyagu as <unk> , a police officer 
 Madhan Bob as R. <unk> <unk> , a police officer trying to eradicate prostitution 
 Ilavarasu as Commissioner of Police 
 <unk> Narasimhan as Bombay Dawood ( named after Dawood Ibrahim ) , a butcher 
 Gemini Ganesan in a cameo as himself 
 Manorama as Annamma , a woman who seeks to avenge her son 's death 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In February 2001 , underworld dons " Vellai " Ravi and Chera , who terrorised the city of Madras ( now Chennai ) in the 1990s , abandoned a life of crime and took up social work . The then @-@ DCP of Flower Bazaar Shakeel Akhter presided over the oath @-@ taking ceremony and welcomed the rehabilitation programme . During the making of his film Alli Arjuna ( 2002 ) , director Saran came across a newspaper article carrying this piece of news and was fascinated . Shortly afterwards in March 2001 , Saran announced his next directorial venture would be inspired by the incident . Titled <unk> ( meaning " upward mobility " ) , the project was scheduled to enter production after the completion of Alli Arjuna . 
 The director disclosed that it was " a modern day rags to riches story " where the protagonist rises from humble origins to an enviable position . The venture was to be funded by A. <unk> Rao of Lakshmi Productions . The film would mark the director 's third collaboration with Ajith Kumar in the lead after the success of Kaadhal Mannan ( 1998 ) and <unk> ( 1999 ) . Laila <unk> and Richa <unk> , who played the heroine in Saran 's <unk> <unk> ( 2000 ) and Alli Arjuna respectively , were to play the female lead roles . While the recording for the film 's audio reportedly began on 16 March 2001 , the filming was to start in mid @-@ June and continue until August that year , followed by post @-@ production work in September . It was planned to release the film on 14 November 2001 coinciding with Diwali . However , after finding a more engaging script in Red ( 2002 ) , Ajith lost interest ; he left the project after a week 's shoot and the production was shelved . Following this incident , Saran stated that he would never do another film with Ajith . The pair would , however , reconcile their differences later , and collaborate on <unk> ( 2004 ) and <unk> ( 2010 ) . 
 Saran rewrote the script based on gang wars in Chennai and began the project again . The film , then untitled , was announced in August 2001 with Vikram to star in the lead role . The production was taken over by M. Saravanan , M. Balasubramaniam , M. S. Guhan and B. <unk> of AVM Productions . The film was AVM 's 162nd production and their first film after a five @-@ year hiatus , their last production being Minsara Kanavu ( 1997 ) , the release of which marked fifty years since their debut Naam Iruvar ( 1947 ) . By producing Gemini , AVM became one of the four film studios that had been producing films for over fifty years . While titling the film , producer M. Saravanan chose Gemini among the many titles suggested to him , but because Gemini Studios was the name of a major production house , Saravanan wrote to S. Balasubramanian , editor of Ananda Vikatan and son of Gemini Studios founder S. S. Vasan , requesting permission to use the title . In response , Balasubramanian gave his consent . 
 = = = Cast and crew = = = 
 With Vikram cast in the title role , Saran was searching for a newcomer to play the female lead role of a Marwari woman . Kiran Rathod is a native of Rajasthan , the place where the Marwaris originate from . She is a relative of actress Raveena Tandon , whose manager brought Rathod the offer to act in Gemini . Saran was convinced after seeing a photograph of Rathod and cast her ; Gemini thus became her debut Tamil film . Malayalam actors Kalabhavan Mani and Murali were approached to play significant roles . 
 Gemini is widely believed to be Mani 's first Tamil film , though he had already starred in <unk> ( 2001 ) . There have been varying accounts on how he was cast : while Vikram claims to have suggested Mani for the role of Teja , Saran said in one interview that casting Mani was his idea , and contradicted this in another interview , saying that Mani was chosen on his wife 's recommendation . While searching for an unfamiliar actor for the DGP 's role , Saran saw Murali in Dumm Dumm Dumm ( 2001 ) and found him " very dignified " . He chose Murali as he wanted that dignity for the role . Though he had planned to make Murali a villain at the end of the film , Saran decided against it because he was " amazed to see awe in everyone 's eyes when Murali entered the sets and performed " . 
 Thennavan , Vinu Chakravarthy , Ilavarasu , Charle , Dhamu , Ramesh Khanna , Vaiyapuri , Madhan Bob , Thyagu and Manorama form the supporting cast . A cameo appearance by Gemini Ganesan was his last film appearance before his death in March 2005 . The technical departments were handled by Saran 's regular crew , which consisted of cinematographer A. Venkatesh , editor Suresh Urs , production designer Thota Tharani and costume designers Sai and Nalini Sriram . The choreography was by Super Subbarayan ( action ) and Suchitra , Brinda and Ashok Raja ( dance ) . The music was composed by Bharathwaj and the lyrics were written by Vairamuthu . Kanmani who went on to direct films like <unk> <unk> Azhagu ( 2003 ) and Chinnodu ( 2006 ) worked as an assistant director . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Gemini was formally launched on 21 November 2001 at the Hotel Connemara , Chennai in the presence of celebrities including Rajinikanth ( through video conferencing ) and Kamal Haasan . The launch function was marked by the submission of the script , songs and lyrics . Principal photography was scheduled to begin in mid @-@ December that year , but commenced slightly earlier . Vikram shot for the film simultaneously with Samurai ( 2002 ) . When Kalabhavan Mani was hesitant in accepting the film due to other commitments in Malayalam , shooting was re @-@ scheduled to film his scenes first . Saran persuaded Mani to allot dates for twelve days to complete his scenes . Since Mani was a mimicry artist , Saran asked him to exhibit his talents ; Mani <unk> the behaviour of a few animals and Saran chose among them , which were added to the film . 
 Gemini , with the exception of two songs which were filmed in Switzerland , was shot at AVM Studios . One of the songs , " Penn <unk> " , was shot at <unk> , the highest railway station in Europe . Part of the song sequence was filmed on a sledge in Switzerland , making it the second Indian film to have done so after the Bollywood film Sangam ( 1964 ) . Though there were problems in acquiring permission , executive producer M. S. Guhan persisted . The overseas shoots were arranged by Travel Masters , a Chennai @-@ based company owned by former actor N. Ramji . Gemini was completed on schedule and M. Saravanan praised the director , saying , " ... we felt like we were working with S. P. Muthuraman himself , such was Saran 's efficiency " . 
 = = Inspiration = = 
 The characters of Gemini and Teja were modelled on " Vellai " Ravi and Chera respectively — Tamil @-@ Burma repatriates who settled in Bhaktavatsalam colony ( B.V. Colony ) in <unk> , North Madras . They were members of rival gangs headed by Benjamin and <unk> respectively . Their rivalry began when Benjamin , a DYFI member , questioned the illegal activities of <unk> who , apart from running a plastics and iron ore business , held kangaroo courts . When their feud developed into a Christian @-@ Hindu conflict , they recruited jobless men and formed gangs to wage wars against each other . While <unk> 's nephew Chera became his right @-@ hand man , " Vellai " Ravi became Benjamin 's aide . Benjamin and Ravi 's gang killed Subbaiah in 1991 . A year later , Chera 's gang retaliated by killing Benjamin with the help of another gang member , <unk> . Another gangster , <unk> , joined Chera 's gang and they killed more than fourteen people to avenge Subbaiah 's murder . One of the murders took place inside the Egmore court in early 2000 when Chera 's gang killed Ravi 's aide Vijayakumar , leading to a police crackdown on the gangsters . Fearing an encounter , both " Vellai " Ravi and Chera decided to give up their lives of crime and reform . The then @-@ DCP of Flower Bazaar , Shakeel Akhter , held the " transition ceremony " in February 2001 . " Vellai " Ravi and Chera were re @-@ arrested under <unk> Act during the film 's pre @-@ production . 
 When asked about his fascination for " rowdy themes " , Saran said : 
 I come from a lower middle class background and have lived all my life in ' Singara Chennai ' . I used to go to college from my house in <unk> by bus and many of the incidents that you see in my films are inspired by those days . Chennai city and its newspapers have been my source material . 
 The characters of DGP Singaperumal and " <unk> " Jeeva were based on Shakeel Akhter and Vijayakumar respectively . Since the criminals were re @-@ arrested after being given a chance , the initial script had Singaperumal turning villainous during the climax . When Saran felt that the audience would not be kind to him and that it would damage the film , he added another corrupt police officer to do the job while maintaining Singaperumal as a " very strong , good police officer " . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack album and background score were composed by Bharathwaj . Since making his entry into Tamil films with Saran 's directorial debut Kaadhal Mannan , he has scored the music for most films directed by Saran . The lyrics were written by poet @-@ lyricist Vairamuthu . 
 " O Podu " was a popular expression among college students in Tamil Nadu . When the director wanted a catchphrase for a song , Vairamuthu suggested using the term and building on it . On the director 's insistence , the term was then incorporated into and mixed with the title song , resulting in the item number " O Podu " . The song was conceived by AVM as a way of reaching out to the masses . The track , picturised on Rani and Vikram and choreographed by Ashok Raja , was sung by Anuradha Sriram . For the song , Vikram performed " <unk> koothu " , a type of funeral dance common in Tamil Nadu . The lyrics of " Deewana " , sung by Sadhana Sargam , had some Hindi words as it was picturised on the heroine , a typical Marwari woman from Sowcarpet for whom Hindi comes naturally . In an interview with The Hindu , Vairamuthu revealed that the track " <unk> Katta " was based on a folk song . 
 The songs were well received by the audience and the track " O Podu " , in particular , was a hit . Following the song 's success , Vikram was greeted everywhere with screams of " O Podu " . He was overwhelmed by the response and , having already worked as a voice artist and singer , offered to sing his version of the song to which the producers agreed . According to Vikram , the song was recorded and filmed the same morning , and was added to the soundtrack album a month after its initial release . The film had been completed by then and the additional track was featured during the closing credits . Initially , a small footage featuring Vikram and Kiran was sent to the cinemas for screening during the end credits . However , the audience were dissatisfied with the shortened version of the song and forced theatre owners to rewind the song and play it again . After receiving calls from distributors and theatre owners , the makers eventually sent the entire song . 
 The album sold more than 100 @,@ 000 cassettes even before the film released despite rampant piracy . It was one of the biggest hits in Bharathwaj 's career and earned him his first Filmfare Award . The music also attracted some unexpected reactions . The high @-@ energy track " O Podu " drove youngsters insane ; some resorted to violence , enraging villagers in Tamil Nadu and damaging public property in Malaysia for fun . The lyrics by Vairamuthu , which are typically in pure Tamil , contained slang and words from other languages like " Deewana " ( Hindi ) . This departure was criticised by film journalist Sreedhar Pillai , who derided the lyrics of " O Podu " as " pure gibberish " . 
 The music received positive reviews from critics . Sify wrote that Bharadwaj 's music was the film 's only saving grace . Writing for Rediff , Pearl stated that the music director was " impressive " . Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu said that the song by Anuradha Sriram has given the term " O ! Podu ! " , which has been part of the " local lingo " for years , a " new , crazy dimension " . The song enjoyed anthem @-@ like popularity and according to V. <unk> , a dealer of film music for 23 years , sold like " hot cakes " . It earned Rani — on whom the song was picturised — the moniker " O Podu Rani " . However , the song 's picturisation attracted criticism . In an article that scrutinised and decried the high level of vulgarity depicted in south Indian films , Sudha G. Tilak of Tehelka wrote that hit tracks like " O Podu " were " obvious in their debauched suggestiveness " . 
 In 2009 , Mid Day wrote , " O <unk> is still considered the cornerstone of the rambunctious koothu dance " . In 2011 , The Times of India labelled the song an " evergreen hit number " . Following the internet phenomenon of " Why This <unk> Di " in 2011 , " O Podu " was featured alongside " <unk> Podu " , " <unk> Mukka " and " <unk> <unk> " in a small collection of South Indian songs that are considered a " national rage " in India . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film , which was supposed to be released on 14 April 2002 coinciding with the Tamil New Year , was released two days early on 12 April , apparently to capitalise on weekend collections . Gemini was released alongside Vijay 's Thamizhan , Prashanth 's Thamizh and <unk> 's <unk> . The film was released across Tamil Nadu with 104 prints , the most for a Vikram film at the time of release . On the day of release , the film premiered in Singapore with the hero , heroine , director and producer in attendance . AVM sold the film to distributors for a " reasonable profit " and marketed it aggressively . They organised promotional events at Music World in Chennai 's Spencer Plaza , Landmark and Sankara Hall , where Vikram publicised the film signing autographs . Since " O Podu " was such a hit among children , AVM invited young children to write reviews , and gave away prizes . In 2006 , Saran revealed in a conversation with director S. P. <unk> that his nervousness rendered him sleepless for four days until the film was released . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Gemini received mixed reviews from critics . Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu wrote that the " Vikram style " action film was more of a stylised fare as realism was a casualty in many sequences . She added that while the credibility level of the storyline was low , Saran had tried to strike a balance in making a formulaic film . Pearl of Rediff.com lauded Saran 's " racy " screenplay but found the plot " hackneyed " and reminiscent of Saran 's <unk> . The critic declared , " Gemini is your typical masala potboiler . And it works . " In contrast , Sify was critical of the film and wrote , " Neither exciting nor absorbing Gemini is as hackneyed as they get . [ ... ] Saran should be blamed for this inept movie , which has no storyline and has scant regard for logic or sense . " 
 The performance of the lead also earned mixed response . Malathi Rangarajan analysed , " Be it action or sensitive enactment , Vikram lends a natural touch [ ... ] helps Gemini score . [ .. ] With his comic streak Mani makes himself a likeable villain . " Kalabhavan Mani 's mimicry and portrayal of a villain with a comic sense received acclaim from the critics and audience alike . Rediff said , " The highlight in Gemini is undoubtedly Kalabhavan Mani 's performance . [ ... ] As the paan @-@ chewing Gemini , Vikram , too , delivers a convincing performance . " However , Sify found the cast to be the film 's major drawback and scrutinised , " Vikram as Gemini is unimpressive [ ... ] Kalabhavan Mani an excellent actor hams as he plays a villain [ ... ] Top character actor Murali is also wasted in the film . " 
 Following the film 's success , Vikram was compared with actor Rajinikanth . D. Govardan of The Economic Times wrote , " The film 's success has catapulted its hero , Vikram as the most sought after hero after Rajinikanth in the Tamil film industry today " . Rajinikanth , who saw the film , met Vikram and praised his performance . Saran told in an interview that Rajinikanth was so impressed with the songs , he predicted the film 's success in addition to considering Rathod for a role in his film Baba ( 2002 ) . The film 's premise of an outlaw reforming his ways was appreciated . D. Ramanaidu of Suresh Productions — the co @-@ producer of the Telugu remake — said , " The story of a rowdy <unk> turning into a good man is a good theme " . In August 2014 , Gemini was featured in a list of " Top 10 Tamil Gangster Films " compiled by Saraswathi of <unk> 
 In an article discussing the rise of the gangster @-@ based film becoming a genre in itself , Sreedhar Pillai wrote in a reference to Gemini : 
 The hero is an all out villain , who is daringly different but the director makes him dream of those lush Switzerland songs ( our hero then is clad in designer wear ) . The rowdies in the film have very highly educated girls from affluent family lusting after them ... Bachchan of " Deewar " or Shah Rukh of " Baazigar " took to crime because they were wronged . Nowadays the Geminis and <unk> of Tamil cinema indulge in crime for the heck of it . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Gemini was a box office success and became the biggest hit of the year in Tamil . Made on an estimated budget of ₹ 40 million ( equivalent to ₹ 110 million or US $ 1 @.@ 6 million in 2016 ) , the film grossed more than ₹ 200 million ( equivalent to ₹ 530 million or US $ 7 @.@ 9 million in 2016 ) . The film 's success was largely attributed to the popularity of the song " O Podu " . D. Govardan of The Economic Times stated , " A neatly made ' masala ' ( spice ) film , with the song O Podu .. as its USP , it took off from day one and has since then not looked back " . Vikram , who was a struggling actor for almost a decade , credited Gemini as his first real blockbuster . Sreedhar Pillai said that a good story , presentation and peppy music made it a " winning formula " and declared " Gemini has been the biggest hit among Tamil films in the last two years " . However , the sceptics in the industry dismissed the film 's success as a fluke . 
 The film ran successfully in theatres for more than 125 days . Since most Tamil films released on the preceding Diwali and Pongal were not successful , Gemini helped the industry recover . Outlook wrote , " Gemini has single @-@ handedly revived the Tamil film industry . " The box office collections revived the fortunes of theatres that were on the verge of closure . AVM received a letter from the owner of New Cinema , a theatre in Cuddalore , who repaid his debts with the revenue the film generated . <unk> Ramanathan , owner of the multiplex Abhirami Mega Mall , said that Gemini 's success would slow down the rapid closure of theatres from 2 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 . Following the success of the film , Saran named his production house " Gemini Productions " , under which he produced films including <unk> ( 2005 ) , <unk> ( 2006 ) and Muni ( 2007 ) . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Encouraged by the film 's success and wide @-@ reaching popularity , Saran remade it in Telugu as <unk> . It is the only film Saran made in a language other than Tamil . The remake starred Venkatesh and <unk> in the lead roles , while Kalabhavan Mani and Murali reprised their roles from the Tamil version . Most of the crew members were retained . Posani Krishna Murali translated the dialogues to Telugu . The soundtrack was composed by R. P. Patnaik , who reused most of the tunes from the original film . Released in October 2002 , the film received lukewarm response and failed to repeat the success of the original . In 2013 , a Kannada remake was reported to have been planned with Upendra in the lead , but he dismissed the reports as rumours . 
 In September 2002 , Gemini was screened as part of a six @-@ day workshop jointly conducted by the Department of Journalism and Communication and the Mass Communication Alumni Association of the University of Madras ; it focussed on the impact of cinema on society . A game @-@ based reality show for children , which was aired between 2003 @-@ 2004 , was titled " O Podu " . AVM was involved in the show , which was produced by Vikatan <unk> and directed by Gerald . The show was broadcast for 26 weeks on Sun TV on Sundays with <unk> as its anchor . In September 2003 , physical trainer Santosh Kumar played " O Podu " among a range of popular music as part of a dance aerobics session in a fitness camp held for the Indian cricket team at Bangalore . 
 When Vikram was signed up as the brand ambassador of Coca @-@ Cola in April 2005 , the commercials featured him playing characters from different walks of life . One among them was a " rowdy role " , the essence for which was taken from the character Gemini . During the run @-@ up to the 2006 assembly election , Chennai @-@ based journalist <unk> Sankaran began a social awareness movement to prevent electoral fraud and named it " O Podu " as a short form of " <unk> Podu " meaning " cast your vote " . The movement urged the electorate to exercise the right to reject candidates under Section 49 @-@ O of The Conduct of Election Rules , 1961 , wherein a voter , who has decided not to vote for anyone , can record the fact . For this purpose , the people behind " O Podu " also urged the election commission to facilitate a separate button on the electronic voting machine . 
 During the 2010 Asia Cup , a Sri Lankan band performed " O Podu " at the India vs. Pakistan cricket match held in <unk> . In July 2011 , Vikram inaugurated " Liver 4 Life " , an initiative launched by <unk> Hospitals to create awareness of the Hepatitis B virus . As the campaign was targeted at school and college students , the organisers tweaked the term " O Podu " into " B Podu " and made it the event 's tagline to capitalise on the song 's immense appeal . In a comical sequence in the film , Dhamu 's character claims to be an expert of a martial art form named " Maan Karate " ( Maan means " Deer " ) , which is actually the art of running away like a deer when in danger . The phrase became famous and was used to name the 2014 comedy film Maan Karate because whenever there is a problem in his life , the hero ( played by <unk> ) fails to face them and runs for cover instead . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = George Juskalian = 
 George Juskalian ( Armenian : <unk> <unk> ; June 7 , 1914 – July 4 , 2010 ) was a decorated member of the United States Army who served for over three decades and fought in World War II , the Korean War and the Vietnam War . Following graduation from Boston University , Juskalian entered the army as a second lieutenant in June 1936 . During World War II , he served with the infantry during the North African Campaign and took part in Operation Torch . At the Battle of the Kasserine Pass , he was captured by German troops and became a prisoner of war ( POW ) for twenty @-@ seven months . During the Korean War he commanded an infantry battalion . He was then stationed in Tehran where he acted an advisor to the Imperial Iranian Army throughout 1957 and 1958 . During the Vietnam War , Juskalian once again undertook advisory duties , working with the South Vietnamese Army between 1963 and 1964 , before serving as the MACV inspector general under General William Westmoreland . 
 Juskalian retired as a colonel in 1967 and is one of the most decorated Armenian @-@ Americans to serve in the United States Army . His awards include two Combat Infantryman Badges , two Silver Stars , the Legion of Merit , four Bronze Stars and the Air Medal . He received the Nerses <unk> Medal from the Catholicos of All Armenians in 1988 . The post office in his home town of Centreville , Virginia , has been named the " Colonel George Juskalian Post Office Building " in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Juskalian was born in Fitchburg , Massachusetts on June 7 , 1914 , the youngest son of Armenian parents Kevork Juskalian ( 1861 – 1938 ) and Maritza Ferrahian ( 1876 – 1960 ) . George 's father , Kevork , was from Kharpert , Ottoman Turkey , and his mother Maritza was from <unk> , Ottoman Turkey . 
 Kevork Juskalian was among the earliest graduates of the Euphrates College in Kharpert , completing his studies around 1881 . He served as a minor official of the local Turkish government in <unk> , a village near Kharpert . He was then invited to work in the Persian consulate in <unk> until he was recalled by the Turkish government to serve as supervisor of eleven villages in the region of Kharpert . Kevork Juskalian felt that there was no secure future for him in Ottoman Turkey and subsequently fled to the United States with his family , arriving at Ellis Island on November 15 , 1887 . Consequently , the Juskalian family became some of the first Armenians to come to the United States . Kevork found a job at the Iver Johnson Arms & Cycle Works in Worcester , Massachusetts . He was instrumental in the establishment of the Armenian Church of Our Savior on January 18 , 1891 . 
 In 1893 , Kevork returned to Kharpert and married Maritza Ferrahian , daughter of Krikor and <unk> ( <unk> ) Ferrahian . Due to the Hamidian Massacres , Kevork and Maritza returned to the United States and Kevork rejoined the Iver Johnson Arms & Cycle Works company . 
 Juskalian , who grew up in Fitchburg , attended the local schools and graduated from Fitchburg High School in 1932 . He continued his education at Boston University , graduating in 1936 with a bachelor 's degree in science , journalism . 
 = = Military service = = 
 While studying at Boston University , Juskalian undertook military training as part of the Reserve Officers Training Corps . On graduation , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the United States Army , and in June 1936 , was assigned as an administrative officer of a Civilian Conservation Corps camp at Brewster , Massachusetts , where he helped build a national park . 
 After leaving active service , Juskalian had intended to study law at the American University in Washington , D.C. , but when his father died in 1938 , he gave up this plan and returned to Fitchburg to reunite with his mother and assist his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's dry @-@ cleaning business . That year , after passing a government exam , Juskalian became a fingerprint classifier for the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , and took part in the search for John Dillinger , who was on the " Top 10 Most Wanted " list . He then volunteered for active service in 1939 . 
 Juskalian was called to active duty at Fort Devens , Massachusetts , and was promoted to the rank as first lieutenant in November 1940 . Juskalian was given command of a 200 @-@ man company after the reorganization of the 1st Infantry Division . In February 1942 , Juskalian was promoted to captain and was sent to Camp Blanding , Florida , before moving to Fort Benning , Georgia and then Indiantown Gap Military Reservation , Pennsylvania , for additional training and combat readiness evaluation . In August 1942 , Juskalian boarded the RMS Queen Mary , and along with the other 15 @,@ 000 soldiers of the 1st Infantry Division , was shipped to Europe . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = North African Campaign = = = = 
 The soldiers of the 1st Infantry Division are believed to be among the first American troops shipped out to the European theater during the war . The division landed near Glasgow , Scotland , then proceeded to a British Army base near London to continue training . Juskalian , who became the assistant plans and operations officer on the regimental staff , went to Inveraray , Scotland , to train for the North African Campaign . 
 Juskalian then took part in Operation Torch as part of the 1st Infantry Division 's 26th Infantry Regiment , commanded by Theodore Roosevelt Jr . The Allies , who had organized three amphibious task forces , aimed to seize key ports and airfields in Morocco and Algeria while simultaneously targeting Casablanca , Oran and Algiers . Juskalian 's unit was part of the task force that invaded through the port of Oran . 
 Landing in Oran on November 8 , 1942 , the 1st Infantry Division 's primary objective was to confront the German Afrika Korps commanded by Erwin Rommel , while its secondary objective was to support Bernard Law Montgomery 's advance against the Italian forces . Eventually , the 1st Infantry Division broke through the German resistance and scaled Mount Djebel . Oran fell to the Allies on November 10 and Juskalian 's unit advanced east into Tunisia , reaching the Algeria – Tunisia border by January 15 , 1943 . There , the task force met resistance from German and Italian troops . 
 = = = = German prisoner of war = = = = 
 As the fighting continued into the <unk> Valley , Juskalian was assigned to the 26th Infantry Regiment 's headquarters . When attempting to save the life of a fellow soldier following heavy fighting , he was captured by German troops at Kasserine Pass in Tunisia on January 28 . Juskalian described his capture as follows : " One of our intelligence officers had gone out to check on the situation , and word came back that he 'd been wounded and was out there somewhere . So another officer and I went out in a Jeep and found him , but he was dead . Then we came under fire , so we couldn 't drag him out of there . " After telling the driver to return to the command post , Juskalian investigated the conditions of the other U.S. soldiers . " I thought they were all right because we hadn 't heard anything from them , but they 'd been overrun by the Germans . " Having lost his glasses , Juskalian could not distinguish the soldiers that were approaching him from 50 feet ( 15 m ) away . The soldiers were Germans and took him prisoner . Juskalian said about his capture , " I was irritated with myself for being so foolhardy , I shouldn 't have been there . " Juskalian later learned , while still a prisoner of war ( POW ) , that he had been awarded the Silver Star for his rescue attempt . After his first two days of being a POW , he was promoted to major . 
 = = = = = Oflag IX @-@ A / Z in Rotenburg , Germany = = = = = 
 Juskalian spent the next twenty @-@ seven months as a POW and was held in various camps in Italy , Poland and Germany . After being interrogated in Kairouan , he was sent to Tunis and flown to Naples . The planes flew at a low altitude as Juskalian described : " They flew about 100 feet above the Mediterranean because they were afraid that , if they flew higher , the American fighter planes — not knowing POWs were inside — would see us and shoot us down . " The POWs were sent to Oflag IX @-@ A / Z British POW camp in Rotenburg an der Fulda where they remained until June 6 , 1943 , when they were transferred to Oflag 64 in Szubin , Poland . 
 The British POWs provided the Americans with necessary advice regarding the camp life and shared rations and clothing sent by the British Red Cross . The British , who were in the process of digging an escape tunnel , requested help from the Americans . Juskalian would later describe the operation : " I volunteered , although I have had claustrophobia ever since a boyhood friend shut me up in a wood bin for a prank . When I look back at it , I wonder how I did it . Some nights when I think about it , I break out in a cold sweat . Somehow , I was able to summon up the will to do it . The tunnel was already some 80 to 100 feet long . It extended underground beyond the barbed wire fence , but those in charge wanted to lengthen it so that the opening would come out below ground level on the steep side near the bank of the Fulda River . In that way when the tunnel was broken open , the escapees could not be seen by the guards in the towers . " 
 The tunnel was about 3 feet ( 1 m ) high by 3 feet ( 1 m ) wide . Lighting in the tunnel was provided by makeshift candles . The prisoners used improvised digging tools and shovels that were constructed from British biscuit cans and their handles made from the wooden slats of their beds . The tins were also used to create a pipe for fresh air to funnel through the tunnel with the assistance of a hand @-@ cranked fan at the entrance of the tunnel . A sled , made of wooden slats with a tine base to make it slide easily over the earthen tunnel floor , was used to haul the sandbags . Juskalian described the method that was used to dispose the sand : " The method used to conceal the sand was ingenious . The sand was poured into burlap bags made surreptitiously from Red Cross parcel wrappings then passed rapidly along a makeshift fire brigade line through the building and up into the attic . There it was dumped between the outer and inner walls where there was a wide space for insulation . Literally tons of sand could be disposed of there before the space would be filled . " 
 Before the tunnel had been completed , the American POWs were transferred to Oflag 64 in Szubin , Poland . Juskalian estimated that if the tunnel had been dug for another 100 feet , it would reach its destination at the bank of the Fulda River . Two American POWs pretended to be sick in order to remain in the Rotenburg camp and to continue working on the tunnel and ultimately escape . The two Americans , who eventually rejoined the rest of the American POWs in Oflag 64 , relayed the news that the tunnel had been discovered by the German guards who had learned of its existence after planting a spy among the POWs . 
 = = = = = Oflag 64 in Szubin , Poland = = = = = 
 Juskalian spent nineteen @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half of his twenty @-@ seven months imprisonment in Oflag 64 . The POWs in the camp undertook various leisure activities including staging plays , playing music , reading , athletics , and learning languages . While there , Juskalian became an editor of a monthly newspaper that was published with the assistance of a guard who owned a local printing shop . The newspaper featured " stories from home , cartoons , pictures of pin @-@ up girls and girlfriends and articles about camp sports and activities " . 
 In June 1944 the American POWs held a party on the first anniversary of being in the camp . The party coincided with the Normandy landings , and the Germans suspected that the American POWs had purposely planned the party because they had prior knowledge of the Allied invasion . The commandant of Oflag 64 called higher headquarters for advice and assistance . Eventually the German Gestapo searched the Americans ' rooms for evidence of outside communication . However , Juskalian shared one of the cigars his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Hagop <unk> , had given him , with the officer undertaking the search who soon became " distracted and softened " . 
 = = = = = Oflag XIII B in Hammelburg , Germany = = = = = 
 On January 21 , 1945 , the German troops and their POWs moved westward into Germany to avoid the Soviet advance from the east . Juskalian and other American POWs were transferred to Parchim , northeast of Berlin , on March 1 , 1945 . Over the course of 48 days , the POWs traveled 350 miles ( 560 km ) from Parchim to Oflag XIII @-@ B in Hammelburg in box cars which , according to Juskalian , were " packed like sardines . " During his time in Hammelburg , Juskalian met another Armenian POW , Captain Peter Mirakian of Philadelphia . Together , the two Armenian Americans discovered that one of the Soviet POWs was also an Armenian . Mirakian and Juskalian surreptitiously gave him food from their limited rations . 
 The camp at Hammelburg held many American prisoners including George S. Patton 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Lieutenant Colonel John K. Waters . Attempting to rescue Waters , a military task force from the 4th Armored Division was sent to liberate the camp . When the task force arrived , the German guards fled the camp , but the task force did not have enough vehicles to evacuate all POWs in the camp . Mirakian and Juskalian escaped through an opening in the compound fence and ran towards Frankfurt hoping to reach the American lines there , but a German patrol captured them , and they were immediately sent to Nuremberg . Juskalian later remarked : " We were tired and depressed but thankful to be alive . " 
 While Juskalian was held in Nuremberg , the Americans began their bombardment of the city . He describes the moment in his own words : " We were cheering , and our guards were getting irritated , but the bombs came down on us , too , and I was sure we were going to get it . About 30 of us were killed . I was thinking of my mother and how ironic it would be to be killed at the end of the war — and by your own aircraft . " 
 After surviving the bombardment , the POWs were resettled in a camp near Munich . The Germans gave them the opportunity to return to Nuremberg as wounded soldiers to obtain treatment ; the POWs agreed because it was closer to the American lines . On April 17 , American troops secured Nuremberg and subsequently freed the POWs . Juskalian described the event : " When the Germans tried to see if we were really wounded , the British erected a sign on the gate saying ' Plague ' , and that kept them out , three or four days later , the 45th U.S. Infantry Division overran Nuremberg and we were liberated . " 
 Juskalian was flown to Paris , France , where he presented himself at a military post and requested financial assistance . However , he did not have official identification and was refused . An officer , who knew George 's older brother Richard ( <unk> ) , who lived in Watertown , overheard him and recognized the last name Juskalian . George confirmed that Richard was his brother , and he was then given all the provisions he needed . 
 = = = = Post World War II = = = = 
 Upon returning to the United States after the war , Juskalian had an appointment with the regular army where he was ultimately promoted to lieutenant colonel . He reported to the Pentagon for duty in the Office of the Secretary of the Army Chief of Staff from 1945 – 1948 . In the Pentagon , Juskalian was assigned as an assistant secretary in the Secretariat of the War Department and was a secretary to Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Chief of Staff of the Army . His responsibilities included supporting the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Combined Chiefs of Staff of the British and Americans and preparing briefs for Eisenhower . After his tour of duty at the Pentagon , he attended the Army 's Command and General Staff College 's regular ten @-@ month course at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , from 1948 to 1949 . His next assignment was with the staff and faculty of the Infantry School at Fort Benning , Georgia , where he remained from 1949 until the summer of 1952 . While at the school , he took airborne training and became a qualified parachutist . 
 Juskalian was then assigned to Alaska as commandant of the Arctic Warfare School . Still embittered by the memory of having spent most of World War II as a POW , he requested his orders be changed from Alaska to Korea where United States forces were engaged in combat operations as part of the United Nations forces committed to Korean War . His request was approved and in the summer of 1952 he was sent to the combat zone . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 Juskalian was assigned as a battalion commander from 1952 to 1953 . In 1953 , he commanded the 1st Battalion , 32nd Infantry Regiment , 7th Infantry Division . In the final winter of the war the Chinese attempted to overcome the United Nations ' main line of resistance and capture a series of hills . Juskalian 's battalion was assigned to carry out a counterattack on a 300 @-@ foot high hill known as " Old Baldy " during an action that later became known as the Battle of Old Baldy . When the Chinese offensive came to a halt , Juskalian reorganized the forces under his command and sent both A and B Companies , under First Lieutenant Jack L. Conn , on a second attack to retake the hill , but they regained only a quarter of it . On March 25 Juskalian ordered C Company , under First Lieutenant Robert C. <unk> , to attack from the northeast , but enemy forces halted their advance . Many members of C Company were trapped on the right flank of Old Baldy , and Juskalian requested tank support to demolish the Chinese bunkers to free 30 to 40 troops of the company . On the night of March 26 , Juskalian received orders from Regimental Commander Colonel William B. Kern to withdraw his forces . 
 To the east of Old Baldy heavy fighting took place around Pork Chop Hill , which was later made famous by the movie Pork Chop Hill starring actor Gregory Peck . The Chinese force grew and became numerically superior to the Americans , and Juskalian was ordered to withdraw . Due to his efforts and the successful withdrawal of troops , he was awarded a second Silver Star for gallantry . At the end of the war in June 1953 , he was transferred to the Eighth Army Headquarters in Seoul where he assisted in the prisoner of war exchange that took place at Panmunjom . 
 = = = Missions in Iran , New York , and France = = = 
 Juskalian was assigned as a logistics officer to the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group ( <unk> ) in Tehran , Iran in 1957 . He then became chief of the Training Division of the Iranian First Army and was promoted to full colonel . As principal logistics officer , Juskalian supervised the U.S. Army officers advising the Iranian Army general officers serving as technical service department chiefs . Additionally , his office was responsible for managing the annual input of U.S. military material and construction to the Iranian armed forces . During his time in Iran , Juskalian met many Armenians in Tehran , a number of whom he kept in touch with for the rest of his life . 
 After his mission in Iran in 1957 – 1958 , Juskalian visited Kharpert , his father 's birthplace . In an article he later wrote about the trip entitled " Harput Revisited " , which appeared in the April 1959 issue of the Armenian Review , Juskalian wrote : " I tried in vain to locate my parents ' home . <unk> , as a community , was alive and well . Harput ( Kharpert ) , on the other hand was dead , a bleak landscape of debris where once proudly stood a college , schools , churches , shops and homes . There was not even a grave over which to weep and pray for the souls of those from whom I came . " 
 After completing his duties in Iran , Juskalian assumed the role of chief of operations and training at the headquarters of the First Army that commanded all U.S. Army installations in New England , New York and New Jersey . His posting in New York was cut short by the Berlin Crisis of 1961 , and Juskalian was sent to France to join the 1st Logistical Command . When the 1st Logistical Command was merged with the 4th Logistical Command at Verdun , Juskalian was transferred to this command , serving as the G @-@ 3 chief of plans , operations and training . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 After his tours of duty in New York and France , Juskalian volunteered to fight in Vietnam in late spring of 1963 . He arrived in Saigon in August 1963 and took up a posting as deputy senior advisor to the Army of the Republic of Vietnam 's IV Corps stationed in the Mekong Delta . After six months , <unk> was assigned to the headquarters of Military Assistance Command , Vietnam ( MACV ) to serve as the MACV inspector general under General William Westmoreland , the MACV commander . As part of his duties , he traveled throughout South Vietnam on inspection visits to many military installations . In the transient officers quarters at Danang , he found an ashtray from George <unk> 's Omar Khayyam restaurant in San Francisco and kept it as a souvenir for the rest of his life . For his service in the Vietnam War , Juskalian was awarded an Air Medal and a Bronze Star . 
 Juskalian returned to the United States in August 1964 and was posted to headquarters of Military District of Washington ( MDW ) as Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Training , his last Army assignment before retirement . During his three years at MDW , he served as chairman of the Joint Military Executive Committee that was chiefly responsible for planning and carrying out all arrangements for the participation of military services in the inauguration of President Lyndon B. Johnson in January 1965 . 
 = = Post @-@ retirement from the army = = 
 Juskalian retired from the army on April 30 , 1967 , and was awarded the Legion of Merit . After his retirement , he settled in Arlington , Virginia . Juskalian worked as the graduate admissions director at the Southeastern University in Washington D.C. for eight years and attained a master 's degree in business and public administration with honors in 1977 at the age of sixty . 
 He was a member of many veterans ' organizations including the American Legion , the Veterans of Foreign Wars , the Disabled American Veterans , the American Ex @-@ Prisoners of War , the Retired Officers Association , and the 1st Infantry Division Association for the Uniformed Services ( <unk> ) . He served for a term as first vice president of <unk> and was the commander of the Northern Virginia Chapter of the American Ex @-@ Prisoners of War . 
 In 1982 Juskalian was appointed for a three @-@ year term to the Veterans Administration Advisory Committee for Former Prisoners of War . Whenever possible , he attended annual reunions with former Oflag 64 POWs and the annual national conventions of the American ex @-@ POW organization . He was appointed to the Editorial Advisory Board of the newly established Washington Times daily newspaper in 1983 . 
 = = = Community service = = = 
 Juskalian was a prominent figure in the Armenian community . He served at the local St. Mary ’ s Armenian Apostolic Church and the Diocesan Council of the Eastern Diocese of the Armenian Church of America . He served on the Eastern Diocese of the Armenian Church of America , and subsequently for a ten @-@ year term on its Board of Trustees . He was also a member of the Armenian General Benevolent Union 's Central Committee of America and the Armenian Assembly of America . 
 He helped organize a memorial service for Armenian American veterans at the Arlington National Cemetery on May 21 , 1978 , where the graves of forty @-@ nine Armenian American veterans , spanning the period from the Spanish – American War to the Vietnam War , were decorated with carnations . Juskalian also volunteered in local schools . He continuously stressed the importance of public service and shared many of his experiences with students . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On August 31 , 1951 , Juskalian married Beatrice MacDougall , the widow of Lieutenant Jack W. Kirk , one of his first company commanders . The marriage ended in divorce in 1958 . In 1970 , he married his second wife , <unk> <unk> , an Armenian from Aleppo , Syria . They had a son named Kevork and a daughter named Elissa . Kevork graduated from George Mason University in May 1996 with a master 's degree in international transactions and was later commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Regular Army . Gregory , a son by his previous marriage with Beatrice MacDougall , lives in Stockbridge , Massachusetts . George Juskalian was also the cousin of Medal of Honor recipient Ernest <unk> who received the award while serving in the U.S. Army during World War II . 
 After his second marriage , Juskalian and his wife visited many countries including Lebanon , Egypt , Italy , France , Spain and his homeland of Armenia . In 1989 , Juskalian along with his family moved to Centreville , Virginia , where he remained the rest of his life . 
 Juskalian died on July 4 , 2010 ; funeral processions were held at the St. Mary 's Armenian Apostolic Church in Washington D.C. He is buried in the Prisoner of War Section of the Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 1988 Juskalian was awarded the St. Nerses <unk> Award and Lifetime Achievement and Pastor 's Recognition Award bestowed by Vasken I , Catholicos of All Armenians for his dedication to the Armenian community . 
 Juskalian was featured in the documentary series Americans At War by the U.S. Naval Institute . Each episode of the documentary series features a U.S. veteran recounting a defining moment from his or her time in the armed services . 
 During a ceremony marking the seventy @-@ fourth anniversary of Washington 's Armenian community , Armenia 's ambassador to the United States Doctor <unk> Markarian , expressed his appreciation of Colonel Juskalian 's many contributions to the Armenian community , and congratulated him for his lifetime achievements . 
 On April 23 , 2007 , the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors recognized Juskalian for " heroism and honorable service " to the United States . 
 Following Juskalian 's death on July 4 , 2010 , Virginia Senator Jim Webb wrote : " It is my understanding that Colonel Juskalian was one of the most highly decorated Armenian @-@ American Veterans to serve in the United States Army . I am sure his dedication to serving the Armenian @-@ American community will be missed and his contribution will always be remembered . " 
 On May 21 , 2011 , President Barack Obama signed House Resolution <unk> of the 2nd Session of the 111th Congress which designated the post office on 5003 <unk> Boulevard in Centreville , Virginia , as the " Colonel George Juskalian Post Office Building " . The renaming ceremony was celebrated at the post office on the same day and was attended by friends , family , politicians , former POWs , veterans , and members of the Armenian community . Attendees included U.S. Congressman Frank Wolf , Virginia Delegate Jim <unk> and member of the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors Michael Frey . During the ceremony , letters of appreciation were read from former Senator John Warner and Presidential candidate Bob Dole . 
 = = Military awards and decorations = = 
 Juskalian 's military awards and decorations include : 
 = = = Silver Star citation = = = 
 The citation for Juskalian 's second Silver Star published in General Orders 41 , Headquarters 7th Infantry Division , 18 July 1953 reads : 
 Lieutenant Colonel George Juskalian , <unk> , Infantry , United States Army , a member of Headquarters , 1st Battalion , <unk> Infantry , distinguished himself by gallantry in action near Chorwon , Korea . During the period 24 March 1953 to 26 March 1953 , Colonel Juskalian led his battalion in a counterattack against strong enemy positions . Colonel Juskalian advanced with the foremost elements of his battalion during the entire conflict . During the attack the battalion encountered a mine field blocking the only route of approach , but Col. Juskalian — with complete disregard for his personal safety — placed himself at the front of his unit and led them through the field . Often exposing himself to the enemy , [ he ] moved from position to position . Colonel Juskalian remained on the position to direct the operations and finally led the last element of his command from his position . The gallantry [ he ] displayed is in keeping with the highest traditions of the military service . Entered the Federal service from Massachusetts . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Juskalian wrote for journals concerning Armenian or military topics . Some of his writings include : 
 " Harput Revisited " , Armenian Review ( Spring , April 1959 ) . <unk> his visit to his father 's native village of Harput , in Turkey . 
 " Why Didn 't They Shoot More ? " , Army Combat Forces Journal ( September 1954 ) , V , No. 2 , p . 35 . Depicts his battles during the Korean War . 
 " A Journey to New Julfa " , Armenian Review ( Spring , May 1960 ) . <unk> his visit to New Julfa , an Armenian populated town in Iran and concludes that the town has lost most of its importance and vitality . 
 " East is East and West is West " , Ararat Quarterly ( Fall 1973 ) , Vol . XIII , No. 4 , p . 19 . <unk> his visit with the <unk> family , an Armenian family that received him while he was in Japan . 
 " The Life You Save " , Ararat Quarterly ( Spring 1988 ) , Vol . XXIV , No. 2 , p . 48 . 
 = Cathy Davey = 
 Catherine " Cathy " Davey ( born 1979 ) is an Irish singer @-@ songwriter . She has released one extended play , " Come Over " ( 2004 ) , and three albums , Something Ilk ( 2004 ) , Tales of Silversleeve ( 2007 ) and The Nameless ( 2010 ) . Her second album garnered her a Choice Music Prize nomination , Meteor Award for Best Irish Female , and spawned a number of successful singles including " Reuben " , " Moving " and " Sing for Your Supper " . The Nameless was the top selling album in Ireland upon the week of its release . It was also nominated for the Choice Music Prize . 
 Davey has performed at several international events , including representing Ireland at the Eurosonic Festival in Groningen , the Netherlands , and performing at the South by Southwest festival in Austin , Texas . She has also performed at other large exhibitions and festivals in Ireland , including Electric Picnic , Indie @-@ pendence and The Music Show . Davey has worked with Autamata , Elbow and The Duckworth Lewis Method as well as providing support for Graham Coxon , R.E.M. and Supergrass . 
 The Irish Times placed Davey third in a list of " The 50 Best Irish Acts Right Now " published in April 2009 , saying " There 's no better female songwriter in Irish music right now " . Tales of Silversleeve was named sixth best Irish album of 2007 by John Meagher of the Irish Independent and ninth best album of the decade by Jim Carroll , Tony Clayton @-@ Lea and Lauren Murphy of The Irish Times . 
 = = Background = = 
 Davey was born in Dublin , daughter of composer Shaun Davey and sculptor Agnes Conway . At the age of ten she moved with her mother to Wiltshire , where they lived for several years . On their return to Dublin they settled in <unk> where Davey spent the rest of her teenage years . The first live performance Davey attended was An Emotional Fish with The Stunning on St Stephen 's Green . She initially intended to be an artist and to develop her interest in music in her leisure time but the offer of a record deal changed that . She is an animal lover . 
 = = Style = = 
 Davey has been referred to as " Ireland 's Björk " . The comparison caused the Irish Independent 's Ed Power to comment in one 2009 review : " Alas , such comparisons are probably inevitable when your favourite mode of communication is an ethereal yelp and your songs are populated with a <unk> @-@ <unk> of <unk> , outsiders and freaks " . His colleague John Meagher opined , " you won 't see Björk heft a guitar half so diligently " . Hot Press compared the music on Something Ilk to the works of PJ Harvey and Nina Hynes . The magazine 's reviewer also compared her to Joni Mitchell after one 2007 show in Cork . Davey 's second album , Tales of Silversleeve , based its sound on the rhythm of the drums . Notable fans of Davey 's music include broadcaster <unk> Ní <unk> . Her records have achieved platinum sales . 
 Davey was initially uncomfortable with being described as a singer @-@ songwriter but is now more accepting of the term . She describes her songwriting style : 
 I write in short quick spurts of manic creativity , which are followed by spells of borderline writer 's block where the writing comes really painfully and laboriously . I ’ m sure it 's a universal experience for anyone who writes , but it 's difficult to get out of , you can 't just wish it away — it just disappears when it 's had enough . It ’ s completely independent of whether I ’ m happy or blue , up or down . It tends to lift as soon as I stop fixating on it — I remember thinking my house was the problem , and I 'd need to go to France in order to write , and I would have been scared without Rex [ her dog ] . I got through it . You can 't chase the muse , or you 'll scare it away . 
 = = Career = = 
 Cathy Davey first came to be known as a backing vocalist alongside Carol Keogh for Ken McHugh 's project Autamata . McHugh and Davey subsequently collaborated on what Hot Press described as " a mixture of otherworldly indie and soft space age melodica " . Davey signed to EMI / Parlophone in 2003 in a deal which Hot Press later described as having " eclipsed even the high @-@ profile signing of The Thrills " . Her rise had been low @-@ profile ; she did not perform live until she had signed her record deal . Her four @-@ track debut EP , " Come Over " , released in 2004 , and in which she " swoops and yelps her way through proceedings with her distinctive voice " , was described by the magazine as " inviting comparisons with others before deciding that she 'd rather be completely unique if it 's all the same with you " . 
 Davey 's debut album , Something Ilk , was recorded at a studio in Wales , produced by Ben Hillier whose previous credits included Blur and Elbow , and released in 2004 . RTÉ reviewer Harry Guerin said it was " high on presence and very low on filler " and gave it three out of five stars . Hot Press remarked , " Not only is her voice elfin , immediate and distinct the songs are also hugely compelling . They are digestible without being lightweight , austere in places without seeming detached " . The Irish Independent 's Paul Byrne described it as " one of the best Irish albums of 2004 " . Davey performed a nationwide tour in September 2004 . She also supported Graham Coxon and Supergrass during tours they undertook that year . The singer later dismissed Something Ilk , saying " I think the record company [ EMI 's Regal Recordings ] thought I was an indie rock chick when they signed me and that album is very much other people 's idea of what I should sound like . [ ... ] I didn 't have the confidence to say no to some of the things [ Ben Hillier ] suggested " . Davey claimed not to " know my arse from my elbow when I signed for them " and did not like performing those songs in a live arena . Despite this , the Irish Independent described her as " very talented — far more so than [ Gemma ] Hayes " but regretted that she had " failed to find an audience for her fine debut Something Ilk " . 
 Davey performed a nationwide tour in late May 2007 , debuting songs from her follow @-@ up album which she initially referred to as Silversleeve . All but two of the songs were recorded in her home . The album , released under the title Tales of Silversleeve and produced by Liam Howe of Sneaker Pimps , was preceded by " Reuben " , its first single , on 21 September 2007 . Davey explained the title choice , " I had a runny nose when I was a child and let 's just say I didn 't wipe it with a tissue " . This proved to be a successful move as it led to a Choice Music Prize nomination for 2007 Irish Album of the Year . RTÉ reviewer Harry Guerin said it was " even more imaginative " than her debut and gave it four out of five <unk> entertainment.ie reviewer Lauren Murphy described the record as " Without doubt , one of the best albums of the year " , noting " there 's a magic about Tales of Silversleeve that makes it an album you 're almost afraid to listen to twice , in case it 's not as good as you remember the first time " . The Irish Independent ' ' s reviewer gave the album five stars , describing it as " a record that she can be proud of " . Jim Carroll , The Irish Times rock critic , called it " The most charming pop album you 'll hear in Zero Seven " . 
 After a series of residencies , Davey embarked on a pre @-@ Christmas tour of Ireland in 2007 . She appeared on the seventh series of Other Voices in early 2008 . The singer represented Ireland at the Eurosonic Festival in Groningen , the Netherlands , in January 2008 . She performed at <unk> Rocks in February 2008 , followed by a performance at the South by Southwest festival in Austin , Texas in that March . Davey was dropped by her record company in mid @-@ 2008 alongside most of their client list . She headlined the Main Stage at Cork X Southwest in <unk> in July 2008 . In August 2009 , she headlined the <unk> Festival in Dublin 's Smithfield Plaza and also performed at that year 's Indie @-@ pendence . Davey appeared at Electric Picnic 2008 . She featured at The Music Show in the RDS in October 2008 . The singer performed in Dublin 's Iveagh Gardens during events to celebrate Africa Day on 25 May . 
 Davey 's song " Moving " has been used in a prominent Vodafone commercial in her native Ireland . Another song , " Sing for Your Supper " , was described by the Irish Independent 's Ed Power as " her biggest smash to date " . The same reviewer described Davey 's song " Reuben " , a number one single , as " a skewed romantic tirade glazed in sugar @-@ candy vocals " . 
 Davey 's third album , The Nameless , was released on 7 May 2010 ( Ireland ) , with contributions from Conor J. O 'Brien and Neil Hannon . Lead single " Little Red " was released on 21 April 2010 and followed by an Irish tour in May . Davey performed on The Late Late Show on 23 April 2010 . She performed at Oxegen 2010 in July . On 16 July 2010 , to promote the second single from The Nameless album , Davey released a download only EP for " Army of Tears " . The EP features three tracks : the original track " Army of Tears " , a previously unreleased track " The Wandering " and a demo version of " Army of Tears " . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Davey has appeared on the Autamata track " Cloud Seekers " , taken from the album My Sanctuary . She has worked with Elbow . She dueted with Gavin Glass on the track " Rag Doll " . She sang a song called " <unk> " on a 2005 CD titled Faction One , released by record label Faction . She appears on the David Turpin track " Red Elk " . She lent her vocals to the 2008 charity album Even Better Than the Disco Thing , on which she performed a cover of Donna Summer 's " I Feel Love " . Tony Clayton @-@ Lea recommended the song be downloaded alongside Lisa Hannigan 's cover version of " Upside Down " . She performed guest vocals on the track " The Sweet Spot " from The Duckworth Lewis Method 's eponymous album and three tracks on Bang Goes the Knighthood , Neil Hannon 's 2010 album as The Divine Comedy . She also supported R.E.M. during their Live Rehearsal shows at the Olympia Theatre , Dublin in summer 2007 . Davey hosted Songs That Scare Children at the Spiegeltent during the Dublin Fringe Festival in September 2008 . Her music is available to download from the PlayStation <unk> . She was involved in efforts to raise funds in the aftermath of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . Davey 's song ' Rescue ' has been used in the ABC TV series The Gates . Her song ' Holy Moly ' is played at the end of The Disappearance of Alice Creed . 
 = = = 2016 = = = 
 In summer 2016 , Davey confirmed a new album was due for release in autumn 2016 , this was preceded by the first new single ' The Pattern ' released on July 15 , 2016 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 Something Ilk ( 2004 ) 
 Tales of Silversleeve ( 2007 ) 
 The Nameless ( 2010 ) 
 The Pattern ( 2016 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 The Irish Times placed Davey third in a list of " The 50 Best Irish Acts Right Now " published in April 2009 , saying " There 's no better female songwriter in Irish music right now " . Her closest female rivals on the list were Lisa Hannigan and Róisín Murphy at numbers five and seven respectively . Tales of Silversleeve was named sixth best Irish album of 2007 by John Meagher of the Irish Independent and ninth best album of the decade by Jim Carroll , Tony Clayton @-@ Lea and Lauren Murphy of The Irish Times . 
 Davey won Best Pop Act at the 2011 Digital Socket Awards in Dublin . 
 = = = Choice Music Prize = = = 
 Davey 's second album Tales of Silversleeve was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in January 2008 . Surprise was expressed within the Irish media when she was beaten by Super Extra Bonus Party . 
 The Nameless was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in 2011 . 
 = = = Meteor Music Awards = = = 
 Davey won Best Irish Female at the 2008 Meteor Awards . Tales of Silversleeve was also nominated for Best Irish Album at the same event but lost to Paddy Casey . Casey later admitted he would have preferred if Davey had won the award . Upon being embraced by and photographed alongside Sinéad O 'Connor at the launch , Davey remarked on how odd it was " to put your arms around someone you don 't know " . 
 = SMS Cöln ( 1916 ) = 
 SMS Cöln was a light cruiser in the German Kaiserliche Marine , the second to bear this name , after her predecessor SMS Cöln had been lost in the Battle of Heligoland Bight . Cöln , first of her class , was launched on 5 October 1916 at Blohm & Voss in Hamburg and completed over a year later in January 1918 . She and her sister Dresden were the last two light cruisers built by the Kaiserliche Marine ; eight of her sisters were scrapped before they could be completed . The ships were an incremental improvement over the preceding Königsberg @-@ class cruisers . 
 Cöln was commissioned into service with the High Seas Fleet ten months before the end of World War I ; as a result , her service career was limited and she did not see action . She participated in a fleet operation to Norway to attack British convoys to Scandinavia , but they failed to locate any convoys and returned to port . Cöln was to have participated in a climactic sortie in the final days of the war , but a revolt in the fleet forced Admirals Reinhard Scheer and Franz von Hipper to cancel the operation . The ship was interned in Scapa Flow after the end of the war and scuttled with the fleet there on 21 June 1919 , under orders from the fleet commander Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter . Unlike many of the other ships scuttled there , Cöln was never raised for scrapping . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Cöln was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Ariadne " and was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg in 1915 . She was launched on 5 October 1916 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 17 January 1918 . The ship was 155 @.@ 5 meters ( 510 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 14 @.@ 2 m ( 47 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 01 m ( 19 @.@ 7 ft ) forward . She displaced 7 @,@ 486 t ( 7 @,@ 368 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of steam turbines powered by eight coal @-@ fired and six oil @-@ fired Marine @-@ type boilers . These provided a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) and a range of approximately 6 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 000 km ; 6 @,@ 900 mi ) at 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , four were located amidships , two on either side , and two were arranged in a super firing pair aft . These guns fired a 45 @.@ 3 @-@ kilogram ( 100 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 840 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 17 @,@ 600 m ( 57 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 040 rounds of ammunition , for 130 shells per gun . Cöln also carried three 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns mounted on the centerline astern of the funnels , though one was removed in 1918 . She was also equipped with a pair of 60 cm ( 23 @.@ 6 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes in deck @-@ mounted swivel launchers amidships . She also carried 200 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After their commissioning under the command of Erich Raeder ( 17 January 1918 – October 1918 ) , Cöln and Dresden joined the High Seas Fleet . They were assigned to the II Scouting Group , alongside the cruisers Königsberg , Pillau , Graudenz , Nürnberg , and Karlsruhe . The ships were in service in time for the major fleet operation to Norway in 23 – 24 April 1918 . The I Scouting Group and II Scouting Group , along with the Second Torpedo @-@ Boat Flotilla were to attack a heavily guarded British convoy to Norway , with the rest of the High Seas Fleet steaming in support . The Germans failed to locate the convoy , which had in fact sailed the day before the fleet left port . As a result , Admiral Reinhard Scheer broke off the operation and returned to port . 
 In October 1918 , the two ships and the rest of the II Scouting Group were to lead a final attack on the British navy . Cöln , Dresden , Pillau , and Königsberg were to attack merchant shipping in the Thames estuary while the rest of the Group were to bombard targets in Flanders , to draw out the British Grand Fleet . Großadmiral Reinhard Scheer , the commander in chief of the fleet , intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to secure a better bargaining position for Germany , whatever the cost to the fleet . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . When informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated , " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet 's ships , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Cöln was among the ships interned . On the voyage there , her captain radioed the fleet commander that one of the ship 's steam turbines had a leaking condenser . Reuter dispatched another light cruiser to remain with the ship in the event that she needed to be towed . Despite the problematic turbine , Cöln managed to steam into port , the last ship in the German line . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Cöln sank at 13 : 50 and was never raised for scrapping . 
 = Lady Croissant = 
 Lady Croissant is a live album by Australian singer Sia , released in April 2007 through the record label Astralwerks . Called a " mini @-@ album " by Astralwerks , the collection contains one studio recording ( " Pictures " ) as well as eight live tracks recorded during an April 2006 concert at the Bowery Ballroom in New York City . Eight songs were written or co @-@ written by Sia ; also featured is a cover version of Ray Davies ' song " I Go to Sleep " , a studio recording of which later appeared on Sia 's studio album Some People Have Real Problems ( 2008 ) . The album was produced by Dan Carey , mixed by Jon Lemon and Taz Mattar at Sarm Studios in London and mastered by Emily Lazar and Sarah Register at The Lodge in New York City . Lady Croissant received mixed critical reception and spawned one single , " Pictures " , which was released exclusively via American Eagle Outfitters on 27 November 2006 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Just over forty minutes in length , Lady Croissant contains nine " slow @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ tempo " compositions . The album includes one previously unreleased studio recording called " Pictures " , co @-@ written by Dan Carey , along with eight live tracks recorded during her 17 April 2006 performance at the Bowery Ballroom in New York City . " Destiny " and " Distractions " each appeared on Zero 7 's 2001 album Simple Things , which featured vocals by Sia . Both songs were co @-@ written by Sia and members of Zero 7 ; " Destiny " was also co @-@ written by Sophie Barker , another vocal contributor to Simple Things . " Blow It All Away " originally appeared on Sia 's 2002 studio album Healing Is Difficult , and " Don 't Bring Me Down " , " Numb " and " Breathe Me " were each released on her 2004 album Colour the Small One . " Lentil " and the cover version of Ray Davies ' song " I Go to Sleep " , made popular by both Cher and the Pretenders , would later appear on Some People Have Real Problems ( 2008 ) . The album was produced by Carey , mixed by Jon Lemon and Taz Mattar at Sarm Studios in London and mastered by Emily Lazar and Sarah Register at The Lodge in New York City . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Lady Croissant received mixed critical reception . AllMusic 's Marisa Brown called Sia 's vocal performance " rich and passionate " and made comparisons to Nelly Furtado and Morley . Brown stated the band was " tight and lush " and that the music was " very modern , warm and melodic and cleanly intricate " . In his review for BBC Music , Paul Sullivan wrote that the album successfully displayed Sia 's vocal capabilities and versatility . However , he noted the minimal audience participation and felt that this prevented the album from capturing a " live " experience . For Sullivan , highlights included " Don 't Bring Me Down " , " Destiny " and " Lentil " , which he believed were " executed with an appealing mixture of frankness and fluidity " . Mark <unk> of Gigwise.com awarded the album four of five stars and opined that the album " portrays an artist who 's star is in the ascendant , whose voice is unrivaled in style and expression , an artist on the brink of deserved and assured greater recognition . " The Selby Times 's review called the collection " mesmerising " and a good indicator of Sia 's future work . One reviewer for <unk> called the album " breathtaking " and wrote positively of Sia 's vocals and the instrumentation . Like Sullivan , the reviewer warned that listeners expecting a traditional live album with " raw cuts and heavy improvisation " might be disappointed . 
 Roque Strew of Pitchfork Media found Sia 's Adelaide accent to be a " liability " , specifically noting difference in pronunciation between the studio versions of " Destiny " and " Distractions " and the live performances . Strew complimented " Pictures " and " Lentil " , the latter of which shined through the " fog of elongated syllables and cut consonants " . Popmatters ' Mike Schiller felt the instrumentation was " robotic " and found Sia 's vocal manipulation and bending of vowels " infuriating " , even unintelligible at times . Schiller did , however , favor her vocal tone and found the power of her voice " occasionally transcendent " . Stuart McCaighy of This Is Fake DIY appreciated " Pictures " but also criticized Sia 's performance for lacking diversity and for " incomprehensible " vocals due to her slurring of words . McCaighy concluded that , like other live albums , Lady Croissant was redundant but would be appreciated by fans . The Australian gay publication DNA wrote a mixed review for the album in 2010 following the release of We Are Born , complimenting Sia 's vocals but accusing " Pictures " of sounding like a B @-@ side . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Pictures " ( Dan Carey , Sia Furler ) – 3 : 37 
 " Don 't Bring Me Down " ( Furler , Blair <unk> ) – 4 : 36 
 " Destiny " ( Sophie Barker , Henry Binns , Furler , Sam Hardaker ) – 3 : 55 
 " Blow It All Away " ( Kevin Armstrong , Furler , Felix Howard , <unk> ) – 5 : 19 
 " Lentil " ( Samuel Dixon , Furler ) – 4 : 11 
 " Numb " ( Furler , Howard , James McMillan ) – 4 : 26 
 " I Go to Sleep " ( Ray Davies ) – 3 : 17 
 " Breathe Me " ( Carey , Furler ) – 5 : 52 
 " Distractions " ( Binns , Furler , Hardaker ) – 5 : 03 
 Track listing adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic and CD liner notes . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = O 'er the Gloomy Hills of Darkness = 
 " O 'er the Gloomy Hills of Darkness " , also titled " O 'er Those Gloomy Hills of Darkness " , is a Welsh Christian hymn by William Williams <unk> written in 1772 . The hymn was written as a missionary hymn ; there are conflicting accounts of why the hymn was written . The hymn was later published in 374 hymnals worldwide , though it was censored and altered in the United States by slaveholders for evangelising to slaves . The hymn later fell out of favour with hymn book editors in the 1960s . 
 = = History = = 
 There are conflicting accounts of why the hymn was written . According to one account , George Bowen was converted to Christianity through hearing a Welsh girl singing hymns . He later went to stay at <unk> @-@ <unk> Manor at the same time that the Welsh Methodist Association were there . While there , he met Williams and asked him to compose some verse about the Preseli Hills . " O 'er the Gloomy Hills of Darkness " was written as a result of these requests . Though it is possible that this story may be correct as <unk> @-@ <unk> Manor and Williams ' bedroom at the manor did overlook Carn <unk> , in the 19th century an alternative story arose . In this version , Williams was travelling to <unk> and composing a new missionary hymn as part of a commission from Selina Hastings , Countess of Huntingdon . Upon passing the ruins of an old Cistercian abbey and seeing the mountains he would have to cross on a stormy night , the view inspired him to write " O 'er the Gloomy Hills of Darkness " for the Countess . The hymn was first written in Welsh as English was not Williams ' first language so it was later translated into English by another person . This was because Williams did not know enough English to fully express the intent of the original Welsh verses in translation . 
 In 1836 , " O 'er the Gloomy hills of Darkness " was reviewed in an issue of The Eclectic Review . In a remarkably snide review , the hymn , among many others , is criticised for a lack of grammatical correctness as well as a lack of rhyme in the first verse , " ... inane verbiage preferred by worthy people to the noblest compositions of sanctified genius ; and to blot it out from our hymn @-@ books would be a species of sacrilege " . This was attributed to Williams ' lack of English as a native language gave rise to " a stiffness apparent " in the hymn . The New York Times stated it had gained popularity because of Williams ' " ease and sweetness " in his hymn writing . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The second verse of the hymn begins with the lines " Let the Indian , let the negro , Let the rude barbarian see " . Williams included this after hearing stories of promising missionary contact with Cherokee tribes and with slaves in the Province of Georgia . When the hymn became established in the United States , slave owners changed the line referencing " Indian " and " negro " to " Let the dark benighted pagan " . The abolitionist Ebenezer Davies claimed “ The altered reading , I learned , prevails universally in America , except in the original version used by the Welsh congregations . Slave @-@ holders , and the abettors of that horrid system which makes it a crime to teach a negro to read the Word of God , felt perhaps that they could not devoutly and consistently sing " Let the Indian , let the negro ... see ” . 
 In the 1850s , the Baptist Union of Great Britain dropped the hymn from usage . The reason published in the Baptist Magazine stated " But the verses are too rude and unfinished to be generally accepted in modern day " . In later years in the 19th century churches , including the Church of England , started to publish the hymn replacing the second verse with the American slave owner 's amended version . In the early 1900s , the second verse would often be omitted altogether from hymnals . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 " O 'er the Gloomy Hills of Darkness " first appeared in published hymnals in 1792 . Jeffrey Richards states that " William Williams 's O 'er the Gloomy Hills of Darkness of 1772 ( sung variously to Thomas Clark 's Calcutta , by Baptists ; to Henry Gauntlett 's Triumph , in The Scottish Hymnal ; to Edwin Moss 's <unk> , in the 1982 Presbyterian Church Praise ) did not make it into Hymns Ancient and Modern , but it was in Bickersteth 's Christian Psalmody in 1833 and was still to be found complete in the 1933 Baptist Hymnal … This very much set the tone for missionary hymns . " After being published in 374 hymnals throughout history , in the 1960s the hymn stopped being published in all Christian hymnals . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints retained the hymn in their hymnals from 1927 until dropping it in 1985 . This was because its members in modern times felt that the hymn connected Native Americans and black people with barbarians . 
 The hymn 's lyrical style set the tone for future missionary hymns . " O 'er the Gloomy Hills of Darkness " inspired the founder of Methodism , Charles Wesley , to write " Sun of <unk> Righteousness " for missionaries working with " <unk> " . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 The lyrics of " O 'er the Gloomy Hills of Darkness " as published in Gloria in Excelsis : or hymns of praise to God and the lamb in 1772 . 
 1 . 
 O 'er those gloomy Hills of Darkness 
 Look my Soul , be still and gaze , 
 All the Promises do travel 
 On a glorious Day of Grace , 
 Blessed <unk> , & c . 
 Let thy glorious Morning dawn . 
 2 . 
 Let the Indian , let the Negro , 
 Let the rude Barbarian see 
 That divine and glorious Conquest 
 Once obtain 'd on Calvary ; 
 Let the Gospel , & c . 
 Word resound from Pole to Pole . 
 3 . 
 Kingdoms wide that sit in Darkness , 
 Let them have the glorious Light , 
 And from Eastern Coast to Western 
 May the Morning chase the Night , 
 And Redemption , & c . 
 Freely <unk> 'd win the Day . 
 4 . 
 May the glorious Days approaching , 
 From eternal Darkness dawn , 
 And the everlasting Gospel 
 Spread abroad thy holy Name . 
 Thousand Years , & c . 
 Soon appear , make no Delay . 
 5 . 
 Lord , I long to see that Morning , 
 When thy Gospel shall abound , 
 And thy Grace get full Possession 
 Of the happy <unk> 'd Ground ; 
 All the Borders , & c . 
 Of the great Immanuel 's Land . 
 6 . 
 Fly abroad , eternal Gospel , 
 Win and conquer , never cease ; 
 May thy eternal wide Dominions 
 Multiply , and still increase ; 
 May thy Scepter , & c . 
 Sway th <unk> <unk> World around . 
 7 . 
 O let Moab yield and tremble , 
 Let Philistia never boast , 
 And let India proud be <unk> <unk> 
 With their <unk> Host ; 
 And the Glory , & c . 
 Jesus only be to thee . 
 = Ernie Toshack with the Australian cricket team in England in 1948 = 
 Ernie Toshack was a member of Donald Bradman 's famous Australian cricket team , which toured England in 1948 and was undefeated in their 34 matches . This unprecedented feat by a Test side touring England earned Bradman 's men the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 A left @-@ arm medium @-@ pace seam bowler , Toshack was a member of the first @-@ choice team , and played in the first four Test matches before succumbing to a persistent knee injury . Toshack contained the English batsmen with leg theory in between the new ball bursts of Keith Miller and Ray Lindwall . He took 11 wickets in the Tests ; his most notable performance was the 5 / 40 he took in the second innings of the Second Test at Lord 's . However , his knee failed in the first innings of the Fourth Test when he took 1 / 112 . He was unable to bowl in the second innings and missed the Fifth Test , marking the end of his Test career . 
 For the entire tour , Toshack took 50 first @-@ class wickets at a bowling average of 21 @.@ 12 with four five @-@ wicket innings hauls , including a best of 7 / 81 against Yorkshire at Bramall Lane . He also took 6 / 51 in the first innings of the match against the Marylebone Cricket Club , who were almost entirely represented by English Test cricketers , playing a key part in an innings victory . With little batting ability , Toshack usually batted last in Australia 's line @-@ up and scored 78 runs at a batting average of 8 @.@ 66 , the worst first @-@ class aggregate and average among the tourists . However , in the Tests , he was dismissed only once and averaged 51 @.@ 00 with a series of tail @-@ wagging performances , including his career best of 20 not out . 
 = = Background = = 
 A left @-@ arm medium @-@ pacer , Toshack made his first @-@ class cricket debut in the 1945 – 46 upon the resumption of cricket after World War II . His performances were enough to ensure his selection for the tour of New Zealand in early @-@ 1946 , where Toshack made his Test debut in the one @-@ off match against the hosts ' national team . From then on , Toshack was a regular member of the national team and played in every Test over the next two summers , fitness permitting . Toshack played in eight of the 11 Tests during this period , taking 36 wickets . Towards the end of the Test series against India in 1947 – 48 in Australia , knee injuries began to hamper Toshack , and he was in doubt for the 1948 tour of England . He only made the trip after a 3 – 2 majority vote by a medical panel , despite being one of the first players chosen by the selectors on cricketing merit . Two Melbourne doctors ruled him unfit , but three specialists from his home state of New South Wales presented a more optimistic outlook ; this allowed him to tour . As a member of Bradman 's Invincibles , the tour was to immortalise him in cricketing history . He grew tired of signing autographs during the sea voyage to England , and entrusted a friend with the task . However , his friend was unaware of the correct spelling of his name ; as a result , there are still sheets in circulation signed <unk> . The team manager Keith Johnson gave Toshack a talking to over this incident . 
 = = Early tour matches = = 
 Australia traditionally fielded its first @-@ choice team in the tour opener , which was customarily against Worcestershire . Toshack was included , reinforcing the new ball attack of Lindwall and Miller and the off spin and leg spin of Ian Johnson and Colin McCool respectively . Australia bowled first , and Toshack took two quick wickets to reduce the hosts to 3 / 158 after a 137 @-@ run second wicket partnership . Toshack ended with 2 / 39 as Australia dismissed Worcestershire for 233 . He was not required to bat as Australia made 8 / 462 declared , and then took 1 / 40 in the second innings as the tourists started their campaign with an innings victory , setting the tone for the summer . 
 Toshack was then rested for the second tour match against Leicestershire , which Australia won by an innings . He then missed the next match against Yorkshire , as Australia came closest to losing a match on the tour , scraping home by four wickets on a damp wicket . 
 Toshack returned as the Australians travelled to London to play Surrey at The Oval , and he had his first outing with the bat on English soil , coming in last and scoring eight to help wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon add 33 for the final wicket before Australia were bowled out for 632 . Toshack bowled without success in the first innings and took one wicket in the second innings , that of Arthur McIntyre , to end with match figures of 1 / 54 as Surrey were defeated by an innings . Toshack then took 2 / 32 in the first innings against Cambridge University , and did not bat as Australia declared at 4 / 414 . He then took 0 / 9 from eight overs in the second innings , as Australia completed another innings victory . He then played in the match against Essex where Australia made 721 runs on the first day to set a new world record for the most runs scored in a day of first @-@ class cricket . However , Toshack only contributed four runs batting at No. 11 . In the first innings , Toshack took the last five wickets to fall , including the top @-@ scorer Ray Smith for 25 , ending with 5 / 31 from 10 @.@ 5 overs as the hosts capitulated for 83 , unable to cope with his swing . Australia enforced the follow on and Toshack took a further 2 / 50 in the second innings as Australia won by an innings and 451 runs , the largest margin of the tour . He then faced Oxford University , scoring two runs in Australia 's 431 . Toshack then took three lower order wickets in the first innings to end with 3 / 34 from 22 overs , sending down more overs than any other Australian . He took 3 / 37 in the second innings as Australia completed another innings victory after enforcing the follow on . The Oxford batsmen had trouble with the seam movement of Toshack . 
 Toshack was retained for the match against the Marylebone Cricket Club at Lord 's . The MCC fielded seven players who would represent England in the Tests , and were basically a full strength Test team , while Australia fielded their first @-@ choice team . It was a chance to gain a psychological advantage , with Len Hutton , Denis Compton and Bill Edrich , three of England 's first four batsmen in the Tests , all playing . Toshack was the last man in and made two , accompanying Lindwall in a 20 @-@ run final wicket stand as Australia totalled 552 . 
 After the MCC had reached 2 / 91 , Toshack broke through the middle order . He had Compton caught behind by Don Tallon for 26 , before trapping the incoming batsman Martin Donnelly — a New Zealand Test player — leg before wicket for five , and then having Hutton caught by vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett for 52 a run later , leaving the hosts at 5 / 104 . After the hosts recovered to 6 / 148 , Toshack removed Test all rounder Ken Cranston , Test wicket @-@ keeper Billy Griffith and spinner Jack Young to leave the MCC at 9 / 166 . The MCC were eventually dismissed for 189 , conceding a first innings lead of 363 runs . Toshack had taken 6 / 51 from 27 overs , and Bradman only allowed him four overs of rest . The Australian captain opted to enforce the follow on and allowed Toshack a lighter load in the second innings , bowling 15 overs and taking 1 / 43 . He removed Edrich as the MCC fell for 205 in 60 @.@ 2 overs to lose by an innings and 158 runs . Toshack had sent down the most overs by any Australian bowler in both innings . Bradman regarded Toshack 's first innings performance as his best of the tour . Toshack again focused on the leg stump , which some English observers decried as being negative . However , former Australian Test batsman Jack Fingleton said that Toshack 's line was close enough to leg stump that most balls had to be played . 
 In the next match against Lancashire , Toshack made four in Australia 's 204 , before claiming both openers after they had put on 48 , including Test batsman Cyril Washbrook . Toshack ended with 2 / 40 as the match ended in a draw after the first day was washed out . It was Australia 's first non @-@ victory of the tour . After six consecutive matches in the space of 21 days , Toshack was rested for the next two matches against Nottinghamshire at Trent Bridge and Hampshire ; the matches ended in a draw and an eight @-@ wicket Australian win respectively . 
 Toshack returned for the final county match against Sussex before the First Test . He did not take a wicket but pinned down the local batsmen as Lindwall blasted them out with match figures of 11 / 59 . Eight of Lindwall 's victims had their stumps knocked over . Toshack bowled 15 overs for 23 runs in the first innings as the hosts were skittled for 86 . He did not bat as Australia made 5 / 549 and then returned in the second innings for 17 overs that yielded only three scoring shots for a total of six runs . He finished the match with a total of 0 / 29 from 32 overs . 
 = = First Test = = 
 Toshack 's performance in the First Test at Trent Bridge was a quiet one , taking a single wicket in each innings . England won the toss and elected to bat . Toshack trapped the home captain Norman Yardley leg before wicket with a ball that straightened after pitching , ending with 1 / 28 as England were bowled out for 165 . Toshack then came to the wicket at 9 / 476 and was involved in an aggressive final wicket partnership of 33 with Johnston , scoring 19 runs — his best at Test level to date — in just 18 minutes , batting in a carefree and freewheeling manner , before falling lbw to Alec Bedser , ending Australia 's innings on 509 with a 344 @-@ run lead . 
 During the second innings , Bradman thought that rain might come so he utilised Toshack to bowl defensive leg theory . He did so to slow the scoring so that England would not have a lead by the time the rain came to create a sticky wicket , otherwise Australia would have been forced to chase a target on a difficult pitch with irregular bounce and pace . As the umpires were obliged to not call off play unless the light was so poor as endanger the batsman , the lack of pace of Johnson and Toshack forced proceedings to continue as they posed no injury threat to the batsmen . Early on the fourth morning , Toshack were able to make the ball deviate regularly while bowling to Hutton and Denis Compton , but Bradman opted to have Miller take the new ball in the fifth over of the day as soon as it was available , taking Toshack off . Later , Toshack was used defensively while Miller attacked from the other end . Bradman 's response to a boundary being hit from Toshack was to further stack the leg side with fielders in defensive positions , and scoring was slow as Toshack bowled accurately . Toshack took the wicket of Joe Hardstaff junior for 43 , who holed out to Hassett on the leg side , having supported Denis Compton in a partnership of 93 . The ball looped up in the air and travelled half @-@ way to the square leg boundary , but Hassett managed to keep track of its trajectory through the fog . Toshack ended with 1 / 60 from 33 overs as Australia were one bowler short after an injury to Lindwall had prevented him from bowling since the first afternoon . England were bowled out for 441 and Australia reached the target of 98 with eight wickets in hand . 
 Toshack was rested for the first tour match after the First Test against Northamptonshire , which Australia won by an innings . He returned against Yorkshire at Bramall Lane , Sheffield , making four as Australia batted first and scored 249 . He then recorded the best innings analysis of his first @-@ class career , taking 7 / 81 from 40 consecutive overs , bemusing the Yorkshire spectators with his Australian accent and distinctive " Ow Wizz Ee " appealing . He removed both openers , including Hutton , and then bowled Yorkshire and England captain Norman Yardley to leave the hosts at 3 / 107 . After Yorkshire reached 4 / 149 , Toshack took four more wickets as the hosts collapsed to be all out for 206 . Wicket @-@ keeper Ron Saggers stood up to the wickets and stumped Ted Lester before Toshack removed three lower @-@ order batsmen . Toshack did not bat or bowl again as the match petered into a draw . Bradman decided to bat until late on the third afternoon and secure a draw instead of pressing for a win ; Yorkshire only batted for 27 overs in their second innings and the crowd booed Bradman for not pursuing a victory . With the match safe , Bradman elected to rely mainly on his second @-@ choice bowlers to conserve his frontline bowlers ' energy for the next Test . 
 = = Second Test = = 
 Australia won the toss and batted first in the Second Test at Lord 's . They were on the back foot at 7 / 258 at stumps on the first day . On the second morning , the Australian lower order counter @-@ attacked ; Toshack joined Johnston with the score at 9 / 320 and they put on 30 runs before Johnston was stumped . Australia regained the momentum , adding 92 runs in 66 minutes of hitting in the morning . One sequence of two overs from Edrich was taken for 28 runs , with many balls unintentionally spooned over the slips or the covers . Both players swung wildly at the ball , which often went in vastly different directions to where they had aimed their shots . Both made new Test best scores ; Toshack scored 20 not out . Both Johnston and Toshack — not known for their batting ability — played without inhibitions , joyfully revelling in their luck . England were then bowled out for 215 . Toshack was wicketless , but was the most economical of the bowlers , conceding only 23 runs from his 18 overs . Toshack operated after the first new ball was taken , and as England had fallen to 4 / 46 , they played him cautiously in an attempt to rebuild the innings . Australia then declared at 7 / 460 in their second innings with Toshack not required to bat , leaving England a target of 596 . 
 England progressed to 1 / 52 in their run @-@ chase before a double strike by Toshack . Edrich and Washbrook fell in quick succession to leave England at 3 / 65 . Edrich edged to Johnson low down in the slips and Tallon took a difficult catch to remove Washbrook . Edrich decided to stand his ground after the catch was taken , thinking that he may have hit a bump ball into the ground before it flew to Johnson , but the umpire ruled otherwise and gave him out . Washbrook inside edged a Toshack full toss directly downwards at Tallon 's ankle . Bradman described the catch as " miraculous " because Tallon had to reach so low , so quickly , in order to complete the catch . English commentator John Arlott speculated that Edrich and Washbrook may have lost concentration after Lindwall was replaced by Toshack , lulled into a false sense of security once Australia 's leading bowler was no longer operating . England then recovered to be 3 / 106 at stumps on the fourth day . 
 Yardley and Tom Dollery took the score to 4 / 133 on the final morning before Toshack bowled the former for 11 . He then trapped Alec Coxon two balls later in the same over for a duck , leaving England at 6 / 133 . Coxon shuffled across his stumps and missed his first delivery , which hit him in front of the stumps and prompted a loud lbw appeal , and did the same thing to the next ball , and the umpire upheld the Australians ' second appeal . During this spell , Toshack conceded only seven runs from eight overs , but was taken off as Bradman wanted to take the new ball and utilise Lindwall and Johnston . The match ended when Doug Wright hit Toshack to Lindwall and England were bowled out for 186 , sealing a 409 @-@ run win for Australia . Toshack ended with 5 / 40 from 20 @.@ 1 overs with Miller unable to bowl due to injury . During the second innings performance , Toshack employed two short legs and a silly mid @-@ off . Arlott said that while Toshack had the best figures , Lindwall was the pivotal figure , at the latter " so patently disturbed Hutton he struck a blow at the morale of the English batting that was never overcome . " 
 A match against Surrey started the day after the Second Test ended , but Bradman nevertheless asked Toshack to bowl 20 overs as Surrey batted first . He took 2 / 76 including opposition captain Errol Holmes . In reply to the hosts ' 221 , Toshack made one in Australia 's total of 389 . He then removed Arthur McIntyre and Eric Bedser in the second innings and ended with 2 / 29 as Australia won by ten wickets . Toshack was then rested after playing 12 days of cricket in two weeks , missing the innings victory over Gloucestershire . 
 = = Third Test = = 
 Toshack had a moderately successful Third Test , in which England elected to bat first . England lost two early wickets , and when Toshack came on , Jack Crapp repeatedly defended a sequence of deliveries to Arthur Morris at silly point . As the hosts were in trouble , they played cautiously and Toshack 's first five overs were all maidens . Crapp then hit Toshack to Sid Barnes at short leg , but the catch was dropped . However , Crapp did not capitalise as Toshack conceded only eight runs in a sequence of eight overs . 
 Halfway through the day , England fell to 5 / 119 , and captain Yardley came in . He hit Toshack in the air , but Barnes was unable to complete the reflex catch at short leg . However , this error did not cost many runs . Yardley lofted Toshack into the on @-@ side and the hands of Johnson at forward square leg to fall for 22 with the score at 6 / 141 . Toshack 's defensive bowling had caused the English skipper to lose patience and his departure for 22 left the score on 141 / 6 . Toshack bowled Dick Pollard late in the innings to finish with 2 / 75 from 41 overs — including 20 maidens — as England ended with 363 . Toshack was unbeaten on zero and was only at the crease for one minute as Australia replied with 221 . In the second innings , Toshack removed Compton for a duck , caught in the slips by Miller , and ended with 1 / 26 as the rain @-@ affected match ended in a draw . He also had Washbrook dropped in the slips cordon by Johnson , one of several times that the batsman was reprieved during the innings . 
 After bowling 53 overs in the Third Test , Toshack was rested for the match against Middlesex . It was the only tour match before the Fourth Test , and Australia won by ten wickets . 
 = = Fourth Test = = 
 Toshack 's knee injury flared again in the Fourth Test at Headingley after England elected to bat . On the first morning , England opener Len Hutton edged Toshack through the slips and was then dropped on 25 . Hutton eventually reached 81 as the opening pair put on 168 . Toshack was wicketless as the hosts closed the first day at 2 / 268 . The following morning , he was removed from the attack after night @-@ watchman Bedser hit him for three consecutive fours . After the lunch break , Toshack bowled Jack Crapp with an inside @-@ edged half volley for five to leave England at 5 / 447 . Toshack ended with an ineffective 1 / 112 from 35 overs as England made 496 . He was the most expensive and uneconomical of the frontline bowlers and it was his most uneconomical performance in the Tests . He aggravated his knee injury and was later taken to London for cartilage surgery , ending his bowling duties for the match and his Test career . 
 Late on the third day , Toshack was part of a rearguard Australian action that minimised England 's first innings lead . He came to the crease at 9 / 403 to accompany Lindwall , featuring in a 55 @-@ run stand and lasting the final 50 minutes until stumps , with Johnston running for him . Australia were 9 / 457 at stumps , with Lindwall on 76 and Toshack on 12 . Lindwall farmed the strike by trying to hit boundaries and twos during the over , but Yardley did not resort to the tactic of setting a deep field to yield a single to Lindwall to get Toshack on strike . Despite Toshack and Johnston 's lack of familiarity with having and acting as a runner respectively , and the resulting disorders in running between the wickets , Lindwall was able to manipulate the strike so that he faced most of the balls . On the next morning of play , Toshack did not add to his score before Lindwall was dismissed and Australia ended at 458 in the third over of the day , leaving the tourists 38 runs in arrears on the first innings . Toshack did not bowl in the second innings as England made 8 / 365 and set Australia a target of 404 for victory on the last day . Australia achieved the runs with seven wickets in hand , setting a new world record for the highest successful run @-@ chase in Tests . 
 After the injury at Headingley , Toshack was out of action for two weeks , missing the matches against Derbyshire , Glamorgan and Warwickshire . These fixtures ended in an innings victory , a rain @-@ affected draw and a nine @-@ wicket win respectively . He returned against Lancashire and scored two in Australia 's 321 . He then bowled seven overs in the first innings , taking 0 / 17 . He aggravated his injury and did not bowl in the second innings and did not play again for the tour . As a result , Toshack missed the last Test and eight further tour matches , three of which were not first @-@ class . Australia won the Fifth Test by an innings in Toshack 's absence to win the series 4 – 0 , and proceeded through the remaining tour matches undefeated . 
 = = Role = = 
 A left @-@ arm medium @-@ pace seamer , Toshack was a member of Bradman 's first @-@ choice team and he played in the first four Tests before being struck down by a persistent knee injury . Toshack contained the English batsmen using leg theory in between the new ball bursts of Miller and Lindwall , usually bowling second change after Miller , Lindwall and Johnston . The English press decried Toshack 's style of bowling as negative , but Jack Fingleton said that " he is generally so close to the stumps that nearly every ball has to be played " . 
 During the Tests , Toshack took 11 wickets at 33 @.@ 09 ; his most notable performance was his 5 / 40 in the second innings of the Second Test at Lord 's . Of the four frontline pacemen , Toshack had the second best economy rate , although with his leg stump bowling , he also had a strike rate of 94 @.@ 45 , while the other three fast bowlers all had strike rates below 70 . It was a similar tale in the first @-@ class statistics , with the second best economy among the seven frontline bowlers , but the worst strike rate . For the entire tour , Toshack took 50 wickets at 21 @.@ 12 with four five @-@ wicket innings hauls , including a best of 7 / 81 against Yorkshire at Bramall Lane . He also took 6 / 51 in the first innings of the match against the Marylebone Cricket Club , which was almost entirely represented by English Test cricketers . Toshack took two catches on tour , none of them in the Tests . 
 An inept batsman with an average of 5 @.@ 78 in his first @-@ class career , Toshack managed a Test average of 51 @.@ 00 on the 1948 tour after being dismissed only once , behind only Arthur Morris , Sid Barnes , Bradman and Neil Harvey . The unbeaten 20 he managed in the Lord 's Test was his best first @-@ class score , made in a freewheeling tenth @-@ wicket stand with Johnston . 
 During the tour , Toshack had few opportunities with the bat , invariably being placed at either No. 10 and No. 11 in the order alongside Johnston , another tailender with little batting <unk> Neither player ever passed 30 in their career , and they were the only two players who failed to make a half @-@ century during the tour . As Australia 's other specialist bowlers were Lindwall , McCool , Johnson and Doug Ring , all of whom made centuries and more than 18 fifties each during their first @-@ class career , Toshack and Johnston were invariably rooted at the bottom of the order . As Australia often won by an innings , and declared in the first innings many times due to their batting strength , Toshack only had 12 innings in his 15 first @-@ class fixtures , never batted in the second innings , and scored 78 runs at 8 @.@ 66 . Of the 78 runs , 51 came from four Test innings in Toshack 's four Tests . 
 Due to the fragility of his knee , Toshack was used sparingly in the tour games , playing in only 11 of the 29 non @-@ Test matches on the tour , the least of any player . Toshack was unable to play in the last nine matches of the tour , having injured himself in the second match against Lancashire . 
 = = = Statistical note = = = 
 = = = General notes = = = 
 = Sexy ! No No No ... = 
 " Sexy ! No No No ... " is a song by British girl group Girls Aloud from their fourth studio album , Tangled Up ( 2007 ) . In 2007 , the group announced that they would release a new album , due in November of that year . In July 2007 , it was announced that " Sexy ! No No No ... " , due to be released in September , would be as the first single from Tangled Up , with a radio premiere scheduled for 20 July . The track leaked a few hours prior to the premiere . " Sexy ! No No No ... " was written by Girls Aloud and Xenomania , and is an electropunk song that incorporates a sample of Nazareth 's 1975 song " Hair of the Dog " , for which they received a writing credit . Composed of three songs welded together , the song avoids the verse @-@ chorus form present in most contemporary pop music . 
 " Sexy ! No No No ... " received generally favourable reviews from music critics , and peaked at number 5 on the UK Singles Chart , continuing the band 's string of hits by becoming their fifteenth consecutive single to chart within the top ten . The song also peaked at number 11 on the Irish Singles Chart . The accompanying music video was directed by Trudy Bellinger , and features the group singing and dancing through pins and wires in black PVC catsuits and red dresses . To promote the song , Girls Aloud performed " Sexy ! No No No ... " at Dance X , ITV1 special Saturday Night Divas and T4 on the Beach . The track was also included in three of the group 's concert tours , 2008 's Tangled Up Tour , 2009 's Out of Control Tour and 2013 's Ten : The Hits Tour . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In 2007 , the group announced that they would release a new album in November of that year . The production and songwriting began with producer Brian Higgins meeting each member of the group individually , and discussing their life since the release of Chemistry ( 2005 ) . Higgins took inspiration from these discussions in his songwriting , with bandmate Nicola Roberts explaining that " it 's important he 's up to date with where we are . Our songs have to reflect us so that 's why we do it . " " Sexy ! No No No ... " was then written by Girls Aloud with production team Xenomania . Roberts , Cheryl Cole , Sarah Harding and Kimberley Walsh recorded vocals for the song in London , England , while Nadine Coyle recorded her vocals in Los Angeles , California . In July 2007 , Girls Aloud announced that they would release " Sexy ! No No No ... " , as the first single from Tangled Up , in September 2007 . The radio premiere of the song was scheduled for the morning of 20 July 2007 on BBC Radio 1 , however , it leaked in full online earlier the same day at 02 : 21 GMT . " Sexy ! No No No ... " was released for digital download on 31 August 2007 , while it was also made available on two different CD single formats on 3 September 2007 . The first disc included a live version of " Something Kinda Ooooh " ( 2006 ) , recorded at the Bournemouth International Centre . The second CD format featured Tony Lamezma 's " Yes Yes Yes " Mix of " Sexy ! No No No ... " and also a new track as a b @-@ side , entitled " Dog Without a Bone " . The b @-@ side was originally written in 2006 in an attempt to come up with a lead single for the group 's first compilation album , The Sound of Girls Aloud : The Greatest Hits , however , " Something Kinda Ooooh " was released instead . " Dog Without a Bone " was Popjustice 's song of the day on 20 August 2007 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Sexy ! No No No ... " is an electropunk song , which consists of three songs welded together , according to journalist Peter Robinson : one with a samba rhythm , one with a sped @-@ up sample and a breakbeat , and an intro from elsewhere . The track opens with Cole singing over a " spooky " instrumentation . Her vocals have been vocodered and she sings " Cause I 've been sitting back , no chance of falling / Hoping that nothing ever blows , no no / Boy , did you ever think that loving would be / Nothing more than walking me home , no no " . As the chorus begins , the song incorporates a sample from Scottish rock band Nazareth 's 1975 track " Hair of the Dog " , and the group starts singing , " Did you tell him ? No no no / Give him kisses ? No no no / Whisper honey ? No no no / You 're delicious ? Hell no " . John Murphy of musicOMH noted that " Sexy ! No No No .. " is not " structured like a proper pop song - there 's no verse @-@ chorus @-@ verse " . The instrumentation of " Sexy ! No No No ... " is composed of multi @-@ layered guitar riffs and " euphoric woo woo @-@ oo harmonies " , while the song 's structure follows as introduction , chorus , chorus , verse , bridge , chorus , middle eight , verse . A Newsround reviewer described the lyrical content , saying that Girls Aloud are " trying a different approach to getting the guy " , in that " instead of being ' sexy ' , they 've backed off . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Sexy ! No No No ... " received positive reviews from music critics . John Lucas of Allmusic described the " pounding electro @-@ punk number " as " one of the most daring songs they 've yet released , " while a reviewer for Newsround deemed it " yet another sample of their perfect pop : bold , sassy , slightly loopy and unbelievably catchy . " Fraser McAlpine of BBC thought that " Sexy ! No No No ... " is " kinda dumb , kinda sassy , kinda pumping and kinda ' what on EARTH is THAT ? ' , just like all the best Aloud anthems are " , while Nick Levine of Digital Spy rated it four out of five stars , noting that Xenomania sacrificed the " conventional song structure in the name of keeping those hooks coming thick and fast - and quite right too . " Levine also praised Girls Aloud for restyling themselves " as teasing <unk> , claiming that they 've ' dropped their d @-@ d @-@ dirty style ' " . Lauren Murphy of Entertainment.ie said that " Sexy ! No No No ... " was a " stellar single " , describing it as an " ' 80s @-@ flavoured radio hit " , while Matt O 'Leary of Virgin Media stated that the song " slam [ s ] home the power @-@ pop message we 're used to [ from Girls Aloud ] . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Because it was available to download one week prior to the release of the CD single , " Sexy ! No No No ... " debuted at number 64 on the UK Singles Chart , based solely on digital downloads . The following week , the single reached a new peak at number five , continuing Girls Aloud 's string of hits by becoming their fifteenth consecutive single to chart within the top ten . It spent a total of ten weeks on the top 40 , and is among fifteen best @-@ selling singles by the group . On the week ending 22 September 2007 , " Sexy ! No No No ... " debuted at number 11 on the Euro Digital Chart compiled by Billboard . The track peaked at the same position on the Irish Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 In an appearance on RTÉ One 's Saturday Night with Miriam on 14 July 2007 , Coyle announced that Girls Aloud were not splitting up , and that the group would film a new music video the following week . On 7 August 2007 , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes pictures of the accompanying music video were published by Daily Mail . The music video was directed by Trudy Bellinger , and premiered on 13 August 2007 . It opens with Cole then singing the introduction , as she and the group are seen wearing PVC catsuits while standing in front of a red material . The material is being used by a seamstress who is starting work on a dress . As the chorus begins , the camera zooms out to show the girls wearing giant inflatable red dresses . The seamstress starts putting large pins into her dress , poking their way around the girls , until the pins start tearing into their dresses . The pins tear the dresses off , and the girls are back in their catsuits , surrounded by the threads of their dresses . Journalist Peter Robinson deemed the video " iconic " and " stylish " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Girls Aloud first performed " Sexy ! No No No ... " at the T4 on the Beach special on 22 July 2007 . The group also performed it at Dance X on 18 August 2007 , at ITV1 special Saturday Night Divas on 3 November 2007 , and at the V Festival in 2008 . The same year , " Sexy ! No No No ... " served as the introduction for the Tangled Up Tour . During the first part of the performance , the girls were suspended on wires as they hovered in the air in black cloaks . As the song 's chorus began , Girls Aloud removed their cloaks to reveal stage outfits designed by Julien Macdonald . For 2009 's Out of Control Tour , " Sexy ! No No No ... " was remixed with parts of " Disturbia " by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna . In 2013 , the song was performed during the second act of the Ten : The Hits Tour . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Sexy ! No No No ... " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Guitar – Nick Coler , Owen Parker 
 Keyboard – Miranda Cooper , Brian Higgins , Tim Powell , Toby Scott 
 Mastering – Dick Beetham for 360 Mastering 
 Mixing – Jeremy Wheatley 
 Production – Brian Higgins , Xenomania 
 Programming – Miranda Cooper , Brian Higgins , Tim Powell , Toby Scott 
 Songwriting – Girls Aloud , Nazareth , Xenomania 
 Contains a sample of " Hair of the Dog " by Nazareth ( Dan McCafferty , Darrell Sweet , Manny Charlton , Pete Agnew ) 
 Vocals - Girls Aloud 
 Published by Warner / Chappell Music and Xenomania Music 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Tangled Up . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Flowing Hair dollar = 
 The Flowing Hair dollar was the first dollar coin issued by the United States federal government . The coin was minted in 1794 and 1795 ; its size and weight were based on the Spanish dollar , which was popular in trade throughout the Americas . 
 In 1791 , following a study by Alexander Hamilton , Congress passed a joint resolution calling for the establishment of a national mint . Later that year , in his third State of the Union address , President George Washington urged Congress to provide for a mint , which was officially authorized by the Coinage Act of 1792 . Despite the authorization , silver and gold coins were not struck until 1794 . The Flowing Hair dollar , designed by Robert Scot , was initially produced in 1794 , and again in 1795 . In October 1795 the design was replaced by the Draped Bust dollar . 
 On January 24 , 2013 , a specimen striking from the 1794 production sold for $ 10 @,@ 016 @,@ 875 , the highest price ever paid for a coin . 
 = = Background = = 
 Beginning in the 1780s , a number of prominent Americans called for the establishment of a central mint to supply the United States with official coinage ; all such proposals failed due in large part to lack of funds and opposition from individuals and groups who preferred that coins be struck by the individual states . Since there were no federal coins issued , the needs of the states were fulfilled by a variety of domestic and foreign coins and tokens , including Spanish eight @-@ real coins ( popularly known as Spanish dollars or pieces of eight ) . 
 In 1789 , the United States Constitution , which granted Congress the power " to coin Money , regulate the Value thereof , and of foreign Coin , and fix the Standard of Weights and Measures " , was ratified and came into force . The following year , Congress began deliberating on the state of the nation 's monetary system and coinage . On January 28 , 1791 , Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton presented a report to Congress detailing the findings of a study he had conducted on the monetary system and the potential of a United States mint . As part of his study , Hamilton had a series of assay tests of Spanish dollars performed , as that was the coin upon which the United States monetary system would be based . After viewing the results , the secretary recommended that the silver content of the United States dollar be based on the average silver content of the reales tested . Hamilton 's recommendation was that the dollar should contain 371 @.@ 25 grains of silver and have a gross weight of 416 grains , the balance being copper . On March 3 , 1791 , after reviewing Hamilton 's report , Congress passed a joint resolution authorizing a federal mint ; the resolution , however , gave no specifics or appropriations . 
 = = = Establishment of the Mint = = = 
 In his third annual address to Congress , later known as the State of the Union address , delivered on October 25 , 1791 , in Philadelphia , President George Washington urged members of Congress to put the joint resolution approved earlier that year into immediate effect : 
 The disorders in the existing currency , and especially the scarcity of small change , a scarcity so peculiarly distressing to the poorer classes , strongly recommend the carrying into immediate effect the resolution already entered into concerning the establishment of a mint . Measures have been taken pursuant to that resolution for procuring some of the most necessary artists , together with the requisite apparatus . 
 In response , the Senate appointed a committee chaired by Robert Morris to draft the necessary specifications and legislation that would officially create a federal mint and coinage . The committee presented a bill before Congress on December 21 , 1791 , which stated in part that the new dollar coin ( which was to form the basis of the United States monetary system ) should contain 371 grains of silver and a total weight of 416 grains , as Hamilton had earlier recommended . The new silver coins were to be struck in an alloy containing 1 @,@ 485 parts out of 1 @,@ 664 ( about 89 @.@ 24 percent ) fine silver , with the remainder copper , intended to equal the silver in Spanish dollars . However , an assay of the Spanish dollars was in error — they were in fact 65 / 72 silver ( about 90 @.@ 28 percent ) with the remainder copper . 
 One provision in Morris ' legislation called for President Washington to be depicted on the obverse side of every coin struck by the new mint . The bill passed the Senate after debate , but it was altered in the House of Representatives to instead call for the head of an allegorical figure representing Liberty to appear . Upon returning to the Senate , the upper house insisted on its version of the design provision . The House rejected the provision for the second time and passed another version of the bill , after which the Senate concurred . The law , known as the Coinage Act of 1792 , was signed into law on April 2 , 1792 , by President Washington . The Act provided for the creation of the United States Mint , and appropriated money to meet the cost of construction of an appropriate facility , and for salaries for employees and officials . The denominations sanctioned under the Act were half cents , cents , half dismes , dismes , quarter dollars , half dollars , dollars , quarter eagles , half eagles and eagles . On July 31 , 1792 , the foundation stone of the Philadelphia Mint was laid by newly appointed Mint Director David Rittenhouse . Machinery and personnel began occupying the new building by September 1792 , and production began on cents in February 1793 . In the first year of production at the Mint , only copper coins were minted , as the prospective assayer could not raise the required $ 10 @,@ 000 surety to officially assume the position ; the 1792 Coinage Act stated that both the chief coiner and assayer were to " become bound to the United States of America , with one or more sureties to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the Treasury , in the sum of ten thousand dollars " . Later that year , Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson appealed to Congress that the amount of the bonds be lowered . On March 3 , 1794 , Congress lowered the bonds to $ 5 @,@ 000 and $ 1 @,@ 000 for chief coiner and assayer , respectively . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Design creation = = = 
 Early in 1794 , engraver Robert Scot began preparing designs for the silver dollar . Scot 's initial design depicted a bust of Liberty , while his reverse featured an eagle , both required by the 1792 Coinage Act . Scot 's design closely followed his design for the cent , but with the Phrygian cap removed . Government officials later instructed Scot to include a wreath around the eagle and to move the denomination from the reverse face to the edge of the coin . After receiving approval , Scot began engraving the hubs for the new silver dollar . Extra care was taken during the engraving of this denomination , because the dollar would be the largest American coin , and would thus receive the most scrutiny from foreign nations . The lettering was executed by Frederick Geiger , who had worked as a typographer for various books and newspapers . After the dies were created , several copper test pieces were struck . Officials decided to add fifteen stars around the periphery , representing the fifteen states that had ratified the Constitution to that point , to the right @-@ facing Liberty on the obverse . 
 = = = Minting = = = 
 Now that mintage of the silver denominations could begin , the Mint began seeking depositors to bring in silver and gold bullion to be coined . After receiving several deposits , assayer Albion Cox notified Rittenhouse of his beliefs that the .892 standard approved for silver coinage was difficult to produce and that it would darken if put into circulation . Instead , Cox recommended that the purity be modified to .900 fine , but also that the weight be kept at 416 grains . This meant that the new alloy was contrary to statute and that all depositors would be overcharged for their silver bullion deposits , as there was a higher silver content in the coins than was allowed by the Coinage Act of 1792 . The Mint 's action cost suppliers of silver about one percent of their deposit ; the largest depositor , John Vaughan , reckoned his loss at $ 2 @,@ 260 . Congress approved his petition for reimbursement in 1800 , after several delays . 
 Before the coins could be struck , the edge lettering and devices had to be impressed on the edge of the planchets . This action was performed with a device known as the Castaing machine ; the machine stamped the edge with the words " Hundred Cents One Dollar or Unit " along with ornamentation . As production was inexact , many planchets intended for silver dollars were overweight . This was remedied by filing the face of the planchets ; for this reason , the coins vary in weight more dramatically than later issues , which were minted with more precise equipment . 
 The first silver dollars were struck on October 15 , 1794 . The silver used for the 1794 dollar coins came from part of a large quantity of French billon coins deposited by the Bank of Maryland ; as they were of a lower fineness than required , refining was necessary . In total , 1 @,@ 758 acceptable silver dollars were produced in 1794 . Those which were deemed unsuitable for circulation were either melted or restruck in 1795 . The 1 @,@ 758 coins that were officially delivered by Chief Coiner Henry Voight , though acceptable , struck poorly due to the press that was used during early production at the Mint , which was a man @-@ powered screw press intended for use on coins no larger than a half dollar . 
 All acceptable 1794 dollars were paid to Rittenhouse . In an attempt to help circulate the coins , Rittenhouse spent many of the new coins and traded them for foreign coins to market the new products of the Mint . Others were distributed to VIPs and distinguished visitors to the Mint . After the initial production , Rittenhouse ordered all dollar coin production to end until Mint personnel could build a more powerful press that would be capable of better striking the coins . The New Hampshire Gazette wrote of the new dollar coins on December 2 , 1794 @,@ 
 Some of the new dollars now coining at the Mint of the United States have found their way to this town . A correspondent put one in into the editor 's hands yesterday . Its weight is equal to that of a Spanish dollar , but the metal appears finer ... The tout ensemble ( entire design ) has a pleasing effect to a connoisseur , but the touches of the [ en ] graver are too delicate , and there is a want of that boldness of execution which is necessary to durability and currency . 
 The new coinage press was completed in early 1795 , and the first group of dollars , totalling 3 @,@ 810 coins , was delivered on May 6 . The coins struck on May 8 may have borne a 1794 date . A number of 1795 dollars ( along with one 1794 issue ) are known to have been struck with a silver plug set into the center , measuring approximately 8 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) . It is believed that this was done to correct the weight of underweight planchets . The total mintage for the second and final year of production is estimated at 160 @,@ 295 . In total , 203 @,@ 033 silver dollars were struck in 1795 , but it is unknown exactly how many of those were of the Flowing Hair type , as the Draped Bust dollar succeeded it in October 1795 ; the Draped Bust dollar was designed by portraitist Gilbert Stuart at the behest of Rittenhouse 's successor as Mint Director , Henry DeSaussure . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 Throughout its history , the 1794 dollar has widely been considered one of the rarest and most valuable of all United States coins . In a September 1880 issue of The Coin Journal , the author noted that a good quality specimen of the 1794 dollar was valued at fifty dollars . In the early 1990s , numismatic historian Jack Collins estimated the surviving number of the coins to be between 120 and 130 . In 2013 , the finest known example , which was among the earliest coins struck and was prepared with special care , was sold at auction for $ 10 @,@ 016 @,@ 875 , the highest selling price of any coin in history . The dollar was graded Specimen @-@ 66 by the Professional Coin Grading Service , noting the special conditions under which it was struck . The coin , which had previously been owned by Colonel E.H.R. Green , was sold by Stack 's Bowers Galleries in a public auction in January 2013 . It was previously sold in 2010 for what was then a record sum of $ 7 @.@ 85 million , to the Cardinal Collection Educational Foundation . Steven <unk> , a former owner of the coin , said that it was a " national treasure " and that he was proud to have been its " custodian " from 2003 until its sale in 2010 . Martin Logies , representative of the foundation that purchased the coin , said that of all the rarities he had seen , he believed that one was the " single most important of all " . 
 = Castles in Great Britain and Ireland = 
 Castles have played an important military , economic and social role in Great Britain and Ireland since their introduction following the Norman invasion of England in 1066 . Although a small number of castles had been built in England in the 1050s the Normans began to build motte and bailey and ringworks castles in large numbers to control their newly occupied territories in England and the Welsh Marches . During the 12th century the Normans began to build more castles in stone , with characteristic square keeps that played both military and political roles . Royal castles were used to control key towns and the economically important forests , while baronial castles were used by the Norman lords to control their widespread estates . David I invited Anglo @-@ Norman lords into Scotland in the early 12th century to help him colonise and control areas of his kingdom such as Galloway ; the new lords brought castle technologies with them and wooden castles began to be established over the south of the kingdom . Following the Norman invasion of Ireland in the 1170s , under Henry II , castles were established there too . 
 Castles continued to grow in military sophistication and comfort during the 12th century , leading to a sharp increase in the complexity and length of sieges in England . While in Ireland and Wales castle architecture continued to follow that of England , after the death of Alexander III the trend in Scotland moved away from the construction of larger castles towards the use of smaller tower houses . The tower house style would also be adopted in the north of England and Ireland in later years . In North Wales Edward I built a sequence of militarily powerful castles after the destruction of the last Welsh polities in the 1270s . By the 14th century castles were combining defences with luxurious , sophisticated living arrangements and heavily landscaped gardens and parks . 
 Many royal and baronial castles were left to decline , so that by the 15th century only a few were maintained for defensive purposes . A small number of castles in England and Scotland were developed into Renaissance Era palaces that hosted lavish feasts and celebrations amid their elaborate architecture . Such structures were , however , beyond the means of all but royalty and the richest of the late @-@ medieval barons . Although gunpowder weapons were used to defend castles from the late 14th century onwards it became clear during the 16th century that , provided artillery could be transported and brought to bear on a besieged castle , gunpowder weapons could also play an important attack role . The defences of coastal castles around the British Isles were improved to deal with this threat , but investment in their upkeep once again declined at the end of the 16th century . Nevertheless , in the widespread civil and religious conflicts across the British Isles during the 1640s and 1650s , castles played a key role in England . Modern defences were quickly built alongside existing medieval fortifications and , in many cases , castles successfully withstood more than one siege . In Ireland the introduction of heavy siege artillery by Oliver Cromwell in 1649 brought a rapid end to the utility of castles in the war , while in Scotland the popular tower houses proved unsuitable for defending against civil war artillery – although major castles such as Edinburgh put up strong resistance . At the end of the war many castles were slighted to prevent future use . 
 Military use of castles rapidly decreased over subsequent years , although some were adapted for use by garrisons in Scotland and key border locations for many years to come , including during the Second World War . Other castles were used as county jails , until parliamentary legislation in the 19th closed most of them down . For a period in the early 18th century , castles were shunned in favour of Palladian architecture , until they re @-@ emerged as an important cultural and social feature of England , Wales and Scotland and were frequently " improved " during the 18th and 19th centuries . Such renovations raised concerns over their protection so that today castles across the British Isles are safeguarded by legislation . Primarily used as tourist attractions , castles form a key part of the national heritage industry . Historians and archaeologists continue to develop our understanding of British castles , while vigorous academic debates in recent years have questioned the interpretation of physical and documentary material surrounding their original construction and use . 
 = = Norman Invasion = = 
 = = = Anglo @-@ Saxon fortifications = = = 
 The English word " castle " derives from the Latin word castellum and is used to refer to the private fortified residence of a lord or noble . The presence of castles in Britain and Ireland dates primarily from the Norman invasion of 1066 . Before the arrival of the Normans the Anglo @-@ Saxons had built burhs , fortified structures with their origins in 9th @-@ century Wessex . Most of these , especially in urban areas , were large enough to be best described as fortified townships rather than private dwellings and are therefore not usually classed as castles . Rural burhs were smaller and usually consisted of a wooden hall with a wall enclosing various domestic buildings along with an entrance tower called a burh @-@ <unk> , which was apparently used for ceremonial purposes . Although rural burhs were relatively secure their role was primarily ceremonial and they too are not normally classed as castles . There were , however , a small number of castles which were built in England during the 1050s , probably by Norman knights in the service of Edward the Confessor . These include Hereford , Clavering , Richard 's Castle and possibly Ewyas Harold Castle and Dover . 
 = = = Invasion = = = 
 William , Duke of Normandy , invaded England in 1066 and one of his first actions after landing was to build Hastings Castle to protect his supply routes . Following their victory at the battle of Hastings the Normans began three phases of castle building . The first of these was the establishment , by the new king , of a number of royal castles in key strategic locations . This royal castle programme focused on controlling the towns and cities of England and the associated lines of communication , including Cambridge , Huntingdon , Lincoln , Norwich , Nottingham , Warwick and York . Of the castles built by William the Conqueror two @-@ thirds were built in towns and cities , often those with the former Anglo @-@ Saxon mints . These urban castles could make use of the existing town 's walls and fortifications , but typically required the demolition of local houses to make space for them . This could cause extensive damage , and records suggest that in Lincoln 166 houses were destroyed , with 113 in Norwich and 27 in Cambridge . Some of these castles were deliberately built on top of important local buildings , such as the burhs or halls of local nobles , and might be constructed so as to imitate aspects of the previous buildings – such as the gatehouse at <unk> Castle in Exeter , which closely resembled the previous Anglo @-@ Saxon burh tower – this was probably done to demonstrate to the local population that they now answered to their new Norman rulers . 
 The second and third waves of castle building were led by the major magnates , and then by the more junior knights on their new estates . The apportionment of the conquered lands by the king influenced where these castles were built . In a few key locations the king gave his followers compact groups of estates including the six rapes of Sussex and the three earldoms of Chester , Shrewsbury and Hereford ; intended to protect the line of communication with Normandy and the Welsh border respectively . In these areas a baron 's castles were clustered relatively tightly together , but in most of England the nobles ' estates , and therefore their castles , were more widely dispersed . As the Normans pushed on into South Wales they advanced up the valleys building castles as they went and often using the larger castles of the neighbouring earldoms as a base . 
 As a result , castle building by the Norman nobility across England and the Marches lacked a grand strategic plan , reflecting local circumstances such as military factors and the layout of existing estates and church lands . Castles were often situated along the old Roman roads that still formed the backbone for travel across the country , both to control the lines of communication and to ensure easy movement between different estates . Many castles were built close to inland river ports and those built on the coast were usually located at the mouths of rivers or in ports , Pevensey and Portchester being rare exceptions . Some groups of castles were located so as to be mutually reinforcing – for example the castles of Littledean Camp , Glasshouse Woods and Howle Hill Camp were intended to act as an integrated defence for the area around Gloucester and Gloucester Castle for Gloucester city itself , while Windsor was one of a ring of castles built around London , each approximately a day 's march apart . Some regional patterns in castle building can also be seen – relatively few castles were built in East Anglia compared to the west of England or the Marches ; this was probably due to the relatively settled and prosperous nature of the east of England and reflected a shortage of available serfs , or unfree labour . 
 Not all of the castles were occupied simultaneously . Some were built during the invasions and then abandoned while other new castles were constructed elsewhere , especially along the western borders . Recent estimates suggest that between 500 and 600 castles were occupied at any one time in the post @-@ conquest period . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 There was a large degree of variation in the size and exact shape of the castles built in England and Wales after the invasion . One popular form of castle was the motte and bailey , in which earth would be piled up into a mound ( called a motte ) to support a wooden tower , and a wider enclosed area built alongside it ( called a bailey ) ; Stafford Castle is a typical example of a post @-@ invasion motte castle . Another widespread design was the ringwork in which earth would be built up in a circular or oval shape and topped with a wooden rampart ; Folkestone Castle is a good example of a Norman ringwork , in this case built on top of a hill although most post @-@ invasion castles were usually sited on lower ground . Around 80 % of Norman castles in this period followed the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey pattern , but ringworks were particularly popular in certain areas , such as south @-@ west England and south Wales . One theory put forward to explain this variation is that ringworks were easier to build in these shallow @-@ soil areas than the larger mottes . 
 The White Tower in London and the keep of Colchester Castle were the only stone castles to be built in England immediately after the conquest , both with the characteristic square Norman keep . Both these castles were built in the Romanesque style and were intended to impress as well as provide military protection . In Wales the first wave of the Norman castles were again made of wood , in a mixture of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey and ringwork designs , with the exception of the stone built Chepstow Castle . Chepstow too was heavily influenced by Romanesque design , reusing numerous materials from the nearby Venta <unk> to produce what historian Robert Liddiard has termed " a play upon images from Antiquity " . 
 The size of these castles varied depending on the geography of the site , the decisions of the builder and the available resources . Analysis of the size of mottes has shown some distinctive regional variation ; East Anglia , for example , saw much larger mottes being built than the Midlands or London. while motte @-@ and @-@ bailey and ringwork castles took great effort to build , they required relatively few skilled craftsmen allowing them to be raised using forced labour from the local estates ; this , in addition to the speed with which they could be built – a single season , made them particularly attractive immediately after the conquest . The larger earthworks , particularly mottes , required an exponentially greater quantity of manpower than their smaller equivalents and consequently tended to be either royal , or belong to the most powerful barons who could muster the required construction effort . Despite motte @-@ and @-@ bailey and ringworks being common designs amongst Norman castles , each fortification was slightly different – some castles were designed with two baileys attached to a single motte , and some ringworks were built with additional towers added on ; yet other castles were built as ringworks and later converted to motte @-@ and @-@ bailey structures . 
 = = 12th century = = 
 = = = Developments in castle design = = = 
 From the early 12th century onwards the Normans began to build new castles in stone and convert existing timber designs . This was initially a slow process , picking up speed towards the second half of the century . Traditionally this transition was believed to have been driven by the more crude nature of wooden fortifications , the limited life of timber in wooden castles and its vulnerability to fire ; recent archaeological studies have however shown that many wooden castles were as robust and as complex as their stone equivalents . Some wooden castles were not converted into stone for many years and instead expanded in wood , such as at Hen Domen . 
 Several early stone keeps had been built after the conquest , with somewhere between ten and fifteen in existence by 1100 , and more followed in the 12th century until around 100 had been built by 1216 . Typically these were four sided designs with the corners reinforced by pilaster buttresses . Keeps were up to four storeys high , with the entrance on the first storey to prevent the door from being easily broken down . The strength of the design typically came from the thickness of the walls : usually made of rag @-@ stone , as in the case of Dover Castle , these walls could be up to 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 metres ) thick . The larger keeps were subdivided by an internal wall while the smaller versions , such as that at Goodrich , had a single , slightly cramped chamber on each floor . Stone keeps required skilled craftsmen to build them ; unlike unfree labour or serfs , these men had to be paid and stone keeps were therefore expensive . They were also relatively slow to erect – a keep 's walls could usually only be raised by a maximum of 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 metres ) a year , the keep at Scarborough was typical in taking ten years to build . 
 Norman stone keeps played both a military and a political role . Most of the keeps were physically extremely robust and , while they were not designed as an intended location for the final defence of a castle , they were often placed near weak points in the walls to provide supporting fire . Many keeps made compromises to purely military utility : Norwich Castle included elaborate blind arcading on the outside of the building , in a Roman style , and appears to had a ceremonial entrance route ; The interior of the keep at Hedingham could have hosted impressive ceremonies and events , but contained numerous flaws from a military perspective . Similarly there has been extensive debate over the role of Orford Castle whose expensive , three @-@ cornered design most closely echoes imperial Byzantine palaces and may have been intended by Henry II to be more symbolic than military in nature . 
 Another improvement from the 12th century onwards was the creation of shell keeps , involving replacing the wooden keep on the motte with a circular stone wall . Buildings could be built around the inside of the shell , producing a small inner courtyard . Restormel Castle is a classic example of this development with a perfectly circular wall and a square entrance tower while the later Launceston Castle , although more ovoid than circular , is another good example of the design and one of the most formidable castles of the period . Round castles were unusually popular throughout Cornwall and Devon . Although the circular design held military advantages , these only really mattered in the 13th century onwards ; the origins of 12th @-@ century circular design were the circular design of the mottes ; indeed , some designs were less than circular in order to accommodate irregular mottes , such as that at Windsor Castle . 
 = = = Economy and society = = = 
 English castles during the period were divided into those royal castles owned by the king , and baronial castles controlled by the Anglo @-@ Norman lords . According to chronicler William of Newburgh royal castles formed the " bones of the kingdom " . A number of royal castles were also designated as <unk> castles , forming the administrative hub for a particular county – for example Winchester Castle served as the centre of Hampshire . These castles formed a base for the royal sheriff , responsible for enforcing royal justice in the relevant shire ; the role of the sheriff became stronger and clearer as the century progressed . 
 A number of royal castles were linked to forests and other key resources . Royal forests in the early medieval period were subject to special royal jurisdiction ; forest law was , as historian Robert Huscroft describes it , " harsh and arbitrary , a matter purely for the King 's will " and forests were expected to supply the king with hunting grounds , raw materials , goods and money . Forests were typically tied to castles , both to assist with the enforcement of the law and to store the goods being extracted from the local economy : Peveril Castle was linked to the Peak Forest and the local lead mining there ; St Briavels was tied to the Forest of Dean ; and Knaresborough , Rockingham and Pickering to their eponymous forests respectively . In the south @-@ west , where the Crown oversaw the lead mining industry , castles such as Restormel played an important role running the local <unk> courts . 
 Baronial castles were of varying size and sophistication ; some were classed as a caput , or the key stronghold of a given lord , and were usually larger and better fortified than the norm and usually held the local baronial <unk> courts . The king continued to exercise the right to occupy and use any castle in the kingdom in response to external threats , in those cases he would staff the occupied castles with his own men ; the king also retained the right to authorise the construction of new castles through the issuing of licenses to crenellate . It was possible for bishops to build or control castles , such as the important Devizes Castle linked to the Bishop of Salisbury , although this practice was challenged on occasion . In the 12th century the practice of castle @-@ guards emerged in England and Wales , under which lands were assigned to local lords on condition that the recipient provided a certain number of knights or sergeants for the defence of a named castle . In some cases , such as at Dover , this arrangement became quite sophisticated with particular castle towers being named after particular families owing castle @-@ guard duty . 
 The links between castles and the surrounding lands and estates was particularly important during this period . Many castles , both royal and baronial , had deer parks or chases attached to them for the purposes of hunting . These usually stretched away from the village or borough associated with the castle , but occasionally a castle was placed in the centre of a park , such as at Sandal . 
 = = = The Anarchy = = = 
 Civil war broke out in England and raged between 1139 and 1153 , forming a turbulent period in which the rival factions of King Stephen and the Empress Matilda struggled for power . Open battles were relatively rare during the war , with campaigns instead centred on a sequence of raids and sieges as commanders attempted to gain control over the vital castles that controlled the territory in the rival regions . Siege technology during the Anarchy centred on basic stone @-@ throwing machines such as ballistae and mangonels , supported by siege towers and mining , combined with blockade and , occasionally , direct assault . The phase of the conflict known as " the Castle War " saw both sides attempting to defeat each other through sieges , such as Stephen 's attempts to take Wallingford , the most easterly fortress in Matilda 's push towards London , or Geoffrey de Mandeville 's attempts to seize East Anglia by taking Cambridge Castle . 
 Both sides responded to the challenge of the conflict by building many new castles , sometimes as sets of strategic fortifications . In the south @-@ west Matilda 's supporters built a range of castles to protect the territory , usually motte and bailey designs such as those at Winchcombe , Upper Slaughter , or Bampton . Similarly , Stephen built a new chain of fen @-@ edge castles at Burwell , <unk> , Rampton , Caxton , and <unk> – all about six to nine miles ( ten to fifteen km ) apart – in order to protect his lands around Cambridge . Many of these castles were termed " adulterine " ( unauthorised ) , because no formal permission was given for their construction . Contemporary chroniclers saw this as a matter of concern ; Robert of Torigny suggested that as many as 1 @,@ 115 such castles had been built during the conflict , although this was probably an exaggeration as elsewhere he suggests an alternative figure of 126 . Another feature of the war was the creation of many " counter @-@ castles " . These had been used in English conflicts for several years before the civil war and involved building a basic castle during a siege , alongside the main target of attack . Typically these would be built in either a ringwork or a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey design between 200 and 300 yards ( 180 and 270 metres ) away from the target , just beyond the range of a bow . Counter @-@ castles could be used to either act as firing platforms for siege weaponry , or as bases for controlling the region in their own right . Most counter @-@ castles were destroyed after their use but in some cases the earthworks survived , such as the counter @-@ castles called Jew 's Mount and Mount Pelham built by Stephen in 1141 outside Oxford Castle . 
 Matilda 's son Henry II assumed the throne at the end of the war and immediately announced his intention to eliminate the adulterine castles that had sprung up during the war , but it is unclear how successful this effort was . Robert of Torigny recorded that 375 were destroyed , without giving the details behind the figure ; recent studies of selected regions have suggested that fewer castles were probably destroyed than once thought and that many may simply have been abandoned at the end of the conflict . Certainly many of the new castles were transitory in nature : Historian Oliver Creighton observes that 56 % of those castles known to have been built during Stephen 's reign have " entirely vanished " . 
 = = = The spread of castles in Scotland , Wales and Ireland = = = 
 Castles in Scotland emerged as a consequence of the centralising of royal authority in the 12th century . Prior to the 1120s there is very little evidence of castles having existed in Scotland , which had remained less politically centralised than in England with the north still ruled by the kings of Norway . David I of Scotland spent time at the court of Henry I in the south , until he became the Earl of Huntingdon , and returned to Scotland with the intention of extending royal power across the country and modernising Scotland 's military technology , including the introduction of castles . The Scottish king encouraged Norman and French nobles to settle in Scotland , introducing a feudal mode of landholding and the use of castles as a way of controlling the contested lowlands . The quasi @-@ independent polity of Galloway , which had resisted the rule of David and his predecessors , was a particular focus for this colonisation . The size of these Scottish castles , primarily wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , varied considerably from larger designs , such as the Bass of Inverurie , to smaller castles like Balmaclellan . As historian Lise Hull has suggested , the creation of castles in Scotland was " less to do with conquest " and more to do with " establishing a governing system " . 
 The Norman expansion into Wales slowed in the 12th century , but remained an ongoing threat to the remaining native rulers . In response the Welsh princes and lords began to build their own castles , usually in wood . There are indications that this may have begun from 1111 onwards under Prince Cadwgan ap Bleddyn with the first documentary evidence of a native Welsh castle being at Cymmer in 1116 . These timber castles , including Tomen y <unk> , Tomen y <unk> and Gaer <unk> , were of equivalent quality to the Norman fortifications in the area and it can prove difficult to distinguish the builders of some sites from the archaeological evidence alone . At the end of the 12th century the Welsh rulers began to build castles in stone , primarily in the principality of North Wales . 
 Ireland remained ruled by native kings into the 12th century , largely without the use of castles . There was a history of Irish fortifications called <unk> , a type of <unk> , some of which were very heavily defended but which are not usually considered to be castles in the usual sense of the word . The kings of Connacht constructed fortifications from 1124 which they called <unk> or <unk> , from the Latin and French for castle , and there has been considerable academic debate over how far these resembled European castles . 
 The Norman invasion of Ireland began between 1166 and 1171 , under first Richard de Clare and then Henry II of England , with the occupation of southern and eastern Ireland by a number of Anglo @-@ Norman barons . The rapid Norman success depended on key economic and military advantages , with castles enabling them to control the newly conquered territories . The new lords rapidly built castles to protect their possessions , many of these were motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions ; in Louth at least 23 of these were built . It remains uncertain how many ringwork castles were built in Ireland by the Anglo @-@ Normans . Other castles , such as Trim and Carrickfergus , were built in stone as the caput centres for major barons . Analysis of these stone castles suggests that building in stone was not simply a military decision ; indeed , several of the castles contain serious defensive flaws . Instead the designs , including their focus on large stone keeps , were intended both to increase the prestige of the baronial owners and to provide adequate space for the administrative apparatus of the new territories . Unlike in Wales the indigenous Irish lords do not appear to have constructed their own castles in any significant number during the period . 
 = = 13th – 14th centuries = = 
 = = = Military developments = = = 
 Castle design in Britain continued to change towards the end of the 12th century . After Henry II mottes ceased to be built in most of England , although they continued to be erected in Wales and along the Marches . Square keeps remained common across much of England in contrast to the circular keeps increasingly prevailing in France ; in the Marches , however , circular keep designs became more popular . Castles began to take on a more regular , enclosed shape , ideally quadrilateral or at least polygonal in design , especially in the more prosperous south . Flanking towers , initially square and latterly curved , were introduced along the walls and gatehouses began to grow in size and complexity , with portcullises being introduced for the first time . Castles such as Dover and the Tower of London were expanded in a concentric design in what Cathcart King has labelled the early development of " scientific fortification " . 
 The developments spread to Anglo @-@ Norman possessions in Ireland where this English style of castles dominated throughout the 13th century , although the deteriorating Irish economy of the 14th century brought this wave of building to an end . In Scotland Alexander II and Alexander III undertook a number of castle building projects in the modern style , although Alexander III 's early death sparked conflict in Scotland and English intervention under Edward I in 1296 . In the ensuing wars of Scottish Independence castle building in Scotland altered path , turning away from building larger , more conventional castles with curtain walls . The Scots instead adopted the policy of slighting , or deliberately destroying , castles captured in Scotland from the English to prevent their re @-@ use in subsequent invasions – most of the new Scottish castles built by nobles were of the tower house design ; the few larger castles built in Scotland were typically royal castles , built by the Scottish kings . 
 Some of these changes were driven by developments in military technology . Before 1190 mining was used rarely and the siege engines of the time were largely incapable of damaging the thicker castle walls . The introduction of the trebuchet began to change this situation ; it was able to throw much heavier balls , with remarkable accuracy , and reconstructed devices have been shown to be able to knock holes in walls . <unk> were first recorded in England in 1217 , and were probably used the year before as well . Richard I used them in his sieges during the Third Crusade and appears to have started to alter his castle designs to accommodate the new technology on his return to Europe . The trebuchet seems to have encouraged the shift towards round and polygonal towers and curved walls . In addition to having fewer or no dead zones , and being easier to defend against mining , these castle designs were also much less easy to attack with trebuchets as the curved surfaces could deflect some of the force of the shot . 
 Castles saw an increasing use of arrowslits by the 13th century , especially in England , almost certainly linked to the introduction of crossbows . These arrowslits were combined with firing positions from the tops of the towers , initially protected by wooden hoarding until stone machicolations were introduced in England in the late 13th century . The crossbow was an important military advance on the older short bow and was the favoured weapon by the time of Richard I ; many crossbows and vast numbers of quarrels were needed to supply royal forces , in turn requiring larger scale iron production . In England , crossbows were primarily made at the Tower of London but St Briavels Castle , with the local Forest of Dean available to provide raw materials , became the national centre for quarrel manufacture . In Scotland , Edinburgh Castle became the centre for the production of bows , crossbows and siege engines for the king . 
 One result of this was that English castle sieges grew in complexity and scale . During the First Barons ' War from 1215 to 1217 , the prominent sieges of Dover and Windsor Castle showed the ability of more modern designs to withstand attack ; King John 's successful siege of Rochester required an elaborate and sophisticated assault , reportedly costing around 60 @,@ 000 marks , or £ 40 @,@ 000 . The siege of Bedford Castle in 1224 required Henry III to bring siege engines , engineers , crossbow bolts , equipment and labourers from across all of England . The Siege of Kenilworth Castle in 1266 , during the Second Barons ' War , was larger and longer still . Extensive water defences withstood the attack of the future Edward I , despite the prince targeting the weaker parts of the castle walls , employing huge siege towers and attempting a night attack using barges brought from Chester . The costs of the siege exhausted the revenues of ten English counties . Sieges in Scotland were initially smaller in scale , with the first recorded such event being the 1230 siege of Rothesay Castle where the besieging Norwegians were able to break down the relatively weak stone walls with axes after only three days . When Edward I invaded Scotland he brought with him the siege capabilities which had evolved south of the border : Edinburgh Castle fell within three days , and Roxburgh , Jedburgh , Dunbar , Stirling , Lanark and Dumbarton castles surrendered to the king . Subsequent English sieges , such as the attacks on Bothwell and Stirling , again used considerable resources including giant siege engines and extensive teams of miners and masons . 
 = = = Economy and society = = = 
 A number of royal castles , from the 12th century onwards , formed an essential network of royal storehouses in the 13th century for a wide range of goods including food , drink , weapons , armour and raw materials . Castles such as Southampton , Winchester , Bristol and the Tower of London were used to import , store and distribute royal wines . The English royal castles also became used as gaols – the Assize of Clarendon in 1166 insisted that royal sheriffs establish their own gaols and , in the coming years , county gaols were placed in all the <unk> royal castles . Conditions in these gaols were poor and claims of poor treatment and starvation were common ; Northampton Castle appears to have seen some of the worst abuses . 
 The development of the baronial castles in England were affected by the economic changes during the period . During the 13th and 14th centuries the average incomes of the English barons increased but wealth became concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of individuals , with a greater discrepancy in incomes . At the same time the costs of maintaining and staffing a modern castle were increasing . The result was that although there were around 400 castles in England in 1216 , the number of castles continued to diminish over the coming years ; even the wealthier barons were inclined to let some castles slide into disuse and to focus their resources on the remaining stock . The castle @-@ guard system faded into abeyance in England , being replaced by financial rents , although it continued in the Welsh Marches well into the 13th century and saw some limited use during Edward I 's occupation of Scotland in the early 14th century . 
 The remaining English castles became increasingly comfortable . Their interiors were often painted and decorated with tapestries , which would be transported from castle to castle as nobles travelled around the country . There were an increasing number of garderobes built inside castles , while in the wealthier castles the floors could be tiled and the windows furnished with Sussex Weald glass , allowing the introduction of window seats for reading . Food could be transported to castles across relatively long distances ; fish was brought to Okehampton Castle from the sea some 25 miles ( 40 km ) away , for example . Venison remained the most heavily consumed food in most castles , particularly those surrounded by extensive parks or forests such as Barnard Castle , while prime cuts of venison were imported to those castles that lacked hunting grounds , such as Launceston . 
 By the late 13th century some castles were built within carefully " designed landscapes " , sometimes drawing a distinction between an inner core of a <unk> , a small enclosed garden complete with orchards and small ponds , and an outer region with larger ponds and high status buildings such as " religious buildings , rabbit warrens , mills and settlements " , potentially set within a park . A <unk> , or a suite of small rooms , might be built within the castle to allow the result to be properly appreciated , or a viewing point constructed outside . At Leeds Castle the redesigned castle of the 1280s was placed within a large water garden , while at Ravensworth at the end of the 14th century an artificial lake was enclosed by a park to produce an aesthetically and symbolically pleasing entrance to the fortification . The wider parklands and forests were increasingly managed and the proportion of the smaller fallow deer consumed by castle inhabitants in England increased as a result . 
 = = = Welsh principalities and Edwardian castles = = = 
 During the 13th century the native Welsh princes built a number of stone castles . The size of these varied considerably from smaller fortifications , such as Dinas Emrys in Snowdonia , to more substantial castles like Deganwy Castle and the largest , Castell y Bere . Native Welsh castles typically maximised the defensive benefits of high , mountainous sites , often being built in an irregular shape to fit a rocky peak . Most had deep ditches cut out of the rock to protect the main castle . The Welsh castles were usually built with a relatively short keep , used as living accommodation for princes and nobility , and with distinctive rectangular watch @-@ towers along the walls . In comparison to Norman castles the gatehouses were much weaker in design , with almost no use of portcullises or spiral staircases , and the stonework of the outer walls was also generally inferior to Norman built castles . The very last native Welsh castles , built in the 1260s , more closely resemble Norman designs ; in the case of Dinas <unk> including a round keep and Norman gatehouse defences . 
 In 1277 Edward I launched a final invasion of the remaining native Welsh strongholds in North Wales , intending to establish his rule over the region on a permanent basis . As part of this occupation he instructed his leading nobles to construct eight new castles across the region ; Aberystwyth and Builth in mid @-@ Wales and Beaumaris , Conwy , Caernarfon , Flint , Harlech and Rhuddlan Castle in North Wales . Historian R. Allen Brown has described these as " amongst the finest achievements of medieval military architecture [ in England and Wales ] " . The castles varied in design but were typically characterised by powerful mural towers along the castle walls , with multiple , over @-@ lapping firing points and large and extremely well defended barbicans . The castles were intended to be used by the king when in the region and included extensive high @-@ status accommodation . Edward also established various new English towns , and in several cases the new castles were designed to be used alongside the fortified town walls as part of an integrated defence . Historian Richard Morris has suggested that " the impression is firmly given of an elite group of men @-@ of @-@ war , long @-@ standing comrades in arms of the king , indulging in an orgy of military architectural expression on an almost unlimited budget " . 
 James of Saint George , a famous architect and engineer from Savoy , was probably responsible for the bulk of the construction work across the region . The castles were extremely costly to build and required labourers , masons , carpenters , diggers , and building resources to be gathered by local sheriffs from across England , mustered at Chester and Bristol , before being sent on to North Wales in the spring , returning home each winter . The number of workers involved placed a significant drain on the country 's national labour force . The total financial cost cannot be calculated with certainty , but estimates suggest that Edward 's castle building programme cost at least £ 80 @,@ 000 – four times the total royal expenditure on castles between 1154 and 1189 . 
 The Edwardian castles also made strong symbolic statements about the nature of the new occupation . For example , Caernarvon was decorated with carved eagles , equipped with polygonal towers and expensive banded masonry , all designed to imitate the Theodosian Walls of Constantinople , then the idealised image of imperial power . The actual site of the castle may also have been important as it was positioned close to the former Roman fort of Segontium . The elaborate gatehouse , with an excessive five sets of doors and six portcullises , also appears to have been designed to impress visitors and to invoke an image of an Arthurian castle , then believed to have been Byzantine in character . 
 = = = Palace @-@ fortresses = = = 
 In the middle of the 13th century Henry III began to redesign his favourite castles , including Winchester and Windsor , building larger halls , grander chapels , installing glass windows and decorating the palaces with painted walls and furniture . This marked the beginning of a trend towards the development of grand castles designed for elaborate , elite living . Life in earlier keeps had been focused around a single great hall , with privacy for the owner 's family provided by using an upper floor for their own living accommodation . By the 14th century nobles were travelling less , bringing much larger households with them when they did travel and entertaining visitors with equally large retinues . Castles such as Goodrich were redesigned in the 1320s to provide greater residential privacy and comfort for the ruling family , while retaining strong defensive features and a capacity to hold over 130 residents at the castle . The design influenced subsequent conversions at Berkeley and by the time that Bolton Castle was being built , in the 1380s , it was designed to hold up to eight different noble households , each with their own facilities . Royal castles such as Beaumaris , although designed with defence in mind , were designed to hold up to eleven different households at any one time . 
 Kings and the most wealthy lords could afford to redesign castles to produce palace @-@ fortresses . Edward III spent £ 51 @,@ 000 on renovating Windsor Castle ; this was over one and a half times Edward 's typical annual income . In the words of Steven Brindle the result was a " great and apparently architecturally unified palace ... uniform in all sorts of ways , as to roof line , window heights , cornice line , floor and ceiling heights " , echoing older designs but without any real defensive value . The wealthy John of Gaunt redesigned the heart of Kenilworth Castle , like Windsor the work emphasised a unifying , rectangular design and the separation of ground floor service areas from the upper stories and a contrast of austere exteriors with lavish interiors , especially on the 1st floor of the inner bailey buildings . By the end of the 14th century a distinctive English perpendicular style had emerged . 
 In the south of England private castles were being built by newly emerging , wealthy families ; like the work at Windsor , these castles drew on the architectural themes of earlier martial designs , but were not intended to form a serious defence against attack . These new castles were heavily influenced by French designs , involving a rectangular or semi @-@ rectangular castle with corner towers , gatehouses and moat ; the walls effectively enclosing a comfortable courtyard plan not dissimilar to that of an unfortified manor . Bodiam Castle built in the 1380s possessed a moat , towers and gunports but , rather than being a genuine military fortification , the castle was primarily intended to be admired by visitors and used as a luxurious dwelling – the chivalric architecture implicitly invoking comparisons with Edward I 's great castle at Beaumaris . 
 In the north of England improvements in the security of the Scottish border , and the rise of major noble families such as the <unk> and the Nevilles , encouraged a surge in castle building at the end of the 14th century . Palace @-@ fortresses such as Raby , Bolton and Warkworth Castle took the quadrangular castle styles of the south and combined them with exceptionally large key towers or keeps to form a distinctive northern style . Built by major noble houses these castles were typically even more opulent than those built by the nouveau riche of the south . They marked what historian Anthony Emery has described as a " second peak of castle building in England and Wales " , after the Edwardian designs at the end of the 14th century . 
 = = = Introduction of gunpowder = = = 
 Early gunpowder weapons were introduced to England from the 1320s onwards and began to appear in Scotland by the 1330s . By the 1340s the English Crown was regularly spending money on them and the new technology began to be installed in English castles by the 1360s and 1370s , and in Scottish castles by the 1380s . Cannons were made in various sizes , from smaller hand cannons to larger guns firing stone balls of up to 7 @.@ 6 inches ( 19 cm ) . Medium @-@ sized weapons weighing around 20 kg each were more useful for the defence of castles , although Richard II eventually established 600 pound ( 272 kilo ) guns at the Tower of London and the 15 @,@ 366 pound ( 6 @,@ 970 kilo ) heavy Mons Meg bombard was installed at Edinburgh Castle . 
 Early cannons had only a limited range , were unreliable and in addition early stone cannonballs were relatively ineffective when fired at stone castle walls . As a result , early cannon proved most useful for defence , particularly against infantry assaults or to fire at the crews of enemy trebuchets . Indeed , early cannons could be quite dangerous to their own soldiers ; James II of Scotland was killed besieging Roxburgh Castle in 1460 when one of his cannons , called " Lion " , exploded next to him . The expense of early cannons meant that they were primarily a weapon deployed by royalty rather than the nobility . 
 Cannons in English castles were initially deployed along the south coast where the Channel ports , essential for English trade and military operations in Europe , were increasingly threatened by French raids . Carisbrooke , Corfe , Dover , <unk> , Saltwood and Southampton Castle received cannon during the late 14th century , small circular " keyhole " gunports being built in the walls to accommodate the new weapons . Carisbrooke Castle was subject to an unsuccessful French siege in 1377 , the Crown reacting by equipping the castle with cannon and a mill for producing gunpowder in 1379 . Some further English castles along the Welsh borders and Scotland were similarly equipped , with the Tower of London and Pontefract Castle acting as supply depots for the new weapons . In Scotland the first cannon for a castle appears to have been bought for Edinburgh in 1384 , which also became an arsenal for the new devices . 
 = = 15th – 16th centuries = = 
 = = = Decline of English castles = = = 
 By the 15th century very few castles were well maintained by their owners . Many royal castles were receiving insufficient investment to allow them to be maintained – roofs leaked , stone work crumbled , lead or wood was stolen . The Crown was increasingly selective about which royal castles it maintained , with others left to decay . By the 15th century only Windsor , Leeds , Rockingham and Moor End were kept up as comfortable accommodation ; Nottingham and York formed the backbone for royal authority in the north , and Chester , Gloucester and Bristol forming the equivalents in the west . Even major fortifications such as the castles of North Wales and the border castles of Carlisle , Bamburgh and Newcastle upon Tyne saw funding and maintenance reduced . Many royal castles continued to have a role as the county gaol , with the gatehouse frequently being used as the principal facility . 
 The ranks of the baronage continued to reduce in the 15th century , producing a smaller elite of wealthier lords but reducing the comparative wealth of the <unk> and many baronial castles fell into similar decline . John Leland 's 16th @-@ century accounts of English castles are replete with descriptions of castles being " sore decayed " , their defences " in ruine " or , where the walls might still be in good repair , the " <unk> within " were " decayed " . English castles did not play a decisive role during the Wars of the Roses , fought between 1455 and 1485 , which were primarily in the form of pitched battles between the rival factions of the Lancastrians and the Yorkists . 
 = = = Renaissance palaces = = = 
 The 15th and 16th centuries saw a small number of British castles develop into still grander structures , often drawing on the Renaissance views on architecture that were increasing in popularity on the continent . Tower keeps , large solid keeps used for private accommodation , probably inspired by those in France had started to appear in the 14th century at Dudley and Warkworth . In the 15th century the fashion spread with the creation of very expensive , French @-@ influenced palatial castles featuring complex tower keeps at Wardour , Tattershall and Raglan Castle . In central and eastern England castles began to be built in brick , with Caister , Kirby <unk> and Tattershall forming examples of this new style . North of the border the construction of Holyrood Great Tower between 1528 and 1532 picked up on this English tradition , but incorporated additional French influences to produce a highly secure but comfortable castle , guarded by a gun park . 
 Royal builders in Scotland led the way in adopting further European Renaissance styles in castle design . James IV and James V used exceptional one @-@ off revenues , such as the forfeiture of key lands , to establish their power across their kingdom in various ways including constructing grander castles such as Linlithgow , almost invariably by extending and modifying existing fortifications . These Scottish castle palaces drew on Italian Renaissance designs , in particular the fashionable design of a quadrangular court with stair @-@ turrets on each corner , using harling to giving them a clean , Italian appearance . Later the castles drew on Renaissance designs in France , such as the work at Falkland and Stirling Castle . The shift in architectural focus reflected changing political alliances , as James V had formed a close alliance with France during his reign . In the words of architectural historian John Dunbar the results were the " earliest examples of coherent Renaissance design in Britain " . 
 These changes also included shifts in social and cultural beliefs . The period saw the disintegration of the older feudal order , the destruction of the monasteries and widespread economic changes , altering the links between castles and the surrounding estates . Within castles , the Renaissance saw the introduction of the idea of public and private spaces , placing new value on castles having private spaces for the lord or his guests away from public view . Although the elite in Britain and Ireland continued to maintain and build castles in the style of the late medieval period there was a growing understanding through the Renaissance , absent in the 14th century , that domestic castles were fundamentally different from the military fortifications being built to deal with the spread of gunpowder artillery . Castles continued to be built and reworked in what cultural historian Matthew Johnson has described as a " conscious attempt to invoke values seen as being under threat " . The results , as at Kenilworth Castle for example , could include huge castles deliberately redesigned to appear old and sporting chivalric features , but complete with private chambers , Italian loggias and modern luxury accommodation . 
 Although the size of noble households shrank slightly during the 16th century , the number of guests at the largest castle events continued to grow . 2 @,@ 000 came to a feast at Cawood Castle in 1466 , while the Duke of Buckingham routinely entertained up to 519 people at Thornbury Castle at the start of the 16th century . When Elizabeth I visited Kenilworth in 1575 she brought an entourage of 31 barons and 400 staff for a visit that lasted an exceptional 19 days ; Leicester , the castle 's owner , entertained the Queen and much of the neighbouring region with pageants , fireworks , bear baiting , mystery plays , hunting and lavish banquets . With this scale of living and entertainment the need to find more space in older castles became a major issue in both England and Scotland . 
 = = = Tower houses = = = 
 Tower houses were a common feature of British and Irish castle building in the late medieval period : over 3 @,@ 000 were constructed in Ireland , around 800 in Scotland and over 250 in England . A tower house would typically be a tall , square , stone @-@ built , crenelated building ; Scottish and Ulster tower houses were often also surrounded by a barmkyn or bawn , a walled courtyard designed to hold valuable animals securely , but not necessarily intended for serious defence . Many of the gateways in these buildings were guarded with <unk> , grill @-@ like doors made out of metal bars . Smaller versions of tower houses in northern England and southern Scotland were known as Peel towers , or pele houses , and were built along both sides of the border regions . In Scotland a number were built in Scottish towns . It was originally argued that Irish tower houses were based on the Scottish design , but the pattern of development of such castles in Ireland does not support this hypothesis . 
 The defences of tower houses were primarily aimed to provide protection against smaller raiding parties and were not intended to put up significant opposition to an organised military assault , leading historian Stuart Reid to characterise them as " defensible rather than defensive " . Gunports for heavier guns were built into some Scottish tower houses by the 16th century but it was more common to use lighter gunpowder weapons , such as muskets , to defend Scottish tower houses . Unlike Scotland , Irish tower houses were only defended with relatively light handguns and frequently reused older <unk> , rather than more modern designs , to save money . 
 Analysis of the construction of tower houses has focused on two key driving forces . The first is that the construction of these castles appears to have been linked to periods of instability and insecurity in the areas concerned . In Scotland James IV 's forfeiture of the Lordship of the Isles in 1494 led to an immediate burst of castle building across the region and , over the longer term , an increased degree of clan warfare , while the subsequent wars with England in the 1540s added to the level of insecurity over the rest of the century . Irish tower houses were built from the end of the 14th century onward as the countryside disintegrated into the unstable control of a large number of small lordships and Henry VI promoted their construction with financial rewards in a bid to improve security . English tower houses were built along the frontier with Scotland in a dangerous and insecure period . Secondly , and paradoxically , appears to have been the periods of relative prosperity . Contemporary historian William Camden observed of the northern English and the Scots , " there is not a man amongst them of a better sort that hath not his little tower or pile " , and many tower houses seem to have been built as much as status symbols as defensive structures . Along the English @-@ Scottish borders the construction pattern follows the relative prosperity of the different side : the English lords built tower houses primarily in the early 15th century , when northern England was particularly prosperous , while their Scottish equivalents built them in late 15th and early 16th centuries , boom periods in the economy of Scotland . In Ireland the growth of tower houses during the 15th century mirrors the rise of cattle herding and the resulting wealth that this brought to many of the lesser lords in Ireland . 
 = = = Further development of gunpowder artillery = = = 
 Cannons continued to be improved during the 15th and 16th centuries . Castle loopholes were adapted to allow cannons and other firearms to be used in a defensive role , but offensively gunpowder weapons still remained relatively unreliable . England had lagged behind Europe in adapting to this new form of warfare ; Dartmouth and Kingswear Castles , built in the 1490s to defend the River Dart , and Bayard 's Cover , designed in 1510 to defend Dartmouth harbour itself , were amongst the few English castles designed in the continental style during the period , and even these lagged behind the cutting edge of European design . Scottish castles were more advanced in this regard , partially as a result of the stronger French architectural influences . Ravenscraig Castle in Scotland , for example , was an early attempt in the 1460s to deploy a combination of " letter box " gun @-@ ports and low @-@ curved stone towers for artillery weapons . These letter box gun @-@ ports , common in mainland Europe , rapidly spread across Scotland but were rarely used in England during the 15th century . Scotland also led the way in adopting the new caponier design for castle ditches , as constructed at Craignethan Castle . 
 Henry VIII became concerned with the threat of French invasion during 1539 and was familiar with the more modern continental designs . He responded to the threat by building a famous sequence of forts , called the Device Forts or Henrician Castles , along the south coast of England specifically designed to be equipped with , and to defend against , gunpowder artillery . These forts still lacked some of the more modern continental features , such as angled bastions . Each fort had a slightly different design , but as a group they shared common features , with the fortification formed around a number of compact lobes , often in a quatrefoil or trefoil shape , designed to give the guns a 360 degree angle of fire . The forts were usually tiered to allow the guns to fire over one another and had features such as vents to disperse the gunpowder smoke . It is probable that many of the forts were also originally protected by earth bulwarks , although these have not survived . The resulting forts have been described by historian Christopher Duffy as having " an air at once sturdy and festive , rather like a squashed wedding cake " . 
 These coastal defences marked a shift away from castles , which were both military fortifications and domestic buildings , towards forts , which were garrisoned but not domestic ; often the 1540s are chosen as a transition date for the study of castles as a consequence . The subsequent years also marked almost the end of indigenous English fortification design – by the 1580s English castle improvements were almost entirely dominated by imported European experts . The superiority of Scottish castle design also diminished ; the Half Moon battery built at Edinburgh Castle in 1574 , for example , was already badly dated in continental terms by the time it was built . The limited number of modern fortifications built in Ireland , such as those with the first gunports retrofitted to Carrickfergus Castle in the 1560s and at <unk> in Cork Harbour and built in the 1570s in fear of an invasion , were equally unexceptional by European standards . 
 Nonetheless , improved gunpowder artillery played a part in the reconquest of Ireland in the 1530s , where the successful English siege of Maynooth Castle in 1530 demonstrated the power of the new siege guns . There were still relatively few guns in Ireland however and , during the Nine Years ' War at the end of the century , the Irish were proved relatively unskilled in siege warfare with artillery used mainly by the English . In both Ireland and Scotland the challenge was how to transport artillery pieces to castle sieges ; the poor state of Scottish roads required expensive trains of pack horses , which only the king could afford , and in Ireland the river network had to be frequently used to transport the weapons inland . In these circumstances older castles could frequently remain viable defensive features , although the siege of <unk> Castle in 1599 and the attack on Dunyvaig Castle on Islay in 1614 proved that if artillery could be brought to bear , previously impregnable castle walls might fall relatively quickly . 
 = = 17th century = = 
 = = = Wars of the Three Kingdoms = = = 
 In 1603 James VI of Scotland inherited the crown of England , bringing a period of peace between the two countries . The royal court left for London and , as a result – with the exceptions of occasional visits , building work on royal castles north of the border largely ceased . Investment in English castles , especially royal castles , declined dramatically . James sold off many royal castles in England to property developers , including York and Southampton Castle . A royal inspection in 1609 highlighted that the Edwardian castles of North Wales , including Conwy , Beaumaris and Caernarfon were " [ u ] <unk> decayed " . ; a subsequent inspection of various English counties in 1635 found a similar picture : Lincoln , Kendal , York , Nottingham , Bristol , Queenborough , Southampton and Rochester were amongst those in a state of dilapidation . In 1642 one pamphlet described many English castles as " <unk> decayed " and as requiring " much provision " for " warlike defence " . Those maintained as private homes ; such as Arundel , Berkeley , Carlisle and Winchester were in much better condition , but not necessarily defendable in a conflict ; while some such as Bolsover were redesigned as more modern dwellings in a Palladian style . A handful of coastal forts and castles , amongst them Dover Castle , remained in good military condition with adequate defences . 
 In 1642 the English Civil War broke out , initially between supporters of Parliament and the Royalist supporters of Charles I. The war expanded to include Ireland and Scotland , and dragged on into three separate conflicts in England itself . The war was the first prolonged conflict in Britain to involve the use of artillery and gunpowder . English castles were used for various purposes during the conflict . York Castle formed a key part of the city defences , with a military governor ; rural castles such as Goodrich could be used a bases for raiding and for control of the surrounding countryside ; larger castles , such as Windsor , became used for holding prisoners of war or as military headquarters . During the war castles were frequently brought back into fresh use : existing defences would be renovated , while walls would be " <unk> " , or backed by earth , in order to protect from cannons . Towers and keeps were filled with earth to make gun platforms , such as at Carlisle and Oxford Castle . New earth bastions could be added to existing designs , such as at Cambridge and Carew Castle and at the otherwise unfortified Basing House the surrounding Norman ringwork was brought back into commission . The costs could be considerable , with the work at Skipton Castle coming to over £ 1000 . 
 Sieges became a prominent part of the war with over 300 occurring during the period , many of them involving castles . Indeed , as Robert Liddiard suggests , the " military role of some castles in the seventeenth century is out of all proportion to their medieval histories " . Artillery formed an essential part of these sieges , with the " characteristic military action " according to military historian Stephen Bull , being " an attack on a fortified strongpoint " supported by artillery . The ratio of artillery pieces to defenders varied considerably in sieges , but in all cases there were more guns than in previous conflicts ; up to one artillery piece for every nine defenders was not unknown in extreme cases , such as near Pendennis Castle . The growth in the number and size of siege artillery favoured those who had the resources to purchase and deploy these weapons . Artillery had improved by the 1640s but was still not always decisive , as the lighter cannon of the period found it hard to penetrate earth and timber bulwarks and defences – demonstrated in the siege of Corfe . Mortars , able to lob fire over the taller walls , proved particularly effective against castles – in particular those more compact ones with smaller courtyards and open areas , such as at Stirling Castle . 
 The heavy artillery introduced in England eventually spread to the rest of the British Isles . Although up to a thousand Irish soldiers who had served in Europe returned during the war , bringing with them experience of siege warfare from the Thirty Years ' War in Europe , it was the arrival of Oliver Cromwell 's train of siege guns in 1649 that transformed the conflict , and the fate of local castles . None of the Irish castles could withstand these Parliamentary weapons and most quickly surrendered . In 1650 Cromwell invaded Scotland and again his heavily artillery proved decisive . 
 = = = The Restoration = = = 
 The English Civil War resulted in Parliament issuing orders to slight or damage many castles , particularly in prominent royal regions . This was particularly in the period of 1646 to 1651 , with a peak in 1647 . Around 150 fortifications were slighted in this period , including 38 town walls and a great many castles . <unk> was quite expensive and took some considerable effort to carry out , so damage was usually done in the most cost @-@ effective fashion with only selected walls being destroyed . In some cases the damage was almost total , such as Pontefract Castle which had been involved in three major sieges and in this case at the request of the townsfolk who wished to avoid further conflict . 
 By the time that Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 , the major palace @-@ fortresses in England that had survived slighting were typically in a poor state . As historian Simon Thurley has described , the shifting " functional requirements , patterns of movement , modes of transport , aesthetic taste and standards of comfort " amongst royal circles were also changing the qualities being sought in a successful castle . Palladian architecture was growing in popularity , which sat awkwardly with the typical design of a medieval castle . Furthermore , the fashionable French court etiquette at the time required a substantial number of enfiladed rooms , in order to satisfy court protocol , and it was impractical to fit these rooms into many older buildings . A shortage of funds curtailed Charles II 's attempts to remodel his remaining castles and the redesign of Windsor was the only one to be fully completed in the Restoration years . 
 Many castles still retained a defensive role . Castles in England , such as Chepstow and York Castle , were repaired and garrisoned by the king . As military technologies progressed the costs of upgrading older castles could be prohibitive – the estimated £ 30 @,@ 000 required for the potential conversion of York in 1682 , approximately £ 4 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 in 2009 terms , gives a scale of the potential costs . Castles played a minimal role in the Glorious Revolution of 1688 , although some fortifications such as Dover Castle were attacked by mobs unhappy with the religious beliefs of their Catholic governors , and the sieges of King John 's Castle in Limerick formed part of the endgame to the war in Ireland . In the north of Britain security problems persisted in Scotland . Cromwellian forces had built a number of new modern forts and barracks , but the royal castles of Edinburgh , Dumbarton and Stirling , along with Dunstaffnage , <unk> and Ruthven Castle , also continued in use as practical fortifications . Tower houses were being built up until the 1640s ; after the Restoration the fortified tower house fell out of fashion , but the weak state of the Scottish economy was such that while many larger properties were simply abandoned , the more modest castles continued to be used and adapted as houses , rather than rebuilt . In Ireland tower houses and castles remained in use until after the Glorious Revolution , when events led to a dramatic shift in land ownership and a boom in the building of Palladian country houses ; in many cases using timbers stripped from the older , abandoned generation of castles and tower houses . 
 = = 18th century = = 
 = = = Military and governmental use = = = 
 Some castles in Britain and Ireland continued to have modest military utility into the 18th century . Up until 1745 a sequence of Jacobite risings threatened the Crown in Scotland , culminating in the rebellion in 1745 . Various royal castles were maintained during the period either as part of the English border defences , like Carlisle , or forming part of the internal security measures in Scotland itself , like Stirling Castle . Stirling was able to withstand the Jacobite attack in 1745 , although Carlisle was taken ; the siege of Blair Castle , at the end of the rebellion in 1746 , was the final castle siege to occur in the British Isles . In the aftermath of the conflict <unk> and many others castles were used as barracks for the forces sent to garrison the Highlands . Some castles , such as Portchester , were used for holding prisoners of war during the Napoleonic Wars at the end of the century and were re @-@ equipped in case of a popular uprising during this revolutionary period . In Ireland Dublin Castle was rebuilt following a fire and reaffirmed as the centre of British administrative and military power . 
 Many castles remained in use as county gaols , run by gaolers as effectively private businesses ; frequently this involved the gatehouse being maintained as the main prison building , as at Cambridge , Bridgnorth , Lancaster , Newcastle and St Briavels . During the 1770s the prison reformer John Howard conducted his famous survey of prisons and gaols , culminating in his 1777 work The State of the Prisons . This documented the poor quality of these castle facilities ; prisoners in Norwich Castle lived in a dungeon , with the floor frequently covered by an inch of water ; Oxford was " close and offensive " ; Worcester was so subject to gaol @-@ fever that the castle surgeon would not enter the prison ; Gloucester was " wretched in the extreme " . Howard 's work caused a shift in public opinion against the use of these older castle facilities as gaols . 
 = = = Social and cultural use = = = 
 By the middle of the century medieval ruined castles had become fashionable once again . They were considered an interesting counterpoint to the now conventional Palladian classical architecture , and a way of giving a degree of medieval allure to their new owners . Historian Oliver Creighton suggests that the ideal image of a castle by the 1750s included " broken , soft silhouettes and [ a ] decayed , rough appearance " . In some cases the countryside surrounding existing castles was remodelled to highlight the ruins , as at <unk> Castle , or at " Capability " Brown 's reworking of Wardour Castle . Alternatively , ruins might be repaired and reinforced to present a more suitable appearance , as at Harewood Castle . In other cases mottes , such as that at Groby Castle , were reused as the bases for dramatic follies , or alternatively entirely new castle follies could be created ; either from scratch or by reusing original stonework , as occurred during the building of Conygar Tower for which various parts of Dunster Castle were cannibalised . 
 At the same time castles were becoming tourist attractions for the first time . By the 1740s Windsor Castle had become an early tourist attraction ; wealthier visitors who could afford to pay the castle keeper could enter , see curiosities such as the castle 's narwhal horn , and by the 1750s buy the first guidebooks . The first guidebook to Kenilworth Castle followed in 1777 with many later editions following in the coming decades . By the 1780s and 1790s visitors were beginning to progress as far as Chepstow , where an attractive female guide escorted tourists around the ruins as part of the popular Wye Tour . In Scotland Blair Castle became a popular attraction on account of its landscaped gardens , as did Stirling Castle with its romantic connections . Caernarfon in North Wales appealed to many visitors , especially artists . Irish castles proved less popular , partially because contemporary tourists regarded the country as being somewhat backward and the ruins therefore failed to provide the necessary romantic contrast with modern life . 
 The appreciation of castles developed as the century progressed . During the 1770s and 1780s the concept of the picturesque ruin was popularised by the English clergyman William Gilpin . Gilpin published several works on his journeys through Britain , expounding the concept of the " correctly picturesque " landscape . Such a landscape , Gilpin argued , usually required a building such as a castle or other ruin to add " consequence " to the natural picture . Paintings in this style usually portrayed castles as indistinct , faintly coloured objects in the distance ; in writing , the picturesque account eschewed detail in favour of bold first impressions on the sense . The ruins of Goodrich particularly appealed to Gilpin and his followers ; Conwy was , however , too well preserved and uninteresting . By contrast the artistic work of antiquarians James Bentham and James Essex at the end of the century , while stopping short of being genuine archaeology , was detailed and precise enough to provide a substantial base of architectural fine detail on medieval castle features and enabled the work of architects such as Wyatt . 
 = = 19th century = = 
 = = = Military and governmental use = = = 
 The military utility of the remaining castles in Britain and Ireland continued to diminish . Some castles became regimental depots , including Carlisle Castle and Chester Castle . Carrickfergus Castle was re @-@ equipped with gunports in order to provide coastal defences at the end of the Napoleonic period . Political instability was a major issue during the early 19th century and the popularity of the Chartist movement led to proposals to refortify the Tower of London in the event of civil unrest . In Ireland Dublin Castle played an increasing role in Ireland as Fenian pressures for independence grew during the century . 
 The operation of local prisons in locations such as castles had been criticised , since John Howard 's work in the 1770s , and pressure for reform continued to grow in the 1850s and 1860s . Reform of the legislation surrounding bankruptcy and debt in 1869 largely removed the threat of imprisonment for unpaid debts , and in the process eliminated the purpose of the debtor 's prisons in castles such as St Briavels . Efforts were made to regularise conditions in local prisons but without much success , and these failures led to prison reform in 1877 which nationalised British prisons , including prisons at castles like York . Compensation was paid to the former owners , although in cases such as York where the facilities were considered so poor as to require complete reconstruction , this payment was denied . In the short term this led to a 39 % reduction in the number of prisons in England , including some famous castle prisons such as Norwich ; over the coming years , centralisation and changes in prison design led to the closure of most remaining castle prisons . 
 = = = Social and cultural use = = = 
 Many castles saw increased visitors by tourists , helped by better transport links and the growth of the railways . The armouries at the Tower of London opened for tourists in 1828 with 40 @,@ 000 visitors in their first year ; by 1858 the numbers had grown to over 100 @,@ 000 a year . Attractions such as Warwick Castle received 6 @,@ 000 visitors during 1825 to 1826 , many of them travelling from the growing industrial towns in the nearby Midlands , while Victorian tourists recorded being charged six @-@ pence to wander around the ruins of Goodrich Castle . The spread of the railway system across Wales and the Marches strongly influenced the flow of tourists to the region 's castles . In Scotland tourist tours became increasingly popular during the 19th century , usually starting at Edinburgh complete with Edinburgh Castle , and then spending up to two weeks further north , taking advantage of the expanding rail and steamer network . Blair Castle remained popular , but additional castles joined the circuit – Cawdor Castle became popular once the railway line reached north to Fort William . 
 Purchasing and reading guidebooks became an increasingly important part of visiting castles ; by the 1820s visitors could buy an early guidebook at Goodrich outlining the castle 's history , the first guidebook to the Tower of London was published in 1841 and Scottish castle guidebooks became well known for providing long historical accounts of their sites , often drawing on the plots of Romantic novels for the details . Indeed , Sir Walter Scott 's historical novels Ivanhoe and Kenilworth helped to establish the popular Victorian image of a Gothic medieval castle . Scott 's novels set in Scotland also popularised several northern castles , including Tantallon which was featured in Marmion . Histories of Ireland began to stress the role of castles in the rise of Protestantism and " British values " in Ireland , although tourism remained limited . 
 One response to this popularity was in commissioning the construction of replica castles . These were particularly popular at beginning of the 19th century , and again later in the Victorian period . Design manuals were published offering details of how to recreate the appearance of an original Gothic castles in a new build , leading to a flurry of work , such as Eastnor in 1815 , the fake Norman castle of Penrhyn between 1827 and 1837 and the imitation Edwardian castle of Goodrich Court in 1828 . The later Victorians built the Welsh Castell Coch in the 1880s as a fantasy Gothic construction and the last such replica , Castle Drogo , was built as late as 1911 . 
 Another response was to improve existing castles , bringing their often chaotic historic features into line with a more integrated architectural aesthetic in a style often termed Gothic Revivalism . There were numerous attempts to restore or rebuild castles so as to produce a consistently Gothic style , informed by genuine medieval details , a movement in which the architect Anthony Salvin was particularly prominent – as illustrated by his reworking of Alnwick and much of Windsor Castle . A similar trend can be seen at Rothesay where William Burges renovated the older castle to produce a more " authentic " design , heavily influenced by the work of the French architect Eugène Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc . North of the border this resulted in the distinctive style of Scots Baronial Style architecture , which took French and traditional medieval Scottish features and reinvented them in a baroque style . The style also proved popular in Ireland with George Jones ' Oliver Castle in the 1850s , for example , forming a good example of the fashion . As with Gothic Revivalism , Scots Baronial architects frequently " improved " existing castles : Floors Castle was transformed in 1838 by William Playfair who added grand turrets and cupolas . In a similar way the 16th @-@ century tower house of Lauriston Castle was turned into the Victorian ideal of a " rambling medieval house " . The style spread south and the famous architect Edward Blore added a Scots Baronial touch to his work at Windsor . 
 With this pace of change concerns had begun to grow by the middle of the century about the threat to medieval buildings in Britain , and in 1877 William Morris established the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings . One result of public pressure was the passing of the Ancient Monuments Protection Act 1882 , but the provisions of the act focused on unoccupied prehistoric structures and medieval buildings such as castles were exempted from it leaving no legal protection . 
 = = 20th – 21st century = = 
 = = = 1900 – 1945 = = = 
 During the first half of the century several castles were maintained , or brought back into military use . During the Irish War of Independence Dublin Castle remained the centre of the British administration , military and intelligence operations in Ireland until the transfer of power and the castle to the Irish Free State in 1922 . During the Second World War the Tower of London was used to hold and execute suspected spies , and was used to briefly detain Rudolf Hess , Adolf Hitler 's deputy , in 1941 . Edinburgh Castle was used as a prisoner of war facility , while Windsor Castle was stripped of more delicate royal treasures and used to guard the British royal family from the dangers of the Blitz . Some coastal castles were used to support naval operations : Dover Castle 's medieval fortifications used as basis for defences across the Dover Strait ; <unk> Castle in Scotland was used to support the Royal Navy ; and Carrickfergus Castle in Ireland was used as a coastal defence base . Some castles , such as Cambridge and Pevensey , were brought into local defence plans in case of a German invasion . A handful of these castles retained a military role after the war ; Dover was used as a nuclear war command centre into the 1950s , while <unk> was used by NATO until the turn of the 21st century . 
 The strong cultural interest in British castles persisted in the 20th century . In some cases this had destructive consequences as wealthy collectors bought and removed architectural features and other historical artefacts from castles for their own collections , a practice that produced significant official concern . Some of the more significant cases included St Donat 's Castle , bought by William Randolph Hearst in 1925 and then decorated with numerous medieval buildings removed from their original sites around Britain , and the case of Hornby , where many parts of the castle were sold off and sent to buyers in the United States . Partially as a result of these events , increasing legal powers were introduced to protect castles – acts of parliament in 1900 and 1910 widened the terms of the earlier legislation on national monuments to allow the inclusion of castles . An act of Parliament in 1913 introduced preservation orders for the first time and these powers were extended in 1931 . Similarly , after the end of the Irish Civil War , the new Irish state took early action to extend and strengthen the previous British legislation to protect Irish national monuments . 
 Around the beginning of the century there were a number of major restoration projects on British castles . Before the outbreak of the First World War work was undertaken at Chepstow , Bodiam , Caernarfon and <unk> ; after the end of the war various major state funded restoration projects occurred in the 1920s with Pembroke , Caerphilly and Goodrich amongst the largest of these . This work typically centred on cutting back the vegetation encroaching on castle ruins , especially ivy , and removing damaged or unstable stonework ; castles such as Beaumaris saw their moats cleaned and <unk> . Some castles such as Eilean Donan in Scotland were substantially rebuilt in the inter @-@ war years . The early UK film industry took an interest in castles as potential sets , starting with Ivanhoe filmed at Chepstow Castle in 1913 and starring US leading actor King <unk> . 
 = = = 1945 – 21st century = = = 
