 After the Second World War picturesque ruins of castles became unfashionable . The conservation preference was to restore castles so as to produce what Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham have described as a " meticulously cared for fabric , neat lawns and [ a ] highly regulated , visitor @-@ friendly environment " , although the reconstruction or reproduction of the original appearance of castles was discouraged . As a result , the stonework and walls of today 's castles , used as tourist attractions , are usually in much better condition than would have been the case in the medieval period . Preserving the broader landscapes of the past also rose in importance , reflected in the decision by the UNESCO World Heritage Site programme to internationally recognise several British castles including Beaumaris , Caernarfon , Conwy , Harlech , Durham and the Tower of London as deserving of special international cultural significance in the 1980s . 
 The single largest group of English castles are now those owned by English Heritage , created out of the former Ministry of Works in 1983 . The National Trust increasingly acquired castle properties in England in the 1950s , and is the second largest single owner , followed by the various English local authorities and finally a small number of private owners . Royal castles such as the Tower of London and Windsor are owned by the Occupied Royal Palaces Estate on behalf of the nation . Similar organisations exist in Scotland , where the National Trust for Scotland was established 1931 , and in Ireland , where An <unk> was created in 1948 to working alongside the Irish Ministry of Works to maintain castles and other sites . Some new organisations have emerged in recent years to manage castles , such as the Landmark Trust and the Irish Landmark Trust , which have restored a number of castles in Britain and Ireland over the last few decades . 
 Castles remain highly popular attractions : in 2009 nearly 2 @.@ 4 million people visited the Tower of London , 1 @.@ 2 million visited Edinburgh Castle , 559 @,@ 000 visited Leeds Castle and 349 @,@ 000 visited Dover Castle . Ireland , which for many years had not exploited the tourist potential of its castle heritage , began to encourage more tourists in the 1960s and 1970s and Irish castles are now a core part of the Irish tourist industry . British and Irish castles are today also closely linked to the international film industry , with tourist visits to castles now often involving not simply a visit to an historic site , but also a visit to the location of a popular film . 
 The management and handling of Britain 's historic castles has at times been contentious . Castles in the late 20th and early 21st century are usually considered part of the heritage industry , in which historic sites and events are commercially presented as visitor attractions . Some academics , such as David Lowenthal , have critiqued the way in which these histories are constantly culturally and socially reconstructed and condemned the " commercial debasement " of sites such as the Tower of London . The challenge of how to manage these historic properties has often required very practical decisions . At one end of the spectrum owners and architects have had to deal with the practical challenges of repairing smaller decaying castles used as private houses , such as that at Picton Castle where damp proved a considerable problem . At the other end of the scale the fire at Windsor Castle in 1992 opened up a national debate about how the burnt out castle wing should be replaced , the degree to which modern designs should be introduced and who should pay the £ 37 million costs ( £ 50 @.@ 2 million in 2009 terms ) . At Kenilworth the speculative and commercial reconstruction of the castle gardens in an Elizabethan style led to a vigorous academic debate over the interpretation of archaeological and historical evidence . Trends in conservation have altered and , in contrast to the prevailing post @-@ war approach to conservation , recent work at castles such as Wigmore , acquired by English Heritage in 1995 , have attempted to minimise the degree of intervention to the site . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 The earliest histories of British and Irish castles were recorded , albeit in a somewhat fragmented fashion , by John Leland in the 16th century and , by the 19th century , historical analysis of castles had become popular . Victorian historians such as George Clark and John Parker concluded that British castles had been built for the purposes of military defence , but believed that their history was pre @-@ Conquest – concluding that the mottes across the countryside had been built by either the Romans or Celts . 
 The study of castles by historians and archaeologists developed considerably during the 20th century . The early @-@ 20th @-@ century historian and archaeologist Ella Armitage published a ground @-@ breaking book in 1912 , arguing convincingly that British castles were in fact a Norman introduction , while historian Alexander Thompson also published in the same year , charting the course of the military development of English castles through the Middle Ages . The Victoria County History of England began to document the country 's castles on an unprecedented scale , providing an additional resource for historical analysis . 
 After the Second World War the historical analysis of British castles was dominated by Arnold Taylor , R. Allen Brown and D. J. Cathcart King . These academics made use of a growing amount of archaeological evidence , as the 1940s saw an increasing number of excavations of motte and bailey castles , and the number of castle excavations as a whole went on to double during the 1960s . With an increasing number of castle sites under threat in urban areas , a public scandal in 1972 surrounding the development of the Baynard 's Castle site in London contributed to reforms and a re @-@ prioritisation of funding for rescue archaeology . Despite this the number of castle excavations fell between 1974 and 1984 , with the archaeological work focusing on conducting excavations on a greater number of small @-@ scale , but fewer large @-@ scale sites . The study of British castles remained primarily focused on analysing their military role , however , drawing on the evolutionary model of improvements suggested by Thompson earlier in the century . 
 In the 1990s a wide @-@ reaching reassessment of the interpretation of British castles took place . A vigorous academic discussion over the history and meanings behind Bodiam Castle began a debate , which concluded that many features of castles previously seen as primarily military in nature were in fact constructed for reasons of status and political power . As historian Robert Liddiard has described it , the older paradigm of " Norman militarism " as the driving force behind the formation of Britain 's castles was replaced by a model of " peaceable power " . The next twenty years was characterised by an increasing number of major publications on castle studies , examining the social and political aspects of the fortifications , as well as their role in the historical landscape . Although not unchallenged , this " revisionist " perspective remains the dominant theme in the academic literature today . 
 = Caesar cipher = 
 In cryptography , a Caesar cipher , also known as Caesar 's cipher , the shift cipher , Caesar 's code or Caesar shift , is one of the simplest and most widely known encryption techniques . It is a type of substitution cipher in which each letter in the plaintext is replaced by a letter some fixed number of positions down the alphabet . For example , with a left shift of 3 , D would be replaced by A , E would become B , and so on . The method is named after Julius Caesar , who used it in his private correspondence . 
 The encryption step performed by a Caesar cipher is often incorporated as part of more complex schemes , such as the <unk> cipher , and still has modern application in the ROT13 system . As with all single @-@ alphabet substitution ciphers , the Caesar cipher is easily broken and in modern practice offers essentially no communication security . 
 = = Example = = 
 The transformation can be represented by aligning two alphabets ; the cipher alphabet is the plain alphabet rotated left or right by some number of positions . For instance , here is a Caesar cipher using a left rotation of three places , equivalent to a right shift of 23 ( the shift parameter is used as the key ) : 
 Plain : <unk> 
 Cipher : <unk> 
 When encrypting , a person looks up each letter of the message in the " plain " line and writes down the corresponding letter in the " cipher " line . 
 <unk> : THE <unk> <unk> FOX <unk> OVER THE <unk> DOG 
 <unk> : <unk> <unk> <unk> CLU <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ALD 
 Deciphering is done in reverse , with a right shift of 3 . 
 The encryption can also be represented using modular arithmetic by first transforming the letters into numbers , according to the scheme , A 
 = 0 , B = 
 1 , ... , Z = 25 . Encryption of a letter <formula> by a shift n can be described mathematically as , 
 <formula> 
 <unk> is performed similarly , 
 <formula> 
 ( There are different definitions for the modulo operation . In the above , the result is in the range 0 ... 25 . I.e. , if x + n or x @-@ n are not in the range 0 ... 25 , we have to subtract or add 26 . ) 
 The replacement remains the same throughout the message , so the cipher is classed as a type of <unk> substitution , as opposed to <unk> substitution . 
 = = History and usage = = 
 The Caesar cipher is named after Julius Caesar , who , according to Suetonius , used it with a shift of three to protect messages of military significance . While Caesar 's was the first recorded use of this scheme , other substitution ciphers are known to have been used earlier . 
 If he had anything confidential to say , he wrote it in cipher , that is , by so changing the order of the letters of the alphabet , that not a word could be made out . If anyone wishes to decipher these , and get at their meaning , he must substitute the fourth letter of the alphabet , namely D , for A , and so with the others . 
 His nephew , Augustus , also used the cipher , but with a right shift of one , and it did not wrap around to the beginning of the alphabet : 
 Whenever he wrote in cipher , he wrote B for A , C for B , and the rest of the letters on the same principle , using AA for Z. 
 There is evidence that Julius Caesar used more complicated systems as well , and one writer , Aulus Gellius , refers to a ( now lost ) treatise on his ciphers : 
 There is even a rather ingeniously written treatise by the grammarian Probus concerning the secret meaning of letters in the composition of Caesar 's epistles . 
 It is unknown how effective the Caesar cipher was at the time , but it is likely to have been reasonably secure , not least because most of Caesar 's enemies would have been illiterate and others would have assumed that the messages were written in an unknown foreign language . There is no record at that time of any techniques for the solution of simple substitution ciphers . The earliest surviving records date to the 9th century works of Al @-@ Kindi in the Arab world with the discovery of frequency analysis . 
 A Caesar cipher with a shift of one is used on the back of the mezuzah to encrypt the names of God . This may be a holdover from an earlier time when Jewish people were not allowed to have mezuzot . The letters of the cryptogram themselves comprise a religiously significant " divine name " which Orthodox belief holds keeps the forces of evil in check . 
 In the 19th century , the personal advertisements section in newspapers would sometimes be used to exchange messages encrypted using simple cipher schemes . Kahn ( 1967 ) describes instances of lovers engaging in secret communications enciphered using the Caesar cipher in The Times . Even as late as 1915 , the Caesar cipher was in use : the Russian army employed it as a replacement for more complicated ciphers which had proved to be too difficult for their troops to master ; German and Austrian cryptanalysts had little difficulty in decrypting their messages . 
 Caesar ciphers can be found today in children 's toys such as secret decoder rings . A Caesar shift of thirteen is also performed in the ROT13 algorithm , a simple method of obfuscating text widely found on Usenet and used to obscure text ( such as joke punchlines and story spoilers ) , but not seriously used as a method of encryption . 
 A construction of 2 rotating disks with a Caesar cipher can be used to encrypt or decrypt the code . 
 The <unk> cipher uses a Caesar cipher with a different shift at each position in the text ; the value of the shift is defined using a repeating keyword . If the keyword is as long as the message , chosen random , never becomes known to anyone else , and is never reused , this is the one @-@ time pad cipher , proven unbreakable . The conditions are so difficult they are , in practical effect , never achieved . <unk> shorter than the message ( e.g. , " Complete Victory " used by the Confederacy during the American Civil War ) , introduce a cyclic pattern that might be detected with a statistically advanced version of frequency analysis . 
 In April 2006 , fugitive Mafia boss Bernardo Provenzano was captured in Sicily partly because some of his messages , clumsily written in a variation of the Caesar cipher , were broken . Provenzano 's cipher used numbers , so that " A " would be written as " 4 " , " B " as " 5 " , and so on . 
 In 2011 , <unk> Karim was convicted in the United Kingdom of " terrorism offences " after using the Caesar cipher to communicate with Bangladeshi Islamic activists discussing plots to blow up British Airways planes or disrupt their IT networks . Although the parties had access to far better encryption techniques ( Karim himself used PGP for data storage on computer disks ) , they chose to use their own scheme ( implemented in Microsoft Excel ) , rejecting a more sophisticated code program called <unk> Secrets " because ' <unk> ' , or non @-@ believers , know about it , so it must be less secure " . 
 The animated series Gravity Falls uses the Caesar cipher as one of three different ciphers ( the other two being <unk> and an <unk> cipher ) during the end credits of the first six episodes . 
 = = Breaking the cipher = = 
 The Caesar cipher can be easily broken even in a ciphertext @-@ only scenario . Two situations can be considered : 
 an attacker knows ( or guesses ) that some sort of simple substitution cipher has been used , but not specifically that it is a Caesar scheme ; 
 an attacker knows that a Caesar cipher is in use , but does not know the shift value . 
 In the first case , the cipher can be broken using the same techniques as for a general simple substitution cipher , such as frequency analysis or pattern words . While solving , it is likely that an attacker will quickly notice the regularity in the solution and deduce that a Caesar cipher is the specific algorithm employed . 
 In the second instance , breaking the scheme is even more straightforward . Since there are only a limited number of possible shifts ( 26 in English ) , they can each be tested in turn in a brute force attack . One way to do this is to write out a snippet of the ciphertext in a table of all possible shifts – a technique sometimes known as " completing the plain component " . The example given is for the ciphertext " <unk> " ; the plaintext is instantly recognisable by eye at a shift of four . Another way of viewing this method is that , under each letter of the ciphertext , the entire alphabet is written out in reverse starting at that letter . This attack can be accelerated using a set of strips prepared with the alphabet written down in reverse order . The strips are then aligned to form the ciphertext along one row , and the plaintext should appear in one of the other rows . 
 Another brute force approach is to match up the frequency distribution of the letters . By graphing the frequencies of letters in the ciphertext , and by knowing the expected distribution of those letters in the original language of the plaintext , a human can easily spot the value of the shift by looking at the displacement of particular features of the graph . This is known as frequency analysis . For example , in the English language the plaintext frequencies of the letters E , T , ( usually most frequent ) , and Q , Z ( typically least frequent ) are particularly distinctive . Computers can also do this by measuring how well the actual frequency distribution matches up with the expected distribution ; for example , the chi @-@ squared statistic can be used . 
 For natural language plaintext , there will , in all likelihood , be only one plausible decryption , although for extremely short <unk> , multiple candidates are possible . For example , the ciphertext <unk> could , plausibly , decrypt to either " <unk> " or " know " ( assuming the plaintext is in English ) ; similarly , " <unk> " to " dolls " or " wheel " ; and " <unk> " to " jolly " or " cheer " ( see also unicity distance ) . 
 Multiple <unk> and decryptions provide no additional security . This is because two <unk> of , say , shift A and shift B , will be equivalent to an encryption with shift A + B. In mathematical terms , the encryption under various keys forms a group . 
 = SM UB @-@ 8 = 
 SM UB @-@ 8 was a German Type UB I submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. She was sold to Bulgaria in 1916 and renamed Podvodnik No. 18 ( Bulgarian : <unk> № 18 ) , and was the first ever Bulgarian submarine . 
 UB @-@ 8 was ordered in October 1914 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in November . UB @-@ 8 was a little under 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 141 tonnes ( 125 and 139 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . UB @-@ 8 was originally one of a pair of UB I boats sent to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy to replace an Austrian pair to be sent to the Dardanelles , and was broken into sections and shipped by rail to Pola in March 1915 for reassembly . She was launched and commissioned as SM UB @-@ 8 in the German Imperial Navy in April when the Austrians opted out of the agreement . 
 Although briefly a part of the Pola Flotilla at commissioning , UB @-@ 8 spent the majority of her German career patrolling the Black Sea as part of the Constantinople Flotilla . The U @-@ boat sank two ships . One of them , SS Merion , was disguised by the British Admiralty as a Royal Navy battlecruiser as part of a decoy operation . In October , she helped repel a Russian bombardment of Bulgaria . 
 In May 1916 , the submarine was transferred to the Bulgarian Navy as Podvodnik No. 18 and commissioned in a ceremony that was attended by Crown Prince Boris and Prince Kiril . In Bulgarian service , the submarine patrolled the Bulgarian Black Sea coast and had encounters with Russian vessels on several occasions . After the war ended , the submarine was surrendered to France in February 1919 and scrapped at Bizerta in August 1921 . However , in July 2011 <unk> <unk> , Commander of the Bulgarian Navy , announced that the submarine , discovered in 2010 at the sea bottom near the town of Varna , is UB @-@ 8 . Divers discovered manufacturer numbers and according to them the identity is confirmed . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . UB @-@ 8 was last boat of the initial allotment of eight submarines — numbered from UB @-@ 1 — ordered on 15 October from Germaniawerft of Kiel , just shy of two months after planning for the class began . 
 UB @-@ 8 was laid down by Germaniawerft in Kiel on 4 December . As built , UB @-@ 8 was 28 @.@ 10 metres ( 92 ft 2 in ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 59 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Daimler 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 6 @.@ 47 knots ( 11 @.@ 98 km / h ; 7 @.@ 45 mph ) , surfaced , and 5 @.@ 51 knots ( 10 @.@ 20 km / h ; 6 @.@ 34 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 650 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 060 km ; 1 @,@ 900 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 8 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 8 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB @-@ 8 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . 
 While UB @-@ 8 's construction neared completion in early March 1915 , Enver Pasha and other Turkish leaders were pleading with their German and Austro @-@ Hungarian allies to send submarines to the Dardanelles to help attack the British and French fleet pounding Turkish positions . The Germans induced the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( German : Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) to send two boats — its own Germaniawerft @-@ built boats U @-@ 3 and U @-@ 4 — with the promise of UB @-@ 7 and UB @-@ 8 as replacements . 
 When work on UB @-@ 7 and UB @-@ 8 was complete at the Germaniwerft yard , they were both readied for rail shipment . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . The boats were ready for shipment to the main Austrian naval base at Pola on 15 March , despite the fact that the Austrian pair was still not ready . German engineers and technicians that accompanied the German boats to Pola worked under the supervision of Kapitänleutnant Hans Adam , head of the newly created U @-@ boat special command ( German : Sonderkommando ) . Typically , the UB I assembly process took about two to three weeks , and , accordingly , UB @-@ 8 was launched at Pola sometime in April . 
 = = German career = = 
 During her trials , UB @-@ 8 was assigned the Austrian number of U @-@ 8 and an Austrian commander . Her German crew at Pola — since it was still the intent for UB @-@ 8 to be transferred to the K.u.K. Kriegsmarine — wore either civilian clothes or Austrian uniforms . As time dragged on , the Austrian U @-@ 3 and U @-@ 4 were still not ready , and eventually Admiral Anton Haus , the head of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , reneged on his commitment because of the overt hostility from neighbor and former ally Italy . 
 With the change of heart from the Austrians , Germany resolved to retain UB @-@ 8 and send her to the aid of the Turks . So , the boat was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 8 on 23 April under the command of Kapitänleutnant Ernst von Voigt , a 27 @-@ year @-@ old first @-@ time U @-@ boat commander . At commissioning , the boat temporarily joined the Pola Flotilla ( German : Deutsche U @-@ Halbflotille Pola ) . 
 Because of her limited range , UB @-@ 8 would not have been able to make the entire journey to Turkey , so on 2 May , she was towed by the Austrian cruiser SMS Novara from Pola down the Adriatic and through the Straits of Otranto . The duo continued until spotted by French forces near Kefalonia . UB @-@ 8 slipped the tow and Novara raced back into the Adriatic without incident . Two days after her departure , UB @-@ 8 was running on the surface when the stern of the boat suddenly dropped . The watch officer , on the conning tower with the helmsman and a lookout , was able to partially close the hatch before the entire submarine slipped below the waves , depositing the three men in the water . On board the submarine , water continued to pour in through the hatch and the boat was sinking by the stern . Voigt ordered the interior hatch to the control room sealed and all the ballast tanks filled with compressed air to increase buoyancy . The tactic returned UB @-@ 8 to the surface where the boat 's diesel engines were restarted . Voigt circled back for the missing crewmen but only the watch officer and helmsman were recovered ; the lookout had drowned . 
 On 29 May 1915 , UB @-@ 8 came upon an Allied convoy near Lemnos , and , enticed by the prospect of hitting what he identified as the Royal Navy battlecruiser HMS Tiger , Voigt allowed five fully laden transport ships to pass unmolested . When he had a clear shot , Voigt launched one of his torpedoes at the stationary ship and hit it , sending debris into the air . Unfortunately for Voigt and UB @-@ 8 , they had in fact torpedoed the British ocean liner SS Merion , which was a participant in an Admiralty plan to disguise large liners as Royal Navy capital ships . Merion , which eventually sank on 31 May , had been outfitted with wood and canvas " guns " and overloaded with cement and stones to approximate the profile of Tiger . There are no reports of any deaths during Merion 's sinking . 
 On 4 June , UB @-@ 8 became the first submarine in the new Constantinople Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote der Mittelmeer division in Konstantinopel ) based in Constantinople ( present @-@ day Istanbul ) . Despite German intentions to use her in the Dardanelles , UB @-@ 8 was ineffective because she was hampered by her limited torpedo supply and her weak engines , which made negotiating the strong currents there nearly impossible . Because of this , UB @-@ 8 was sent to patrol in the Black Sea , where she was active by late July . Off Sevastopol on 31 July , UB @-@ 8 sank her second and final ship , the 1 @,@ 265 @-@ ton Russian ship Peter <unk> . 
 On 12 August , UB @-@ 8 fired a <unk> at HMS Manica from 500 yards , which passed under Manica 's shallow draught , the submarine was then sighted outside net , two torpedoes fired and missed Manica , which hit the net at an acute angle and burst . An attack two days later on similar vessels was also unsuccessful . 
 In September , UB @-@ 7 and UB @-@ 8 were sent to Varna , Bulgaria , and from there , to patrol off the Russian Black Sea coast . Because Bulgaria had joined the Central Powers , battleships of the Russian Black Sea Fleet , and aircraft from the seaplane carriers Almaz and Imperator Nikolai I began attacks on Varna and the Bulgarian coast on 25 October . UB @-@ 7 and UB @-@ 8 , both based out of Varna by this time , sortied to disrupt the bombardment . UB @-@ 8 was never able to launch any attacks , but UB @-@ 7 launched a torpedo at the Russian battleship Panteleimon ( most well @-@ known under her former name of Potemkin ) , but it missed . Despite the lack of any success by either submarine , their presence did cause the Russians to break off their attacks and withdraw . 
 In early 1916 , UB @-@ 7 and UB @-@ 8 were still cruising in the Black Sea out of Varna . The Germans did not have good luck in the Black Sea , which was not a priority for them . The Bulgarians , who saw the value of the submarines in repelling Russian attacks , began negotiations to purchase UB @-@ 7 and UB @-@ 8 . Bulgarian sailors practiced in the pair of boats and technicians were sent to Kiel for training at the German submarine school there . The transfer of UB @-@ 8 to the Bulgarian Navy took place on 25 May 1916 , but for reasons unreported in sources , UB @-@ 7 remained under the German flag . 
 = = Bulgarian career = = 
 Upon acceptance of UB @-@ 8 by the Bulgarian Navy , she was renamed Podvodnik No. 18 ( in Cyrillic : <unk> № 18 ) . Although the commissioning ceremony for Podvodnik No. 18 was kept out of newspapers , it was attended by Crown Prince Boris and his brother Prince Kiril , who both boarded the submarine for a ceremonial first voyage to <unk> , the Bulgarian summer palace located just north of Varna . In Bulgarian service , the submarine was armed with a 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) deck gun that supplemented its machine gun . 
 Podvodnik No. 18 's first patrol under the Bulgarian flag took place on 4 and 5 July 1916 when she sailed to Cape <unk> and Mangalia . The submarine was used for reconnaissance and coastal defense , and patrolled a regular route . This route was a loop that began in Varna and went northward to <unk> , Mangalia , and Constanţa ; then southward to Burgas , and Sozopol ; then ended at Varna . On 6 September , she had an encounter with the Russian destroyers Bystry and <unk> , drove off Russian submarines on other occasions , and on 16 December helped turn back a Russian sortie against Balchik . After the Russian withdrawal from World War I in 1917 , Podvodnik No. 18 's activities were greatly reduced . 
 After the end of the war , Podvodnik No. 18 was surrendered to the French on 23 February 1919 . Towed to Bizerta , she was scrapped after August 1921 . 
 = = Ships sunk or damaged = = 
 = Whitechapel Road = 
 Whitechapel Road is a major arterial road in Whitechapel , Tower Hamlets , in the East End of London . It is named after a small chapel of ease dedicated to St Mary and connects Aldgate to the west ( as Whitechapel High Street ) with Mile End Road to the east . The road is part of the historic Roman Road from London to Colchester , now the A11 . 
 The road had become built up by the 19th century and is now a main shopping district in the Whitechapel area . There is an established street market along the road next to Whitechapel tube station . The Whitechapel Bell Foundry and the Royal London Hospital have been based on Whitechapel Road since the 18th century . It remains an important road and is marked with bus lanes , with limited parking . 
 Several ethnic minority communities have centred on Whitechapel Road . The road was a focal point of the Jewish Community from the 1850s to the 1930s , with many Jewish shops and market stalls . Towards the latter part of the 20th century , the street became an established settlement of the British Bangladeshi community , who now sell a range of authentic Asian food and clothes in the market and on shop fronts . Altab Ali Park sits on the site of the original church at the western end of Whitechapel Road , and is a memorial to an Asian worker who suffered a fatal racial attack in 1978 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The road 's name , along with the area , is derived from the original 14th @-@ century White Chapel . It follows the section of the Roman road between Londinium ( London ) and Camulodunum ( Colchester ) , which connected to the Pye Road to Venta Icenorum ( Caistor St Edmund near Norwich ) . The section of the Roman Road that is now Whitechapel Road is a Primary A @-@ road , the A11 , and has bus lanes running along its length . Owing to the popularity of the market , parking is heavily restricted , limited to occasional parking metered spaces along the road . 
 Cycle Superhighway CS2 runs along Whitechapel Road . The nearest London Underground stations are Whitechapel station and Aldgate East station and the nearest National Rail station is Bethnal Green railway station . A number of local London Buses routes run along Whitechapel Road , including 25 , 205 and 254 . 
 = = History = = 
 The road has been an important thoroughfare and coaching route for centuries . Whitechapel High Street and Whitechapel Road are named as such on John Rocque 's Map of London , 1746 , both marked as " White Chapel " . On John Cary 's " Environs of London " of 1795 ( published in his New Itinerary of 1798 ) there are properties on both sides of the road . By the ninth edition in 1821 , the road is shown as extensively built up . In the mid @-@ 19th century , drovers steered livestock from local farms along the road towards Smithfield Market , causing considerable traffic congestion . By the 1870s , the road had become extensively developed with properties along the entire stretch of the road . 
 The Freedom Press Bookshop is on Angel Alley , No. 84b Whitechapel High Street , and was established in the 1880s by Peter Kropotkin and Charlotte Wilson as the first publishing house to deal with anarchism and radical publications . The press has been controversial , and was fire @-@ bombed in 2013 , but quickly reopened . The Whitechapel Art Gallery on Whitechapel High Street opened in 1899 . It was designed by Charles Harrison Townsend in 1895 and was the first major art gallery in East London . It has shown works of Jackson Pollock , Robert Rauschenberg and David Hockney . It continues to be the centre of the arts scene in the area . 
 The Whitechapel Bell Foundry , a principal supplier of church bells in Britain , is based at No. 32 – 34 Whitechapel Road . The buildings date from 1670 and are Grade II listed . Originally a coaching inn known as The Artichoke , it has been occupied by the foundry since 1738 , replacing smaller premises on the north side of the road . Davenant Foundation School moved to No. 173 Whitechapel Road in 1818 . The school expanded with a new hall and classrooms in 1896 , with further improvements in 1909 . However , a decreasing child population meant that in 1965 , the school moved to Loughton , Essex . The building remains on the north side and is Grade II listed . 
 Continuing eastwards , Whitechapel tube station is on the north side of the road , alongside the street market . Behind the tube station is the former site of Blackwall Buildings a set of philanthropic houses built in 1890 . Just to the east of the market are almshouses at Trinity House , that were originally built in 1695 for retired seamen . 
 Nearby is the former site of St. Mary 's ( Whitechapel Road ) tube station . The station opened in March 1884 but its close proximity to both Whitechapel and Aldgate East tube stations made it superfluous , leading to its closure in April 1938 . It was used as an air raid shelter in World War II , but was destroyed by bombing in 1940 . Opposite to the south is the former Royal London Hospital building , built in 1740 . The hospital suffered significant structural damage during World War II , but much of the 18th- and 19th @-@ century architecture still remains . A new building now sits adjacent to the original . 
 The Pavilion Theatre opened on <unk> – 193 Whitechapel Road , the site of a former clothes factory , in 1828 . It was the first major theatre to open in the East End of London . The original building was destroyed in a fire in 1856 , and was replaced by a larger theatre that could accommodate over 1 @,@ 000 people , becoming the centre of Yiddish theatre in Britain . It closed in 1934 . 
 During the 1940s , the Metropolitan Police attempted to crack down on illegal gambling held in social clubs along Whitechapel Road . The <unk> Social Club was based at No. 69 , and in March 1944 , a police raid uncovered unlicensed horse and dog race betting which led to the arrest of the club 's owner and 21 patrons . 
 The Albion Brewery was first established at the eastern end of Whitechapel Road in 1808 by Richard Ivory , landlord of the Blind Beggar . In 1860 , the brewery was rebuilt , producing an average of 133 @,@ 000 barrels of beer a year . It closed in 1979 . 
 The Eastern District Post Office is based at the eastern end of Whitechapel Road , on the south side . This was the eastern terminus for the former London Post Office Railway ( colloquially known as the " Mail Rail " ) , built to allow fast mail transfers across London . It closed in 2003 . Beyond this is Mile End Gate – where the road becomes Mile End Road ; and was the site of the former toll gate . 
 = = Community = = 
 The road has the been the centre of several ethnic minority groups in London . In the 1840s , many Irish emigrated to avoid the potato famine and began street selling at Whitechapel Market and along Whitechapel Road . 
 The Jewish community settled on and around Whitechapel Road from the 1850s onwards . In the 1880s , the community expanded rapidly as Ashkenazi Jews fled to Britain and took over many of the shops and market stalls on the street . For the remainder of the century and much of the 20th , the road was the focal point of the community . The nearby Jewish Free School was , at one point , the largest educational establishment in the world , with over 4 @,@ 300 pupils . A fountain opposite the Royal London Hospital in memory of King Edward VII has the inscription " erected from subscriptions raised by Jewish inhabitants of East London " . On 4 October 1936 , British Union of Fascists leader Oswald Mosley organised an anti @-@ Jewish parade through the East End that included passing through Whitechapel Road , but was stopped by a crowd of protesters . The sentiment against Jews in Whitechapel Road caused the community to dissolve from the 1930s onwards ; the Pavilion Theatre closed and the Jewish Free School was destroyed in the Blitz during World War II . The Yiddish newspaper The Jewish Times ( Die Zeit ) was produced at No. 135 Whitechapel Road from 1913 to 1936 . 
 Towards the end of the 20th century , the street , along with nearby Brick Lane became the centre of the British Bangladeshi community . The East London Mosque on Whitechapel Road was opened by Shaykh Abdullah bin <unk> in 1985 and can accommodate over 3 @,@ 000 worshippers , with dedicated facilities for women . The nearby London Muslim Centre opened in 2003 . Whitechapel Market caters well for the community , with stalls stocking Asian fruit and vegetables including okra and mangoes , clothing such as tunics and <unk> , and mobile phone cards for cheap long @-@ distance calls . A racially motivated attack on local worker Altab Ali near Whitechapel Road in May 1978 was a significant event for the local Asian community , and his life is now commemorated in Altab Ali Park at the western end of the road , which was built on the former St Mary 's church grounds . 
 = = Events = = 
 The area around Whitechapel Road is notorious for the 19th @-@ century Whitechapel Murders , which are believed to be linked to Jack The Ripper . One of the first victims was Martha Tabram , who was found with multiple stab wounds on George Yard Buildings , Whitechapel Road on 7 August 1888 . 
 Joseph Merrick , the Elephant Man , moved to Whitechapel Road in 1884 . Visitors paid to see him in the back room of a shop owned by showman Tom Norman . The shop was directly opposite the Royal London Hospital , and Merrick was frequently visited by doctors . Merrick later moved to the hospital permanently , where he spent the last years of his life . 
 The Blind Beggar is at No. 337 and was the founding point of the Salvation Army following a meeting outside the pub by William Booth in 1865 . On 9 March 1966 , the venue became notorious after Ronnie Kray fatally shot George Cornell at the pub . The premises remains open for business , though it has been refurbished several times . The Kray Twins also used the Blackwall Buildings , by then dilapidated , as a form of punishment by locking a victim in a flat alone with Ronnie 's German Shepherd dog . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Whitechapel Road is the equal cheapest property location on the British version of the Monopoly game board . Both it and the Old Kent Road are priced at £ 60 . In reality , increasing property prices across London meant that the average house price on Whitechapel Road in 2013 was £ 295 @,@ 082 . 
 = Bookends ( album ) = 
 Bookends is the fourth studio album by American music duo Simon & Garfunkel . Produced by Paul Simon , Roy Halee and Art Garfunkel , the album was released on April 3 , 1968 in the United States by Columbia Records . The duo had risen to fame two years prior with hit albums such as Sounds of Silence and Parsley , Sage , Rosemary and Thyme , radio singles , and touring colleges . In 1967 , Simon was approached by director Mike Nichols to write songs for his next film , The Graduate . Released several weeks prior to Bookends , the soundtrack album propelled the band further into stardom . 
 Bookends , in contrast to the soundtrack album , follows a unified concept , exploring a life journey from childhood to old age . Side one of the album marks successive stages in life , the theme serving as literal bookends to the life cycle . Side two largely consists of unused material for The Graduate soundtrack . Simon 's lyrics largely revolve around youth , disillusionment , relationships , old age , and mortality . Much of the material was crafted alongside producer John Simon , who joined the recording process when Paul Simon suffered from writer 's block . As a result , the album was recorded gradually over the period of a year , with production speeding up around the later months of 1967 . 
 Initial sales for Bookends were substantial in the US , and the album produced the number one hit single , " Mrs. Robinson " . The album was mainly a hit in the duo 's native country as well as the United Kingdom , where in both countries it peaked at number one . Bookends was considered a breakthrough for the group , placing them on the same level as artists such as The Beatles , Bob Dylan and The Rolling Stones at the forefront of the cultural movement in the 1960s . The album has continued to receive critical acclaim in recent years as one of the duo 's finest efforts . 
 = = Background = = 
 Simon & Garfunkel first burst onto the national scene when their hit single " The Sound of Silence " made waves on radio in 1965 , during a period in which the duo had broken up due to the failure of their debut release , Wednesday Morning , 3 AM ( 1964 ) . Following another release , Sounds of Silence ( 1965 ) , the duo recorded and released Parsley , Sage , Rosemary and Thyme ( 1966 ) , which brought new critical and commercial success to the duo . Simon , then 27 , felt he had finally " made it " into an upper echelon of rock and roll , while most importantly retaining artistic integrity ( " making him spiritually closer to Bob Dylan than to , say , Bobby Darin " , wrote biographer Marc Eliot ) . The duo chose William Morris as their booking agency after a recommendation from Wally Amos , a mutual friend through their producer , Tom Wilson . 
 During the sessions for Parsley , the duo cut " A Hazy Shade of Winter " and decided to release it as a single then , where it peaked at number 13 on the national charts . Similarly , they recorded " At the Zoo " for single release in early 1967 ( it charted lower , at number 16 ) . Simon began work for Bookends around this time , noting to a writer at High Fidelity that " I 'm not interested in singles anymore " . He had hit a dry spell in his writing , which led to no Simon & Garfunkel album on the horizon for 1967 . Artists at the time were expected to release two , perhaps three albums each year and the lack of productivity from the duo worried executives at Columbia Records . Amid concerns for Simon 's idleness , Columbia Records chairman Clive Davis arranged for up @-@ and @-@ coming record producer John Simon to kick @-@ start the recording . Simon was distrustful of " suits " at the label ; on one occasion , he and Garfunkel brought a tape recorder into a meeting with Davis , who was giving a " fatherly talk " on speeding up production , in order to laugh at it later . 
 Meanwhile , director Mike Nichols , then filming The Graduate , had become fascinated with the duo 's past two efforts , listening to them nonstop before and after filming . After two weeks of this obsession , he met with Clive Davis to ask for permission to license Simon & Garfunkel music for his film . Davis viewed it as a perfect fit and envisioned a best @-@ selling soundtrack album . Simon was not as immediately receptive , viewing movies akin to " selling out " , creating a damper on his artistic integrity . However , after meeting Nichols and becoming impressed by his wit and the script , he agreed to write at least one or two new songs for the film . Leonard <unk> , a powerful agent at William Morris , negotiated a deal that paid Simon $ 25 @,@ 000 to submit three songs to Nichols and producer Lawrence Turman . Several weeks later , Simon re @-@ emerged with two new tracks , " Punky 's Dilemma " and " Overs " , neither of which Nichols was particularly taken with . The duo offered another new song , which later became " Mrs. Robinson " , that was not as developed . Nichols loved it . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Bookends was recorded in fits and starts from 1966 to 1968 . John Simon 's first session with the group was for " Fakin ' It " in June 1967 . The duo were signed under an older contract that specified the label pay for sessions ( " As a folk duo , how much could recording costs be ? " said John Simon ) . Simon & Garfunkel took advantage of this indulgence , hiring viola and brass players , as well as percussionists . When the viola players arrived , the duo were so intrigued with the sound of the musicians tuning their instruments before recording that they spent nearly all night ( at Columbia 's expense ) trying to find the random sound . 
 The record 's brevity reflects its concise and <unk> production . The team spent over 50 studio hours recording " Punky 's Dilemma " , for example , and re @-@ recorded vocal parts , sometimes note by note , until they were satisfied . Simon <unk> close attention to his vocal takes , and he strived to get each line perfect . He took a bigger role in all aspects of production , and harmonies for which the band was famous gradually disappeared in favor of songs sung solo by each member . Although the album had been planned long in advance , work did not begin in earnest until the late months of 1967 . 
 John Simon 's work with the duo produced several tracks that ended up on Bookends , such as " Punky 's Dilemma " , " Save the Life of My Child " , and " Overs " . In October 1967 , Morgan Ames , writer for High Fidelity magazine , attended a recording session with the duo , Simon , Halee and an assistant engineer at Columbia 's recording studio on 52nd Street in New York City . Her observations were reported in the November edition of the magazine : 
 The team 's working relationship is built upon listening to each other , asking advice , taking it , building each other 's morale . Though it 's obvious they enjoy working with John Simon , the last word seems to come from one partner to the other [ … ] Ideas are tried , accepted , rejected . Time passes . Too much time . Too little headway [ … ] " Punky 's Dilemma " is put aside for the moment and Simon begins work on the title song for the new album , Bookends . 
 Work on Bookends slowed by the beginning of the new year , with John Simon 's departure from Columbia . The duo and Halee completed production themselves , recording " America " on February 1 , the final version of " Mrs. Robinson " on February 2 , and " Old Friends " and the closing " Bookends Theme " on March 8 . Simon felt the album " had the most use of the studio " of all of the duo 's albums . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The " Bookends Theme " that opens and closes side one is played on the acoustic guitar , with no additional instruments . An audio sample of the band 's first hit , " The Sound of Silence " , softly plays during a cacophony of sounds near the end of the second track , " Save the Life of My Child " . John Simon , who was credited with production assistance on the song , created the bassline by playing a Moog synthesizer with help from Bob Moog himself . James <unk> , author of The Words and Music of Paul Simon , finds that " textural elements are variously supported by a churning groove , percussive , and distorted electronic sounds " that complement the song 's subject matter , suicide suburban youth . " Overs " explores a more jazz @-@ oriented style , with a larger selection or chords and looser form than the group 's previous styles . 
 " Voices of Old People " is a sound collage , and was recorded on tape by Garfunkel at the United Home for Aged Hebrews and the California Home for the Aged at Reseda . The collection of audio recordings of the elderly find them musing on treasured photographs , illness and living conditions . In " Old Friends " , the title generally conveys the introduction or ending of sections through repetition , and the song builds upon a " rather loose formal structure " that at first includes an acoustic guitar and soft mood . An additional element is introduced midway through the track : an orchestral arrangement conducted by Jimmie Haskell , dominated by strings and xylophone notes . Horns and other instruments are added when the duo cease singing , creating a turbulence that builds to a single high , sustained note on the strings . The song then segues into the final song of side one , the reprise of the " Bookends Theme " . 
 Side two consists of miscellaneous unrelated songs unused for The Graduate , with many possessing a more rock @-@ based sound than the unified folk songs that precede it . Simon felt the album 's second side were composed of throwaway tracks : " They didn 't mean a lot . They weren 't well recorded . " In " Fakin ' It " , melodies are occasionally deleted to suit lyrics , but the song generally follows a similar chord structure and melodic outline over a " funky rock beat " that sonically references the Beatles ' " Tomorrow Never Knows " . " Punky 's Dilemma " is breezy and minimal musically , with a soft jazz @-@ style percussion and seemingly improvised guitar lines dominated by seventh chords . " Mrs. Robinson " opens with an " instantly recognizable " pop rock guitar hook that carries throughout the track . The first verse consists only of syllables — " dee @-@ dee @-@ dee " and " doo @-@ doo @-@ doo " — that form stable harmonic foundation . The inclusion of the meaningless syllables arises from the unfinished nature of the song when pitched to director Mike Nichols , who particularly liked the verse . " A Hazy Shade of Winter " follows a more rock @-@ tinged sound , with a fairly straightforward verse @-@ refrain structure . " At the Zoo " uses a rock groove that settles into the key of G major . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 According to disc jockey and author Pete Fornatale , the album perhaps shares thematic qualities with another concept album , the Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , released ten months prior . He equates " At the Zoo " and " Old Friends " to " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite ! " and " When I 'm Sixty @-@ Four " , respectively . Fornatale notes , however , that while Sgt. Pepper was notable for sonically colorful , psychedelic shapes , Bookends is starkly contrasted by moody , " black @-@ and @-@ white and gray " sounds . While concept albums were fairly common among rock groups at this time — such as The Rolling Stones ' Their Satanic Majesties Request , The Byrds ' Sweetheart of the Rodeo and Iron Butterfly 's In @-@ a @-@ Gadda @-@ Da @-@ Vida — Bookends enjoyed massive success with the format not unlike the Beatles nearly one year before . Garfunkel confirmed the influence of Sgt. Pepper 's in a 2015 interview , commenting , " We were terribly impressed , and that shone a light on the path that led to Bookends . " Simon often smoked hashish when writing , and he was convinced he must be high to write . He felt the drug had a negative effect and caused him to " retreat more into myself . " He often found himself alone while on tour , and his thoughts grew dark during these times . He attributed " the pain that comes out in some of the songs is due to the exaggeration of being high . " 
 Bookends contains many of Paul Simon 's major themes , including " youth , alienation , life , love , disillusionment , relationships , old age , and mortality " . Simon 's work on Bookends is loosely autobiographical , designed to function as both a personal and artistic statement . Simon , " feeling especially auteurist in the Dylan style of the day " , had planned out the album 's concept before he began writing , telling Garfunkel " I 'm going to start writing a whole side of an album — a cycle of songs . I want the early ones to be about youth and the last song to be about old age , and I want the feel of each song to fit . " Bookends , originally released primarily on the vinyl LP , opens and closes side one of the disc with the " Bookends Theme " , a brief acoustic piece ( once compared to English rock band the Moody Blues ) that evokes " a time of innocence " . " Save the Life of My Child " is a dramatic story involving drugs , violence and a mother and child relationship . According to James <unk> , the song " deals with individual crises in crowded urban settings , along with references to larger societal forces and at least a hint of some transcendent perspective " . The song crossfades into " America " , which follows two young lovers — " an apparently impromptu romantic traveling alliance " — as they board a Greyhound bus " to look for America " . It is a protest song that " creates a cinematic vista that tells of the singer 's search for a literal and physical America that seems to have disappeared , along with the country 's beauty and ideals " . " Overs " includes themes regarding the disintegration of love and marriage . " Old Friends " paints a portrait of two old men reminiscing on the years of their youth . The two men " sit on a park bench like bookends " , and ponder how strange it feels to be nearing their lifetime . The song is joined with the " Bookends Theme " , this time with vocal accompaniment from the duo . The piece closes the entire suite with the " resigned admonition " to " Preserve your memories / They 're all that 's left you " . 
 " Fakin ' It " opens side two and finds the protagonist mulling over his insecurities and shortcomings . It has been suggested that " Fakin ' It " may be an allegory for Simon 's relationship with Art Garfunkel . " Punky 's Dilemma " employs breakfast @-@ food images to lampoon Hollywood and the film industry . It improbably takes an " abrupt left turn " in its third verse , when the singer begins to fantasize himself an admired soldier . " Mrs. Robinson " collects wide @-@ ranging images to address social milieu , with a constant reassurance that Jesus loves the eponymous character , God will bless her , and heaven will welcome her . The song includes a famous reference to athlete Joe DiMaggio of the New York Yankees , one of Simon 's favorite baseball teams . It also features an explicit homage to the Beatles , with Simon uttering the meaningless phrase " coo @-@ coo @-@ ca @-@ choo " that John Lennon sings in " I Am the Walrus " . " A Hazy Shade of Winter " is an older track that dates back to Simon 's days in England in 1965 . The song follows a hopeless poet , with " manuscripts of unpublished rhyme " , unsure of his achievements in life . In sharp contrast , the whimsical , Orwellian " At the Zoo " both concludes the album and what Simon described as the " cycle of life " . The song indicates that the personalities of certain zoo animals may represent particular walks of people . The song was originally intended as a possible children 's book . According to rock journalist Bud Scoppa , " the record is a meditation on the passage of life and the psychological impact of life 's irreversible , ever @-@ accumulating losses " . The song cycle also describes the life and death of the romantic ideal of the American Dream . 
 = = Release and commercial performance = = 
 Prior to release , the band helped put together and performed at the Monterey Pop Festival , which signaled the beginning of the Summer of Love on the West Coast . " Fakin ' It " was issued as a single that summer and found only modest success on AM radio ; the duo were much more focused on the rising FM format , which played album cuts . In January 1968 , the duo appeared on a Kraft Music Hall special , Three for Tonight , performing ten songs largely culled from their third album . Richard Avedon , regarded then as one of the best photographers , was commissioned to shoot the album cover . When viewed up close , one can see Avedon 's reflection in Simon 's irises . 
 Bookends was released by Columbia Records on April 3 , 1968 . In a historical context , this was just 24 hours before the assassination of Civil Rights Movement activist Martin Luther King , Jr . , which spurred nationwide outrage and riots . Fornatale opines that the album served as " comfort food " during rather tumultuous times within the nation . The album debuted on the Billboard Pop Album Chart in the issue dated April 27 , 1968 , climbing to number one and staying at that position for seven non @-@ consecutive weeks ; it remained on the chart for a total of 66 weeks . Bookends received such heavy orders weeks in advance of its release that Columbia was able to apply for award certification before copies left the warehouse , a fact it touted in magazine ads . The record became the duo 's best @-@ selling album to date : it fed off the buzz created by the release of The Graduate soundtrack album ten weeks earlier , creating an initial combined sales figure of over five million units . In the United Kingdom , Bookends was a number one hit . Likewise , the album charted highly in both Australia and France , where it peaked in both countries at number three . 
 The duo held a complicated relationship with Davis ; Simon was particularly outraged when he suggested raising the list price of Bookends by one dollar to $ 5 @.@ 79 , above the then standard retail price . Davis explained that by including the large poster with each copy , an extra dollar would be necessary to cover the cost . Simon instead scoffed and viewed it as charging a premium on " what was sure to be that year 's best @-@ selling Columbia album " . According to biographer Marc Eliot , Davis was " offended by what he perceived as their lack of gratitude for what he believed was his role in turning them into superstars " . Rather than implement Davis ' price increase plan , Simon & Garfunkel signed a contract extension with Columbia that guaranteed them a higher royalty rate . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reviews of Bookends upon its release in 1968 were largely positive . Allen Evans of the British publication New Musical Express ( NME ) gave the record four out of five stars and called it " inspiring , descriptive music , " while noting the album is " Imaginative and at times confusing to know what the composer is getting at , if anything . " Rival newspaper Melody Maker did not use a ratings system , but called Bookends a " thoughtful , clever and well @-@ produced album . " Reviewer Chris Welch criticized the songs as " not particularly tuneful , " but performed with " Beatles fervour and Beatles conviction , " praising the lyricism , opining that " The words capture part of America today , a lot of its sickness and tragedy . " In the US , Rolling Stone reviewer Arthur Schmidt wrote that " The music is , for me , questionable , but I 've always found their music questionable . It is nice enough , and I admit to liking it , but it exudes a sense of process , and it is slick , and nothing too much happens . " 
 Later reviews were more positive . " In just over 29 minutes , Bookends is stunning in its vision of a bewildered America in search of itself " , said AllMusic writer Thom Jurek , who gave it five stars out of five . Pitchfork Media 's Stephen M. Deusner called Bookends the moment in which the duo " were settling into themselves , losing their folk revival pretensions and emphasizing quirky production techniques to match their soaring vocals " . The A.V. Club called it the group 's " most musically and conceptually daring album " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " Mrs. Robinson " became the first rock and roll song to win Record of the Year at the 11th Annual Grammy Awards in 1969 ; it also nabbed the honor of Best Contemporary Pop Performance by a Duo or Group . 
 ( * ) designates unordered lists . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The album , alongside The Graduate soundtrack , propelled Simon & Garfunkel to become the biggest rock duo in the world . Simon was approached by numerous film producers who desired for him to write music for their films or license a track ; he turned down Franco Zeffirelli , who was preparing to film Brother Sun , Sister Moon , and John Schlesinger , who likewise was readying to shoot Midnight Cowboy . In addition to Hollywood proposals , producers from the Broadway show Jimmy Shine ( starring Simon 's friend Dustin Hoffman , also the lead in Midnight Cowboy ) asked for two original songs and Simon declined . He eventually paired with Leonard Bernstein , with whom he collaborated for a short time on a sacred mass ( he eventually withdrew from the project , " finding it perhaps too far afield from his comfort zone " . ) 
 Disc jockey and author Pete Fornatale writes that Bookends represents " a once @-@ in @-@ a @-@ career convergence of musical , personal , and societal forces that placed Simon & Garfunkel squarely at the center of the cultural zeitgeist of the sixties " . Rolling Stone credited the record with striking a chord among lonely , adrift young adults near the end of the decade , writing that a lyric in " A Hazy Shade of Winter " — " Time , time , time , see what ’ s become of me ... " — " defined the moment for a generation on the edge of adulthood " . Many viewed Bookends as the band 's most accomplished work at the time , a breakthrough in production and songwriting . " Bookends was our first serious piece of work , I 'd say " , said Simon in a 1984 interview with Playboy . 
 In 2010 , a line from the song " America " — " All gone to look for America " — began appearing spray @-@ painted on vacant buildings and abandoned factories in the town of Saginaw , Michigan , which is mentioned in the song . A loose group of artists , who eventually became known as " Paint Saginaw " , began duplicating the phrase after the city 's population had dwindled vastly , noting that the song now encapsulated a sense of nostalgia for a bygone era among the city 's residents . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Paul Simon , except where noted . 
 Tracks 1 , 3 , 5 @-@ 7 & 10 Produced by Paul Simon , Arthur Garfunkel & Roy Halee Tracks 2 , 4 , 8 & 9 Produced by John Simon Track 11 Produced by Bob Johnston Track 12 Produced by Paul Simon , Arthur Garfunkel & Bob Johnston 
 Track 13 Produced by John Simon Track 14 Produced by Paul Simon , Arthur Garfunkel , Roy Halee 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Bookends adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Morden tube station = 
 Morden is a London Underground station in Morden in the London Borough of Merton . The station is the southern terminus for the Northern line and is the most southerly station on the Underground network . The next station north is South Wimbledon . The station is located on London Road ( A24 ) , and is in Travelcard Zone 4 . Nearby are Morden Hall Park , the Baitul Futuh Mosque and Morden Park . 
 The station was one of the first modernist designs produced for the London Underground by Charles Holden . Its opening in 1926 contributed to the rapid development of new suburbs in what was then a rural part of Surrey with the population of the parish increasing nine @-@ fold in the decade 1921 – 1931 . 
 = = History = = 
 In the period following the end of First World War , the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) began reviving a series of prewar plans for line extensions and improvements that had been postponed during the hostilities . Finance for the works was made possible by the government 's Trade Facilities Act , 1921 , which , as a means of alleviating unemployment , provided for the Treasury to underwrite the value of loans raised by companies for public works . 
 One of the projects that had been postponed was the Wimbledon and Sutton Railway ( W & SR ) , a plan for a new surface line from Wimbledon to Sutton over which the UERL 's District Railway had control . The UERL wished to maximise its use of the government 's time @-@ limited financial backing , and , in November 1922 , presented bills to parliament to construct the W & SR in conjunction with an extension of the UERL 's City and South London Railway ( C & SLR ) south from Clapham Common through Balham , Tooting and Merton . 
 The C & SLR would connect to the W & SR route south of Morden station and run trains to Sutton and the District Railway would run trains between Wimbledon and Sutton . Under these proposals , the station on the C & SLR extension would have been named " North Morden " and the station on the W & SR route would have been called " South Morden " ( now Morden South ) . The proposals also included a depot at Morden for use by both District Railway and C & SLR trains . 
 The Southern Railway objected to this encroachment into its area of operation and the anticipated loss of its passenger traffic to the C & SLR 's more direct route to central London . The UERL and SR reached an agreement in July 1923 that enabled the C & SLR to extend as far as Morden in exchange for the UERL giving up its rights over the W & SR route . 
 Once the station was opened , the UERL established Morden , the southernmost on the system , as the hub for numerous bus routes heading further into suburban south London and northern Surrey . These routes had a significant impact on the Southern Railway 's main line operations in the area , with the SR estimating in 1928 that it had lost approximately four million passengers per year . The UERL though was able to demonstrate that its passenger numbers on its buses to Sutton station were actually more than double those for Morden . Across the road from the station , the UERL opened its own petrol station and garage where commuters with cars could leave their vehicles during the day . The opening of the C & SLR and the Wimbledon to Sutton line led to rapid construction of suburban housing throughout the area . The population of the parish of Morden , previously the most rural of the areas through which the lines passed , increased from 1 @,@ 355 in 1921 to 12 @,@ 618 in 1931 and 35 @,@ 417 in 1951 . 
 = = Station building = = 
 Construction of the C & SLR extension was rapidly carried out and Morden station was opened on 13 September 1926 . Morden in 1926 was a rural area and the station was built on open farmland , giving its architect , Charles Holden , more space than had been available for the majority of the stations on the new extension which were located in already built @-@ up areas . The stations on the Morden extension were Holden 's first major project for the Underground . He was selected by Frank Pick , general manager of the UERL , to design the stations after he was dissatisfied with designs produced by the UERL 's own architect , Stanley Heaps . 
 In a letter to his friend Harry Peach , a fellow member of the Design and Industries Association ( DIA ) , Pick explained his choice of Holden : " I may say that we are going to build our stations upon the Morden extension railway to the most modern pattern . We are going to discard entirely all ornament . We are going to build in reinforced concrete . The station will be simply a hole in the wall , everything being sacrificed to the doorway and some notice above to tell you to what the doorway leads . We are going to represent the DIA gone mad , and in order that I may go mad in good company I have got Holden to see that we do it properly . " 
 Built with a range of shops to both sides , the modernist design of the entrance vestibule takes the form of a double @-@ height box clad in white Portland stone with a three @-@ part glazed screen on the front façade divided by columns of which the capitals are three @-@ dimensional versions of the Underground roundel . The central panel of the screen contains a large version of the roundel . The ticket hall beyond is octagonal with a central roof light of the same shape . The ticket hall originally had a pair of wooden ticket booths ( <unk> ) from which tickets were issued and collected , but these were removed when modern ticketing systems made them redundant . 
 The main structure of the station and the shops to each side was designed with the intention of taking upward development on its roof , though this did not come until around 1960 when three storeys of office building were added . 
 Unlike the other stations built for the extension , the station 's platforms are not in tunnels , but in a wide cutting with the tunnel portals a short distance to the north . Three tracks run through the station to the depot , and the station has three platforms , two of which are island platforms with tracks on each side . The platforms are accessed by steps down from the ticket hall and are numbered 1 to 5 from east to west ; the island platforms have different numbers for each face ( 2 / 3 and 4 / 5 ) . To indicate departures , the platforms are usually referred to as 2 , 3 and 5 . The tunnel portals are one end of the longest tunnel on the London Underground running 27 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 17 @.@ 3 mi ) to East Finchley via the Bank branch . 
 Refurbishment and improvement works completed in 2007 included new and reconstructed cross bridges between platforms and the installation of lifts for mobility impaired passengers . Cosmetic improvements carried out at the same time included the reinstatement of pole @-@ mounted roundels on the sides of the entrance vestibule . Other work in the 2000s at the station includes the construction of a substantial air rights building spanning across the cutting . 
 The station is locally listed by Merton Council as being of architectural interest , though not statutorily listed like the others on the Morden extension . 
 = = Services and connections = = 
 The station sits at the southern end of the Northern line in London fare zone 4 . It is the southernmost station on the whole London Underground network . The next station to the north is South Wimbledon . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally operate every 2 – 5 minutes between 05 : 15 and midnight . 
 London Bus routes 80 , 93 , 118 , 154 , 157 , 163 , 164 , 201 , 293 , 413 , 470 and K5 , and night route N155 serve the station . 
 = Prince Rupert of the Rhine = 
 Rupert , Count Palatine of the Rhine , Duke of Bavaria , Duke of Cumberland , Earl of Holderness ( German : Ruprecht <unk> bei Rhein , Herzog von Bayern ) , commonly called Prince Rupert of the Rhine , KG , PC , FRS ( 17 December 1619 – 29 November 1682 ) , was a noted German soldier , admiral , scientist , sportsman , colonial governor and amateur artist during the 17th century . Rupert was a younger son of the German prince Frederick V , Elector Palatine and his wife Elizabeth , the eldest daughter of James I of England . Thus Rupert was the nephew of King Charles I of England , who made him Duke of Cumberland and Earl of Holderness , and the first cousin of King Charles II of England . His sister Electress Sophia was the mother of George I of Great Britain . 
 Prince Rupert had a varied career . He was a soldier from a young age , fighting against Spain in the Netherlands during the Eighty Years ' War ( 1568 – 1648 ) , and against the Holy Roman Emperor in Germany during the Thirty Years ' War ( 1618 – 48 ) . Aged 23 , he was appointed commander of the Royalist cavalry during the English Civil War , becoming the archetypal Cavalier of the war and ultimately the senior Royalist general . He surrendered after the fall of Bristol and was banished from England . He served under Louis XIV of France against Spain , and then as a Royalist privateer in the Caribbean . Following the Restoration , Rupert returned to England , becoming a senior British naval commander during the Second and Third Anglo @-@ Dutch wars , engaging in scientific invention , art , and serving as the first governor of the Hudson 's Bay Company . Rupert died in England in 1682 , aged 62 . 
 Rupert is considered to have been a quick @-@ thinking and energetic cavalry general , but ultimately undermined by his youthful impatience in dealing with his peers during the Civil War . In the Interregnum , Rupert continued the conflict against Parliament by sea from the Mediterranean to the Caribbean , showing considerable persistence in the face of adversity . As the head of the Royal Navy in his later years , he showed greater maturity and made impressive and long @-@ lasting contributions to the Royal Navy 's doctrine and development . As a colonial governor , Rupert shaped the political geography of modern Canada — Rupert 's Land was named in his honour . He also played a role in the early African slave trade . Rupert 's varied and numerous scientific and administrative interests combined with his considerable artistic skills made him one of the more colourful individuals of the Restoration period . 
 = = Early life and exile = = 
 Rupert was born in Prague in 1619 , at the start of the Thirty Years ' War , to Frederick V , Elector Palatine , and Elizabeth Stuart , and was declared a prince by the principality of Lusatia . He was given his name in honour of King Rupert of Germany , a famous Wittelsbach ancestor . Rupert 's father was a leading member of the Holy Roman Empire and the head of the Protestant Union , with a martial family tradition stretching back several centuries . Rupert 's family was at the heart of a network of Protestant rulers across the north of Europe , as Frederick had close ties through his mother to the ruling House of Orange @-@ Nassau in the United Provinces , and Elizabeth was the daughter of James I of England and Anne of Denmark . The family lived an extremely wealthy lifestyle in Heidelberg , enjoying the palace gardens — the Hortus <unk> , designed by Inigo Jones and Salomon de Caus — and a lavish castle with one of the best libraries in Europe . 
 Frederick had allied himself with rebellious Protestant Bohemian nobility in 1619 , expecting support from the Protestant Union in his revolt against the Catholic Ferdinand II , the newly elected Holy Roman Emperor . This support was not forthcoming , resulting in a crushing defeat at the hands of his Catholic enemies at the Battle of White Mountain in 1620 . Rupert 's parents were mockingly termed the " Winter King and Queen " as a consequence of their reigns in Bohemia having lasted only a single season . Rupert was almost left behind in the court 's rush to escape Ferdinand 's advance on Prague , until <unk> z <unk> ( Christopher <unk> ) , a court member , tossed the prince into a carriage at the last moment . 
 Rupert accompanied his parents to The Hague , where he spent his early years at the Hof te <unk> , the <unk> Court . Rupert 's mother paid her children little attention even by the standards of the day , apparently preferring her pet monkeys and dogs . Instead , Frederick employed Monsieur and Madame de <unk> to act as governors to his children , with instructions to inculcate a positive attitude towards the Czechs / Bohemians and the English , and to bring them up as strict Calvinists . The result was a strict school routine including logic , mathematics , writing , drawing , singing and playing instruments . As a child , Rupert was at times badly behaved , " fiery , mischievous , and passionate " and earned himself the nickname Robert le Diable , or " Rupert The Devil " . Nonetheless , Rupert proved to be an able student . By the age of three he could speak some English , Czech and French , and mastered German while still young , but had little interest in Latin and Greek . He excelled in art , being taught by Gerard van <unk> , and found the maths and sciences easy . By the time he was 18 he stood about 6 ft 4 in ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) tall . 
 Rupert 's family continued their attempts to regain the Palatinate during their time in The Hague . Money was short , with the family relying upon a relatively small pension from The Hague , the proceeds from family investments in Dutch raids on Spanish shipping , and revenue from pawned family jewellery . Frederick set about convincing an alliance of nations — including England , France and Sweden — to support his attempts to regain the Palatinate and Bohemia . By the early 1630s Frederick had built a close relationship with the Swedish King Gustavus , the dominant Protestant leader in Germany . In 1632 , however , the two men disagreed over Gustavus ' insistence that Frederick provide equal rights to his Lutheran and Calvinist subjects after regaining his lands ; Frederick refused and started to return to The Hague . He died of a fever along the way and was buried in an unmarked grave . Rupert had lost his father at the age of 13 , and Gustavus ' death at the battle of Lützen in the same month deprived the family of a critical Protestant ally . With Frederick gone , King Charles proposed that the family move to England ; Rupert 's mother declined , but asked that Charles extend his protection to her remaining children instead . 
 = = Teenage years = = 
 Rupert spent the beginning of his teenage years in England between the courts of The Hague and his uncle King Charles I , before being captured and imprisoned in Linz during the middle stages of the Thirty Years ' War . Rupert had become a soldier early ; at the age of 14 he attended the Dutch pas d <unk> with the Protestant Frederick Henry , Prince of Orange . Later that year he fought alongside him and the Duke of Brunswick at the Anglo @-@ German siege of Rheinberg , and by 1635 he was acting as a military lifeguard to Prince Frederick . Rupert went on to fight against imperial Spain in the successful campaign around Breda in 1637 during the Eighty Years ' War in the Netherlands . By the end of this period , Rupert had acquired a reputation for fearlessness in battle , high spirits and considerable industry . 
 In between these campaigns Rupert had visited his uncle 's court in England . The Palatinate cause was a popular Protestant issue in England , and in 1637 a general public subscription helped fund an expedition under Charles Louis to try and regain the electorate as part of a joint French campaign . Rupert was placed in command of a Palatinate cavalry regiment , and his later friend Lord Craven , an admirer of Rupert 's mother , assisted in raising funds and accompanied the army on the campaign . The campaign ended badly at the Battle of Vlotho ( 17 October 1638 ) during the invasion of Westphalia ; Rupert escaped death , but was captured by the forces of the Imperial General Melchior von <unk> towards the end of the battle . 
 After a failed attempt to bribe his way free of his guards , Rupert was imprisoned in Linz . Lord Craven , also taken in the battle , attempted to persuade his captors to allow him to remain with Rupert , but was refused . Rupert 's imprisonment was surrounded by religious overtones . His mother was deeply concerned that he might be converted from Calvinism to Catholicism ; his captors , encouraged by Emperor Ferdinand III , deployed Jesuit priests in an attempt to convert him . The Emperor went further , proffering the option of freedom , a position as an Imperial general and a small principality if Rupert would convert . Rupert refused . 
 Rupert 's imprisonment became more relaxed on the advice of the Archduke Leopold , Ferdinand 's younger brother , who met and grew to like Rupert . Rupert practised etching , played tennis , practised shooting , read military textbooks and was taken on accompanied hunting trips . He also entered into a romantic affair with Susan <unk> , the daughter of Count von <unk> , his gaoler . He received a present of a rare white poodle that Rupert called Boye , and which remained with him into the English Civil War . Despite attempts by a Franco @-@ Swedish army to seize Linz and free Rupert , his release was ultimately negotiated through Leopold and the Empress Maria Anna ; in exchange for a commitment never again to take up arms against the Emperor , Rupert would be released . Rupert formally kissed the Emperor 's hand at the end of 1641 , turned down a final offer of an Imperial command and left Germany for England . 
 = = Career during the First English Civil War = = 
 Rupert is probably best remembered today for his role as a Royalist commander during the English Civil War . He had considerable success during the initial years of the war , his drive , determination and experience of European techniques bringing him early victories . As the war progressed , Rupert 's youth and lack of maturity in managing his relationships with other Royalist commanders ultimately resulted in his removal from his post and ultimate retirement from the war . Throughout the conflict , however , Rupert also enjoyed a powerful symbolic position : he was an iconic Royalist Cavalier and as such was frequently the subject of both Parliamentarian and Royalist propaganda , an image which has endured over the years . 
 = = = Early phases , 1642 – 43 = = = 
 Rupert arrived in England following his period of imprisonment and final release from captivity in Germany . In August 1642 , Rupert , along with his brother Prince Maurice and a number of professional soldiers , ran the gauntlet across the sea from the United Provinces , and after one initial failure , evaded the pro @-@ Parliamentary navy and landed in Newcastle . Riding across country , he found the King with a tiny army at Leicester Abbey , and was promptly appointed General of Horse , a coveted appointment at the time in European warfare . Rupert set about recruiting and training : with great effort he had put together a partially trained mounted force of 3 @,@ 000 cavalry by the end of September . Rupert 's reputation continued to rise and , leading a sudden , courageous charge , he routed a Parliamentarian force at Powick Bridge , the first military engagement of the war . Although a small engagement , this had a propaganda value far exceeding the importance of the battle itself , and Rupert became an heroic figure for many young men in the Royalist camp . 
 Rupert joined the King in the advance on London , playing a key role in the resulting Battle of Edgehill in October . Once again , Rupert was at his best with swift battlefield movements ; the night before , he had undertaken a forced march and seized the summit of Edgehill , giving the Royalists a superior position . When he quarrelled with his fellow infantry commander , Lindsey , however , some of the weaknesses of Rupert 's character began to display themselves . Rupert vigorously interjected — probably correctly , but certainly tactlessly — that Lindsey should deploy his men in the modern Swedish fashion that Rupert was used to in Europe , which would have maximised their available firepower . The result was an argument in front of the troops and Lindsey 's resignation and replacement by Sir Jacob Astley . In the subsequent battle Rupert 's men made a dramatic cavalry charge , but despite his best efforts a subsequent scattering and loss of discipline turned a potential victory into a stalemate . 
 After Edgehill , Rupert asked Charles for a swift cavalry attack on London before the Earl of Essex 's army could return . The King 's senior counsellors , however , urged him to advance slowly on the capital with the whole army . By the time they arrived , the city had organised defences against them . Some argue that , in delaying , the Royalists had perhaps lost their best chance of winning the war , although others have argued that Rupert 's proposed attack would have had trouble penetrating a hostile London . Instead , early in 1643 , Rupert began to clear the South @-@ West , taking Cirencester in February before moving further against Bristol , a key port . Rupert took Bristol in July with his brother Maurice using Cornish forces and was appointed Governor of the city . By mid @-@ 1643 Rupert had become so well known that he was an issue in any potential peace accommodation — Parliament was seeking to see him punished as part of any negotiated solution , and the presence of Rupert at the court , close to the King during the negotiations , was perceived as a bellicose statement in itself . 
 = = = Later stages , 1644 – 46 = = = 
 During the second half of the war , political opposition within the Royalist senior leadership against Rupert continued to grow . Rupert 's personality during the war had made him both friends and enemies . He enjoyed a " frank and generous disposition " , showed a " quickness of ... intellect " , was prepared to face grave dangers , and could be thorough and patient when necessary . However , he lacked the social gifts of a courtier , and his humour could turn into a " sardonic wit and a contemptuous manner " : with a hasty temper , he was too quick to say who he respected , and who he disliked . The result was that , while Rupert could inspire great loyalty in some , especially his men , he also made many enemies at the Royal court . When he took Bristol , he also slighted the Marquess of Hertford , the lethargic but politically significant Royalist leader of the South @-@ West . Most critically , Rupert fell out with George Digby , a favourite of both the King and the Queen . Digby was a classic courtier and Rupert fell to arguing with him repeatedly in meetings . The result was that towards the end of the war Rupert 's position at court was increasingly undermined by his enemies . 
 Rupert continued to impress militarily . By 1644 , now the Duke of Cumberland and Earl of Holderness , he led the relief of Newark and York and its castle . Having marched north , taking Bolton and Liverpool along the way in two bloody assaults , Rupert then intervened in Yorkshire in two highly effective manoeuvres , in the first outwitting the enemy forces at Newark with speed ; in the second , striking across country and approaching York from the north . Rupert then commanded much of the royalist army at its defeat at Marston Moor , with much of the blame falling on the poor working relationship between Rupert and the Marquess of Newcastle , and orders from the King that wrongly conveyed a desperate need for a speedy success in the north . 
 In November 1644 Rupert was appointed General of the entire Royalist army , which increased already marked tensions between him and a number of the King 's councillors . By May 1645 , and now desperately short of supplies , Rupert captured Leicester , but suffered a severe reversal at the Battle of Naseby a month later . Although Rupert had counselled the King against accepting battle at Naseby , the opinions of Digby had won the day in council : nonetheless , Rupert 's defeat damaged him , rather than Digby , politically . After Naseby , Rupert regarded the Royalist cause as lost , and urged Charles to conclude a peace with Parliament . Charles , still supported by an optimistic Digby , believed he could win the war . By late summer Rupert had become trapped in Bristol by Parliamentary forces ; faced with an impossible military situation on the ground , Rupert surrendered Bristol in September 1645 , and Charles dismissed him from his service and command . 
 Rupert responded by making his way across Parliamentary held territory to the King at Newark with Prince Maurice and around a hundred men , fighting their way through smaller enemy units and evading larger ones . King Charles attempted to order Rupert to desist , fearing an armed coup , but Rupert arrived at the royal court anyway . After a difficult meeting , Rupert convinced the King to hold a court @-@ martial over his conduct at Bristol , which exonerated him and Maurice . After a final argument over the fate of his friend Richard Willis , the governor of Newark , who had let Rupert into the royal court to begin with , Rupert resigned and left the service of King Charles , along with most of his best cavalry officers . Earlier interpretations of this event focused on Rupert 's concern for his honour in the face of his initial dismissal by the King ; later works have highlighted the practical importance of the courts martial to Rupert 's future employability as a mercenary in Europe , given that Rupert knew that the war by this point was effectively lost . Rupert and Maurice spent the winter of 1645 in Woodstock , examining options for employment under the Venetian Republic , before returning to Oxford and the King in 1646 . Rupert and the King were reconciled , the Prince remaining to defend Oxford when the King left for the north . After the ensuing siege and surrender of Oxford in 1646 , Parliament banished both Rupert and his brother from England . 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 Rupert 's contemporaries believed him to have been involved in some of the bloodier events of the war , although later histories have largely exonerated him . Rupert had grown up surrounded by the relatively savage customs of the Thirty Years ' War in Europe . Shortly after his arrival in England he caused consternation by following similar practices ; one of his early acts was to demand two thousand pounds from the people of Leicester for the King as the price of not sacking Leicester . Although in keeping with European practices , this was not yet considered appropriate behaviour in England and Rupert was reprimanded by the King . 
 Rupert 's reputation never truly recovered , and in subsequent sieges and attacks he was frequently accused of acting without restraint . Birmingham , a key arms producing town , was taken in April 1643 , and Rupert faced allegations — probably untrue — of wilfully burning the town to the ground ( see the battle of Camp Hill ) . Shortly afterwards Rupert attempted to take the town of Lichfield , whose garrison had executed Royalist prisoners , angrily promising to kill all the soldiers inside . Only the urgent call for assistance from the King prevented him from doing so , forcing him to agree more lenient terms in exchange for a prompt surrender . Towards the end of the war , practices were changing for the worse across all sides ; a rebellious Leicester was retaken by the Prince in May 1645 , and no attempt was made to limit the subsequent killing and plunder . 
 Rupert was accordingly a prominent figure in Parliamentary propaganda . He faced numerous accusations of witchcraft , either personally or by proxy through his pet dog , Boye . Boye , a large white hunting poodle , accompanied Rupert everywhere from 1642 up until the dog 's death at Marston Moor and was widely suspected of being a witch 's familiar . There were numerous accounts of Boye 's abilities ; some suggested that he was the Devil in disguise , come to help Rupert . Pro @-@ Royalist publications ultimately produced parodies of these , including one which listed Rupert 's dog as being a " Lapland Lady " transformed into a white dog ; Boye was able , apparently , to find hidden treasure , possessed invulnerability to attack , could catch bullets fired at Rupert in his mouth , and could prophesy as well as the 16th century soothsayer , Mother Shipton . Similar stories from the period relate to Rupert 's pet monkey . Like his dog , the monkey was featured in newsprint of the day and was also reputed to have shape shifting powers , being able to disguise itself behind enemy lines . 
 = = Career during the Second English War and Interregnum = = 
 After the end of the First English Civil War Rupert was employed by the young King Louis XIV of France to fight the Spanish during the final years of the Thirty Years ' War . Rupert 's military employment was complicated by his promises to the Holy Roman Emperor that had led to his release from captivity in 1642 , and his ongoing commitment to the English Royalist faction in exile . He also became a Knight of the Garter in 1642 . Throughout the period Rupert was inconvenienced by his lack of secure income , and his ongoing feuds with other leading members of the Royalist circle . 
 = = = Service in the French army = = = 
 Rupert first travelled to the Royal court in exile at St Germain but found it still dominated by the Queen and her favourite , Rupert 's enemy Digby . Instead , Rupert moved on , accepting a well paid commission from Anne of Austria to serve Louis XIV as a <unk> de camp , subject to Rupert being free to leave French service to fight for King Charles , should he be called upon to do so . In 1647 Rupert fought under Marshal de Gassion against the Spanish . After a three @-@ week siege , Rupert took the powerful fortress of La Bassée through quiet negotiations with the enemy commander — an impressive accomplishment , and one that won him favour in French court circles . Gassion and Rupert were ambushed shortly afterwards by a Spanish party ; during the resulting fight , Rupert was shot in the head and seriously injured . Afterwards , Gassion noted : " Monsieur , I am most annoyed that you are wounded . " " And me also , " Rupert is recorded as replying . Gassion was himself killed shortly afterwards , and Rupert returned to St Germain to recuperate . 
 = = = Service in the Royalist navy = = = 
 In 1648 , the relatively brief Second English Civil War broke out , and Rupert informed the French King that he would be returning to King Charles ' service . The Parliamentary navy mutinied in favour of the King and sailed for Holland , providing the Royalists with a major fleet for the first time since the start of the civil conflict ; Rupert joined the fleet under the command of the Duke of York , who assumed the rank of Lord High Admiral . Rupert argued that the fleet should be used to rescue the King , then being held prisoner on the Isle of Wight , while others advised sailing in support of the fighting in the north . The fleet itself rapidly lost discipline , with many vessels ' crews focussing on seizing local ships and cargoes . This underlined a major problem for the Royalists — the cost of maintaining the new fleet was well beyond their means . Discipline continued to deteriorate , and Rupert had to intervene personally several times , including defusing one group of mutinous sailors by suddenly dangling the ringleader over the side of his vessel and threatening to drop him into the sea . Most of the fleet finally switched sides once more , returning to England in late 1648 . 
 Then , following a degree of reconciliation with Charles , Rupert obtained command of the Royalist fleet himself . The intention was to restore Royalist finances by using the remaining vessels of the fleet to conduct a campaign of organised piracy against English shipping across the region . One of the obstacles that this plan faced was the growing strength of the Parliamentary fleet and the presence of Robert Blake , one of the finest admirals of the period , as Rupert 's opponent during the campaign . 
 Rupert 's naval campaign formed two phases . The first involved the Royalist fleet sailing from Kinsale in Ireland to Lisbon in Portugal . He took three large ships , HMS Constant Reformation , the <unk> and the Swallow , accompanied by four smaller vessels . Rupert sailed to Lisbon taking several prizes on route , where he received a warm welcome from King John IV , the ruler of recently independent Portugal , who was a supporter of Charles II . Blake arrived shortly afterwards with a Parliamentary fleet , and an armed stand @-@ off ensued . Tensions rose , skirmishes began to break out and King John became increasingly keen for his Royalist guests to leave . In October 1650 , Rupert 's fleet , now comprising six vessels , broke out and headed into the Mediterranean . Still pursued by Blake , the Royalist fleet manoeuvred up the Spanish coast , steadily losing vessels to their pursuers . 
 The second phase of the campaign then began . Rupert crossed back into the Atlantic and , during 1651 , cut west to the Azores , capturing vessels as he went . He intended to continue on to the West Indies , where there would be many rich targets . Instead he encountered a late summer storm , leading to the sinking of the Constant Reformation with the loss of 333 lives — almost including Rupert 's brother , Prince Maurice , who only just escaped — and a great deal of captured treasure . Turning back to regroup , repair and re @-@ equip in early 1652 , Rupert 's reduced force moored at Cape Blanc , an island near what is now Mauritania . Rupert took the opportunity to explore and acquired a Moorish servant boy , who remained in his service for many years . Rupert also explored 150 miles up the Gambia River , taking two Spanish vessels as prizes and contracting malaria in the process . 
 Rupert then finally made a successful crossing into the Caribbean , landing first at Saint Lucia , before continuing up the chain of the Antilles to the Virgin Islands . There the fleet was hit by a terrible hurricane , which scattered the ships and sank the Defiance , this time with Prince Maurice on board . It was a while before Maurice 's death became certain , which came as a terrible blow to Rupert . He was forced to return to Europe , arriving in France in March 1653 with a fleet of five ships . It became clear , as the profits and losses of the piracy campaign were calculated , that the venture had not been as profitable as hoped . This complicated tensions in the Royalist court , and Charles II and Rupert eventually split the spoils , after which Rupert , tired and a little bitter , returned to France to recuperate from the long campaign . 
 In 1654 , Rupert appears to have been involved in a plot to assassinate Oliver Cromwell , an event that would then have been followed by a coup , the landing of a small army in Sussex , and the restoration of Charles II . Charles himself is understood to have rejected the assassination proposal , but three conspirators — who implicated Rupert in the plan — were arrested and confessed in London . Rupert 's presence at the royal court continued to be problematic ; as in 1643 , he was regarded by Edward Hyde ( later Earl of Clarendon ) and others as a bellicose figure and an obstacle to peace negotiations ; in 1655 Rupert left for Germany . 
 = = = Service in Germany = = = 
 After his quarrel with the Royalist court in exile , Rupert travelled to Heidelberg to visit his brother Charles Louis , now partially restored as Elector Palatine , where the two had an ambivalent reunion . Charles Louis and Rupert had not been friendly as children and had almost ended up on opposite sides during the Civil War . To make matters worse , Charles Louis had been deprived of half the old Palatinate under the Peace of Westphalia , leaving him badly short of money , although he still remained responsible under the Imperial laws of <unk> for providing for his younger brother and had offered the sum of £ 375 per annum , which Rupert had accepted . Rupert travelled on to Vienna , where he attempted to claim the £ 15 @,@ 000 compensation allocated to him under the Peace of Westphalia from the Emperor . Emperor Ferdinand III warmly welcomed him , but was unable to pay such a sum immediately — instead , he would have to pay in installments , to the disadvantage of Rupert . 
 Over the next twelve months , Rupert was asked by the Duke of Modena in northern Italy to raise an army against the Papal States — having done so , and with the army stationed in the Palatinate , the enterprise collapsed , with the Duke requesting that Rupert invade Spanish held Milan instead . Rupert moved on , having placed his brother Charles Louis in some diplomatic difficulties with Spain . Rupert travelled onwards , continuing to attempt to convince Ferdinand to back Charles II 's efforts to regain his throne . 
 In 1656 relations between Rupert and Charles Louis deteriorated badly . Rupert had fallen in love with Louise von <unk> , one of his sister @-@ in @-@ law 's maids of honour . One of Rupert 's notes proffering his affections accidentally fell into the possession of Charles Louis ' wife Charlotte , who believed it was written to her . Charlotte was keen to engage in an affair with Rupert and became unhappy when she was declined and the mistake explained . Unfortunately , von <unk> was uninterested in Rupert , but was engaged in an affair with Charles Louis — this was discovered in due course , leading to the annulment of the marriage . Rupert , for his part , was unhappy that Charles Louis could not endow him with a suitable estate , and the two parted on bad terms in 1657 , Rupert refusing to ever return to the Palatinate again and taking up employment under Ferdinand III in Hungary . 
 During this period Rupert became closely involved in the development of the printmaking process of mezzotint , a method of " negative " , or intaglio ) , printing which eventually superseded the older woodcut method of printmaking . Rupert appears to have told a range of associates that he had conceived of the mezzotint process having watched a soldier scrape the rust from the barrel of his musket during a military campaign ; John Evelyn credited Rupert as the inventor of the technique in 1662 , and Rupert 's story was further popularised by Horace Walpole during the 18th century . Considerable academic debate surrounds the issue , but the modern consensus is that mezzotint was instead invented in 1642 by Ludwig von Siegen , a German Lieutenant @-@ Colonel who was also an amateur artist . Siegen may or may not have met Rupert : Siegen had worked as chamberlain , and probably part @-@ tutor , to Rupert 's young cousin William VI , Landgrave of Hesse @-@ Kassel , with whom Rupert discussed the technique in letters from 1654 . Rupert did , however , became a noted artist in mezzotint in his own right . He produced a few stylish prints in the technique , mostly interpretations of existing paintings , and introduced the form to England after the Restoration , though it was <unk> Vaillant , Rupert 's artistic assistant or tutor , who first popularised the process and exploited it commercially . Rupert 's most famous and largest art work , The Great Executioner , produced in 1658 , is still regarded by critics such as Arthur Hind and Antony Griffiths as full of " brilliance and energy " , " superb " and " one of the greatest mezzotints " ever produced ; other important works by Rupert include the Head of Titian and The Standard Bearer . 
 = = Career following the Restoration = = 
 Following the Restoration of the monarchy under Charles II in 1660 , Rupert returned to England , where Charles had already largely completed the process of balancing the different factions across the country in a new administration . Since most of the better government posts were already taken , Rupert 's employment was limited , although Charles rewarded him with the second highest pension he had granted , £ 4 @,@ 000 a year . Rupert 's close family ties to King Charles were critical to his warm reception ; following the deaths of the Duke of Gloucester and Princess Mary , Rupert was the King 's closest adult relation in England after his brother , the Duke of York , and so a key member of the new regime . Rupert , as the Duke of Cumberland , resumed his seat in the House of Lords . For the first time in his life , Rupert 's financial position was relatively secure , and he had matured . Near @-@ contemporaries described how " his temper was less explosive than formerly and his judgement sounder " . Rupert continued to serve as an admiral in the Royal Navy throughout the period , ultimately rising to the rank of " General at Sea and Land " . 
 = = = Restoration statesman = = = 
 Rupert was appointed to the King 's Privy Council in 1662 , taking roles on the Foreign Affairs Committee , the Admiralty Committee and the Tangier Committee . Accounts vary of Rupert 's role in all these committees of government . Samuel Pepys , no friend of Rupert 's , sat on the Tangier Committee with him and later declared that all Rupert did was to laugh and swear occasionally : other records , such as those of the Foreign Affairs Committee , show him taking a full and active role in proceedings . 
 In 1668 , the King appointed Rupert to be the Constable of Windsor Castle . Rupert was already one of the Knights of the Garter , who had their headquarters at the castle , and was a close companion of the King , who would wish to be suitably entertained at the castle . Rupert immediately began to reorder the castle 's defences , sorting out the garrison 's accommodation , repairing the Devil 's Tower , reconstructing the real tennis court and improving the castle 's hunting estate . Rupert acquired his own apartments in the castle , which were recorded as being " very singular " with some decorated with an " extraordinary " number of " pikes , muskets , pistols , bandoliers , holsters , drums , back , breast , and head pieces " , and his inner chambers " hung with <unk> , curious and effeminate pictures " . King Charles II and Rupert spent much time together over the years hunting and playing tennis together at Windsor , and Rupert was also a close companion of James , the Duke of York . Rupert was considered by Pepys to be the fourth best tennis player in England . 
 Rupert became romantically engaged to Frances Bard ( 1646 – 1708 ) , the daughter of the English explorer and Civil War veteran Henry Bard . Frances claimed to have secretly married Rupert in 1664 , although this was denied by him and no firm proof exists to support the claim . Rupert acknowledged the son he had with Frances , Dudley Bard ( 1666 – 86 ) , often called " Dudley Rupert " , who was schooled at Eton College . In 1673 , Rupert was urged by Charles Louis to return home , marry and establish an heir to the Palatinate , as it appeared likely that Charles Louis 's own son would not survive infancy . Rupert refused , and remained in England . 
 = = = Career in the Restoration navy = = = 
 For much of the 17th century , England was embroiled in conflict with commercial rival Holland through the Anglo @-@ Dutch Wars . Rupert became closely involved in these as a senior Admiral to King Charles II , rising to command the Royal Navy by the end of his career . Although several famous admirals of the day had previously been army commanders , including Blake and Monk , they had commanded relatively small land forces and Rupert was still relatively unusual for the period in having both practical experience of commanding large land armies and having extensive naval experience from his campaigns in the 1650s . 
 At the start of the Second Anglo @-@ Dutch War ( 1665 – 67 ) , Rupert was appointed as one of the three squadron commanders of the English fleet , under the overall command of the Duke of York , taking HMS Royal James as his flagship . As the commander of the White Squadron , Rupert fought at the Battle of Lowestoft in 1665 , breaking through the enemy defences at a critical moment ; Rupert 's leg was injured in the battle , an injury that caused him ongoing pain . Recalled to accompany the King during the plague that was sweeping London , Rupert continued to argue in favour of the fleet seeking a set @-@ piece engagement with the Dutch that would force the Dutch back to the negotiating table . The following year , Rupert was made joint commander of the fleet with Monk and given the opportunity to put this plan into practice . In June 1666 , they fought the Dutch at the Four Days Battle , one of the longest naval battles in history ; the battle saw the new aggressive tactics of Rupert and Monk applied , resulting in " a sight unique till then in sailing @-@ ship warfare , the English beating upwind and breaking the enemy 's line from leeward . " However , the Four Days Battle was considered a victory for the Dutch , but the St. James 's Day Battle the following month allowed Rupert and Monk to use the same tactics to inflict heavy damage on the Dutch and the battle resulted in a significant English victory . The Dutch however would see a favourable end to the war with the decisive Raid on the Medway . 
 Rupert also played a prominent role in the Third Anglo @-@ Dutch War ( 1672 – 74 ) . This time Louis XIV of France was a key English ally against Holland , and it was decided that the French would form a squadron in a combined fleet . The English fleet had been much expanded , and Rupert had three ships , HMS Royal Charles , HMS Royal James and HMS Royal Oak , equipped with a high @-@ specification , annealed and lathe @-@ produced gun of his own design , the <unk> . Unfortunately the cost of the weapon — three times that of a normal gun — prevented its wider deployment in the fleet . The French role in the conflict proved a problem when Charles turned to the appointment of an admiral . Rupert 's objection to the French alliance was well known , and accordingly the King appointed the Duke of York to the role instead . Rupert was instead instructed to take over the Duke 's work at the Admiralty , which he did with gusto . The Allied naval plans were stalled after the Duke 's inconclusive battle with the Dutch at Solebay . 
 The English plan for 1673 centred on first achieving naval dominance , followed by landing an army in Zeeland . The King appointed the Duke as supreme commander , with Rupert as his deputy , combining the rank of General and Vice Admiral of England . During the winter of 1672 , however , Charles — still ( legitimately ) childless — decided that the risk to the Duke , his heir , was too great and made Rupert supreme Allied commander in his place . Rupert began the 1673 campaign against the Dutch knowing the logistical support for his fleet remained uncertain , with many ships undermanned . The result was the Battle of <unk> in June and the Battle of Texel in August , a controversial sequence of engagements in which , at a minimum , poor communications between the French and English commanders assisted the marginal Dutch victory . Many English commentators were harsher , blaming the French for failing to fully engage in the battles and Rupert — having cautioned against the alliance in the first place — was popularly hailed as a hero . Rupert finally retired from active seagoing command later that year . 
 Rupert had a characteristic style as an admiral ; he relied upon " energetic personal leadership backed by close contact with his officers " ; having decided how to proceed in a naval campaign , however , it could be difficult for his staff to change his mind . Recent work on Rupert 's role as a commander has also highlighted the progress the prince made in formulating the way that orders were given to the British fleet . Fleet communications were limited during the period , and the traditional orders from admirals before a battle were accordingly quite rigid , limiting a captain 's independence in the battle . Rupert played a key part in the conferences held by the Duke of York in 1665 to review tactics and operational methods from the first Dutch war , and put these into practice before the St James Day battle . These instructions and supplementary instructions to ships ' captains , which attempted to balance an adherence to standing orders with the need to exploit emerging opportunities in a battle , proved heavily influential over the next hundred years and shaped the idea that an aggressive fighting spirit should be at the core of British naval doctrine . 
 After 1673 Rupert remained a senior member of the Royal Navy and Charles ' administration . Rupert allied himself with Lord Shaftesbury on matters of foreign policy , but remained loyal to King Charles II on other issues , and was passionate about protecting the Royal Prerogative . As a consequence he opposed Parliament 's plan in 1677 to appoint him to Lord High Admiral — on the basis that only the King should be allowed to propose such appointments — but noted that he was willing to become Admiral if the King wished him to do so . The King 's solution was to establish a small , empowered Admiralty Commission , of which Rupert became the first commissioner . As a result , from 1673 to 1679 Rupert was able to focus on ensuring a closer regulation of manning , gunning and the selection of officers . He was also involved in setting priorities between the different theatres of operations that the English Navy were now involved in around the world . Rupert was also appointed to the supreme position of " General at Sea and Land " , effectively assuming the wartime powers of the Lord High Admiral . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the end of his seagoing naval career Rupert continued to be actively involved in both government and science , although he was increasingly removed from current politics . To the younger members of the court the prince appeared increasingly distant — almost from a different era . Count <unk> described Rupert as " brave and courageous even to rashness , but cross @-@ grained and <unk> obstinate ... he was polite , even to excess , unseasonably ; but haughty , and even brutal , when he ought to have been gentle and courteous ... his manners were ungracious : he had a dry hard @-@ favoured visage , and a stern look , even when he wished to please ; but , when he was out of humour , he was the true picture of reproof " . Rupert 's health during this period was also less robust ; his head wound from his employment in France required a painful trepanning treatment , his leg wound continued to hurt and he still suffered from the malaria he had caught while in the Gambia . 
 = = = Colonial administration = = = 
 Rupert had demonstrated an interest in colonial issues for many years . On arriving in England in 1660 , he had encouraged the government to continue Rupert 's own exploration of the Gambia in an attempt to find gold , leading to Robert Holmes 's expedition the following year . Rupert was an active shareholder in the Company of Royal Adventurers Trading into Africa that was established as a result in 1662 . The company continued operations for the next eight years , with backers including the King , the Duke of York and the Royal Society , with operations including engaging in the West Africa slave trade until it folded in 1670 . The company 's operations merged with those of the Gambia Merchants ' Company into the new Royal African Company , with a royal charter to set up forts , factories , troops and to exercise martial law in West Africa , in pursuit of trade in gold , silver and slaves ; Rupert was the third named member of the company 's executive committee . 
 By then , however , Rupert 's attention had turned to North America . The French explorers Radisson and des Groseilliers had come to England after conducting a joint exploration of the Hudson 's Bay region in 1659 ; there their account attracted the attention of the King and Rupert . Rupert put an initial investment of £ 270 of his own money into a proposal for a fresh expedition and set about raising more ; despite setbacks , including the Great Fire of London , by 1667 he had formed a private syndicate and leased the Eaglet from the King for the expedition . The Eaglet failed , but her sister vessel , the Nonsuch , made a successful expedition , returning in 1669 with furs worth £ 1 @,@ 400 . In 1670 , the King approved the charter for " The Governor and Company of Adventurers of England trading into Hudson 's Bay " that would form the Hudson 's Bay Company , which was granted a trading monopoly in the whole Hudson Bay watershed area , an immense territory named Rupert 's Land , with Rupert appointed the first Governor . Rupert 's first company secretary was Sir James Hayes and Radisson named the Hayes River , in present @-@ day Manitoba , in his honour . The company continued to prosper , forming the basis for much of the commercial activity of colonial Canada . Rupert 's role in colonial commerce was marked by his being asked to lay the cornerstone of the new Royal Exchange in 1670 , and being made one of its first councillors . 
 = = = Science and the Royal Society = = = 
 After Rupert 's retirement from active seafaring in around 1674 , he was able to spend more time engaged in scientific research and became credited with many inventions and discoveries , although some subsequently turned out to be the innovative introduction of European inventions into England . Rupert converted some of the apartments at Windsor Castle to a luxury laboratory , complete with forges , instruments and raw materials , from where he conducted a range of experiments . 
 Rupert had already become the third founding member of the scientific Royal Society , being referred to by contemporaries as a " philosophic warrior " , and guided the Society as a Councillor during its early years . Very early on in the Society 's history , Rupert demonstrated Prince Rupert 's Drops to King Charles II and the Society , glass teardrops which explode when the tail is cracked ; although credited with their invention at the time , later interpretations suggest that he was instead responsible for the introduction of an existing European discovery into England . He demonstrated a new device for lifting water at the Royal Society , and received attention for his process for " painting colours on marble , which , when polished , became permanent " . During this time , Rupert also formulated a mathematical question concerning the paradox that a cube can pass through a slightly smaller cube ; Rupert questioned how large a cube had to be in order to fit . The question of Prince Rupert 's cube was first solved by the Dutch mathematician Pieter <unk> . Rupert was also known for his success in breaking cypher codes . 
 Many of Rupert 's inventions were military . After designing the <unk> naval gun , Rupert erected a water @-@ mill on Hackney Marshes for a revolutionary method of boring guns , however his secret died with him , and the enterprise failed . Rupert enjoyed other military problems , and took to manufacturing gun locks ; he devised both a gun that fired multiple rounds at high speed , and a " handgun with rotating barrels " . He is credited with the invention of a form of gunpowder , which when demonstrated to the Royal Society in 1663 had a force of over ten times that of regular powder ; a better method for using gunpowder in mining ; and a torpedo . He also developed a form of grapeshot for use by artillery . Rupert also focussed on naval inventions : he devised a balancing mechanism to allow improved quadrant measurements at sea , and produced a diving engine for retrieving objects on the ocean floor . While recovering from his trepanning treatment Rupert set about inventing new surgical equipment to improve future operations . 
 Other parts of Rupert 's scientific work lay in the field of metallurgy . Rupert invented a new brass alloy , slightly darker in hue than regular brass involving three parts of copper to one part of zinc , combined with charcoal ; this became known as " Prince 's metal " in his honour — sometimes also referred to as " Bristol Brass " . Rupert invented the alloy in order to improve naval artillery , but it also became used as a replacement for gold in decorations . Rupert was also credited with having devised an exceptional method for tempering <unk> fish hooks , and for casting objects into an appearance of perspective . He also invented an improved method for manufacturing shot of varying sizes in 1663 , that was later retained by the scientist Robert Hooke , one of Rupert 's Royal Society friends during the period . 
 = = = Peg Hughes = = = 
 Towards the end of his life Rupert fell in love with an attractive Drury Lane actress named Peg Hughes . Rupert became involved with her during the late 1660s , leaving his previous mistress , Frances Bard , although Hughes appears to have held out from reciprocating his attentions with the aim of negotiating a suitable settlement . Hughes rapidly received advancement through his patronage ; she became a member of the King 's Company by 1669 , giving her status and immunity from arrest for debt , and was painted four times by Sir Peter Lely , the foremost court artist of the day . 
 Despite being encouraged to do so , Rupert did not marry Hughes , but acknowledged their daughter , Ruperta ( later Howe ) , born in 1673 . Hughes lived an expensive lifestyle during the 1670s , enjoying gambling and jewels ; Rupert gave her at least £ 20 @,@ 000 worth of jewellery during their relationship , including several items from the Palatinate royal collection . Margaret continued to act even after Ruperta 's birth , returning to the stage in 1676 with the prestigious Duke 's Company at the Dorset Garden Theatre , near the Strand in London . The next year Rupert established Hughes with a " grand building " worth £ 25 @,@ 000 that he bought in Hammersmith from Sir Nicholas Crispe . Rupert seems rather to have enjoyed the family lifestyle , commenting that his young daughter " already rules the whole house and sometimes argues with her mother , which makes us all laugh . " 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Rupert died at his house at Spring Gardens , Westminster , on 29 November 1682 after a bout of pleurisy , and was buried in the crypt of Westminster Abbey on 6 December in a state funeral . Rupert left most of his estate , worth some £ 12 @,@ 000 , equally to Hughes and Ruperta . Hughes had an " uncomfortable widowhood " without Rupert 's support , allegedly not helped by her unproductive gambling . Presents from Rupert such as his mother 's earrings were sold to the Duchess of Marlborough , while a pearl necklace given by Elector Frederick to Electress Elizabeth was sold to fellow actress Nell Gwynn . Hughes sold the house in Hammersmith to two London merchants : Timothy Lannoy and George Treadwell — it was then purchased by the Margrave of Brandenburg @-@ Ansbach and became known as Brandenburg ( or <unk> ) House . 
 Ruperta later married Emanuel Scrope Howe , future MP and English general , and had five children , Sophia , William , Emanuel , James and Henrietta . Through William 's daughter , Mary , Rupert is an ancestor of the Bromley baronets . 
 Rupert 's son , Dudley Bard , became a military officer , frequently known as " Captain Rupert " , and died fighting at the Siege of Budapest while in his late teens . 
 In Canada , the city of Prince Rupert , British Columbia , the community of Prince Rupert in the city of Edmonton , Alberta and the Rupert River in Quebec are all named after the Prince . In Bristol there was also a street , Rupert Street and formerly a public house , The Prince Rupert in Rupert Street named to commemorate Prince Rupert . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = = In fiction = = 
 Prince Rupert is the protagonist of Poul Anderson 's alternative history / fantasy book A Midsummer Tempest , where the Prince , with the help of various Shakespearean characters who are actual persons in this timeline , eventually defeats Cromwell and wins the English Civil War . 
 Prince Rupert is the key character in the King Crimson song Lizard from their 1970 album of the same name . The 23 @-@ minute suite includes several sections , one named Prince Rupert Awakes and another The Battle of Glass Tears ( an artistic reference to the battle of Naseby ) in turn including a sub @-@ section called Prince Rupert 's Lament . 
 Prince Rupert appears in The Oak Apple and The Black Pearl , volumes 4 and 5 of The Morland Dynasty , a series of historical novels by author Cynthia Harrod @-@ Eagles . He is assisted during the Civil War by the staunchly Royalist fictional Morland family , and is father to the illegitimate <unk> Morland , with whom he has a complicated relationship . 
 Prince Rupert and his sister Elisabeth are minor characters in Eric Flint 's 1632 series books <unk> Gazette IV and <unk> Gazette VI 
 Prince Rupert is the protagonist of Margaret Irwin 's novel The Stranger Prince and appears in her later novel The Bride . Both novels deal with the Civil War period . 
 Prince Rupert is the subject of Samuel Edwards 's biographical novel The White Plume , published by William Morrow and Company Ltd. in 1961 , a semi @-@ fictional account of his life from his late teens until his marriage to Peg ( Margaret Hughes ) . 
 Prince Rupert 's Tower is the name given to a Georgian Lock @-@ Up in the Everton area of Liverpool . Rupert stayed in the area during the siege of Liverpool . 
 = = Film and television = = 
 Rupert was portrayed by Timothy Dalton in the 1970 film Cromwell . 
 Harry Lloyd played Rupert in the 2008 TV drama The Devil 's Whore . 
 Rupert was portrayed by Will Bowden in the 2015 Dutch film Michiel de Ruyter . 
 = = Additional reading = = 
 Ashley , Maurice . ( 1976 ) Rupert of the Rhine . London : Hart Davis , MacGibbon . 
 De Viet , <unk> . ( 2010 ) <unk> en de <unk> twee <unk> met <unk> in de <unk> eeuw . MA Thesis . Rotterdam : Erasmus University . ( Dutch ) 
 Fergusson , Bernard . ( 1952 ) Rupert of the Rhine . London : Collins . 
 Irwin , Margaret . ( 1937 ) The Stranger Prince : The story of Rupert of the Rhine . New York : Harcourt , Brace . 
 Kitson , Frank . ( 1994 ) Prince Rupert : Portrait of a Soldier . London : Constable . ISBN 0 @-@ 09 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Patrick . ( 1976 ) Prince Rupert of the Rhine . London : Constable . 
 Petrie , Charles . ( 1974 ) King Charles , Prince Rupert , and the Civil War : From Original Letters . London : Routledge and Kegan Paul . 
 Thomson , George Malcolm . ( 1976 ) Warrior Prince : Prince Rupert of the Rhine . London : Secker and Warburg . 
 Wilkinson , Clennell . ( 1935 ) Prince Rupert , the Cavalier . Philadelphia : J.B. Lippincott . 
 = AT & T Plaza = 
 AT & T Plaza ( formerly Ameritech Plaza and SBC Plaza ) is a public space that hosts the Cloud Gate sculpture . It is located in Millennium Park , which is a park built to celebrate the third millennium and which is located within the Loop community area of Chicago , Illinois in the United States . The sculpture and the plaza are sometimes jointly referred to as Cloud Gate on the AT & T Plaza . 
 It was opened in the summer of 2004 with the initial unveiling of the sculpture during the grand opening weekend of the park . Ameritech Corporation / SBC Communications Inc. donated US $ 3 million for the naming right to the space . The plaza has become a place view the McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink and during the Christmas holiday season , the Plaza hosts Christmas caroling . 
 = = Details = = 
 Lying between Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west , Grant Park has been Chicago 's front yard since the mid @-@ 19th century . Its northwest corner , north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute , east of Michigan Avenue , south of Randolph Street , and west of Columbus Drive , had been Illinois Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997 , when it was made available for development by the city as Millennium Park . Today , Millennium Park trails only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction . 
 The plaza is located above Park Grill , above and behind the McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink , adjacent to the Chase Promenade , and between the North and South Boeing Galleries . The plaza and sculpture sit atop the 300 @-@ seat $ 6 million Park Grill , which opened in November 2003 behind the McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink . The surface of the plaza is concrete . The plaza is composed of 25 @,@ 200 square feet ( 2 @,@ 340 m2 ) of concrete pavers . Each paver is 30 by 30 inches ( 76 by 76 cm ) , and each is 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 6 @.@ 4 cm ) thick . 
 = = History = = 
 The plaza was originally named Ameritech Plaza for Ameritech Corporation , the corporate sponsor , who donated $ 3 million for the sculpture @-@ hosting plaza 's naming rights . By the time the park officially opened in 2004 , Ameritech had merged with SBC Communications and the plaza was called SBC Plaza . When SBC acquired AT & T and subsequently changed the name from SBC to AT & T in 2005 , the name of the plaza changed again . 
 Cloud Gate was originally estimated to weigh 60 short tons ( 54 @.@ 4 t ; 53 @.@ 6 long tons ) because it was impossible to estimate the thickness of the steel compatible with the desired aesthetics . The final piece , however , weighs 110 short tons ( 99 @.@ 8 t ; 98 @.@ 2 long tons ) and care had to be taken in supporting it . The roof of the Park Grill , upon which Cloud Gate sits , had to be strong enough to bear the weight . A large retaining wall separating Chicago 's Metra train tracks from the North Grant Park garage travels along the back side of the restaurant and supports much of the sculpture 's weight . This wall , along with the rest of the garage 's foundation , required additional bracing before the piece was erected . In June 2004 , when construction of the shell began , a large tent ( pictured left ) was erected around the piece in order to shield it from public view . 
 = = Activities = = 
 In 2006 , annual Christmas caroling began at the plaza . Following Thanksgiving , weekly sing @-@ alongs are led by choral groups including Bella Voce , Chicago Mass Choir , and Chicago Children 's Choir . 
 Because of its elevation above the McCormick Tribune Plaza & Ice Rink , the plaza has become a prime viewing location for Jazz music concerts held during the summer at the McCormick Tribune Plaza . McCormick Tribune Plaza is located below and to the west of AT & T Plaza as well as adjacent to Michigan Avenue 's Historic Michigan Boulevard District , which are slightly further west . 
 = Grand Quartier Général ( 1914 – 1919 ) = 
 The Grand Quartier Général ( abbreviated to GQG or Grand <unk> in spoken French ) was the general headquarters of the French Army during the First World War . It served as the wartime equivalent of the Conseil Supérieur de la Guerre and had extensive powers within an area defined by the French parliament . The GQG was activated by parliament on 2 August 1914 , after the violation of French borders by German military patrols and remained in existence until 20 October 1919 . 
 GQG was commanded by the Chief @-@ of @-@ Staff , assisted by a varying number of subordinate generals and had representatives to the French government and president . The headquarters of GQG was originally at Vitry @-@ le @-@ François in the Marne department but rapid German advances in the early stages of the war forced its withdrawal to Chantilly , near Paris , by November 1914 and it remained there for much of the rest of the war . General Joseph Joffre served as the first Chief of Staff of GQG from the start of the war until December 1916 and his replacement by General Robert Nivelle . Nivelle was replaced in May 1917 after the failure of his Spring offensive and was succeeded by General Philippe Pétain , who retained command of GQG until its dissolution in 1919 . In April 1918 the Grand Quartier Général des Armées <unk> was established under General Ferdinand Foch as an equivalent organisation with authority for Allied operations in France . 
 GQG was organised into a complex series of departments and bureaux that changed frequently throughout the war . This structure has been criticised by historians for failing to encourage co @-@ operation between departments and for widespread infighting . There were also concerns about the autonomy and power vested in GQG . French policy , laid down in 1913 , had been for the two most important field armies , the north and north @-@ east , to retain operational independence . GQG , under Joffre , assumed control of these armies in December 1915 and retained them until his replacement by Nivelle when the Minister of War , Joseph Gallieni , raised concerns that the pre @-@ war policy was being violated . GQG failed accurately to assess German casualties , basing military operations on wildly optimistic assessments of the weakness of German units and reserves . 
 = = Origins and structure = = 
 The Grand Quartier Général had its origins in the reforms instituted by France after their defeat in the Franco @-@ Prussian War . The position and supporting staff , of the Chief of Staff of the French Army was created with responsibility for training and mobilisation in peace and the formation of the army high command in times of war . The establishment of GQG in 1911 formalised this situation , with GQG becoming the wartime counterpart of the Conseil Supérieur de la Guerre ( CSG ) and the vice @-@ president of CSG becoming the chief of staff of the GQG . The GQG received extensive military powers within an area defined as the zone of army control ; control of the remainder of the armed forces was retained by the Minister of War . GQG was activated upon the mobilisation of the French Army by parliament , who also defined the zone of army control . 
 The chief of staff was assisted by an état @-@ major @-@ général , who ran the GQG general staff of around 50 officers and saw that the commander @-@ in @-@ chief 's orders were carried out and two aides @-@ majors with responsibilities for the individual departments of GQG . GQG was originally organised into four bureaux ( or departments ) . The First Bureau was responsible for organization , personnel and equipment ; the Second Bureau for intelligence , information and political affairs ; the Third Bureau for the planning of military operations and the Fourth Bureau ( sometimes called the Direction de l <unk> - Directorate of the Rear [ lines ] ) for transport , communication and supply . 
 The Third Bureau was considered by far the most powerful as it had control of active military operations . Its staff consisted mainly of liaison officers , embedded with individual unit headquarters . Though these officers were junior in rank to the generals commanding the armies , they held significant power over their careers through the reports made on their operations to GQG . One officer from the Third Bureau liaised with the French government and another with the president and they were said to wield " considerable political power " . The Fourth Bureau had a wide remit , with responsibility for the management of military railways , motor vehicles , water transport , financial offices , post offices and telegraphy and its chief was sometimes called the directeur de l <unk> ( director of the rear [ lines ] ) . In addition GQG was responsible for co @-@ ordination with allied armies . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Activation of GQG = = = 
 The French Chief of Staff , General Joseph Joffre , was convinced of the inevitability of the outbreak of the First World War and , on 30 July 1914 , began organising the personnel for his GQG staff . Joffre persuaded the French government to enact mobilisation on 1 August and at 14 @.@ 00 the next day parliament , following the violation of the French borders by German military patrols , gave Joffre full wartime powers and activated the GQG . The zone of army control was initially limited to just 8 departments of France , but on 10 August was expanded to 33 departments out of 86 in Metropolitan France . In this area Joffre was the absolute authority and no civilian , not even President Poincaré or his ministers , could enter it without his permission . Joffre used this authority to exclude the press and his own government 's parliamentary commission on military affairs from his zone of control . 
 Upon activation the major @-@ général of GQG was General Emile Belin and the two aides @-@ majors were General Henri Berthelot and General Céleste <unk> . Each aide @-@ major had responsibility for two of the bureaus ; Berthelot oversaw the Second and Third Bureaus , <unk> oversaw the First and Fourth Bureaus . Each bureau was under the day @-@ to @-@ day control of a lower ranking officer , upon activation the Third Bureau was headed by Colonel Ferdinand Auguste Pont , the Fourth Bureau by General Étienne Édouard <unk> de <unk> and the president 's liaison officer was General <unk> . The other officers were generally selected by Joffre from those who had excelled at the Ecole Supérieure de Guerre ( French Army staff college ) . Representatives from the allied powers were also present within the GQG structure and at various times included officers from the United Kingdom , Russia , USA , Japan , Italy , Belgium , Serbia and Romania . 
 The GQG established its physical headquarters at Vitry @-@ le @-@ François , in the Marne department , on 5 August . The location had been chosen as it was halfway between Paris and Nancy and roughly equidistant ( at around 80 to 90 miles ) to the headquarters of each of the five French armies . The staff occupied a school building with the second bureau located in the classrooms and the third bureau in the <unk> , with the sports equipment pushed up against one wall . The staff at GQG had the use of a detachment of the 8th Engineer Regiment , a company of the 19th Railway Squadron , two companies of the 68th Territorial Infantry Regiment , a company of Forestry Chasseurs , two anti @-@ aircraft sections , up to two carrier pigeon units , a unit of cyclist messengers , a medical detachment and a military police escort squadron . 
 = = = GQG during the war = = = 
 GQG played a key role at the start of the war . Due to illness Belin had delegated much of his role to Berthelot , further increasing the power of his influential Third Bureau . The officers in that department , particularly the recent staff college graduates who were known as the Young Turks , favoured strong offensive action . Having failed to initially perceive the German advance through Belgium , it was these officers who were key in persuading Joffre to attack the exposed German right flank during the Great Retreat from Mons . As a result of the German advances in late 1914 GQG was forced to relocate its headquarters progressively westwards . It moved to Bar @-@ sur @-@ Aube on 31 August , Châtillon @-@ sur @-@ Seine on 6 September , Romilly @-@ sur @-@ Seine on 28 September 1914 and , on 29 November , to Chantilly , within the Paris metropolitan area , where it was to remain for the next few years . This location was suited to GQG operations due to its proximity to the seat of government and the ministries in Paris . 
 Joffre found his new command difficult ; while he was able to dismiss army commanders at will ( he <unk> 54 generals by the time of the First Battle of the Marne ) he seemed unable to remove officers from GQG . The reasons for Joffre 's lack of action are unknown but historian Alistair Horne speculated that it was due to the vast power granted to the GQG staff or to Joffre 's desire not to be upstaged by his staff . The GQG officers , isolated from the direct effects of the war , engaged in intrigue on a grand scale and there was little co @-@ operation between the rival departments . The Second Bureau was often incapable of estimating the strength of the German forces committed to action . At the start of the war it took until 24 August for the Second Bureau to realise that each German army corps deployed alongside a correspondingly numbered reserve corps , effectively doubling the strength of that corps in the field . Throughout the war it maintained an inadequate means of calculating German casualty figures , simply assuming that for each two Frenchmen killed in battle three Germans must have fallen . In reality the figures were almost the reverse . By means of such estimations they calculated that Germany would run out of manpower reserves by early 1916 . Thus the Third Bureau found itself directing French generals to undertake military operations based on wholly inaccurate assessments of the strength of opposing units . 
 French set @-@ backs in 1915 forced Joffre to reorganise GQG — on 11 December he replaced Belin with General Noël de Castelnau — and expand its remit . Three entirely new bureaus were formed , that of the North Army ( Armée du Nord ) , the North @-@ East Army ( Armée du Nord @-@ Est ) and for external theatres of war bringing GQG direct control of French armies in the field . Two major @-@ <unk> were appointed , General Maurice Janin for the two army bureaus and General Maurice <unk> for the Bureau for External Theatres of War . The Second Bureau was also reformed with its censorship , counter @-@ espionage and intelligence gathering duties being passed to a new Fifth Bureau ; though the Second Bureau retained some of its former intelligence responsibilities . 
 Despite this reorganisation GQG remained dysfunctional with the Second Bureau , described as " perennial <unk> " by Horne , again responsible for providing deceptive assessments of German casualties , at one point in the Battle of Verdun simply adding " a hundred thousand or thereabouts " every fortnight to the figures . The confused responsibility for intelligence between the Second and Fifth Bureaus , the Ministry of the Interior and the police also led to delays in providing intelligence to the armies in the field during the battle . The Third Bureau was responsible for withdrawing two and a half batteries of artillery from the fortresses of Verdun in the months leading up to that close @-@ fought battle , despite receiving requests for reinforcements from the local commander General Frédéric @-@ Georges Herr , who stated he could not hold if attacked in force . 
 The autonomy and power afforded to GQG worried Minister for War Joseph Gallieni and after his death , one of his successors , Hubert Lyautey , ordered a reorganisation of GQG by ministerial decree on 13 December 1916 . Joffre was sidelined to a position as " technical adviser to the government " , with few defined responsibilities , which led to his resignation on 27 December 1916 and replacement by General Robert Nivelle . Such was Joffre 's fall from grace that , entitled to take three staff officers from GQG with him to his new post , he could find only one volunteer . The North Army and North @-@ East Army were also removed from the direct control of GQG . This course of action was justified by the Ministry of War as an essential step in restoring the independence of the two armies , a key pre @-@ war policy that had been established in a ministerial decree on 28 October 1913 . 
 Nivelle ordered his own reorganisation on 1 January 1917 , returning control of external theatres to the Ministry of War . In February the 2nd and 5th Bureaus were re @-@ united , though there remained an informal division and intense rivalry between the officers of the " old " and " new " 2nd Bureau . This division remained until the arrival of Georges Clemenceau as Prime Minister and Minister of War in November 1917 . 
 Nivelle moved the GQG headquarters forward to Beauvais in Picardy on 10 January and to Compiègne in Oise on 4 April . At this stage the GQG staff numbered 450 officers and 800 enlisted personnel . However , the failure of the Nivelle Offensive of April 1917 led to his downfall and replacement by General Philippe Pétain on 17 May . Pétain expanded GQG 's operations , establishing a new Section for Relations with the Civil Authorities and a Bureau for <unk> , <unk> and Aviation . He later reformed the Second Bureau , absorbing into it the newly formed section for relations with the civil authorities and a new responsibility for cryptography . A minor change in February 1918 saw the expansion of the Third Bureau , gaining telegraphy and liaison from the Bureau for Aeronautics and cryptography from the Bureau for Special Services . In March the Bureau for Aeronautics gained control of anti @-@ aircraft matters and the army medical departments under their own Bureau of Health Services . This organisation would last until after the armistice with Germany in 1918 . 
 At 19 @.@ 00 on 16 February 1918 the offices of the Third Bureau on Algiers Street in Compiègne were hit by a bomb from a squadron of three German bombers . Serious damage was caused to the building and two officers were killed , Commandant Mathis and Captain Mallet . The dead officers were buried at the Saint @-@ Jacques Church in Compiègne . Fourteen additional officers were injured by flying glass , two of whom were hospitalised . 
 The GQG headquarters moved further eastwards to <unk> in Seine @-@ et @-@ Marne on 26 March 1918 . After the armistice GQG moved to Metz in the newly reacquired Moselle department on 1 December 1918 and returned to Chantilly on 29 January 1919 . GQG was dissolved on 20 October 1919 in accordance with a request from the War Ministry on 14 October which also abolished the zone of army control . The powers previously delegated to GQG were returned to the chief @-@ of @-@ staff of the army . During the Second World War the German army took control of the GQG First World War archives and sent many of the most secret documents to Berlin for analysis . These documents were recovered by the USSR at the end of the war and taken back to Moscow for processing . They were not returned to France until after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the 1990s . 
 Equivalent bodies in the other nations of the war were the General Headquarters ( GHQ ) of the British , Italian and American armies , the <unk> <unk> of the German army and the Stavka of the Russian forces . Though one was allowed for in the constitution , the Japanese army did not operate a General Headquarters during the war . After April 1918 all Allied troops on the Western Front were placed under the command of the Grand Quartier Général des Armées <unk> ( <unk> ) , a multi @-@ national general staff that developed from the Supreme War Council . The <unk> was on similar lines to the GQG and came under General Ferdinand Foch , who had overall command of all Allied troops . 
 = = = Evolution of responsibilities = = = 
 = Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do = 
 Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do ( <unk> ; <unk> ) , also known as Rhee Tae Kwon @-@ Do , Rhee Tae Kwon Do , or Rhee Taekwondo , is a martial art school in Australia and New Zealand teaching the Korean martial art of taekwondo . Its full name is " Rhee International Taekwon @-@ Do " with " ( Australia ) " or " ( New Zealand ) " appended . Chong Chul Rhee , one of the original masters of taekwondo , founded the school in the mid @-@ 1960s . Two of Rhee 's brothers , Chong Hyup Rhee and Chong Yoon Rhee , later came to assist him in the 1970s . 
 C. C. Rhee claims the title ' Father of Australian Taekwondo ' and Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do is widely publicised as being Australia 's first and biggest taekwondo school . It has at least 294 publicly listed dojang ( training halls ) in Australia ( and at least five such dojang in New Zealand ) , with perhaps around 1 @,@ 400 dojang in total at its peak . Several Australian martial art school founders received their foundational taekwondo training in Rhee 's school . 
 Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do is an independent martial art organisation . It was once affiliated to the International Taekwon @-@ Do Federation ( ITF ) , but has had no relation to the World Taekwondo Federation ( WTF ) . 
 = = Chong Chul Rhee = = 
 Chong Chul Rhee , 8th dan , is the founder and head of Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do . He holds the title ' World Master ' and claims the title ' Father of Australian Taekwondo . ' Rhee is one of the twelve original masters of taekwondo selected from the South Korean military to develop taekwondo under Choi Hong Hi in the Korea Taekwon @-@ Do Association ( KTA ) . Rhee is a former unarmed combat instructor in the Korean Marines , and helped introduce taekwondo to Southeast Asia ( notably in Malaysia and Singapore ) before becoming the first taekwondo master sent to Australia by the Republic of Korea . 
 Rhee has worked towards the reunification of Korea , serving as a member during the third through ninth terms — and as Chairman for the eighth term — of the Oceania Division of the Advisory Council on Democratic and Peaceful Unification . He has also served as Chairman of the Seoul Olympics Supporting Committee and founding President of the Korean Community Hall Construction Supporting Committee . The Republic of Korea awarded Rhee the <unk> Medal ( <unk> ) in 2003 for promoting taekwondo and Korean culture over the past 33 years . 
 Two of Rhee 's brothers , Chong Hyup Rhee and Chong Yoon Rhee , also hold the title of ' Master ' in Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do and assist him in managing parts of the school . Chong Hyup Rhee , 7th dan , is in charge of operations in Melbourne . He appears on the right in the school 's logo . C. H. Rhee is also one of the twelve original masters of taekwondo , and helped introduce the art of taekwondo to Malaysia and Singapore before arriving in Australia in 1970 . He conducts grading examinations in Melbourne and Darwin . Chong Yoon Rhee , 9th dan , is in charge of operations in parts of Sydney . He trained under Nam Tae Hi during the late 1950s , served as a South Korean army officer , and helped introduce the art of taekwondo to Vietnam in the late 1960s . C. Y. Rhee retired from military service at the rank of Major , and moved to Australia in January 1976 . 
 C. C. Rhee and C. H. Rhee are listed as pioneers in Asia ( 1950s and 1960s ) and Australia ( 1970s ) in Chang Keun Choi 's list of taekwondo pioneers , while C. Y. Rhee came to Australia some time later . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do occupies a prominent place in Australian taekwondo history . This is reflected in three key claims : ( 1 ) Chong Chul Rhee is the Father of Australian Taekwondo , ( 2 ) Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do is the first taekwondo school in Australia , and ( 3 ) Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do is the biggest taekwondo school in Australia . The school has widely publicised these claims since at least the 1980s . 
 = = = Father of Australian Taekwondo = = = 
 No one has challenged C. C. Rhee 's claim as the Father of Australian Taekwondo . The title might be debated , however , based on claims made about five other martial art masters : 
 Chan Yong Kim , 9th dan , was the first tang soo do instructor in Australia . He arrived in the early 1960s , sponsored by the <unk> Taxi Karate Club or the Judo Federation of Australia , and stayed for one or two years before moving overseas . Kim might be considered the first taekwondo instructor in Australia if tang soo do were recognised as taekwondo retrospectively , and so might lay claim to the title . Kim did not establish a taekwondo school in Australia . 
 Jack Rozinsky , 9th dan ( <unk> ) , founded the <unk> Karate Club in 1963 ; it later became the Melbourne Taekwondo Centre . As Rozinsky taught tang soo do there , he might be considered the first taekwondo school founder in Australia ( again , if tang soo do were recognised as taekwondo retrospectively ) , and so might lay claim to the title . Rozinsky did not introduce taekwondo outside Victoria . 
 Ke <unk> No , 8th dan ( WTF ) , was invited to Australia by the Victoria Judo Federation in 1965 , and taught taekwondo alongside judo . If tang soo do were not recognised as taekwondo retrospectively , No might lay claim to the title . He travelled back to South Korea for further training , returned to Australia in 1971 , and established his own martial arts centre at that time . As with Rozinsky , No did not introduce taekwondo outside Victoria . 
 Terence Walsh , 8th dan ( World Kido Federation ) , claims to have introduced taekwondo to New South Wales in 1969 . If he was the first to introduce taekwondo to Australia 's most populous state , then he might lay claim to the title . Walsh did not introduce taekwondo outside the eastern states . 
 Young Ku Yun , 8th dan ( ITF ) , has been described as having introduced taekwondo to Sydney in 1971 . If he was the first to introduce taekwondo to Australia 's largest city , then he might lay claim to the title . Yun arrived around five years after Rhee , however , and himself claimed to be the first ITF instructor ( rather than the first taekwondo instructor ) in Australia . 
 Kim and No would have been in the lower dan ranks , and would not yet have held the title of ' Master , ' when they were invited to teach in Australia . A biography of No indicates that he had four years ' training when he arrived . Rozinsky and Walsh would have held 1st dan ranking in the 1960s . Both Rhee ( KTA ) and Yun ( ITF ) would have been in the middle dan ranks and held the title of ' Master ' when they arrived , as they were sent to Australia by their respective Korean governing bodies . 
 = = = First taekwondo school in Australia = = = 
 Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do was the first Australian martial art school founded by a Korean master and using the name of taekwondo . Rhee 's school was also the first nationwide taekwondo school in Australia , having operated in South Australia from its founding in the mid @-@ 1960s , Western Australia from at least 1970 , Victoria from at least 1971 , the Australian Capital Territory from 1971 , Queensland from at least 1973 , New South Wales from 1973 , and Tasmania from at least 1983 . The first Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do class was held in the Adelaide YMCA centre . 
 Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 's position as the first taekwondo school in Australia might be challenged by the Melbourne Taekwondo Centre ( originally the <unk> Karate Club ) , as tang soo do was one of the arts taught there . Such status would , however , involve recognising tang soo do as taekwondo retrospectively . The Melbourne Taekwondo Centre incorporated taekwondo into its name in the 1970s . 
 = = = Biggest taekwondo school in Australia = = = 
 Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 's position as the biggest taekwondo school in Australia is supported by independently verifiable listings of dojang . It has at least 294 publicly listed dojang in Australia , with perhaps around 1 @,@ 400 dojang in total at its peak . The claim might be disputed if the Australian member schools of the ITF and the WTF were considered as ' schools ' as a whole , whether in terms of numbers of dojang or numbers of members . Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do is , however , a single school under the direct leadership of Rhee while both the ITF and WTF are groups of schools ( each with its own head ) under a larger governing body . 
 = = Ex @-@ Rhee members = = 
 At least 25 founders of Australian martial art schools ( and at least one in New Zealand ) received their foundational taekwondo training in Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do or are former Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do instructors . Of these ex @-@ members , the highest @-@ ranked was a Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 6th dan instructor when he left Rhee 's school . 
 = = = International Taekwon @-@ Do Federation = = = 
 Ex @-@ members who founded ITF schools include some of the most senior ITF instructors in Australia . Ming Tuck Low , 8th dan , was promoted to Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 1st dan in 1971 , and was a Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do instructor at the University of Western Australia in 1972 . Peter Wong , 7th dan , trained in Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do in Western Australia in the early 1970s . Jamie Moore , 8th dan , commenced Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do training in Queensland in 1976 . Several other ex @-@ members have founded ITF schools across Australia . 
 = = = Other taekwondo styles = = = 
 Ex @-@ members who founded non @-@ ITF taekwondo schools include some of the more expansionist instructors in Australia . John Ivanov , 7th dan , was a Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do regional instructor in Queensland in 1995 . Robert Frost , 6th dan , was a Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do regional instructor in New South Wales in 2003 . Lesley Hicks , 6th dan , commenced Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do training in the late 1970s , and was a Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 3rd dan regional instructor in New South Wales in 2003 . Vernon Low , 6th dan , was the Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do State Master Instructor of South Australia , was the first Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do instructor promoted to 5th dan , and had been ranked at 4th dan as early as 1974 , prior to establishing his own school . Several other ex @-@ members have founded non @-@ ITF taekwondo schools . 
 = = = Other martial arts = = = 
 Ex @-@ members who founded schools teaching martial arts other than taekwondo include three instructors with an eclectic martial arts history . Hans Fricke , 8th dan , first met Rhee in Perth in 1970 ( with Fricke bearing an introductory letter from the ITF , as he had trained briefly in South Korea ) , was a Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 2nd dan instructor in Sydney during the 1970s , and now teaches <unk> . Christopher <unk> , 10th dan , trained in Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do in Adelaide from 1972 to 1984 , was a Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 2nd dan instructor , and now teaches arnis and jujitsu . Graham Healy , 7th dan , trained in Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do in Queensland from 1977 to 1982 , was a Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 1st dan instructor , and now teaches boxing and taekwondo . Several other ex @-@ members have founded other martial art schools . 
 = = Training = = 
 Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do teaches the military style of taekwondo , closer to traditional martial art than modern martial sport in nature . Training consists of exercises that may be classified as : basics ( group drill exercises ; similar to <unk> in karate ) , destruction ( breaking ) , hyung ( patterns or forms ) , self @-@ defence , and sparring . Basics , destruction , hyung , and self @-@ defence are similar to equivalent exercises in other traditional martial art schools . Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do teaches the Chang Hon hyung . 
 Sparring takes three forms : three @-@ step sparring , one @-@ step sparring , and free sparring . Three @-@ step sparring and one @-@ step sparring are similar to equivalent exercises in ITF and WTF schools , but free sparring is different , having more in common with traditional karate sparring . Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do free sparring is unscored , unarmoured , and usually ' non @-@ contact ' in principle . Members typically achieve non @-@ contact sparring by two methods , whether separately or in combination : 
 The attacker consciously stops just short of hitting the training partner , while still executing attacks with full speed and power . The attacker has primary responsibility for non @-@ contact , at a given moment during sparring , and this typically occurs when one training partner has more experience than the other . This is normally the practice when one training partner is a beginner . 
 The defender actively avoids or blocks an incoming attack executed by the training partner . The defender has primary responsibility for non @-@ contact , at a given moment during sparring , and this typically occurs with training partners of similar experience . This is normally the practice when both training partners are in the senior ranks . 
 = = Ranks = = 
 Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do ranks are denoted by coloured belts , which indicate a member 's level of experience and responsibility within the school . There are ten coloured belt grades , or kup ranks ( <unk> ) , and nine black belt degrees , or dan ranks ( <unk> ) . Members start with white belts and progress through yellow , green , blue , brown , and then black . 
 Non @-@ black belts , from white through to brown , denote the kup ranks . ' Tips ' denoting odd @-@ numbered kup ranks are marked by a stripe of the higher colour near the right end ( from the wearer 's point of view ) of a belt of the lower colour . Black belts denote the dan ranks . A specific dan rank is represented by the number of white bars embroidered on the black belt . A black belt with no bars is a Junior Black Belt , a rank assigned to members considered too young ( typically 15 years or younger ) for 1st dan . Junior Black Belt members are tested for 1st dan when they reach 18 years of age . One bar denotes 1st dan , two bars denote 2nd dan , and so on . The end of the belt bearing the dan rank also carries embroidery noting the name of the master issuing the promotion ( Chong Chul Rhee , Chong Hyup Rhee , or Chong Yoon Rhee ) . 
 To attain Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do 1st dan ranking typically takes around four to five years of regular training . Progression through the school 's dan ranks is by invitation , and is usually slower than in other taekwondo schools . Invitation appears to be based on a combination of technique and knowledge . Promotion to 2nd dan might come after 10 – 15 years , in which time someone might have reached 4th dan ( ITF ) or 5th dan ( WTF ) . Promotion to 3rd dan might come after 20 – 25 years , in which time someone might have reached 6th dan ( ITF ) or 7th dan ( WTF ) . Several former Rhee Taekwon @-@ Do instructors who joined other taekwondo organisations received new ranks consistent with these approximations . 
 = Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough = 
 " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " is a single written and recorded by American singer Michael Jackson . Released under Epic Records on August 10 , 1979 , the song is the first single from Jackson 's fifth studio album , titled Off the Wall . The song was the first solo recording over which Jackson had creative control . 
 " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " was Jackson 's first single to hit # 1 on the United States Billboard Hot 100 chart in seven years , and his first solo # 1 on the Soul singles chart . It remained at # 1 for six weeks on Billboard 's Soul chart . The song was a worldwide success . Within a few months of release , the 45 was certified Gold , and eventually earned a Platinum certification for sales in excess of two million US copies . 
 " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " was well received by contemporary music critics . An accompanying music video for the song was released in October 1979 . The video shows Jackson dancing , as well as being shown in a triplicate , in different color backgrounds . The song also won Jackson his first solo Grammy and American Music Awards . " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " is considered to be the first song to showcase Jackson 's talent as a solo artist , both as a singer and songwriter . Since the song 's release , it has been covered by numerous musicians . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 In 1978 , Jackson starred as the Scarecrow in The Wiz , an urbanized retelling of L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz . After the filming , Jackson , who was still a member of The Jacksons , approached the film 's musical director , Quincy Jones , to ask if he knew of any producers to help with Jackson 's future solo endeavors . Jones suggested himself , and the two began work on Off the Wall . After listening to hundreds of demos , the two decided upon the ones to record . These included " Workin ' Day and Night " , " Get on the Floor " and " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . The song was recorded in Los Angeles recording studios . Jackson claimed that when the melody of " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " came to him , he couldn 't shake it off . He found himself humming and singing it while walking through the Jacksons ' Encino home . As Michael could not play , he had his brother Randy perform the melody on a piano in the family 's recording studio . When Jackson 's mother , Katherine Jackson , a devout Jehovah 's Witness , heard the song , she was shocked by the lyrical content , and felt that the title could be misconstrued as pertaining to sexual activity . Jackson reassured her that the song was not a reference to sex , but could mean whatever people wanted it to . Upon playing the recording to Jones , it was agreed that the song would be featured on Off the Wall . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " is credited as a disco @-@ funk song . The song 's full length on Off The Wall is just over 6 minutes . " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " introduced Jackson 's falsetto voice and vocal hiccups , which would become one of Jackson 's signature techniques . Along with Jackson 's vocal hiccups , Jackson 's voice in the song was described as having vocal tics — from the hiccups , a " grunt " , and " the ' <unk> ! ' " . " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " is played in the key of B Mixolydian and in common time signature . In the song , Jackson 's voice range is from G # 3 to F # 5 . Instruments for " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " are a 6 piece horn section ( 2 trumpets , alto sax , tenor sax , trombone , and baritone sax ) , string section ( arranged by Ben Wright ) , and 2 guitars , keyboards , bass , drums and percussion . The song 's tempo is upbeat at 120 beats per minute . " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " begins with Jackson speaking , before singing the song 's lyrics . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Don ’ t Stop ' til You Get Enough " was released on August 10 , 1979 , under Epic Records ; Jackson 's first solo album away from Motown Records . It was well received by contemporary critics . Stephen Holden , of Rolling Stone , described the song as " one of a handful of recent disco releases that works both as a dance track and as an aural extravaganza comparable to Earth , Wind and Fire 's ' Boogie Wonderland ' " . Within three months of its release , the song was at the top of the charts and had been certified gold . Reaching number one on Billboard 's Hot 100 and Hot Soul Singles charts in the United States ; it was Jackson 's first solo number one single since " Ben " , seven years prior . It remained atop of the Billboard Hot 100 for one week . It also reached the top of the charts in Australia , New Zealand , Norway and South Africa , and peaked at number three in the United Kingdom . " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " s was awarded platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America in 1989 . 
 In 2006 , " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " reached number 17 in the United Kingdom , following the Visionary campaign , whereby 20 of Jackson 's hit singles were reissued in several European countries . Following Jackson 's death in June 2009 , his music saw an increase in popularity . " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " peaked at number seven on Billboard 's Hot Digital Songs Chart , peaking at number nine on the charts issue date July 11 , 2009 . " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " charted within the top ten , placing at number nine , in France , and charted within the top 20 in Portugal and Switzerland , placing at number 18 and 20 . The song also charted at number 21 in Australia , 38 in the United Kingdom , and 50 in Sweden , respectively . " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " s least successful country was Japan , peaking at number 77 . " Don ’ t Stop ' til You Get Enough " was certified gold in Australia by Australian Recording Industry Association in 2009 for the shipments of 35 @,@ 000 units . 
 " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " earned Jackson his first solo Grammy Award , winning Best Male R & B Vocal Performance at the 1980 Grammy Awards . It was also nominated for Best Disco Recording . The song also received Favorite Soul / R & B Single at the 1980 American Music Awards . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " was directed and produced by Nick Saxton and made its world premiere in October 1979 . It was Jackson 's first music video as a solo artist . The music video shows a smiling Jackson dancing and singing " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " in a black and white tuxedo with a black bow tie while appearing chroma keyed over a background of abstract geometric figures . At one stage , Jackson is seen dancing in triplicate , which was considered innovative at the time . 
 The music video was included on the video albums : Video Greatest Hits - HIStory , Number Ones and Michael Jackson 's Vision . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Michael Jackson performed this song on The Jacksons ' Destiny Tour on the second leg , as well as the Triumph Tour . During the ' ' Victory Tour ' ' and the first leg of the Bad Tour , Michael would sing lines from the song while performing " Shake Your Body ( Down to the Ground ) " . Michael also performed this song as part of the " Off the Wall Medley " on his HIStory World Tour , but only on certain concerts . Jackson was also going to perform it for the This Is It concert series , but the shows were cancelled due to his death . 
 = = Michael Jackson : The Experience = = 
 The song is featured in the video game Michael Jackson : The Experience . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " has been covered by multiple artists since its release in 1979 . 
 In 1980 : A reggae version was released by Derrick <unk> & Trinity as a 12 " single . 
 In 1985 : the song was included in the second album of Dominican Juan Luis Guerra & 440 , <unk> y <unk> . This version is a merengue based on disco and rock sounds and was titled " Dame " ( Give me ) . 
 In 1999 : The song was covered by BB Band in 1999 on their album entitled , The Detroit Sound . 
 Chris Tucker and Adrienne Bailon recorded a new version of the song for the 2001 film Rush Hour 2 , which stars also Tucker . 
 In 2005 : Westlife performed the song live on their The Number Ones Tour . 
 In 2005 : The song was also covered by James Chance on his 2005 album , which included a recorded and live version . 
 In 2005 : " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " was covered by Melissa Forbes on her 2005 album entitled , No More Mondays . 
 In 2007 : American pop @-@ rock band Shivaree covered " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " on their 2007 album of cover versions , entitled , Tainted Love : Mating Calls and Fight Songs . 
 The song was covered by Rod Hanna , on his album of covers entitled Rod Hanna Live : <unk> 70 's Superhits - Rod Hanna . 
 In 2009 : Following Jackson 's death in June 2009 , the band U2 began their world tour , entitled U2 360 ° Tour , with renditions of two of Jackson 's songs , " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " and " Man In The Mirror " ( from Jackson 's 1987 album Bad ) on June 30 , 2009 . 
 Also in 2009 , Egyptian singer Tamer Hosny heavily sampled " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " in his song , " <unk> Fein ( Don 't Stop ) , which is featured on his album , " <unk> Hayati " . 
 Cookin Soul did a remix cover of the track , entitled , " Don ’ t Stop ‘ til You Get Enough feat . Jay @-@ Z " . The remixed version was performed during Cookin Souls <unk> show , and the track was made available as a digital download track . Amos Barshad and Nick Catucci , of NYMag.com , commented that the remix version was a " surprisingly great meeting of music and lyrics , connecting MJ and rap without overstating the shared DNA " . 
 Former rival Prince covered it on his 2011 " Welcome 2 America " tour . 
 Usher performed the song and a few other mix of songs as a tribute to Jackson on his OMG Tour . 
 Maroon 5 incorporated the song in its set list on the U.S. Overexposed Tour following the band 's opening song " Payphone " and is prior to the next song , " Makes Me Wonder . " 
 Anthony Strong 's jazzy version appears on the album On a Clear Day ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 James Montgomery of MTV noted that " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " , along with Off the Wall 's other three singles , " showcased ( or , more specifically , unleashed ) Jackson 's talents as a [ sic ] entertainer , a vocalist , a writer and , most importantly , as a leading man . " After Jackson 's death , AOL 's Radio Blog released a list , entitled " 10 Best Michael Jackson Songs " , which placed " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " at number ten on the list . 
 William Ruhlmann , author of The All @-@ Music Guide to Rock , praised " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " as an " irresistible dance track " . John Lewis , author of 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die , noted that the " jittery , frenetic opening track " is the centerpiece of Off the Wall . He concluded that " Jackson 's falsetto hollers and frisky yelps serve as an obbligato to the lead line , punctuating Ben Wright 's thrilling string arrangement and Jerry Hey 's tight horn charts " . Jason Elias , a writer for Allmusic , noted that " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " presents a " new Michael Jackson " that was " sexual , [ an ] adult , and aggressive . Elias commented that " Like the best of Jones ' late- ' 70s , early- ' 80s work , this [ song ] wasn 't quite disco , couldn 't be hardcore funk - it was an amalgam of styles with the all @-@ important pop accessibility . " 
 Jackson 's biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli described Jackson 's unveiling of a " sexy , playful falsetto " that " no one had ever heard from him before " . Nelson George stated that the argument for Jackson 's greatness began with the arrangements of " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . He noted that the percussion and backing vocals were " artfully choreographed " to " create drama and ecstasy on the dance floor " . He concluded , " It 's one thing to make a dance record — it is another to instill that track with an epic , celebratory quality as Michael does here " . James Montgomery of MTV noted that Off The Wall contained a " masterful mixture of fiery disco tracks " , specifying " Don 't Stop ' til You Get Enough " and " Workin ' Day and Night " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = 2006 Pangandaran earthquake and tsunami = 
 The 2006 Pangandaran earthquake and tsunami occurred on July 17 at 15 : 19 local time along a subduction zone off the coast of west and central Java , a large and densely populated island in the Indonesian archipelago . The shock had a moment magnitude of 7 @.@ 7 and a maximum perceived intensity of IV ( Light ) in Jakarta , the capital and largest city of Indonesia . There were no direct effects of the earthquake 's shaking due to its light to moderate intensity , and the large loss of life from the event was due to the resulting tsunami , which inundated a 300 km ( 190 mi ) portion of the Java coast that had been unaffected by the earlier 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami that was off the coast of Sumatra . The July 2006 earthquake was also centered in the Indian Ocean , 180 kilometers ( 110 mi ) from the coast of Java , and had a duration of more than three minutes . 
 An abnormally slow rupture at the Sunda Trench and a tsunami that was unusually strong relative to the size of the earthquake were both factors that led to it being categorized as a tsunami earthquake . Several thousand kilometers to the southeast , surges of several meters were observed in northwestern Australia , but in Java the tsunami <unk> ( height above normal sea level ) were typically 5 – 7 meters ( 16 – 23 ft ) and resulted in the deaths of more than 600 people . Other factors may have contributed to exceptionally high peak <unk> of 10 – 21 m ( 33 – 69 ft ) on the small and mostly uninhabited island of Nusa Kambangan , just to the east of the resort town of Pangandaran , where damage was heavy and a large loss of life occurred . Since the shock was felt with only moderate intensity well inland , and even less so at the shore , the surge arrived with little or no warning . Other factors contributed to the tsunami being largely undetected until it was too late and , although a tsunami watch was posted by an American tsunami warning center and a Japanese meteorological center , no information was delivered to people at the coast . 
 = = Tectonic setting = = 
 The island of Java is the most densely populated island on earth , and is vulnerable to both large earthquakes and volcanic eruptions , due to its location near the Sunda Trench , a convergent plate boundary where the Australian tectonic plate is subducting beneath Indonesia . Three great earthquakes occurred in the span of three years to the northwest on the Sumatra portion of the trench . The 2004 <unk> Sumatra – Andaman , the 2005 <unk> Nias – <unk> , and the 2007 <unk> <unk> earthquakes produced the largest release of elastic strain energy since the 1957 / 1964 series of shocks on the Aleutian / Alaska trench . 
 The southeastern ( Java ) portion of the Sunda Trench extends from the Sunda Strait in the west to Bali Basin in the east . The convergence of relatively old oceanic crust is occurring at a rate of 6 centimeters ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) per year in the west portion and 4 @.@ 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) per year in the east , and the dip of the Benioff Zone ( the angle of the zone of seismicity that defines the down @-@ going slab at a convergent boundary ) is around 50 ° and extends to a depth of approximately 600 kilometers ( 370 mi ) . Historical events that occurred before seismometers were operating in the region were the large to very large events of 1840 , 1867 , and 1875 , but unlike the northwestern Sumatra segment , no megathrust earthquake has occurred on the Java segment of the Sunda Trench in the last 300 years . 
 = = Earthquake = = 
 The earthquake was the result of thrust faulting at the Sunda Trench . A rupture length of approximately 200 kilometers ( 120 mi ) ( and an unusually low rupture velocity of 1 – 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 62 – 0 @.@ 93 mi ) per second ) resulted in a duration of about 185 seconds ( just over three minutes ) for the event . The shock was centered 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) from the trench , and about 180 kilometers ( 110 mi ) from the south coast of the island . A comparison was made with the earlier 2002 Sumatra earthquake , a <unk> <unk> earthquake of a similar size that also occurred along the Sunda Arc and at a shallow depth , but one that did not result in a tsunami . 
 The large and damaging tsunami that was generated was out of proportion relative to the size of the event , based on its short @-@ period body wave magnitude . The Indonesian Meteorological , <unk> , and Geophysical Agency assigned a magnitude of 6 @.@ 8 , and the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) reported a similar value of 6 @.@ 1 ( both body wave magnitude ) that were calculated from short @-@ period seismic waves ( 1 – 2 seconds in the case of the USGS ) . The USGS then presented a moment magnitude of 7 @.@ 2 that was calculated from 5 – 100 @-@ second surface waves , and Harvard University subsequently revealed that a moment magnitude of 7 @.@ 7 had been resolved based on even longer 150 @-@ second surface waves . 
 = = = Intensity = = = 
 In tsunami prone regions , strong earthquakes serve as familiar warnings , and this is especially true for earthquakes in Indonesia . Previous estimates of the tsunami hazard for the Java coastline may have minimized the risk to the area , and to the northwest along the Sumatran coast , the risk is substantially higher for tsunami , especially near Padang . Previous events along the coast of Java in 1921 and again in 1994 illustrate the need for an accurate assessment of the threat . The July 2006 earthquake had an unusually slow rupture velocity which resulted in minor shaking on land for around three minutes , but the intensity was very light relative to the size of the tsunami that followed . 
 The earthquake produced shaking at Pangandaran ( where the M6.3 2006 Yogyakarta earthquake was felt more strongly ) of intensity III – IV ( Weak – Light ) , intensity III at Cianjur , and II ( Weak ) at Yogyakarta . Further inland and farther from the epicenter , intensity IV shaking made tall buildings sway in Jakarta , but at some coastal villages where many of the casualties occurred , the shaking was not felt as strong . An informal survey of 67 people that were present at the time revealed that in at least eight cases , individuals stated that they did not feel the earthquake at all ( a typical <unk> earthquake would have been distinctly noticed at those distances ) . The unusually low felt intensities , along with the short period body wave magnitudes , were components of the event that narrowed its classification into that of a tsunami earthquake . 
 = = = Type = = = 
 Tsunami earthquakes can be influenced by both the presence of ( and lack of ) sediment at the subduction zone , and can be categorized as either aftershocks of megathrust earthquakes , like the M7 June 22 , 1932 Cuyutlán event in Mexico , or as standalone events that occur near the upper portion of a plate interface . Northwestern University professor Emile <unk> imparts that in the aftershock scenario , they can occur as a result of stress transfer from a mainshock to an accretionary wedge or a similar environment with " deficient mechanical properties " , and as standalone events they can occur in the presence of irregular contacts at the plate interface in a zone that lacks sediment . 
 One of the initial characterizations of tsunami earthquakes came from seismologist Hiroo <unk> in the early 1970s , and additional clarity materialized following the 1992 Nicaragua earthquake and tsunami , which was evaluated to have a surface wave magnitude of 7 @.@ 0 when analyzing short period seismic signals . When longer period signals of around 250 seconds were investigated , the shock was reevaluated to have a moment magnitude of 7 @.@ 6 , with a hypothesis that the slow nature of the slip of the event may have concealed its substantial extent . Sediment was thought to have contributed to a slower rupture , due to a lubrication effect at the plate interface , with the result being an earthquake signature that had abundant long period seismic signals , which could be an important factor in the tsunami @-@ generation process . 
 = = = Warning = = = 
 A tsunami warning system was not in operation at the time of the shock , but the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center ( operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in Hawaii ) and the Japan Meteorological Agency posted a tsunami watch , based on the occurrence of a M7.2 earthquake . The bulletin came within 30 minutes of the shock , but there was no means to transmit the warning to the people on the coast that needed to know . Many of those who felt the earthquake responded by moving away from the shore , but not with any urgency . The withdrawal of the sea that exposed an additional 5 – 10 meters ( 16 – 33 ft ) of beach created an even more significant warning sign , but in some locations wind waves on the sea effectively concealed the withdrawal that signalled the approach of the tsunami . 
 = = Tsunami = = 
 The earthquake and tsunami came on a Monday afternoon , a day after many more people were present on the beach , due to a major national holiday . The waves came a few tens of minutes after the shock ( and were a surprise , even to lifeguards ) and occurred when the sea level was approaching low tide which , along with the wind waves , masked the initial withdrawal of the sea as the tsunami drew near . Most portions of the south Java coast saw runup heights of 5 – 7 meters ( 16 – 23 ft ) , but evidence on the island of Nusa Kambangan indicated that a peak surge measuring 21 meters ( 69 ft ) had occurred there , suggesting to researchers that the possibility of a submarine landslide had contributed to the magnitude of the tsunami in that area . 
 = = = Runup = = = 
 A 300 km ( 190 mi ) portion of the southwest and south @-@ central Java coast was affected by the tsunami , and resulted in around 600 fatalities , with a high concentration in Pangandaran . Two thousand kilometers ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) to the southeast at the Steep Point area of western Australia , a runup of 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) was measured , which was comparable to a similar runup in northern Oman from the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami , though in that case it was at a much greater distance of 5 @,@ 000 kilometers ( 3 @,@ 100 mi ) . Within three weeks of the event , scientists from five different countries were on the ground in Java performing a survey of the affected areas , including gathering runup ( height above normal sea level ) and inundation ( distance the surge moved inland from the shore ) measurements . 
 The island of Nusa Kambangan ( 30 km × 4 km ( 18 @.@ 6 mi × 2 @.@ 5 mi ) ) sits on the south coast of Java and is separated from the main island by a narrow strait . It is a large and mostly uninhabited nature reserve , and is referred to as the Alcatraz of Indonesia , due to the three high security prisons that are located at the town of <unk> . Of all the measurements taken during the post @-@ tsunami survey , the highest runup heights ( 10 – 21 m ( 33 – 69 ft ) ) were seen on the island behind a beach , where hibiscus and pandanus plants , and large coconut trees were mangled and uprooted up to 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) from the shore . The ( sea floor ) bathymetry in the area supported a proposition that a canyon slope failure or an underwater landslide may have contributed to or focused the tsunami energy at that location . Nineteen farmers and one prisoner were killed there , but the deep water port of Cilacap ( just to the east ) was protected by the island , although one large moored vessel made ground contact during the initial 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 ft 11 in ) withdrawal . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 Since the earthquake caused only minor ground movement , and was only lightly felt , all the damage that occurred on the island was due to the tsunami . Types of buildings that were affected were timber / bamboo , brick traditional , and brick traditional with reinforced concrete . Semi @-@ permanent timber or bamboo structures that were based on a wooden frame were the most economical style of construction that were assessed following the disaster . A tsunami flow depth of 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) usually resulted in complete destruction of these types of structures . A group of scientists that evaluated the damage considered the unreinforced brick construction as weak , because the performance of homes constructed in that style did not fare much better than the timber / bamboo variety . Hotels and some houses and shops that were of reinforced brick construction were far better off , because units that were exposed to a flood depth of 3 – 4 meters ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) were considered repairable . 
 Many wooden cafes and shops within 20 meters ( 66 ft ) of the shore were completely removed by the tsunami at Pangandaran , and severe damage still occurred to unreinforced masonry that was within several hundred meters , but some hotels that were constructed well held up better . The villages of Batu Hiu and Batu Kara , both to the west of Pangandaran , experienced similar damage . Other severe damage was seen at <unk> village , <unk> , where all buildings had been removed down to their foundation within 150 meters ( 490 ft ) of the water line , and even 300 – 500 m ( 980 – 1 @,@ 640 ft ) further inland there were many buildings that were totally destroyed . Witnesses reported that waves were breaking several hundred meters inland at that location . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 Officials in Indonesia received information regarding the tsunami in the form of bulletins from the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center and the Japan Meteorological Agency , but wanted to avoid panic , and did not attempt to disseminate the advisories to the public . Virtually no time was available to make that sort of effort ( had the intention been to communicate the danger with the public ) because some community leaders were sent text messages with pertinent information only minutes prior to the arrival of the first waves . The tsunami affected the coast of Java comprising mostly fishing villages and beach resorts that were unscathed following the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami , and was also only several hundred kilometers distant from the region that saw heavy destruction just several months prior during the 2006 Yogyakarta earthquake , where more than 6 @,@ 000 were killed . 
 Trained research teams were already on the ground on Java responding to the May earthquake and began a survey of more than one hundred Muslim farmers , plantation laborers , and fishermen ( or those with fishing @-@ related occupations ) that were affected by the tsunami . Almost two thirds of the group reported that they lived in permanent structures made of wood , brick , or cement , while the remainder lived in semi @-@ permanent facilities made from earth or stone . The government was cited as the first responder for water , relocation and medical assistance , and helping with the deceased . For rescue , shelter , clothing , and locating missing people , individuals were listed as the primary provider , but 100 % of those surveyed replied that the government should be responsible for relief . Most of those requiring aid stated that they were given effective assistance within 48 hours and that they were satisfied with the help . 
 = Serval = 
 The serval / <unk> / ( Leptailurus serval ) , also known as the <unk> , is a wild cat found in Africa . The sole member of the genus Leptailurus , it was first described by German naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in 1776 . Eighteen subspecies are recognised . The serval is a slender , medium @-@ sized cat that stands 54 – 62 centimetres ( 21 – 24 in ) at the shoulder and weighs 8 – 18 kilograms ( 18 – 40 lb ) . It is characterised by a small head , large ears , a golden @-@ yellow to buff coat spotted and striped with black , and a short , black @-@ tipped tail . The serval has the longest legs of any cat relative to its body size . 
 Active in the day as well as at night , servals tend to be solitary with minimal social interaction . Both sexes establish highly overlapping home ranges of 10 to 32 square kilometres ( 3 @.@ 9 to 12 @.@ 4 sq mi ) , and mark them with excrement and saliva . Servals are omnivores – they prey on rodents ( particularly vlei rats ) , small birds , frogs , insects and reptiles , and are also known to consume grasses . The serval uses its sense of hearing to locate the prey ; to kill small prey , it leaps over 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) above the ground to land on the prey on its forefeet , and finally kills it with a bite on the neck or the head . Mating takes place at different times of the year in different parts of their range , but typically once or twice a year in an area . After a gestational period of two to three months , a litter of one to four is born . Weaning occurs at one month , and kittens begin hunting on their own at six months . The juveniles leave their mother at 12 months . 
 The serval prefers areas with cover such as reeds and tall grasses and proximity to water bodies , such as wetlands and savannahs . It is rare in northern Africa and the Sahel , but widespread in southern Africa . The International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) classifies the serval as least concern . It occurs in protected areas across its range , and hunting of servals is either prohibited or regulated in several countries . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The scientific name of the serval is Leptailurus serval . It is the sole member of its genus and is placed under the family Felidae . The species was first described by German naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber as Felis serval in the journal Die <unk> in Abbildungen nach der Natur mit Beschreibungen in 1776 . In 1858 , Russian naturalist Nikolai Severtzov proposed the genus Leptailurus for the serval , a name constructed from Greek roots meaning " slender cat " . The name " serval " could have been derived from the Medieval Latin words Lupus <unk> ( " deer @-@ like wolf " ) or from the Portuguese Lobos <unk> ( referring to the lynx ) . The first recorded use of this name dates back to 1771 . Another name for the serval is " <unk> " . 
 In the 19th and 20th centuries , some taxonomists inspected serval skins and identified two species on the basis of coat pattern : Felis serval ( serval ) , with large , pronounced spots , and F. <unk> or F. ornata ( <unk> cat ) , marked by freckle @-@ sized dots . F. <unk> was first described in 1839 by Irish naturalist William Ogilby from Sierra Leone ; in 1867 , British zoologist John Edward Gray described F. herschelii from an Indian skin , which was probably the same as the <unk> cat . In 1907 , British zoologist Reginald Innes Pocock commented that the two forms should be considered independent species , but reverted from this in 1917 . Eventually , the two forms came to be recognised as the same species . Another form , F. himalayanus ( Himalayan serval ) , was described from a skin procured from the Himalayan region ; however , Scottish naturalist William Jardine noted in The Naturalist 's Library ( 1843 ) that no such specimen had been identified by him or his colleagues , and that it differed considerably from the common serval . In 1944 , Pocock identified three races of the serval from northern Africa . 
 The phylogenetic relationships of the serval have remained in dispute ; in 1997 , palaeontologists M. C. McKenna and S. K. Bell classified Leptailurus as a subgenus of Felis , while others like O. R. P. <unk> @-@ Edmonds ( of the Technical University of Munich ) have grouped it with Felis , Lynx and Caracal . Studies in the 2000s and the 2010s show that the serval , along with the caracal and the African golden cat , forms one of the eight lineages of Felidae . According to a 2006 genetic study , the Caracal lineage came into existence 8 @.@ 5 mya , and the ancestor of this lineage arrived in Africa 8 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 6 mya . 
 Up to 18 subspecies are currently recognised , although some authors recognize fewer : 
 The 2006 study gave the phylogenetic relationships of the serval as follows : 
 = = Hybrid = = 
 On 7 April 1986 , a healthy hybrid kitten between a male serval and a female domestic cat was born ; this kitten was larger than a typical domestic kitten and resembled its father in its coat pattern . It appeared to have inherited a few domestic traits , such as tameness , from its mother . The hybrid cat may have a doglike habit of following its owner about , and can be a good swimmer . Over the years , savannah cats have gained popularity as pets . 
 = = Description = = 
 The serval is a slender , medium @-@ sized cat ; it stands 54 – 62 centimetres ( 21 – 24 in ) at the shoulder and weighs 8 – 18 kilograms ( 18 – 40 lb ) , but females tend to be lighter . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically between 67 and 100 centimetres ( 26 and 39 in ) . Males tend to be sturdier than females . Prominent characteristics include the small head , large ears , spotted and striped coat , long legs and a black @-@ tipped tail that is around 30 centimetres ( 12 in ) long . In fact , the serval has the longest legs of any cat relative to its body size , likely due to the greatly elongated metatarsal bones in the feet . The toes are elongated as well , and unusually mobile . 
 The coat is basically golden @-@ yellow to buff , and extensively marked with black spots and stripes . The spots show great variation in size . Melanistic servals are also known . Facial features include the brownish or greenish eyes , white whiskers on the snout and near the ears , ears as large as those of a domestic cat ( but large relative to the size of the head ) and black on the back with a white horizontal band in the middle , whitish chin , and spots and streaks on the cheeks and the forehead . Three to four black stripes run from the back of the head onto the shoulders , and then break into rows of spots . The white underbelly has dense and fluffy basal fur , and the soft guard hairs ( the layer of fur protecting the basal fur ) are 5 – 10 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long . Guard hairs are up to 3 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) long on the neck , back and the flanks , and are merely 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long on the face . The closely set ears are black on the back with a horizontal white band ; the ears can rotate up to 180 degrees independently of each other . The serval has a good sense of smell , hearing and vision . 
 The serval is similar to the sympatric caracal , but has a narrower spoor , a rounder skull , and lacks its prominent ear tufts . The African golden cat is darker , with different cranial features . It resembles the cheetah in its build and coat pattern , though not in size . The serval shares its adaptations to its marshy habitat with the jungle cat ; both cats have large and sharp ears that help in locating the prey efficiently , and their long legs raise them above muddy ground and water . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The serval is active in the day as well as at night ; activity might peak in early morning , around twilight and at midnight . Servals might be active for a longer time on cool or rainy days . During the hot midday , they rest or groom themselves in the shade of bushes and grasses . Servals remain cautious of their vicinity , though they may be less alert when no large carnivores or prey animals are around . Serval walk as much as 2 – 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 5 mi ) every night . Servals will often use special trails to reach certain hunting areas . A solitary animal , there is little social interaction among servals except in the mating season , when pairs of opposite sexes may stay together . The only long @-@ lasting bond appears to be of the mother and her cubs , which leave their mother only when they are a year old . 
 Both males and females establish home ranges , and are most active only in certain regions ( ' core areas ' ) within them . The area of these ranges can vary from 10 to 32 square kilometres ( 3 @.@ 9 to 12 @.@ 4 sq mi ) ; prey density , availability of cover and human interference could be significant factors in determining their size . Home ranges might overlap extensively , but occupants show minimal interaction . Aggressive encounters are rare , as servals appear to mutually avoid one another rather than fight and defend their ranges . Agonistic behaviour involves vertical movement of the head ( contrary to the horizontal movement observed in other cats ) , raising the hair and the tail , displaying the teeth and the white band on the ears , and yowling . Individuals mark their ranges and preferred paths by spraying urine on nearby vegetation , dropping scats along the way , and rubbing their mouth on grasses or the ground while releasing saliva . Servals tend to be sedentary , shifting only a few kilometres away even if they leave their range . 
 The serval is vulnerable to <unk> and wild dogs . It will seek cover to escape their view , and , if the predator is very close , immediately flee in long leaps , changing its direction frequently and with the tail raised . The serval is an efficient , though not frequent , climber ; an individual was observed to have climbed a tree to a height of more than 9 metres ( 30 ft ) to escape dogs . Like many cats , the serval is able to purr ; it also has a high @-@ pitched chirp , and can hiss , cackle , growl , grunt and meow . 
 = = = Hunting and diet = = = 
 The serval is an omnivore that preys on rodents ( particularly vlei rats ) , small birds , frogs , insects and reptiles , and also feeds on grasses ( that can facilitate digestion or act as an emetic ) . Up to 90 percent of the preyed animals weigh less than 200 grams ( 7 @.@ 1 oz ) ; larger prey , such as duikers , hares , flamingoes and young antelopes , may occasionally be hunted . Several studies have estimated the percentage of rodents in the diet at 80 to 97 percent . Apart from vlei rats , other rodents recorded frequently in the diet include the African grass rat , African pygmy mouse and multimammate mice . 
 Servals locate prey by their strong sense of hearing . To kill small prey , the serval will slowly stalk it , then pounce on it with the forefeet directed toward the chest , and finally land on it with its forelegs outstretched . The prey , receiving a blow from one or both of the serval 's forepaws , is incapacitated , and the serval gives it a bite on the head or the neck and immediately swallows it . Snakes are dealt more blows and even bites , and may be consumed even as they are moving . Larger prey , such as larger birds , are killed by a sprint followed by a leap to catch them as they are trying to flee , and are eaten slowly . Servals have been observed caching large kills to be consumed later by concealing them in dead leaves and grasses . Servals typically get rid of the internal organs of rodents while eating , and pluck feathers from birds before consuming them . During a leap , a serval can reach more than 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) above the ground and cover a horizontal distance of up to 3 @.@ 6 metres ( 12 ft ) ; the cat can even change direction mid @-@ air . Servals appear to be efficient hunters ; a study in Ngorongoro showed that servals were successful in half of their hunting attempts , regardless of the time of hunting , and a mother serval was found to have a success rate of 62 % . The number of kills in a 24 @-@ hour period averaged 15 to 16 . Scavenging has been observed , but very rarely . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Both sexes become sexually mature when they are one to two years old . Oestrus in females lasts one to four days ; it typically occurs once or twice a year , though it can occur three or four times a year if the mother loses her litters . Observations of captive servals suggest that when a female enters oestrus , the rate of urine @-@ marking increases in her as well as the males in her vicinity . Zoologist Jonathan Kingdon described the behaviour of a female serval in oestrus in his 1997 book East African Mammals . He noted that she would roam restlessly , spray urine frequently holding her vibrating tail in a vertical manner , rub her head near the place she has marked , salivate continuously , give out sharp and short " miaow " s that can be heard for quite a distance , and rub her mouth and cheeks against the face of an approaching male . The time when mating takes place varies geographically ; births peak in winter in Botswana , and toward the end of the dry season in the Ngorongoro Crater . A trend generally observed across the range is that births precede the breeding season of <unk> rodents . 
 Gestation lasts for two to three months , following which a litter of one to four kittens is born . Births take place in secluded areas , for example in dense vegetation or burrows abandoned by aardvarks and porcupines . Blind at birth , newborn weigh nearly 250 grams ( 8 @.@ 8 oz ) and have soft , woolly hair ( greyer than in adults ) and unclear markings . The eyes open after nine to thirteen days . Weaning begins after a month of birth ; the mother brings small kills to her kittens and calls out to them as she approaches the " den " . A mother with young kittens rests for a notably lesser time and has to spend almost twice the time and energy for hunting than do other servals . If disturbed , the mother will shift her kittens one by one to a more secure place . Kittens eventually start accompanying their mother to hunts . At around six months , they acquire their permanent canines and begin to hunt themselves ; they leave their mother at about 12 months of age . They may reach sexual maturity from 12 to 25 months of age . Life expectancy is about 10 years in the wild , and up to 20 years in captivity . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The serval prefers areas with cover , such as reeds and tall grasses , and proximity to water bodies , such as wetlands and savannahs . It typically shuns rainforests and arid areas , though it can occur in semi @-@ arid areas and cork oak forests in northern Africa , close to the Mediterranean Sea . Servals also occur on grasslands , moorlands and bamboo thickets at high altitudes ; they are known to occur up to 3 @,@ 800 metres ( 12 @,@ 500 ft ) above the sea level on Mount Kilimanjaro . In the <unk> National Park ( Zambia ) , the population density was recorded as 0 @.@ 1 individual per square kilometre in 2011 . 
 The serval is confined to Africa – it is rare in northern Africa and the Sahel , but widespread in southern Africa , where their range is reportedly expanding . In northern Africa , the serval is known only from Morocco and has been reintroduced in Tunisia , but is feared to be extinct in Algeria . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The IUCN ( International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ) lists the serval as least concern ; the animal is also included in CITES Appendix II . A major threat to the survival of the serval include the degradation of wetlands and grasslands . Trade of serval skins , though on the decline , still occurs in countries such as Benin and Senegal . In western Africa , the serval has significance in traditional medicine . <unk> often kill servals to protect their animals , though servals generally do not prey upon livestock . 
 Servals occur in several protected areas across its range . Hunting of servals is prohibited in Algeria , Botswana , Congo , Kenya , Liberia , Morocco , Mozambique , Nigeria , Rwanda , Cape Province ( South Africa ) , and Tunisia ; regulations apply in Angola , Burkina Faso , Central African Republic , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Ghana , Malawi , Senegal , Sierra Leone , Somalia , Tanzania , Togo and Zambia . 
 = = Relationship with human beings = = 
 The association of servals with human beings dates to the time of Ancient Egypt . Servals are depicted as gifts or traded objects from Nubia in Egyptian art . Servals are common pets in Europe , but became popular in the Americas only in the twentieth century . 
 = Gregor the Overlander = 
 Gregor the Overlander is a children 's novel by Suzanne Collins containing elements of high fantasy . It was published in 2003 and is the first book of The Underland Chronicles . It was received well by critics , and was listed as one of New York Public Library 's 100 Books for Reading and Sharing . It was featured by the U.S. National Public Radio in 2005 . Scholastic has rated the book 's " grade level equivalent " as 4 @.@ 9 and the book 's <unk> score as <unk> , making it reading @-@ level @-@ appropriate for the average fourth or fifth grader . 
 The novel has been published in several languages and is available as both an audiobook and ebook . Its United Kingdom edition was published under the alternate title Gregor and the Rats of the Underland . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Eleven @-@ year @-@ old Gregor is left home alone in his family 's New York City apartment to watch his sisters and grandmother . When Gregor 's baby sister Boots falls through an old air duct grate in the building 's basement , he dives in after her . The two fall miles below into the Underland : a subterranean world home to humans with near @-@ translucent skin ; giant sentient bats , rodents , and insects ; and an escalating conflict between the human city of Regalia and the rats ' King Gorger . They meet several " Underlanders " , among them the Regalians ' crown princess Luxa , her cousin Henry , and the bats who are " bonded " to them . At first , Gregor wants only to return home , but when he is attacked by two rats during an escape attempt and saved by the Underlanders , he inadvertently brings the conflict between the two groups to a head . 
 It is then that he learns the real reason for the rats ' hatred of Overlanders : a mysterious prophecy written by the human colony 's founder Bartholomew of Sandwich hints that an Overland " warrior " will stop an attempt by the rats to take over the underground realm once and for all . The Regalian council believes Gregor to be this warrior , and tries to convince him to undertake the quest mentioned in the " Prophecy of Gray " . Though he sympathizes , Gregor is reluctant to help until he learns a surprising fact : his father , who disappeared unexpectedly over two years before , had actually fallen down into Regalia just like Gregor and Boots and been taken prisoner by the rats . Gregor , his sister , and a group of Regalians go on a journey to rescue Gregor 's father and recruit allies for a war against the rats . 
 The quest group is challenged to successfully recruit allies for the Regalians , and then journeys to find Gregor 's dad emaciated and tortured in the personal prison of King Gorger . When the rat king discovers their rescue attempt , Henry reveals that he has been helping the rats all along , hoping to ally them with the Regalians and conquer the entire Underland . During the questers ' attempt to escape , Gregor sacrifices himself to lure the rats ' attack force — King Gorger and Henry among them — off the edge of a cliff . Henry 's bat Ares , who had no knowledge of his bond 's treachery , chooses to save Gregor rather than Henry as they fall . When the few remaining quest members make it back to Regalia , Luxa and her family are devastated , both because of Henry 's treason and death and because Ares has been sentenced to banishment ( essentially a death sentence in the Underland ) for allowing his bond to die . Gregor saves his life by using his status as the " warrior " to form a new bond with him . When things have settled down somewhat and the Regalian doctors have done all they can for his father , Gregor and his family return to the surface . 
 = = = The Prophecy of Gray = = = 
 Beware , Underlanders , time hangs by a <unk> hunters are hunted , white water runs <unk> <unk> will strike to extinguish the <unk> hope of the hopeless resides in a quest . 
 Meaning : The usually uneasy balance of power in the Underland is in flux , with the rats ' king planning to launch an attack against the other species in the Underland . The phrase " white water runs red " refers specifically to how the humans deposit the bodies of two rats who try to kill Gregor into a fast @-@ flowing river beneath the Regalian palace . " Hope of the hopeless " may be interpreted as a reference to Gregor , who refuses to " allow himself to think about the future at all " , because it makes him sad that he has lost his father . 
 An Overlander warrior , a son of the sun , May bring us back light , he may bring us back <unk> gather your neighbors and follow his <unk> rats will most surely devour us all . 
 Meaning : Gregor is an Overlander and the son of another fallen Overlander ( thus a " son " of the " sun " , in multiple ways ) . He brings the Regalians " light " ( an Underland idiom for " life " ) by killing King Gorger and the traitor Henry . The humans ally themselves with the other species of their world , warding off an attack by the rats , who are carnivores and occasionally cannibalistic . 
 Two over , two under , of royal descent , Two fliers , two crawlers , two spinners <unk> <unk> beside and one lost up <unk> eight will be left when we count up the dead . 
 Meaning : Gregor and Boots ; Luxa and Henry ; the bats Ares and Aurora ; two giant cockroaches named Temp and Tick ; the spiders Gox and Treflex ; and the rat <unk> all journey on a quest to find the " one lost up ahead " : Gregor 's dad . Out of the original twelve , Tick , Treflex , Gox , and Henry all die during the quest . 
 The last who will die must decide where he <unk> fate of the eight is contained in his <unk> bid him take care , bid him look where he leaps , As life may be death , and death life again reaps . 
 Meaning : Henry , the last " <unk> " to die , decides that he is a traitor to the humans , and seals his fate by failing to notice as Gregor leads him off a cliff . He may be interpreted as controlling the " fate of the eight " because of his powerful connection with the rats , whom he could have manipulated had he lived . The final line may have many different meanings ; among them may be a hint about how miserable Luxa is even though she lives , as Henry was her best friend until he had his life " reaped " . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 = = = = Quest Members = = = = 
 Gregor : An ordinary eleven @-@ year @-@ old boy from New York City , said to be the warrior mentioned in " The Prophecy of Gray " . He is later bonded to Ares the flier . 
 Boots ( Margaret ) : Boots is Gregor 's two @-@ year @-@ old sister . She accidentally discovers the entrance to the Underland . She befriends the crawlers immediately and is the only reason they decide to come on the quest . 
 Luxa : The future queen of the Underland , about the same age as Gregor . Her parents were killed by rats shortly after Henry 's . She is bonded to Aurora the flier . 
 Henry : Luxa 's cousin , next in line to the throne after her . He wants to ally with the rats to conquer the " weak " species of the Underland . He dies chasing Gregor off the edge of a cliff , believing his bond Ares would always come catch him . 
 <unk> : A <unk> ( rat ) with deadly fighting skills and intelligence ; <unk> asks him to help the quest group into the rats ' domain . 
 Temp : One of two crawlers ( cockroaches ) to join the quest . He is one of the first crawlers who encounters Boots and her brother and befriends the two . 
 Tick : A friend of Temp who sacrifices herself to save Boots from a group of rats . 
 Ares : A large black flier ( bat ) bonded to Henry who chooses to save Gregor rather than his bond when the two fall off a cliff . He does not know of Henry 's treachery until after the fact , and so Gregor decides to bond with him to save him from banishment . 
 Aurora : A flier who is bonded to Luxa . She has a golden coat . 
 Gox and Treflex : Two spinners ( spiders ) who help the quest group . 
 Gregor 's dad : Though never named , Gregor 's father is an important member of the quest because it is he the group goes to find and rescue . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Several editions of the novel have been published since the first in 2003 , each with new or adapted cover art . To date , editions have appeared in German , French , Spanish , <unk> , Italian , Polish , Greek , Dutch , Finnish , and Chinese . Scholastic has also licensed the novel 's rights to publishers in several other languages . In 2006 The Chicken House produced yet another edition , distributed in the UK by Gardners Books . This edition was published under the alternate title Gregor and the Rats of the Underland . 
 The novel was available as an ebook as early as 2010 , and as part of a boxed set . An audiobook edition was published December 13 , 2005 , read by actor and narrator Paul Boehmer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gregor the Overlander has received much critical acclaim , primarily for its new treatment of common themes in fantasy . School Library Journal called it " an engrossing adventure for fantasy fans and for those new to the genre . " Common Sense Media gave it a 5 / 5 and credited the book 's " strong characters , vivid descriptions , flawless pacing , breathless excitement , laughs and scares , and a vision that makes this fantasy very different . " Readers have also praised the novel ; Jane <unk> , an Amazon Reviewer , stated that , " Rats and other wonderfully creepy creatures fill the story 's dark underworld , but what makes this book so wonderful is how human it is . " A. Reid , also from Amazon.com , praised the believable characters , saying , " Gregor is one of the most warmly believable characters I 've encountered in a children 's novel in a long time . " As of August 2015 , users on Amazon.com had given the book a rating of 4 @.@ 5 stars out of 5 , and Barnes & Noble reviews awarded it a total of 4 @.@ 4 stars . 
 The book has also been praised for covering political themes , such as war and genocide , while still maintaining an adventurous feeling . Collins herself has stated that " she spent hours ... plotting strategic alliances that would make military sense " in a way that kept such themes accessible for younger audiences . Publishers Weekly 's review of the novel was " starred " , an honor reserved for books of " exceptional merit " . The reviewer stated , " Collins does a grand job of world @-@ building , with a fine economy of words @-@ no unnecessary details bog down either the setting or the invigorating story . In her world , a child singing " Patty @-@ Cake " can change the course of history and a stoic rat can mourn the fact that although he is able to read , he cannot write because he has no thumb . Unlike Gregor who cannot wait to leave , readers will likely find it to be a fantastically engaging place . " 
 Despite the mainly positive reviews , the novel has received some negative criticism . One critical review by Children 's Literature writer Tina Gregory points out that " the novel lacks at certain points necessary descriptive details of the characters and settings . For instance , the descriptions of Regalia , the Underland city , and many of the book 's characters should be so distinct that we visualize them . " The same School Library Journal review which praised the novel 's " exciting scenes and cliff @-@ hanger chapters " also had this to say : " Gregor is not the most compelling figure at first , but as the story progresses he becomes more interesting , maturing through the challenges he faces . " 
 Gregor the Overlander was named a Kirkus Reviews Editors ' Choice and placed third for the Nutmeg Children 's Book Award in 2006 in the intermediate category . It was also nominated for the Kansas William Allen White Children 's Book Award , the Pacific Northwest Young Reader 's Choice Award , and several other awards . It won the Pennsylvania Young Readers ' Choice Award for 2005 – 2006 and was the first runner @-@ up for the Texas Bluebonnet Award . 
 = Cool World = 
 Cool World is a 1992 American live @-@ action / animated fantasy film directed by Ralph Bakshi , and starring Kim Basinger , Gabriel Byrne and Brad Pitt . It tells the story of a cartoonist who finds himself in the animated world he thinks he created , and is seduced by one of the characters , a comic strip vamp who wants to be real . Cool World marked Bakshi 's return to feature films after nine years . The film was originally pitched as an animated horror film about an underground cartoonist who fathers an illegitimate half @-@ real / half @-@ cartoon daughter , who hates herself for what she is and tries to kill him . 
 During production , Bakshi 's original screenplay was scrapped by producer Frank Mancuso , Jr. and heavily rewritten by Michael Grais and Mark Victor in secret . Reviews praised the film 's visuals , but criticized the story and characters , as well as the combination of live @-@ action and animation , which some critics felt was unconvincing . The film would eventually gross only half its production budget . It was filmed in 1991 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1945 Las Vegas , World War II veteran Frank Harris ( Brad Pitt ) returns to his mother . Riding on a motorcycle that he won in Italy during his service , Frank and his mother are struck by a drunk couple . Frank survives , but his mother dies . As an ambulance takes her away , Frank is transported to " Cool World " , an animated city of surrealistic landscapes and random cartoon violence . He was inadvertently teleported by Dr. Vincent Whiskers ( Maurice LaMarche ) , a doctor who created a " spike " that was supposed to take him to the real world , but brought Frank to Cool World instead . Whiskers finds Frank useful enough to run things in the Cool World while he is gone to the real world . 
 Forty seven years later , Jack Deebs ( Gabriel Byrne ) , a cartoonist , is detained after murdering a man he found in bed with his wife . He creates the highly acclaimed comic book series Cool World , which features the femme fatale Holli Would ( Kim Basinger ) . On the night before his release , Holli summons Jack into the Cool World , and he sees Holli dance in the local dance club . After he sees her dance , Jack is teleported back to the real world . It turns out that Holli wants to enter the real world , but is forbidden to do so by Frank , who is now a police officer in the Cool World . 
 After he is released , Jack is transported to the Cool World once again and meets Holli and her goons , who have been encouraging his misled beliefs that he himself created the Cool World . In reality , Holli has simply been bringing him there , and Jack created his comic book series on what he 's seen there , which he initially believed were his own dreams . Meanwhile , Frank is about to go on a date with his longtime girlfriend Lonette ( Candi Milo ) , when his partner Nails ( Charlie Adler ) , a spider , tells him about Jack 's presence . Frank confronts Jack at the local Slash Club , confiscating his fountain pen , informing him that it 's a dangerous weapon in the Cool World . Frank then tells Jack the truth : the Cool World has existed long before he created the comic series and <unk> him that " noids " , real humans from the real world , are not allowed to have sex with " doodles " , the cartoon inhabitants of the Cool World . He further advises Jack not to get involved with Holli before Jack returns to the real world . 
 Holli brings Jack back into the Cool World , where he is taken to Holli 's apartment . Holli and Jack have sex , transforming Holli into a real human . While Frank attempts to mend his relationship with Lonette , he temporarily leaves detective duties to Nails . Nails receives a call from an informant named Sparks , who tells him that Jack and Holli have had sex and are leaving for the real world . Nails decides that he can do this on his own and goes off to stop Holli . Nails attempts to stop her from leaving the Cool World , but Holli uses Jack 's fountain pen to suck Nails in . Jack and Holli return to the real world , where Holli sings " Let 's Make Love " at a nightclub with Frank Sinatra , Jr .. Frank discovers that Nails is gone and decides to venture into the real world to pursue Jack and Holli . Meanwhile , Jack and Holli have started to flicker between real and doodle states . While contemplating their situation , Holli tells Jack about the " Spike of Power " , an artifact placed on the top of a Las Vegas casino by a doodle who crossed into the real world . When Jack displays skepticism about Holli and the idea , Holli abandons him to search for the spike on her own . 
 Frank meets up with Jack later on , explaining that the flickering both Jack and Holli have been experiencing is the disappearance of both worlds . They decide to team up and stop Holli from removing the spike . They get Jennifer ( Michele Abrams ) , the daughter of Jack 's neighbor to drive them to the casino , and on the way , Frank explains that it was Doc Whiskers who crossed worlds and put the spike on the top of the hotel and if it were removed , it could potentially destroy both the real world and the Cool World . 
 Holli is escorted out of the casino for not spending any money , all the while asking about Vegas Vinnie , which is the alias of Doc Whiskers . When she spots the Doc , she tells him that she couldn 't find him , but when she starts to flicker between real human and doodle state again , she begins to become suspicious and starts to see through Doc 's disguise and shakes him out of it , revealing his identity . Doc tries to convince Holli not to get the Spike of Power , but Holli becomes enraged and threatens Doc Whiskers with the fountain pen . When Frank , Jack , and Jennifer get to the destination , Frank pursues Holli on the casino , while Jack and Jennifer put Doc Whiskers back together after being popped by Holli 's pen . Frank chases after Holli throughout the hotel , while she 's still flickering from real to doodle state . While in doodle form , Holli pushes Frank off the building to his death . Holli finds and takes the Spike of Power , transforming her , Jack , and everyone in Vegas into doodles and opening a gateway between the two worlds , releasing numerous monstrous doodles . Transformed into a superhero doodle , Jack gets a hold of the spike . Holli tries to seduce it away from Jack , but instead he returns the Spike of Power to its place , trapping him , Holli and the rest of the doodles in Cool World . 
 Meanwhile , Nails escapes from Holli 's pen and both he and Doc Whiskers return Frank 's body to Cool World . Lonette discovers that Holli was a doodle when she killed Frank and explains when a noid is killed by a doodle , he is reborn in Cool World as a doodle . He is transformed into a doodle , allowing him to pursue his relationship with Lonette . Meanwhile , Jack and Holli are last seen together in the panels of a comic book . Jack ( still a superhero doodle ) is planning out how they will live , much to Holli 's dismay . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Live action actors 
 Kim Basinger as Holli Would , a femme fatale and who wishes to be real in the real world . 
 Gabriel Byrne as Jack Deebs , the cartoonist seemingly responsible for the creation of Cool World . 
 Brad Pitt as Detective Frank Harris , a Cool World police detective who is bent on catching Holli . 
 Deirdre O 'Connell as Isabelle Malley 
 Frank Sinatra , Jr. as Himself 
 Michele Abrams as Jennifer Malley 
 Janni <unk> – Lowen as Agatha Rose Harris 
 Voice actors 
 Charlie Adler as Nails , an anthropomorphic spider who serves as Frank 's partner . He actually has four arms and two legs . 
 Candi Milo as Lonette / Bob 
 Joey <unk> as <unk> No. 1 / Slash / Holli 's Door 
 Michael Lally as Sparks 
 Maurice LaMarche as <unk> No. 2 / Mash / Dr. Vincent " Vegas Vinnie " Whiskers / Super Jack Deebs 
 Patrick Pinney as Chico the bouncer 
 Gregory <unk> as Bash 
 Frank Welker as a telephone 
 <unk> Jennings as <unk> Bunny 
 Marilyn Monroe ( archival footage ) 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1990 , Ralph Bakshi decided that it was time to make another animated film . According to Bakshi , " I made 1 @,@ 500 bucks in 10 years of painting ; I thought it would be nice to pick up a piece of change . So I called my lawyer , who was still speaking to me because no one ever leaves Hollywood , and asked him where I should go to sell a movie . " Bakshi pitched Cool World to Paramount Pictures ( where Bakshi had worked as the final head of the studio 's animation division ) as an animated horror film . The concept of the film involved a cartoon and live action human having sex and conceiving a hybrid child who visits the real world to murder the father who abandoned her . Bakshi states that Paramount Pictures " bought the idea in ten seconds " . 
 As the sets were being built in Las Vegas , producer Frank Mancuso , Jr . , son of Paramount president Frank Mancuso , Sr. , had the screenplay rewritten in secret , and gave Bakshi a new screenplay by screenwriters Michael Grais and Mark Victor that " was barely the same " . Larry Gross also contributed to the script , but his work would later go on to be uncredited . In interviews at the time of the film 's release , Mancuso , Jr . , who was best known for the Friday the 13th franchise , stated a desire to move away from horror films , and wanted to produce a film " about what happens when someone creates a world , becomes defined by it , and then can 't escape [ ... ] a film about being trapped by your own creation . " Bakshi remembers that he got into a fight with Mancuso , Jr. and " punched [ him ] in the mouth . " Paramount threatened Bakshi with a lawsuit if he refused to complete the film . " I thought if I did the animation well , it would be worth it , but you know what ? It wasn 't worth it . " Bakshi also stated that he " had a lot of animators there that I 'd brought in and I thought that maybe I could just have fun animating this stuff , which I did . " Bakshi had developed the film as a mix of comedy and horror that he described as " a hard R @-@ rated story " but Paramount wanted a PG @-@ 13 film , one of the reasons for the doomed and angry relationship between filmmaker and studio . 
 Bakshi had originally intended to cast Drew Barrymore and Brad Pitt in the film 's leading roles . Brad Pitt was cast as Frank Harris instead , with Gabriel Byrne as Deebs and Kim Basinger as Holli . The film 's voice cast includes Maurice LaMarche and Charles Adler . According to Bakshi , Basinger had attempted to rewrite the film halfway into its production because she " thought it would be great [ ... ] if she would be able to show this picture in hospitals to sick children [ ... ] I said , ' Kim , I think that 's wonderful , but you 've got the wrong guy to do that with . ' [ ... ] [ Mancuso ] was sitting there with Kim [ ... ] agreeing with her . " 
 The visual design of the live @-@ action footage was intended to look like " a living , walk @-@ through painting " , a visual concept Bakshi had long wanted to achieve . The film 's sets were based upon enlargements of designer Barry Jackson 's paintings . The animation was strongly influenced by Fleischer Studios ( whose cartoons were released by Paramount ) and Terrytoons ( where Bakshi once worked , and whose Mighty Mouse character was also adapted into a series by Bakshi ) . The artwork by the character Jack Deebs was drawn by underground comix artist Spain Rodriguez . The film 's animators were never given a screenplay , and were instead told by Bakshi to " Do a scene that 's funny , whatever you want to do ! " 
 A soundtrack album , Songs from the Cool World , featuring recordings by My Life with the Thrill Kill Kult , Moby , Ministry , The Future Sound of London , and others , was released in 1992 by Warner Bros. Records . It included the track " Real Cool World " , a David Bowie song written for the film . The soundtrack received stronger reviews from critics than the film itself , including a four @-@ star rating from Allmusic . Mark Isham 's original score for Cool World , featuring a mixture of jazz , orchestral pieces , and electronic remixes , and performed by the Munich Symphony Orchestra , was released on compact disc by Varèse Sarabande , and in complete form in 2015 by Quartet . It also received positive reviews . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Promotion and merchandising = = = 
 As part of the film 's promotion , the Hollywood Sign was altered to include a 75 @-@ foot @-@ tall cutout of Holli Would . The alteration angered local residents . In a letter to the city 's Recreation and Park Board , commission officials wrote that they were " appalled " by the board 's approval of the alterations and that " the action your board has taken is offensive to Los Angeles women and is not within your role as custodian and guardian of the Hollywood sign . The fact that Paramount Pictures donated a mere $ 27 @,@ 000 to Rebuild L.A. should not be a passport to exploit women in Los Angeles . " Protestors picketed the unveiling of the altered sign . The promotional campaign was focused on the sex appeal of Holli . It was considered by some experts as <unk> , with Paramount 's marketing president Barry London saying " Cool World unfortunately did not seem to satisfy the younger audience it was aimed at , " and designer Milton Knight recalling that " Audiences actually wanted a wilder , raunchier Cool World . The premiere audience I saw it with certainly did . " 
 Several different licensed video games based on the film were created by Ocean Software . The first game was developed by Twilight and released in 1992 for the Amiga , Atari ST , Commodore 64 and DOS . Two different games were released in 1993 for the Nintendo Entertainment System and Super NES , alongside a Game Boy version of the former . A four @-@ issue comic book prequel to the film was published as a miniseries by DC Comics . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Cool World opened at sixth on the North American box office , with $ 5 @.@ 5 million . Its lifetime gross was $ 14 @.@ 1 million , a little more than half its reported $ 28 million budget . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes collected a sample of 45 reviews and judged 4 % of them to be positive . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that Cool World " misses one opportunity after another " , describing it as " a surprisingly incompetent film " . Deseret News reviewer Chris Hicks described it as " a one @-@ joke movie – and it 's a dirty joke . [ ... ] And much of what 's going on here seems more angry and nasty than inspired or funny . " Variety reviewer Brian Lowry compared the film to an extended music video , praising the soundtrack and visuals , but panning the story . Leonard Maltin described the film as " too serious to be fun [ and ] too goofy to take seriously " , and the lead characters as " unlikable and unappealing " . The Washington Post reviewer Hal Hinson wondered " whether Kim Basinger is more obnoxious as a cartoon or as a real person , " and felt that the combination of animation and live action was unconvincing . Contributing to the low box office was the fact the studio withdrew all advertising support after the opening weekend . 
 In 1997 , John Grant wrote in The Encyclopedia of Fantasy that Cool World " stands as one of the fantastic cinema 's most significant achievements , an <unk> fantasy that reveals greater depths with each viewing . " Animation historian Jerry Beck described the film as being " for adults and Bakshi completists only , " writing that the film " has a great premise , a great cast , and the best animation he 's ever been involved with , " but critiquing it as a " pointless rehash of many of Ralph 's favorite themes , and the story literally goes nowhere . " The film garnered a Razzie Award nomination for Worst Actress ( Kim Basinger ; also for Final Analysis ) . 
 = Amanita bisporigera = 
 Amanita bisporigera is a deadly poisonous species of fungus in the family Amanitaceae . It is commonly known as the eastern North American destroying angel or the destroying angel , although it shares this latter name with three other lethal white Amanita species , A. ocreata , A. verna and A. virosa . The fruit bodies are found on the ground in mixed coniferous and deciduous forests of eastern North America south to Mexico , but are rare in western North America ; the fungus has also been found in pine plantations in Colombia . The mushroom has a smooth white cap that can reach up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) across , and a stipe , up to 14 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 7 in ) thick , that has a delicate white skirt @-@ like ring near the top . The bulbous stipe base is covered with a membranous sac @-@ like volva . The white gills are free from attachment to the stalk and crowded closely together . As the species name suggests , A. bisporigera typically bears two spores on the basidia , although this characteristic is not as immutable as was once thought . 
 Amanita bisporigera was described as a new species in 1906 . It is classified in the section Phalloideae of the genus Amanita together with other amatoxin @-@ containing species . Amatoxins are cyclic peptides which inhibit the enzyme RNA polymerase II and interfere with various cellular functions . The first symptoms of poisoning appear 6 to 24 hours after consumption , followed by a period of apparent improvement , then by symptoms of liver and kidney failure , and death after four days or more . Amanita bisporigera closely resembles a few other white amanitas , including the equally deadly A. virosa and A. verna . These species , difficult to distinguish from A. bisporigera based on visible field characteristics , do not have two @-@ spored basidia , and do not stain yellow when a dilute solution of potassium hydroxide is applied . The DNA of A. bisporigera has been partially sequenced , and the genes responsible for the production of amatoxins have been determined . 
 = = Taxonomy , classification , and phylogeny = = 
 Amanita bisporigera was first described scientifically in 1906 by American botanist George Francis Atkinson in a publication by Cornell University colleague Charles E. Lewis . The type locality was Ithaca , New York , where several collections were made . In his 1941 monograph of world Amanita species , Édouard @-@ Jean Gilbert transferred the species to his new genus <unk> , but this genus is now considered synonymous with Amanita . In 1944 , William Murrill described the species Amanita <unk> , collected from Gainesville , Florida ; that species is now thought to be synonymous with A. bisporigera after a 1979 examination of its type material revealed basidia that were mostly 2 @-@ spored . Amanita phalloides var. striatula , a poorly known taxon originally described from the United States in 1902 by Charles Horton Peck , is considered by Amanita authority Rodham Tulloss to be synonymous with A. bisporigera . Vernacular names for the mushroom include " destroying angel " , " deadly amanita " , " white death cap " , " angel of death " and " eastern North American destroying angel " . 
 Amanita bisporigera belongs to section Phalloideae of the genus Amanita , which contains some of the deadliest Amanita species , including A. phalloides and A. virosa . This classification has been upheld with phylogenetic analyses , which demonstrate that the toxin @-@ producing members of section Phalloideae form a clade — that is , they derive from a common ancestor . In 2005 , Zhang and colleagues performed a phylogenetic analysis based on the internal transcribed spacer ( ITS ) sequences of several white @-@ bodied toxic Amanita species , most of which are found in Asia . Their results support a clade containing A. bisporigera , A. subjunquillea var. alba , A. exitialis , and A. virosa . The Guangzhou destroying angel ( Amanita exitialis ) has two @-@ spored basidia , like A. bisporigera . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is 3 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter and , depending on its age , ranges in shape from egg @-@ shaped to convex to somewhat flattened . The cap surface is smooth and white , sometimes with a pale tan- or cream @-@ colored tint in the center . The surface is either dry or , when the environment is moist , slightly sticky . The flesh is thin and white , and does not change color when bruised . The margin of the cap , which is rolled inwards in young specimens , does not have striations ( grooves ) , and lacks volval remnants . The gills , also white , are crowded closely together . They are either free from attachment to the stipe or just barely reach it . The lamellulae ( short gills that do not extend all the way to the stipe ) are numerous , and gradually narrow . 
 The white stipe is 6 – 14 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) by 0 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 7 in ) thick , solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , and tapers slightly upward . The surface , in young specimens especially , is frequently floccose ( covered with tufts of soft hair ) , fibrillose ( covered with small slender fibers ) , or squamulose ( covered with small scales ) ; there may be fine grooves along its length . The bulb at the base of the stipe is spherical or nearly so . The delicate ring on the upper part of the stipe is a remnant of the partial veil that extends from the cap margin to the stalk and covers the gills during development . It is white , thin , membranous , and hangs like a skirt . When young , the mushrooms are enveloped in a membrane called the universal veil , which stretches from the top of the cap to the bottom of the stipe , imparting an oval , egg @-@ like appearance . In mature fruit bodies , the veil 's remnants form a membrane around the base , the volva , like an eggshell @-@ shaped cup . On occasion , however , the volva remains underground or gets torn up during development . It is white , sometimes lobed , and may become pressed closely to the stipe . The volva is up to 3 @.@ 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) in height ( measured from the base of the bulb ) , and is about 2 mm thick midway between the top and the base attachment . The mushroom 's odor has been described as " pleasant to somewhat nauseous " , becoming more cloying as the fruit body ages . The cap flesh turns yellow when a solution of potassium hydroxide ( KOH , 5 – 10 % ) is applied ( a common chemical test used in mushroom identification ) . This characteristic chemical reaction is shared with A. ocreata and A. virosa , although some authors have expressed doubt about the identity of North American A. virosa , suggesting those collections may represent four @-@ spored A. bisporigera . Tulloss suggests that reports of A. bisporigera that do not turn yellow with KOH were actually based on white forms of A. phalloides . Findings from the Chiricahua Mountains of Arizona and in central Mexico , although " nearly identical " to A. bisporigera , do not stain yellow with KOH ; their taxonomic status has not been investigated in detail . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 The spore print of A. bisporigera , like most Amanita , is white . The spores are roughly spherical , thin @-@ walled , hyaline ( translucent ) , amyloid , and measure 7 @.@ 8 – 9 @.@ 6 by 7 @.@ 0 – 9 @.@ 0 μm . The cap cuticle is made of partially gelatinized , filamentous interwoven hyphae , 2 – 6 μm in diameter . The tissue of the gill is bilateral , meaning it diverges from the center of the gill to its outer edge . The subhymenium is <unk> — composed of relatively thin branching , unclamped hyphae . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are club @-@ shaped , thin @-@ walled , without clamps , with dimensions of 34 – 45 by 4 – 11 μm . They are typically two @-@ spored , although rarely three- or four @-@ spored forms have been found . Although the two @-@ spored basidia are a defining characteristic of the species , there is evidence of a tendency to shift towards producing four @-@ spored basidia as the fruiting season progresses . The volva is composed almost exclusively of densely interwoven filamentous hyphae , 2 – 10 μm in diameter , that are sparsely to moderately branched . There are few small inflated cells , which are mostly spherical to broadly elliptic . The tissue of the stipe is made of abundant , sparsely branched , filamentous hyphae , without clamps , measuring 2 – 5 μm in diameter . The inflated cells are club @-@ shaped , longitudinally oriented , and up to 2 – 3 by 15 @.@ 7 μm . The annulus is made of abundant moderately branched filamentous hyphae , measuring 2 – 6 μm in diameter . The inflated cells are sparse , broadly elliptic to pear @-@ shaped , and are rarely larger than 31 by 22 μm . Pleurocystidia and cheilocystidia ( cystidia found on the gill faces and edges , respectively ) are absent , but there may be cylindrical to sac @-@ like cells of the partial veil on the gill edges ; these cells are hyaline and measure 24 – 34 by 7 – 16 μm . 
 In 1906 Charles E. Lewis studied and illustrated the development of the basidia in order to compare the nuclear behavior of the two @-@ spored with that of the four @-@ spored forms . Initially ( 1 ) , the young basidium , appearing as a club @-@ shaped branch from the subhymenium , is filled with cytoplasm and contains two primary nuclei , which have distinct <unk> . As the basidium grows larger , the membranes of the two nuclei contact ( 2 ) , and then the membrane disappears at the point of contact ( 3 ) . The two primary nuclei remain distinct for a short time , but eventually the two nuclei fuse completely to form a larger secondary nucleus with a single secondary nucleolus ( 4 , 5 ) . The basidium increases in size after the primary nuclei fuse , and the nucleus migrates towards the end of the basidia ( 6 , 7 ) . During this time , the nucleus develops vacuoles " filled by the nuclear sap in the living cell " . Chromosomes are produced from the nucleolar threads , and align transversely near the apex of the basidium , connected by spindles ( 8 – 10 ) . The chromosomes then move to the poles , forming the daughter nuclei that occupy different positions in the basidium ; the daughters now have a structure similar to that of the parent nuclei ( 11 ) . The two nuclei then divide to form four nuclei , similar to fungi with four @-@ spored basidia ( 12 , 13 ) . The four nuclei crowd together at some distance from the end of the basidium to form an irregular mass ( 14 ) . Shortly thereafter , the sterigmata ( slender projections of the basidia that attach the spores ) begin to form ( 15 ) , and cytoplasm begins to pass through the sterigmata to form the spores ( 16 ) . Although Lewis was not able to clearly determine from observation alone whether the contents of two or four nuclei passed through the sterigmata , he deduced , by examining older basidia with mature spores , that only two nuclei enter the spores ( 16 , 17 ) . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Amanita bisporigera is considered the most toxic North American Amanita mushroom , with little variation in toxin content between different fruit bodies . Three subtypes of amatoxin have been described : α- , β , and γ @-@ amanitin . The principal amatoxin , α @-@ amanitin , is readily absorbed across the intestine , and 60 % of the absorbed toxin is excreted into bile and undergoes enterohepatic circulation ; the kidneys clear the remaining 40 % . The toxin inhibits the enzyme RNA polymerase II , thereby interfering with DNA transcription , which suppresses RNA production and protein synthesis . This causes cellular necrosis , especially in cells which are initially exposed and have rapid rates of protein synthesis . This process results in severe acute liver dysfunction and , ultimately , liver failure . Amatoxins are not broken down by boiling , freezing , or drying . Roughly 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 4 milligrams of α @-@ amanitin is present in 1 gram of A. bisporigera ; the lethal dose in humans is less than 0 @.@ 1 mg / kg body weight . One mature fruit body can contain 10 – 12 mg of α @-@ amanitin , enough for a lethal dose . The α @-@ amanitin concentration in the spores is about 17 % that of the fruit body tissues . A. bisporigera also contains the phallotoxin phallacidin , structurally related to the amatoxins but considered less poisonous because of poor absorption . Poisonings ( from similar white amanitas ) have also been reported in domestic animals , including dogs , cats , and cows . 
 The first reported poisonings resulting in death from the consumption of A. bisporigera were from near San Antonio , Mexico , in 1957 , where a rancher , his wife , and three children consumed the fungus ; only the man survived . Amanita poisoning is characterized by the following distinct stages : the incubation stage is an asymptomatic period which ranges from 6 to 12 hours after ingestion . In the gastrointestinal stage , about 6 to 16 hours after ingestion , there is onset of abdominal pain , explosive vomiting , and diarrhea for up to 24 hours , which may lead to dehydration , severe electrolyte imbalances , and shock . These early symptoms may be related to other toxins such as phalloidin . In the cytotoxic stage , 24 to 48 hours after ingestion , clinical and biochemical signs of liver damage are observed , but the patient is typically free of gastrointestinal symptoms . The signs of liver dysfunction such as jaundice , hypoglycemia , acidosis , and hemorrhage appear . Later , there is an increase in the levels of prothrombin and blood levels of ammonia , and the signs of hepatic encephalopathy and / or kidney failure appear . The risk factors for mortality that have been reported are age younger than 10 years , short latency period between ingestion and onset of symptoms , severe coagulopathy ( blood clotting disorder ) , severe <unk> ( jaundice ) , and rising serum creatinine levels . 
 = = Similar species = = 
 The color and general appearance of A. bisporigera are similar to those of A. verna and A. virosa . A. bisporigera is at times smaller and more slender than either A. verna or A. virosa , but it varies considerably in size ; therefore size is not a reliable diagnostic characteristic . A. virosa fruits in autumn — later than A. bisporigera . A. <unk> is less common but widely distributed in the southeastern United States , while A. ocreata is found on the West Coast and in the Southwest . Other similar toxic North American species include Amanita <unk> , which has a cream @-@ colored , rather thick , felted @-@ <unk> , skirt @-@ like ring , and A. <unk> , which has elongated spores that are 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 7 by 11 @.@ 7 – 13 @.@ 4 μm . Neither A. <unk> nor A. <unk> typically turn yellow with the application of KOH ; the KOH reaction of A. <unk> has not been reported . 
 Leucoagaricus <unk> is another all @-@ white mushroom with an annulus , free gills , and white spore print , but it lacks a volva and has thick @-@ walled dextrinoid ( staining red @-@ brown in Melzer 's reagent ) egg @-@ shaped spores with a pore . A. bisporigera may also be confused with the larger edible species Agaricus <unk> , the " horse @-@ mushroom " . Like many white amanitas , young fruit bodies of A. bisporigera , still enveloped in the universal veil , can be confused with puffball species , but a longitudinal cut of the fruit body reveals internal structures in the Amanita that are absent in puffballs . In 2006 , seven members of the Hmong community living in Minnesota were poisoned with A. bisporigera because they had confused it with edible paddy straw mushrooms ( Volvariella volvacea ) that grow in Southeast Asia . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Like most other Amanita species , A. bisporigera is thought to form mycorrhizal relationships with trees . This is a mutually beneficial relationship where the hyphae of the fungus grow around the roots of trees , enabling the fungus to receive moisture , protection and nutritive byproducts of the tree , and giving the tree greater access to soil nutrients . Fruit bodies of Amanita bisporigera are found on the ground growing either solitarily , scattered , or in groups in mixed coniferous and deciduous forests ; they tend to appear during summer and early fall . The fruit bodies are commonly found near oak , but have been reported in birch @-@ aspen areas in the west . It is most commonly found in eastern North America , and rare in western North America . It is widely distributed in Canada , and its range extends south to Mexico . The species has also been found in Colombia , where it may have been introduced from trees exported for use in pine plantations . 
 = = Genome sequencing = = 
 The Amanita Genome Project was begun in Jonathan Walton 's lab at Michigan State University in 2004 as part of their ongoing studies of Amanita bisporigera . The purpose of the project is to determine the genes and genetic controls associated with the formation of mycorrhizae , and to elucidate the biochemical mechanisms of toxin production . The genome of A. bisporigera has been sequenced using a combination of automated Sanger sequencing and pyrosequencing , and the genome sequence information is publicly searchable . The sequence data enabled the researchers to identify the genes responsible for amatoxin and phallotoxin biosynthesis , <unk> and <unk> . The cyclic peptides are synthesized on ribosomes , and require proline @-@ specific peptidases from the prolyl <unk> family for processing . 
 The genetic sequence information from A. bisporigera has been used to identify molecular polymorphisms in the related A. phalloides . These single @-@ nucleotide polymorphisms may be used as population genetic markers to study phylogeography and population genetics . Sequence information has also been employed to show that A. bisporigera lacks many of the major classes of secreted enzymes that break down the complex polysaccharides of plant cell walls , like cellulose . In contrast , saprobic fungi like Coprinopsis cinerea and Galerina marginata , which break down organic matter to obtain nutrients , have a more complete complement of cell wall @-@ degrading enzymes . Although few ectomycorrhizal fungi have yet been tested in this way , the authors suggest that the absence of plant cell wall @-@ degrading ability may correlate with the ectomycorrhizal ecological niche . 
 = = = Cited books = = = 
 Jenkins DB . ( 1986 ) . Amanita of North America . Eureka , California : Mad River Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 916422 @-@ 55 @-@ 0 . 
 = Serotonin syndrome = 
 Serotonin syndrome is any of a group of symptoms that may be an indication of any number of potentially life @-@ threatening drug interactions that may occur following therapeutic drug use , combination , overdose of particular drugs , or the recreational use of certain drugs . Serotonin syndrome is not an idiopathic drug reaction ; it is a predictable consequence of excess serotonin on the CNS and / or peripheral nervous system . For this reason , some experts strongly prefer the terms serotonin toxicity or serotonin <unk> , which more accurately reflect that it is a form of poisoning . 
 Excessive levels of serotonin produce a spectrum of specific symptoms including cognitive , autonomic , and somatic effects . Symptoms may range from barely perceptible to fatal . Numerous drugs and drug combinations have been reported to produce serotonin syndrome , though the exact mechanism is not well understood in many instances . 
 Diagnosis includes observing symptoms and investigating patient history for causal factors ( interacting drugs ) . The syndrome has a characteristic picture but can be mistaken for other illnesses in some people , particularly those with neuroleptic malignant syndrome , a condition characterized by excessive blockade of the dopamine receptors ( usually the result of anti @-@ nausea / vomiting or antipsychotic drugs ) , leading to movement disorders , changes in temperature , and other problems . No laboratory tests can currently confirm the diagnosis . Hence it is diagnosed based on symptoms , disease course ( that is , the progression of the disease ) and the exclusion of other possible causes of the presenting symptoms . 
 Treatment consists of discontinuing medications which may contribute and in moderate to severe cases administering a serotonin antagonist . An important adjunct treatment includes controlling agitation with benzodiazepine sedation . The high @-@ profile case of Libby Zion , who is generally accepted to have died from serotonin syndrome , resulted in changes to graduate medical education in New York State . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Symptom onset is usually rapid , often occurring within minutes of elevated serotonin levels . Serotonin syndrome encompasses a wide range of clinical findings . Mild symptoms may consist of increased heart rate , shivering , sweating , dilated pupils , myoclonus ( intermittent jerking or twitching ) , as well as <unk> reflexes . However , many of these symptoms may be side effects of the drug or drug interaction causing excessive levels of serotonin ; not an effect of elevated serotonin itself . Tremor is a common side effect of MDMA 's action at dopamine , whereas hyperreflexia is symptomatic of exposure to serotonin agonists . Moderate intoxication includes additional abnormalities such as hyperactive bowel sounds , high blood pressure and hyperthermia ; a temperature as high as 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) . The overactive reflexes and clonus in moderate cases may be greater in the lower limbs than in the upper limbs . Mental changes include hypervigilance or insomnia and agitation . Severe symptoms include severe increases in heart rate and blood pressure that may lead to shock . Temperature may rise to above 41 @.@ 1 ° C ( 106 @.@ 0 ° F ) in life @-@ threatening cases . Other abnormalities include metabolic acidosis , rhabdomyolysis , seizures , renal failure , and disseminated intravascular coagulation ; these effects usually arising as a consequence of hyperthermia . 
 The symptoms are often described as a clinical triad of abnormalities : 
 Cognitive effects : headache , agitation , hypomania , mental confusion , hallucinations , coma 
 Autonomic effects : shivering , sweating , hyperthermia , vasoconstriction , tachycardia , nausea , diarrhea . 
 Somatic effects : myoclonus ( muscle twitching ) , hyperreflexia ( manifested by clonus ) , tremor . 
 = = Cause = = 
 A large number of medications either alone in high dose or in combination can produce serotonin syndrome . 
 Many cases of serotonin toxicity occur in patients who have ingested drug combinations that synergistically increase synaptic serotonin . It may also occur as a symptom of overdose of a single serotonergic agent . The combination of MAOIs with precursors such as l @-@ tryptophan or 5 @-@ <unk> pose a particularly acute risk of life @-@ threatening serotonin syndrome . The case of combination of MAOIs with tryptamine agonists ( commonly known as <unk> ) can present similar dangers as their combination with precursors , but this phenomenon has been described in general terms as the " cheese effect " . Many MAOIs irreversibly inhibit monoamine oxidase . It can take at least four weeks for this enzyme to be replaced by the body in the instance of irreversible inhibitors . 
 Many medications may have been incorrectly thought to cause serotonin syndrome . For example , some case reports have implicated atypical antipsychotics in serotonin syndrome , but it appears based on their pharmacology that they are unlikely to cause the syndrome . It has also been suggested that mirtazapine has no significant serotonergic effects , and is therefore not a dual action drug . Bupropion has also been suggested to cause serotonin syndrome , although as there is no evidence that it has any significant serotonergic activity , it is thought unlikely to produce the syndrome . In 2006 the United States Food and Drug Administration issued an alert suggesting that the combined use of SSRIs or <unk> and <unk> medications or <unk> could potentially lead to severe cases of serotonin syndrome . This has been disputed by other researchers as none of the cases reported by the FDA met the Hunter criteria for serotonin syndrome . The condition has however occurred in surprising clinical situations , and because of phenotypic variations among individuals , it has been associated with unexpected drugs , including mirtazapine . 
 The relative risk and severity of serotonergic side effects and serotonin toxicity , with individual drugs and combinations , is complex . Serotonin syndrome has been reported in patients of all ages , including the elderly , children , and even newborn infants due to in utero exposure . The serotonergic toxicity of SSRIs increases with dose , but even in over @-@ dose it is insufficient to cause fatalities from serotonin syndrome in healthy adults . Elevations of central nervous system serotonin will typically only reach potentially fatal levels when drugs with different mechanisms of action are mixed together . Various drugs , other than SSRIs , also have clinically significant potency as serotonin reuptake inhibitors , ( e.g. tramadol , amphetamine , and MDMA ) and are associated with severe cases of the syndrome . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Serotonin is a neurotransmitter involved in multiple states including aggression , pain , sleep , appetite , anxiety , depression , migraine , and vomiting . In humans the effects of excess serotonin were first noted in 1960 in patients receiving a monoamine oxidase inhibitor ( MAOI ) and tryptophan . The syndrome is caused by increased serotonin in the central nervous system . It was originally suspected that agonism of 5 @-@ HT1A receptors in central grey nuclei and the medulla was responsible for the development of the syndrome . Further study has determined that overstimulation of primarily the 5 @-@ HT2A receptors appears to contribute substantially to the condition . The 5 @-@ HT1A receptor may still contribute through a <unk> interaction in which increased synaptic concentrations of a serotonin agonist saturate all receptor subtypes . Additionally , noradrenergic CNS hyperactivity may play a role as CNS norepinephrine concentrations are increased in serotonin syndrome and levels appear to correlate with the clinical outcome . Other neurotransmitters may also play a role ; NMDA receptor antagonists and GABA have been suggested as affecting the development of the syndrome . Serotonin toxicity is more pronounced following supra @-@ therapeutic doses and overdoses , and they merge in a continuum with the toxic effects of overdose . 
 = = = Spectrum concept = = = 
 A postulated " spectrum concept " of serotonin toxicity emphasises the role that progressively increasing serotonin levels play in mediating the clinical picture as side effects merge into toxicity . The dose @-@ effect relationship is the effects of progressive elevation of serotonin , either by raising the dose of one drug , or combining it with another serotonergic drug which may produce large elevations in serotonin levels . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 There is no laboratory test for serotonin syndrome . Therefore , diagnosis is by symptom observation and investigation of the patient 's history . Several diagnostic criteria have been proposed . The first rigorously evaluated criteria were introduced in 1991 by Harvey Sternbach , a professor of psychiatry at UCLA . Researchers in Australia later developed the Hunter Toxicity Criteria Decision Rules , which have better sensitivity and specificity , 84 % and 97 % , respectively , when compared with the gold standard of diagnosis by a medical toxicologist . As of 2007 , Sternbach 's criteria were still the most commonly used . 
 The most important symptoms for diagnosing serotonin syndrome are tremor , extreme aggressiveness , akathisia , or clonus ( spontaneous , inducible and ocular ) . Physical examination of the patient should include assessment of deep @-@ tendon reflexes and muscle rigidity , the dryness of the oral mucosa , the size and reactivity of the pupils , the intensity of bowel sounds , skin color , and the presence or absence of sweating . The patient 's history also plays an important role in diagnosis , investigations should include <unk> about the use of prescription and over @-@ the @-@ counter drugs , illicit substances , and dietary supplements , as all these agents have been implicated in the development of serotonin syndrome . To fulfill the Hunter Criteria , a patient must have taken a serotonergic agent and meet one of the following conditions : 
 Spontaneous clonus , or 
 <unk> clonus plus agitation or diaphoresis , or 
 Ocular clonus plus agitation or diaphoresis , or 
 Tremor plus hyperreflexia , or 
 <unk> plus temperature > 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) plus ocular clonus or inducible clonus 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 Serotonin toxicity has a characteristic picture which is generally hard to confuse with other medical conditions , but in some situations it may go unrecognized because it may be mistaken for a viral illness , anxiety , neurological disorder , anticholinergic poisoning , sympathomimetic toxicity , or worsening psychiatric condition . The condition most often confused with serotonin syndrome is neuroleptic malignant syndrome ( NMS ) . The clinical features of neuroleptic malignant syndrome and serotonin syndrome share some features which can make differentiating them difficult . In both conditions , autonomic dysfunction and altered mental status develop . However , they are actually very different conditions with different underlying dysfunction ( serotonin excess vs dopamine blockade ) . Both the time course and the clinical features of NMS differ significantly from those of serotonin toxicity . Serotonin toxicity has a rapid onset after the administration of a serotonergic drug and responds to serotonin blockade such as drugs like chlorpromazine and cyproheptadine . Dopamine receptor blockade ( NMS ) has a slow onset and typically evolves over several days after administration of a neuroleptic drug and responds to dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine . 
 Differential diagnosis may become difficult in patients recently exposed to both serotonergic drugs and neuroleptic drugs . Features that are classically present in NMS , that are useful for differentiating the two , are bradykinesia and extrapyramidal " lead pipe " rigidity , whereas serotonin syndrome causes <unk> and clonus . 
 = = Management = = 
 Management is based primarily on stopping the usage of the precipitating drugs , the administration of serotonin antagonists such as cyproheptadine , and supportive care including the control of agitation , the control of autonomic instability , and the control of hyperthermia . Additionally , those who ingest large doses of serotonergic agents may benefit from gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal if it can be administered within an hour of overdose . The intensity of therapy depends on the severity of symptoms . If the symptoms are mild , treatment may only consist of discontinuation of the offending medication or medications , offering supportive measures , giving benzodiazepines for myoclonus , and waiting for the symptoms to resolve . Moderate cases should have all thermal and cardiorespiratory abnormalities corrected and can benefit from serotonin antagonists . The serotonin antagonist cyproheptadine is the recommended initial therapy , although there have been no controlled trials demonstrating its efficacy for serotonin syndrome . Despite the absence of controlled trials , there are a number of case reports detailing apparent improvement after people have been administered cyproheptadine . Animal experiments also suggest a benefit from serotonin antagonists . <unk> is only available as tablets and therefore can only be administered orally or via a nasogastric tube ; it is unlikely to be effective in people administered activated charcoal and has limited use in severe cases . Additional pharmacological treatment for severe case includes administering atypical antipsychotic drugs with serotonin antagonist activity such as olanzapine . Critically ill people should receive the above therapies as well as sedation or neuromuscular paralysis . People who have autonomic instability such as low blood pressure require treatment with direct @-@ acting sympathomimetics such as epinephrine , norepinephrine , or <unk> . Conversely , hypertension or tachycardia can be treated with short @-@ acting antihypertensive drugs such as nitroprusside or <unk> ; longer acting drugs such as propranolol should be avoided as they may lead to hypotension and shock . The cause of serotonin toxicity or accumulation is an important factor in determining the course of treatment . Serotonin is <unk> by monoamine oxidase in the presence of oxygen , so if care is taken to prevent an unsafe spike in body temperature or metabolic acidosis , oxygenation will assist in dispatching the excess serotonin . The same principle applies to alcohol intoxication . In cases of serotonin syndrome caused by monoamine oxidase inhibitors oxygenation will not help to dispatch serotonin . In such instances hydration is the main concern until the enzyme is regenerated . 
 = = = Agitation = = = 
 Specific treatment for some symptoms may be required . One of the most important treatments is the control of agitation due to the extreme possibility of injury to the person themselves or caregivers , benzodiazepines should be administered at first sign of this . Physical restraints are not recommended for agitation or delirium as they may contribute to mortality by enforcing isometric muscle contractions that are associated with severe lactic acidosis and hyperthermia . If physical restraints are necessary for severe agitation they must be rapidly replaced with pharmacological sedation . The agitation can cause a large amount of muscle breakdown . This breakdown can cause severe damage to the kidneys through a condition called rhabdomyolysis . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Treatment for hyperthermia includes reducing muscle overactivity via sedation with a benzodiazepine . More severe cases may require muscular paralysis with vecuronium , intubation , and artificial ventilation . <unk> is not recommended for muscular paralysis as it may increase the risk of cardiac dysrhythmia from hyperkalemia associated with rhabdomyolysis . <unk> agents are not recommended as the increase in body temperature is due to muscular activity , not a hypothalamic temperature set point abnormality . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Upon the discontinuation of serotonergic drugs , most cases of serotonin syndrome resolve within 24 hours , although in some cases delirium may persist for a number of days . Symptoms typically persist for a longer time frame in patients taking drugs which have a long elimination half @-@ life , active metabolites , or a protracted duration of action . 
 Cases have reported muscle pain and weakness persisting for months , and antidepressant discontinuation may contribute to ongoing features . Following appropriate medical management , serotonin syndrome is generally associated with a favorable prognosis . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Epidemiological studies of serotonin syndrome are difficult as many physicians are unaware of the diagnosis or they may miss the syndrome due to its variable manifestations . In 1998 a survey conducted in England found that 85 % of the general practitioners that had prescribed the antidepressant nefazodone were unaware of serotonin syndrome . The incidence may be increasing as a larger number of pro @-@ serotonergic drugs ( drugs which increase serotonin levels ) are now being used in clinical practice . One postmarketing surveillance study identified an incidence of 0 @.@ 4 cases per 1000 patient @-@ months for patients who were taking nefazodone . Additionally , around 14 to 16 percent of persons who overdose on SSRIs are thought to develop serotonin syndrome . 
 = = Notable cases = = 
 The most widely recognized example of serotonin syndrome was the death of Libby Zion in 1984 . Zion was a freshman at Bennington College at her death on March 5 , 1984 , at age 18 . She died within 8 hours of her emergency admission to the New York Hospital Cornell Medical Center . She had an ongoing history of depression , and came to the Manhattan hospital on the evening of March 4 , 1984 , with a fever , agitation and " strange jerking motions " of her body . She also seemed disoriented at times . The emergency room physicians were unable to diagnose her condition definitively , but admitted her for hydration and observation . Her death was caused by a combination of pethidine and <unk> . A medical intern prescribed the pethidine . The case had an impact on graduate medical education and residency work hours . Limits were set on working hours for medical postgraduates , commonly referred to as interns or residents , in hospital training programs , and they also now require closer senior physician supervision . 
 = George IV of the United Kingdom = 
 George IV ( George Augustus Frederick ; 12 August 1762 – 26 June 1830 ) was King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and of Hanover following the death of his father , George III , on 29 January 1820 , until his own death ten years later . From 1811 until his accession , he served as Prince Regent during his father 's final mental illness . 
 George IV led an extravagant lifestyle that contributed to the fashions of the Regency era . He was a patron of new forms of leisure , style and taste . He commissioned John Nash to build the Royal Pavilion in Brighton and remodel Buckingham Palace , and Sir Jeffry <unk> to rebuild Windsor Castle . He was instrumental in the foundation of the National Gallery and King 's College London . 
 His charm and culture earned him the title " the first gentleman of England " , but his poor relationship with both his father and his wife , Caroline of Brunswick , and his dissolute way of life , earned him the contempt of the people and dimmed the prestige of the monarchy . He even forbade Caroline to attend his coronation and asked the government to introduce the unpopular Pains and Penalties Bill in a desperate , unsuccessful attempt to divorce her . 
 For most of George 's regency and reign , Lord Liverpool controlled the government as Prime Minister , with little help from George . His ministers found his behaviour selfish , unreliable and irresponsible . At all times he was much under the influence of favourites . Taxpayers were angry at his wasteful spending at a time when Britons were fighting in the Napoleonic Wars . He did not provide national leadership in time of crisis , nor act as a role model for his people . Liverpool 's government presided over Britain 's ultimate victory , negotiated the peace settlement , and attempted to deal with the social and economic malaise that followed . After Liverpool 's retirement , George was forced to accept Catholic emancipation despite opposing it . His only child , Princess Charlotte , died before him in 1817 and so he was succeeded by his younger brother , William . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George was born at St James 's Palace , London , on 12 August 1762 , the first child of King George III of the United Kingdom and Queen Charlotte . As the eldest son of a British sovereign , he automatically became Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay at birth ; he was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester a few days later . On 18 September of the same year , he was baptised by Thomas Secker , Archbishop of Canterbury . His godparents were the Duke of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz ( his maternal uncle , for whom the Duke of Devonshire , Lord Chamberlain , stood proxy ) , the Duke of Cumberland ( his twice @-@ paternal great @-@ uncle ) and the Dowager Princess of Wales ( his paternal grandmother ) . George was a talented student , and quickly learned to speak French , German and Italian , in addition to his native English . 
 At the age of 18 he was given a separate establishment , and in dramatic contrast with his prosaic , scandal @-@ free father , threw himself with zest into a life of dissipation and wild extravagance involving heavy drinking and numerous mistresses and escapades . He was a witty conversationalist , drunk or sober , and showed good , but grossly expensive , taste in decorating his palace . The Prince turned 21 in 1783 , and obtained a grant of £ 60 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 6 @,@ 514 @,@ 000 today ) from Parliament and an annual income of £ 50 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 5 @,@ 429 @,@ 000 today ) from his father . It was far too little for his needs – the stables alone cost £ 31 @,@ 000 a year . He then established his residence in Carlton House , where he lived a profligate life . Animosity developed between the Prince and his father , who desired more frugal behaviour on the part of the heir apparent . The King , a political conservative , was also alienated by the Prince 's adherence to Charles James Fox and other radically inclined politicians . 
 Soon after he reached the age of 21 , the Prince became infatuated with Maria Fitzherbert . She was a commoner , six years his elder , twice widowed , and a Roman Catholic . Despite her complete unsuitability , the Prince was determined to marry her . This was in spite of the Act of Settlement 1701 , which barred the spouse of a Catholic from succeeding to the throne , and the Royal Marriages Act 1772 , which prohibited his marriage without the King 's consent , which would never have been granted . 
 Nevertheless , the couple went through a marriage ceremony on 15 December 1785 at her house in Park Street , Mayfair . Legally the union was void , as the King 's consent was not granted ( and never even requested ) . However , Fitzherbert believed that she was the Prince 's canonical and true wife , holding the law of the Church to be superior to the law of the State . For political reasons , the union remained secret and Fitzherbert promised not to reveal it . 
 The Prince was plunged into debt by his exorbitant lifestyle . His father refused to assist him , forcing him to quit Carlton House and live at Fitzherbert 's residence . In 1787 , the Prince 's political allies proposed to relieve his debts with a parliamentary grant . The Prince 's relationship with Fitzherbert was suspected , and revelation of the illegal marriage would have scandalised the nation and doomed any parliamentary proposal to aid him . Acting on the Prince 's authority , the Whig leader Charles James Fox declared that the story was a calumny . Fitzherbert was not pleased with the public denial of the marriage in such vehement terms and contemplated severing her ties to the Prince . He appeased her by asking another Whig , Richard Brinsley Sheridan , to restate Fox 's forceful declaration in more careful words . Parliament , meanwhile , granted the Prince £ 161 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 18 @,@ 450 @,@ 000 today ) to pay his debts and £ 60 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 6 @,@ 876 @,@ 000 today ) for improvements to Carlton House . 
 = = Regency crisis of 1788 = = 
 In the summer of 1788 the King 's mental health deteriorated , possibly as the result of the hereditary disease porphyria . He was nonetheless able to discharge some of his duties and to declare Parliament prorogued from 25 September to 20 November . During the prorogation he became deranged , posing a threat to his own life , and when Parliament reconvened in November the King could not deliver the customary speech from the throne during the State Opening of Parliament . Parliament found itself in an untenable position : according to long @-@ established law it could not proceed to any business until the delivery of the King 's Speech at a State Opening . 
 Although arguably barred from doing so , Parliament began debating a Regency . In the House of Commons , Charles James Fox declared his opinion that the Prince of Wales was automatically entitled to exercise sovereignty during the King 's incapacity . A contrasting opinion was held by the Prime Minister , William Pitt the Younger , who argued that , in the absence of a statute to the contrary , the right to choose a Regent belonged to Parliament alone . He even stated that , without parliamentary authority " the Prince of Wales had no more right ... to assume the government , than any other individual subject of the country . " Though disagreeing on the principle underlying a Regency , Pitt agreed with Fox that the Prince of Wales would be the most convenient choice for a Regent . 
 The Prince of Wales — though offended by Pitt 's boldness — did not lend his full support to Fox 's approach . The Prince of Wales 's brother , Prince Frederick , Duke of York , declared that George would not attempt to exercise any power without previously obtaining the consent of Parliament . Following the passage of preliminary resolutions Pitt outlined a formal plan for the Regency , suggesting that the powers of the Prince of Wales be greatly limited . Among other things , the Prince of Wales would not be able either to sell the King 's property or to grant a peerage to anyone other than a child of the King . The Prince of Wales denounced Pitt 's scheme , declaring it a " project for producing weakness , disorder , and insecurity in every branch of the administration of affairs . " In the interests of the nation , both factions agreed to compromise . 
 A significant technical impediment to any Regency Bill involved the lack of a speech from the throne , which was necessary before Parliament could proceed to any debates or votes . The speech was normally delivered by the King , but could also be delivered by royal representatives known as Lords Commissioners ; but no document could empower the Lords Commissioners to act unless the Great Seal of the Realm was affixed to it . The Seal could not be legally affixed without the prior authorisation of the Sovereign . Pitt and his fellow ministers ignored the last requirement and instructed the Lord Chancellor to affix the Great Seal without the King 's consent , as the act of affixing the Great Seal in itself gave legal force to the Bill . This legal fiction was denounced by Edmund Burke as a " glaring falsehood " , as a " palpable absurdity " , and even as a " forgery , fraud " . The Duke of York , described the plan as " unconstitutional and illegal . " Nevertheless , others in Parliament felt that such a scheme was necessary to preserve an effective government . Consequently , on 3 February 1789 , more than two months after it had convened , Parliament was formally opened by an " illegal " group of Lords Commissioners . The Regency Bill was introduced , but before it could be passed the King recovered . The King declared retroactively that the instrument authorising the Lords Commissioners to act was valid . 
 = = Marriage and mistresses = = 
 The Prince of Wales 's debts continued to climb , and his father refused to aid him unless he married his cousin Princess Caroline of Brunswick . In 1795 , the Prince acquiesced ; and they were married on 8 April 1795 at the Chapel Royal , St James 's Palace . The marriage , however , was disastrous ; each party was unsuited to the other . The two were formally separated after the birth of their only child , Princess Charlotte , in 1796 , and remained separated thereafter . The Prince remained attached to Maria Fitzherbert for the rest of his life , despite several periods of estrangement . 
 George 's mistresses included Mary Robinson , an actress who was bought off with a generous pension when she threatened to sell his letters to the newspapers ; Grace Elliott , the divorced wife of a physician ; and Frances Villiers , Countess of Jersey , who dominated his life for some years . In later life , his mistresses were the Marchioness of Hertford and the Marchioness Conyngham , who were both married to aristocrats . 
 George was rumoured to have fathered several illegitimate children . James Ord ( born 1786 ) — who moved to the United States and became a Jesuit priest — was reportedly his son by Fitzherbert . The King , late in life , told a friend that he had a son who was a naval officer in the West Indies , whose identity has been tentatively established as Captain Henry A. F. Hervey ( 1786 – 1824 ) , reportedly George 's child by the songwriter Lady Anne Lindsay ( later Barnard ) , a daughter of the 5th Earl of Balcarres . Other reported offspring include Major George Seymour <unk> , the son of theatre manager 's daughter Eliza <unk> or Fox ; William Hampshire , the son of publican 's daughter Sarah Brown ; and Charles " Beau " Candy , the son of a Frenchwoman with that surname . Anthony Camp , Director of Research at the Society of Genealogists , has dismissed the claims that George IV was the father of Ord , Hervey , Hampshire and Candy as fictitious . 
 The problem of the Prince of Wales 's debts , which amounted to the extraordinary sum of £ 630 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 58 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 today ) in 1795 , was solved ( at least temporarily ) by Parliament . Being unwilling to make an outright grant to relieve these debts , it provided him an additional sum of £ 65 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 6 @,@ 056 @,@ 000 today per annum ) . In 1803 , a further £ 60 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 4 @,@ 941 @,@ 000 today ) was added , and George 's debts of 1795 were finally cleared in 1806 , although the debts he had incurred since 1795 remained . 
 In 1804 , a dispute arose over the custody of Princess Charlotte , which led to her being placed in the care of the King , George III . It also led to a Parliamentary Commission of Enquiry into Princess Caroline 's conduct after the Prince of Wales accused her of having an illegitimate son . The investigation cleared Caroline of the charge but still revealed her behaviour to have been extraordinarily indiscreet . 
 = = Regency = = 
 In late 1810 , George III was once again overcome by his malady following the death of his youngest daughter , Princess Amelia . Parliament agreed to follow the precedent of 1788 ; without the King 's consent , the Lord Chancellor affixed the Great Seal of the Realm to letters patent naming Lords Commissioners . The letters patent lacked the Royal Sign Manual , but were sealed by request of resolutions passed by both Houses of Parliament . The Lords Commissioners appointed by the letters patent , in the name of the King , then signified the granting of Royal Assent to a bill that became the Regency Act of 1811 . Parliament restricted some of the powers of the Prince Regent ( as the Prince of Wales became known ) . The constraints expired one year after the passage of the Act . The Prince of Wales became Prince Regent on 5 February 1811 . 
 The Regent let his ministers take full charge of government affairs , playing a far lesser role than his father . The principle that the prime minister was the person supported by a majority in the House of Commons , whether the king personally favoured him or not , became established . His governments , with little help from the Regent , presided over British policy . One of the most important political conflicts facing the country concerned Catholic emancipation , the movement to relieve Roman Catholics of various political disabilities . The Tories , led by the Prime Minister , Spencer Perceval , were opposed to Catholic emancipation , while the Whigs supported it . At the beginning of the Regency , the Prince of Wales was expected to support the Whig leader , William Grenville , 1st Baron Grenville . He did not , however , immediately put Lord Grenville and the Whigs into office . Influenced by his mother , he claimed that a sudden dismissal of the Tory government would exact too great a toll on the health of the King ( a steadfast supporter of the Tories ) , thereby eliminating any chance of a recovery . 
 In 1812 , when it appeared highly unlikely that the King would recover , the Prince of Wales again failed to appoint a new Whig administration . Instead , he asked the Whigs to join the existing ministry under Perceval . The Whigs , however , refused to co @-@ operate because of disagreements over Catholic emancipation . Grudgingly , the Prince of Wales allowed Perceval to continue as Prime Minister . 
 On 10 May 1812 , Perceval was assassinated by John Bellingham . The Prince Regent was prepared to reappoint all the members of the Perceval ministry under a new leader . The House of Commons formally declared its desire for a " strong and efficient administration " , so the Prince Regent then offered leadership of the government to Richard Wellesley , 1st Marquess Wellesley , and afterwards to Francis Rawdon @-@ Hastings , 2nd Earl of Moira . He doomed the attempts of both to failure , however , by forcing each to construct an all party ministry at a time when neither party wished to share power with the other . Possibly using the failure of the two peers as a pretext , the Prince Regent immediately reappointed the Perceval administration , with Robert Jenkinson , 2nd Earl of Liverpool , as Prime Minister . 
 The Tories , unlike Whigs such as Earl Grey , sought to continue the vigorous prosecution of the war in Continental Europe against the powerful and aggressive Emperor of the French , Napoleon I. An anti @-@ French alliance , which included Russia , Prussia , Austria , Britain and several smaller countries , defeated Napoleon in 1814 . In the subsequent Congress of Vienna , it was decided that the Electorate of Hanover , a state that had shared a monarch with Britain since 1714 , would be raised to a kingdom , known as the Kingdom of Hanover . On 30 December 1814 , the Prince Regent signed and ratified the Treaty of Ghent which ended the War of 1812 with the United States . Napoleon returned from exile in 1815 , but was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo by Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington , brother of Marquess Wellesley . 
 During this period George took an active interest in matters of style and taste , and his associates such as the dandy Beau <unk> and the architect John Nash created the Regency style . In London Nash designed the Regency terraces of Regent 's Park and Regent Street . George took up the new idea of the seaside spa and had the Brighton Pavilion developed as a fantastical seaside palace , adapted by Nash in the " Indian Gothic " style inspired loosely by the Taj Mahal , with extravagant " Indian " and " Chinese " interiors . 
 = = Reign = = 
 When George III died in 1820 , the Prince Regent , then aged 57 , ascended the throne as George IV , with no real change in his powers . By the time of his accession , he was obese and possibly addicted to laudanum . 
 George IV 's relationship with his wife Caroline had deteriorated by the time of his accession . They had lived separately since 1796 , and both were having affairs . In 1814 , Caroline left the United Kingdom for continental Europe , but she chose to return for her husband 's coronation , and to publicly assert her rights as queen consort . However , George IV refused to recognise Caroline as Queen , and commanded British ambassadors to ensure that monarchs in foreign courts did the same . By royal command , Caroline 's name was omitted from the Book of Common Prayer , the liturgy of the Church of England . 
 The King sought a divorce , but his advisors suggested that any divorce proceedings might involve the publication of details relating to the King 's own adulterous relationships . Therefore , he requested and ensured the introduction of the Pains and Penalties Bill , under which Parliament could have imposed legal penalties without a trial in a court of law . The bill would have annulled the marriage and stripped Caroline of the title of Queen . The bill proved extremely unpopular with the public , and was withdrawn from Parliament . George IV decided , nonetheless , to exclude his wife from his coronation at Westminster Abbey , on 19 July 1821 . Caroline fell ill that day and died on 7 August ; during her final illness she often stated that she thought she had been poisoned . 
 George 's coronation was a magnificent and expensive affair , costing about £ 243 @,@ 000 ( approximately £ 19 @,@ 970 @,@ 000 in 2016 ; for comparison , his father 's coronation had only cost about £ 10 @,@ 000 , less than a twentieth of George IV 's ) . Despite the enormous cost , it was a popular event . In 1821 the King became the first monarch to pay a state visit to Ireland since Richard II of England . The following year he visited Edinburgh for " one and twenty daft days " . His visit to Scotland , organised by Sir Walter Scott , was the first by a reigning British monarch since the mid @-@ 17th century . 
 George IV spent most of his later reign in seclusion at Windsor Castle , but he continued to intervene in politics . At first it was believed that he would support Catholic emancipation , as he had proposed a Catholic Emancipation Bill for Ireland in 1797 , but his anti @-@ Catholic views became clear in 1813 when he privately canvassed against the ultimately defeated Catholic Relief Bill of 1813 . By 1824 he was denouncing Catholic emancipation in public . Having taken the coronation oath on his accession , George now argued that he had sworn to uphold the Protestant faith , and could not support any pro @-@ Catholic measures . The influence of the Crown was so great , and the will of the Tories under Prime Minister Lord Liverpool so strong , that Catholic emancipation seemed hopeless . In 1827 , however , Lord Liverpool retired , to be replaced by the pro @-@ emancipation Tory George Canning . When Canning entered office , the King , hitherto content with privately instructing his ministers on the Catholic Question , thought it fit to make a public declaration to the effect that his sentiments on the question were those of his revered father , George III . 
 Canning 's views on the Catholic Question were not well received by the most conservative Tories , including the Duke of Wellington . As a result , the ministry was forced to include Whigs . Canning died later in that year , leaving Frederick Robinson , 1st Viscount Goderich , to lead the tenuous Tory @-@ Whig coalition . Lord Goderich left office in 1828 , to be succeeded by the Duke of Wellington , who had by that time accepted that the denial of some measure of relief to Roman Catholics was politically untenable . George was never as friendly with Wellington as he had been with Canning and chose to annoy the Duke by pretending to have fought at Waterloo disguised as a German general . With great difficulty Wellington obtained the King 's consent to the introduction of a Catholic Relief Bill on 29 January 1829 . Under pressure from his fanatically anti @-@ Catholic brother , the Duke of Cumberland , the King withdrew his approval and in protest the Cabinet resigned en masse on 4 March . The next day the King , now under intense political pressure , reluctantly agreed to the Bill and the ministry remained in power . Royal Assent was finally granted to the Catholic Relief Act on 13 April . 
 = = Decline and death = = 
 George 's heavy drinking and indulgent lifestyle had taken their toll on his health by the late 1820s . Through huge banquets and copious amounts of alcohol , he had become obese , making him the target of ridicule on the rare occasions that he appeared in public . By 1797 his weight had reached 17 stone 7 pounds ( 111 kg ; 245 lb ) , and by 1824 his corset was made for a waist of 50 inches ( 130 cm ) . He suffered from gout , arteriosclerosis , peripheral edema ( " dropsy " ) , and possibly porphyria . In his last years , he spent whole days in bed and suffered spasms of breathlessness that would leave him half @-@ asphyxiated . 
 By December 1828 , like his father , he was almost completely blind from cataracts , and was suffering from such severe gout in his right hand and arm that he could no longer sign documents . In mid @-@ 1829 , Sir David Wilkie reported the King " was wasting away frightfully day after day " , and had become so obese that he looked " like a great sausage stuffed into the covering " . The King took laudanum to counteract severe bladder pains , which left him in a drugged and mentally handicapped state for days on end . In 1830 his weight was recorded to be 20 stone ( 130 kg ; 280 lb ) . 
 By the spring of 1830 , George 's imminent end was apparent . Attacks of breathlessness due to dropsy forced him to sleep upright in a chair , and doctors frequently tapped his abdomen to drain excess fluid . He was admired for clinging doggedly to life despite his obvious decline . He dictated his will in May and became very devout in his final months , confessing to an archdeacon that he repented of his early dissolute life , but hoped mercy would be shown to him as he had always tried to do the best for his subjects . At about half @-@ past three in the morning of 26 June 1830 at Windsor Castle , he reportedly called out " Good God , what is this ? " , clasped his page 's hand , said " my boy , this is death " , and died . An autopsy conducted by his physicians revealed he had died from upper gastrointestinal bleeding resulting from the rupture of a blood vessel in his stomach . A large tumour " the size of an orange " was found attached to his bladder , and he had an enlarged heart surrounded by a large fat deposit and heavily calcified heart valves . He was buried in St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , on 15 July . 
 His only legitimate child , Princess Charlotte of Wales , had died from post @-@ partum complications in 1817 , after delivering a stillborn son . The second son of George III , Prince Frederick , Duke of York and Albany , had died childless in 1827 , so the succession passed to the third son of George III , Prince William , Duke of Clarence , who reigned as William IV . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 George 's last years were marked by increasing physical and mental decay and withdrawal from public affairs . Privately a senior aide to the King confided to his diary : " A more contemptible , cowardly , selfish , unfeeling dog does not exist ... There have been good and wise kings but not many of them ... and this I believe to be one of the worst . " On his death The Times captured elite opinion succinctly : " There never was an individual less regretted by his fellow @-@ creatures than this deceased king . What eye has wept for him ? What heart has heaved one throb of <unk> sorrow ? ... If he ever had a friend – a devoted friend in any rank of life – we protest that the name of him or her never reached us . " George IV was described as the " First Gentleman of England " on account of his style and manners . He possessed many good qualities ; he was bright , clever , and knowledgeable . However , his laziness and gluttony led him to squander much of his talent . The Times wrote , he would always prefer " a girl and a bottle to politics and a sermon " . 
 The Regency period saw a shift in fashion that was largely determined by George . After political opponents put a tax on wig powder , he abandoned wearing a powdered wig in favour of natural hair . He wore darker colours than had been previously fashionable as they helped to disguise his size , favoured pantaloons and trousers over knee breeches because they were looser , and popularised a high collar with neck cloth because it hid his double chin . His visit to Scotland in 1822 led to the revival , if not the creation , of Scottish tartan dress as it is known today . 
 During the political crisis caused by Catholic emancipation , the Duke of Wellington said that George was " the worst man he ever fell in with his whole life , the most selfish , the most false , the most ill @-@ natured , the most entirely without one redeeming quality " , but his eulogy delivered in the House of Lords called George " the most accomplished man of his age " and praised his knowledge and talent . Wellington 's true feelings probably lie somewhere between these two extremes ; as he said later , George was " a magnificent patron of the arts ... the most extraordinary compound of talent , wit , buffoonery , obstinacy , and good feeling — in short a medley of the most opposite qualities , with a great <unk> of good — that I ever saw in any character in my life . " 
 There are many statues of George IV , a large number of which were erected during his reign . In the United Kingdom , they include a bronze statue of him on horseback by Sir Francis Chantrey in Trafalgar Square and another outside the Royal Pavilion in Brighton . 
 In Edinburgh , " George IV Bridge " is a main street linking the Old Town High Street to the north over the ravine of the Cowgate , designed by the architect Thomas Hamilton in 1829 and completed in 1835 . King 's Cross , now a major transport hub sitting on the border of Camden and Islington in north London , takes its name from a short @-@ lived monument erected to George IV in the early 1830s . A square and a neighbouring park in St Luke 's , Islington , are also named after George IV . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 12 August 1762 – 29 January 1820 : His Royal Highness The Duke of Cornwall 
 19 August 1762 – 29 January 1820 : His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales 
 5 February 1811 – 29 January 1820 : His Royal Highness The Prince Regent 
 1 October 1814 – 29 January 1820 : His Royal Highness The Crown Prince of Hanover 
 29 January 1820 – 26 June 1830 : His Majesty The King 
 At birth , he was also entitled to the dignities Prince of Great Britain , Electoral Prince of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg and Duke of Rothesay . Under the Act of Parliament that instituted the Regency , the Prince 's formal title as Regent was " Regent of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland " . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 = = = = British honours = = = = 
