 The turquoise parrot is found in the foothills of the Great Dividing Range and surrounding areas . The northern limit of its range is 26 ° south in southeastern Queensland , around <unk> , <unk> and Chinchilla , extending westwards to the vicinity of St George . Before 1945 , it had been recorded as far north as the <unk> River and Mackay . In New South Wales , it is found in a broad band across the central and eastern parts of the state , with its western limits delineated by Moree , <unk> , Hillston , Narrandera and Deniliquin . There have been unconfirmed sightings in the far west of the state . In Victoria it is found in the vicinity of Wangaratta as well as East Gippsland and around Mallacoota . Sightings in South Australia are likely to have been the scarlet @-@ chested parrot , the similar appearance of the females leading to confusion and misidentification . 
 The turquoise parrot inhabits open woodland and savanna woodland composed either of native cypress ( Callitris species ) or eucalypts , particularly white box ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) , yellow box ( E. melliodora ) , Blakely 's red gum ( E. blakelyi ) , red box ( E. <unk> ) , red stringybark ( E. <unk> ) , <unk> box ( E. <unk> ) , or mugga ironbark ( E. sideroxylon ) , and less commonly Angophora near Sydney , silvertop ash forest ( E. sieberi ) in Nadgee Nature Reserve , and stands of river red gum ( E. camaldulensis ) , mountain swamp gum ( E. camphora ) or western grey box ( E. microcarpa ) in flatter more open areas . Within this habitat , it prefers rocky ridges or gullies , or transitional areas between different habitats , such as between woodland and grassland or fields in cultivated areas . 
 The turquoise parrot is considered sedentary and does not migrate , though its movements are not well known . Birds are present in some areas all year , though in northern Victoria they are thought to move into more open areas outside the breeding season . Some populations may be locally nomadic , following availability of water . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Around 90 % of the turquoise parrot population resides in New South Wales . The species is not listed as threatened on the Commonwealth Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 , though a status of near threatened was proposed by Stephen Garnett and Gabriel Crowley in their 2000 work The Action Plan for Australian Birds on account of the significant reduction in distribution . Its population and range have varied wildly ; widely distributed across eastern Australia from Mackay to Melbourne up to the 1880s , it vanished from much of its range to the extent that it was presumed extinct in 1915 . It was not recorded from Queensland between 1923 and 1950 , and Victoria between the mid @-@ 1880s and 1949 . However , numbers in New South Wales began increasing in the 1930s and the species had repopulated East Gippsland by the 1960s . Tentatively estimated at 20 @,@ 000 breeding birds in 2000 , the population is thought to be still rising . 
 = = = New South Wales = = = 
 The turquoise parrot was once common across the Sydney region , and particularly abundant between the localities of Parramatta and Penrith . It dramatically declined in numbers between 1875 and 1895 , although rare sightings in western Sydney and the Blue Mountains were recorded in the mid @-@ twentieth century . The turquoise parrot was trapped for the aviary trade and used as pie @-@ filling . Almost all of its preferred habitat , the Cumberland Plain , across western Sydney , had disappeared with development . Over half the woodland in New South Wales , and 80 % across Australia has been cleared , and the remaining habitat is fragmented . A key issue is removal of mature eucalypts with resulting loss of hollows available for nesting . The species is thus listed as a Vulnerable species under Schedule 2 of the New South Wales Threatened Species Conservation Act , 1995 because of habitat destruction ( TSC Act ) . Fire @-@ burning regimes may be resulting in the regeneration favouring shrubs rather than grasses , which are the preferred food source for the species . Feral cats and foxes are a threat , particularly to nesting birds and young . 
 = = = Victoria = = = 
 Although formerly common in its range , the species was on the brink of extinction in Victoria by 1917 . However , numbers have built up again since the 1930 – 40s as it reestablishes in its former territory . On the 2007 advisory list of threatened vertebrate fauna in Victoria , this species is listed as near threatened . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Turquoise parrots are encountered in pairs or small groups consisting of parents and several offspring , though they may congregate into larger flocks of up to 50 to 75 predominantly juvenile birds outside the breeding season . As the breeding season nears , pairs separate out from these flocks . Turquoise parrots roost together communally in autumn and winter . At night they roost among the foliage of trees such as gums or wattles , anywhere from 1 to 8 m ( 3 – 25 ft ) above the ground . They retreat to trees near their feeding areas during the day . The calls of the turquoise parrot have been little @-@ studied ; birds give a high @-@ pitched soft contact call when feeding or in flight , while the alarm call has been described as a high @-@ pitched <unk> call . Turquoise parrots also chatter when settling to roost in the evening . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The turquoise parrot is a predominantly ground @-@ based seed eater , foraging in clearings in open woodland , forest margins , and near trees in more open areas such as pastures . It occasionally feeds along road verges and rarely ventures onto lawns . Birds forage in pairs or small troops of up to thirty or even fifty individuals . Observations at Chiltern in Victoria indicated seasonal variation in flock size , with turquoise parrots foraging in groups of 5 – 30 in winter and 6 – 8 in spring and summer . Foraging takes place from early in the morning till late afternoon , with a break between midday and mid @-@ afternoon . Birds prefer to feed in shaded areas , where they are better camouflaged in the grass . 
 Grass and shrub seeds form the bulk of the diet , and leaves , flowers , fruit and scale insects are also eaten . The turquoise parrot has been recorded feeding on seeds of various plant species ; more commonly consumed items include the fruit of common fringe @-@ myrtle ( <unk> <unk> ) , seeds and fruit of erect guinea @-@ flower ( Hibbertia riparia ) , daphne heath ( Brachyloma <unk> ) , seeds of common <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , Geranium species , black @-@ anther flax @-@ lily ( <unk> <unk> ) and grass species such as the introduced big quaking grass ( Briza maxima ) and little quaking grass ( B. minor ) and members of the genus Danthonia , members of the pea genus Dillwynia , and small @-@ leaved beard @-@ heath ( Leucopogon <unk> ) . Seed of the introduced common chickweed ( Stellaria media ) and <unk> ( <unk> calendula ) are also consumed . Nectar of Grevillea alpina , and spores from moss have been recorded as food items . 
 A female was observed placing leaves of the flaky @-@ barked tea @-@ tree ( Leptospermum trinervium ) underneath its feathers , leading the observers to wonder whether they were being used to deter or kill insects . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The turquoise parrot is monogamous . The male perches upright on a tree stump and extends its wings to show off its red and blue markings when courting a female . Once paired , both sexes look for a nesting site , which is ultimately chosen by the female . Breeding has been reported from <unk> National Park on the New South Wales @-@ Queensland border in the north to Wangaratta and Mallacoota in Victoria . Birds use vertical or nearly @-@ vertical hollows of live and dead trees , generally eucalypts , as nesting sites . Occasionally old fence posts have been used . The turquoise parrot competes with — and may be ousted by — the eastern rosella ( Platycercus eximius ) , red @-@ rumped parrot ( <unk> <unk> ) and brown treecreeper ( <unk> <unk> ) for suitable breeding sites . The tree containing the hollow is often located in open woodland , and the hollow itself is generally at least 1 m ( 3 ft ) above the ground . Fieldwork in northern Victoria yielded average dimensions of 10 by 6 cm ( 4 by 3 in ) for the hollow entrance , and a depth of around 50 cm ( 20 in ) for the depth of the hole . Elsewhere the average depth is around 76 cm ( 30 in ) . 
 Breeding takes place over the warmer months with eggs laid from August to January . The clutch is laid on a bed of wood dust or leaves and consists of two to five ( or rarely up to eight ) round or oval glossy white eggs , each of which is generally 21 to 22 mm long by 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 8 by 0 @.@ 7 in ) wide . Clutches tend to have more eggs in earlier rather than later clutches , and in nests located further from cleared land . Eggs are laid at an interval of two to three days . Incubation takes 18 to 21 days . The female incubates the eggs and broods the young , and feeds them for their first few days before the male begins helping . She leaves to feed and drink twice a day , once in the morning and once in the afternoon . Both parents take part in feeding the young , on a diet predominantly of seeds with some fruit . The chicks are altricial and nidicolous ; that is , they are born helpless and blind and remain in the nest for an extended period . Covered in silvery @-@ white down , they have pink skin and darker blue @-@ grey skin around the eye . By seven days they open their eyes , and are well @-@ covered in grey down with pin feathers emerging from their wings on day six . They are almost covered in feathers by day 21 , and fledge ( leave the nest ) at around 23 days of age in the wild and up to 30 days of age in captivity . 
 Around 56 % of eggs lead to successful fledging of young , with fieldwork in northeastern Victoria yielding an average of 2 @.@ 77 young leaving the nest . The lace monitor ( Varanus varius ) and red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) are nest predators . Baby birds may perish by overheating in very hot weather , or by being drowned in the hollows after heavy rain . 
 = = Pathogens = = 
 In 1966 , a paramyxovirus with some antigenic similarity to Newcastle disease was isolated from the brain of a turquoise parrot in the Netherlands . That year , many aviary species including several species of Australian parrot and members of the genus Neophema had exhibited neurological symptoms reminiscent of Newcastle disease . Like other members of the genus , the turquoise parrot is highly sensitive to avian paramyxovirus infection . It is one of many species of parrot that can host the nematode <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Aviculture = = 
 Initially popular as a caged bird in the 19th century , the turquoise parrot was rarely seen in captivity between 1928 and 1956 , the main problem being the high rate of infertile eggs . It has become more common since , and has adapted readily to aviculture . A quiet species , it likes to bathe in captivity . There is a possibility of interbreeding with other members of the genus Neophema if caged together . Specimens with more prominent orange bellies have been bred , sourced from wild birds in New South Wales and not from breeding with scarlet @-@ chested parrots . A yellow form , where the blue pigment is lost and yellow and red pigments are conserved , first appeared in the 1950s in aviculture . It is a recessive mutation . Other colour forms seen are a red @-@ fronted and pied form ( both recessive ) , and jade and olive ( dominant ) . 
 = Croup = 
 Croup is a type of respiratory infection that is usually caused by a virus . The infection leads to swelling inside the wind pipe , which interferes with normal breathing and produces the classic symptoms of " barking " cough , stridor , and a hoarse voice . Fever and runny nose may also be present . These symptoms may be mild , moderate , or severe . Often it starts or is worse at night . It normally lasts one to two days . 
 Croup can be caused by a number of viruses including parainfluenza and influenza virus . Rarely it is due to a bacterial infection . Croup is typically diagnosed based on signs and symptoms after potentially more severe causes such as epiglottitis or an airway foreign body have been ruled out . Further investigations — such as blood tests , X @-@ rays , and cultures — are usually not needed . 
 Many cases of croup are preventable by immunization for influenza and diphtheria . Croup is usually treated with a single dose of steroids by mouth . In more severe cases inhaled epinephrine may also be used . Hospitalization is required in one to five percent of cases . 
 Croup is a relatively common condition that affects about 15 % of children at some point . It most commonly occurs between 6 months and 5 years of age but may rarely be seen in children as old as fifteen . It is slightly more common in males than females . It occurs most often in autumn . Before vaccination , croup was frequently caused by diphtheria and was often fatal . This cause is now very rare in the Western world due to the success of the diphtheria vaccine . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Croup is characterized by a " barking " cough , stridor , hoarseness , and difficulty breathing which usually worsens at night . The " barking " cough is often described as resembling the call of a seal or sea lion . The stridor is worsened by agitation or crying , and if it can be heard at rest , it may indicate critical narrowing of the airways . As croup worsens , stridor may decrease considerably . 
 Other symptoms include fever , <unk> ( symptoms typical of the common cold ) , and chest wall indrawing . Drooling or a very sick appearance indicate other medical conditions . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Croup is usually deemed to be due to a viral infection . Others use the term more broadly , to include acute laryngotracheitis , spasmodic croup , laryngeal diphtheria , bacterial tracheitis , laryngotracheobronchitis , and laryngotracheobronchopneumonitis . The first two conditions involve a viral infection and are generally milder with respect to symptomatology ; the last four are due to bacterial infection and are usually of greater severity . 
 = = = Viral = = = 
 Viral croup or acute laryngotracheitis is caused by parainfluenza virus ( a member of the paramyxovirus family ) , primarily types 1 and 2 , in 75 % of cases . Other viral causes include influenza A and B , measles , adenovirus and respiratory syncytial virus ( RSV ) . <unk> croup is caused by the same group of viruses as acute laryngotracheitis , but lacks the usual signs of infection ( such as fever , sore throat , and increased white blood cell count ) . Treatment , and response to treatment , are also similar . 
 = = = Bacterial = = = 
 Bacterial croup may be divided into laryngeal diphtheria , bacterial tracheitis , laryngotracheobronchitis , and laryngotracheobronchopneumonitis . <unk> diphtheria is due to Corynebacterium <unk> while bacterial tracheitis , laryngotracheobronchitis , and laryngotracheobronchopneumonitis are usually due to a primary viral infection with secondary bacterial growth . The most common bacteria implicated are Staphylococcus aureus , Streptococcus pneumoniae , <unk> influenzae , and Moraxella catarrhalis . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 The viral infection that causes croup leads to swelling of the larynx , trachea , and large bronchi due to infiltration of white blood cells ( especially histiocytes , lymphocytes , plasma cells , and neutrophils ) . Swelling produces airway obstruction which , when significant , leads to dramatically increased work of breathing and the characteristic turbulent , noisy airflow known as stridor . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Croup is a clinical diagnosis . The first step is to exclude other obstructive conditions of the upper airway , especially epiglottitis , an airway foreign body , <unk> stenosis , angioedema , retropharyngeal abscess , and bacterial tracheitis . 
 A frontal X @-@ ray of the neck is not routinely performed , but if it is done , it may show a characteristic narrowing of the trachea , called the steeple sign , because of the <unk> stenosis , which is similar to a steeple in shape . The steeple sign is suggestive of the diagnosis , but is absent in half of cases . 
 Other investigations ( such as blood tests and viral culture ) are discouraged , as they may cause unnecessary agitation and thus worsen the stress on the compromised airway . While viral cultures , obtained via nasopharyngeal aspiration , can be used to confirm the exact cause , these are usually restricted to research settings . Bacterial infection should be considered if a person does not improve with standard treatment , at which point further investigations may be indicated . 
 = = = Severity = = = 
 The most commonly used system for classifying the severity of croup is the Westley score . It is primarily used for research purposes rather than in clinical practice . It is the sum of points assigned for five factors : level of consciousness , cyanosis , stridor , air entry , and retractions . The points given for each factor is listed in the table to the right , and the final score ranges from 0 to 17 . 
 A total score of ≤ 2 indicates mild croup . The characteristic barking cough and hoarseness may be present , but there is no stridor at rest . 
 A total score of 3 – 5 is classified as moderate croup . It presents with easily heard stridor , but with few other signs . 
 A total score of 6 – 11 is severe croup . It also presents with obvious stridor , but also features marked chest wall indrawing . 
 A total score of ≥ 12 indicates impending respiratory failure . The barking cough and stridor may no longer be prominent at this stage . 
 85 % of children presenting to the emergency department have mild disease ; severe croup is rare ( < 1 % ) . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Many cases of croup have been prevented by immunization for influenza and diphtheria . At one time , croup referred to a <unk> disease , but with vaccination , diphtheria is now rare in the developed world . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Children with croup are generally kept as calm as possible . Steroids are given routinely , with epinephrine used in severe cases . Children with oxygen saturations under 92 % should receive oxygen , and those with severe croup may be hospitalized for observation . If oxygen is needed , " blow @-@ by " administration ( holding an oxygen source near the child 's face ) is recommended , as it causes less agitation than use of a mask . With treatment , less than 0 @.@ 2 % of people require endotracheal intubation . 
 = = = Steroids = = = 
 Corticosteroids , such as dexamethasone and <unk> , have been shown to improve outcomes in children with all severities of croup . Significant relief is obtained as early as six hours after administration . While effective when given orally , parenterally , or by inhalation , the oral route is preferred . A single dose is usually all that is required , and is generally considered to be quite safe . <unk> at doses of 0 @.@ 15 , 0 @.@ 3 and 0 @.@ 6 mg / kg appear to be all equally effective . 
 = = = Epinephrine = = = 
 Moderate to severe croup may be improved temporarily with <unk> epinephrine . While epinephrine typically produces a reduction in croup severity within 10 – 30 minutes , the benefits last for only about 2 hours . If the condition remains improved for 2 – 4 hours after treatment and no other complications arise , the child is typically discharged from the hospital . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 While other treatments for croup have been studied , none have sufficient evidence to support their use . Inhalation of hot steam or humidified air is a traditional self @-@ care treatment , but clinical studies have failed to show effectiveness and currently it is rarely used . The use of cough medicines , which usually contain <unk> and / or <unk> , are also discouraged . While breathing heliox ( a mixture of helium and oxygen ) to decrease the work of breathing has been used in the past , there is very little evidence to support its use . Since croup is usually a viral disease , antibiotics are not used unless secondary bacterial infection is suspected . In cases of possible secondary bacterial infection , the antibiotics vancomycin and <unk> are recommended . In severe cases associated with influenza A or B , the antiviral neuraminidase inhibitors may be administered . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Viral croup is usually a self @-@ limited disease , with half of cases going away in a day and 80 % of cases in two days . It can very rarely result in death from respiratory failure and / or cardiac arrest . Symptoms usually improve within two days , but may last for up to seven days . Other uncommon complications include bacterial tracheitis , pneumonia , and pulmonary edema . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Croup affects about 15 % of children , and usually presents between the ages of 6 months and 5 – 6 years . It accounts for about 5 % of hospital admissions in this population . In rare cases , it may occur in children as young as 3 months and as old as 15 years . Males are affected 50 % more frequently than are females , and there is an increased prevalence in autumn . 
 = = History = = 
 The word croup comes from the Early Modern English verb croup , meaning " to cry <unk> " ; the name was first applied to the disease in Scotland and popularized in the 18th century . <unk> croup has been known since the time of Homer 's Ancient Greece and it was not until 1826 that viral croup was differentiated from croup due to diphtheria by <unk> . Viral croup was then called " faux @-@ croup " by the French and often called " false croup " in English , as " croup " or " true croup " then most often referred to the disease caused by the diphtheria bacterium . False croup has also been known as pseudo croup or spasmodic croup . Croup due to diphtheria has become nearly unknown in affluent countries in modern times due to the advent of effective immunization . 
 = Hannah Banana = 
 " Hannah Banana " is the fifth episode of the eighth season of the animated series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on November 8 , 2009 . The episode follows baby Stewie after he sneaks backstage at a Miley Cyrus concert in Quahog , eventually discovering that she is actually an android and causing her to wreak havoc on the town . Meanwhile , Chris proves to his family that the Evil Monkey who lives in his closet is actually real , and eventually comes to realize that the monkey is actually friendly , well @-@ spoken and intelligent , when he begins spending more time with him than his own father . 
 First announced at the 2009 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , the episode was written by Cherry Chevapravatdumrong and directed by John Holmquist . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 73 million homes in its original airing . The episode aired during an " all @-@ Seth MacFarlane " line @-@ up , along with the live @-@ action special Seth and Alex 's Almost Live Comedy Show , and featured a guest performance by Candace Marie , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Hannah Banana " was released on DVD along with seven other episodes from the season on June 15 , 2010 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chris does poorly on a test at school and blames the Evil Monkey living in his closet , which he says prevented him from being able to study . His parents , Peter and Lois , are fed up with Chris talking about the Evil Monkey , saying it does not exist . Later , Stewie , a self @-@ proclaimed Hannah Montana fan , learns that Miley Cyrus is having a concert in Quahog . Tickets to the show are sold out mere seconds after being made available for purchase , leaving him unable to attend the show . Brian makes fun of Stewie for watching Hannah Montana , at one point , calling him " gay " . But seeing him cry about not being able to attend the show persuades him to help get tickets . Chris sets up a camera in his room to capture the creature . When he reviews the tape he finds no evidence of the Evil Monkey , and goes ahead with his plans on capturing him . The family is taken aback when Chris proves it is real by capturing the monkey , and showing it to them , but he turns out not to be evil after all . The monkey explains he was forced to move into Chris 's closet after his wife had an affair , and their divorce put him into a deep depression which made him lose his job , his money and his house altogether . He took refuge in Chris ' closet until getting back on his feet where he spent almost a decade in there , and pointing at Chris was only his way of trying to make conversation ( he 's been trying to talk to Chris this whole time ) . In addition , the angry face he gave was his way of thinking , and the trembling was due to a copper deficiency . The monkey apologizes for unintentionally terrorizing Chris , and wants to start over with him . Chris is at first unconvinced , but when the monkey helps him write a book report , he is surprised to receive a passing grade , and the two become great friends . 
 Brian and Stewie manage to sneak in backstage at the concert , where Miley asks why they 're here . Brian then explains that Stewie has a ' tumor ' shaped like a football , which convinces Miley to let them hang out with her backstage . Miley and Stewie quickly become best friends and they sing a song which Stewie wrote . Soon , Chris realizes that the Monkey has spent more time with him , like taking him to play baseball and going to a father and son BBQ in <unk> . Chris then says to Peter that he has never gave as much attention to him as the monkey has , so he grows to resent his own father . While having ice @-@ cream with Miley , Stewie notices a signal interference on her cell phone when handing it to her . He then realises something is strange about Miley . Upon spying on her , Stewie and Brian discover that she is actually an android after seeing an employee insert a USB drive on the control panel on Miley 's back . They both realized that Miley was created by Walt Disney Imagineering to become the perfect teen idol that can never fail . When Brian curiously asks if she can perform other tasks , Stewie agrees to reprogram Miley to have sex with Brian by gaining access to the control panel . However , it goes wrong and he accidentally sends Miley into a rage , forcing Stewie and Brian to run away from the monstrous Miley . 
 Peter and Chris set up traps for each other as they fight . Lois then gets sick of the boys fighting , so the monkey tricks Peter and Chris into coming to dinner together . Chris and Peter admit they don 't hate each other and vow to spend more time together . As they are doing this , they see Brian and Stewie running away from the chaotic Miley who is smashing vehicles , shops and houses . The monkey confronts her , and attempts to talk her out of her rampage ( as well as her career ) , but Miley ends up kidnapping him and takes him to the top of a nearby skyscraper . Fortunately , Peter is able to recruit his neighbor , Quagmire , to shoot her down in a biplane , and a battle with Miley starts escalating . The monkey falls out of her hands and he grips onto a narrow ledge with one hand . Miley 's skin , hair and clothes peel off , revealing her android skeleton and she tries to kill Peter and Quagmire with a rock , but fails . Eventually , she is pummelled off the top . Afterwards , the monkey falls off the ledge but is saved by Peter just before he hits the road far below . Stewie and Brian then see the broken Miley , where Stewie says Brian can now have sex with her , but Miley blows up seconds later . Monkey then moves out of Chris 's closet , and his friendly attitude also parts ways with him , saying he will " go where he 's needed " , and moves to Tom Tucker 's upside @-@ down @-@ faced son Jake 's closet as his new haunt . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 " Hannah Banana " was written by series regular Cherry Chevapravatdumrong and directed by John Holmquist , before the conclusion of the eighth production season . Commenting on the original development of the episode , series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane stated , " [ The episode ] was the result of our ongoing desire to let the series stagnate , and kind of evolve things that may have run their course . There 's only so many times you can do the Evil Monkey jumping out of that closet , before the joke gets old , and I think often times there 's a fear to mess with what works , and change things permanently . [ ... ] We literally retired the Evil Monkey in this episode , and got a great episode out of it , which was worth it , and kind of evolved the series in a way . " Singer and actress Candace Marie provided the voice of Miley Cyrus . Marie received the role when her producer alerted her of the audition , and she eventually received a call from the Family Guy casting director a month later . Even though the episode mocked Cyrus , Marie did not think she would upset any of Cyrus ' fans . She added that she is a fan herself , and " was very impressed by the way Family Guy developed the episode , " and thought it was " a huge compliment for them to refer to Miley as the " perfect popstar . " " After voicing Cyrus , Marie was called back to Family Guy to voice Meg 's friend Beth for " several upcoming episodes . " Marie described Beth as a girl that is " rarely addressed in conversation but loves to chime in whenever she can . " The song in the episode sung by Cyrus was written by Chevapravatdumrong , and composed and performed by Family Guy composer Walter Murphy . 
 The episode aired as a part of an " all @-@ Seth MacFarlane " line @-@ up , after the episode " Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag " and the live @-@ action special Seth and Alex 's Almost Live Comedy Show . " Hannah Banana " , along with the seven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on June 15 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " Road to the Multiverse " , and mini @-@ feature entitled Family Guy Karaoke . In addition to the regular cast , series regular , writer and executive producer Danny Smith voiced the Evil Monkey . Recurring guest voice actors Chris Cox , actor Ralph Garman , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener made minor appearances throughout the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , Chris alerts his parents of a failing grade he received at school on a science test , causing his mother to suggest he receive help on his homework . Chris then asks his father , Peter , for help who ends up rejecting him , leading Chris to blame his bad grades on the Evil Monkey , and announces that he will prove the monkey is real . Peter then suggests that his son would have to do a better job than God when he created actresses Ellen Barkin and Kelly McGillis . 
 Later that day , Stewie is shown watching television in the family room , with a narrator announcing a Hannah Montana marathon , as well as a concert in Quahog , Rhode Island , causing him to become excited . A scene from an episode of Hannah Montana is then shown , featuring Miley Cyrus , as well as her father , singer @-@ songwriter Billy Ray Cyrus . 
 Deciding to sneak into the concert , Brian agrees to dress as rapper Kanye West , and is forced to sing one of his songs by a security guard . Despondent , Brian then begins singing the theme song to 1972 NBC sitcom Sanford and Son . The scene is not shown on TV ; Stewie and Brian sneak into the concert in the televised version . 
 As the monkey begins bonding with the family , including having a conversation about actress and comedian Sarah Silverman , Chris realizes his deep hatred of the monkey . Deciding to help Chris on his homework , the monkey scraps a lame attempt by Chris to write an essay about the 1951 novel The Catcher in the Rye by American author J. D. Salinger , and instead writes an A + essay titled , " The Slave Trade Allegory of Curious George . " The two then begin their own personal bonding , and eventually decide to go fishing , leading Chris to catch the comic book superhero Aquaman , before beating him to death and eating him . 
 In the conclusion of the episode , Miley Cyrus begins destroying downtown Quahog , causing the monkey to attempt to stop and reason with her . Not realizing that Stewie had unsuccessfully reprogrammed her , the monkey is then kidnapped , and taken to the top of a nearby skyscraper , in a parody of the 1933 film King Kong . Cyrus is then shot down by Quagmire and Peter while piloting a biplane , before the two rescue the monkey from certain death . After being shot during several passes , Miley 's robotic skeleton is partially revealed making her resemble a T @-@ 800 from " Terminator " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight improvement over the previous episode , the episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 73 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with Sunday Night Football on NBC , The Amazing Race on CBS and Desperate Housewives on ABC . The episode also acquired a 4 @.@ 0 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating Seth & Alex 's Almost @-@ Live Comedy Show , The Cleveland Show and the Family Guy episode " Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag " , in addition to significantly edging out all three in total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode from television critics were mostly mixed , who found it to be " a thorough examination of both Miley Cyrus and the evil monkey in Chris ' closet , " but , " things got ridiculous . " Television critic Ahsan Haque of IGN gave the episode an 8 @.@ 5 out of ten , and called it a " much better episode than Brian 's Got a Brand New Bag , with some clever sight gags , an annoyingly catchy musical number , and the revelation of the Evil Monkey 's true reasons for hiding in Chris ' closet . " In a simultaneous review of all four MacFarlane programs , Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a C- stating , " Turning Miley Cyrus into a Small Wonder parody was fitfully amusing , but the rest of the Hannah Montana material was ridiculously non @-@ specific , filled with the kinds of jokes everyone made about Cyrus a few years ago . " VanDerWerff praised the action sequence at the end of the episode , however , calling it " high quality stuff for the show . " Jason Hughes of TV Squad stated of the Evil Monkey 's role in the episode , " I don 't think I ever wanted this character fully explored or seen by anyone else in the house [ ... ] The character lost some of its mystique and charm . " 
 = The Duel ( The Office ) = 
 " The Duel " is the twelfth episode of the fifth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 84th overall episode . In the episode , Andy learns his fiancee Angela is having an affair with Dwight , and the two challenge each other to a physical fight to win her affections . Meanwhile , Michael travels to New York City for a meeting with David Wallace , where Wallace seeks managerial advice from Michael due to the poor financial condition of the fictional company , Dunder Mifflin . 
 The episode was written by Jennifer Celotta and directed by Dean Holland , the show 's long @-@ time editor making his directorial debut . It featured the conclusion of the love triangle between Dwight , Andy and Angela , a subplot that had been going on since the end of the fourth season . David Wallace 's meeting with Michael marked the show 's first acknowledgment of the economic crisis facing much of the globalized nation at the time of the episode due to the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 . 
 " The Duel " was seen as a defining episode for Andy Bernard , who is portrayed in a more sympathetic way than he has been seen in previous episodes . Ed Helms was particularly praised for his performance . Several bits of dialogue were improvised , especially during the duel scene between Andy and Dwight . That scene was shot over the course of six hours in an exterior parking lot set , with Helms and Wilson providing their own stunts . 
 The episode received generally positive reviews , and was largely described as an effective conclusion to the love triangle subplot . According to Nielsen Media Research , " The Duel " was seen by 8 @.@ 35 million viewers . During its original American broadcast , it received particularly strong competition from the CBS drama series CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , which that night featured the final appearance of actor William Petersen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy ( Ed Helms ) still has not learned about fiancee Angela 's ( Angela Kinsey ) affair with Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) , seventeen days after Phyllis ( Phyllis Smith ) revealed it to everyone else in the Dunder Mifflin office . Michael ( Steve Carell ) suggests he should inform Andy , but the entire office argues that Angela should be the one to break the news . Jim ( John Krasinski ) is particularly concerned that Andy 's past anger management issues may lead to violence . Dwight tries convincing Angela to tell Andy , but she continues to put it off . This leaves Michael to tell Andy before he leaves for a meeting with David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) . Michael reveals the affair to Andy while driving out of the parking lot , leaving Andy shocked and dismayed . Angela reluctantly confirms the affair occurred , and Andy realizes everybody else in the office already knew about it . 
 Andy confronts Dwight and challenges him to a " duel " in the parking lot , with Angela as a prize to the winner . Dwight accepts and Angela , anxious to avoid making a choice between the two men herself , says she will honor the results of the duel . Jim , acting as office manager in Michael 's absence , tries to talk them out of the duel and confiscates Dwight 's hidden weapons around the office , but concedes he does not have the power to prevent a fight outside the office . Meanwhile in New York , Michael is nervous about why David Wallace wants to meet with him . But as the meeting begins , David tells him Scranton is the most successful Dunder Mifflin branch amid a difficult economic climate , and he wants to learn why Michael 's management has been so successful . Michael is delighted with the compliment and attention , but can only manage vague , off @-@ topic and largely nonsensical answers . David claims it is difficult for someone to make a self @-@ evaluation , and Michael leaves the meeting in a very pleasant mood . 
 In the parking lot , Andy has not shown up for the duel , instead leaving a deliberately verbose note hanging in the bushes saying he has given up . As Dwight reads it , Andy sneaks up behind him in his Toyota Prius , a hybrid car that remains completely silent when driven below five miles per hour due to the electric motor . Impressed by Andy 's deviousness , the rest of the office does not warn Dwight , saying that Andy " deserves the win " . Andy pins Dwight between the car and the large bushes in the parking lot . Jim races out to check that Andy and Dwight are not seriously injured , but they snap at him to go away . The two bicker back and forth about Angela . However , the fight goes out of Dwight when he learns Andy has had sex with Angela , because she told him that he was the only one she had had sex with . <unk> , Dwight and Andy return to the office , where Andy calls to cancel his wedding cake , and Dwight throws away a bobblehead doll Angela previously bought him as a gift . A saddened Angela realizes she has lost both men . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " The Duel " was written by Jennifer Celotta , a producer and show runner with The Office . The episode featured the conclusion of the love triangle between Dwight , Andy and Angela , a subplot that had been going on since the fourth season finale , " Goodbye , Toby " . The cast and writing staff saw " The Duel " as a defining episode for Andy Bernard because it demonstrated a softer , more emotional side of the character . Dean Holland , who directed the episode , said this was particularly effective because in past episodes , he displayed such rage problems that he had to attend anger management courses , but in " The Duel " he responded to horrible news in a heartrending way . Rainn Wilson particularly praised Ed Helms ' performance , saying , " He gives a lot of heart and soul , and Andy is such a doofus and a douche , and now you really get to see his heart break . There 's some reality there . That 's the great thing this show gives us , just when you think you know the characters and they 're two @-@ dimensional and they 're goofy and crazy , in their own way , you get real human redemption . " 
 The subplot with David Wallace seeking managerial advice from Michael due to the poor financial condition of Dunder Mifflin was the first acknowledgment of the economic crisis facing much of the globalized nation at the time of the episode due to the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 . This set the stage for a continuing motif of financial difficulties for Dunder Mifflin , which would eventually culminate in the sixth season episode " Secret Santa " , in which it is revealed the company has been sold and its executives all fired . 
 A number of scenes and lines in " The Duel " were improvised by the actors . During one scene , Michael repeatedly tries to tell Andy about Angela 's affair , but Jim constantly interrupts him while forcing him into his office . John Krasinski improvised most of his lines and noises , and Wilson said they were so funny , " I was just chortling over at my desk " . The scene as it appears in the episode consists of about six different takes spliced together . Krasinski also conceived a moment in " The Duel " when Jim returns to his desk by awkwardly passing through Dwight and Andy while they are facing off against each other . Wilson called the addition to the scene " a really nice touch " . During another scene , Dwight sings a nursery rhyme that goes , " Learn your rules , you better learn your rules , if you don 't , you 'll be eaten in your sleep ! " Celotta and Wilson came up with several versions of the song , but the one that appeared in the final episode was conceived by Wilson . 
 A line in which Dwight tells Andy that Angela " certainly seems to enjoy making lovemaking " was improvised by Wilson . Much of the dialogue between Andy and Dwight during the duel scene was also improvised . It was writer Paul Lieberstein , who served as show runner along with Celotta at the time , who suggested the idea of Andy sneaking up on Dwight with his Toyota Prius . The original script called for the entire office cast to come down to the parking lot from the Dunder Mifflin office to try to stop Dwight and Andy from fighting . However , the staging proved awkward during filming , so John Krasinski suggested that only Jim go down to the parking lot while the others stayed behind , and the change was eventually incorporated into the episode . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " The Duel " marked the directorial debut of Dean Holland , a longtime film editor with The Office . The original cut of the episode was 38 minutes long and Holland , who edited it himself , had to trim it down to 22 minutes . During a cold open scene , the Dunder Mifflin employees run past a radar speed sign in the street and compete for the best speed . This was inspired by Aaron Shure , a television producer and The Office screenwriter , who worked on the staff of another television show that held races in front of a radar speed sign in exactly the same way . It was about 96 degrees when the scene was filmed , which made running particularly difficult for the actors . Despite the extremely hot temperatures , fake snow was placed in the exterior shots because the writers were trying to simulate the winter season weather of Scranton , Pennsylvania , where The Office is set , rather than the Van Nuys district in Los Angeles , California , where the show is filmed . 
 The original script called for Michael to tell Andy about Angela 's affair outside in the parking lot before getting into his car and driving away . When filming began , Holland considered filming the scene inside the car instead . Steve Carell suggested Michael get in the car and leave Andy outside , then tell him while driving away , which was how the scene was ultimately shot . During a scene when Andy returns to the office and confronts his co @-@ workers ; there is a long , awkward silence , and the script originally called for Kevin to pass gas and ruin the tension . During filming , it was changed so Phyllis would pass gas instead because it was decided it would be funnier if it were a woman . During the editing process , Holland decided the joke did not work very well and cut it , but a brief moment of Dwight reacting in a disgusted way to the flatulence , while maintaining a defensive fighting pose toward Andy , can still be seen in the finished episode . 
 The duel scene itself was shot over the course of six hours in the exterior parking lot setting . Natural lighting from the sun changed so drastically over that time , large bounce cards had to be placed above the hedges so the shadows would remain consistent throughout the shoot . Ed Helms actually drove the car during the scenes , and Rainn Wilson performed his own stunts . The crew considered using a stunt double for Wilson , but they found his acting so funny during filming that they decided against it . At the end of " The Duel " , Michael Scott talks directly to the camera with a New York City background behind him . The scenes were not filmed in the city , but rather behind a greenscreen where the scenery images were later added . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During the cold open , after Michael believes he has run extremely fast , he says , " Eat that , Carl Lewis " , a reference to the American track and field athlete and gold medalist . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on January 15 , 2009 , " The Duel " was watched by 8 @.@ 35 million viewers . It aired the same night as actor William Petersen 's final appearance on the CBS drama series CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , which drew an unusually high viewership of 23 @.@ 13 million viewers . Nevertheless , The Office outperformed CSI in the ratings among viewers between ages 18 and 34 , earning a 5 @.@ 0 rating / 13 share compared to CSI 's 3 @.@ 8 rating / 10 share . Both shows were outperformed in that age group by the ABC drama series Grey 's Anatomy , which drew a 5 @.@ 2 rating / 13 share , and a total of 12 @.@ 95 million viewers for the night . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , " The Duel " drew a 4 @.@ 3 rating / 10 share , which was lower than both CSI and Grey 's Anatomy . The Office also earned higher ratings in its timeslot than the Fox reality television series " Kitchen Nightmares " ( 4 @.@ 28 million viewers ) and the CW thriller series Supernatural ( 2 @.@ 96 million viewers ) . 
 " The Duel " received generally positive reviews . Andy calling off the wedding after learning Angela cheated on him with Dwight ranked number 6 in phillyBurbs.com 's top ten moments from the fifth season of The Office . " The Duel " was voted the fourteenth highest @-@ rated episode out of 26 from the fifth season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally , where the episode was rated 8 @.@ 11 out of 10 . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said the episode " brings the Dwight / Angela / Andy triangle to an effective close " that made him feel sympathy for both Dwight and Andy . He was disappointed , however , that the idea of David Wallace trying to learn from Michael seemed undeveloped . The A.V. Club writer Scott Tobias said " The Duel " efficiently resolved a major storyline in 30 minutes , and was " a nice mix of the wacky and the melancholy , though it ’ s perhaps a little long on the former and a little short on the latter " . He called the David Wallace subplot " funny @-@ but @-@ forgettable " . Travis Fickett of IGN said the episode was surprisingly intense and dramatic , and particularly highlighted the talents of Ed Helms . Fickett said " The Duel " was a great payoff to the Angela love triangle storyline and demonstrated how well The Office varies and paces stories from episode to episode . 
 TV Guide writer Shahzad Abbas called it possibly the best episode of the season . Abbas particular enjoyed the tension as Andy learned the truth and the resolution of the duel . Entertainment Weekly writer Alynda Wheat called it an " instant classic " and a vast improvement over the most recent string of episodes . Wheat called the interactions between Dwight and Andy " brilliance " and described the cold open " pretty genius " . New York magazine writer Will Leitch said the Andy @-@ Dwight @-@ Angela triangle was like a " dirtier , meaner , crazier parody " of the Jim @-@ Pam @-@ Roy subplot from previous seasons , and Leitch appreciated that it was resolved in a darker way than the latter love triangle . Brian Howard of The Journal News called it a " great episode " , and particularly enjoyed the moments between Angela and Dwight , and the way Jim tried to prevent Michael from telling Andy about the affair . Jay Black of TV Squad said he enjoyed seeing Angela get her comeuppance , and felt he could relate to the voyeuristic interest the office co @-@ workers took in the duel . Black praised the Michael subplot because it " provided an ironic counter @-@ weight " to the duel because Michael was being praised for his managerial skills while his co @-@ workers fought each other in the parking lot . 
 = Bill Virdon = 
 William Charles Virdon ( born June 9 , 1931 ) is an American former professional baseball outfielder , manager , and coach in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Virdon played in MLB for the St. Louis Cardinals and Pittsburgh Pirates from 1955 through 1965 and in 1968 . He served as a coach for the Pirates and Houston Astros , and managed the Pirates , Astros , New York Yankees , and Montreal Expos . 
 After playing in Minor League Baseball for the Yankees organization , Virdon was traded to the Cardinals , and he made his MLB debut in 1955 . That year , Virdon won the National League Rookie of the Year Award . He slumped at the beginning of the 1956 season , and was traded to the Pirates , where he spent the remainder of his playing career . A premier defensive outfielder during his playing days as a center fielder for the Cardinals and Pirates , Virdon led a strong defensive team to the 1960 World Series championship . In 1962 , Virdon won a Rawlings Gold Glove Award . Following the 1965 season , he retired due to his desire to become a manager . 
 Virdon managed in Minor League Baseball until returning to the Pirates as a coach in 1968 . He served as manager of the Pirates in 1972 and 1973 , before becoming the manager of the Yankees in 1974 . During the 1975 season , the Yankees fired Virdon , and he was hired by the Astros . After being fired by the Astros after the 1982 season , Virdon managed the Expos in 1983 and 1984 . Virdon won The Sporting News ' Manager of the Year Award in 1974 , his only full season working for the Yankees , and in 1980 , while managing the Astros . He returned to the Pirates as a coach following his managerial career , and remains with the Pirates as a guest instructor during spring training . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Charles Virdon was born in Hazel Park , Michigan , on June 9 , 1931 . His parents , Bertha and Charles Virdon , were originally from Missouri , but moved to Hazel Park during the Great Depression , where they were able to find jobs in automotive factories . When he was 12 years old , his family moved to West Plains , Missouri . 
 Virdon attended West Plains High School . He competed in American football , basketball , and track and field for the school . As West Plains did not compete in baseball , Virdon traveled to Clay Center , Kansas , to play for their American Amateur Baseball Congress team as a center fielder and shortstop . He enrolled at Drury University in Springfield , Missouri . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 = = = = Minor league career = = = = 
 Virdon attended an open tryout held by the New York Yankees in Branson , Missouri , and scout Tom <unk> signed Virdon to the Yankees for a $ 1 @,@ 800 signing bonus ( $ 17 @,@ 704 in current dollar terms ) . Virdon made his professional debut in 1950 with the Independence Yankees in the Class D Kansas – Oklahoma – Missouri League , and was promoted to the Kansas City Blues in the Class AAA American Association for the final 14 games of the season . Virdon played for the Norfolk Tars in the Class B Piedmont League in 1951 , and for the Binghamton Triplets in the Class A Eastern League in 1952 . The Yankees assigned him to Kansas City in 1953 , but he struggled , batting .233 . While he played in Kansas City , Virdon was diagnosed with astigmatism . When Kansas City manager Harry Craft noticed Virdon reading while wearing glasses , Craft told him to wear them while he played . 
 The Yankees demoted Virdon to the Birmingham Barons in the Class AA Southern Association . In 42 games for Birmingham , Virdon had a .317 batting average . According to Hal Smith , his roommate with Birmingham , Virdon changed his approach to hitting , prioritizing line drives to all parts of the field , rather than trying to hit for power . 
 Virdon remained stuck behind Mickey Mantle on the Yankees ' depth chart for center field , while Gene Woodling and Hank Bauer played the corner outfield positions . The Yankees traded Virdon to the St. Louis Cardinals before the 1954 season with Mel Wright and Emil <unk> for veteran outfielder and All @-@ Star Enos Slaughter . Virdon struggled during spring training , and Cardinals manager Eddie Stanky worked with Virdon to improve his hitting . The Cardinals assigned Virdon to the Rochester Red Wings of the Class AAA International League for the season . He led the league with a .333 batting average and hit 22 home runs , finishing second in voting for the International League Most Valuable Player Award to Elston Howard . 
 = = = = Major league career = = = = 
 Virdon joined the Cardinals in 1955 , as the Cardinals moved Stan Musial to first base to allow Virdon to play the outfield . As a rookie , Virdon had a .281 average with 17 home runs and 69 runs batted in ( RBIs ) . He was named the winner of the National League ( NL ) Rookie of the Year Award , voted on by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America , beating Jack Meyer of the Philadelphia Phillies . 
 After the 1955 season , the Cardinals hired Frank Lane , nicknamed " The Trader " , as their general manager . Virdon slumped to begin the 1956 season , and the Cardinals traded him to the Pittsburgh Pirates in May 1956 for Bobby Del Greco and Dick Littlefield . Lane claimed that Virdon 's late season slump in 1955 was because he tired down the stretch , and that is why he chose to trade him . Lane later referred to the trade as " the worst trade [ he ] ever made " . 
 When he arrived at Pittsburgh , he developed an eye condition , for which he received treatment , missing one week of the season . Virdon 's vision improved , and he challenged Hank Aaron for the NL batting title . Virdon batted .334 for the Pirates during remainder of the season , which increased his season batting average to .319 , second @-@ best in the NL to Aaron , who batted .328 . Pirates ' announcer Bob Prince gave Virdon the nickname " Quail " due to the frequency of his soft @-@ hit infield hits . 
 The Pirates hired Danny Murtaugh as their manager during the 1957 season ; Virdon credited Murtaugh with pushing him to perform at his best . Virdon consistently batted in the <unk> for the next several seasons . He led all NL center fielders in assists in 1959 with 16 , and in double plays turned with five . In 1960 , Virdon , along with right fielder Roberto Clemente , shortstop Dick <unk> , second baseman Bill Mazeroski , and third baseman Don Hoak , formed a strong defensive unit for the Pirates , and they reached the 1960 World Series , where they faced the New York Yankees . Virdon batted .241 during the seven game series . In the deciding Game 7 , he hit a ground ball that struck Yankees shortstop Tony Kubek in the throat after taking an unpredictable bounce , enabling Virdon to reach base safely . This started a rally for the Pirates that culminated in Bill Mazeroski 's home run that won the series for Pittsburgh . 
 Virdon led the NL in triples with 10 during the 1962 season . That year , he won the Rawlings Gold Glove Award . He struggled in the 1964 season , batting only .243 . Though his batting average improved to .279 in the 1965 season , Virdon retired after the season due to his desire to become a manager . Virdon retired with 1 @,@ 596 MLB hits , a career batting average of .267 with 91 home runs during his 1 @,@ 583 @-@ game NL career . 
 = = = Coaching and managing = = = 
 Virdon began operating a baseball academy in 1956 . After the 1962 season , Virdon coached in the Arizona Instructional League . He coached in the Florida Instructional League following the 1964 season . Following his retirement as a player after the 1965 season , Virdon spent the next two seasons as a manager in the minor leagues for the New York Mets ' organization . In 1966 , he managed the Williamsport Mets of the Eastern League , and in 1967 , he managed the Jacksonville Suns of the International League . He led Williamsport to a 68 – 72 win @-@ loss record , and Jacksonville to a 66 – 73 record . 
 Virdon joined the Pirates ' major league coaching staff under manager Larry Shepard in 1968 . Shepard left the Pirates after the 1969 season , and Virdon interviewed to become the Pirates ' next manager . However , the Pirates re @-@ hired Murtaugh , and Virdon remained on Murtaugh 's coaching staff . Virdon coached the Pirates as they won the 1971 World Series . Due to health problems , Murtaugh retired after the 1971 season , and Virdon was named as his successor . 
 As a manager , Virdon led the Pirates to the 1972 NL East division title , but the Pirates lost the 1972 National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) to the Cincinnati Reds when Pittsburgh pitcher Bob Moose unleashed a wild pitch in the final inning of Game 5 , allowing the winning run to score . The 1973 Pirates had to play without Clemente , who died during the previous offseason . Further struggles included pitcher Steve Blass ' inability to throw strikes and injuries to Dock Ellis . In 1973 , Virdon clashed with Ellis and Richie Hebner , and the Pirates fell into third place , with a 67 – 69 record , and the team fired Virdon , replacing him with Murtaugh . 
 The Yankees announced the hiring of Dick Williams as their manager for the 1974 season , but American League president Joe Cronin nullified the transaction because Williams was still under contract with the Oakland Athletics . The Athletics demanded prospects Otto Vélez and Scott McGregor as compensation for Williams , but the Yankees decided the price was too steep . Without a manager , the Yankees hired Virdon , signing him to a one @-@ year contract . Virdon led the Yankees to a competitive finish , one game behind the Baltimore Orioles in the American League East division . He won The Sporting News ' Manager of the Year Award . The Yankees signed him to a two @-@ year contract after the 1974 season , with a raise from $ 50 @,@ 000 to $ 65 @,@ 000 per year . However , Virdon clashed with Bobby Murcer . He received a death threat due to his preference of playing Elliott Maddox over Murcer in center field . The Yankees struggled in 1975 . When Billy Martin was fired as manager of the Texas Rangers during the 1975 season , the Yankees fired Virdon on August 2 and hired Martin . 
 The Houston Astros hired Virdon as their manager on August 20 , 1975 , succeeding Preston Gómez . Tal Smith , who had served as executive vice president for the Yankees , had become the Astros ' general manager on August 7 . Virdon led the Astros to third @-@ place finishes in 1976 and 1977 , but the Astros slipped to fifth place in 1978 . The 1979 Astros fell one game short of winning the NL West division championship . The Astros tied the Los Angeles Dodgers for the division championship in 1980 , and defeated them in the 1980 NL West tie @-@ breaker game . The Astros played the Philadelphia Phillies in the 1980 NLCS , losing the series in five games . He again won the Manager of the Year Award in 1980 . Due to the 1981 Major League Baseball strike , the 1981 season was split into halves with each half 's winner appearing in the 1981 NL Division Series . The Dodgers won the first half , while the Astros won the second . In the Division Series , the Dodgers defeated the Astros in five games . During the 1982 season , the Astros fell to fifth place . Virdon was fired during the season and replaced by Bob Lillis . 
 The Montreal Expos hired Virdon as their manager before the 1983 season , replacing Jim Fanning , and signed a two @-@ year contract . During the 1984 season , Virdon expressed his to Expos general manager John McHale that he did not want to return to the Expos in 1985 . With a 64 – 67 record in August 1984 , the Expos fired Virdon during the 1984 season , replacing him with Fanning . Gary Lucas , a pitcher for the Expos , felt that they had lost many one @-@ run games because Virdon was too conservative in his managing , not employing the hit and run play and relying on the starting pitcher for long in the game . 
 Virdon returned to the Pirates as the hitting coach under Jim Leyland in 1986 , Leyland 's first season as a manager . He took the position only when he was convinced that he would not succeed Leyland should the Pirates fire him . Following a contract dispute , the Pirates replaced Virdon with Milt May before the 1987 season . Virdon remained with the Pirates as a minor league hitting instructor for the Pirates from 1987 through 1989 . He worked as a spring training instructor for the Cardinals in 1990 and 1991 , and then rejoined Leyland 's coaching staff in Pittsburgh in 1992 . 
 With Major League Baseball expanding by two teams for the 1993 season , Virdon interviewed for the managerial positions of both expansion teams , the Florida Marlins and the Colorado Rockies , in 1992 . The Marlins instead hired Rene <unk> , and the Rockies hired Don Baylor . In 1994 , Virdon interviewed with the Orioles for their vacant managerial position . Virdon left the Pirates after the 1995 season . He became the bench coach for the Astros under first @-@ time manager Larry Dierker in 1997 . The Pirates brought Virdon back as their bench coach for the 2001 season under first @-@ time manager Lloyd McClendon . He retired from coaching after the 2002 season . 
 Virdon 's career managerial record , over all or parts of 13 seasons , was 995 – 921 ( .519 ) . He also managed in the minor leagues for the Cardinals and the Astros . In June 2012 , the Pirates attempted to add Virdon and Mazeroski to their coaching staff , but were rebuffed by MLB for violating the rules on uniformed coaching staffs after one game . Virdon continues to serve as a special outfield instructor for the Pirates during spring training . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Virdon and his wife , Shirley , married in November 1951 , and live in Springfield , Missouri . They have three daughters . Together , Bill and Shirley Virdon endowed two scholarships at Southeast Missouri State University , Shirley 's alma mater , with one specifically devoted for a baseball player . 
 A portion of the U.S. Route 63 business route in West Plains is named " Bill Virdon Boulevard " . Virdon was inducted into the Missouri Sports Hall of Fame in 1983 , and named a Missouri Sports Legend by the Missouri Sports Hall of Fame in 2012 . The Independence , Missouri , Baseball Hall of Fame inducted Virdon in 2013 . Following Whitey Herzog 's election to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2012 , Herzog indicated that he would champion Virdon 's cause to the Veterans Committee in future elections . 
 = Airborne real @-@ time cueing hyperspectral enhanced reconnaissance = 
 Airborne real @-@ time cueing hyperspectral enhanced reconnaissance , also known by the acronym ARCHER , is an aerial imaging system that produces ground images far more detailed than plain sight or ordinary aerial photography can . It is the most sophisticated unclassified hyperspectral imaging system available , according to U.S. Government officials . ARCHER can automatically scan detailed imaging for a given signature of the object being sought ( such as a missing aircraft ) , for abnormalities in the surrounding area , or for changes from previous recorded spectral signatures . 
 It has direct applications for search and rescue , <unk> , disaster relief and impact assessment , and homeland security , and has been deployed by the Civil Air Patrol ( CAP ) in the US on the Australian @-@ built Gippsland GA8 Airvan fixed @-@ wing aircraft . CAP , the civilian auxiliary of the United States Air Force , is a volunteer education and public @-@ service non @-@ profit organization that conducts aircraft search and rescue in the US . 
 = = Overview = = 
 ARCHER is a daytime non @-@ invasive technology , which works by analyzing an object ’ s reflected light . It cannot detect objects at night , underwater , under dense cover , underground , under snow or inside buildings . The system uses a special camera facing down through a quartz glass portal in the belly of the aircraft , which is typically flown at a standard mission altitude of 2500 feet ( 800 meters ) and 100 knots ( 50 meters / second ) ground speed . 
 The system software was developed by Space Computer Corporation of Los Angeles and the system hardware is supplied by <unk> Corp. of Honolulu , Hawaii specifically for CAP . The ARCHER system is based on hyperspectral technology research and testing previously undertaken by the United States Naval Research Laboratory ( NRL ) and Air Force Research Laboratory ( AFRL ) . CAP developed ARCHER in cooperation with the NRL , AFRL and the United States Coast Guard Research & Development Center in the largest interagency project CAP has undertaken in its 74 @-@ year history . 
 Since 2003 , almost US $ 5 million authorized under the 2002 Defense Appropriations Act has been spent on development and deployment . As of January 2007 , CAP reported completing the initial deployment of 16 aircraft throughout the U.S. and training over 100 operators , but had only used the system on a few search and rescue missions , and had not credited it with being the first to find any wreckage . In searches in Georgia and Maryland during 2007 , ARCHER located the aircraft wreckage , but both accidents had no survivors , according to Col. Drew Alexa , director of advanced technology , and the ARCHER program manager at CAP . An ARCHER equipped aircraft from the Utah Wing of the Civil Air Patrol was used in the search for adventurer Steve Fossett in September 2007 . ARCHER did not locate Mr. Fossett , but was instrumental in uncovering eight previously uncharted crash sites in the high desert area of Nevada , some decades old . 
 Col. Alexa described the system to the press in 2007 : " The human eye sees basically three bands of light . The ARCHER sensor sees 50 . It can see things that are anomalous in the vegetation such as metal or something from an airplane wreckage . " Major Cynthia Ryan of the Nevada Civil Air Patrol , while also describing the system to the press in 2007 , stated , " ARCHER is essentially something used by the geosciences . It 's pretty sophisticated stuff … beyond what the human eye can generally see , " She elaborated further , " It might see boulders , it might see trees , it might see mountains , sagebrush , whatever , but it goes ' not that ' or ' yes , that ' . The amazing part of this is that it can see as little as 10 per cent of the target , and extrapolate from there . " 
 In addition to the primary search and rescue mission , CAP has tested additional uses for ARCHER . For example , an ARCHER equipped CAP GA8 was used in a pilot project in Missouri in August 2005 to assess the suitability of the system for tracking hazardous material releases into the environment , and one was deployed to track oil spills in the aftermath of Hurricane Rita in Texas during September 2005 . 
 Since then , in the case of a flight originating in Missouri , the ARCHER system proved its usefulness in October 2006 , when it found the wreckage in Antlers , Okla . The National Transportation and Safety Board was extremely pleased with the data ARCHER provided , which was later used to locate aircraft debris spread over miles of rough , wooded terrain . In July 2007 , the ARCHER system identified a flood @-@ borne oil spill originating in a Kansas oil refinery , that extended downstream and had invaded previously unsuspected reservoir areas . The client agencies ( EPA , Coast Guard , and other federal and state agencies ) found the data essential to quick remediation . In September 2008 , a Civil Air Patrol GA @-@ 8 from Texas Wing searched for a missing aircraft from Arkansas . It was found in Oklahoma , identified simultaneously by ground searchers and the overflying ARCHER system . Rather than a direct find , this was a validation of the system ’ s accuracy and efficacy . In the subsequent recovery , it was found that the ARCHER plotted the debris area with great accuracy . 
 = = Technical description = = 
 The major ARCHER subsystem components include : 
 advanced hyperspectral imaging ( HSI ) system with a resolution of one square meter per pixel . 
 panchromatic high @-@ resolution imaging ( HRI ) camera with a resolution of 8 cm x 8 cm ( 3 in x 3 in ) per pixel . 
 global positioning system ( GPS ) integrated with an inertial navigation system ( INS ) 
 = = = Hyperspectral imager = = = 
 The passive hyperspectral imaging spectroscopy remote sensor observes a target in multi @-@ spectral bands . The HSI camera separates the image spectra into 52 " bins " from 500 nanometers ( nm ) wavelength at the blue end of the visible spectrum to 1100 nm in the infrared , giving the camera a spectral resolution of 11 @.@ 5 nm . Although ARCHER records data in all 52 bands , the computational algorithms only use the first 40 bands , from 500 nm to 960 nm because the bands above 960 nm are too noisy to be useful . For comparison , the normal human eye will respond to wavelengths from approximately 400 to 700 nm , and is trichromatic , meaning the eye 's cone cells only sense light in three spectral bands . 
 As the ARCHER aircraft flies over a search area , reflected sunlight is collected by the HSI camera lens . The collected light passes through a set of lenses that focus the light to form an image of the ground . The imaging system uses a pushbroom approach to image acquisition . With the pushbroom approach , the focusing slit reduces the image height to the equivalent of one vertical pixel , creating a horizontal line image . 
 The horizontal line image is then projected onto a diffraction grating , which is a very finely etched reflecting surface that disperses light into its spectra . The diffraction grating is specially constructed and positioned to create a two @-@ dimensional ( 2D ) spectrum image from the horizontal line image . The spectra are projected vertically , i.e. , perpendicular to the line image , by the design and arrangement of the diffraction grating . 
 The 2D spectrum image projects onto a charge @-@ coupled device ( CCD ) two @-@ dimensional image sensor , which is aligned so that the horizontal pixels are parallel to the image 's horizontal . As a result , the vertical pixels are coincident to the spectra produced from the diffraction grating . Each column of pixels receives the spectrum of one horizontal pixel from the original image . The arrangement of vertical pixel sensors in the CCD divides the spectrum into distinct and non @-@ overlapping intervals . The CCD output consists of electrical signals for 52 spectral bands for each of 504 horizontal image pixels . 
 The on @-@ board computer records the CCD output signal at a frame rate of sixty times each second . At an aircraft altitude of 2 @,@ 500 ft AGL and a speed of 100 knots , a 60 Hz frame rate equates to a ground image resolution of approximately one square meter per pixel . Thus , every frame captured from the CCD contains the spectral data for a ground swath that is approximately one meter long and 500 meters wide . 
 = = = High @-@ resolution imager = = = 
 A high @-@ resolution imaging ( HRI ) black @-@ and @-@ white , or panchromatic , camera is mounted adjacent to the HSI camera to enable both cameras to capture the same reflected light . The HRI camera uses a pushbroom approach just like the HSI camera with a similar lens and slit arrangement to limit the incoming light to a thin , wide beam . However , the HRI camera does not have a diffraction grating to disperse the incoming reflected light . Instead , the light is directed to a wider CCD to capture more image data . Because it captures a single line of the ground image per frame , it is called a line scan camera . The HRI CCD is 6 @,@ 144 pixels wide and one pixel high . It operates at a frame rate of 720 Hz . At ARCHER search speed and altitude ( 100 knots over the ground at 2 @,@ 500 ft AGL ) each pixel in the black @-@ and @-@ white image represents a 3 inch by 3 inch area of the ground . This high resolution adds the capability to identify some objects . 
 = = = Processing = = = 
 A monitor in the cockpit displays detailed images in real time , and the system also logs the image and Global Positioning System data at a rate of 30 gigabytes ( GB ) per hour for later analysis . The on @-@ board data processing system performs numerous real @-@ time processing functions including data acquisition and recording , raw data correction , target detection , cueing and chipping , precision image geo @-@ registration , and display and dissemination of image products and target cue information . 
 ARCHER has three methods for locating targets : 
 signature matching where reflected light is matched to spectral signatures 
 anomaly detection using a statistical model of the pixels in the image to determine the probability that a pixel does not match the profile , and 
 change detection which executes a pixel @-@ by @-@ pixel comparison of the current image against ground conditions that were obtained in a previous mission over the same area . 
 In change detection , scene changes are identified , and new , moved or departed targets are highlighted for evaluation . In spectral signature matching , the system can be programmed with the parameters of a missing aircraft , such as paint colors , to alert the operators of possible wreckage . It can also be used to look for specific materials , such as petroleum products or other chemicals released into the environment , or even ordinary items like commonly available blue polyethylene tarpaulins . In an impact assessment role , information on the location of blue tarps used to temporarily repair buildings damaged in a storm can help direct disaster relief efforts ; in a <unk> role , a blue tarp located in a remote area could be associated with illegal activity . 
 = Tropical Storm Franklin ( 2005 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Franklin was a tropical storm over the western Atlantic Ocean during July of the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the sixth named storm of the season and twice approached hurricane strength . The storm formed over the Bahamas on July 21 then moved north erratically , approaching Bermuda on July 26 . Franklin eventually became extratropical near Newfoundland on July 30 , before being absorbed by a larger system . The National Hurricane Center struggled to predict Tropical Storm Franklin mainly due to difficulties in predicting the effects of wind shear . There were only minor effects on land from Tropical Storm Franklin and no damages were caused . The name Franklin was used for the first time because of Hurricane Floyd which was retired in the 1999 season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged from the African coast late on July 10 . The wave entered the Bahamas on July 21 and organized into Tropical Depression Six while 70 miles ( 110 km ) east of Eleuthera . Initially the storm was predicted to execute a clockwise loop and drift to the west in response to a high pressure system . Several models indicated the possibility of the storm to drift westward into central Florida . Soon after the depression formed , it strengthened into Tropical Storm Franklin . 
 Tropical Storm Franklin suffered high levels of wind shear associated with the development of Tropical Storm Gert , which led the forecasters at the National Hurricane Center to say that Franklin could be torn apart in the next few days . However the shear abated as Franklin moved to the northeast allowing the storm to strengthen . The forecasters then stated that Franklin could " attain and maintain hurricane strength " and make a close approach to Bermuda . Shortly after on July 23 , Tropical Storm Franklin reached its peak strength with 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) winds . 
 Franklin moved erratically to the east weakening as shear increased again . The NHC predicted that would dissipate , but the weakening trend stopped on July 25 with Franklin a minimal tropical storm . The storm passed to 200 miles ( 325 km ) to the west of Bermuda on July 26 and moved slowly northwards into the warmer waters of the Gulf Stream . The shear also reduced once again allowing Franklin to re @-@ strengthen somewhat , with winds reaching 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on July 28 . Franklin began to accelerate to the northeast , becoming extratropical on July 30 to the south of Newfoundland . The extratropical storm passed just south of the Avalon Peninsula later that day and was absorbed by a larger system on July 31 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As Tropical Storm Franklin was forming , a tropical storm warning was issued for the northwest Bahamas , but it was canceled as Franklin moved north and away from the islands . A tropical storm watch was issued for Bermuda on July 25 but was canceled a day later when Franklin turned away . 
 Tropical Storm Franklin developed very close to land in the Bahamas and passed near Bermuda , but there were no reports of tropical storm force winds overland , with the strongest gust recorded on Bermuda being 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) . After Franklin became extratropical , it brushed southeastern Newfoundland , bringing about 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of rain to the area . There were no damages or fatalities as a result of Tropical Storm Franklin . 
 = Grade School Confidential = 
 " Grade School Confidential " is the nineteenth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 6 , 1997 . It was written by Rachel Pulido and directed by Susie Dietter . The episode establishes the long @-@ term relationship between Seymour Skinner and Edna Krabappel . Bart witnesses a romantic moment between Principal Skinner and Mrs. Krabappel and acts as a snitch for them . However , they later embarrass him and he exposes their romance to the public . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Martin Prince invites his classmates to his birthday party , but the event turns out to be incredibly boring . To cap off the poorly received party , things come to an abrupt end when everyone becomes ill with food poisoning thanks to Martin 's parents serving diseased oysters instead of cake . In the meantime , Principal Seymour Skinner and Edna Krabappel attend and have a conversation which leads to them discovering that they have romantic feelings for each other . They end up kissing in Martin 's pink playhouse in an act witnessed by Bart Simpson , who did not get food poisoning since he fed his oysters to Martin 's cat along with Lisa who feigns sickness so she could leave without excuse . 
 Bart plans to reveal what he witnessed , but Seymour and Edna fear that they would be fired if anyone found out and they swear him to secrecy . They hire him as their gofer so they can secretly exchange messages . Bart agrees for a while because the reward for his cooperation is that Milhouse will inherit Bart 's poor school record . Eventually , Bart grows frustrated about his home , school and social life continually being interrupted to help them advance their relationship , putting him in embarrassing situations . One afternoon at school , after he is embarrassed in front of his classmates by having to say one of Seymour 's messages to Edna out loud , Bart bitterly gathers the entire school in front of a janitor 's closet and he opens the door to reveal that Seymour and Edna are making out . 
 Word of Seymour and Edna 's relationship quickly spreads throughout Springfield , with the story growing more illicit and exaggerated with each passing turn by the children . An appalled Chief Wiggum , upon hearing his son Ralph 's less than accurate version of the events , alerts Superintendent Chalmers . Chalmers gives Seymour an ultimatum – end the relationship or have both of them face dismissal . Seymour decides that love is stronger than his professional goals , so Chalmers fires him and Edna , expecting them to leave the school at the end of the day . 
 Bart learns that the couple have lost their jobs and feels remorseful . After Seymour apologizes to Bart for embarrassing him , Bart encourages the former principal to stand up for himself and Edna . Agreeing to Bart 's comment , Seymour and Edna lock down the school , call the media ( with Bart 's help ) and make their demands : They want their jobs back and the townspeople to not interfere with their relationship . However , several residents reply with their accusation about the two having sexual intercourse in the janitor 's closet described by their children . Seymour insists nothing of the sort happened and that he is a virgin . At first , everyone is speechless , but being on the basis of being such an embarrassing thing for someone his age to admit , it has to be true for them . Realizing that they have overreacted over the relationship , the residents peacefully leave , believing that no one can pretend to be a 44 @-@ year @-@ old virgin . Chalmers agrees to reinstate Seymour and Edna as though nothing ever happened , but insists that they keep their relationship at a minimum level during school days . The couple decide to continue their relationship more privately than ever by convincing Bart that they have broken up after thanking him for helping them . They then go back into their relationship and enter the janitor 's closet where they continue kissing . 
 = = Production = = 
 The idea of Skinner and Krabappel becoming a couple had been around since the days when Mike Reiss and Al Jean were show runners . The episode 's writer Rachel Pulido took some of the inspiration for this episode from " Bart the Lover " , specifically Mrs. Krabappel 's line to Bart about refusing to date Principal Skinner because , " his mommy won 't let him out to play " . The <unk> is based on Bill Gates . The cakes in Agnes Skinner 's cake book were designed to accurately resemble the real life versions of them . Homer using his megaphone to talk to Marge and Lisa , who were standing next to him , was ad @-@ libbed by Dan Castellaneta . A deleted scene featured an awkward moment at Martin 's party , between Bart , Milhouse and Martin , when the latter introduces the two to his parents . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The central argument of this episode was inspired by the film The Children 's Hour , starring Audrey Hepburn and Shirley MacLaine , in which two teachers was accused to have a lesbian relationship , starting a conflict between the teachers and the education community . 
 Mrs. Krabappel has a candle which resembles Charlie Brown , a character from Peanuts . At the Aztec theater , a movie by Tom Berenger was played . It is implied by Superintendent Chalmers ' comment " You think they actually filmed this in Atlanta ? " and from the commentary that the movie is The Big Chill . In trying to force Edna and Seymour out of the school , the Springfield police attempts to flood the area with music . This is similar to a tactic that the US troops used during Operation Just Cause in an attempt to force Manuel Noriega out of the Vatican embassy in Panama City . However , in this case , romance @-@ themed music was played , which was " <unk> You " by George Gershwin and Ira Gershwin . Edna and Seymour 's dance poses were taken from Orlando Baeza , who was the assistant director for this episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Grade School Confidential " finished 57th in ratings for the week of March 31 - April 6 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 7 , equivalent to approximately 7 @.@ 5 million viewing households . It was the fifth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Party of Five , Beverly Hills , 90210 and Melrose Place . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " A delightful episode that finally brings to fruition one of the series ' longest running gags : Edna and Seymour 's mutual attraction . What is doubly refreshing is that it remains a constant in the subsequent episodes . " The scene in which Agnes Skinner shows Bart her cake book is one of Matt Groening 's all @-@ time favorite scenes . 
 = Museum of Bad Art = 
 The Museum of Bad Art ( MOBA ) is a privately owned museum whose stated aim is " to celebrate the labor of artists whose work would be displayed and appreciated in no other forum " . It was originally located in Dedham with current branches in Somerville , Brookline , and South Weymouth in Massachusetts . Its permanent collection includes 500 pieces of " art too bad to be ignored " , 25 to 35 of which are on public display at any one time . 
 MOBA was founded in 1994 , after antique dealer Scott Wilson showed a painting he had recovered from the trash to some friends , who suggested starting a collection . Within a year , receptions held in Wilson 's friends ' home were so well @-@ attended that the collection needed its own viewing space . The museum then moved to the basement of a theater in Dedham . Explaining the reasoning behind the museum 's establishment , co @-@ founder Jerry Reilly said in 1995 : " While every city in the world has at least one museum dedicated to the best of art , MOBA is the only museum dedicated to collecting and exhibiting the worst . " To be included in MOBA 's collection , works must be original and have serious intent , but they must also have significant flaws without being boring ; curators are not interested in displaying deliberate kitsch . 
 MOBA has been mentioned in dozens of off @-@ the @-@ beaten @-@ path guides to Boston , featured in international newspapers and magazines , and has inspired several other collections throughout the world that set out to rival its own visual atrocities . Deborah Solomon of The New York Times Magazine noted that the attention the Museum of Bad Art receives is part of a wider trend of museums displaying " the best bad art " . The museum has been criticized for being anti @-@ art , but the founders deny this , responding that its collection is a tribute to the sincerity of the artists who persevered with their art despite something going horribly wrong in the process . According to co @-@ founder Marie Jackson , " We are here to celebrate an artist 's right to fail , gloriously . " 
 = = History = = 
 The Museum of Bad Art was established in 1994 by antique dealer Scott Wilson , who discovered what has become the museum 's signature piece — Lucy in the Field with Flowers — protruding from between two trash cans on a Roslindale @-@ area curb in Boston , among some garbage waiting to be collected . Wilson was initially interested only in the frame , but when he showed the picture to his friend Jerry Reilly , Reilly wanted both the frame and the painting . He exhibited Lucy in his home , and encouraged friends to look for other bad art and notify Wilson of what they found . When Wilson acquired another " equally lovely " piece and shared it with Reilly , they decided to start a collection . Reilly and his wife , Marie Jackson , held a party in their basement to exhibit the collection to date , and hosted a reception they facetiously titled " The Opening of the Museum of Bad Art " . 
 Regular showings of the pieces collected by Wilson , Reilly , and Jackson ( and those donated by others ) , became too much for Reilly and Jackson 's small home in West Roxbury , Massachusetts , as hundreds of people attended the receptions . The founders initial attempt at dealing with their constrained exhibition space was to create the Virtual Museum of Bad Art , a CD @-@ ROM with a cast of 95 people that presented the MOBA art collection in a fictional imaginary museum . This fictional MOBA allowed the visitors to not only view the paintings but to go behind the scenes in the fictional museum to see what was happening in the back offices , the restoration shop , the rest rooms etc . 
 Word of the museum 's collection continued to spread until , according to " Permanent Interim Acting Director " Louise Reilly Sacco , " it got completely out of hand " when a group of senior citizens on a tour bus stopped to see it . In 1995 the display space was moved to the basement of the Dedham Community Theatre , a building with an aesthetic described in 2004 as " ramshackle " . The museum in Dedham had no fixed operating hours , instead being open while the theater upstairs was open . As The Boston Globe notes , the art collection was appropriately placed " just outside the men 's room " , where sounds and smells carry to the collection and the constant flushing of the toilet " supposedly helps maintain a uniform humidity " , according to the South China Morning Post . 
 In MOBA 's early days , the museum hosted traveling shows ; on one occasion the works were hung from trees in the woods on Cape Cod for the " Art Goes Out the Window — The Gallery in the Woods " . Bad music was played during the public viewings to complete the ambiance . In an exhibition titled " Awash in Bad Art " , 18 pieces of art were covered in shrink wrap for " the world 's first drive @-@ thru museum and car wash " . Marie Jackson , formerly the Director of Aesthetic Interpretation noted , " We didn 't put any watercolors in there . " A 2001 exhibition , " Buck Naked — Nothing But Nudes " featured all of the MOBA nudes hung in a local spa . 
 MOBA features its works in rotating collections . In 2003 , " Freaks of Nature " focused on landscape artwork " gone awry " . A 2006 exhibit titled " <unk> Portraits " was designed to " pick up some of the slack " when the David Hockney show at Boston 's Museum of Fine Arts closed . MOBA unveiled its show " Nature <unk> a Vacuum and All Other <unk> " in 2006 ; this format continues on the museum 's website . 
 A second gallery opened in 2008 at the Somerville Theatre in Davis Square , Somerville , Massachusetts , where the collection was placed near both the women 's and men 's restrooms . Although the original gallery was free and open to the public , the second is only free with admission to the theater . Exhibitions titled " Bright Colors / Dark Emotions " and " Know What You Like / Paint How You Feel " have been held in the academic gallery at Montserrat College of Art in Beverly , Massachusetts . One of MOBA 's goals is " to take bad art on the road " , according to Sacco . Pieces from MOBA 's collection have been on display in museums in Virginia , Ottawa , and New York . 
 In February 2009 , MOBA announced a fundraiser to assist the Rose Art Museum at Brandeis University , which was seriously considering whether to sell masterpieces because of the global financial crisis of 2008 – 2009 , made worse for the university by some of its donors ' losing money in Bernard Madoff 's investment scheme . Current MOBA curator and balloon artist / musician Michael Frank placed Studies in Digestion — a four @-@ panel piece showing four renditions of the human digestive tract in various media by artist Deborah Grumet — on eBay for a buy @-@ it @-@ now price of $ 10 @,@ 000 ; the first bid was $ 24 @.@ 99 . It eventually sold for $ 152 @.@ 53 and the meager proceeds went to the Rose Art Museum , while both museums gained publicity . 
 In 2010 , the museum opened a third location in the offices of the Brookline Interactive Group . 
 In December 2012 , the branch at the Dedham Community Theater closed to convert the space into a screening room . Another branch has since opened at the New England Wildlife Center in South Weymouth . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The loss of two MOBA works to theft has drawn media attention and enhanced the museum 's stature . In 1996 , the painting Eileen , by R. Angelo Le , vanished from MOBA . Eileen was acquired from the trash by Wilson , and features a rip in the canvas where someone slashed it with a knife even before the museum acquired it , " adding an additional element of drama to an already powerful work " , according to MOBA . 
 The museum offered a reward of $ 6 @.@ 50 for the return of Eileen , and although MOBA donors later increased that reward to $ 36 @.@ 73 , the work remained unrecovered for many years . The Boston Police listed the crime as " larceny , other " , and Sacco was reported saying she was unable to establish a link between the disappearance of Eileen and a notorious heist at Boston 's famed Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum that occurred in 1990 . In 2006 – 10 years after Eileen was stolen — MOBA was contacted by the purported thief demanding a $ 5 @,@ 000 ransom for the painting ; no ransom was paid , but it was returned anyway . 
 Prompted by the theft of Eileen , MOBA staff installed a fake video camera over a sign at their Dedham branch reading : " Warning . This gallery is protected by a fake security camera " . Despite this deterrent , in 2004 Rebecca Harris ' Self Portrait as a <unk> was removed from the wall and replaced with a ransom note demanding $ 10 , although the thief neglected to include any contact information . Soon after its disappearance the painting was returned , with a $ 10 donation . Curator Michael Frank speculates that the thief had difficulty fencing the portrait because " reputable institutions refuse to negotiate with criminals . " 
 = = Collection standards = = 
 Although the museum 's motto is " Art too bad to be ignored " , MOBA holds rigorous standards as to what they will accept . According to Marie Jackson , " Nine out of ten pieces don 't get in because they 're not bad enough . What an artist considers to be bad doesn 't always meet our low standards . " As stated in the introduction to The Museum of Bad Art : Masterworks , the primary attribute of an objet d 'art to be acquired by MOBA is that it must have been seriously attempted by someone making an artistic statement . A lack of artistic skill is not essential for a work to be included ; a prospective painting or sculpture for the collection ideally should " [ result ] in a compelling image " , or as honorary curator Ollie Hallowell stated , the art must have an " Oh my God " quality . 
 An important criterion for inclusion is that a painting or sculpture must not be boring . Michael Frank says they are not interested in commercial works like Dogs Playing Poker : " We collect things made in earnest , where people attempted to make art and something went wrong , either in the execution or in the original premise . " Montserrat College of Art used MOBA 's exhibition as a demonstration to its students that " sincerity is still important , and pureness of intent is valid " . 
 MOBA accepts unsolicited works if they meet its standards . Frequently , curators consider works by artists who display an intensity or emotion in the art that they are unable to reconcile with their level of skill . The museum dedicated a show to " relentless creativity " in an exhibition titled " I Just Can 't Stop " that was covered by local news and CNN . Other artists are clearly technically proficient , but attempted an experiment that did not end well . Michael Frank has compared some of the works at MOBA with outsider art or art <unk> ; some MOBA artists ' works are also included in other galleries ' outsider collections . Dean Nimmer , a professor at the Massachusetts College of Art ( also holding the title of MOBA 's Executive Director of Good Taste ) , noted the parallels between the Museum of Bad Art 's standards and those of other institutions : " They take the model of a museum of fine arts and apply the same kind of criteria to acceptance for bad work ... [ Their rules ] are very similar to a gallery or museum that says ' Well , our area is really installation art or realist paintings or neo @-@ post @-@ modern abstractions . ' " 
 MOBA does not collect art created by children , or art traditionally perceived as lesser in quality , such as black velvet paintings , paint @-@ by @-@ numbers , kitsch , or factory @-@ produced art — including works specifically created for tourists . Curators are also not interested in crafts such as latch hook rug kits . MOBA curators suggest that more appropriate venues for such works would be the " Museum of Questionable Taste , The International Schlock Collection , or the National Treasury of Dubious Home Decoration " . 
 The Museum of Bad Art has been accused of being anti @-@ art , or taking works that were sincerely rendered and mocking them . However , Scott Wilson insists that a work of art accepted into MOBA is a celebration of the artist 's enthusiasm . Marie Jackson reiterated this thought , saying " I think it 's a great encouragement to people ... who want to create [ and ] are held back by fear , and when they see these pieces , they realize there 's nothing to be afraid of — just go for it . " Louise Reilly Sacco agreed , stating , " If we 're making fun of something , it 's the art community , not the artists . But this is a real museum . It 's 10 years . It 's 6 @,@ 000 people on a mailing list . It 's recognition all over the world . " Curators insist that artists whose works are selected by the MOBA enjoy the attention and that it is a win @-@ win ; the museum gains another work of art , and the artist receives exposure in a museum . A 1997 article in The Chicago Tribune stated that none of the 10 to 15 artists who had stepped forward to acknowledge their work in MOBA had been upset . 
 Many of the works in MOBA are donated , often by the artists themselves . Others come from yard sales or thrift stores ; the Trash Collectors Union in Cambridge , Massachusetts has donated works rescued from imminent demise . Occasionally a painting may be purchased ; at one time MOBA 's policy was not to spend more than $ 6 @.@ 50 on any piece . More recently , twice and even three times that amount has been paid for an exceptional work . Those pieces not retained by the museum are included in a " Rejection Collection " that may be sold at auction . In the past , some proceeds went to the Salvation Army for providing so many of MOBA 's pieces ; the museum itself usually benefits from most auctions . 
 = = Collection highlights = = 
 Each painting or sculpture MOBA exhibits is accompanied by a brief description of the medium , size , name of the artist , as well as how the piece was acquired , and an analysis of the work 's possible intention or symbolism . Museums Journal noted that the discussion accompanying each work would most likely have most visitors reduced " to hysterics " . The captions — described as " distinctly tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek commentaries " by David Mutch of the Christian Science Monitor — were primarily written by Marie Jackson , until the " dissolution of the MOBA interpretative staff " ; the task was then taken over by Michael Frank and Louise Reilly Sacco . 
 = = = Lucy in the Field with Flowers = = = 
 Many of MOBA 's works generate extensive discourse from visitors . Lucy in the Field with Flowers ( oil on canvas by Unknown ; acquired from trash in Boston ) remains a favorite with the news media and patrons . As the first work acquired by the museum , Lucy is " a painting so powerful it commands its own preservation for posterity " , setting a standard by which all future acquisitions would be compared , and causing MOBA 's founders to question if Scott Wilson found Lucy or she found him . 
 Kate <unk> of The Montreal Gazette called Lucy a " gorgeous mistake " , describing her thus : " an elderly woman dancing in a lush spring field , sagging breasts flopping willy @-@ nilly , as she inexplicably seems to hold a red chair to her behind with one hand and a clutch of daisies in the other " . Author Cash Peters , using less florid language , summarized it as " the old woman with an armchair glued to her ass " . 
 MOBA 's statement about Lucy reads : " The motion , the chair , the sway of her breast , the subtle hues of the sky , the expression on her face — every detail combines to create this transcendent and compelling portrait , every detail cries out ' masterpiece ' . " The Times recounted comments left by a museum visitor regarding the " endless layers of mysteries " the image offers : " What is Norman Mailer 's head doing on an innocent grandma 's body , and are those crows or F @-@ 16s skimming the hills ? " 
 Lucy 's granddaughter , a Boston @-@ area nurse named Susan Lawlor , became a fan of MOBA after seeing the portrait in a newspaper . She recognized it as her grandmother , Anna Lally Keane ( c . 1890 – 1968 ) ; upon seeing the picture , Lawlor snorted Coca @-@ Cola from her nose in astonishment . The painting was commissioned by her mother , and it hung in her aunt 's house for many years , despite the trepidation family members felt at seeing the final composition . Says Lawlor : " The face is hauntingly hers , but everything else is so horribly wrong . It looks like she only has one breast . I 'm not sure what happened to her arms and legs , and I don 't know where all the flowers and yellow sky came from . " 
 = = = Sunday on the Pot with George = = = 
 Sunday on the Pot With George ( acrylic on canvas by Unknown ; donated by Jim Schulman ) has been deemed " iconic " by Bella English of The Boston Globe , who assures the work is " 100 percent guaranteed to make you burst out laughing " . Wilson has pointed to George as an example of a technically well @-@ executed piece of art using a subject not usually seen rendered in paint . 
 Many admirers of the first work donated to MOBA are hypnotized by the image of a portly man wearing " Y @-@ front " underwear while sitting on a chamber pot , in pointillist impressionism similar to the style of Georges Seurat . One critic speculates the pointillist style in George may have been acquired " from watching too much TV " . The title refers to the Stephen Sondheim musical Sunday in the Park with George , which contains a dramatic recreation of Seurat 's painting A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande <unk> . Author Amy Levin suggests that George is a pastiche of Seurat 's painting . The subject of this painting has been " tentatively identified " by the Annals of Improbable Research — the creators of the Ig Nobel award — as John Ashcroft , former United States Attorney General . 
 A visitor was so moved by George he felt compelled to express his gratitude for its display in the Dedham Community Theatre basement , writing " Someone had slipped into the bathroom as I took in this painting and began peeing loudly into a toilet . The reverberating sound of urine splashing while viewing George brought the painting to life , and when the denouement of the flush sounded , I wept . " MOBA 's accompanying caption introduces questions and observations : " Can the swirling steam melt away the huge weight of George 's corporate responsibilities ? This pointillist piece is curious for meticulous attention to fine detail , such as the stitching around the edge of the towel , in contrast to the almost careless disregard for the subject 's feet . " 
 = = = Juggling Dog in Hula Skirt = = = 
 In contrast to the pointillist impressionism of George , the museum also features a " fine example of labor @-@ intensive <unk> " , according to MOBA staff . Mari Newman 's Juggling Dog in Hula Skirt ( tempera and acrylic paint on canvas ; donated by the artist ) , inspired this description by MOBA : " We can only wonder what possesses an artist to portray a dog juggling bones while wearing a hula skirt . " MOBA enjoys the mystery as much as any other aspect of art , however . 
 Newman , a professional artist from Minneapolis , responded to the curators ' <unk> by describing how the image came into being . She bought used canvases while a poor art student , and was unsure how to use a canvas with these dimensions . Inspired by a cartoon of a dachshund , she chose that as a subject , but was unhappy with the effect until she added a hula skirt she had seen in a magazine , and colored dog bones she spied in a pet store . Newman wrote to them , saying " I almost threw it out until I heard of MOBA . After many years of slashing rejected work , now I wish I had saved them all for you . " 
 = = = Motifs and interpretations = = = 
 Travel writer Cash Peters identifies six characteristics common to many of the museum 's artworks . The first is that MOBA artists are unable to render hands or feet , and mask them by extending figures ' arms off the canvas , hiding them with long sleeves , or placing shoes on feet in inappropriate scenarios . Second , Peters compared artists Rembrandt and J. M. W. Turner , masters of landscapes , who " could probably paint with their eyes shut " to MOBA artists who apparently did paint with their eyes shut , as skies are often painted in any color but blue , flora are created without reference to any existing plant organisms , and fauna appear so small in the background it is impossible to discern what kind of animals they are . Third , MOBA artists apply perspective inconsistently , either from one painting to the next , or within a single work . Peters 's fourth observation concerns the difficulty MOBA artists seem to have in successfully rendering noses : he writes that a nose will be attempted so many times that the work takes on a third dimension as paint is reapplied over and over . Fifth , bad artists favor " mixed media " : if in doubt , they glue feathers , glitter , or hair to their work . Lastly , Peters suggests that artists know their work is bad , but apparently feel the piece may be saved by including a monkey or a poodle in the composition . 
 Since late 2008 , MOBA has been experimenting with allowing the public to title and caption some works . According to the curatorial staff , since some of the works are so puzzling , mere artistic interpretation is not sufficient : they must be " interpreted " . The " Guest <unk> 's Collection " is an invitation for MOBA 's visitors to include their thoughts on compelling artworks ; a contest decides the best analysis and one is added every two months . A professor at Boston University offered his thoughts : " The location of the museum as much as its collection suggests a commitment to the abject and a belief in the power and force of culture 's marginalized effects . I was also reminded that I need to pick up some toilet bowl cleaner on my way home ! " 
 = = Influence = = 
 The Museum of Bad Art has been mentioned in hundreds of international publications , as well as in Boston @-@ area travel guides highlighting offbeat attractions . It has inspired similar collections or events in Ohio , Seattle , and Australia . 
 Commedia Beauregard , a theatre company whose mission focuses on translation , was inspired by MOBA 's mission to create their Master Works series of short play festivals . The company commissioned six playwrights to write short plays based on MOBA artworks . Master Works : The MOBA Plays was originally performed in January and February 2009 in Minneapolis , Minnesota . The plays were based on the MOBA pieces Mana Lisa , Invasion of the Office Zombies , My Left Foot , Bone @-@ Juggling Dog in Hula Skirt , Gina 's Demons , and <unk> , Fowl and <unk> . After moving to Chicago , the company again produced The MOBA Plays in March and April 2011 , using three of the original plays and translating three new paintings . 
 = = = Responses to bad art = = = 
 Museum visitors can sign a guest book , and leave comments . One Canadian visitor wrote : " This collection is disturbing , yet I can 't seem to look away ... Just like a hideous car accident . " Another visitor warns : " Her nipples follow you around the room . Creepy ! " 
 Response to MOBA 's opening and continued success is , for some , evocative of the way art is treated in society . MOBA works have been described as " unintentionally hilarious " , similar to the atrocious films of Ed Wood . Visitors — and even MOBA staff — often laugh out loud at displays . In <unk> 's Travels , Cash Peters contrasted this behavior with what is expected of patrons at galleries such as Southern California 's Getty Museum ; though viewers might find the art at the Getty equally hilarious , were they to show it they would almost certainly be thrown out . 
 In 2006 , Louise Reilly Sacco participated in a panel discussion with authorities on art and architecture about standards of beauty and ugliness in art , published in Architecture Boston . She remarked that teachers bring high school art students to MOBA , then to the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston ( MFA ) . Sacco observes , " Somehow MOBA frees kids to laugh and point , to have their own opinions and argue about things . Then they take the experience to the MFA , where they might otherwise feel intimidated ... Maybe the ugly ... frees us . " Sacco believes that extreme ugliness is more striking than extreme beauty , and it forces people to think more deeply about what is wrong or misplaced . She connects this rigid judgment of what does not conform to beauty with intolerance for physical imperfections in people , noting that such rigidity sometimes causes parents to " fix " the perceived flaws in their children 's faces to keep them from suffering later . 
 Jason Kaufman , a Harvard professor who teaches the sociology of culture , wrote that MOBA is part of a social trend he calls " <unk> " , where mass media venues promote performances and artists who mix the deliberately bad with the clever . The Museum of Bad Art happens to embody this trend , and further illustrates its central aim to mock the judgment system by which people identify what is bad from what is not . For Kaufman , " The beauty of MOBA — though beauty is surely the wrong word — is the way it undermines aesthetic criteria from numerous angles . " Amy Levin , describing how American history and culture have been shaped by small local museums , suggests that MOBA is a parody of art itself , and that MOBA 's commentary , newsletter , website , and publications mock museums as authorities on what is good art . The director of the Ellipse Arts Center , a gallery in Arlington , Virginia , that hosted a traveling exhibition of MOBA works , was astonished to see people 's exuberant laughter because no one visiting the Ellipse had ever responded to art this way . She observed , " If I didn 't have a sign on the door , people might not think it 's so bad . Who 's to say what 's bad and what 's good ? " 
 Deborah Solomon , in The New York Times Magazine , asserted that MOBA 's success reflects a trend in modern art among artists and audiences . The arrival of abstraction and modern art in the early 20th century made art appreciation more esoteric and less accessible for the general community , showing that " the American public ... think [ s ] of museums as intimidating places ruled by a cadre of experts whose taste and rituals [ seem ] as mysterious as those of Byzantine priests . " Bad art is in vogue , as a movement that rejects the anti @-@ sentimentalism that marked earlier disdain for artists such as Norman Rockwell or Gustave Moreau , according to Solomon . Garen Daly , a MOBA fan on several Boston @-@ area art councils , stated in 1995 , " I go to a lot of openings , and sometimes they 're pretty damn stuffy . " Not only does the Museum of Bad Art offer different fare for the eyes , but instead of the wine and cheese that is provided for most museum and art gallery visitors , a MOBA show provides its patrons with Kool @-@ Aid , Fluffernutters and cheese puffs . 
 = = = Use in academic research = = = 
 The Museum of Bad Art has been used in academic studies as a standard of reference for the spectacularly awful . In one such study , published in Perspectives on Psychological Science , researchers tested the consistency of responses between people asked to make " gut " judgments versus those who gave conscious well @-@ reasoned responses regarding the quality of various pieces of art . The researchers showed respondents images from MOBA and New York 's Museum of Modern Art ( MoMA ) , and asked them to rate each painting on a scale with two ends representing " Very Attractive " and " Very <unk> " . The study found that those who reasoned in conscious thought were neither more accurate nor as consistent in their ratings . Study participants identified and rated MoMA art higher quality , but those who used conscious reasoning did not find MoMA art more attractive than those who rated with " gut " judgments . Furthermore , the <unk> did not find MOBA art as unattractive as those with quicker response times . The study concluded that people who make quick judgments do so more consistently , with no significant change to accuracy . 
 In another study that appeared in the British Journal of Psychology , researchers tested how respondents considered balance in artwork composition of differing qualities . Fifteen pairs of works from <unk> by artists such as Paul Gauguin , Georgia O 'Keeffe , and Georges @-@ Pierre Seurat , and fifteen from MOBA by artists including Doug <unk> , Unknown , and D. Alix were shown to participants ; in each , an item in the painting was shifted vertically or horizontally , and respondents were asked to identify the original . The researchers hypothesized that respondents would identify balance and composition more easily in the traditional masterworks , and that study participants would find a greater change of quality when items were shifted in traditional masterworks than they would in MOBA pieces . However , the study concluded that balance alone did not define art of higher quality for the participants , and that respondents were more likely to see that original art was more balanced than the altered version , not necessarily that the traditional art was significantly better composed and balanced than MOBA works . 
 = County Road 492 ( Marquette County , Michigan ) = 
 County Road 492 ( CR 492 , Co . Rd . 492 ) is a primary county road in Marquette County , Michigan . The road serves as an alternate route between Negaunee and Marquette . Several historic sites line the roadway as it runs south and parallel to the main highway , U.S. Highway 41 ( US 41 ) and M @-@ 28 , through the Marquette Iron Range in Michigan 's Upper Peninsula . The path of the road runs near tracks of the Lake Superior and Ishpeming Railroad ( LS & I ) . The locally created Iron Ore Heritage Trail will follow CR 492 through Eagle Mills and Morgan Meadows upon completion . The western terminus of the county road is on US 41 / M @-@ 28 in Negaunee and the eastern end is in Marquette next to Lake Superior . 
 CR 492 was previously known as the Marquette – Negaunee Road before it was made a part of the State Trunkline Highway System . It was originally designated as a part of M @-@ 15 as early as 1917 . The superintendent of the Marquette County Road Commission , Kenneth Ingalls Sawyer , painted the first rural highway centerline on the roadway on Dead Man 's Curve . The highway was later a part of M @-@ 28 before being transferred back to county control . The highway assumed its current form by 2001 . The eastern section along Brookton Road in Marquette Township was redesignated as a county secondary highway when a new connection to US 41 / M @-@ 28 was opened , and the designation was extended along Wright Street on the west and north sides of Marquette . 
 = = Route description = = 
 In the city of Negaunee , CR 492 is a part of Maas Street , which runs east – west through town starting at Teal Lake . CR 492 begins at the intersection of Maas Street and US 41 / M @-@ 28 in Negaunee next to Miners Park . From there , CR 492 passes some businesses near the highway before running through a residential area . East of Woodland Drive , the street runs downhill into a more rural section of town . In this area , the roadway runs through forested terrain parallel to tracks of the LS & I. The road then loops to the north away from the tracks , crossing the Carp River next to the Forge Road intersection . Through this area , the Iron Ore Heritage Trail , a new multi @-@ use trail system , was built to follow CR 492 , and opened in 2013 . Forge Road runs north to the Michigan Iron Industry Museum on the site of the Carp River Forge , the original iron ore forge in the region . Maas Street runs along the south side of the city cemetery . The cemetery main gate is located near the city limits , where Maas Street ends and CR 492 continues into Negaunee Township . 
 CR 492 intersects M @-@ 35 near Eagle Mills Location . M @-@ 35 approaches the county road from the north before it turns east to run concurrently with CR 492 . The two roadway designations cross a rail track before M @-@ 35 separates and turns south ; traffic along the state highway must yield the right @-@ of @-@ way to traffic on the county road in the process . Eagle Mills is the location of the main LS & I rail yard and the former Pioneer Pellet Plant . CR 492 curves away from this industrial area to the northeast . The roadway crosses Morgan Creek and enters the Morgan Heights area on the border of Negaunee Township and Marquette Township . This is the site of the first tuberculosis sanatorium in the Upper Peninsula built in 1911 ; the facility is said to have been haunted before the main buildings were torn down around 2002 . The road continues east through forested lands in Marquette Township , rounding Dead Man 's Curve and running downhill into the Morgan Meadows area . CR 492 passes a convent of the Sisters of St. Paul de Chartres before entering a residential area . The road curves north past these subdivisions , meeting the western end of CR 500 ( Grove Street ) . Further north , CR 492 intersects Brookton Road before the southern segment terminates at US 41 / M @-@ 28 in the middle of Marquette Township 's commercial corridor . 
 The county road designation continues north on Wright Street . This segment of CR 492 is separated from the southern section by US 41 / M @-@ 28 . Traffic crossing between the two sides have to use the main highway through median turn arounds in a maneuver similar to a Michigan left . The roadway leaves the commercial corridor and returns to woodland before the intersection with Forestville Road and Commerce Drive . Wright Street curves to the northeast and then the east crossing into the westernmost section of the City of Marquette . As Wright Street continues eastward , it runs through a residential section along part of the city line before completely crossing into Marquette . The roadway passes the Holy Cross Cemetery and the north side of the campus of Northern Michigan University ( NMU ) . The northern main entrance to campus is located at the intersection with CR 550 ( Sugar Loaf Avenue ) and Tracy Avenue . Wright Street passes through residential neighborhoods east of CR 550 before meeting Presque Isle Avenue . East of that intersection , CR 492 crosses onto the northern edge of NMU 's campus immediately north of the Superior Dome . Wright Street ends as it curves around to the south into a junction with Lakeshore Boulevard at the shore of Lake Superior . 
 = = History = = 
 The first roadway along the route of the modern CR 492 was a plank road built by the Cleveland and Sharon Iron Companies in the 1850s . The roadway was originally named the Marquette – Negaunee Road , due to its endpoints . The road was included as a section of " Division 8 " in the State Trunkline Highway System when that was created on May 13 , 1913 . In 1917 , the first highway centerline in the nation was painted along a section of the road known as " Dead Man 's Curve " . The centerline was painted by Kenneth Ingalls Sawyer , long @-@ time superintendent of the county road commission . Traffic along the road was heavy for the era , and along the curves , drivers would follow the innermost side instead of keeping to their own lane . Sawyer added arrows to indicate travel direction and found that motorists used the appropriate travel lanes . 
 At this time , the road carried an unsigned designation of " Trunk Line 15 " ( T.L. 15 ) as designated by the Michigan State Highway Department ( MSHD ) . This designation was changed to M @-@ 15 by the time the state highway system was signed by MSHD in 1919 . With the creation of the United States Highway System on November 11 , 1926 , M @-@ 15 in Michigan was redesignated as a part of the larger US 41 . Between Negaunee and Marquette , US 41 was routed north of the Marquette – Negaunee Road , following a section of M @-@ 35 out of downtown Negaunee . At the same time , M @-@ 28 was extended eastward through the Upper Peninsula of Michigan . Between Negaunee and Marquette , M @-@ 28 followed the old routing of M @-@ 15 . By 1936 , M @-@ 28 was shifted to follow US 41 between Negaunee and Marquette , transferring the old Marquette – Negaunee Road to county control . 
 After this transfer , the roadway carried the CR 492 designation . In 1964 , several abandoned underground mine shafts collapsed underneath M @-@ 35 in Negaunee , and M @-@ 35 was rerouted out of the city along its current roadway through Negaunee Township , connecting with CR 492 . The eastern end of CR 492 was moved by 2001 . Before this realignment , CR 492 followed Brookton Road , parallel to US 41 / M @-@ 28 before turning to the previous terminus just west of the border between Marquette Township and the City of Marquette . After the change , CR 492 turned north to intersect the highway opposite of Wright Street . The CR 492 designation was extended along Wright Street at the same time . In 2006 , the city of Marquette extended Wright Street to end at Lakeshore Boulevard . 
 In 2010 , the county road commission built an extension to Commerce Drive across US 41 / M @-@ 28 . This extension was designed to connect the southern and northern segments of CR 492 severed by traffic flow changes along US 41 / M @-@ 28 . Traffic wishing to cross between the two segments needs to follow US 41 / M @-@ 28 to a median turn around in a maneuver similar to a Michigan left . After the project was completed , motorists gained a second option to cross between the two segments of CR 492 following Brookton Road to the Commerce Drive extension and around the Westwood Mall to Wright Street . This newer connector is designed for 35 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 56 km / h ) traffic . The stop light at the US 41 / M @-@ 28 intersection was installed in early November to complete the project . In August 2010 , the speed limits along Wright Street were increased . After the results of a speed study , the limits were increased from 25 and 35 mph ( 40 and 56 km / h ) to 35 , 40 and 45 mph ( 56 , 64 and 72 km / h ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire road is in Marquette County . 
 = Naruto : Clash of Ninja = 
 Naruto : Clash of Ninja ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ! , Naruto : Gekitō Ninja Taisen , lit . " Naruto : Great Ninja Battle " ) is a 3 @-@ D cel @-@ shaded fighting game developed by Eighting and published by D3 Publisher and Tomy . It is based on the popular anime and manga series Naruto by Masashi Kishimoto , and the first installment of the Naruto : Clash of Ninja video game series . In the game , players pit two characters from the Naruto manga and anime series against each other , using basic attacks and special techniques to defeat their opponent in one of the game 's modes . 
 Clash of Ninja was originally released in Japan on December 19 , 2002 , and the game was subsequently released in North America on March 7 , 2006 , with the only major difference being the voice @-@ overs by the English voice actors from the Naruto anime . Critical opinions of the game have been mixed , with many praising the simple and easy @-@ to @-@ learn fighting system , with others lambasting the fighting system , and the lack of significant unlockable content . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Over the course of the game , the player controls one of a select few characters directly based upon their counterparts in the Naruto anime and manga . Clash of Ninja is a member of the fighting game genre ; the player pits their character against another character controlled by the game 's AI or by another player , depending on the mode that the player is in . The objective is to reduce the opponent 's health to zero using basic attacks and special techniques unique to each character that are derived from techniques they use in the Naruto anime or manga . For instance , Naruto Uzumaki is able to use his signature Shadow Clone Technique , and Rock Lee utilizes many of his Strong Fist style techniques . To use these techniques , characters have available a chakra bar , which depletes upon the execution of a special technique , and regenerates over time . In the game 's numerous modes , the player can choose from different styles of play . The game 's story mode follows the plot from the anime and manga , and a versus mode pitting two players against each other also included . 
 = = Development = = 
 The original Japanese version of Clash of Ninja , the first installment of the Clash of Ninja series , was developed by Eighting and published by D3 Publisher and Tomy , and released on December 19 , 2002 . On October 27 , 2005 , both Clash of Ninja and its sequel , Clash of Ninja 2 , were confirmed for a 2006 release in North America . The game has a total of ten characters that come from the Land of Waves arc and the start of the Chunin Exam arc of the series . Masato Toyoshima , one of the executives of Eighting , stated that the game was designed to appeal to both casual and hardcore gamers . The only significant difference made by Eighting in the development between the English variant and its Japanese counterpart were the voice @-@ overs , which were done by the English voice actors in the Naruto anime . Toyoshima claimed that the development team was especially " proud that [ they ] were able to accomplish " creating the cel @-@ shaded graphics that closely matched the scenes in the Naruto anime and manga . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Clash of Ninja has received mixed reactions from several video game publications . GameRankings gave it a score of 67 @.@ 35 % , while Metacritic gave it 72 out of 100 . In Japan , Famitsu gave the game a score of 31 out of 40 . The game sold well in North America , becoming part of Nintendo 's set of Player 's Choice games , which lowers the retail price to $ 19 @.@ 99 if the game has sold at least 250 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The gameplay present in the game was subject to mixed opinions amongst critics . IGN lauded the game 's battle system as " very balanced , amazingly quick , and still a lot of fun , " but accepted that the battle designs were " a bit basic . " GameSpot provided a more negative review , deriding the game 's different modes as " seriously boring and predictable , " as well as criticizing the lack of significant differences in the playing style of the game 's characters . GameSpot characterized the voice acting as having " some of the worst stereotypes of anime voice acting , " and noted the lack of unlockable items and other incentives to continue play . G4 's X @-@ Play gave Clash of Ninja two out of five stars , lambasting the fighting engine as " one of the laziest , most oversimplified engines ever seen in a 3D fighting game , " and " ridiculously basic . " X @-@ Play also criticized the lack of a significant plot in the story mode and the lack of use of cutscenes or unlockable items . GameSpy commented on this , noting that " considering the charm of the source material , [ the game ] is really a disappointment " . 
 The cel @-@ shaded graphics and audio received acclaim from reviewers , with GameSpot praising the game 's " smooth , powerful @-@ looking animations , " as well as extolling how " powerful sound effects and a driving soundtrack " contributed to the game 's overall feel . GameSpy noted that " [ the game ] manages to shine in the visual department , " making note of how the varied graphical details were " fluid and precise and doesn 't ever slow down or become choppy . " X @-@ Play , however , considered the graphics " underwhelming , " criticizing the lack of significant usage of animation and cinematic scenes , and remarking that the graphics " follow the rest of the game 's lead . " 
 = RAF Northolt = 
 RAF Northolt ( IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) is a Royal Air Force station in South Ruislip , 2 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ; 2 @.@ 3 mi ) from Uxbridge in the London Borough of Hillingdon , west London . Approximately 6 mi ( 10 km ) north of London Heathrow Airport , the station also handles a large number of private civil flights . Northolt has one runway in operation , spanning 1 @,@ 687 m × 46 m ( 5 @,@ 535 ft × 151 ft ) , with a grooved asphalt surface . 
 Northolt pre @-@ dates the establishment of the Royal Air Force by almost three years , having opened in May 1915 . Originally established for the Royal Flying Corps , it has the longest history of continuous use of any RAF airfield . Before the outbreak of the Second World War , the station was the first to take delivery of the Hawker Hurricane . The station played a key role during the Battle of Britain , when fighters from several of its units , including No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron , engaged enemy aircraft as part of the defence of London . It became the first base to have squadrons operating Supermarine Spitfire aircraft within German airspace . 
 During the construction of Heathrow Airport , Northolt was used for commercial civil flights , becoming the busiest airport in Europe for a time and a major base for British European Airways . More recently the station has become the hub of British military flying operations in the London area . Northolt has been extensively redeveloped since 2006 to accommodate these changes , becoming home to the British Forces Post Office , which moved to a newly constructed headquarters and sorting office on the site . Units currently based at RAF Northolt are No. 32 ( The Royal ) Squadron , the Queen 's Colour Squadron , 600 ( City of London ) Squadron , No 1 Aeronautical Information Documents Unit , the Air Historical Branch and the Central Band of the RAF . The station has also been used as a filming location for productions made at Pinewood Studios . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Following Louis Blériot 's first flight across the English Channel in 1909 , the British Army considered the necessity of defending the United Kingdom from a future air attack . By May 1910 , Claude Grahame @-@ White and other aviation pioneers were flying from the flat areas around Ruislip , although they soon sought an aerodrome for London , which was eventually built at Hendon . A proposal was made in 1912 for the area around where RAF Northolt now stands to be developed as " Harrow Aerodrome " . The company established to develop the site was listed on the London Stock Exchange but the idea did not progress any further . 
 The outbreak of the First World War necessitated a new aerodrome for the Royal Flying Corps . The Corps had received the Royal Warrant on 13 April 1912 , whereupon Major Sefton Brancker of the War Office conducted aerial surveys in 1914 of Glebe Farm in Ickenham , and Hundred Acres Farm and Down Barnes Farm in Ruislip , looking for the most effective operating base for new squadrons . He settled on a site near Northolt Junction railway station but it was not until January 1915 that the British government officially requisitioned the land . It is rumoured that the government official tasked with acquiring the land arrived at the site with his map upside down , leading to the government requisitioning and developing land on the wrong side of the railway line , including the old Hill Farm . 
 Construction of the new aerodrome , to be named " RFC Military School , Ruislip " , began in January 1915 . It opened on 3 May 1915 , becoming known as Northolt and home to No. 4 Reserve Aeroplane Squadron which relocated from Farnborough . The airfield became " Northolt " despite being in neighbouring South Ruislip . Most early RAF airfields were named after the nearest railway station , in this case South Ruislip station , known at that time as Northolt Junction and later Northolt Halt . In the same year the airfield was extended westwards and aircraft began flying sorties in defence of London against Zeppelin raids . No. 18 Squadron was formed in the same month as Northolt and equipped with Bleriot Experimental biplanes , whose slow speed led to heavy losses in combat with the German <unk> . 
 In 1916 , No. 43 Squadron was formed under the command of Major Sholto Douglas . Aircraft equipping the squadron included the Sopwith 1 ½ Strutter , built by the Fairey Aviation company , then in Hayes . The Strutter made its first test flight from Northolt in 1916 with Harry Hawker at the controls . Fairey conducted test flights at Northolt from 1917 until 1928 when the Air Ministry gave the company notice to vacate the aerodrome . Flights later resumed from the Great West Aerodrome owned by Fairey in Harmondsworth , which was eventually developed as Heathrow Airport . No. 43 Squadron went on to fly sorties over France from 17 January 1917 , taking part in the Battle of Vimy Ridge between 4 and 8 April 1917 . 
 No. 600 Squadron and No. 601 Squadron of the fledgling Royal Auxiliary Air Force were formed at Northolt in 1925 under the command of Squadron Leader Lord Edward Grosvenor . Both squadrons were deployed to RAF Hendon in 1927 , although 600 Squadron would return in 1939 . The Prince of Wales , later King Edward VIII and subsequently the Duke of Windsor , made his first flight in a Bristol F.2 Fighter from Northolt on 27 April 1929 . 
 = = = Battle of Britain and the Second World War = = = 
 Northolt became an active base during the Second World War for Royal Air Force and Polish Air Force squadrons in their defence of the United Kingdom . It was the first RAF station to operate the Hawker Hurricane , with No. 111 Squadron receiving the first four aircraft in December 1937 , and reaching its full complement by February 1938 . In the lead @-@ up to war , the RAF implemented a policy of adding concrete runways to important airfields . As a result , by 1939 Northolt had a new 800 @-@ by @-@ 50 @-@ yard ( 732 by 46 m ) concrete runway . Later in 1939 RAF Hendon became one of its satellite airfields . Polish pilots were taught English at RAF Uxbridge , where they also practised formation flying using tricycles with radios , compasses and speed indicators . 
 On 15 September 1940 during the Battle of Britain , No. 1 Squadron RCAF , No. 229 Squadron , No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron , No. 504 Squadron , and part of No. 264 Squadron were based at the station , all under the control of No. 11 Group RAF , headquartered at RAF Uxbridge . All flew Hawker Hurricanes except No. 264 Squadron 's contingent , which operated the Boulton Paul Defiant . During the Battle of Britain , the Polish Squadron downed the highest number of enemy aircraft with its Czech pilot Sergeant Josef Frantisek scoring the most " kills " . The Luftwaffe bombed the airfield in August 1940 as well as other sector airfields in the area , including Biggin Hill , Hornchurch and North Weald , as part of a concentrated effort against the airfields and sector stations of No. 11 Group RAF . A total of 4 @,@ 000 bombs were recorded as falling within two miles ( 3 km ) of the airfield over a fifteen @-@ month period , although only two were recorded as hitting the airfield itself . Under the leadership of the station commander , Group Captain Stanley Vincent , the airfield was camouflaged to resemble civil housing . Vincent had been concerned that camouflaging the airfield as open land would look too suspicious from the air ; Northolt was surrounded by housing and so a large open area would draw attention . A fake stream was painted across the main runway while the hangars were decorated to look like houses and gardens . The result was so effective that pilots flying to Northolt from other airfields often struggled to find the airfield . 
 Thirty Allied airmen including servicemen from Belgium , Canada , Czechoslovakia , New Zealand , Poland and the United Kingdom were killed flying from RAF Northolt during the Battle of Britain , of whom ten were Polish . The Polish War Memorial dedicated to all Polish airmen who lost their lives during the Second World War stands near the southeastern corner of the airfield . Its name is also commemorated at the adjacent eponymous junction on Western Avenue . 
 Squadrons based at RAF Northolt during the battle shot down a total of 148 Luftwaffe aircraft and damaged 52 . A further 25 were claimed by pilots and recorded as " probables " . Group Captain Vincent became one of the few RAF airmen to shoot down an enemy aircraft in both World Wars . Vincent was a long @-@ serving RAF man who had claimed an aerial victory over the Western Front in the First World War . By the time of the Battle of Britain he was too old for operational flying . Nevertheless , he took to the skies during one raid and succeeded in bringing down a German aircraft . 
 After the Battle of Britain , the station remained a base for daytime fighter operations , with No. 302 Polish Fighter Squadron , No. 229 Squadron and No. 615 Squadron all arriving before 3 November 1940 . No. 308 Polish Fighter Squadron and No. 306 Polish Fighter Squadron later joined No. 303 during 1941 to form the No. 1 Polish Fighter Wing . Polish Fighter Squadrons based at Northolt in 1942 took part in Operation Jubilee ( the raid on Dieppe ) on 19 August alongside Nos. 302 and 308 from nearby RAF Heston . Reconnaissance squadrons No. 16 Squadron and No. 140 Squadron operating Supermarine Spitfires and de Havilland Mosquitos moved to Northolt in 1944 . No. 69 Squadron with their Vickers Wellingtons modified for photographic reconnaissance arrived later . All three reconnaissance squadrons were combined to form No. 34 ( PR ) Wing . 
 In 1943 , the station became the first to fly sorties using Supermarine Spitfire Mk IXs in German airspace in support of bomber operations . On 25 March , RAF Ferry Command became RAF Transport Command and thereafter used Northolt as a London base for the transfer of new aircraft from factories to airfields . Runway 26 / 08 was extended in February that year to accommodate the larger transport aircraft required by the Command . Northolt continued as a Sector Fighter Station until February 1944 . As a result of this and the new larger runway , the smaller 02 / 20 runway closed in April 1944 . 
 RAF Northolt became home to Prime Minister Winston Churchill 's personal aircraft , a modified Douglas C @-@ 54 Skymaster , in June 1944 . The aircraft was used to fly him to meetings with other Allied leaders . Between 20 and 21 July 1944 , a converted Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator bomber named " Marco Polo " made the first non @-@ stop intercontinental flight , flying from London to Washington , DC , then returning to Northolt from La Guardia Airport within 18 hours . In November of the same year , an Avro York flew non @-@ stop from Northolt to Cairo in 10 hours and 25 minutes . A new runway , 31 / 13 , was surveyed the following month and built in March 1946 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war civil and military use = = = 
 Starting in 1946 the airfield was used by civil aviation during the construction of nearby Heathrow Airport . During this period , Northolt became a major base for British European Airways , which used the nearby Bourne School as its headquarters . Other airlines including Aer Lingus , Alitalia , Scandinavian Airlines System and Swissair used the airfield for scheduled services across Europe . 
 In December 1946 , after taking off during a heavy snowstorm , a Douglas DC @-@ 3 operated by British European Airways , flying from Northolt to Glasgow , crashed onto the roof of a house in South Ruislip . All the crew and passengers escaped unharmed by climbing through the loft of the house and leaving via the front door . No residents were injured , even though the owner of the house next door was standing at her front gate when the aircraft came down . The owners of the house had not moved in at the time of the crash as they were due to be married a few days later . The house was later named " Dakota Rest " after the Douglas DC @-@ 3 's wartime operational name , and still stands today . 
 During 1952 a total of 50 @,@ 000 air movements were recorded , making the airfield the busiest in Europe . By then the only scheduled airlines were BEA and Aer Lingus . The RAF maintained a presence throughout its use by civil airlines , making it the longest continually used airfield in the history of the Royal Air Force . En route from Northolt to Dublin , on 10 January 1952 , a civil Douglas C @-@ 47 Skytrain operated by Aer Lingus and named " St. Kevin " flew into an area of extreme turbulence caused by a mountain wave generated by Snowdon . As a result , the plane crashed into a peat bog near Llyn <unk> in Snowdonia , killing all 20 passengers and three crew in the company 's first fatal accident . 
 Civil flights ceased when the central area at Heathrow opened in 1954 with Northolt reverting to sole military use in May that year . Northolt 's operations became constrained by its proximity to the new much larger civil airport at Heathrow . No. 1 Aeronautical Information Documents Unit ( AIDU ) moved to the station in 1956 from the neighbouring RAF West Ruislip station . The unit had been established in 1953 to provide information on airfields , communications and navigational aids for the benefit of aircraft safety . AIDU was originally under the command of RAF Transport Command but this was moved to Home Command in March 1957 . 
 On 1 June 1960 , an Avro Anson aircraft suffered engine failure soon after take @-@ off from Northolt and crash @-@ landed on top of the nearby Express Dairies plant in South Ruislip . There were no fatalities . Later that year , on 25 October , a Pan Am Boeing 707 , heading for Heathrow , mistakenly landed at Northolt with forty @-@ one passengers on board . A Lufthansa Boeing 707 also attempted to land at the station on 28 April 1964 but was dissuaded by a red signal flare fired by personnel from Air Traffic Control . In the days before navigational aids such as instrument landing systems ( ILS ) and the global positioning system ( GPS ) were available , the letters NO ( for Northolt ) and LH ( for Heathrow ) were painted on two gasometers on the approach to each airfield , one at Southall for the approach to Heathrow 's diagonal runway ( coded <unk> ) and one at South Harrow for the approach to Northolt 's runway ( then coded 26 ) , in an effort to prevent a recurrence of such errors . By the 1980s movements of privately owned aircraft , mainly corporate jets , outnumbered military aircraft . Civil flights were limited to 28 per day , with a maximum of 7 @,@ 000 a year . This limit remains to this day . 
 Northolt received its first gate guardian , a Spitfire <unk> 22 , in September 1963 . Purchased from the RAF in 1969 for use in the film Battle of Britain , it was replaced by a Spitfire Mk XVI on 2 June 1970 . This aircraft remained at the station until its removal on 8 September 1989 for restoration to full flying condition . The Kermit Weeks ' Fantasy of Flight Museum in Polk City , Florida , purchased the aircraft whereupon the station received a fibreglass replica of a Spitfire Mk IX as a replacement . 
 Servicing of No. 32 Squadron passed from the RAF to the private company Fields Aviation Services in April 1985 , then to <unk> Aircraft Servicing in 1990 . In 1991 , the Station Flight was established , taking delivery of two Britten @-@ Norman Islanders in December which entered service in January 1992 . No. 32 Squadron celebrated its Diamond Jubilee in 1991 , at a time when personnel became involved in operations during the Gulf War . No. 38 Group RAF assumed control of RAF Northolt on 2 November 1992 following a wider restructuring of the RAF . On 16 December 1994 , the new southside Operations Building opened , replacing the old Northolt Airport Terminal building . With the reorganisation of RAF Strike Command on 1 April 2000 , No. 38 Group was disbanded and Northolt came under the control of No. 2 Group RAF . 
 = = = Modern use = = = 
 In August 1996 , a Spanish Learjet operated by Mar Aviation overshot runway 25 and collided with a van heading eastward on the A40 Western Avenue ; the aircraft was carrying an actress bound for Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire . The two pilots , the actress and van driver all suffered minor injuries . The ensuing investigation by the Civil Aviation Authority 's Air Accidents Investigation Branch found that both the crew 's lack of understanding English and military air traffic control procedures had contributed significantly to the crash . Subsequently , after some thirty years of protracted consideration , an ILS was eventually fitted to Northolt 's redefined Runway 25 . In addition , aggregate @-@ filled safety pits were installed at each end of the runway by 21 January 1998 to protect road users in the event of another business jet or military transport failing to stop or ascend before the end of the runway . The House of Commons Transport Select Committee considered the conversion of RAF Northolt to a possible offshoot of Heathrow Airport in the 1990s . While the existing runways would cause aircraft to cross the <unk> of those using Heathrow , new parallel runways were suggested . These suggestions were opposed by then MP for Ruislip @-@ Northwood , John Wilkinson , and eventually progressed no further . 
 Much media attention focused on the airfield when the body of Diana , Princess of Wales , arrived there from Villacoublay airfield , in Paris , France , after her death in a car crash in the city on 31 August 1997 . The Queen 's Colour Squadron , then based at neighbouring RAF Uxbridge , acted as the bearer party , while the flight was met by the Prime Minister , the Lord Chamberlain , Lord Lieutenant of Greater London , Secretary of State for Defence , the RAF Northolt station commander and the RAF Chaplain @-@ in @-@ Chief . 
 Attention was high again in 2001 when Ronnie Biggs , the seriously ill , fugitive Great Train Robber , was flown from Brazil to the airfield to be arrested by waiting police officers . Biggs had escaped from custody in 1965 ; upon his return he was taken to Belmarsh Prison to complete the remainder of his sentence . 
 Since 1 June 1998 , station commanders have served as aides @-@ de @-@ camp to Her Majesty the Queen . The station received the Freedom of Entry to the London Borough of Hillingdon on 11 May 2000 . This allowed military personnel to march through the borough in full uniform , an honour granted by the council in light of 2000 being the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Britain and the 85th anniversary of the opening of RAF Northolt . The neighbouring RAF Uxbridge station had received the same honour in 1960 . 
 The remains of a Hawker Hurricane flown by Flying Officer Ludwik Witold <unk> , the first pilot in No. 303 Squadron to shoot down an enemy aircraft , were donated to the station in June 2008 . During the Battle of Britain , <unk> became a flying ace and received the Distinguished Flying Cross after shooting down six aircraft . He was killed in action over Borough Green in Kent on 27 September 1940 . No. 303 Squadron recorded its 100th kill less than a month after commencing operations . Polish pilot Squadron Leader Franciszek <unk> , who saw wartime service at RAF Northolt , was reunited with the Supermarine Spitfire he had flown at a special ceremony in September 2010 . 
 An additional memorial to British , Polish , Australian and New Zealand aircrew killed during the Battle of Britain was unveiled in September 2010 . In October that year , the hangar which had housed Churchill 's personal aircraft , the former Squadron Watch office and the Operations Block were given Grade II listed building status . The Operations Block was a prototype of the " Dowding System " , which facilitated the chain of command 's issuance of orders for the interception of enemy aircraft and a scheme used for the first time during the Battle of Britain . Prior to the listing , the block was renamed the Sir Keith Park Building on 20 September in honour of the former No. 11 Group RAF commander who had also served as station commander at Northolt between 1931 and 1932 . RAF Northolt itself is the only airfield used in the Battle of Britain still operated by the RAF . 
 Group Captain Tom Barrett , appointed station commander in September 2009 and the final station commander of neighbouring RAF Uxbridge , died on 10 March 2011 following a road traffic accident on the A40 . 
 In January 2012 , it was reported that the future of station was under review by the Ministry of Defence as part of efforts to reduce defence spending . A proposed use has been as a satellite of Heathrow Airport , although a Ministry of Defence spokesman described that as unlikely . Stephen Pound , Member of Parliament for Ealing North , described such a move as " disastrous " for his constituency , and said it was unlikely that the site could be sold for construction of housing . 
 Four Eurofighter Typhoon aircraft arrived at the station from RAF Coningsby on 2 May 2012 to take part in a security exercise as part of preparations for the 2012 Summer Olympics . During the Games , the aircraft were deployed to the station to provide air superiority protection for London , in conjunction with other security measures by the British Armed Forces . Westland Sea King helicopters of the Royal Navy were also deployed to the station . The presence of the aircraft during the Olympics became the first time fighter aircraft had been stationed at RAF Northolt since the Second World War . The Typhoons and Sea Kings left Northolt on 16 August following the conclusion of the Olympics . 
 The overnight base of the London Air Ambulance moved to RAF Northolt from Denham Aerodrome in February 2013 . The flying time from the station to its daytime base at the Royal London Hospital in Whitechapel is three minutes shorter than from Denham , which also provides savings for the charity . 
 In April 2013 , the Ministry of Defence announced a proposal to increase the number of private flights from 7 @,@ 000 to 12 @,@ 000 per year as part of plans to increase the income generated by the airfield . The number of flights would be limited to 40 per day , and the increase would be phased in over three years to 2016 . 
 = = = Project MoDEL redevelopment = = = 
 The Ministry of Defence launched Project MoDEL ( Ministry of Defence Estates London ) in 2006 to consolidate many of its London @-@ based operations at RAF Northolt . Under the project , RAF Bentley Priory , RAF Uxbridge , RAF West Ruislip , RAF Eastcote and the Inglis Barracks in Mill Hill were all closed between 2006 and 2010 with any remaining units transferring to Northolt . The Air Historical Branch , originally established in 1919 to provide a record of air activity during the First World War , was also relocated to RAF Northolt from RAF Bentley Priory in 2008 as part of this project . As a result , the station has been extensively redeveloped with new facilities to support these operations . 
 The statue , Letter from Home , of a First World War soldier reading a letter was moved from outside Inglis Barracks in Mill Hill to RAF Northolt in June 2007 . It is a replica of the statue at Paddington Station and was first unveiled in 1982 . Following the relocation of the British Forces Post Office and Defence Courier Service from Mill Hill , a new headquarters and main sorting facility were built for their use which opened in November 2007 . New hangar facilities for the use of No. 32 Squadron were also constructed , along with new personnel accommodation . 
 The original 1920s Officers ' Mess was refurbished as part of the work , which also saw the relocation of the Supermarine Spitfire ( full @-@ scale replica ) gate guardian to the passenger terminal , and the unveiling of a new Hawker Hurricane ( full @-@ scale replica ) gate guardian near the eastern station entrance in September 2010 , commemorating the aircrew based at Northolt who had fought in the Battle of Britain . 
 Upon the closure of RAF Uxbridge , control of the Battle of Britain Bunker passed to RAF Northolt to allow for continued public visits . In December 2010 it was agreed that the South Hillingdon branch of the St. John Ambulance service would move from its existing base in RAF Uxbridge to new premises at Northolt . 
 The station 's new police dog section , featuring kennels and a quarantine building , opened in February 2012 , marking the completion of building work . 
 = = Operations = = 
 The station is organised into two wings , with a number of lodger units . Within the Operations Wing , the station houses No. 32 ( The Royal ) Squadron RAF , and the <unk> Fleet Force Headquarters . 32 Squadron flies six BAe 125 <unk> executive jets , two BAe 146 <unk> four @-@ engine VIP short range transport aircraft and two BAe 146 QC versions , with one Agusta Westland <unk> Power helicopter . RAF Northolt also houses the Station Flight , operating two Britten @-@ Norman Islander <unk> in electronic intelligence gathering – described by the RAF as performing " photographic mapping and light communications roles " . 
 The Support Wing of the station incorporates the Personnel Management Squadron , the Estates Management Squadron , the Station Management Squadron , the Force Development Squadron , Media and Communications , the Finance Department and Safety , Health and Environmental Protection . Its Operations Squadron , the Air Movements Squadron and the Airfield Support Squadron make up the station 's Operations Wing . 
 Lodger Units at Northolt include No. 600 Squadron Royal Auxiliary Air Force , 621 EOD Squadron Royal Logistics Corps ( part of 11 Explosive Ordnance Disposal Regiment RLC ) , No. 1 AIDU ( Aeronautical Information Documents Unit ) , the Central Band of the Royal Air Force , the Service Prosecuting Authority , Naval Aeronautical Information Centre , the British Forces Post Office ( <unk> ) , the Air Historical Branch and the Polish Records Office . 
 = = Squadrons and aircraft = = 
 Sources : Battle of Britain Airfields ( 1st Edition ) and A History of Royal Air Force Northolt 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 As it is near several film studios including those at Pinewood , the airfield has been used to represent outside locations in a number of feature films . Scenes of the James Bond films Goldfinger , Thunderball and Octopussy were filmed at Northolt , and station personnel served as extras in the Octopussy hangar fly @-@ through stunt scene . The mini @-@ series The Winds of War and The Bill and the BBC shows Waking the Dead , Doctor Who and Red Dwarf have all used Northolt to represent various fictional airfields . In early 2010 the station was used for the filming action scenes of the final episode of the BBC 's final series of Ashes to Ashes . 
 = Margaret McKenna = 
 Sister Margaret McKenna , <unk> , ( born 1940 ) is an American Medical Mission Sister and anti @-@ militarist activist . Raised in Hackensack , New Jersey , she earned her PhD in the origins and religious thought of Christianity from the University of Pennsylvania . In the 1970s , McKenna began participating in non @-@ violent civil disobedience with the Plowshares Movement , sometimes being arrested or imprisoned for her actions . Her activism has continued through recent years . 
 In 1989 , McKenna helped to found New Jerusalem Laura , a North Philadelphia addiction treatment center that strives to help people recover from substance abuse without the use of medication , by substituting community service , discussion , and Bible study as routes to recovery . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 McKenna grew up in Hackensack , New Jersey and upon graduating from high school entered the Medical Mission Sisters , a Roman Catholic organization of women dedicated to improving world access to health care . She earned a bachelor 's degree in English from Chestnut Hill College , then a small Catholic women 's college , and a master 's degree in liturgy from Notre Dame University before moving on to the University of Pennsylvania and earning a doctorate in Christian origins and religious thought . For her doctorate thesis , she traveled to Israel for the clarity and solitude . 
 = = Activism = = 
 McKenna has been arrested for several acts of civil disobedience since becoming an activist in the 1970s . In 1987 , she participated in a protest over the Iran – Contra affair during the bicentennial celebration of the signing of the constitution in Philadelphia . In 1988 on Easter Sunday , McKenna and three other Plowshares activists accessed the third deck of the USS Iowa and symbolically hammered on empty Tomahawk missile housings before pouring their own blood on them . At the same time , a banner that read " Follow the nonviolent Christ " was placed on the side of the ship . The group was charged with trespassing , and McKenna was sentenced to four months in prison . In 2007 , McKenna , as well as musician Aaron Weiss , was arrested for participating in a " die @-@ in " to protest the civilian casualties of the Iraq War on the grounds of The Pentagon in Arlington County , Virginia . This event was referenced in the song " Timothy Hay " by Weiss 's band , mewithoutYou , on their album It 's All Crazy ! It 's All False ! It 's All a Dream ! It 's Alright . 
 = = New Jerusalem Laura = = 
 McKenna and modern @-@ day hermit Richard Withers , who were both passionate about Desert Fathers then , asked themselves , " Where is the desert today ? " After concluding that " the desert " was the inner cites , in 1989 , they moved to the Fox Chase neighborhood in Northeast Philadelphia . There , they witnessed the impact of drug addiction on the lives of the residents . In reaction , McKenna and Withers founded New Jerusalem Laura in an attempt to treat drug and alcohol addiction . In addition to New Jerusalem , McKenna helped set up the Peacemakers Reflection Center and the Alternate to Violence Project in her community . 
 New Jerusalem Laura 's addict counseling methods were influenced by those of One Day at a Time , founded by the Rev. Henry Wells . For the first 60 days of their stay , recovering addicts are prohibited from contacting the outside world , must surrender their cigarettes , and must be escorted if they leave the building . During this time , residents occupy their time with chores , community service , meetings , and Bible studies . Less than half of all people who enter the program remain after the first 60 days . After the first 60 days , residents ' actions are less tightly restricted ; however , they are still required to participate in the chores , Bible studies , and meetings . Residents graduate from the program after six months . 
 McKenna believes that the reason for the New Jerusalem Laura 's success is the community . " In a recovery community , you can 't get away with [ lying ] , because it shows , " she said . " It forces you to be honest . " Nearly 400 residents have graduated from the program since its inception . Of those , close to seventy percent are reported to remain drug @-@ free , well above the results of traditional recovery methods . 
 = Khandoba = 
 Khandoba , ( Marathi : <unk> Kannada : <unk> , Telugu : <unk> , <unk> ) also known as Martanda Bhairava and Malhari , is a Hindu god , worshipped as a form of Shiva , mainly in the Deccan plateau of India , especially in the states of Maharashtra and Karnataka . He is the most popular Kuladaivat in Maharashtra . He is also the patron deity of warrior , farming , herding as well as some Brahmin ( priest ) castes , the hunters and gatherers of the hills and forests . The cult of Khandoba has linkages with Vaishnava and Jain traditions , and also assimilates all communities irrespective of caste , including Muslims . Khandoba is sometimes identified with Mallanna of Andhra Pradesh and Mailara of Karnataka . The worship of Khandoba developed during the 9th and 10th centuries from a folk deity into a composite god possessing the attributes of Shiva , Bhairava , Surya and Karttikeya ( Skanda ) . He is depicted either in the form of a Lingam , or as an image of a warrior riding on a bull or a horse . The foremost centre of Khandoba worship is Jejuri in Maharashtra . The legends of Khandoba , found in the text Malhari Mahatmya and also narrated in folk songs , revolve around his victory over demons Mani @-@ malla and his marriages . 
 = = Etymology and other names = = 
 The name " Khandoba " comes from the words " khadga " ( sword ) , the weapon used by Khandoba to kill the demons , and " ba " ( father ) . " <unk> " means " king Khandoba " . Another variant is " Khanderao " , where the suffix " <unk> " ( king ) is used . 
 In Sanskrit texts , Khandoba is known as Martanda Bhairava or Surya , a combination of the solar deity Martanda and Shiva 's fierce form Bhairava . The name " Mallari " or " Malhari " is split as " Malla " and " ari " ( enemy ) , thus meaning " enemy of the demon Malla " . Malhari Mahatmya records Martanda Bhairava , pleased with the bravery of Malla , takes the name " Mallari " ( the enemy of Malla ) . Other variants include <unk> ( Mallanna ) and Mailara ( Mailar ) . 
 Other names include <unk> <unk> , Mhalsa @-@ <unk> ( " husband of Mhalsa " ) and <unk> Vani . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 In a popular <unk> representation of Khandoba , Mhalsa is seated in front of Khandoba on his white horse . Mhalsa is piercing a demon 's chest with a spear , while a dog is biting his thigh and the horse is hitting his head . The other demon is grabbing the reins of the horse and attacking Khandoba with a club as Khandoba is dismounting the horse and attacking the demon with his sword . In other representations , Khandoba is seen seated on a horse with the heads of demons trod under the horse 's hooves or their heads under Khandoba 's knees . 
 In murtis ( idols ) , Khandoba or <unk> is depicted as having four arms , carrying a damaru ( drum ) , Trishula ( trident ) , <unk> @-@ patra ( turmeric powder @-@ filled bowl ) and khadga ( sword ) . Khandoba 's images are often dressed as a Maratha Sardar , or a Muslim <unk> . Often , Khandoba is depicted as a warrior seated on horseback with one or both of his wives and accompanied with one or more dogs . He is also worshipped as the aniconic Lingam , the symbol of Shiva . Often in Khandoba temples , both representations of Khandoba — the aniconic lingam and the anthropomorphic horseback form . 
 = = Legends = = 
 Legends of Khandoba generally tell about the battle between the deity and demons Malla and Mani . The principle written source of the legend is Malhari Mahatmya ( Mallari Mahatmya ) , which claims to be from the chapter Kshetra @-@ kanda of the Sanskrit text Brahmanda Purana , but is not included in standard editions of the Purana . R.C. Dhere and Sontheimer suggests that the Sanskrit Mahatmya was composed around 1460 @-@ 1510 AD , mostly by a Deshastha Brahmin , to whom Khandoba is the family deity . A version is also available in Marathi by <unk> <unk> ( 1585 ) . Other sources include the later texts of <unk> Mahatmya and Martanda Vijaya by Gangadhara ( 1821 ) and the oral stories of the Vaghyas , bards of the god . 
 The legend tell of the demon Malla and his younger brother Mani , who had gained the boon of invincibility from Brahma , creating chaos on the earth and harassing the sages . When the seven sages approached Shiva for protection after Indra and Vishnu confessed their incapability , Shiva assumed the form ( Avatar ) of Martanda Bhairava , as the Mahatmya calls Khandoba , riding the Nandi bull , leading an army of the gods . Martanda Bhairava is described as shining like the gold and sun , covered in turmeric also known as Haridra , three @-@ eyed , with a crescent moon on his forehead . The demon army was slaughtered by the gods and finally Khandoba killed Malla and Mani . While dying , Mani offers his white horse to Khandoba as an act of repentance and asks for a boon . The boon is that he be present in every shrine of Khandoba , that human @-@ kind is bettered and that he be given an offering of goat flesh . The boon was granted , and thus he was transformed into a demigod . Malla , when asked by the deity if he asked for a boon , asks for the destruction of the world and human @-@ flesh . Angered by the demon 's request , Khandoba decapitates him , and his head falls at the temple stairs where it will trampled by devotees ' feet . The legend further describes how two <unk> appeared at <unk> , the place where the demons were killed . 
 Oral stories continue the process of <unk> of Khandoba — his elevation from a folk deity to Shiva , a deity of the classical Hindu pantheon — that was initiated by the texts . Khandoba 's wives Mhalsa and Banai are also identified with Shiva 's classical Hindu wives Parvati and Ganga . <unk> Pradhan , the minister and brother @-@ in @-@ law of Khandoba and brother of <unk> Vani Mhalsa , the faithful dog that helps Khandoba kill the demons , the horse given by Mani and the demon brothers are considered avatars of Vishnu , Krishna , Nandi and the demons Madhu @-@ <unk> respectively . Other myth variants narrate that Khandoba defeats a single demon named <unk> , who offers his white horse , sometimes called Mani , to the god . Other legends depict Mhalsa ( or Parvati ) and Banai or Banu ( or Ganga ) as futilely helping Khandoba in the battle to collect the blood of Mani , every drop of which was creating a new demon . Finally , the dog of Khandoba swallows all the blood . Sometimes , Mhalsa , or rarely Banai , is described as seated behind Khandoba on the horse and fighting with a sword or spear . 
 The legends portray Khandoba as a king who rules from his fortress of Jejuri and holds court where he distributes gold . Also , king Khandoba goes on hunting expeditions , which often turn into " erotic adventures " , and subsequent marriages . 
 = = Wives = = 
 Khandoba has many wives who are women from many communities , who serve as cultural links between the god and the communities . He has five wives , Mhalsa and Banai / Banu / <unk> being the most important . While Khandoba 's first wife Mhalsa is from the high caste Lingayat merchant ( Vani ) community , his second wife Banai is a Dhangar ( shepherd caste ) . Mhalsa has had a regular ritualistic marriage with Khandoba . Banai , on the other hand , has a love marriage by capture with the god . Mhalsa is described as jealous and a good cook ; Banai is erotic , resolute , but does not even know to cook . Often folk songs tell of their quarrels . Mhalsa represents " culture " and Banai " nature " . The god king Khandoba stands between them . 
 Mhalsa is believed to be a combined avatara of Mohini and Parvati . Mhalsa was born as the daughter of a rich merchant in <unk> called <unk> . On the divine orders of Khandoba in a dream to <unk> , she was married to Khandoba on <unk> Pournima ( the full moon day of Hindu calendar month of Paush ) in Pali ( <unk> ) . Two <unk> appeared on this occasion . An annual festival marking this event is celebrated in Pali every Paush Pournima . 
 Banai is believed to the daughter of Indra , the king of the gods . Banai was found by Dhangar shepherd , when she was abandoned on earth by an angry Indra . When Banai grew up , it was predicted that she would get her match at Jejuri . There , she felt in love with God Khandoba . Khandoba also fell in her love . Khandoba accepted a self @-@ exile for 12 years by intentionally losing a game of chess ( <unk> ) to his wife Mhalsa . He took disguise of shepherd and started serving Banai 's father . One day , Khandoba killed all the sheep and goats of Banai ' father and promised to make them alive again if he was married to Banai . The reluctant Banai was married to Khandoba , the shepherd in disguise at Naldurg . Khandoba revealed his real form to Banai on their way back to Jejuri . 
 On reaching Jejuri , Khandoba was greeted by Mhalsa 's fury and her strong protest of his second marriage . To avoid the quarrels of his wives , Khandoba gave the upper half of the hill to Mhalsa and the lower half to Banai . The idol of Mhalsa is placed with Khandoba in the main shrine at top of the hill at Jejuri . A separate shrine to Banai is situated halfway down the hill . 
 Khandoba 's third wife , Rambhai <unk> , is a tailor woman who was a heavenly nymph or <unk> and is sometimes identified with Banai . She is a prototype of the Muralis — the girls " married " to Khandoba . Rambhai is worshipped as a goddess whom Khandoba visits after his hunt . She is also localised , being said to come from the village from <unk> , near Jejuri . The fourth wife <unk> Malin , from the gardener or Mali caste , She was a particular Murali and is thus a deified devotee of Khandoba . She is visited by him at " <unk> Mal " ( field of southernwood , a herb said to be dear to Khandoba ) . The fifth wife , <unk> <unk> , is a <unk> , a member of the <unk> caste . She is recognised as a Muslim by the Muslims . Apart from these , Muralis — girls offered to Khandoba — are considered as wives or concubines of the god . 
 = = Other associations and identifications = = 
 Mallana ( <unk> ) of Andhra Pradesh and Mailara of Karnataka are sometimes identified with Khandoba ( Mallari , Malhari , <unk> ) . Khandoba is also associated with Bhairava , who is connected with <unk> ( murder of a Brahmin ) . Devotees emphasize that Khandoba is a full avatar of Shiva , and not a partial avatar like Bhairava or Virabhadra . He accepts the attributes of the demon king — his horse , weapons and royal insignia . 
 Sontheimer stresses the association of Khandoba with clay and termite mounds . Oral legends tell of Khandoba 's murtis being found in termite mounds or " made of earth " . According to Sontheimer , Martanda Bhairava ( Khandoba ) is a combination of the sun god Surya and Shiva , who is associated with the moon . Martanda ( " blazing orb " ) is a name of Surya , while Bhairava is a form of Shiva . Sundays , gold and turmeric , which are culturally associated with the sun , form an important part of the rituals of Khandoba . Sontheimer associates the worship of the Sun as termite mounds for fertility and his role as a healer to Khandoba 's role as granter of fertility in marriages and to the healing powers of turmeric , which the latter holds . 
 Another theory identifies Kartikeya ( Skanda ) with Khandoba . The hypotheses of the theory rests upon the similarities between Skanda and Khandoba , namely their association with mountains and war , similarity of their names and weapons ( the lance of Skanda and the sword of Khandoba ) and both having two principal wives . Other symbols associated with Khandoba are the dog and horse . Also the festivals for both deities , Champa Sashthi and Skanda Sashthi respectively for Khandoba and Skanda fall on the same day . 
 = = Worship = = 
 Though Shiva is worshipped across Maharashtra in his original form , some Maharashtrian communities prefer to worship him in form of his avatars , Khandoba being the most popular . He is the most popular Kuldevta ( family deity ) in Maharashtra . One of the most widely worshipped gods of the Deccan plateau , Khandoba is considered as " the premier god of <unk> bhakti ( wish @-@ granting devotion ) and one of the most powerful deities responsive to vows ( navas ) " . He is worshipped by the vast majority of Marathi Hindu people from all strata of that society . He is the patron deity of warrior , farming , herding as well as some Brahmin ( priest ) castes , the hunters and gatherers of the hills and forests , merchants and kings . The cult of Khandoba in the Deccan principally consists of peasant classes Marathas and <unk> , shepherd Dhangars , village guards and watchmen <unk> — a " <unk> tribe " , the former " untouchable " <unk> and <unk> , fisher @-@ folk Kolis , <unk> castes like gardeners ( Mali ) and tailors ( <unk> ) , though it also includes of a few Brahmins and even some Muslims . Although Brahmin presence is nominal in his cult , Deshastha Brahmins , as well as the <unk> Brahmins - in Nashik and Satara - do worship Khandoba , some imitating the Deshastha Brahmins . The Deshastha Brahmins , <unk> <unk> Prabhus , as well as the royal families like <unk> and <unk> worship Khandoba as their Kuldevta . He is also worshipped by Jains and Lingayats . He is viewed as a " king " of his followers . 
 = = = Rituals and modes of worship = = = 
 Khandoba is believed to be a <unk> ( fierce ) deity , who causes troubles if not propitiated properly as per the family duties . Khandoba is worshipped with Turmeric ( <unk> ) , Bel fruit @-@ leaves , onions and other vegetables . The deity is offered <unk> poli - a sweet or a simpler dish called <unk> <unk> of onion and <unk> . Mostly a vegetarian naivedya ( offering of food ) is offered to Khandoba in the temples , though most devotees consider him a non @-@ vegetarian and a goat flesh is offered to the deity outside the temple . 
 An important part of the Khandoba @-@ cult is navas , a vow to perform service to the god in return for a boon of good harvest , male child , financial success etc . On fulfilment of the navas , Khandoba was offered children or some devotees would afflict pain by hook @-@ swinging or fire @-@ walking . This type of worship using navas is called <unk> Bhakti - worship done with an expectation of return and is considered " to be of a lower esteem " . But the most faithful bhaktas ( devotees ) are considered to be greedy only for the company of their Lord , Khandoba is also called <unk> - hungry for such true bhaktas in Martanda Vijaya . 
 Boys called <unk> ( or <unk> , literally " tigers " ) and girls called <unk> were formerly dedicated to Khandoba , but now the practice of marrying girls to Khandoba is illegal . The Vaghyas act as the bards of Khandoba and identify themselves with the dogs of Khandoba , while Muralis act as his courtesans ( <unk> — nymphs or devadasis ) . The Vaghyas and their female counterparts Muralis sing and dance in honour of Khandoba and narrate his stories on <unk> — all night song @-@ festivals , which are sometimes held after navas fulfilment . Another custom was ritual @-@ suicide by <unk> ( heroes ) in the cult . According to legend , an " untouchable " Mang ( Matanga ) sacrificed himself for the foundation of the temple at Jejuri to persuade Khandoba to stay at Jejuri forever . Other practices in the cult include the belief that Khandoba possesses the body of a <unk> or <unk> ( shaman ) . Another ritual in the cult is an act of chain @-@ breaking in fulfilment of a vow or an annual family rite ; the chain is identified with the snake around Shiva 's neck , which was cut by the demons in the fight . Another rite associated with the family duties to please Khandoba is the tali <unk> , which is to be performed every full moon day . A tali ( dish ) is filled with coconuts , fruits , betel nuts , saffron , turmeric ( Bhandar ) and Bel leaves . Then , a coconut is placed on a pot filled with water and the pot is worshipped as an embodiment of Khandoba . Then , five persons lift the tali , place it repeatedly on the pot thrice , saying " <unk> " or " <unk> <unk> <unk> " . Then the coconut in the tali is broken and mixed with sugar or jaggery and given to friends and relatives . A <unk> is performed along with the tali <unk> . A <unk> is a ritualistic folk art in which the performer <unk> invoke the deities . 
 Khandoba is considered as the giver of fertility . Maharashtrian Hindu couples are expected to visit a Khandoba temple to obtain Khandoba 's blessing on consummation of marriage . Traditional Maharashtrian families also organize a <unk> as part of the marriage ceremony , inviting the god to the marriage . Copper figurines of Khandoba riding on a horse ( sometimes with Mhalsa ) are worshipped by devotees on a daily basis in the household shrine . 
 The Sanskrit Malhari Mahatmya suggests offerings of incense , lights , betel and animals to Khandoba . The Marathi version mentions offerings of meat and the worship by <unk> - " causing themselves to be cut " , hook @-@ swinging and self @-@ mortification by <unk> . Marathi version calls this form of bhakti ( devotion ) as ugra ( violent , demonic ) bhakti . Martanda <unk> narrates about <unk> bhakti ( demonic worship ) by animal sacrifice and self — torture . Possession by Khandoba , in form of a wind , is lower demonic worship ( <unk> worship ) . <unk> worship , the purest form of worship , is believed to be feeding Khandoba in form of a Brahmin . 
 = = = Muslim veneration = = = 
 Khandoba is also a figure of respect and worship to Muslims , and this affiliation is visible in the style of his temples . He is called Mallu or <unk> Khan ( <unk> ) by Muslim devotees , and many times portrayed as being a Muslim himself in this context . The latter is believed to conferred upon by the Mughal invader king Aurangzeb , who was forced to flee from Jejuri by Khandoba 's power . Some of these distinguishing Muslim features include his usual appearance as that of a <unk> on horseback , one of his wives being a Muslim , and that his horse @-@ keeper is a Muslim in Jejuri . The <unk> Vijaya expressly states that his devotees are mainly Muslims . The worship of Khandoba had received royal patronage by Ibrahim II , which consisted of the reinstatement of the annual jatra and the right of pilgrims to perform rituals at the Naldurg temple . Malhari Mahatmya even records Muslims ( <unk> ) as the god 's bhaktas ( devotees ) , who call him as <unk> Pathan or Mallu Khan . In Jejuri , a Muslim family traditionally looks after the horses of the god . 
 = = = Temples = = = 
 There are over 600 temples dedicated to Khandoba in the Deccan . His temples stretch from Nasik , Maharashtra in the north to Davangere , Karnataka in the south , Konkan , Maharashtra in the west to western Andhra Pradesh in the east . The eleven principal centres of worship of Khandoba or <unk> kshetras , where the deity is to be called awake or " <unk> " , are recognized ; six of them in Maharashtra and the rest in northern Karnataka . Khandoba 's temples resemble forts , the capital of his kingdom being Jejuri . The priests here are <unk> , not Brahmins . His most important temples are : 
 Jejuri : The foremost center of worship of Khandoba . It is situated 48 km from Pune , Maharashtra . There are two temples : the first is an ancient temple known as <unk> . <unk> is difficult to climb . The second one is the newer and more famous Gad @-@ kot temple , which is easy to climb . This temple has about 450 steps , 18 <unk> ( arches ) and 350 <unk> ( lamp @-@ pillars ) . Both temples are fort @-@ like structures . 
 Pali ( Rajapur ) or Pali @-@ Pember , Satara district , Maharashtra . 
 Adi @-@ <unk> or <unk> ( Pember or <unk> ) near Bidar , Karnataka 
 Naldurg , <unk> district , Maharashtra . 
 Mailara Linga , Dharwad district , Karnataka . 
 <unk> , Belgaum district , Karnataka . 
 <unk> or Mailara temple at <unk> , <unk> Taluk , Haveri district , Karnataka . 
 <unk> or Mailar , Bellary , Karnataka . 
 <unk> <unk> , Pune district , Maharashtra . 
 <unk> , Ahmednagar district , Maharashtra . 
 <unk> , Warangal district , Telangana . 
 <unk> , Aurangabad district , Maharashtra . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 A six @-@ day festival , from the first to sixth lunar day of the bright fortnight of the Hindu month of Margashirsha , in honour of Khandoba is celebrated at Jejuri , to commemorate the fight with demons Mani @-@ Malla . On the sixth day ( Champa @-@ Shashthi ) , Khandoba is believed to have slew the demons . A jatra ( temple festival and fair ) is held in Pember on Champa @-@ <unk> , and the festival continues until the day of the new moon . Another festival <unk> Amavasya , which is a new @-@ moon day that falls on a Monday , is celebrated in Jejuri . A <unk> ( palanquin ) procession of Khandoba and Mhalsa 's images is carried from the Gad @-@ kot temple to the <unk> river , where the images are ritually bathed . 
 <unk> Brahmans and Marathas observe the <unk> festival every year in honour of Khandoba . The festival begins on the bright half of the Hindu month of <unk> . The images of Khandoba and Malla are cleaned and worshipped . For six days a fast is observed . On the seventh day the worshippers break their fast by a feast known as the <unk> <unk> . An invitation to this feast is regarded as an invitation from the god Khandoba himself and is harder to refuse . 
 In Pali @-@ Pember , the ritual of the marriage of Khandoba with Mhalsa is annually performed . Turmeric is offered to the deities . Two festivals are celebrated in honour of Mailara , as Khandoba is known in Karnataka . These are the Dasara festival at <unk> , and an eleven @-@ day festival in Magha month ( February – March ) in Mailar , Bellary district . Both festivals have enactments of the battle between Mailar and the demons Mani @-@ Malla . Chaitra Purnima ( full @-@ moon day ) is also considered auspicious . In general , Sundays , associated with the sun @-@ god , are considered as considered auspicious for Khandoba worship . 
 = = Development of the cult = = 
 The cult of Khandoba , a folk religion , reflects the effect of Vedic Rudra , the Puranic Shiva worshipped as Linga in Brahmanical religion and Nath and Lingayat sects . Khandoba may be a product of the Vedic Rudra , who like Khandoba was associated with robbers , horses and dogs . Sayana traces the name Malhari to Taittiriya Samhita , Malhari is explained as enemy ( ari ) of Malha ( Prajapati ) - an epithet of Rudra , who is considered a rival to deity Prajapati . According to Stanley , Khandoba originated as a mountain @-@ top god , solar deity and a regional guardian and then assimilated into himself gods of various regions and communities . According to Stanley , Khandoba inherits traits from both the sun @-@ god Surya as well as Shiva , who is identified with the moon . Stanley describes Khandoba as " a moon god , who has become a sun god " , emphasizing on how the moon imagery of Shiva transforms into the solar iconography of Khandoba in the Malhari Mahatmya . 
 As per R. C. Dhere , two stone inscriptions in 1063 C.E. and 1148 <unk> mentioning the folk deities Mailara and his consort <unk> which suggests that Mailara gained popularity in Karnataka in this period . Soon , royals of this region started erecting temples to this folk deity , upsetting the elite class of established religion who vilified Mailara . Initially <unk> by an incarnation of Shiva , Mailara was <unk> by Basava , the founder of the Shiva @-@ worshipping Lingayat sect - who would later promote the deity . <unk> Swami ( <unk> , founder of <unk> sect ) , <unk> , Sheikh Muhammad also criticized the god . The Varkari poet @-@ saint Eknath also wrote " disparagingly " about Khandoba 's cult worship , but after him , the " open " criticism of Khandoba stopped , but the " barbaric " practices of his cult were still targeted . 
 Sontheimer suggests that the cult of Khandoba is at least older than 12th century , which can be determined by references in Jain and Lingayat texts and inscriptions . A 12th @-@ century Jain author Brahmashiva claims that a Jain , who died in battle after a display of his valour , was later named as Mailara . By the 13th century , wide worship of Malhari or Mailara is observed by kings , Brahmins , simple folk and warriors . With the rise of Muslim empire , classical Hindu temples fell into ruin , giving rise to the folk religion such as of Khandoba . <unk> remarks , ' by the end of the Kali Yuga , temples of Vishnu and Shiva will be destroyed , but those of Mailara will stay ' . A 1369 AD inscription at <unk> near Warangal tells an account of Mallari different from Malhari Mahatmya — Shiva helped the epic hero Arjuna kill the demon Malla , thus acquiring the title of Mallari . Mailara was the family deity of Kakatiya dynasty ( 1083 – 1323 AD ) ; a text from their rule records the self @-@ torture rituals of Mailara @-@ devotees and describes the deity . Throughout his development , Mailara is looked upon as a lower manifestation of Ishvara ( God ) by Lingayat and Maharashtrian bhakti saints . 
 Malhari Mahatmya states that Khandoba first appeared on <unk> , which was a Sunday , at <unk> , which identified as Pember ( <unk> , <unk> ) near Bidar . Marathi traditions tell that Khandoba came originally from <unk> , now Pember in Karnataka , then went to Naldurg , Pali and finally to Jejuri . Sontheimer suggests that the cult of Mailara may have originated in Pember and then spread to Maharashtra , merging with the cult of <unk> — the patron yaksha ( demi @-@ god ) of Paithan giving it its distinct <unk> characteristics . <unk> call the god - <unk> <unk> , the god from Karnataka . The cult possibly was spread by Lingayat , Jain and other merchants , associated with Mailara @-@ Khandoba , to other parts of the Deccan . Besides Mailara , Khandoba is identified with other deities of Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh , and is called as Mallanna , <unk> , and Mallu Khan . Other traditions like Shakta cults of folk goddesses were assimilated into the Khandoba cult , identifying the goddesses with Khandoba 's wives Mhalsa or Banai . 
 Marathi literature has a mixed reaction to the cult of Khandoba . <unk> ( 1790 ) in stotra ( hymn ) dedicated to Khandoba calls him " an illustrious king with rich clothes and a horse with a saddle studded with jewels " , who was once " an ascetic beggar who ride an old bull and carried an ant @-@ bitten club ( khatvanga ) " - a humorous take on the Puranic Shiva . In another instance ( 1855 ) , he is called a ghost by a Christian missionary and <unk> Brahmin in a debate against Deshastha Brahmin . Another Brahmin remarks with scorn about the impurity of the Khandoba temple , visited by Sudras and whose priests are non @-@ Brahmin <unk> . The Marathi term " khel @-@ <unk> " , which is taken to mean " devastation " in general usage , refers to the possession of devotee by the god in his cult . 
 = 2009 Alabama Crimson Tide football team = 
 The 2009 Alabama Crimson Tide football team ( variously " Alabama " , " UA " , " Bama " or " The Tide " ) represented the University of Alabama in the 2009 NCAA Division I FBS football season . It was the Crimson Tide 's 115th overall season , 76th season as a member of the Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) and its 18th within the SEC Western Division . The team was led by head coach Nick Saban , in his third year , and played their home games at Bryant – Denny Stadium in Tuscaloosa , Alabama . They finished the season undefeated with a record of 14 – 0 ( 8 – 0 in the SEC ) and as national champions . 
 Looking to build on the successes of the 2008 campaign , Alabama entered the 2009 season as the favorite to win the Western Division and meet the Florida Gators in the 2009 SEC Championship Game . Alabama closed the regular season with a 12 – 0 record including four wins against Top 25 @-@ ranked teams — and met the Gators for the SEC Championship in a rematch of the 2008 contest . Alabama was victorious by a final score of 32 – 13 . The following day , final Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) standings were unveiled . No. 1 ranked Alabama would meet No. 2 ranked Texas for the BCS National Championship . In the BCS National Championship Game , the Crimson Tide defeated the Longhorns 37 – 21 to capture their first @-@ ever BCS Championship . 
 Alabama earned their third SEC championship since the inception of the SEC Championship Game in 1992 , and their 22nd SEC title . The victory over Texas gave Alabama their 13th national championship in football ( their eighth wire service title since the AP Poll began in 1936 ) and their ninth perfect season since 1925 . The season included victories over the previous three national champions : Florida , Louisiana State University ( LSU ) , and Texas . 
 The season marked the first time a player for Alabama won the Heisman Trophy : Mark Ingram won the award over Stanford running back Toby Gerhart . Other award winners included Rolando McClain , who won the Butkus Award and the Jack Lambert Award , and defensive coordinator Kirby Smart , who won the Broyles Award as the nation 's top assistant coach . Also , six players were named to various All @-@ America Teams with Terrence Cody , Mike Johnson , and Javier Arenas being consensus selections and Ingram and McClain each being unanimous selections . 
 = = Before the season = = 
 During the 2008 – 2009 campaign , the Crimson Tide completed a perfect 12 – 0 regular season record with wins over No. 9 Clemson , No. 3 Georgia , longtime rival Tennessee , No. 16 LSU , and in @-@ state rival Auburn to end a six game losing streak in the Iron Bowl . The Tide went on to lose their final two games in the postseason to end the season 12 – 2 . They lost to the Florida Gators ( 31 – 20 ) in the SEC Championship Game , and to the Utah Utes ( 31 – 17 ) in the Sugar Bowl . Alabama reached No. 1 in the AP and Coaches ' Polls for the first time since the final polls in 1992 and during the regular season for the first time since 1980 between weeks ten and fourteen . The Tide reached No. 1 in the BCS rankings for the first time in school history between weeks ten and fourteen . The team finished the 2008 season with a final ranking of No. 6 in both the AP and Coaches ' Polls . 
 In February 2009 , Alabama signed the No. 1 recruiting class according to Rivals and the No. 2 recruiting class according to Scout . Spring practice began on March 13 and concluded with the annual A @-@ Day game on April 18 . Televised live by ESPN , the Crimson team defeated the White team by a score of 14 – 7 before 84 @,@ 050 fans in Bryant – Denny Stadium . Greg McElroy and Marquis Maze were named co @-@ MVPs of the game . 
 On June 11 , 2009 , the NCAA Committee on Infractions sanctioned Alabama for " major violations " of NCAA policies as a result of athletes who received improper benefits in 16 of 19 NCAA sports , including football . As a penalty , the football program was forced to vacate 21 victories from the 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 seasons in addition to being placed on three years probation , ending in June 2012 . The university stated that none of the textbooks or materials identified in the investigation were used for profit , and that the athletes involved who still had eligibility remaining were to pay restitution for the additional materials identified as part of the inquiry . Alabama appealed the ruling to the NCAA Infractions Appeals Committee in late June , but was unsuccessful ; the Committee upheld the sanctions in March 2010 . 
 During SEC Media Days in July , voters selected Alabama and Florida to again win their divisions , with 63 of 64 ballots choosing Florida to win the SEC Championship Game . Voters selected Julio Jones , Mike Johnson , Terrence Cody , Rolando McClain , Javier Arenas ( as a defensive back ) , and Leigh Tiffin to the Preseason All @-@ SEC First Team and selected Mark Ingram and Arenas ( as a return specialist ) to the Preseason All @-@ SEC Second Team . 
 By August , Alabama had 19 players on 11 different preseason award watch lists . These included Cody and McClain for the Chuck Bednarik Award ; Jones for the Fred Biletnikoff Award ; Dont ’ a Hightower and McClain for the Butkus Award ; Leigh Tiffin for the Lou Groza Award ; Cody , Hightower , Mike Johnson , and McClain for the Lombardi Award ; Cody and McClain for the Lott Trophy ; Jones for the Maxwell Award ; Javier Arenas , Cody , and McClain for the Bronko Nagurski Trophy ; Cody and Johnson for the Outland Trophy ; Arenas for the Jim Thorpe Award ; and Mark Ingram for the Doak Walker Award . 
 = = = Returning starters = = = 
 Alabama had 16 returning starters from the previous season , including eight on defense , four on offense , and all of the special teams . The most notable departures from the previous year were Andre Smith , Antoine Caldwell , and Marlon Davis on the offensive line ; John Parker Wilson at quarterback ; Glen Coffee at running back ; and Rashad Johnson at safety . 
 = = = Recruiting class = = = 
 Alabama 's recruiting class was highlighted by seven players from the " ESPN 150 " : No. 4 Dre Kirkpatrick ( CB ) ; No. 6 Trent Richardson ( RB ) ; No. 12 D.J. Fluker ( OT ) ; No. 20 Nico Johnson ( ILB ) ; No. 36 A. J. McCarron ( QB ) ; No. 65 Kendall Kelly ( WR ) ; No. 110 Tana Patrick ( OLB ) ; No. 142 Petey Smith ( ILB ) ; and No. 143 Eddie Lacy ( RB ) . Alabama signed the No. 1 recruiting class according to Rivals and the No. 2 recruiting class according to Scout . The football program received 29 letters of intent on National Signing Day , February 4 , 2009 . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 The Sagarin computer ratings calculated Alabama 's strength of schedule to be the most difficult out of the 245 Division I teams . The <unk> Computer Rankings also calculated it as the most difficult out of the 120 Division I FBS teams in its rankings . Alabama 's 2009 schedule was officially released on December 19 , 2008 . In accordance with conference rules , Alabama faced all five Western Division opponents : Arkansas , Auburn , LSU , Mississippi State , and Ole Miss . They also faced three Eastern Division opponents : official SEC rival Tennessee , Kentucky , and South Carolina . Alabama did not play SEC opponents Georgia and Vanderbilt . Although not on the regular season schedule , Bama met Florida in the SEC Championship Game . 
 Alabama also played five non @-@ conference games . For the season opener , the Tide played in the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Kickoff Game against Virginia Tech at the Georgia Dome in Atlanta . The non @-@ conference schedule also included games against Florida International and North Texas of the Sun Belt Conference and UT @-@ Chattanooga of the Football Championship Subdivision ( FCS ) . For the 2010 BCS National Championship Game , Alabama played Texas for the first time since the 1982 Cotton Bowl Classic . 
 Source : Rolltide.com All @-@ time Football Results : 2009 Season 
 = = Depth chart = = 
 Starters and backups . 
 = = Coaching staff = = 
 Prior to the 2009 season , Alabama made several changes to its coaching staff . Alabama lost their defensive head coach , Kevin Steele , on January 10 , 2009 , when he was hired as defensive coordinator for Clemson , and their linebacker coach Lance Thompson on January 16 , when he was hired as linebacker coach by Tennessee . The following week , Saban named Sal Sunseri from the NFL 's Carolina Panthers as his team 's new assistant head and linebacker coach , and James Willis from Auburn as the new associate head and linebacker coach . 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 After defeating Clemson in the inaugural Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Kickoff Game , Alabama announced in December 2008 they would return for the 2009 edition against the Virginia Tech Hokies . The Tide dominated play for most of the game , <unk> Tech in total offense by 498 yards to 155 , but mistakes , penalties , and poor play by the special teams allowed the Hokies to hang on until 18 fourth @-@ quarter points sealed the 34 – 24 Alabama victory . 
 Bama scored first with field goals of 49 and 34 yards from Leigh Tiffin to take an early 6 – 0 lead . The Hokies responded with a 98 @-@ yard Dyrell Roberts kickoff return for a touchdown to give Tech a 7 – 6 lead . Following the recovery of a Ryan Williams fumble by Brian Selman deep in Hokie territory , the Tide retook the lead 9 – 7 on a 32 @-@ yard Tiffin field goal . Early in the second quarter , Antoine Hopkins intercepted a Greg McElroy pass . On the ensuing possession , Tech led 10 – 9 after a successful 28 @-@ yard Matt Waldron field goal . Alabama responded by driving 76 yards for a touchdown and a 16 – 10 lead , with the big plays coming on a 14 @-@ yard run by Mark Ingram , passes of 16 and 10 yards from McElroy to Julio Jones and the score coming on a 19 @-@ yard Roy Upchurch run . On the next Virginia Tech possession , three personal fouls and a pass interference penalty carried the Hokies downfield with Williams scoring on an one @-@ yard touchdown run . The score remained 17 – 16 at the half after Tiffin missed a 36 @-@ yard field goal at the end of the second quarter . 
 In the third quarter Roy Upchurch fumbled the ball at the Tech nine after a long run , negating the lone scoring opportunity for either team in the third quarter . Still down by a point in the fourth quarter , McElroy hit Marquis Maze for a 48 @-@ yard completion to the Virginia Tech six @-@ yard line , and Ingram scored a touchdown on the next play . A successful two @-@ point conversion pass from McElroy to Colin Peek gave Alabama a 24 – 17 lead . On the ensuing kickoff , Davon Morgan fumbled and Chris Rogers recovered for the Tide at the Tech 21 . The following Alabama drive stalled at the 3 , but Tiffin 's fourth field goal made the score 27 – 17 . Poor kickoff coverage and penalties set up a 32 @-@ yard Williams that run cut the lead to 27 – 24 late in the fourth quarter . Alabama quickly struck back as Ingram rushed for 39 yards , McElroy completed a 19 @-@ yard pass to Peek , and then threw to Ingram for an 18 @-@ yard touchdown and a 34 – 24 lead . The Hokies never threatened to score again and Alabama won its opener , 34 – 24 . Ingram led the Tide with 150 yards rushing on 26 carries and a pair of touchdowns , and he was named the SEC Offensive Player of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Hokies to 11 – 1 . 
 = = = Florida International = = = 
 The Golden Panthers of Florida International proved a tougher opponent than Alabama expected in the first half . However , the Tide pulled away with a 40 – 14 victory in the 2009 home opener . Alabama opened the scoring with a 23 @-@ yard Leigh Tiffin field goal followed by a 24 @-@ yard Greg McElroy touchdown pass to Mike McCoy , which gave Bama a 10 – 0 lead . FIU followed the McElroy touchdown with <unk> Hilton returning the ensuing kickoff 96 yards , bringing the score to 10 – 7 . Bama responded with a 29 @-@ yard Tiffin field goal to extend the lead to 13 – 7 early in the second quarter ; the following kickoff was booted out of bounds , which set up the Golden Panthers at the 40 . The ensuing 60 @-@ yard drive resulted in a 9 @-@ yard Paul McCall touchdown pass to Greg Ellingson that gave FIU a 14 – 13 lead . Bama responded with a 64 @-@ yard drive culminating with a two @-@ yard Mark Ingram touchdown run to put Bama up 20 – 14 at the half . 
 Trent Richardson continued the Alabama scoring in the third quarter with a nine @-@ yard touchdown run to extend the lead to 26 – 14 . A 46 @-@ yard punt return by Javier Arenas set up Richardson 's second score on a 35 @-@ yard touchdown run on the first play of the fourth quarter . Alabama led 33 – 14 . Terry Grant scored the Tide 's final points with a 42 @-@ yard touchdown run to bring the final score to 40 – 14 . Alabama outgained FIU 516 – 214 in total offense and 275 – 1 in rushing offense . Greg McElroy set an all @-@ time Alabama record by completing 14 consecutive pass attempts and was 18 – 24 for 241 yards and a touchdown . For his 113 @-@ yard , two @-@ touchdown rushing performance , Richardson was named the SEC Freshman of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Golden Panthers to 2 – 0 . 
 = = = North Texas = = = 
 Alabama 's second consecutive matchup with a Sun Belt opponent on the season resulted in its second consecutive victory , as the Tide defeated the North Texas Mean Green 53 – 7 . Greg McElroy opened the scoring with a two @-@ yard touchdown run followed by a 34 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Marquis Maze to take a 14 – 0 first quarter lead . The Tide continued the scoring in the second quarter , with touchdowns on a one @-@ yard Trent Richardson run and a 29 @-@ yard McElroy pass to Mark Ingram followed with a 35 @-@ yard Leigh Tiffin field goal . This gave Alabama a 30 – 0 lead at the half . In the third quarter , Bama extended their lead to 44 – 0 following touchdown runs of five and one yard respectively from Ingram and Terry Grant . After North Texas reached the end zone on a 34 @-@ yard Nathan Tune touchdown pass to Lance Dunbar , Alabama closed the game with ten fourth @-@ quarter points on a 20 @-@ yard Tiffin field goal and 9 @-@ yard Grant touchdown run . 
 Alabama outgained the Mean Green 523 – 187 in yards of total offense . It was the most points for Alabama in a game since beating Texas @-@ El Paso 56 – 7 in 2001 and the most scored at Bryant – Denny since defeating Tulane 62 – 0 in 1991 . By completing of 13 of 15 passes , McElroy tied a school record with an overall completion percentage of 86 @.@ 7 . The game was notable for McElroy as the North Texas head coach , Todd Dodge , was his high school head coach when McElroy led Southlake Carroll to the 2005 Texas Class 5A high school football championship . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Mean Green to 3 – 0 . 
 = = = Arkansas = = = 
 In Bobby Petrino 's first visit to Tuscaloosa as a head coach , Alabama opened conference play by defeating the Arkansas Razorbacks 35 – 7 . After a scoreless first quarter , two big touchdown plays , a 52 @-@ yard run by Trent Richardson and a 50 @-@ yard pass from Greg McElroy to Julio Jones , had the Tide up 14 – 0 at the half . Arkansas responded early in the third quarter and cut the lead to 14 – 7 after Ryan Mallett hit Greg Childs for an 18 @-@ yard touchdown reception ; the Hogs would not reach the end zone again as the Tide responded with three unanswered touchdowns . Bama scored first on an 80 @-@ yard touchdown pass from McElroy to Marquis Maze followed with two touchdowns by Mark Ingram , one on a 14 @-@ yard pass from McElroy and one on a 2 @-@ yard run , bringing the final score to 35 – 7 . 
 Alabama outgained the Razorbacks 425 – 254 in yards of total offense . McElroy threw for career highs of 291 yards and three touchdowns . For his 65 @-@ yard , nine @-@ carry , one @-@ touchdown performance , Richardson was named the SEC Freshman of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Razorbacks to 10 – 8 ( 13 – 7 without NCAA vacations and forfeits ) . 
 = = = Kentucky = = = 
 In Alabama 's first trip to Lexington since 2004 , and their first road game of the 2009 season , the Tide defeated the Kentucky Wildcats 38 – 20 . Alabama scored on their opening drive after Javier Arenas returned the opening kickoff 60 yards , which set up an 11 @-@ yard Mark Ingram touchdown for an early 7 – 0 lead . Kentucky responded with a pair of 49 @-@ yard <unk> Seiber field goals . The score was 7 – 6 at the end of the first quarter . The Tide extended their lead late in the second quarter following a nearly seven @-@ minute , 13 @-@ play , 97 @-@ yard touchdown drive . Greg McElroy passes of 27 and 21 yards and a 13 @-@ yard run by Ingram moved Bama down the field , culminating with a three @-@ yard touchdown pass from McElroy to Colin Peek to put the Tide up 14 – 6 . With only 40 seconds remaining in the half , Kentucky tailback Derrick Locke fumbled the ball after catching a short pass . Courtney Upshaw returned 45 yards for an Alabama touchdown that put the Tide ahead 21 – 6 at halftime . 
 On the second play of the third quarter , Rolando McClain intercepted a Mike Hartline pass , giving Alabama possession at the Wildcat 38 . Two plays later Ingram scored on a 32 @-@ yard run , making the score 28 – 6 . Following an Eryk Anders interception that set up a 36 @-@ yard Leigh Tiffin field goal , the Wildcats reached the end zone for the first time on the ensuing drive . Hartline connected with Randall Cobb for a 45 @-@ yard touchdown reception in bringing the score to 31 – 13 . The Tide responded with a 7 @-@ yard Darius Hanks touchdown reception to complete a 13 @-@ play , 76 @-@ yard drive . Kentucky scored the afternoon 's final points in the fourth quarter on a two @-@ yard Alfonso Smith touchdown run . The final score was 38 – 20 . Kentucky 's four turnovers sabotaged an effort that was better than any other of Alabama 's previous opponents , as the Wildcats gained 301 yards in total offense and held Alabama to 352 . McElroy threw for two touchdowns , giving him nine on the season against only one interception , and Ingram rushed for 140 yards on 22 carries . For his 12 tackles ( 8 solo ) , one interception , one forced fumble and one pass break @-@ up , McClain was named both the SEC Defensive Player of the Week and the Bronko Nagurski Award National Defensive Player of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Wildcats to 35 – 2 – 1 . 
 = = = Ole Miss = = = 
 Before the largest crowd to ever witness a game in Vaught – Hemingway Stadium , Alabama defeated their long @-@ time rival , the Ole Miss Rebels , 22 – 3 . Alabama struggled to put the ball in the end zone all afternoon with drives stalled at the Mississippi 8 , 4 , 4 , 4 , and 13 . Each of those drives resulted in a field goal by Leigh Tiffin , who was 5 for 5 on the day . Other special teams contributions included a blocked punt in the second quarter and a recovered Dexter <unk> fumble on a punt return in the third quarter , both by Cory Reamer . McElroy struggled , completing only 15 of 34 passes for 147 yards , but Mark Ingram ran for a then career @-@ high 172 yards and accounted for Alabama 's only touchdown on a 36 @-@ yard run in the second quarter . 
 The Alabama defense had an excellent day , with Javier Arenas , Kareem Jackson , Rolando McClain , and Cory Reamer each intercepting a Jevan Snead pass . Overall , the Tide held the Rebels to 212 yards of total offense and a single Joshua Shene field goal in the third <unk> center William Vlachos was named the SEC Offensive Lineman of the Week and Tiffin was named the Lou Groza Award " Star of Stars " for his five field goal performance . The victory was the team 's sixth in a row over the Rebels and improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against Ole Miss to 43 – 9 – 2 ( 47 – 8 – 2 without NCAA vacations and forfeits ) . 
 = = = South Carolina = = = 
 In South Carolina 's first trip to Bryant – Denny since 2004 , the Tide defeated the South Carolina Gamecocks 20 – 6 on homecoming in Tuscaloosa . On the second play from the start of the game , Mark Barron intercepted a Stephen Garcia pass and returned it 77 yards for a touchdown and a 7 – 0 Alabama lead . Greg McElroy struggled ; he threw a pair of first @-@ quarter interceptions on Bama 's first two offensive possessions . South Carolina 's C.C. Whitlock fumbled the ball on the return of the second interception and possession was recovered by Darius Hanks . The Tide continued its drive to the Gamecock 8 , and Leigh Tiffin kicked a field goal to put Alabama ahead 10 – 0 . 
 Following a failed 49 @-@ yard Leigh Tiffin field goal attempt in the second quarter , South Carolina answered by driving to the Alabama five @-@ yard line . However , the Bama defense held the Gamecock offense to three consecutive incompletions ; the result was a 22 @-@ yard Spencer Lanning field goal to make the score 10 – 3 . On the following possession , Mark Ingram ran 54 yards to the South Carolina 28 . The drive stalled at the 17 and Tiffin 's field goal made it 13 – 3 . South Carolina responded with a quick drive that ended with a 31 @-@ yard Lanning field goal as time expired in the first half with the score 13 – 6 . 
 After a scoreless third quarter , with 8 : 08 to go , Alabama took possession at its own 32 following a Gamecock punt . Taking direct snaps out of the wildcat formation , Ingram rushed for 64 yards on five carries , then took a pitch from Greg McElroy for the last four yards and the touchdown , sealing Alabama 's 20 – 6 victory . The Alabama offense turned the ball over four times in this game after committing only two turnovers in the first six games . Mark Ingram 's 246 yards rushing marked his third consecutive career @-@ high effort and the third highest single game total in Alabama history . For their performances , Ingram was named the SEC Offensive Player of the Week and Rolando McClain was named the Lott Trophy IMPACT Player of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Gamecocks to 10 – 3 ( 12 – 2 before NCAA vacations and forfeits ) . 
 = = = Tennessee = = = 
 This edition of the Third Saturday in October was a defensive struggle with a surprise finish as the Crimson Tide defeated the Tennessee Volunteers 12 – 10 . In a defensive struggle for both teams , Leigh Tiffin was 4 for 4 on field goals and accounted for all of Alabama 's scoring . 
 With the Tennessee defense stopping the Tide on consecutive drives , Alabama 's defense responded with Mark Barron intercepting a Jonathan Crompton pass at the Bama 19 in the first quarter . The ensuing drive resulted in a 38 @-@ yard Leigh Tiffin field goal and a 3 – 0 lead . The Vols responded with a 24 @-@ yard Daniel Lincoln field goal that tied the game 3 – 3 . Tiffin hit field goals of 50 and 22 yards before Lincoln missed a 47 @-@ yard attempt at the end of the first half , leaving the score 9 – 3 at halftime . After a scoreless third , in the fourth Tennessee drove to the Alabama 27 , but Terrence Cody blocked Lincoln 's field goal . On the ensuing possession , Tiffin hit a 49 @-@ yard field goal to bring the score to 12 – 3 . 
 Late in the fourth , Mark Ingram lost a fumble for the first time in his collegiate career , giving Tennessee possession at the Alabama 43 with 3 : 29 remaining in the game . The Vols drove the ball 43 yards in 2 : 10 , culminating with an 11 @-@ yard Crompton touchdown pass to Gerald Jones to cut the gap to 12 – 10 . The Vols followed with a successful onside kick attempt and regained possession of the ball at their own 41 @-@ yard line . After Tennessee was penalized five yards for a false start , Crompton completed a pass to Luke Stocker for 23 yards , to the Bama 27 @-@ yard line . With the clock ticking off the final seconds and Tennessee out of time outs , Crompton spiked the ball to stop the clock with four seconds left . This set up Lincoln for a 45 @-@ yard field goal attempt to win the game . However , Terrence Cody knocked his blocker over and broke through the line . He blocked Lincoln 's field goal as time expired , preserving Alabama 's 12 – 10 victory and perfect season . For their performances , Cody was named the SEC Defensive Lineman of the Week and Tiffin was named the SEC Special Teams Player of the Week . 
 = = = LSU = = = 
 With the SEC West divisional championship on the line , Alabama defeated their long @-@ time rival the LSU Tigers 24 – 15 to secure a spot in the SEC Championship Game . Following a scoreless first quarter , LSU took possession on its own 9 on the last play of the first quarter and embarked on a 13 @-@ play , 91 @-@ yard drive that ended in a 12 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Jordan Jefferson to Deangelo Peterson and a 7 – 0 lead . Javier Arenas returned the ensuing punt 40 yards to the Alabama 49 , and the Tide drove to the LSU 11 before settling for a 28 @-@ yard Leigh Tiffin field goal that made the score 7 – 3 . Neither team could mount a sustained drive for the rest of the half . 
 At the start of the second half Alabama received the kickoff , took possession at its own 19 , and started getting the ball to Mark Ingram . On the drive , Ingram was responsible for a 12 @-@ yard reception from Greg McElroy and rushes of 4 , 12 , 12 , and 18 yards that advanced the ball to the Tiger 23 . Two plays later , McElroy hit Darius Hanks for his first touchdown pass since the Kentucky game , and Alabama was up 10 – 7 . The ensuing LSU drive stalled at the Tide 46 . The LSU punt was downed at the Alabama 1 @-@ yard line . Two plays later McElroy was sacked for a safety , making the score 10 – 9 . LSU returned the free kick to its own 41 and drove 59 yards for the touchdown , the big play coming on a 34 @-@ yard run by Charles Scott . The two @-@ point conversion attempt failed , leaving the score 15 – 10 in favor of LSU . 
 Alabama received the kickoff and again relied on Ingram : seven Ingram rushes for 48 yards accounted for most of the offense on a drive that ended with a 20 @-@ yard Tiffin field goal , making the score 15 – 13 . Following a LSU three and out , Alabama took possession on its own 27 @-@ yard line . On first down , McElroy completed a screen pass to Julio Jones which Jones turned into a 73 @-@ yard touchdown . After a successful two @-@ point conversion , Alabama led 21 – 15 . LSU went three and out again . A methodical 11 @-@ play , 31 @-@ yard Alabama drive consumed 6 : 14 of game time and ended in a 40 @-@ yard Tiffin field goal with 3 : 04 left to seal a 24 – 15 Alabama victory . Alabama won the SEC Western Division championship and clinched a berth in the SEC Championship Game against Florida , which clinched the East that same day with a 27 – 3 victory over Vanderbilt . Ingram rushed for 144 yards and Jones had 102 receiving yards . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Tigers to 45 – 23 – 5 . 
 = = = Mississippi State = = = 
 Playing in front of the largest crowd to ever witness a game in Davis Wade Stadium , and with the Bulldogs wearing black jerseys for the first time in their history , Alabama cruised to a 31 – 3 victory over long @-@ time rival Mississippi State . After a scoreless first quarter , Alabama scored a pair of touchdowns in the second to take a 14 – 0 lead . The first touchdown came on a 45 @-@ yard Darius Hanks reception from Greg McElroy and the second on a 1 @-@ yard Mark Ingram run . 
 After a 39 @-@ yard field goal by Leigh Tiffin extended the lead to 17 – 0 in the third , the Bulldogs scored their only points of the night on a 34 @-@ yard Derek DePasquale field goal . On the ensuing kickoff , Javier Arenas returned the ball 46 yards and on the next play , McElroy hit Julio Jones for a 48 @-@ yard touchdown reception . The score was 24 – 3 . Mark Barron intercepted a Tyson Lee pass at the Alabama 30 on the next Bulldog offensive series . On the following play , Ingram scored a touchdown on a 70 @-@ yard run to bring the final score to 31 – 3 . 
 For the game , McElroy threw for 192 yards and two touchdowns on 13 of 18 passing , and Mark Ingram rushed for 149 yards two touchdowns . Mississippi State was held to 213 total yards , with Barron intercepting two Tyson Lee and Marquis Johnson intercepting one Chris Relf pass . For his performance , left guard Mike Johnson was named the SEC Offensive Lineman of the Week . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Bulldogs to 73 – 18 – 3 ( 72 – 19 – 3 without NCAA vacations and forfeits ) . 
 = = = Chattanooga = = = 
 On senior day in Tuscaloosa , Alabama dipped down to college football 's Football Championship Subdivision and defeated the Mocs of UT @-@ Chattanooga 45 – 0 . After being stopped on their first possession , Alabama reached the end zone on the next five consecutive possessions in running up a 35 – 0 lead in the first half . First @-@ quarter touchdowns included a 2 @-@ yard Trent Richardson run , a 25 @-@ yard Mark Ingram run , and a 19 @-@ yard Julio Jones reception from Greg McElroy . In the second quarter , touchdowns were scored by Javier Arenas on a 66 @-@ yard punt return and on a 40 @-@ yard Ingram run . With the only third quarter points coming on a 41 @-@ yard Leigh Tiffin field goal , Bama 's final points of the afternoon came on a 21 @-@ yard Roy Upchurch touchdown run in the fourth . 
 Javier Arenas set the all @-@ time SEC record with his seventh punt return for a touchdown and was named the SEC Special Teams Player of the Week . Mark Ingram led the offense with 102 yards and two touchdowns before being pulled early in the second quarter . Alabama outgained Chattanooga in total offense 422 – 84 and recorded their first defensive shutout since defeating Auburn 36 – 0 in 2008 . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Mocs to 11 – 0 . 
 = = = Auburn = = = 
 One year after Alabama 's 36 – 0 victory in Tuscaloosa , the 2009 Iron Bowl contest against the Auburn Tigers ended with a 26 – 21 Tide victory and a 12 – 0 regular season . The Tigers , who entered the game 7 – 4 and unranked , took the ball after Alabama 's initial three and out and struck quickly . On Auburn 's fourth play from scrimmage , Terrell Zachery raced 67 yards on a reverse for a touchdown and a 7 – 0 Auburn lead . The run was the longest allowed by the Tide since a 70 @-@ yard run by Arkansas ' Darren McFadden in 2005 . Auburn then successfully executed an onside kick and retained possession of the ball . After the onside kick , Auburn drove 58 yards in 12 plays , scoring on a 1 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Chris Todd to Eric Smith . The Crimson Tide , which had never trailed in a game by more than seven points all season , found itself down 14 – 0 before the first quarter was over . 
 Early in the second quarter Alabama completed a 10 @-@ play , 58 @-@ yard drive by scoring on a two @-@ yard run by backup tailback Trent Richardson . The key plays were a 15 @-@ yard pass from McElroy to Darius Hanks and a 13 @-@ yard pass from McElroy to Richardson . After an exchange of punts gave Alabama good starting position at the Auburn 45 , the Tide quickly struck again with McElroy hitting tight end Colin Peek on a 33 @-@ yard touchdown pass that left the game tied 14 – 14 at halftime . 
 In the third quarter , Auburn scored on another quick strike . The Tigers took possession on their 24 after a Bama punt ; Kodi Burns rushed for four yards , and then Todd hit Darvin Adams on a 72 @-@ yard completion that put Auburn back in front 21 – 14 . The completion marked the longest play from scrimmage allowed by the Bama defense all season and the longest pass play since 1999 . Javier Arenas gave Alabama an opportunity by returning the ensuing kickoff 46 yards to the Auburn 45 , but Mark Ingram , who struggled the entire game , rushed for 7 yards and 2 yards and then was held for no gain on both third and one and fourth and one , and Alabama turned the ball over on downs . Auburn went three and out and punted , and Arenas set the Tide up again , returning the punt 56 yards to the Auburn 33 @-@ yard line . Alabama drove to the Auburn 10 before settling for a Leigh Tiffin field goal that cut the deficit to 21 – 17 . Alabama kicked off and two plays later , Auburn quarterback Todd threw an interception that gave Alabama possession at the Auburn 43 . The Tide drove to the Tigers ' 13 before this drive also stalled , forcing another Leigh Tiffin field goal that made the score 21 – 20 . As the third quarter ended , Auburn continued to hang on to a one @-@ point lead . 
 Neither team could make progress with possessions early in the fourth quarter , and after an exchange of punts , Alabama got the ball on its own 21 with 8 : 27 to go , and began what would soon be known as " The Drive " . Richardson opened with a 7 @-@ yard rush , and on third and three , McElroy completed a nine @-@ yard pass to Julio Jones for a first down . Three plays later , on third and five , McElroy completed a six @-@ yard pass to Jones for another first down and advancing the ball to the Tide 48 . Two plays later , on second and eight , a third pass from McElroy to Jones for 11 yards led to a third first down . Two plays after that , a fourth pass from McElroy to Jones and a fourth first down at the Auburn 28 @-@ yard line . On second and nine at the Auburn 27 , McElroy chose a different target , hitting Richardson for a first down to the Auburn 11 @-@ yard line . After a four @-@ yard run by Richardson to the Auburn 7 , the Tigers called time out with 1 : 34 left . Richardson took the ball three more yards to the Auburn 4 , leaving the Tide at third and three . Each team called a time out in succession with 1 : 29 left . Alabama 's offensive coaches called for a running play , but head coach Nick Saban , unwilling to settle for a field goal , overruled this decision and demanded a pass . McElroy completed a 4 @-@ yard touchdown pass to third @-@ string tailback Roy Upchurch , giving Alabama a 26 – 21 lead with 1 : 24 to go . McElroy had completed seven consecutive passes on The Drive after missing his first . 
 A two @-@ point conversion attempt failed and the lead was five points . Auburn took possession at the 25 following the kickoff and took 1 : 14 to run four plays and advance the ball to its own 46 with ten seconds to go . Todd completed a 17 @-@ yard pass to Darvin Adams at the Alabama 37 , and after spiking the ball , Todd 's last pass fell incomplete and the game was over . Alabama had survived , beating Auburn 26 – 21 despite being outgained 332 yards to 291 and being held to only 73 yards rushing . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Alabama faced Florida in the SEC Championship Game in a rematch of the 2008 contest , with the Tide capturing their 22nd conference championship following their 32 – 13 victory over the Gators . The Tide struck first , driving 47 yards with the opening possession before Leigh Tiffin kicked a 48 @-@ yard field goal and a 3 – 0 lead . Following a Florida three and out on their first possession , Alabama responded with an 8 @-@ play , 76 @-@ yard touchdown drive . On the drive , Greg McElroy completed key passes to Colin Peek and Marquis Maze and Mark Ingram rushed for 37 yards and the touchdown in taking a 9 – 0 lead following a missed extra point . On the ensuing possession , Caleb Sturgis hit a 48 @-@ yard field goal that made the score 9 – 3 at the end of the first quarter . 
 Alabama scored first in the second quarter on a 34 @-@ yard Tiffin field goal to complete a 68 @-@ yard drive and extend the Bama lead to 12 – 3 . Florida followed with what turned out to be its only touchdown drive of the game . Rushes of 23 yards and 15 yards from quarterback and former Heisman Trophy winner Tim Tebow were followed by a 23 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Tebow to David Nelson , and Florida had cut the lead to two , 12 – 10 . On the next offensive play , Ingram took a short pass from McElroy and raced 69 yards to the Gator 3 @-@ yard line , and ran it in for a touchdown from three yards out on the next play . The Gators ended the first half with a 32 @-@ yard Sturgis field goal to make the halftime score 19 – 13 . 
 Florida opened the third quarter with a three and out . On the Tide 's first offensive series of the second half , McElroy completed a 28 @-@ yard pass to Maze and was followed with a 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalty in bringing the ball into the red zone . On the next play McElroy completed the drive with a 17 @-@ yard touchdown pass to tight end Colin Peek . Alabama took a 26 – 13 lead . Florida got one first down on its next possession before punting the ball to Alabama . Taking the ball at its own 12 @-@ yard line with 7 : 36 to go in the third quarter , Alabama held the ball for the rest of the quarter and into the fourth , using up 8 : 47 of game time on a 12 @-@ play , 88 @-@ yard drive . Ingram , who rushed for 37 yards on the drive , scored on a 1 @-@ yard touchdown run early in the fourth quarter to increase Bama 's lead to 32 – 13 . Florida mounted a late drive that reached the Alabama 6 before Tebow threw an interception to Javier Arenas in the end zone . On Florida 's next possession , the Gators turned the ball over on downs at the Alabama 13 , and the Tide was able to run out the clock to secure the 32 – 13 victory . 
 For his 239 yard , one touchdown passing performance , Greg McElroy was named the game 's MVP . Ingram rushed for 113 and Trent Richardson rushed for 80 yards . The victory gave Alabama its 22nd SEC title , their third since the inception of the Championship Game and their first in ten years — the longest time the Crimson Tide program has ever gone without an SEC championship . The victory improved Alabama 's all @-@ time record against the Gators to 20 – 14 ( 21 – 14 without the NCAA vacation of the 2005 victory ) . Alabama earned their third SEC championship since the inception of the SEC Championship Game in 1992 , and their 22nd SEC title . 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 Following victories in their respective conference championship games , on December 6 the final Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) standings were unveiled , pitting the No. 1 ranked Crimson Tide against the No. 2 ranked Texas Longhorns for the 2010 BCS National Championship . The game was held in the Rose Bowl , although it was not the actual Rose Bowl Game , in which Ohio State beat Oregon six days earlier . Alabama came into the game having never beaten Texas , compiling an all @-@ time 0 – 7 – 1 record against the Longhorns . 
 Alabama won the toss and elected to receive the opening kickoff . After losing thirteen yards on a sack and a penalty , Nick Saban called for a fake punt , which resulted in a Texas interception by Blake Gideon at the Alabama 37 @-@ yard line . On the initial possession , Texas quarterback Colt McCoy suffered a hit from Marcell Dareus which forced him to leave the game . Suffering from a pinched nerve in his throwing shoulder , McCoy did not return . With McCoy out , freshman Garrett Gilbert replaced him at quarterback , and the Longhorns settled for a field goal and a 3 – 0 lead . The ensuing kickoff was an onside kick , and Texas retained possession of the ball when Alabama failed to field the kick . The Longhorns only advanced the ball five yards and Hunter Lawrence kicked another field goal to go ahead 6 – 0 . 
 The Tide went ahead in the second quarter . Greg McElroy threw for only 58 yards on 6 of 11 passing for Alabama , but 23 of those yards came on a completion to Julio Jones that advanced the ball to the Texas 12 . Three plays later Mark Ingram ran it in from two yards out , and Alabama went ahead 7 – 6 . After an exchange of punts , Bama took possession on the Texas 49 @-@ yard line , and on the second play Trent Richardson burst through a hole in the middle and raced 49 yards untouched for the touchdown , extending the lead to 14 – 6 . Texas continued to struggle for offense in McCoy 's absence , and on the next possession a Texas drive ended when Javier Arenas intercepted a Gilbert pass at the Alabama 25 . Following a short punt late in the quarter , Bama drove to the Texas 9 , and increased their lead to 17 – 6 following a successful 26 @-@ yard Leigh Tiffin field goal . It appeared that the Crimson Tide would go into the locker room leading 17 – 6 . However , after gaining nine yards on a rush up the middle , Texas called time out with 15 seconds left . With the ball at the Texas 37 , Gilbert threw a shovel pass to D.J. Monroe , who bobbled the ball and batted it into the arms of Alabama defensive lineman Marcell Dareus , who lumbered 28 yards for a touchdown that made the halftime score 24 – 6 . 
 Having been sacked 4 times in the first half but had considerable success rushing the ball , Alabama came out rushing after halftime , attempting only two passes in the 3rd quarter . Meanwhile Gilbert , who had struggled early in the game , started to find his rhythm , mostly due to the efforts of Jordan Shipley , one of only two Texas receivers to catch a pass thrown beyond the line of scrimmage in the game . A 44 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Gilbert to Shipley cut the lead to 24 – 13 . Early in the fourth , Leigh Tiffin missed a 52 @-@ yard field goal . On the ensuing possession , the Longhorns drove 65 yards and scored another touchdown on a 28 @-@ yard Shipley reception . A successful two @-@ point conversion pulled the score to within three points , 24 – 21 . Following an Alabama punt , Texas gained possession on their own 7 @-@ yard line with 3 : 14 to go . On the second play of the drive , Eryk Anders laid a hit on Gilbert that forced a fumble , and Alabama recovered at the Texas 3 . Three plays later Ingram , who rushed for 116 yards in the game , ran it in for the score that gave Alabama a 31 – 21 lead . On the following drive , Gilbert threw a second interception to Arenas , and a Trent Richardson touchdown with 47 seconds left made the final score 37 – 21 . 
 For their performances , Mark Ingram was named the game 's offensive MVP and Marcell Dareus was named defensive MVP . Alabama beat Texas for the first time in their history , won its first ever BCS championship game , and won its first national championship since 1992 . It was Alabama 's thirteenth claimed and eighth national championship by vote of the AP poll or coaches ' poll , the others coming in 1961 , 1964 , 1965 , 1973 , 1978 , 1979 , and 1992 , and ninth perfect season , the others coming in 1925 , 1930 , 1934 , 1945 , 1961 , 1966 , 1979 , and 1992 . Alabama became the third school in major college history to go 14 – 0 , joining the 2002 Ohio State Buckeyes and the 2009 Boise State Broncos . 
 = = Rankings = = 
 Entering the 2009 season , the Crimson Tide was ranked No. 5 in the AP and Coaches ' Preseason Polls . By week seven Alabama moved into the No. 1 ranking in the AP Poll and the No. 2 ranking in both the Coaches ' Poll and the initial BCS rankings . After dropping as low as No. 3 , following the victory against Florida in the SEC Championship Game Alabama captured the No. 1 ranking in the AP and Coaches ' Polls as well as in the final BCS rankings . Following the victory over Texas in the BCS Championship Game , Alabama was selected a unanimous No. 1 by the AP and as the No. 1 team in the Coaches ' Poll . 
 = = After the season = = 
 Following the victory against Texas for the national championship , the team arrived at the Tuscaloosa Regional Airport on the evening of January 8 . Several thousand fans were there to greet them upon their arrival . On January 16 , a public national championship celebration at Bryant – Denny Stadium was attended by well over 30 @,@ 000 spectators . Speakers at the event included head coach Nick Saban and Alabama athletic director Mal Moore . All of the championship trophies were available for public viewing . In early March , the team was invited to the White House , where Obama greeted the team and offered congratulatory remarks for their championship season . 
 For their victory , each team member and coach received three championship rings designed by <unk> : a university @-@ issued title ring , a BCS issued title ring , and another for winning the SEC championship . The rings were distributed as part of the annual A @-@ Day weekend the following April . Also as part of the A @-@ Day celebrations , the 2009 team captains Javier Arenas , Rolando McClain , and Mike Johnson were honored at the Walk of Fame ceremony at the base of Denny Chimes . As recognition for becoming the fifth Alabama head coach to win a national championship , the University unveiled a statue of coach Saban along the Walk of Champions outside Bryant – Denny Stadium as part of A @-@ Day festivities on April 16 , 2011 . 
 = = = Final statistics = = = 
 After their victory over Texas in the BCS National Championship Game , Alabama 's final team statistics were released . On the defensive side of the ball , they ranked second in scoring defense ( 11 @.@ 71 points per game ) , second in total defense ( 244 @.@ 14 yards per game ) , second in rushing defense ( 78 @.@ 14 yards per game ) and tenth in passing defense ( 166 @.@ 00 yards per game ) . They were also the conference leaders in scoring , total and rushing defense . On offense , nationally the Crimson Tide ranked 12th in rushing offense ( 215 @.@ 07 yards per game ) , 22nd in scoring offense ( 32 @.@ 07 points per game ) , 42nd in total offense ( 403 @.@ 00 yards per game ) and 92nd in passing offense ( 187 @.@ 93 yards per game ) . Individually , Leigh Tiffin led the SEC with an average of 2 @.@ 14 field goals and 9 @.@ 43 points per game . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In the weeks following the SEC Championship Game , multiple Alabama players were recognized for their on @-@ field performances with a variety of awards and recognitions . At the team awards banquet on December 6 , Javier Arenas , Mike Johnson and Rolando McClain were each named the permanent captains of the 2009 squad . At that time both McClain and Mark Ingram were also named the 2009 co @-@ most valuable players with McClain and Terrence Cody named defensive players of the year and Ingram and Johnson named the offensive players of the year . 
 = = = = Conference = = = = 
 The SEC recognized several players for their individual performances with various awards . Alabama swept the three major individual awards on the AP All @-@ SEC team , with Mark Ingram named Offensive Player of the Year , Rolando McClain named Defensive Player of the Year , and Nick Saban named Coach of the Year . In addition to Ingram and McClain , Javier Arenas ( as a defensive back ) , Terrance Cody , Mike Johnson , and Leigh Tiffin were named to the AP All @-@ SEC First Team . James Carpenter , Colin Peek , and Arenas ( as a return specialist ) were named to the AP All @-@ SEC Second Team . Eight players were named to the Coaches ' All @-@ SEC First Team , including Arenas ( as both a defensive back and return specialist ) , Mark Barron , Cody , Ingram , Mike Johnson , McClain , and Tiffin . Julio Jones was named to the Coaches ' All @-@ SEC Second Team . Nico Johnson , Barrett Jones , and Trent Richardson were named to the 2009 Freshman All @-@ SEC Team . 
 = = = = National = = = = 
 After the season , a number of Alabama players were named as national award winners and finalists . Mark Ingram became Alabama 's first Heisman Trophy winner , with the closest margin of victory in the history of the award , over Stanford 's Toby Gerhart . Ingram was a finalist for the Maxwell Award and the Doak Walker Award . Linebacker Rolando McClain won the Butkus Award and the Jack Lambert Award . Other national award finalists included Terrence Cody ( for the Chuck Bednarik Award ) and Leigh Tiffin ( for the Lou Groza Award ) . Defensive coordinator Kirby Smart won the Broyles Award as the nation 's top assistant coach . 
 In addition to the individual awards , several players were also named to various national All @-@ American Teams . Javier Arenas , Terrance Cody , Mark Ingram , Mike Johnson , Rolando McClain , and Leigh Tiffin were named to the AP All @-@ American First Team and Mark Barron was named to the AP All @-@ American Second Team . Cody , Ingram , Mike Johnson , and McClain were named to the Walter Camp All @-@ American First Team . Arenas and Tiffin were named to the Walter Camp All @-@ American Second Team . Arenas , Ingram , Mike Johnson , and McClain were named to the AFCA All @-@ America Team . With their selections on various teams , Mike Johnson , Mark Ingram , Terrence Cody , Rolando McClain and Javier Arenas were each consensus All @-@ America , with Ingram and McClain each being unanimous selections . 
 = = = = All @-@ star games = = = = 
 Seven Alabama players were selected by postseason all @-@ star games . Lorenzo Washington appeared in the Texas vs. The Nation Game . Justin Woodall participated in the East @-@ West Shrine Game . Javier Arenas , Terrence Cody , Mike Johnson , Colin Peek , and Leigh Tiffin played in the Under Armour Senior Bowl . 
 = = = NFL Draft = = = 
 Of all the draft @-@ eligible juniors , only Rolando McClain and Kareem Jackson declared their eligibility for the 2010 NFL Draft . Ten Alabama players , eight seniors and two juniors , were invited to the NFL Scouting Combine . The invited Alabama players were tight end Colin Peek , offensive lineman Mike Johnson , defensive linemen Terrence Cody , Brandon Deaderick and Lorenzo Washington , linebacker Rolando McClain , defensive backs Javier Arenas , Kareem Jackson and Justin Woodall , and placekicker Leigh Tiffin . In the draft , Alabama had seven players selected . The first round selections were McClain ( 8th Oakland Raiders ) and Jackson ( 20th Houston Texans ) ; the second round picks were Arenas ( 50th Kansas City Chiefs ) and Cody ( 57th Baltimore Ravens ) ; the third round pick was Mike Johnson ( 98th Atlanta Falcons ) ; and the seventh round picks were Marquis Johnson ( 211th St. Louis Rams ) and Deaderick ( 247th New England Patriots ) . Both Peek and Washington , with the Atlanta Falcons and Dallas Cowboys respectively , signed as undrafted free agents . 
 Following the 2010 season , juniors Mark Ingram , Julio Jones and Marcell Dareus declared their eligibility for the 2011 NFL Draft . Five Alabama players , two seniors and three juniors , were invited to the 2011 NFL Scouting Combine . The invited players were offensive lineman James Carpenter , quarterback Greg McElroy , defensive end Marcell Dareus , running back Mark Ingram , and wide receiver Julio Jones . In the draft , Alabama set a school record with four players selected in the first round . The first round selections were Dareus ( 3rd Buffalo Bills ) , Jones ( 6th Atlanta Falcons ) , Carpenter ( 25th Seattle Seahawks ) and Ingram ( 28th New Orleans Saints ) . McElroy was selected in the seventh round ( 208th New York Jets ) . Preston Dial signed as an undrafted free agent with the Detroit Lions in July 2011 after the NFL labor dispute was resolved . 
 = Banjo @-@ Kazooie = 
 Banjo @-@ Kazooie is a platform video game developed by Rare and originally released for the Nintendo 64 video game console on 29 June 1998 in North America and 17 July 1998 in Europe . It is the first instalment in the Banjo @-@ Kazooie series and follows the story of the title characters Banjo and Kazooie as they try to stop the plans of series antagonist Gruntilda , who intends to switch her beauty with Banjo 's sister Tooty . The game features nine nonlinear levels where the player must complete a number of challenges like solving puzzles , jumping over obstacles , gathering objects , and defeating opponents . 
 Banjo @-@ Kazooie was originally designed as an adventure game named Project Dream for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System , but was later changed for the Nintendo 64 . The game was a critical and commercial success , selling nearly two million copies in the United States and receiving an aggregated review score of 92 out of 100 from Metacritic . The game was praised for its detailed graphics , immersive sound , and intricate level design . In 1999 , it received two awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences : Console Action Game of the Year and Outstanding Achievement in Art / Graphics . A sequel , Banjo @-@ Tooie , was released for the Nintendo 64 in 2000 . In 2008 , Banjo @-@ Kazooie was re @-@ released for the Xbox 360 through its Xbox Live Arcade download service . The game is also included in the Rare Replay video game compilation , released for the Xbox One in 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Banjo @-@ Kazooie is a single @-@ player platform game where the player controls the protagonists Banjo and Kazooie from a third @-@ person perspective . The game is split into nine levels where the player must gather musical notes and jigsaw pieces , called " Jiggies " , to progress . Players transit from one level to another through Gruntilda 's lair , which acts as the game 's central overworld . Jiggies allow the player to complete jigsaw puzzles which open doors to new levels , while musical notes grant players access to new inner sections of the overworld . Like in Super Mario 64 , the gameplay of Banjo @-@ Kazooie is very open and allows the player to collect Jiggies and musical notes in a nonlinear order . It is also possible to skip certain levels as long as the player has enough of these items to reach a farther one . 
 Each level is composed of a number of challenges that involve solving puzzles , jumping over obstacles , gathering objects , and defeating opponents . The game also features some elements of action @-@ adventure games . Players often have to speak with NPCs and then figure out a way to help them . It is also possible to increase Banjo and Kazooie 's energy bar by collecting extra honeycombs that are hidden throughout the levels . Banjo and Kazooie can perform a wide range of abilities , such as jumping , climbing , swimming , flying , and rolling into enemies . Most of these moves are learned by finding Bottles , a friendly mole , inside the worlds . Some moves require specific items so that they can be performed . For instance , red feathers allow Banjo and Kazooie to fly , while gold feathers protect them from damage . Some items also allow the character to gain temporary abilities in a particular moment . For instance , the turbo trainers provide a speed burst to reach a certain destination on time . 
 Banjo and Kazooie are occasionally aided by their friend Mumbo Jumbo , a shaman who can use magical powers to transform them into several creatures like a termite , a pumpkin , a bee , a walrus , and a crocodile . These transformations have their own special features and allow the player to access areas that were previously inaccessible . For instance , the walrus can resist the effects of icy @-@ cold water . Mumbo Tokens that are scattered throughout the game allow the transformation process . The game also includes cheats that the player can unlock by finding Gruntilda 's spellbook , <unk> . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Banjo @-@ Kazooie is set in the Spiral Mountain and follows the story of Banjo , a male brown honey bear , and Kazooie , a red @-@ crested <unk> who is always kept in Banjo 's backpack . The game begins when a foul @-@ tempered witch named Gruntilda learns from her cauldron <unk> that Tooty , Banjo 's younger sister , is more beautiful than her . Jealous , Gruntilda creates a machine that can transfer a person 's level of beauty to another , which she intends to use with Tooty . She then abducts Tooty from Banjo 's house while he is sleeping . In response to the kidnapping , Kazooie wakes Banjo up and the two set out to rescue her . Banjo and Kazooie learn from Tooty 's friend , Bottles the mole , that she was captured by Gruntilda and suggests they need some training to collect musical notes and jigsaw pieces to progress through Gruntilda 's lair . Along the way , they are aided by Mumbo Jumbo , a shaman and Gruntilda 's former teacher . 
 By the time most of the musical notes and <unk> are gathered , Banjo and Kazooie face Gruntilda in a trivia game show named " Grunty 's Furnace Fun " . The game presents questions and challenges related to certain aspects of the game . After going through several game boards , the two win the game and Gruntilda flees . Reunited with Tooty , Banjo and Kazooie return home and celebrate their victory with their friends and a barbecue . However , Tooty reminds everyone that Gruntilda has fled and orders Banjo and Kazooie to defeat her . The duo returns to Gruntilda 's lair and reach the top of the tower , where they face a battle with Gruntilda . With the help of some friendly creatures called <unk> , Banjo and Kazooie defeat Gruntilda , trapping her underneath a boulder . Returning to their home , Banjo and Kazooie go on vacation at a beach with their friends and celebrate their victory . The game ends with Gruntilda swearing revenge against Banjo and Kazooie and calling for her henchman Klungo to move the boulder that is covering her . 
 = = Development = = 
 Banjo @-@ Kazooie was developed by Rare and designed by Gregg Mayles . The game evolved from Project Dream , a cancelled adventure game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System that was being developed by Rare 's Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest team . Project Dream used Rare 's ACM ( Advanced Computer Modeling ) graphics technology , first used in Donkey Kong Country , to a very advanced level and was originally intended to star a boy named Edison who would own a wooden sword and get into trouble with a group of pirates . However , as development of the game continued , Edison was replaced by a rabbit and later a bear , who became Banjo . Although the project was in development for more than one year , it was ultimately cancelled with the introduction of the Nintendo 64 , which made the ACM technology obsolete . 
 Actual work on Banjo @-@ Kazooie started in March 1997 with a development team of 10 people . However , as development progressed , the team grew to a total of 15 members , which included seven engineers , five artists , two designers and one musician . The team was composed of both experienced and inexperienced people ; some had been working at Rare for 10 years while others had never previously worked on a video game . The 3D world of Super Mario 64 was a major inspiration for Banjo @-@ Kazooie , as Rare intended to combine it with the look of Donkey Kong Country . The game was designed to appeal players of all ages in a similar vein to Walt Disney Animation Studios films . According to Rare , " We wanted the characters to primarily appeal to a younger audience but , at the same time , give them enough humour and attitude not to discourage older players . " The music of the game , composed by Grant Kirkhope , was designed to gradually fade from one style to the next without pause , while the overall composition loops continuously . 
 Rare decided to make an action @-@ based game that focused totally on Banjo and his abilities . Kazooie was later conceived during the planning of such abilities . According to Mayles , " We came up with the [ ... ] idea that a pair of wings could appear from his backpack to help him perform a second jump . We also wanted Banjo to be able to run very fast when required [ so ] we added a pair of ' fast @-@ running ' legs that appeared from the bottom of the backpack . [ And soon after ] we came up with the logical conclusion that these could belong to another character , one that actually lived in Banjo 's backpack . " The character was named after a kazoo , which was considered an annoying instrument , " much like the personality of the bird " , Mayles explained . Instead of actual dialogue , all the characters in the game feature " mumbling " voices . This choice was made to convey their personalities without them actually speaking , as Rare felt the actual speech " could ruin the player 's perception of the characters . " The witch Gruntilda was inspired by <unk> from the <unk> British television series . 
 Banjo @-@ Kazooie employs a very advanced technique to render its graphics . The characters were created with minimal amounts of texturing to give them a sharp and clean look , while the backgrounds use very large textures split into 64 × 64 pieces , which was the largest texture size the Nintendo 64 could render . As a result , this technique caused significant memory fragmentation issues . However , the developers managed to create a proprietary system that could " reshuffle " memory as players played through the game to solve the fragmentation . According to lead programmer Chris Sutherland , " I 'd doubt many N64 games of the time did anything like that " . The fact that the player could be transformed into small creatures was implemented to give some of the worlds a different sense of scale . 
 Rare originally planned to include a multiplayer mode and more worlds to the game , but these features were not implemented due to time constraints ; some of these would later be included in the sequel Banjo @-@ Tooie instead . In addition , a feature called " Stop ' N ' Swop " , which would have allowed data to be transferred between both Banjo @-@ Kazooie and Banjo @-@ Tooie , remains incomplete in the game . The feature was never fully implemented due to technical difficulties in the Nintendo 64 hardware . The actual development of the game took overall 17 months to complete after Rare discarded Project Dream , the first two of these being spent experimenting with Dream 's graphic technology . A working version of the game was shown at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in June 1997 . The game was initially scheduled for a release in late 1997 , but was eventually delayed . It was released on 29 June 1998 in North America and 17 July 1998 in Europe . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Banjo @-@ Kazooie was a critical and commercial success , selling more than 1 @.@ 8 million copies in the United States and more than 405 @,@ 000 units in Japan . The game has an aggregated score of 92 out of 100 at Metacritic , which is considered " universal acclaim " . GamePro described Banjo @-@ Kazooie as a " more complex , more fluid , and more attractive game than its plumber predecessor Super Mario 64 . It 's sure to have even the staunchest [ Nintendo 64 ] critics raising their eyebrows . " Journalist Peer Schneider , writing for IGN , awarded the game a rating of 9 @.@ 6 out of 10 , stating that the game " is the best 3D platformer [ he has ] ever played , and a more than worthy successor to Super Mario 64 " . 
 The graphics were seen as one of the strongest aspects of the game . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot wrote : " graphically , Banjo @-@ Kazooie takes it to another level . The game maintains the look and feel of Mario 64 , but instead of flat , shaded polygons , [ Banjo @-@ Kazooie ] uses a lot of textures " . The game 's long draw distance , solid frame rate , and differently themed worlds were highlighted very positively . Critics also praised the game 's dynamic soundtrack . Schneider remarked that this feature " lets players know where they are going . This happens all the time and in every level . It 's all very Disney @-@ esque . " The sound effects received similar praise , with several editors crediting the unique and diverse speech patterns of the characters . The writing was also praised for its double @-@ meanings in several character interactions . 
 The game was often called a Super Mario 64 clone for its similarity in gameplay . Gerstmann compared it favourably to Mario , saying that " it doesn 't stray too far from the formula , but it makes the logical progressions you would expect Nintendo to make . " Game Informer observed that , while both games are very similar , Banjo @-@ Kazooie has less emphasis on the platforming and more on exploration . Schneider noted that the worlds in Banjo @-@ Kazooie are " bigger , more detailed and are filled with interactive characters at every corner . " Colin Williamson of AllGame stated similar pros , crediting the level design as " simply delightful , loaded with creativity , secrets , and memorable characters . " James Ashton of N64 Magazine highlighted the game 's replay value , noting that the game can take 40 or 50 hours to fully complete . One habitually @-@ criticized aspect of the game was its flawed camera system . Game Revolution remarked it can occasionally be in a bad angle to gauge a jump properly . 
 In 1999 , Banjo @-@ Kazooie received two awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences : Console Action Game of the Year and Outstanding Achievement in Art / Graphics . Similarly , IGN awarded the game Overall Best Graphics of 1998 , Best Texture Design of 1998 , and Best Music of 1998 . In 2000 , the game was ranked number seven on IGN 's list of The Top 25 N64 Games of All Time . In 2009 , Game Informer ranked the game 71st in their list of the Top 100 Games Of All Time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Banjo @-@ Kazooie 's critical and commercial success led Rare to begin development of a sequel titled Banjo @-@ Tooie , also for the Nintendo 64 . Banjo @-@ Tooie was released on 20 November 2000 to very positive reviews , and largely adopts the gameplay mechanics of its predecessor . The characters Banjo and Kazooie proved to be popular and made cameo appearances in subsequent Rare games such as Conker 's Bad Fur Day and Grabbed by the Ghoulies . The series continued to be developed with the release of the handheld games Banjo @-@ Kazooie : Grunty 's Revenge and Banjo @-@ Pilot for the Game Boy Advance . In 2008 , a third main game titled Banjo @-@ Kazooie : Nuts & Bolts was released for the Xbox 360 to generally favourable reviews . The gameplay of Nuts & Bolts is a departure from the previous games in that , rather than learning new moves to continue , the player must instead build vehicles of all shapes and sizes to complete challenges . 
 An Xbox Live Arcade version of Banjo @-@ Kazooie , developed by 4J Studios , was also released for the Xbox 360 on 3 December 2008 . This version runs in a full widescreen mode , includes achievements , and supports the " Stop ' N ' Swop " connectivity that was incomplete in the Nintendo 64 game , used now to unlock features in both Banjo @-@ Kazooie : Nuts & Bolts and the then @-@ upcoming Xbox Live Arcade version of Banjo @-@ Tooie . The Xbox Live Arcade version was generally well received by critics , featuring an aggregate score of 77 out of 100 at Metacritic . While some publications such as Eurogamer considered the relatively unchanged game to be outdated , several agreed that the Xbox Live Arcade version is a solid resurrection of a classic . In 2009 , IGN ranked it seventh on its list of Top 10 Xbox Live Arcade Games , with editor Cam Shea stating that while the game is " not perfect , it was a landmark title for a reason " . The Xbox Live Arcade version of Banjo @-@ Tooie was released in 2009 to a similar critical reception . In 2015 , the Xbox Live Arcade version of Banjo @-@ Kazooie was included as part of the Rare Replay video game compilation for Xbox One . 
 On 10 February 2015 , a group of former Rare employees announced their formation of a new studio named Playtonic Games , planning a " spiritual successor " to the Banjo @-@ Kazooie franchise titled Yooka @-@ Laylee , formerly code @-@ named Project Ukulele . The game reached its initial funding goal of £ 175 @,@ 000 within thirty @-@ eight minutes and is currently set to be released in the first quarter of 2017 on Microsoft Windows , Mac , Linux , PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and Wii U. 
 = <unk> = 
 The flatworms , flat worms , Platyhelminthes , <unk> , or platyhelminths ( from the Greek <unk> , platy , meaning " flat " and <unk> ( root : <unk> ) , <unk> , meaning " worm " ) are a phylum of relatively simple bilaterian , unsegmented , soft @-@ bodied invertebrates . Unlike other bilaterians , they are acoelomates ( having no body cavity ) , and have no specialized circulatory and respiratory organs , which restricts them to having flattened shapes that allow oxygen and nutrients to pass through their bodies by diffusion . The digestive cavity has only one opening for both ingestion ( intake of nutrients ) and <unk> ( removal of undigested wastes ) ; as a result , the food cannot be processed continuously . 
 In traditional medicinal texts , Platyhelminthes are divided into Turbellaria , which are mostly non @-@ parasitic animals such as planarians , and three entirely parasitic groups : Cestoda , Trematoda and Monogenea ; however , since the turbellarians have since been proven not to be monophyletic , this classification is now deprecated . Free @-@ living flatworms are mostly predators , and live in water or in shaded , humid terrestrial environments , such as leaf litter . Cestodes ( tapeworms ) and trematodes ( flukes ) have complex life @-@ cycles , with mature stages that live as parasites in the digestive systems of fish or land vertebrates , and intermediate stages that infest secondary hosts . The eggs of trematodes are excreted from their main hosts , whereas adult cestodes generate vast numbers of hermaphroditic , segment @-@ like proglottids that detach when mature , are excreted , and then release eggs . Unlike the other parasitic groups , the monogeneans are external parasites infesting aquatic animals , and their larvae metamorphose into the adult form after attaching to a suitable host . 
 Because they do not have internal body cavities , Platyhelminthes were regarded as a primitive stage in the evolution of bilaterians ( animals with bilateral symmetry and hence with distinct front and rear ends ) . However , analyses since the mid @-@ 1980s have separated out one subgroup , the Acoelomorpha , as basal bilaterians — closer to the original bilaterians than to any other modern groups . The remaining Platyhelminthes form a monophyletic group , one that contains all and only descendants of a common ancestor that is itself a member of the group . The redefined Platyhelminthes is part of the Lophotrochozoa , one of the three main groups of more complex bilaterians . These analyses had concluded the redefined Platyhelminthes , excluding Acoelomorpha , consists of two monophyletic subgroups , Catenulida and Rhabditophora , with Cestoda , Trematoda and Monogenea forming a monophyletic subgroup within one branch of the Rhabditophora . Hence , the traditional platyhelminth subgroup " Turbellaria " is now regarded as paraphyletic , since it excludes the wholly parasitic groups , although these are descended from one group of " turbellarians " . 
 Over half of all known flatworm species are parasitic , and some do enormous harm to humans and their livestock . Schistosomiasis , caused by one genus of trematodes , is the second @-@ most devastating of all human diseases caused by parasites , surpassed only by malaria . <unk> , which arises when larvae of the pork tapeworm Taenia solium penetrate the central nervous system , is the major cause of acquired epilepsy worldwide . The threat of platyhelminth parasites to humans in developed countries is rising because of the popularity of raw or lightly cooked foods , and imports of food from high @-@ risk areas . In less developed countries , people often cannot afford the fuel required to cook food thoroughly , and poorly designed water @-@ supply and irrigation projects increase the dangers presented by poor sanitation and unhygienic farming . 
 Two planarian species have been used successfully in the Philippines , Indonesia , Hawaii , New Guinea , and Guam to control populations of the imported giant African snail Achatina fulica , which was displacing native snails . However , there is now concern that these planarians may themselves become a serious threat to native snails . In northwest Europe , there are concerns about the spread of the New Zealand planarian <unk> triangulatus , which preys on earthworms . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Distinguishing features = = = 
 Platyhelminthes are bilaterally symmetrical animals : their left and right sides are mirror images of each other ; this also implies they have distinct top and bottom surfaces and distinct head and tail ends . Like other bilaterians , they have three main cell layers ( endoderm , mesoderm , and ectoderm ) , while the radially symmetrical cnidarians and ctenophores ( comb jellies ) have only two cell layers . Beyond that , they are " defined more by what they do not have than by any particular series of specializations . " Unlike other bilaterians , Platyhelminthes have no internal body cavity , so are described as acoelomates . They also lack specialized circulatory and respiratory organs , both of these facts are defining features when classifying a flatworm 's anatomy . Their bodies are soft and unsegmented . 
 = = = Features common to all subgroups = = = 
 The lack of circulatory and respiratory organs limits platyhelminths to sizes and shapes that enable oxygen to reach and carbon dioxide to leave all parts of their bodies by simple diffusion . Hence , many are microscopic and the large species have flat ribbon @-@ like or leaf @-@ like shapes . The guts of large species have many branches , so nutrients can diffuse to all parts of the body . Respiration through the whole surface of the body makes them vulnerable to fluid loss , and restricts them to environments where dehydration is unlikely : sea and freshwater , moist terrestrial environments such as leaf litter or between grains of soil , and as parasites within other animals . 
 The space between the skin and gut is filled with mesenchyme , a connective tissue made of cells and reinforced by collagen fibers that act as a type of skeleton , providing attachment points for muscles . The mesenchyme contains all the internal organs and allows the passage of oxygen , nutrients and waste products . It consists of two main types of cell : fixed cells , some of which have fluid @-@ filled vacuoles ; and stem cells , which can transform into any other type of cell , and are used in regenerating tissues after injury or asexual reproduction . 
 Most platyhelminths have no anus and regurgitate undigested material through the mouth . However , some long species have an anus and some with complex , branched guts have more than one anus , since excretion only through the mouth would be difficult for them . The gut is lined with a single layer of endodermal cells that absorb and digest food . Some species break up and soften food first by secreting enzymes in the gut or pharynx ( throat ) . 
 All animals need to keep the concentration of dissolved substances in their body fluids at a fairly constant level . Internal parasites and free @-@ living marine animals live in environments with high concentrations of dissolved material , and generally let their tissues have the same level of concentration as the environment , while freshwater animals need to prevent their body fluids from becoming too dilute . Despite this difference in environments , most platyhelminths use the same system to control the concentration of their body fluids . Flame cells , so called because the beating of their flagella looks like a flickering candle flame , extract from the mesenchyme water that contains wastes and some reusable material , and drive it into networks of tube cells which are lined with flagella and microvilli . The tube cells ' flagella drive the water towards exits called nephridiopores , while their microvilli reabsorb reusable materials and as much water as is needed to keep the body fluids at the right concentration . These combinations of flame cells and tube cells are called <unk> . 
 In all platyhelminths , the nervous system is concentrated at the head end . This is least marked in the <unk> , which have nerve nets rather like those of cnidarians and ctenophores , but densest around the head . Other platyhelminths have rings of ganglia in the head and main nerve trunks running along their bodies . 
 = = Major subgroups = = 
 Early classification divided the flatworms into four groups : Turbellaria , Trematoda , Monogenea and Cestoda . This classification had long been recognized to be artificial , and in 1985 , Ehlers proposed a phylogenetically more correct classification , where the massively polyphyletic " Turbellaria " was split into a dozen orders , and Trematoda , Monogenea and Cestoda were joined in the new order Neodermata . However , the classification presented here is the early , traditional , classification , as it still is the one used everywhere except in scientific articles . 
 = = = Turbellaria = = = 
 These have about 4 @,@ 500 species , are mostly free @-@ living , and range from 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) to 600 mm ( 24 in ) in length . Most are predators or scavengers , and terrestrial species are mostly nocturnal and live in shaded , humid locations , such as leaf litter or rotting wood . However , some are symbiotes of other animals , such as crustaceans , and some are parasites . Free @-@ living turbellarians are mostly black , brown or gray , but some larger ones are brightly colored . The Acoela and Nemertodermatida were traditionally regarded as turbellarians , but are now regarded as members of a separate phylum , the Acoelomorpha , or as two separate phyla . Xenoturbella , a genus of very simple animals , has also been reclassified as a separate phylum . 
 Some turbellarians have a simple pharynx lined with cilia and generally feed by using cilia to sweep food particles and small prey into their mouths , which are usually in the middle of their undersides . Most other turbellarians have a pharynx that is eversible ( can be extended by being turned inside @-@ out ) , and the mouths of different species can be anywhere along the underside . The freshwater species <unk> <unk> can open its mouth almost as wide as its body is long , to swallow prey about as large as itself . 
 Most turbellarians have pigment @-@ cup ocelli ( " little eyes " ) , one pair in most species , but two or even three pairs in some . A few large species have many eyes in clusters over the brain , mounted on tentacles , or spaced uniformly around the edge of the body . The ocelli can only distinguish the direction from which light is coming and enable the animals to avoid it . A few groups have statocysts , fluid @-@ filled chambers containing a small , solid particle or , in a few groups , two . These statocysts are thought to be balance and acceleration sensors , as that is the function they perform in cnidarian medusae and in ctenophores . However , turbellarian statocysts have no sensory cilia , and how they sense the movements and positions of the solid particles is unknown . On the other hand , most have ciliated touch @-@ sensor cells scattered over their bodies , especially on tentacles and around the edges . Specialized cells in pits or grooves on the head are probably smell sensors . 
 <unk> , a subgroup of <unk> , are famous for their ability to regenerate if divided by cuts across their bodies . Experiments show that , in fragments that do not already have a head , a new head grows most quickly on those closest to the original head . This suggests the growth of a head is controlled by a chemical whose concentration diminishes from head to tail . Many turbellarians clone themselves by transverse or longitudinal division , and others , especially <unk> , reproduce by budding . 
 The vast majority of turbellarians are hermaphrodites ( have both female and male reproductive cells ) , and fertilize eggs internally by copulation . Some of the larger aquatic species mate by penis fencing , a duel in which each tries to impregnate the other , and the loser adopts the female role of developing the eggs . In most species , " miniature adults " emerge when the eggs hatch , but a few large species produce plankton @-@ like larvae . 
 = = = Trematoda = = = 
 These parasites ' name refers to the cavities in their holdfasts ( Greek <unk> , hole ) , which resemble suckers and anchor them within their hosts . The skin of all species is a syncitium , a layer of cells that shares a single external membrane . Trematodes are divided into two groups , Digenea and <unk> ( also known as <unk> ) . 
 = = = = Digenea = = = = 
 These are often called flukes , as most have flat rhomboid shapes like that of a flounder ( Old English <unk> ) . There are about 11 @,@ 000 species , more than all other <unk> combined , and second only to roundworms among parasites on metazoans . Adults usually have two holdfasts , a ring around the mouth and a larger sucker midway along what would be the underside in a free @-@ living flatworm . Although the name " <unk> " means " two generations " , most have very complex life cycles with up to seven stages , depending on what combinations of environments the early stages encounter – most importantly whether the eggs are deposited on land or in water . The intermediate stages transfer the parasites from one host to another . The definitive host in which adults develop is a land vertebrate , the earliest host of juvenile stages is usually a snail that may live on land or in water , and in many cases a fish or arthropod is the second host . For example , the adjoining illustration shows the life cycle of the intestinal fluke <unk> , which hatches in the intestine of a snail ; moves to a fish , where it penetrates the body and <unk> in the flesh ; then moves to the small intestine of a land animal that eats the fish raw ; and then generates eggs that are excreted and ingested by snails , thereby completing the cycle . <unk> , which cause the devastating tropical disease bilharzia , belong to this group . 
 Adults range between 0 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 0079 in ) and 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 in ) in length . Individual adult digeneans are of a single sex , and in some species , slender females live in enclosed grooves that run along the bodies of the males , and partially emerge to lay eggs . In all species , the adults have complex reproductive systems and can produce between 10 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 times as many eggs as a free @-@ living flatworm . In addition , the intermediate stages that live in snails reproduce asexually . 
 Adults of different species infest different parts of the definitive host , for example the intestine , lungs , large blood vessels , and liver . The adults use a relatively large , muscular pharynx to ingest cells , cell fragments , mucus , body fluids or blood . In both the adults and the stages that live in snails , the external syncytium absorbs dissolved nutrients from the host . Adult digeneans can live without oxygen for long periods . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Members of this small group have either a single divided sucker or a row of suckers that cover the underside . They infest the guts of bony or cartilaginous fish and of turtles , and the body cavities of marine and freshwater bivalves and gastropods . Their eggs produce ciliated swimming larvae , and the life cycle has one or two hosts . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 These parasites attach themselves to their hosts by means of disks that bear crescent @-@ shaped hooks . They are divided into Monogenea and Cestoda . 
 = = = = Monogenea = = = = 
 Of about 1 @,@ 100 species of monogeneans , most are external parasites that require particular host species , mainly fish , but in some cases amphibians or aquatic reptiles . However , a few are internal parasites . Adult monogeneans have large attachment organs at the rear , <unk> ( Greek <unk> , <unk> , means " catch " ) , which have suckers , clamps , and hooks . They often have flattened bodies . In some species , the pharynx secretes enzymes to digest the host 's skin , allowing the parasite to feed on blood and cellular debris . Others graze externally on mucus and flakes of the hosts ' skins . The name " Monogenea " is based on the fact that these parasites have only one <unk> generation . 
 = = = = Cestoda = = = = 
 These are often called tapeworms because of their flat , slender but very long bodies – the name " cestode " is derived from the Latin word <unk> , which means " tape " . The adults of all 3 @,@ 400 cestode species are internal parasites . Cestodes have no mouths or guts , and the <unk> skin absorbs nutrients – mainly carbohydrates and amino acids – from the host , and also disguises it chemically to avoid attacks by the host 's immune system . Shortage of carbohydrates in the host 's diet stunts the growth of the parasites and kills some . Their metabolisms generally use simple but inefficient chemical processes , and they compensate by consuming large amounts of food relative to their size . 
 In the majority of species , known as <unk> ( " true tapeworms " ) , the neck produces a chain of segments called proglottids by a process known as <unk> . Hence , the most mature proglottids are furthest from the scolex . Adults of Taenia <unk> , which infests humans , can form <unk> chains over 20 metres ( 66 ft ) long , although 4 metres ( 13 ft ) is more typical . Each <unk> has both male and female reproductive organs . If the host 's gut contains two or more adults of the same cestode species , they generally fertilize each other , but proglottids of the same worm can fertilize each other and even fertilize themselves . When the eggs are fully developed , the proglottids separate and are excreted by the host . The <unk> life cycle is less complex than that of digeneans , but varies depending on the species . For example : 
 Adults of Diphyllobothrium infest fish , and the juveniles use copepod crustaceans as intermediate hosts . <unk> proglottids release their eggs into the water , and the eggs hatch into ciliated , swimming larvae . If a larva is swallowed by a copepod , it sheds the cilia and the skin becomes a syncitium and the larva makes its way into the copepod 's hemocoel ( internal cavity that is the main part of the circulatory system ) and attached itself with three small hooks . If the copepod is eaten by a fish , the larva metamorphoses into a small , unsegmented tapeworm , drills through to the gut and becomes an adult . 
 Various species of Taenia infest the guts of humans , cats and dogs . The juveniles use herbivores – for example pigs , cattle and rabbits – as intermediate hosts . <unk> proglottids release eggs that stick to grass leaves and hatch after being swallowed by a herbivore . The larva makes its way to the herbivore 's muscles and metamorphoses into an oval worm about 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) long , with a scolex that is kept inside . When the definitive host eats infested and raw or undercooked meat from an intermediate host , the worm 's scolex pops out and attaches itself to the gut , and the adult tapeworm develops . 
 A members of the smaller group known as <unk> have no scolex , do not produce proglottids , and have body shapes like those of <unk> . <unk> parasitize fish and turtles . 
 = = Classification and evolutionary relationships = = 
 The oldest confidentially identified parasitic flatworm fossils are cestode eggs found in a Permian shark coprolite , but helminth hooks still attached to Devonian <unk> and placoderms might also represent parasitic flatworms with simple life cycles . The oldest known free @-@ living platyhelminth specimen is a fossil preserved in Eocene age Baltic amber and placed in the monotypic species <unk> <unk> , while the oldest subfossil specimens are <unk> eggs discovered in ancient Egyptian mummies . The Platyhelminthes have very few synapomorphies , distinguishing features that all Platyhelminthes and no other animals have . This makes it difficult to work out both their relationships with other groups of animals and the relationships between different groups that are described as members of the Platyhelminthes . 
 The " traditional " view before the 1990s was that Platyhelminthes formed the sister group to all the other bilaterians , which include , for example , arthropods , molluscs , annelids and chordates . Since then molecular phylogenetics , which aims to work out evolutionary " family trees " by comparing different organisms ' biochemicals such as DNA , RNA and proteins , has radically changed scientists ' view of evolutionary relationships between animals . Detailed morphological analyses of anatomical features in the mid @-@ 1980s and molecular phylogenetics analyses since 2000 using different sections of DNA agree that Acoelomorpha , consisting of Acoela ( traditionally regarded as very simple " turbellarians " ) and Nemertodermatida ( another small group previously classified as " turbellarians " ) are the sister group to all other bilaterians , including the rest of the Platyhelminthes . However , a 2007 study concluded that Acoela and Nemertodermatida were two distinct groups of bilaterians , although it agreed that both are more closely related to cnidarians ( jellyfish , etc . ) than other bilaterians are . 
 Xenoturbella , a bilaterian whose only well @-@ defined organ is a statocyst , was originally classified as a " primitive turbellarian " . However , it has recently been reclassified as a deuterostome . 
 The Platyhelminthes excluding Acoelomorpha contain two main groups , Catenulida and Rhabditophora , both of which are generally agreed to be monophyletic ( each contains all and only the descendants of an ancestor that is a member of the same group ) . Early molecular phylogenetics analyses of the Catenulida and Rhabditophora left uncertainties about whether these could be combined in a single monophyletic group , but a study in 2008 concluded they could , therefore Platyhelminthes could be redefined as Catenulida plus Rhabditophora , excluding the Acoelomorpha . 
 Other molecular phylogenetics analyses agree the redefined Platyhelminthes are most closely related to Gastrotricha , and both are part of a grouping known as Platyzoa . Platyzoa are generally agreed to be at least closely related to the Lophotrochozoa , a superphylum that includes molluscs and annelid worms . The majority view is that Platyzoa are part of Lophotrochozoa , but a significant minority of researchers regard Platyzoa as a sister group of Lophotrochozoa . 
 It has been agreed since 1985 that each of the wholly parasitic platyhelminth groups ( Cestoda , Monogenea and Trematoda ) is monophyletic , and that together these form a larger monophyletic grouping , the Neodermata , in which the adults of all members have <unk> skins . However , there is debate about whether the Cestoda and Monogenea can be combined as an intermediate monophyletic group , the <unk> , within the Neodermata . It is generally agreed that the Neodermata are a sub @-@ group a few levels down in the " family tree " of the Rhabditophora . Hence the traditional sub @-@ phylum " Turbellaria " is paraphyletic , since it does not include the Neodermata although these are descendants of a sub @-@ group of " turbellarians " . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 An outline of the origins of the parasitic life style has been proposed . Epithelial feeding <unk> on fish hosts are basal in the Neodermata and were the first shift to parasitism from free living ancestors . The next evolutionary step was a dietary change from epithelium to blood . The last common ancestor of Digenea + Cestoda was monogenean and most likely <unk> . 
 The earliest known fossils of tapeworms have been dated to 270 million years ago . They were found in coprolites ( fossilised faeces ) from an <unk> . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 = = = Parasitism = = = 
 Cestodes ( tapeworms ) and digeneans ( flukes ) cause important diseases in humans and their livestock , and monogeneans can cause serious losses of stocks in fish farms . Schistosomiasis , also known as bilharzia or snail fever , is the second @-@ most devastating parasitic disease in tropical countries , behind malaria . The Carter Center estimated 200 million people in 74 countries are infected with the disease , and half the victims live in Africa . The condition has a low mortality rate , but often is a chronic illness that can damage internal organs . It can impair the growth and cognitive development of children , and increase the risk of bladder cancer in adults . The disease is caused by several flukes of the genus Schistosoma , which can bore through human skin . The people most at risk are those who use infected bodies of water for recreation or laundry . 
 In 2000 , an estimated 45 million people were infected with the beef tapeworm Taenia <unk> and 3 million with the pork tapeworm Taenia solium . Infection of the digestive system by adult tapeworms causes abdominal symptoms that are unpleasant but not disabling or life @-@ threatening . However , neurocysticercosis resulting from penetration of T. solium larvae into the central nervous system is the major cause of acquired epilepsy worldwide . In 2000 , about 39 million people were infected with trematodes ( flukes ) that naturally parasitize fish and crustaceans , but can pass to humans who eat raw or lightly cooked seafood . Infection of humans by the broad fish tapeworm Diphyllobothrium <unk> occasionally causes vitamin B12 deficiency and , in severe cases , megaloblastic anemia . 
 The threat to humans in developed countries is rising as a result of social trends : the increase in organic farming , which uses manure and sewage sludge rather than artificial fertilizers , and spreads parasites both directly and via the droppings of seagulls which feed on manure and sludge ; the increasing popularity of raw or lightly cooked foods ; imports of meat , seafood and salad vegetables from high @-@ risk areas ; and , as an underlying cause , reduced awareness of parasites compared with other public health issues such as pollution . In less @-@ developed countries , inadequate sanitation and the use of human feces ( night soil ) as fertilizer and to enrich fish farm ponds continues to spread parasitic platyhelminths , and poorly designed water @-@ supply and irrigation projects have provided additional channels for their spread . People in these countries often cannot afford the cost of fuel required to cook food thoroughly enough to kill parasites . Controlling parasites that infect humans and livestock has become more difficult , as many species have become resistant to drugs that used to be effective , mainly for killing juveniles in meat . While poorer countries still struggle with unintentional infection , cases have been reported of intentional infection in the US by <unk> desperate for rapid weight @-@ loss . 
 = = = Pests = = = 
 There is concern about the proliferation in northwest Europe , including the British Isles , of the New Zealand planarian <unk> triangulatus and the Australian flatworm <unk> sanguinea , both of which prey on earthworms . A. triangulatus is thought to have reached Europe in containers of plants imported by botanical gardens . 
 = = = Benefits = = = 
 In Hawaii , the planarian <unk> <unk> has been used to control the imported giant African snail Achatina fulica , which was displacing native snails , and <unk> <unk> , another planarian , has been used for the same purpose in Philippines , Indonesia , New Guinea and Guam . Although A. fulica has declined sharply in Hawaii , there are doubts about how much E. <unk> contributed to this . However , P. <unk> is given credit for severely reducing , and in places exterminating , A. fulica – achieving much greater success than most biological pest control programs , which generally aim for a low , stable population of the pest species . The ability of planarians to take different kinds of prey and to resist starvation may account for their ability to decimate A. fulica . However , these abilities have raised concerns that planarians may themselves become a serious threat to native snails . 
 A study in La Plata , Argentina shows the potential for planarians such as <unk> anceps , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> to reduce populations of the mosquito species Aedes aegypti and Culex pipiens . The experiment showed that G. anceps in particular can prey on all instars of both mosquito species and maintain a steady predation rate over time . The ability for these flatworms to live in artificial containers showed the potential of placing these species in popular mosquito breeding sites , which would ideally reduce the amount of mosquito @-@ borne diseases . 
 = Francis Gleeson ( priest ) = 
 Father Francis Gleeson ( 28 May 1884 – 26 June 1959 ) was an Irish Roman Catholic priest who served as a British Army chaplain during <unk> ' involvement in the First World War . Educated at seminaries near Dublin , Gleeson was ordained in 1910 and worked at a home for the blind before volunteering for service upon the outbreak of war . Commissioned into the Army Chaplains ' Department and attached to the 2nd Battalion , Royal Munster Fusiliers he served with them at the First Battle of Ypres . During this battle Gleeson is said to have taken command of the battalion after all the officers were incapacitated by the enemy . He was highly regarded by his men for tending to the wounded under fire , visiting the frontline trenches , and bringing gifts . 
 On 8 May 1915 , on the eve of the Battle of Aubers Ridge , Gleeson addressed the assembled battalion at a roadside shrine and gave the general absolution . The battalion suffered heavily in the battle and when paraded again afterwards only 200 men were assembled . Gleeson 's absolution was the subject of a painting by Fortunino Matania that was made at the request of the widow of the battalion 's commanding officer . At the end of his year 's service in 1915 Gleeson returned to Dublin and became a curate but rejoined the army as a Chaplain in 1917 and remained for a further two years . After the war he returned once more to Ireland , becoming a priest at churches near to Dublin and being elected canon of the Metropolitan Chapter of the Archdiocese of Dublin before his death on 26 June 1959 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gleeson was born on 28 May 1884 at <unk> , County Tipperary in Ireland , one of thirteen children . Gleeson decided to become a Catholic priest and was educated at the Holy Cross College in Dublin and St Patrick 's College in Maynooth . He was ordained as a priest in 1910 at St Mary 's Pro @-@ Cathedral , Dublin and lived in Glasnevin before going to St. Mary 's Home for the Blind in March 1912 . Gleeson was a Jesuit , a nationalist and a speaker of Irish Gaelic . 
 = = Outbreak of war = = 
 On the outbreak of the First World War in July 1914 Gleeson volunteered for service with the British Army , one of only 17 priests to do so . He was commissioned as a Chaplain to the Forces , 4th Class ( equivalent to a Captain ) the Army Chaplains ' Department on 18 November 1914 and was soon serving with the 2nd battalion , Royal Munster Fusiliers on the Western Front in France . The battalion , regular troops who formed part of the 3rd Infantry Brigade of the 1st Infantry Division , were amongst the first British troops to be deployed to France , seeing action during the Battle of Mons , and after Gleeson joined them they participated in the First Battle of Ypres . British officer and poet Robert Graves recalled in his autobiography Good @-@ Bye to All That that during this battle Gleeson found himself the only unwounded officer of the battalion and , having removed his chaplain 's insignia that indicated his non @-@ combatant status , took command of the unit and held until relieved . Later in December that year he joined the battalion in a counterattack at the Battle of Givenchy . On Christmas Day the Munsters were in part of the front line unaffected by the Christmas Truce and Gleeson chose to conduct a Mass in one of the front line trenches that was frequently under fire . The mass was in memory of the seven officers and 200 men of the Munsters who had died in a failed attack on 22 December . 
 Gleeson was an advisor to men of all faiths in the regiment and kept careful records of their names and addresses so that he could write to the families of those that died . He ended each letter with the words " They paid a great sacrifice " , which was later used as the title of a book published in 2010 that details the wartime service records of men from Cork . Much of his time was spent answering letters from families in Ireland concerned about the wellbeing of their sons and husbands . At times the task almost overwhelmed him and this is evident in his personal diary when he wrote , in June 1915 , " I got 12 letters today ; just after reading them . What answering they will take tomorrow . I like to give these poor people all the solace I can , anyhow , but still there ’ s no limit to the sorrowing inquiries . The tragedy of these letters " . 
 Gleeson made frequent visits to the front lines and often conducted burial services there with wooden grave marker crosses that he made himself or entering no man 's land to comfort dying soldiers . His men said that they were always sure of a cup of tea from him when he visited the trenches late at night and he was certain to check that they were not short of ammunition . Gleeson sent requests to Ireland for hymn books for the men in the field and also bought mouth organs for their entertainment . One of Gleeson 's men said " He 's a warrior and no mistake . There 's no man at the Front more brave or cooler . Why , it is in the hottest place up in the firing line he do be to give comfort to the boys that are dying . " His work as a chaplain was renowned , one war correspondent stated that " If you meet a man of the 2nd Munsters , just mention the name of Father Gleeson and see how his face lights up " . 
 = = Aubers Ridge = = 
 Whilst moving forwards to the trenches on 8 May 1915 , in preparation for the Battle of Aubers Ridge , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Victor Rickard ordered the battalion to halt at a roadside shrine in Rue du Bois , near Fleurbaix . The shrine was in fact the altar of the Chapel of Notre Dame de <unk> which had been destroyed by shells earlier in the war . Gleeson , who had ridden at the front of the column , addressed the assembled 800 men and gave them the general absolution whilst still mounted on his horse . The men then sang the hymns Hail , Queen of Heaven , the Te Deum and Hail Glorious Saint Patrick before Gleeson moved along the ranks bidding farewell to the officers and encouraging the men to maintain the honour of the regiment . The battalion then moved off to the trenches from which they launched their attack at 5 @.@ 30 the next morning . The Munsters were largely cut down by machine gun fire before they had advanced more than a few yards although enough men survived to capture the German trenches , the only unit to do so that day , before being forced to withdraw . 
 Casualties in the battalion amounted to 11 officers and 140 men killed , including Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Rickard , in addition to 8 officers and 230 men wounded . Gleeson made it his duty to attend to the wounded and dying , comforting them and delivering the last rites , despite German shells landing close by him . After the battle the Munsters once again assembled at the Rue de Bois , though only three officers and 200 men were found fit to parade . Rickard 's widow , Jessie Louisa Rickard , requested that war artist Fortunino Matania immortalise the parade at Rue de Bois in a painting that centred on Gleeson delivering the absolution ( Rickard is also depicted in the background ) . Gleeson later donated the stole he wore for the parade to the regimental museum . 
 Gleeson further distinguished himself later that year by assisting in the defence of a trench against enemy attack . He had a strong commitment to the idea of freeing Belgium from German occupation but was known to be critical of what he considered anti @-@ clerical views held by the French authorities . Gleeson was familiar with the realities of war and , in December 1914 , wrote that " if ... advocates of war were made to be soaked and caked and crusted with cold , wet trench mud , like these poor soldiers , and to wear those mud @-@ weighted coats they would not be so glib with their treatises on the art of war . These militants should be made undergo a few nights in cheerless billets [ and ] mud @-@ river trenches to teach them a lesson . What is it all for at all ? " . 
 Having originally agreed to serve for a year Gleeson wrote to Father Bernard Rawlinson , the senior Roman Catholic chaplain , in October 1915 requesting that he be relieved of duty stating that " I am sorry to be leaving the dear old Munster lads , but I really can 't stand it any longer . I do not like the life , though I love the poor men ever so much " . He became a curate at the Church of Our Lady of Lourdes in Dublin but requested permission from his Archbishop , William Walsh , to return to army service for another year . He was recommissioned in his previous rank on 15 May 1917 and would serve another two years . When the Royal Munster Fusiliers were transferred to the 48th Brigade , 16th ( Irish ) Division on 29 January 1918 Gleeson remained with the 1st Infantry Division . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 After the Armistice with Germany Gleeson returned once more to Ireland , being discharged from the British Army in May 1919 . Gleeson encountered hostility with Irish republicans after the war due to his association with the British Army . On 4 June 1922 he attended the dedication of <unk> British Cemetery which holds the remains of 110 men of the Royal Munster Fusiliers who were killed in the defence of <unk> against superior German forces whilst acting as a rearguard for the Great Retreat of August 1914 . Gleeson served as a chaplain to the armed forces of the Irish Free State from February 1923 and was with them during the Irish Civil War . 
 = = Dramatist = = 
 Gleeson successfully wrote and produced two dramas ; the first was a drama of the first Holy Week , entitled Bethany to Calvary which was staged at the Theatre Royal , Dublin in February 1931 and received high praise from many authorities on sacred drama . It was subsequently staged in the Abbey Theatre Dublin in April 1935 . In March 1938 it was presented again during the Sundays of Lent and the Passion Week with a cast of seventy at Our Lady ’ s Hall in Inchicore , Dublin . 
 His second drama Rose of Battle was laid in the French lines during the 1917 @-@ 18 war , in which one of two soldier friends is reconciled to his faith and Church after his friend is killed but he , though badly wounded , becomes miraculously cured through the prayers of his friend ’ s sister , a hospital nurse . The drama was widely acclaimed in 1935 when staged at the Abbey Theatre , Dublin ( casting Cyril Cusack ) , the Opera House , Cork , and the Theatre Royal , Waterford . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 He worked later as a priest at Bray , Aughrim and was at St Catherine 's in Meath Street , Dublin from August 1944 . He was elected a canon of the Metropolitan Chapter of the Archdiocese of Dublin on 7 May 1956 and died on 26 June 1959 . Gleeson was buried at the Glasnevin Cemetery in Dublin . The Old Comrades Association of the Royal Munster Fusiliers honoured him in their annual report , stating that he was " a canon when he died . A saint when next we all meet " . 
 A stone tablet at the Island of Ireland Peace Park near Ypres , Belgium is inscribed with a quote from Gleeson describing his efforts to comfort the wounded . The stole Gleeson wore during his famous absolution before Aubers Ridge was rediscovered in August 2014 in the collection of the National Army Museum , having been acquired by them in 1959 . A memorial was unveiled in May 2015 at the recently rediscovered site of Gleeson 's absolution at Rue de Bois . Gleeson 's war diaries are held by the Archdiocese of Dublin and the National Museum of Ireland at Collins Barracks , Dublin . The diaries , notes and records from the diocesan collection were digitised in an 18 @-@ month @-@ long joint project with the University College Dublin that was completed in April 2015 . 
 = Green Lantern ( film ) = 
 Green Lantern is a 2011 American superhero film based on the DC Comics character of the same name . The film stars Ryan Reynolds , Blake Lively , Peter Sarsgaard , Mark Strong , Angela Bassett , and Tim Robbins , with Martin Campbell directing a script by Greg Berlanti and comic book writers Michael Green and Marc Guggenheim , which was subsequently rewritten by Michael Goldenberg . Green Lantern tells the story of Hal Jordan , a test pilot who is selected to become the first human member of the Green Lantern Corps . Hal is given a ring that grants him superpowers and must confront Parallax , who threatens to upset the balance of power in the universe . 
 The film first entered development in 1997 ; progress remained stalled until Greg Berlanti was hired to write and direct in October 2007 . Martin Campbell was brought on board in February 2009 after Berlanti was forced to vacate the director 's position . Most of the live @-@ action actors were cast between July 2009 and February 2010 and filming took place from March to August 2010 in Louisiana . The film was converted to 3D in post @-@ production . 
 Green Lantern was released on June 17 , 2011 and received generally negative reviews ; most criticised the film for its screenplay , inconsistent tone , choice and portrayal of villains , and use of CGI while some praised Reynolds ' performance . The film underperformed at the box office , grossing just $ 220 million against a production budget of $ 200 million . Due to the film 's negative reception and disappointing box office performance , Warner Bros. cancelled any plans for a sequel , instead opting to reboot the character in the DC Extended Universe with the movie Green Lantern Corps , set for release in 2020 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Billions of years ago , beings called the Guardians of the Universe used the green essence of willpower to create an intergalactic police force called the Green Lantern Corps . They divided the universe into 3600 sectors , with one Green Lantern per sector . One such Green Lantern , Abin Sur of Sector 2814 , defeated the malevolent being Parallax and imprisoned him in the Lost Sector on the desolate planet <unk> . In the present day , Parallax escapes from his prison after becoming strengthened by an encounter with crash survivors on the planet , feeding off of their fear to gain strength before pursuing and nearly killing Abin Sur , who escapes and crash @-@ lands on Earth where he commands his ring to find a worthy successor . 
 Hal Jordan , a cocky test pilot working at Ferris Aircraft , is chosen by the ring and transported to the crash site , where the dying Abin Sur appoints him a Green Lantern , telling him to take the lantern and speak the oath . At home he says the oath and is later whisked away to the Green Lantern Corps home planet of Oa , where he meets and trains with veteran Corps members Tomar @-@ Re and Kilowog and Corps leader Sinestro , who believes he is unfit and fearful . Jordan quits and returns to Earth , keeping the power ring and lantern . 
 Meanwhile , scientist Hector Hammond is summoned by his father , Senator Robert Hammond , to a secret government facility to perform an autopsy on Abin Sur 's body . A piece of Parallax inside the corpse enters Hammond , giving him telepathic and telekinetic powers , at the cost of his sanity . After discovering that he was chosen for the secret work only due to his father 's influence , Hammond attempts to kill his father by telekinetically sabotaging his helicopter at a party . Jordan saves the senator and the party guests , including his childhood sweetheart Carol Ferris . Later , Hammond successfully kills his father by burning him alive , and Jordan learns of Parallax coming to Earth . 
 Back on Oa , the Guardians tell Sinestro that Parallax was once one of their own until he desired to control the yellow essence of fear , only to become the embodiment of fear itself . Arguing that the way to fight fear is by fear itself , Sinestro requests that the Guardians forge a ring of the same yellow power , preparing to concede Earth 's destruction to Parallax in order to protect Oa . Jordan appears and tries to convince the Guardians that fear will turn the users evil if its power is used , but they reject his pleas , and he returns to Earth to try to defeat Parallax alone feeling defeated . 
 Upon returning to Earth as the Lantern , Jordan saves Ferris from Hammond after a brief showdown with him . Parallax arrives , consumes Hammond 's life force , killing him and then wreaks havoc on Coast City . After a fierce battle , with new @-@ found strength , Jordan lures Parallax away from Earth and toward the Sun , destroying and killing Parallax . He loses consciousness after the battle and falls toward the sun , but is saved by Sinestro , Kilowog , and Tomar @-@ Re . Later , the entire Green Lantern Corps congratulates him for his bravery . Sinestro tells Jordan he now bears the responsibility of protecting his sector as a Green Lantern . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Sinestro steals the yellow ring and places it on his finger , causing his green suit and eyes to change to yellow . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ryan Reynolds as Hal Jordan / Green Lantern : 
 A test pilot for the Ferris Aircraft Company whose will to act <unk> him as first <unk> ever inducted into an intergalactic peacekeeping force fueled by green energy of will . Reynolds said , " I 've known about ' Green Lantern ' my whole life , but I 've never really followed it before . I fell out of love with the character when I met with Martin Campbell " . Reynolds called the film " an origin story to a certain degree , but it 's not a labored origin story , where the movie begins in the third act . The movie starts when it starts . We find out Hal is the guy fairly early on , and the adventure begins " . Alternatively Chris Pine and Sam Worthington had been in discussions for the role . Bradley Cooper , Jared Leto and Justin Timberlake were other top contenders , while Brian Austin Green , a Green Lantern fan , campaigned for the part , but ultimately did not <unk> Griffith as Young Hal Jordan . 
 Blake Lively as Carol Ferris : 
 The vice president of Ferris Aircraft and a long @-@ time love interest of Hal Jordan . One pseudonymous writer citing unnamed sources said Lively was among five leading contenders that included Eva Green , Keri Russell , Diane Kruger and Jennifer Garner . About her stunt work in which she rehearsed with stunt coordinator Gary Powell ( Casino Royale , The Bourne Ultimatum , Quantum of Solace ) , gymnastic acrobats from Cirque du Soleil and used aerial stunt rigs created for The Matrix , Lively explained , " Our director likes it real — the fights close and dirty ... I 'm 40 feet in the air , spiraling around . That 's the best workout you can ever do because it 's all core ... You do that for ten minutes and you should see your body the next day ! It 's so exhilarating , so thrilling — and nauseating " <unk> Craig as Young Carol Ferris . 
 Peter Sarsgaard as Dr. Hector Hammond : 
 A scientist who is exposed to the yellow energy of fear from Parallax , causing his brain to grow to enormous size grant him psionic powers . Regarding his preparation for the role , Sarsgaard stated , " I actually did hang with this biologist from Tulane that was I think just the most eccentric guy they could find . He was entertaining , and he and I actually worked on my lecture that I give in [ Green Lantern ] . " About his character Sarsgaard remarked , " He 's got shades of gray . It 's eccentricity on top of eccentricity " <unk> <unk> as Young Hector Hammond . 
 Mark Strong as <unk> Sinestro / Green Lantern : 
 A Green Lantern and Hal Jordan 's mentor . Strong affirmed that the film will follow the origin story , " the film closely follows the early comics . Sinestro starts out as Hal Jordan ’ s mentor , slightly suspicious and not sure of him because obviously Hal is the first human being who ’ s made into a Green Lantern . He 's certainly very strict and unsure of the wisdom of Hal becoming a Green Lantern " . Strong said , the character " is a military guy but isn 't immediately bad . It 's the kind of person that lends himself to becoming bad over the course of the comics being written , but initially he ’ s quite a heroic figure . ” He also revealed that the outfit and other aspects of the character very closely follow the character 's early days , “ That widow 's peak and thin mustache was for some reason originally based on David Niven ... So I would like to do justice to the Sinestro that was conceived for the comic books ” . 
 Angela Bassett as Dr. Amanda Waller : 
 A former congressional aide and government agent . About the differences between the comic book and film character Bassett said , " Well , I ’ m not <unk> , " but added that her character does have " that intellectual , that bright , that no @-@ nonsense , that means business [ personality ] . [ She 's ] getting it done and in the trenches nothing <unk> her " . 
 Tim Robbins as Robert Hammond : 
 A United States senator and the father of the movie 's human villain , Hector Hammond . 
 Temuera Morrison as Abin Sur / Green Lantern : 
 A Green Lantern who crash lands on Earth and recruits Hal Jordan as his replacement . Morrison said it took four to five hours to put on the prosthetic makeup for the character . About filming with Ryan Reynolds , Morrison commented , " We did the whole scene together where I give him the ring , our suits are CGI so we had these grey suits with things on them so it was cool and working with Martin Campbell again was great too " . 
 Geoffrey Rush as the voice of Tomar @-@ Re / Green Lantern : 
 A bird @-@ beaked member of the Green Lantern Corps who teaches Hal Jordan how to use his cosmic powers . Rush stated he was not initially familiar with Green Lantern but was drawn to the part after seeing the concept art explaining , " When I got the offer for it I said , ‘ Haven ’ t they made that film ? ’ They said , ‘ No , it ’ s a completely computer @-@ generated character . ’ I saw the artwork and I said , I would love to be that guy . Because I had voiced an owl in Legend of the Guardians : The Owls of Ga <unk> and I ’ d voiced a pelican in Finding Nemo and I thought I could really improve on that now by being half @-@ bird , half @-@ fish , part lizard . You don ’ t get to do that in a live @-@ action film . " Rush compared the role to previous roles where he played a mentoring figure , " You could say that I ’ ve mentored Queen Elizabeth I as [ Sir Francis ] Walsingham , and [ Leon ] Trotsky has mentored Frida Kahlo and now Tomar Re is going to mentor Hal Jordan , and I was sort of mentoring King George VI in The King 's Speech . But I can ’ t imagine Tomar Re setting up an office on Harley Street in London . They ’ re all very different people to me , but there is a kind of theme I suppose " . 
 Michael Clarke Duncan as the voice of Kilowog / Green Lantern : 
 A drill sergeant trainer of new recruits for the Green Lantern Corps . About the character , Duncan , a fan of the comic book , stated , " He 's a real type of tough guy who knows everything , and actually in one of the comic books he and Superman fought to a tie " . 
 Taika Waititi as Thomas <unk> : 
 An Inuit engineer at Ferris Aircraft . Waititi said he was cast after a Warner Bros. casting agent saw his performance in Boy , which he also wrote and directed . Waititi – who has a Jewish mother and Maori father – says the production " had an opening for a role in the film for someone who wasn 't , I don 't [ know ] , not @-@ white or not @-@ black . " 
 Clancy Brown as the voice of Parallax : 
 A former Guardian of the Universe who was imprisoned by Abin Sur after he was exposed to the yellow energy of fear . 
 Additionally , Jon Tenney plays Martin Jordan , Hal Jordan 's father ; Jay O. Sanders portrays Carl Ferris , an aircraft designer and father of Carol Ferris ; and Mike Doyle is cast as Jack Jordan , Hal Jordan 's older brother . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In early 1997 , Warner Bros. approached cult filmmaker and comic book writer Kevin Smith , who had then just finished writing Superman Lives , to script a Green Lantern film . Smith turned down the offer , believing there were more suitable candidates to make a Green Lantern film . At one point Quentin Tarantino was offered the chance to write and direct . Warner also considered the property as an action comedy ; by 2004 , Robert Smigel had completed a script which was set to star Jack Black in the lead role . However , the studio dropped the comedy idea following poor fan reaction from the Internet . David S. Goyer was offered the chance to write and direct either a Green Lantern or Flash film after Warner Bros. was impressed with his screenplay for Batman Begins , but he opted to direct the latter . Actor @-@ writer Corey Reynolds , a comic book fan of the John Stewart character , pitched Warner an idea for a trilogy , with him starring as John Stewart and performing screenwriting duties . Reynolds intended to introduce Hal Jordan , the Green Lantern Corps and Justice League in possible sequels . He finished the script for Green Lantern : Birth of a Hero in June 2007 , receiving positive feedback from Warner Bros. with a potential 2010 release date . However , the studio abandoned Reynolds ' concept , and in October 2007 , Greg Berlanti signed to direct the film and co @-@ write it with comic @-@ book writers Michael Green and Marc Guggenheim . A draft of the trio 's 2008 script , leaked on the Internet , revealed a story that included the hero 's origin and included the characters Carol Ferris , Kilowog , Sinestro , and Guy Gardner in a cameo appearance , and appeared " to set up Hector Hammond as Hal Jordan 's ... first major nemesis .... " Shortly afterward , Guggenheim said that the script would contain characterizations inspired by the Denny O 'Neil @-@ Neal Adams run on the comic in the 1970s , and Dave Gibbons ' work in the early 1980s . He added that he and his co @-@ writers also looked to the 2000s Geoff Johns stories , saying , " It ’ s been interesting because we finished a draft just before [ Johns ' ] ' Secret Origin ' [ story arc ] started up . " So I ’ ve been reading ' Secret Origin ' with a real interest in seeing ' OK , how did Geoff solve this problem ? ' There are certain elements just for anyone trying to retell Hal ’ s origin for a modern day audience has to address and grapple with . For example , why the hell was Abin [ Sur ] flying in a space ship when he 's a Green Lantern ? You don 't ask that question back in the Silver Age , but when you 're writing in the Modern Age , you have to answer these things . " 
