 King Henry 's Mound , a Neolithic burial barrow , is the highest point within the park and is located within the public gardens of Pembroke Lodge . At various times the mound 's name has been connected with Henry VIII or with his father Henry VII . But there is no evidence to support the legend that Henry VIII stood on the mound to watch for a sign from St Paul 's that Anne Boleyn had been executed at the Tower and that he was then free to marry Jane Seymour . 
 To the west of King Henry 's Mound is a panorama of the Thames Valley . St Paul 's Cathedral , over 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the east , can be seen through the naked eye or via a telescope that has been installed on the Mound . This vista , created soon after the cathedral was completed in 1710 , is protected by a " dome and a half " width of sky on either side . In 2005 the then Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone , sought to overturn this protection and reduce it to " half a dome " . In 2009 his successor , Boris Johnson , promised to reinstate the wider view , though also approving a development at Victoria Station which , when completed , will obscure its right @-@ hand corner . New gates − " The Way " − which can be viewed through the King Henry 's Mound telescope , were installed in 2012 on the edge of Sidmouth Wood to mark the 300th anniversary of St Paul 's Cathedral . 
 = = = Plantings and memorials = = = 
 The park 's open slopes and woods are based on lowland acid soils . The grassland is mostly managed by grazing . The park contains numerous woods and copses , some created with donations from members of the public . 
 Between 1819 and 1835 , Lord Sidmouth , Deputy Ranger , established several new plantations and enclosures , including Sidmouth Wood and the ornamental Isabella Plantation , both of which are fenced to keep the deer out . After World War II the existing woodland at Isabella Plantation was transformed into a woodland garden , and is organically run , resulting in a rich flora and fauna . Opened to the public in 1953 , it is now a major visitor attraction in its own right . It is best known for the flowering , in April and May , of its evergreen azaleas and camellias , which have been planted next to its ponds and streams . There are also many rare and unusual trees and shrubs . 
 The Jubilee Plantation , created to commemorate the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria , was established in 1887 . Prince Charles ' Spinney was planted out in 1951 with trees protected from the deer by fences , to preserve a natural habitat . The bluebell glade is managed to encourage native British bluebells . Teck Plantation , established in 1905 , commemorates the Duke and Duchess of Teck , who lived at White Lodge . Their daughter Mary married George V. Tercentenary Plantation , in 1937 , marked the 300th anniversary of the enclosure of the park . Victory Plantation was established in 1946 to mark the end of the Second World War . Queen Mother 's Copse , a small triangular enclosure on the woodland hill halfway between Robin Hood Gate and Ham Gate , was established in 1980 to commemorate the 80th birthday of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother . 
 The park lost over 1000 mature trees during the Great Storm of 1987 and the Burns ' Day storm of 1990 . The subsequent replanting included a new plantation , Two Storms Wood , a short distance into the park from Sheen Gate . Some extremely old trees can also be seen inside this enclosure . 
 Bone Copse , which was named in 2005 , was started by the Bone family in 1988 by purchasing and planting a tree from the park authorities in memory of Bessie Bone who died in that year . Trees have been added annually , and in 1994 her husband Frederick Bone also died . The annual planting has been continued by their children . 
 = = = = James Thomson = = = = 
 A bench known as " Poet 's seat " is located at the north end of Pembroke Lodge Gardens , in a spot called Poet 's Corner . Sculpted by Richard Farrington , it was based on an idea by Jane Fowles . The seat is inscribed with lines by the poet James Thomson , who was living in Richmond at the time of his death . 
 A wooden memorial plaque with an ode to Thomson by the writer and historian John Heneage Jesse was formerly located near Pembroke Lodge stables , where it was installed in 1851 . The plaque was replaced by the Selborne Society in 1895 . 
 In 2014 Poet 's Corner was re @-@ sited to the other side of the main path and the ode , on a re @-@ gilded board , was installed in a completely new oak frame . The new Poet 's Corner , funded by the Friends of Richmond Park and the Visitor Centre at Pembroke Lodge , and by a donation in memory of Wendy Vachell , also includes three curved benches made from reclaimed teak . The benches are inscribed with a couplet by the Welsh poet W. H. Davies , " A poor life this , if , full of care , we have no time to stand and stare " . 
 King Henry 's Mound is inscribed with a few lines from Thomson 's poem " The Seasons " . 
 Poets ' Corner is linked to King Henry 's Mound by The John Beer Laburnum Arch , named after one of Pembroke Lodge Gardens ' former charge @-@ hands . The arch has a display of yellow laburnum flowers in May . 
 = = = = Ian Dury = = = = 
 In 2002 a " musical bench " , designed by Mil <unk> , was placed in a favoured viewing spot of rock @-@ and @-@ roll singer and lyricist Ian Dury ( 1942 – 2000 ) near Poet 's Corner . On the back of the bench are the words " Reasons to be cheerful " , the title of one of Dury 's songs . The solar powered seat was intended to allow visitors to plug in and listen to eight of his songs as well as an interview , but has been subjected to repeated vandalism . 
 = = Nature = = 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 Originally created for deer hunting , Richmond Park now has 630 red and fallow deer that roam freely within much of the park . A cull takes place each November and February to ensure numbers can be sustained . Some deer are also killed in road accidents , through ingesting litter such as small items of plastic , or by dogs ; three deer were killed by dogs in 2012 . Many of the deer in Richmond Park are infected with a bacterium called Borrelia burgdorferi which can be transmitted to humans through a tick bite causing Lyme disease . 
 The park is an important refuge for other wildlife , including woodpeckers , squirrels , rabbits , snakes , frogs , toads , stag beetles and many other insects plus numerous ancient trees and varieties of fungi . It is particularly notable for its rare beetles . 
 Richmond Park supports a large population of what are believed to be ring @-@ necked ( or rose @-@ ringed ) parakeets . These bred from birds that escaped or were freed from captivity . 
 = = = Ponds and streams = = = 
 There are about 30 ponds in the park . Some – including Barn Wood Pond , Bishop 's Pond , Gallows Pond , Leg of Mutton Pond , Martin 's Pond and White Ash Pond – have been created to drain the land or to provide water for livestock . The Pen Ponds ( which in the past were used to rear carp for food ) date from 1746 . They were formed when a trench was dug in the early 17th century to drain a boggy area ; later in that century this was widened and deepened by the extraction of gravel for local building . The Ponds now take in water from streams flowing from the higher ground around them and release it to Beverley Brook . Beverley Brook and the two Pen Ponds are most visible areas of water in the park . 
 Beverley Brook rises at <unk> Recreation Park in Worcester Park and enters the park ( where it is followed by the Tamsin Trail and Beverley Walk ) at Robin Hood Gate , creating a water feature used by deer , smaller animals and water grasses and some water lilies . Its name is derived from the former presence in the river of the European beaver ( Castor fiber ) , a species extinct in Britain since the sixteenth century . 
 Most of the streams in the park drain into Beverley Brook but a spring above Dann 's Pond flows to join Sudbrook ( from " South brook " ) on the park boundary . Sudbrook flows through a small valley known as Ham Dip and has been dammed and enlarged in two places to form Ham Dip Pond and Ham Gate Pond , first mapped in 1861 and 1754 respectively . These were created for the watering of deer . Both ponds underwent restoration work including de @-@ silting , which was completed in 2013 . Sudbrook drains the western escarpment of the hill that , to the east , forms part of the catchment of Beverley Brook and , to the south , the <unk> River . Sudbrook is joined by the Latchmere Stream just beyond Ham Gate Pond . Sudbrook then flows into Sudbrook Park , Petersham . Another stream rises north of Sidmouth Wood and goes through Conduit Wood towards the park boundary near Bog Gate . 
 A separate water system for Isabella Plantation was developed in the 1950s . Water from the upper Pen Pond is pumped to Still Pond , Thomson 's Pond and Peg 's Pond . 
 The park 's newest pond is Attenborough Pond , opened by and named after the broadcaster and naturalist Sir David Attenborough in July 2014 . It was created as part of the park 's Ponds and Streams Conservation Programme . 
 = = In culture = = 
 = = = The Hearsum Collection = = = 
 The Hearsum Collection is a registered charity that collects and preserves the heritage of Richmond Park . It has a collection , which was started in 1997 , of heritage material covering the last four centuries , with over 5000 items including antique prints , paintings , maps , postcards , photographs , documents , books and press cuttings . Volunteers from the Friends of Richmond Park have been cataloguing them . The Collection , which as of 2015 continues to be stored in unsatisfactory accommodation in Pembroke Lodge , is overseen by volunteers and part @-@ time staff . The trustees announced in 2014 plans for a new purpose @-@ built heritage centre to provide full public access to the Collection . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 = = = = Fiction = = = = 
 Chapter 22 of George MacDonald 's novel The Marquis of <unk> ( published in London in 1877 by Hurst and Blackett ) is entitled " Richmond Park " . 
 In Georgette Heyer 's Regency romance Sylvester , or the Wicked Uncle ( 1957 ) there is an expedition to Richmond Park . 
 Isabella Plantation in Richmond Park is the scene of a picnic and a child 's disappearance in chapters 9 and 10 of Chris Cleave 's 2008 novel The Other Hand . Richmond Park features in Jacqueline Wilson 's novel Lily Alone ( 2010 ) and in the poetry anthology she edited , Green Glass Beads ( 2011 ) . 
 Anthony Horowitz 's 2014 novel Moriarty , about Arthur Conan Doyle 's character in his Sherlock Holmes stories , includes a scene set in Richmond Park . 
 = = = = Non @-@ fiction = = = = 
 A Hind in Richmond Park by William Henry Hudson , published in 1922 and republished in 2006 , is an extended natural history essay . It includes an account of his visits to Richmond Park and a particular occasion when a young girl was struck by a red deer when she tried to feed it an acorn . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 = = = = 17th century = = = = 
 The oil painting The Carlile Family with Sir Justinian Isham in Richmond Park is held at Lamport Hall in Northamptonshire . It was painted by Joan Carlile ( 1600 – 1679 ) who lived at Petersham Lodge . 
 = = = = 18th and 19th centuries = = = = 
 A portrait by T Stewart ( a pupil of Sir Joshua Reynolds ) in 1758 of John Lewis , Brewer of Richmond , Surrey , whose legal action forced Princess Amelia to reinstate pedestrian access to the park , is in the Richmond upon Thames Borough Art Collection . It is on display in Richmond Reference Library . 
 Joseph Allen 's Sir Robert Walpole ( 1676 – 1745 ) , 1st Earl of Orford , KG , as Ranger of Richmond Park ( after Jonathan Richardson the Elder ) is in the collection of the National Trust , and is held at <unk> , Wrexham . The painting is based on a portrait with a similar title , by Jonathan Richardson the Elder and John Wootton , which is held at Norwich Castle Museum and Art Gallery . 
 Artist and caricaturist Thomas Rowlandson ( 1756 – 1827 ) ' s drawing Richmond Park is at the Yale Center for British Art . 
 The Earl of Dysart 's Family in Richmond Park by William Frederick Witherington ( 1785 – 1865 ) is in The Hearsum Collection at Pembroke Lodge . 
 Landscape : View in Richmond Park was painted in 1850 by the English Romantic painter John Martin . It is held at the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge . 
 William Bennett 's watercolour In Richmond Park , painted in 1852 , is held by Tate Britain . It can be viewed , by appointment , at its Prints and Drawings Rooms . 
 The oil painting In Richmond Park ( 1856 ) by the Victorian painter Henry Moore is in the collection of the York Museums Trust . 
 Landscape with Deer , Richmond Park ( 1875 ) by Alfred Dawson is in the Reading Museum 's collection . 
 John Buxton Knight 's White Lodge , Richmond Park , painted in 1898 , is in the collection of Leeds Museums and Galleries . 
 = = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = = 
 The oil painting Richmond Park ( 1913 ) by Arthur George Bell is in the collection of the London Transport Museum . 
 Spencer Gore 's painting Richmond Park , thought to have been painted in the autumn of 1913 or shortly before the artist 's death in March 1914 , was exhibited at the Paterson and Carfax Gallery in 1920 . In 1939 it was exhibited in Warsaw , Helsingfors and Stockholm by the British Council as Group of Trees . It is now in the collection of the Tate Gallery under its original title but is not currently on display . The painting is one of a series of landscapes painted in Richmond Park during the last months of Gore 's life . According to Tate curator Helena <unk> , Gore 's early death from pneumonia , two months before what would have been his 36th birthday , was brought on by his painting outdoors in Richmond Park in the cold and wet winter months . It is not certain where in the park the picture was made but a row of trees close to the pond near Cambrian Gate has a very close resemblance to those in the painting . Another Gore painting , with the same title ( Richmond Park ) , painted in 1914 , is at the Ashmolean Museum . His painting Wood in Richmond Park is in the Birmingham Art Gallery 's collection . 
 The oil painting Autumn , Richmond Park by Alfred James Munnings is at the Sir Alfred Munnings Art Museum in Colchester . 
 Chinese artist Chiang Yee wrote and illustrated several books while living in Britain . Deer in Richmond Park is Plate V in his book The Silent Traveller in London , published in 1938 . 
 Trees , Richmond Park , Surrey , painted in 1938 by Francis Ferdinand Maurice Cook , is in the Manchester City Galleries ' collection . 
 Richmond Park No 2 by the English Impressionist painter Laura Knight is at the Royal Academy of Arts . 
 In Richmond Park ( 1962 ) by James Andrew Wykeham Simons is at the UCL Art Museum . 
 Kenneth Armitage ( 1916 – 2002 ) made a series of sculptures and drawings of oak trees in Richmond Park between 1975 and 1986 . His collage and etching Richmond Park : Tall Figure with Jerky Arms ( 1981 ) is in the British Government Art Collection and is on display at the British Embassy in Prague . The Government Art Collection also holds his Richmond Park : Two Trees with White Trunks ( 1975 ) , Richmond Park : Five Trees , Grey Sky ( 1979 ) and his sculpture Richmond Oak ( 1985 – 86 ) . 
 Richmond Park Morning , London ( 2004 ) by Bob Rankin is at Queen Mary 's Hospital , Roehampton , which also holds a panel of five oil paintings by Yvonne Fletcher entitled Richmond Park , London ( 2005 – 06 ) . 
 = = = = Historic posters = = = = 
 The Underground Electric Railways Company published , in 1911 , a poster , Richmond Park , designed by Charles Sharland . This is at the London Transport Museum , which also has : a District line poster from 1908 , Richmond Park for pleasure and fresh air , by an unknown artist ; Richmond Park , by an unknown artist ( 1910 ) ; Richmond by Underground , by Alfred France ( 1910 ) ; Richmond Park , by Arthur G Bell ( 1913 ) ; Richmond Park ; humours no . 10 by German American puppeteer and illustrator Tony <unk> ( 1913 ) ; Richmond Park by tram , by Charles Sharland ( 1913 ) ; Richmond Park , by Harold L Oakley ( 1914 ) ; Natural history of London ; no . 3 , herons at Richmond Park , by Edwin Noble ( 1916 ) ; Richmond Park by Emilio <unk> Leopoldo <unk> ( 1920 ) ; Rambles in Richmond Park , by Freda <unk> ( 1924 ) ; Richmond Park by Charles Paine ( 1925 ) ; and Richmond Park , a poster commissioned by London Transport in 1938 and illustrated by the artist Dame Laura Knight . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Richmond Park has been a location for several films and TV series : 
 A locomotive runs through the park and crashes into a tree in the film The Titfield Thunderbolt ( 1955 ) . 
 In the 1968 film Performance , James Fox crosses Richmond Park in a Rolls Royce car . 
 The park was the backdrop for the classic historical film Anne of the Thousand Days ( 1969 ) , with Richard Burton and Geneviève Bujold , which looks back to Richmond Park in the 16th century . The film tells the story of King Henry VIII 's courtship of Anne Boleyn and their brief marriage . 
 An Indian dust storm was filmed in the park for the film Heat and Dust ( 1983 ) . 
 The Royal Ballet School in Richmond Park featured in the film Billy Elliot ( 2000 ) . 
 In 2010 , director Guy Ritchie filmed parts of Sherlock Holmes : A Game of Shadows in the park with Robert Downey , Jr. and Jude Law . 
 Some of the scenes from Into the Woods ( 2014 ) , the Disney fantasy film featuring Meryl Streep , were filmed in the park . 
 As well as a location for films , Richmond Park is regularly featured in television programmes , corporate videos and fashion shoots . It has made an appearance on Blue Peter , Inside Out ( the BBC regional current affairs programme ) and BBC <unk> . In 2014 it was featured in a video commissioned by The Hearsum Collection . 
 = = International connections = = 
 = = = Richmond Park , Brunswick , Germany = = = 
 The " Richmond Park " in Germany is named after the park in Britain , since it was created in 1768 in Brunswick for Princess Augusta , sister of George III . She was married to the Duke of Brunswick and was feeling homesick , so an English @-@ style park was laid out and a palace built for her , both with the name " Richmond " . 
 In 1935 , the palace including the entire estate was purchased by the City of Braunschweig . One condition for the purchase was that no structural changes ever be made and the park not be built on . The palace , which was rebuilt after the war , is now used for public events . 
 = Bye Bye Nerdie = 
 " Bye Bye Nerdie " is the sixteenth episode of the twelfth season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 11 , 2001 . In the episode , after Lisa becomes the target of a female bully named Francine , she discovers a scientific reason as to why bullies pick on nerds and demonstrates her findings at a science conference . Meanwhile , Homer goes into the childproofing business , causing baby @-@ injury @-@ related businesses to go in decline . 
 John Frink and Don Payne wrote " Bye Bye Nerdie " and their original idea for the episode saw Lisa being sent to juvenile hall after accidentally punching Principal Skinner when she was attempting to punch Francine . " Bye Bye Nerdie " was the first The Simpsons episode directed by Lauren MacMullan , who also made the design for Francine . Actress and comedian Kathy Griffin guest starred in the episode as this new bully character . 
 " Bye Bye Nerdie " has received generally positive reviews from critics and it was listed among " The Top Ten science moments in The Simpsons " by the editorial staff of Nature . Around 8 @.@ 8 million American homes tuned in to watch the episode during its original airing , and in 2009 it was released on DVD along with the rest of the episodes of the twelfth season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On an ordinary day at Springfield Elementary , Lisa attempts to make friends with a new girl , Francine ( who is much larger and tougher than Lisa ) , but Francine beats up Lisa severely . Even attempting to share an interest in Malibu Stacy does not work since the doll that Francine has turns out to be Lisa 's , which she then ruins . Lisa attempts to hire the school bullies ( Nelson , Dolph , Jimbo , and Kearney ) to protect her , but they refuse since girls fight dirtier than boys ( and boys tend to be more vulnerable to falling in love ) . It is up to Lisa to investigate by herself the reason why Francine is targeting her . 
 Meanwhile , Homer starts to fear that Maggie could die from touching things unsafe to her when he hears this from a childproofing saleswoman . As a result , he starts his own childproofing crusade , selling cheap but safe and effective products and making Springfield safe for children . However , this causes the baby @-@ injury @-@ related business in Springfield to go in decline . Homer feels bad for making people such as pediatricians lose their jobs and thus he ends his childproofing career . 
 Lisa does scientific research on nerds and discovers that the odor of the chemical nerd pheromone " poindextrose " attracts bullies like Francine , proving that both nerds and bullies are predisposed to be what they are . Lisa then tests the poindextrose extracted from the nerds on famous boxer Drederick Tatum by putting it on his clothes when he visits the school . This causes Nelson to start punching Tatum uncontrollably and give him a wedgie . Lisa demonstrates her experiment at Professor Frink 's science conference , the " 12th Annual Big Science Thing " , using an antidote on herself and making Francine peaceful and friendly towards her , the antidote being just salad dressing which covers up the smell of the poindextrose . The audience is impressed and Lisa is awarded a gift certificate from J. C. Penney for her research . However , the salad dressing soon runs out and Francine goes on a rampage beating up all the scientists in the room . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was produced as part of the twelfth season of The Simpsons ( 2000 – 01 ) and was written by writing partners John Frink and Don Payne . " Bye Bye Nerdie " was the first episode of the show directed by Lauren MacMullan , who joined the staff of The Simpsons following the cancellation of the short @-@ lived television series Mission Hill , which was created by former Simpsons writers and executive producers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein on which she worked as a supervising director and designer . American actress and stand @-@ up comedian Kathy Griffin guest starred in the episode as the bully Francine . MacMullan designed this new character herself and tried to make her seem like a professional bully by having her carry her lunch box with her all the time like a briefcase . 
 " Bye Bye Nerdie " was initially titled " Lisa the Bully " because the original idea for the episode , which the writers first pitched , saw Lisa becoming so fed up with Francine 's behavior that she attempted to punch Francine . However , she would miss and accidentally punch Principal Skinner instead , resulting in her being sent to juvenile hall where she would make illegal jeans . According to The Simpsons show runner Mike Scully , when the staff members worked on the episode they decided to include a lot of observations they had made about how it is like to be the new student in school . Scully has said that the episode shows how in real life the " poor new kid always has kind of two strikes against them just for being the new kid , and the other students are usually looking for anything that they perceive as different or weird about that kid . " 
 The subplot of Homer entering the childproofing business was inspired by an instance when a salesman visited Payne and his pregnant wife to see if their home was safe for children . In an interview with Star @-@ News , Payne commented : " You hire this person to come into your home to look for changes you can make . They make you feel like the most horrible person in the world and that your house is the temple of doom . " " Bye Bye Nerdie " features a scene based specifically on this instance in which a saleswoman ( voiced by cast member Tress MacNeille ) selling childproofing items visits Homer and Marge and exaggerates the dangers in their home . NRBQ 's song " Always Safety First " is played during a montage in the episode in which Homer is seen improving the safety of the infants of Springfield . 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 11 , 2001 . During this broadcast , it was watched in approximately 8 @.@ 8 million households . It received an 8 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating , ranking twenty @-@ sixth in the ratings for the week of March 5 – 11 , 2001 . The episode was seen by a fourteen percent share of the television audience during the broadcast . On August 18 , 2009 , " Bye Bye Nerdie " was released on DVD as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Twelfth Season . Staff members Mike Scully , Don Payne , Lauren MacMullan , Tim Long , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Matt Selman , Tom Gammill , Yeardley Smith , and Steven Dean Moore participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . Deleted scenes from the episode were also featured on the box set . 
 Critics have given " Bye Bye Nerdie " generally positive reviews . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented that " While this isn ’ t saying much , ' Nerdie ' provides one of Season 12 ’ s better shows . Both plots work well , though I prefer the childproofing side of things ; it peters out at the end , but it has some good bits . The episode keeps us interested and entertained . " Mac McEntire of DVD Verdict cited the scene in which the children imagine what kind of person the new student is as the greatest moment in the episode . 
 In the July 26 , 2007 issue of Nature , the scientific journal 's editorial staff listed " Bye Bye Nerdie " among " The Top Ten science moments in The Simpsons " , writing : " Lisa isolates the element in nerd sweat that makes them irresistible targets for bullies . She presents her data at a conference with luminaries including former surgeon general C. Everett Koop , a scene in which we find the true purpose of a science pole . " At the conference , Professor Frink gets the attention of the audience by shouting " Pi is exactly three ! " , making everyone gasp . This scene and the episode as a whole has been used by mathematicians Sarah J. Greenwald of Appalachian State University and Andrew <unk> of Santa Monica College in mathematics classes to teach students about the number pi ( π ) . 
 = Indiana World War Memorial Plaza = 
 The Indiana World War Memorial Plaza is an urban feature located in Indianapolis , Indiana , United States , originally built to honor the veterans of World War I. The five @-@ city @-@ block plaza was conceived in 1919 as a location for the national headquarters of the American Legion and a memorial to the state 's and nation 's veterans . At the north end of the plaza is the American Legion Mall , which is the site of the administration buildings of the Legion , as well as a memorial cenotaph . South of that is the Veterans Memorial Plaza with its obelisk . 
 The centerpiece of the plaza is the Indiana World War Memorial , modeled after the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus . Within is a military museum , the Shrine Room , and an auditorium . At the south end is University Park , the oldest part of the plaza , filled with statues and a fountain . On October 11 , 1994 , the Indiana World War Memorial Plaza was designated a National Historic Landmark District . 
 = = History = = 
 The origins of the Indiana World War Memorial Plaza lay in a 1919 attempt by the city of Indianapolis to lure the newly formed American Legion from its temporary headquarters in New York City . The American Legion , chartered by Congress in 1919 after World War I , is an organization of veterans that sponsors youth programs , promotes patriotism and national security , and provides commitment to Americans who have served in the armed forces . Three Indianapolis veterans wanted to attract the Legion to the city , which already had the Soldiers ' and Sailors ' Monument . At an American Legion national convention in Minneapolis during November 1919 , cities sent representatives to lobby to become the new headquarters . Indianapolis drew support because of its central location within the United States and the city 's shows of patriotism . Although Washington , D.C. received the most votes on the first ballot , Indianapolis gained a majority and won the second with 361 votes out of 684 cast . 
 The city and state then had to provide a location , and one of the promises the city made was to erect a fitting memorial to those who served in World War I. Thus , in January 1920 a public library , St. Clair Park , University Park , and two occupied city blocks were designated as the site for the plaza , with one new building for the American Legion to use as their national headquarters , various public buildings , and a war memorial . The Indiana War Memorial Bill was passed in July 1920 and appropriated $ 2 million for construction and land . Work began in 1921 . The city and state reached an agreement whereby the city would pay for the site and maintenance costs , while the State of Indiana would pay for the memorial 's construction . The Plaza was dedicated by the Legion in November 1921 with the laying of a cornerstone from the bridge over the River Marne at Château @-@ Thierry . 
 Various architects were invited by an appointed War Memorial Board to submit designs for a memorial intended to honor all who fought in World War I and also to provide meeting places , archives , and offices for the American Legion . The partnership of Walker and Weeks of Cleveland , Ohio was chosen in 1923 . Their plan consisted of a main memorial and two auxiliary buildings , an obelisk , a mall , and a cenotaph . Bids for the American Legion building , one of the two auxiliary buildings , were put out in 1925 and construction by the Craig @-@ Curtiss Company began the same year . In style the structure complimented the nearby local library . The second auxiliary building was not constructed until 1950 . When Congress authorized the payment of WWI veterans ' bonuses in 1936 , the state of Indiana used the money for construction of the memorial plaza , rather than paying it to the veterans . The Neoclassical design incorporated the existing library , federal building , and University Park . One additional building was planned but never built . 
 The War Memorial and the parks in the plaza are an example of the City Beautiful movement , which supported classical , uniform , and beautiful public architecture . The plaza covers a five @-@ block strip north of Monument Circle between St. Clair , Pennsylvania , New York , and Meridian Streets . In 1989 , the plaza was listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and it was named a National Historic Landmark District in 1994 . The Historic District includes the plaza as well as the Indianapolis Public Library , immediately north of the plaza , and the Birch Bayh Federal Building & U.S. Courthouse , immediately south . The Scottish Rite Cathedral is across the street on the west side of the plaza , and the Minton @-@ Capehart Federal Building is across the street on the east side . 
 The Indiana World War Memorial Plaza is a popular location for celebrations , including the Fourth of July festival , Veterans Day , and Memorial Day services . The Chase Tower , located three blocks directly south of the Memorial building , has a roof with a design similar to the Memorial 's . 
 = = American Legion Mall = = 
 The two auxiliary buildings on the plaza are used by the American Legion . Both buildings were constructed from Indiana limestone in neoclassical style , similar to the public library just to the north . The east building at Meridian and St. Clair , designated building B on the original plan , houses the Indiana Department of the American Legion , the American Legion Auxiliary , and the National Forty and Eight . The four @-@ story building served as the national headquarters until the second building was completed . 
 The larger west building at Pennsylvania and St. Clair , building C , serves as the Legion 's national headquarters . The headquarters deals with the mail , archives , and other internal administrative functions of the Legion ; the lobbying efforts of the Legion are based in its Washington , D.C. office . Its two wings each mirror building B and are joined by a recessed central entrance . 
 Three semi @-@ circular granite memorials list the names of the Hoosiers killed in World War II , the Korean War , and the Vietnam War . 
 = = = Cenotaph Square = = = 
 Cenotaph Square is located between the two auxiliary buildings used by the American Legion . It is in a sunken garden with the rectangular black granite cenotaph centered in it resting upon a base of red and dark green granite . Four shafts of black granite , with gold eagles surmounted on them , mark the corners of the square . The inscription on the north face of the cenotaph memorializes James Bethel Gresham , a Hoosier who was the first member of the American Expeditionary Force to be killed in action in World War I. A native of Evansville , he was a corporal in the 16th Infantry Regiment and was killed at <unk> , France on November 3 , 1917 . The inscription on the south side says " A tribute by Indiana to the hallowed memory of the glorious dead who served in the World War . " 
 = = Veterans Memorial Plaza = = 
 The Veterans Memorial Plaza , also called Obelisk Square , has an obelisk and fountain and is located on the plaza south of the Mall . The 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) black granite obelisk was built in 1923 , and the square was completed in 1930 . Near the base of the obelisk are 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) -by @-@ 8 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) panels placed in 1929 representing law , science , religion , and education intended to represent the fundamentals of the nation . The obelisk rises from a 100 @-@ foot @-@ diameter ( 30 m ) , two @-@ level fountain made of pink Georgia marble and terrazzo . The fountain has two basins , spray rings , and multicolored lights . On the east and west sides fly the flags of the fifty states , which were installed in 1976 for the US Bicentennial . They were replaced with the flags of countries of the Americas during the 1987 Pan American Games . The square was originally paved with asphalt , but it was landscaped with grass and trees in 1975 . 
 = = The War Memorial = = 
 Architects Walker and Weeks planned the Indiana World War Memorial Building as the plaza 's centerpiece , sitting between the federal building and the public library . Work on the actual memorial to the veterans of World War I began in early 1926 . Five of the seven buildings located on the site had to be demolished before the construction commenced ; the other two , Second Presbyterian Church and First Baptist Church , were not demolished until 1960 . General John Pershing laid the cornerstone of the memorial on July 4 , 1927 , saying he was " consecrating the edifice as a patriotic shrine " . Funding problems in 1928 slowed the building of the interior . Even a new contractor in 1931 and $ 195 @,@ 000 provided by the Public Works Administration in 1936 did little to speed the process of completing the structure . Although its interior was incomplete , it was dedicated on November 11 , 1933 ( Veterans Day ) by Governor Paul McNutt and Lt. Gen. Hugh Drum , Deputy Chief of Staff of the United States Army . In 1949 a local newspaper reported that the memorial was already deteriorating , its limestone scaling , paint peeling , leaks forming , and plaster cracking ; further reports were published in 1961 . Despite proposals to develop the area instead of completing it as originally planned , the memorial and surrounding landscaping were finally completed in 1965 . 
 The memorial 's design is based upon the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus , which was one of the Seven Wonders of the World . At 210 feet ( 64 m ) tall it is approximately 75 feet ( 23 m ) taller than the original Mausoleum . The blue lights which shine between columns on the side of the War Memorial make the monument easily recognizable . It is the most imposing neoclassical structure in Indianapolis due to its scale and size . 
 The cubical structure is clad in unrelieved ashlar Indiana limestone on a high , lightly rusticated base , and is topped with a low pyramidal roof that sheathes its interior dome . It stands on a raised terrace approached by a wide monumental staircase . The structure has four identical faces . On each face an Ionic screen of six columns , behind which are tall banks of windows , and is surmounted by symbolic standing figures designed by Henry Hering : Courage , Memory , Peace , Victory , Liberty , and Patriotism . The sculptures are repeated on each façade . On the south side , standing on a pink granite base in the center of the grand access stairs , is Hering 's colossal exultant male nude bronze Pro Patria ( 1929 ) ; it is 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) high , weighs seven tons , and was the largest cast bronze sculpture in the United States . 
 The north and south entrances are guarded by shield @-@ bearing limestone lions , and on each corner of the terrace sits an urn . The pyramidal roof is stepped and has a lantern on top . Above the tall bronze doors on each side is the inscription " To vindicate the principles of peace and justice in the world . " On the north side is the building 's main inscription : 
 = = = Indiana World War Memorial Military Museum = = = 
 The main entrance of the Indiana War Memorial Museum is on the north façade , which opens into a large hall with Tennessee marble floors and Art Deco Egyptian themes . The museum is housed mainly on the lower level of the monument and honors the efforts of Hoosier soldiers in a timeline from the American Revolutionary War to modern conflicts . World War I and World War II are featured most prominently . Aside from firearms , it features a Cobra helicopter , and the USS Indiana 's commission plate . There are over 400 military flags housed in the museum , more than 300 of which are from the American Civil War . Indiana 's Liberty Bell replica is located near the main entrance . It is of the kind given to each state by the federal government in 1950 to encourage the purchase of savings bonds . 
 Additional museum exhibits are displayed on the main level of the monument . An exhibit replicating the radio room of the USS Indianapolis includes original equipment from World War II was opened on November 7 , 2009 . The Grand Foyer main level features the 500 @-@ seat Pershing Auditorium , built and decorated with materials donated from several states and World War I allies . The memorial also has three meeting rooms on the main level ; these rooms were originally named in honor of General George Patton , General Douglas MacArthur , and Admiral Chester Nimitz . In 2009 , the rooms were renamed in honor of Hoosier veterans : Admiral Raymond A. Spruance , General David M. Shoup , and Major Samuel <unk> . 
 Above the main level is the Shrine Room , nearly a vertical double cube , 110 ft ( 34 m ) high and 60 ft ( 18 m ) on a side , clad in materials collected from all the allied nations of World War I. Accessed by two staircases from the Grand Foyer , the Shrine Room Stairway 's American <unk> marble walls bear the names of all Hoosiers who fought in World War I. On the east and west sides are paintings by Walter Brough of the leading soldiers of France , America , Great Britain , Belgium , Italy , and Serbia . Surrounding the room are sculptor Frank <unk> 's marble frieze depicting events of World War I. At the center of the space , beneath a giant hanging 17 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) -by @-@ 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) American flag , is the Altar of Consecration , flanked at the corners with cauldrons on tripod stands . Above the flag is the Star of Destiny , made of Swedish crystal , representing the future of the nation . 
 = = University Park = = 
 University Park occupies the southernmost block of the plaza . It was originally intended to serve as the site of a state university , but this never occurred . Instead , it was the site of churches , a high school , and a training ground for Union soldiers during the American Civil War . In 1876 it was transformed into a city park . Surrounding the square are statues of prominent Hoosiers . Benjamin Harrison 's statue is on the south side , designed by Henry Bacon and Charles Niehaus ; seated Abraham Lincoln is in the southeast corner , designed by Henry Hering in 1934 ; and Schuyler Colfax is on the east side , designed by Lorado Taft in 1887 . There are also sculptures of Pan and the nymph Syrinx designed by Myra Reynolds Richards in 1923 . University Park was redesigned in 1914 by George Kessler for the park and boulevard system he had developed for Indianapolis , which included a fountain at the center . Street lamps on the walkways have acorn globes and fluted shafts , and two of them decorated with lions ' heads stand on the backs of metal turtles . 
 = = = The Depew Memorial Fountain = = = 
 The Depew Memorial Fountain is a free standing fountain completed in 1919 . It is composed of multiple bronze figures arranged on a five @-@ tier granite stone base with three basins . The bronze sculptures depict fish , eight children dancing , and a woman on the topmost tier dancing and playing cymbals . The dimensions are approximately 25 x 45 x 45 feet ( 14 m ) . 
 The fountain was commissioned in memory of Dr. Richard J. Depew by his wife , Emma Ely , following Dr. Depew 's death in 1887 . When Mrs. Depew died in 1913 , she had bequeathed $ 50 @,@ 000 from her estate to the city of Indianapolis for the erection of a fountain in memory of her husband " in some park or public place where all classes of people may enjoy it . " The original design was created by Karl Bitter , who was killed in a traffic accident in 1915 before the work could be finished . Following Bitter 's overall design , Alexander Stirling Calder created the bronze figures and the fountain . Architect Henry Bacon designed the fountain 's setting . 
 A memorial plaque on south side of the large granite basin reads " Depew Memorial Fountain . A gift to Indianapolis from Emma Ely Depew in memory of her husband Richard Johnson Depew M.D. whose long and honorable life was spent in untiring service to his fellow men . " 
 = Charlemagne @-@ class battleship = 
 The Charlemagne class was a class of three pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the French Navy in the 1890s . The ships spent most of their careers assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron ( Escadre de la Méditerranée ) . They had oddly eventful peacetime careers as they were involved in four accidental collisions between them , one of which sank a French submarine with all hands . Saint Louis was usually a fleet flagship during her career and Charlemagne twice participated in the occupation of the port of Mytilene on the island of Lesbos — then owned by the Ottoman Empire — once as part of a French expedition and another as part of an international squadron . 
 During World War I , they were initially used to escort Allied troop convoys in the Mediterranean . All three ships were ordered to the Dardanelles in November 1914 to guard against a sortie into the Mediterranean by the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben . Charlemagne and Gaulois joined British ships in bombarding Turkish fortifications in early 1915 while Saint Louis was briefly assigned to bombard Turkish positions in Palestine and the Sinai Peninsula . Gaulois was badly damaged by a Turkish shell during one of these bombardments and had to beach herself to avoid sinking . She later returned to the Dardanelles and rejoined her sisters , providing fire support during the Gallipoli Campaign until the Allies evacuated their troops . Saint Louis and Charlemagne were transferred to the squadron assigned to prevent any interference by the Greeks with Allied operations on the Salonica front in 1916 and Gaulois was en route to join them when she was sunk by a German submarine later that year . 
 The two surviving ships were placed in reserve during 1917 . Charlemagne was decommissioned later in 1917 and sold for scrap in 1923 . Saint Louis briefly became a training ship in 1919 – 20 and was then converted to serve as an accommodation hulk in 1920 . She was not sold until 1933 , although she was listed for disposal in 1931 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Charlemagne @-@ class battleships were 117 @.@ 7 metres ( 386 ft 2 in ) long overall and had a beam of 20 @.@ 3 metres ( 66 ft 7 in ) . At deep load , they had a draught of 7 @.@ 4 metres ( 24 ft 3 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 4 metres ( 27 ft 7 in ) aft . They displaced 11 @,@ 275 metric tons ( 11 @,@ 097 long tons ) at deep load . Their crew generally consisted of 727 officers and enlisted men as a private ship , or 41 officers and 744 men as a fleet flagship . 
 The Charlemagne @-@ class ships did not function well in a head sea . Stormy weather in the Bay of Biscay in 1900 caused the captain of Gaulois to complain that the ship 's forward gun turret and casemates were flooded out and that the ship generated enormous sheets of spray when water came over the bow . Like most French capital ships of the period , they had pronounced tumblehome . Gaulois 's captain also said that his ship was a steady gunnery platform and manoeuvered well in tight spaces but he criticized the armour layout as not high enough to prevent munitions from penetrating above the main armour belt and detonating below the secondary armament positions . 
 The ships used three 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines , each engine driving a 4 @.@ 3 @-@ metre ( 14 ft ) propeller . Rated at 14 @,@ 500 PS ( 10 @,@ 700 kW ) , they produced between 14 @,@ 220 – 15 @,@ 295 metric horsepower ( 10 @,@ 459 – 11 @,@ 249 kW ) during their sea trials using steam generated by 20 Belleville water @-@ tube boilers . The boilers had a maximum operating pressure of 17 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 667 kPa ; 242 psi ) . The ships reached top speeds of 18 @.@ 024 to 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 33 @.@ 380 to 34 @.@ 262 km / h ; 20 @.@ 742 to 21 @.@ 289 mph ) on their trials . They carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 050 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 030 long tons ) of coal which allowed them to steam for 4 @,@ 200 miles ( 3 @,@ 600 nmi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The <unk> carried their main armament of four 40 @-@ calibre Canon de 305 mm Modèle 1893 guns in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . These were the first twin 305 mm gun turrets to be used by the French Navy . They were rotated by electric motors , but the guns were hand @-@ cranked to elevate and depress . This ranged from -5 ° to + 15 ° and the guns were loaded at full depression . The turrets had a ready rack holding 10 shells before they needed to reload from the magazine . The guns fired 349 @.@ 4 @-@ kilogram ( 770 lb ) armour @-@ piercing projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 815 m / s ( 2 @,@ 670 ft / s ) at a theoretical rate of one round every 1 @.@ 3 minutes . At maximum elevation , this provided a range of 12 @,@ 900 metres ( 14 @,@ 100 yd ) . The guns were provided with 45 shells each . 
 The ships ' secondary armament consisted of ten 45 @-@ calibre Canon de 138 mm Modèle 1893 guns , eight of which were mounted in individual casemates and the remaining pair in shielded mounts on the forecastle deck amidships . The guns had an elevation range between -5 ° 30 " and + 19 ° 30 " . They fired four 35 @-@ kilogram ( 77 lb ) armour @-@ piercing shells per minute at a muzzle velocity of 730 m / s ( 2 @,@ 400 ft / s ) . This gave them a range of 11 @,@ 000 metres ( 12 @,@ 000 yd ) at maximum elevation . The ships carried a total of <unk> rounds for these guns . 
 They also carried eight 45 @-@ calibre Canon de 100 mm Modèle 1893 guns in shielded mounts on the superstructure . These guns could elevate from -10 ° to + 20 ° and they fired a 16 @-@ kilogram ( 35 lb ) shell at a rate of five rounds per minute . With a muzzle velocity of 710 m / s ( 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ) , they had a range of 10 @,@ 000 metres ( 11 @,@ 000 yd ) at maximum elevation . A total of 2288 rounds , or 286 rounds per gun , was carried for them in each ship . Their anti @-@ torpedo boat defences consisted of twenty 40 @-@ calibre Canon de 47 mm Modèle 1885 Hotchkiss guns , fitted in platforms on both masts , on the superstructure , and in casemates in the hull . These guns could depress to <unk> ° and elevate to + 24 ° They fired 1 @.@ 5 @-@ kilogram ( 3 @.@ 3 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 650 m / s ( 2 @,@ 100 ft / s ) at a rate of 12 rounds every minute . They had a maximum range of 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 4 @,@ 400 yd ) and were provided with a total of 10 @,@ 500 rounds . 
 The Charlemagne class mounted four 450 @-@ millimetre ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside . Two of these were submerged , angled 20 ° from the ship 's axis , and the other two were above the waterline . They were provided with a total of twelve Modèle 1892 torpedoes . These torpedoes had a 75 @-@ kilogram ( 165 lb ) warhead and a maximum range of 800 metres ( 870 yd ) at a speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Beginning about 1906 , the above @-@ water torpedo tubes were removed from each ship . As was common with ships of their generation , they were built with a plough @-@ shaped ram . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The Charlemagne @-@ class ships carried a total of 820 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 807 @.@ 7 long tons ) of Harvey armour . They had a complete waterline armour belt that was 3 @.@ 26 metres ( 10 ft 8 in ) high . The armour belt tapered from its maximum thickness of 400 mm ( 15 @.@ 7 in ) to a thickness of 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) at its lower edge . The armoured deck was 55 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) thick on the flat and was reinforced with an additional 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) plate where it angled downwards to meet the armoured belt . The main turrets were protected by 320 mm ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) of armour and their roofs were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . Their barbettes were 270 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The outer walls of the casemates for the 138 @.@ 6 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 46 in ) guns were 55 mm thick and they were protected by transverse bulkheads 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The conning tower walls were 326 mm ( 12 @.@ 8 in ) thick and its roof consisted of 50 mm armour plates . Its communications tube was protected by armour plates 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Careers = = 
 Charlemagne , the first ship completed , was initially assigned to the Northern Squadron ( escadre du Nord ) , but all three ships were assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron during 1900 . Saint Louis became the flagship of the squadron almost as soon as she reached Toulon and all three participated in a number of port visits and naval reviews . Shortly after her arrival in Toulon , Gaulois accidentally rammed the destroyer Hallebarde and later rammed the battleship Bouvet in 1903 , none of the ships involved were seriously damaged . In 1901 , Gaulois and Charlemagne participated in the occupation of Mytilene in an effort for force the Turkish Sultan , Abdul Hamid II , to enforce contracts made with French companies and to repay loans made by French banks . Charlemagne was the French contribution to an international squadron that briefly occupied Mytilene in November – December 1905 for much the same purposes . Together with the battleships Iéna and Bouvet , Gaulois aided survivors of the April 1906 eruption of Mount Vesuvius in Naples . 
 All three ships were transferred to the Northern Squadron in 1909 – 10 and Saint Louis was accidentally rammed by the destroyer Poignard during manoeuvers off Hyères in 1911 . Repairs were combined with a major refit later in the year . She accidentally rammed the submarine Vendémiaire on 8 June 1912 off the Casquets , killing all 24 of the submarine 's crew . Her sisters received their refits during 1912 – 13 . All three ships were transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet after their refits , although their exact assignments differed . Saint Louis became a divisional flagship and Charlemagne was assigned to the Training Division . The Navy intended to assign Gaulois to the Training Division in October 1914 , but the war intervened . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Together with the older French pre @-@ dreadnoughts , the trio escorted Allied troop convoys through the Mediterranean for the first several months of the war . All three ships were ordered to Tenedos Island , not far from the Gallipoli Peninsula of Turkey , in November to guard against a sortie by the German battlecruiser Goeben . Gaulois became the temporary flagship of Rear Admiral ( contre @-@ amiral ) Émile Guépratte upon her arrival until the return of the battleship Suffren in January 1915 . Saint Louis became the flagship of the newly formed Syrian Squadron ( escadre de Syrie ) on 9 February . The squadron was intended to attack Turkish positions and lines of communication in Syria , Lebanon , Palestine and the Sinai Peninsula . Saint Louis participated in the bombardment of Gaza and El Arish in April before she was transferred back to the Dardanelles in May . 
 During the bombardment of 19 February , Gaulois bombarded Turkish forts covering the mouth of the Dardanelles , although Charlemagne did not participate that day . During the day 's action , the ship was hit twice , but was only lightly damaged . The two ships traded positions during the bombardment of 25 February , although Charlemagne was not damaged . On 2 March , the French squadron bombarded targets in the Gulf of Saros , at the base of the Gallipoli Peninsula . Five days later , the French squadron attempted to suppress the Turkish guns while British battleships bombarded the fortifications . Gaulois was hit by one shell during this attack that failed to detonate . Admiral Guépratte and his squadron returned to the Gulf of Saros on 11 March where they again bombarded Turkish fortifications . 
 They returned to assist in the major attack on the fortifications planned for 18 March . British ships made the initial entry into the Dardanelles , but the French ships passed through them to engage the forts at closer range . Gaulois was hit twice during this bombardment , but only one shell did any significant damage . It hit just above the waterline on the starboard bow and pushed in the armour plates below the waterline and opened up a hole through which water flooded in . Little could be done to staunch the inflow and the ship 's captain decided to head for the Rabbit Islands , north of Tenedos , where he could beach his ship for temporary repairs . Escorted by Charlemagne in case she foundered en route , Gaulois managed to reach the islands . After temporary repairs , the ship was refloated and sailed for Toulon , escorted by Suffren . They encountered heavy weather en route and emergency repairs had to be made in the Bay of Navarin . She made Toulon without further incident where the ship was refitted and extensively modified to improve her stability , returning to the Dardanelles in July . 
 Charlemagne was less severely damaged and was repaired at Bizerte , returning to the Dardanelles in May . Saint Louis arrived that same month and both ships provided fire support for French troops ashore . Charlemagne was transferred to Salonica in October 1915 where she joined the French squadron assigned to prevent any interference by the Greeks with Allied operations in Greece . Saint Louis departed for a refit in Lorient that same month and relieved Charlemagne at Salonica in May 1916 so the latter could be refitted in Bizerte . Gaulois remained at the Dardanelles until August , covering the evacuation of Allied troops from Gallipoli at the end of 1915 , when she started a refit at Brest . 
 Saint Louis became flagship of the Eastern Naval Division ( division navale d 'Orient ) in October 1916 until she was transferred to Bizerte in February 1917 . Charlemagne returned to Salonica in August 1916 and remained there until ordered to Toulon in August 1917 . Gaulois was en route to Salonica after the completion of her refit in December and was sunk on 27 December 1916 by the German U @-@ boat UB @-@ 47 . Four crewmen were killed , but the rest of the crew was rescued by her escorts . Both of her sisters were placed in reserve upon their arrivals in Bizerte and Toulon . Charlemagne was disarmed on 1 November 1917 , condemned on 21 June 1920 and later sold for scrap in 1923 . Saint Louis was transferred to Toulon in January 1919 and was disarmed and decommissioned the following month . She became a training ship for stokers and engineers that same month . The ship was condemned in June 1920 , although she was converted into an accommodation hulk . Saint Louis listed for disposal in 1931 , but was not sold until 1933 . 
 = Pamela C. Rasmussen = 
 Pamela Cecile Rasmussen ( born October 16 , 1959 ) is a prominent American ornithologist and expert on Asian birds . She was formerly a research associate at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington D.C. , and is based at the Michigan State University . She is associated with other major centers of research in the United States and the United Kingdom . 
 Rasmussen 's early research investigated South American seabirds and fossil birds from North America . She later specialised in Asian birds describing several new species and clarifying the status of others , particularly white @-@ eyes and owls . More recently , she has been involved in large scale collaborations looking at patterns of global biodiversity , and has assessed the taxonomic status of South Asian vultures . 
 She was the main author of Birds of South Asia : The Ripley Guide , a landmark publication due to its greater geographical and species coverage compared to its predecessors . As a result of her study of museum bird specimens when researching for the book , she was instrumental in unveiling the extent of the theft from museums and fraudulent documentation perpetrated by eminent British ornithologist Richard Meinertzhagen . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Rasmussen is the daughter of Helen Rasmussen , a Seventh @-@ Day Adventist , whose husband , Chester Murray Rasmussen , a doctor , had left the family when Pamela and her sisters were young . Her interest in birds started when her mother bought her the junior edition of Oliver Austin 's Birds of the World , and Pamela subsequently always chose to receive bird books as presents . 
 She took her M.S. in 1983 at Walla Walla University , an Adventist @-@ affiliated university in southeast Washington , and her Ph.D. at the University of Kansas in 1990 , where she studied blue @-@ eyed shags , and was introduced to evolutionary theory , which had not been taught at her alma mater . 
 Rasmussen is a visiting assistant professor of zoology , and assistant museum curator of mammalogy and ornithology , at Michigan State University , having formerly been a research associate for the eminent American ornithologist S. Dillon Ripley at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington D.C. She is a member of the American Ornithologists Union ( AOU ) Committee on Classification and Nomenclature , a scientific associate with the bird group of the British Natural History Museum zoology section at Tring , and an associate editor of The Ibis , the scientific journal of the British Ornithologists ' Union . Pamela Rasmussen is married to Dr Michael D. Gottfried , who is Curator of Paleontology , Associate Professor of Geology , and Director of the Center for Integrative Studies in General Science at MSU . 
 = = = Research highlights = = = 
 = = = = South American seabirds = = = = 
 Rasmussen ’ s early work was largely focused on studies of the systematics , ecology and behaviour of Patagonian seabirds , notably cormorants . She studied plumage variations in juvenile blue @-@ eyed , king and red @-@ legged shags , and used plumage and behavioural patterns to establish relationships between king and blue @-@ eyed shags . She also reviewed the fishing activity of olivaceous cormorants . 
 = = = = Asian birds = = = = 
 Rasmussen described four new Asian bird species from her study of museum specimens . The Nicobar scops owl Otus <unk> , the <unk> scops owl Otus <unk> , and the cinnabar hawk owl Ninox <unk> , a Sulawesi endemic , all in 1998 , and the Taiwan bush @-@ warbler <unk> <unk> in 2000 . She rediscovered the forest owlet Athene <unk> , which had not been seen since 1884 , in western India , previous searches by S. Dillon Ripley , Salim Ali and others having failed because they relied on fake documentation from Richard Meinertzhagen . In November 1997 , Rasmussen and Ben King of the American Museum of Natural History spent ten days unsuccessfully searching two east Indian locations before driving west to the site of another old specimen , where King spotted a small , chunky owl with short , heavily white @-@ feathered legs and huge claws , which Rasmussen confirmed as the target species whilst the owl was videotaped and photographed . 
 With her colleagues , she clarified the taxonomy of Indonesian white @-@ eyes , establishing the specific status of the <unk> white @-@ eye Zosterops <unk> and the Seram white @-@ eye Z. <unk> and confirmed the identity of the <unk> scops owl which had originally been discovered in Sri Lanka by local ornithologist <unk> <unk> . 
 The imperial pheasant is a rare bird found in the forests of Vietnam and Laos . Rasmussen and her co @-@ workers used morphology , hybridisation experiments , and DNA analysis to show that this pheasant , previously thought critically endangered , is actually a naturally occurring hybrid between the Vietnamese pheasant <unk> <unk> and the subspecies <unk> of the silver pheasant L. <unk> . 
 A 2008 paper saw a return to white @-@ eye taxonomy with the formal description of the Togian white @-@ eye Zosterops <unk> , an endemic species of the Togian Islands of Indonesia , which , unlike most of its relatives , lacks the white ring around the eye which give this group of birds its name . Rasmussen noted that the Togian white @-@ eye is distinctive not only in its appearance , but also in its lilting song , which sounds higher pitched and is less varied in frequency than the songs of its close relatives . 
 Pamela Rasmussen ’ s interest in Asian birds led to her involvement in more specifically conservation @-@ directed projects . Two Gyps vultures , the Indian white @-@ rumped vulture , Gyps bengalensis , and the " long @-@ billed vulture " suffered a 99 percent population decrease in South Asia due to poisoning by diclofenac , a veterinary drug that causes kidney failure in birds that have eaten the carcasses of treated cattle . Rasmussen showed that there are two distinct species of long @-@ billed vulture : the Indian vulture G. indicus and slender @-@ billed vulture G. tenuirostris . This is important to conservation , since a captive @-@ breeding program has been established to assist the recovery of at @-@ risk vulture species . 
 = = = = Biodiversity = = = = 
 In 2005 , Rasmussen was part of a large multi @-@ institutional collaboration investigating biodiversity hotspots , which have a prominent role in conservation . The study assessed locations quantitatively for three criteria of bird diversity – species richness , the level of threat , and the number of endemism species . The results demonstrated that hotspots did not show the same geographical distribution for each factor . Only 2 @.@ 5 % of hotspot areas are common to all three aspects of diversity , with over 80 % of hotspots registering on only one criterion . Each criterion explained less than 24 % of the variation in the other factors , suggesting that even within a single taxonomic class , different mechanisms are responsible for the origin and maintenance of various aspects of diversity . Consequently , the different types of hotspots also vary greatly in their utility as conservation tools . 
 Rasmussen 's recent work has concentrated on further large @-@ scale collaborations with the same group of institutions studying global patterns in biodiversity . A survey of species richness and geographical range size did not show the decrease in range size from temperate regions to the tropics that had been previously assumed ; although that pattern was largely true in the northern hemisphere , it did not appear to apply in the southern hemisphere . Research evaluating the relationship between extinction and human impact showed that , after controlling for species richness , the best predictors of the global pattern of extinction risk are measures of human impact , with ecological factors being of secondary importance . An examination of the distribution of rare and threatened vertebrate species , showed differing patterns for bird , mammal and amphibian species , which has consequences for hotspot @-@ based conservation strategies . 
 Other studies by Rasmussen and her international colleagues looked at the importance of energy availability , and a 2007 paper showed that global patterns of spatial turnover are driven principally by widespread species rather than restricted ones . This complements other work , and helps to establish a unified model of how terrestrial biodiversity varies both within and between the Earth 's major land masses . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A fossil site at a borrow pit in near Cheswold , Delaware created during highway construction unearthed 11 specimens of fragmentary and <unk> avian fossils , which were identified by Rasmussen as including a small loon , a small gull @-@ like species and five specimens of a gannet @-@ like seabird , probably Morus <unk> , a common species in the Miocene . All of these forms were already known from a site in Chesapeake Bay , Maryland . The finds suggests that the Delaware site was the near @-@ shore area of a large bay at the time of deposition . 
 Rasmussen was also involved in a review of fossil birds from Miocene and Pliocene deposits in North Carolina . Finds included an early Miocene loon <unk> minutus , various ducks , a crested tern closely resembling the modern royal tern Sterna maxima , and a member of the crow genus , one of the few fossil passerine birds from that period . The review found that fossil birds from this period generally closely resemble a modern species or genus , and those that do not can usually be placed in a modern family with a fair degree of confidence . 
 = = = Birds of South Asia = = = 
 In 1992 , Rasmussen took the position of assistant to S. Dillon Ripley , the former secretary of the Smithsonian , who was planning to produce a definitive guide to the birds of South Asia . When he became ill shortly after beginning the project , Rasmussen took over the project , and with artist John C. Anderton , produced Birds of South Asia : The Ripley Guide , a two @-@ volume bird guide for the Indian subcontinent which was the first field guide for the area to include sonograms . Volume 1 contains the field guide with over 3400 illustrations in 180 plates , and more than 1450 colour maps . Volume 2 ( Attributes and Status ) gives specimen measurements , data about identification , status , distribution and habits . Vocalizations are described from recordings , and there are over 1000 <unk> . 
 1508 species that have occurred in India , Bangladesh , Pakistan , Nepal , Bhutan , Maldives , the Chagos archipelago and Afghanistan are covered , including 85 hypothetical and 67 ' possible ' species , which are given only short accounts . Notable aspects of Birds of South Asia are its distribution evidence @-@ base – the book 's authors based their distributional information almost completely on museum specimens – and its taxonomic approach , involving a large number of species @-@ level splits . Its geographical range was also greater than that of older works , notably in the inclusion of Afghanistan . 
 Many allopatric forms previously regarded as conspecific are treated by Rasmussen and Anderton as full species . Most of these had previously been proposed elsewhere , but the book introduced a number of innovations of its own . Experts on Asian birds , Nigel Collar and John Pilgrim , in 2008 analysed Rasmussen and Anderton 's proposed changes , indicating which had previously been proposed by other authors , and which were novel , and required further justification . 
 Although reviews in the birding and ornithological press have often been favourable , there have been criticisms . Peter Kennerley , author and Asian bird expert , considered that some of the illustrations are small and garish or technically inaccurate . He also believes that the over @-@ reliance on sometimes very old museum specimens and dismissal of the wealth of observational data filed by amateur travelling birders is a mistake , and states that many of the taxonomic decisions appear to be random choices , unsupported by published research . 
 Apart from the Meinertzhagen fraud , which is discussed in the next section , and the death of S. Dillon Ripley , other problems in the production of Birds of South Asia included the loss of the main map database during a trip to Burma , and poorly prepared specimen skins . There were also difficulties reconciling sources , delays in producing illustrations and maps , and in obtaining reliable data for " difficult " areas like Assam , Arunachal Pradesh , Bangladesh and Afghanistan . The Andaman and Nicobar Islands also presented serious challenges with regard to the status and taxonomy of their <unk> . 
 Rasmussen considered in a 2005 paper whether the revised taxonomy of the book , with its many species splits , had significant conservation implications , but felt that the effect on species richness in South Asia was limited , and would have only a moderate conservation impact , increasing the number of potentially threatened species in the region from 6 % of the total avifauna to about 7 % . 
 = = = The Meinertzhagen fraud = = = 
 Rasmussen revealed the true extent of the major fraud perpetrated by the eminent British soldier , ornithologist and expert on bird lice , Colonel Richard Meinertzhagen . Meinertzhagen , who died in 1967 , was the author of numerous taxonomic and other works on birds , and possessed a vast collection of bird and bird lice specimens ; he was considered to be one of Britain 's greatest ornithologists . However , British ornithologist Alan Knox had analysed Meinertzhagen 's bird collection at the Walter Rothschild Zoological Museum in Tring , UK in the early 1990s , and uncovered significant fraud involving theft of specimens from museums and falsification of the accompanying documentation . 
 When researching for Birds of South Asia , Rasmussen examined tens of thousands of bird specimens , since the late S. Dillon Ripley had strongly favoured the use of museum specimens to determine which birds to include . With Robert <unk> @-@ Jones of the Natural History Museum , she showed that the decades @-@ old Meinertzhagen fraud was far more extensive than first thought . Many of the 20 @,@ 000 bird specimens in his collection had been relabelled with regard to where they were collected , and sometimes also remounted . The false documentation delayed the rediscovery of the forest owlet , since previous searches had relied on <unk> 's faked records . Rasmussen 's successful expedition ignored these and looked in the areas identified by the remaining genuine specimens . 
 <unk> had been banned from the Natural History Museum 's Bird Room for 18 months for unauthorised removal of specimens , and suspicions that he was stealing specimens and library material were documented by staff for over 30 years , twice reaching the verge of prosecution . 
 <unk> records identified by Rasmussen and <unk> @-@ Jones included high @-@ altitude occurrences of coral @-@ billed scimitar @-@ babbler <unk> <unk> , out @-@ of @-@ range Kashmir flycatcher Ficedula <unk> and Himalayan winter records of ferruginous flycatcher Muscicapa ferruginea and large blue flycatcher <unk> magnirostris ( now hill blue @-@ flycatcher C. <unk> ) . However , some records such as those for Afghan <unk> <unk> <unk> , a species Meinertzhagen described , appear to be genuine . 
 = Grévy 's zebra = 
 The Grévy 's zebra ( Equus grevyi ) , also known as the imperial zebra , is the largest extant wild <unk> and the largest and most threatened of the three species of zebra , the other two being the plains zebra and the mountain zebra . Named after Jules Grévy , it is the sole extant member of the subgenus Dolichohippus . The Grévy 's zebra is found in Kenya and Ethiopia . Compared with other zebras , it is tall , has large ears , and its stripes are narrower . 
 The Grévy 's zebra lives in semi @-@ arid grasslands where it feeds on grasses , legumes , and browse ; it can survive up to five days without water . It differs from the other zebra species in that it does not live in harems and has few long @-@ lasting social bonds . Male territoriality and mother – foal relationships form the basis of the social system of the Grévy 's zebra . This zebra is considered to be endangered . Its population has declined from 15 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 since the 1970s . However , as of 2008 , the population is stable . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The Grévy 's zebra was first described by French naturalist Émile Oustalet in 1882 . He named it after Jules Grévy , then president of France , who , in the 1880s , was given one by the government of Abyssinia . Traditionally , this species was classified in the subgenus Dolichohippus with plains zebra and mountain zebra in Hippotigris . Fossils of zebra @-@ like equids have been found throughout Africa and Asia in the Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits . Notable examples include E. <unk> from China , E. cautleyi from India , E. <unk> from central Asia and E. <unk> from East Africa . The latter , in particular is very similar to the Grévy 's zebra and may have been its ancestor . The modern Grévy 's zebra arose in the early Pleistocene . Zebras appear to be a monophyletic linage and recent ( 2013 ) phylogenies have placed Grevy 's zebra in a sister taxon with the plains zebra . In areas where Grévy 's zebras are sympatric with plains zebras , the two may gather in same herds and fertile hybrids do occur . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Grévy 's zebra is the largest of all wild equines . It is 2 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 75 m ( 8 @.@ 2 – 9 @.@ 0 ft ) from head to tail with a 55 – 75 cm ( 22 – 30 in ) tail , and stands 1 @.@ 45 – 1 @.@ 6 m ( 4 @.@ 8 – 5 @.@ 2 ft ) high at the shoulder . These zebras weigh 350 – 450 kg ( 770 – 990 lb ) . Grévy 's zebra differs from the other two zebras in its more primitive characteristics . It is particularly mule @-@ like in appearance ; the head is large , long , and narrow with elongated nostril openings ; the ears are very large , rounded , and conical and the neck is short but thick . The zebra 's muzzle is ash @-@ grey to black in colour with the lips having whiskers . The mane is tall and erect ; juveniles have a mane that extends to the length of the back and shortens as they reach adulthood . 
 As with all zebra species , the Grevy 's zebra 's pelage has a black and white striping pattern . The stripes are narrow and close @-@ set , being broader on the neck , and they extend to the hooves . The belly and the area around the base of the tail lack stripes which is unique to the Grevy 's zebra . Foals are born with brown and white striping , with the brown stripes darkening as they grow older . <unk> evidence has shown that the zebra 's background colour is dark and the white is an addition . The stripes of the zebra may serve to make it look bigger than it actually is or disrupt its outline . It appears that a stationary zebra can be inconspicuous at night or in shade . Experiments have suggested that the stripes polarize light in such a way that it discourages biting horse @-@ flies in a manner not shown with other coat patterns . Other studies suggest that , when moving , the stripes may confuse observers , such as mammalian predators and biting insects , via two visual illusions , the wagon wheel effect , where the perceived motion is inverted , and the barber pole illusion , where the perceived motion is in a wrong direction . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The Grévy ’ s zebra largely inhabits northern Kenya , with some isolated populations in Ethiopia . It was extirpated from Somalia and Djibouti and its status in South Sudan is uncertain . It lives in Acacia @-@ Commiphora bushlands and barren plains . Ecologically , this species is intermediate between the arid @-@ living African wild ass and the water @-@ dependent plains zebra . Lactating females and non @-@ territorial males use areas with green , short grass and medium , dense bush more often than non @-@ lactating females and territorial males . 
 Grévy 's zebras rely on grasses , legumes , and browse for nutrition . They commonly browse when grasses are not plentiful . Their hindgut fermentation digestive system allows them to subsist on diets of lower nutritional quality than that necessary for ruminant herbivores . Grevy 's zebras can survive up to five days without water , but will drink daily when it is plentiful . They often migrate to better watered highlands during the dry season . Females require significantly more water when they are lactating . During droughts , the zebras will dig water holes and defend them . Grévy 's zebras are preyed on by lions , hyenas , wild dogs , cheetahs and leopards . In addition , they are susceptible to various gastro @-@ intestinal parasites , notably of the Trichostrongylus genus . 
 Adult males mostly live in territories during the wet seasons but some may stay in them year round if there 's enough water left . Stallions that are unable to establish territories are free @-@ ranging and are known as bachelors . Females , young and non @-@ territorial males wander through large home ranges . The females will wander from territory to territory preferring the ones with the highest @-@ quality food and water sources . Up to nine males may compete for a female outside of a territory . 
 Territorial stallions will tolerate other stallions who wander in their territory , however when an oestrous female is present the territorial stallion keeps other males at bay . Non @-@ territorial males may avoid territorial ones because of harassment . When females are not around , a territorial stallion will seek the company of other stallions . The stallion shows his dominance with an arched neck and a high @-@ stepping gait and the least dominant stallions submit by extending their tail , lowering their heads and nuzzling their superior 's chest or groin . The call of the Grévy 's zebra has been described as " something like a hippo 's grunt combined with a donkey 's wheeze " . To get rid of flies or parasites , they roll in dust , water or mud or , in the case of flies , twitch their skin . They also rub against trees , rocks and other objects to get rid of irritations like itchy skin , hair or parasites . Although Grévy 's zebras do not perform mutual grooming , they do sometimes rub against a conspecific . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Grévy 's zebras can mate and give birth year @-@ round , but most mating takes place in the early rainy seasons and births mostly take place in August or September after the long rains . An oestrous mare may visit though as many as four territories a day and will mate with the stallions in them . Among territorial stallions , the most dominant ones control territories near water sources , which mostly attract mares with dependant foals , while more subordinate stallions control territories away from water with greater amounts of vegetation , which mostly attract mares without dependant foals . 
 The resident stallions of territories will try to subdue the entering mares with dominance rituals and then continue with courtship and copulation . Grévy 's zebra stallions have large testicles and can ejaculate a large amount of semen to replace the sperm of other males . This is a useful adaptation for a species whose females mate <unk> . Bachelors or outside territorial stallions sometimes " sneak " copulation of mares in another stallion ’ s territory . While female associations with individual males are brief and mating is promiscuous , females who have just given birth will reside with one male for long periods and mate exclusively with that male . Lactating females are harassed by males more often than non @-@ lactating ones and thus associating with one male and his territory provides an advantage as he will guard against other males . 
 Gestation of the Grévy 's zebra normally lasts 390 days , with a single foal being born . A newborn zebra will follow anything that moves , so new mothers prevent other mares from approaching their foals while imprinting their own striping pattern , scent and vocalisation on them . Females with young foals may gather into small groups . Mares may leave their foals in " kindergartens " while searching for water . The foals will not hide , so they can be vulnerable to predators . However , kindergartens tend to be protected by an adult , usually a territorial male . A female with a foal stays with one dominant territorial male who has exclusive mating rights to her . While the foal will not likely be his , the stallion will look after it to ensure that the female stays in his territory . To adapt to a semi @-@ arid environment , Grévy 's zebra foals have longer nursing intervals and wait until they are three months old before they start drinking water . Although offspring became less dependant on their mothers after half a year , associations with them continue for up to three years . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The Grévy 's zebra was known to the Europeans in antiquity and was used by the Romans in circuses . It was subsequently forgotten in the Western world for a thousand years . In the seventeenth century , the king of <unk> ( now central Ethiopia ) exported two zebras ; one to the Sultan of Turkey and another to the Dutch governor of Jakarta . A century later , in 1882 , the government of Abyssinia sent one to French president Jules Grévy . It was at that time that the animal was recognised as its own species and named in Grévy ’ s honor . 
 = = = Status and conservation = = = 
 The Grévy 's zebra is considered endangered . Its population was estimated to be 15 @,@ 000 in the 1970s and by the early 21st century the population was lower than 3 @,@ 500 , a 75 % decline . It is estimated that there are less than 2 @,@ 500 Grévy 's zebras still living in the wild . There are also an estimated 600 Grévy 's zebras in captivity . Captive herds have been known to thrive , like at White Oak Conservation in Yulee , Florida , United States , where more than 70 foals have been born . There , research is underway in partnership with the Conservation Centers for Species Survival on semen collection and freezing and on artificial insemination . The Grévy 's zebra population trend is considered stable as of 2008 . 
 The Grévy 's zebra is legally protected in Ethiopia . In Kenya , it is protected by the hunting ban of 1977 . In the past , Grévy 's zebras were threatened mainly by hunting for their skins which fetched a high price on the world market . However , hunting has declined and the main threat to the zebra is habitat loss and competition with livestock . Cattle gather around watering holes and the Grévy 's zebras are fenced from those areas . Community @-@ based conservation efforts have shown to the most effective in preserving Grévy 's zebras and their habitat . Less than 0 @.@ 5 % of the range of the Grévy 's zebra is in protected areas . In Ethiopia , the protected areas include <unk> Wildlife Reserve , <unk> Wildlife Sanctuary , <unk> Controlled Hunting Area and <unk> Sanctuary . In Kenya , important protected areas include the Buffalo Springs , Samburu and Shaba National Reserves and the private and community land wildlife <unk> in <unk> , Samburu and the Laikipia Plateau . 
 The Mesquite plant was introduced into Ethiopia around 1997 and is endangering the zebra 's food supply . The Mesquite plant is an invasive species replacing the two grass species , Cenchrus ciliaris and Chrysopogon <unk> , which the zebra 's eat for most of their food . 
 = House of Lancaster = 
 The House of Lancaster was the name of two cadet branches of the royal House of Plantagenet . The first house was created when Henry III of England created the Earldom of Lancaster — from which the house was named — for his second son Edmund Crouchback in 1267 . Edmund had already been created Earl of Leicester in 1265 and was granted the lands and privileges of Simon de Montfort , 6th Earl of Leicester , after de Montfort 's death and attainder at the end of the Second Barons ' War . When Edmund 's son Thomas , 2nd Earl of Lancaster , inherited his father @-@ in @-@ law 's estates and title of Earl of Lincoln he became at a stroke the most powerful nobleman in England , with lands throughout the kingdom and the ability to raise vast private armies to wield power at national and local levels . This brought him — and Henry , his younger brother — into conflict with their cousin Edward II of England , leading to Thomas 's execution . Henry inherited Thomas 's titles and he and his son , who was also called Henry , gave loyal service to Edward 's son — Edward III of England . 
 The second house of Lancaster was descended from John of Gaunt , who married the heiress of the first house . Edward III married all his sons to wealthy English heiresses rather than following his predecessors ' practice of finding continental political marriages for royal princes . Henry of Grosmont , 1st Duke of Lancaster , had no male heir so Edward married his son John to Henry 's heiress daughter and John 's third cousin Blanche of Lancaster . This gave John the vast wealth of the House of Lancaster . Their son Henry usurped the throne in 1399 , creating one of the factions in the Wars of the Roses . There was an intermittent dynastic struggle between the descendants of Edward III . In these wars , the term Lancastrian became a reference to members of the family and their supporters . The family provided England with three kings : Henry IV , who ruled from 1399 to 1413 , Henry V ( 1413 – 1422 ) , and Henry VI ( 1422 – 1461 and 1470 – 1471 ) . 
 The House became extinct in the male line upon the murder in the Tower of London of Henry VI , following the battlefield execution of his son Edward of Westminster , Prince of Wales , by supporters of the House of York in 1471 . Lancastrian cognatic descent — from John of Gaunt and Blanche of Lancaster 's daughter Phillipa — continued in the royal houses of Spain and Portugal while the Lancastrian political cause was maintained by Henry Tudor — a relatively unknown scion of the Beauforts — eventually leading to the establishment of the House of Tudor . The Lancastrians left a legacy through the patronage of the arts — most notably in founding Eton College and King 's College , Cambridge — but to historians ’ chagrin their propaganda , and that of their Tudor successors , means that it is Shakespeare ’ s partly fictionalized history plays rather than medievalist scholarly research that has the greater influence on modern perceptions of the dynasty . 
 = = Origin of the Earls of Lancaster = = 
 After the supporters of Henry III of England suppressed opposition from the English nobility in the Second Barons ' War , Henry granted to his second son Edmund Crouchback the titles and possessions forfeited by attainder of the barons ' leader , Simon de Montfort , 6th Earl of Leicester , including the Earldom of Leicester , on 26 October 1265 . Later grants included the first Earldom of Lancaster on 30 June 1267 and that of Earl Ferrers in 1301 . Edmund was also Count of Champagne and Brie from 1276 by right of his wife . Henry IV of England would later use his descent from Edmund to legitimise his claim to the throne , even making the spurious claim that Edmund was the elder son of Henry but had been passed over as king because of his deformity . 
 Edmund 's second marriage to Blanche of Artois , the widow of the King of Navarre , placed him at the centre of the European aristocracy . Blanche 's daughter Joan I of Navarre was queen regnant of Navarre and through her marriage to Philip IV of France was queen consort of France . Edmund 's son Thomas became the most powerful nobleman in England , gaining the <unk> of Lincoln and Salisbury through marriage to the heiress of Henry de Lacy , 3rd Earl of Lincoln . His income was £ 11 @,@ 000 per annum — double that of the next wealthiest earl . 
 Thomas and his younger brother Henry served in the coronation of their cousin King Edward II of England on 25 February 1308 ; Thomas carried Curtana , the Sword of Mercy , and Henry carried the royal sceptre . After initially supporting Edward , Thomas became one of the Lords Ordainers , who demanded the banishment of Piers Gaveston and the governance of the realm by a baronial council . After Gaveston was captured , Thomas took the lead in his trial and execution at Warwick in 1312 . Edward 's authority was weakened by poor governance and defeat by the Scots at the Battle of Bannockburn . This allowed Thomas to restrain Edward 's power by republishing the Ordinances of 1311 . Following this achievement Thomas took little part in the governance of the realm and instead retreated to Pontefract Castle . This allowed Edward to regroup and re @-@ arm , leading to a fragile peace in August 1318 with the Treaty of Leake . In 1321 Edward 's rule again collapsed into civil war . Thomas raised a northern army but was defeated and captured at the Battle of Boroughbridge . He was sentenced to be hanged , drawn and quartered but because he was Edward 's cousin he was given a quicker death by beheading . 
 Henry joined the revolt of Edward 's wife Isabella of France and her lover Mortimer in 1326 , pursuing and capturing Edward at Neath in South Wales . Following Edward 's deposition at the Parliament of Kenilworth in 1326 and reputed murder at Berkeley Castle , Thomas 's conviction was posthumously reversed and Henry regained possession of the <unk> of Lancaster , Derby , Salisbury and Lincoln that had been forfeit for Thomas 's treason . His restored prestige led to him knighting the young King Edward III of England before his coronation . Mortimer lost support over the Treaty of Edinburgh – Northampton that formalised Scotland 's independence , and his developing power in the Welsh Marches provoked jealousy from the barons . When Mortimer called a parliament to make his new powers and estates permanent with the title of Earl of March in 1328 , Henry led the opposition and held a counter @-@ meeting . In response , Mortimer ravaged the lands of Lancaster and checked the revolt . Edward III was able to assume control in 1330 but Henry 's further influence was restricted by poor health and blindness for the last fifteen years of his life . 
 = = Duchy and Palatinate of Lancaster = = 
 Henry 's son , also called Henry , was born at the castle of Grosmont in Monmouthshire between 1299 and 1314 . According to the younger Henry 's memoirs , he was better at martial arts than academic subjects and did not learn to read until later in life . Henry was coeval with Edward III and was pivotal to his reign , becoming his best friend and most trusted commander . Henry was knighted in 1330 , represented his father in parliament and fought in Edward 's Scottish campaign . After the outbreak of the Hundred Years ' War , Henry took part in several diplomatic missions and minor campaigns and was present at the great English victory in the naval Battle of Sluys in 1340 . Later , he was required to commit himself as hostage in the Low Countries for Edward ’ s considerable debts . He remained hostage for a year and had to pay a large ransom for his own release . 
 In 1345 , Edward III launched a major , three @-@ pronged attack on France . The Earl of Northampton attacked from Brittany , Edward from Flanders , and Henry from Aquitaine in the south . Moving rapidly through the country , Henry confronted the Comte d 'Isle at the Battle of Auberoche and achieved a victory described as " the greatest single achievement of Lancaster 's entire military career " . The ransom from the prisoners has been estimated at £ 50 @,@ 000 . Edward rewarded Henry by including him as a founding knight of the Order of the Garter . An even greater honour was bestowed on Lancaster when Edward created him Duke of Lancaster . The title of duke was relatively new in England , with only Cornwall being a previous ducal title . Lancaster was also given palatinate status for the county of Lancashire , which entailed a separate administration independent of the crown . There were two other counties palatine ; Durham was an ancient ecclesiastical palatinate and Chester was crown property . 
 In 1350 , Henry was present at the naval victory at Winchelsea , where he saved the life of the Black Prince . He spent 1351 @-@ 2 on crusade in Prussia where a quarrel with Otto , Duke of Brunswick , almost led to a duel between the two men , which was only averted by the intervention of John II of France . As campaigning in France resumed , Henry participated in the last great offensive of the Rheims campaign of 1359 – 60 — the first phase of the Hundred Years ' War — before returning to England where he fell ill and died , most likely of the plague , at Leicester Castle . 
 Edward III of England married John of Gaunt , his third surviving son , to Henry 's heiress Blanche of Lancaster . On Henry 's death , Edward conferred on Gaunt the second creation of the title of Duke of Lancaster , which made Gaunt , after Edward , the wealthiest landowner in England . Gaunt enjoyed great political influence during his lifetime , but upon his death in 1399 his lands were confiscated by Richard II . Gaunt 's exiled son and heir Henry of Bolingbroke returned home and gathered military support in clear contravention of Richard 's treason act of 1397 , which included a definition of treason of " or [ to ] ... <unk> People and <unk> against the King to make War within his Realm ... " . Although he claimed his aim was restoration of his Lancaster inheritance , this Act and Henry 's knowledge of Richard 's character — suspicious and vindictive — probably meant Henry knew that only by removing Richard from power could he be secure . Henry unified popular opposition to Richard II , took control of the kingdom and Richard — recognising that he had insufficient support to resist — surrendered to Henry ’ s forces at Conwy Castle . Henry instigated a commission to decide who should be king . Richard was forced to abdicate and although Henry was not next in line , he was chosen by an unlawfully constituted parliament dominated by his supporters . After the first unrest of his reign and a revolt by the Earls of Salisbury , Gloucester , Exeter and Surrey , Richard reputedly starved to death . There is some debate as to whether this was self @-@ inflicted or ordered by Henry to end the risk of restoration without leaving incriminating marks on the body . 
 = = Reign of Henry IV = = 
 There is much debate amongst historians about Henry 's accession , in part because some see it as a cause of the Wars of the Roses . For many historians , the accession by force of the throne broke principles the Plantagenets had established successfully over two and a half centuries and allowed any magnate with sufficient power and Plantagenet blood to have ambitions to assume the throne . Richard had attempted to disinherit Henry and remove him from the succession . In response Henry ’ s legal advisors , led by William <unk> , dissuaded Henry from claiming the throne by right of conquest and instead look for legal justification . Although Henry established a committee to investigate his assertion that his mother had legitimate rights through descent from Edmund Crouchback , whom he said was the elder son of Henry III of England but was set aside because of deformity , no evidence was found . The eight @-@ year @-@ old Edmund Mortimer , Earl of March , was the heir general to Richard II by being the grandson of Edward III 's second son , Lionel of Antwerp , 1st Duke of Clarence , and also the son of Richard 's last nominated heir . In desperation , Henry 's advisors made the case that Henry was heir male to Henry III and this was supported by thirteenth @-@ century entails . Mortimer 's sister Anne de Mortimer married Richard of Conisburgh , 3rd Earl of Cambridge , son of Edward III 's fourth son Edmund of Langley , consolidating Anne 's place in the succession with that of the more junior House of York . As a child Mortimer was not considered a serious contender and as an adult he showed no interest in the throne , instead loyally serving the House of Lancaster . Mortimer informed Henry V when Conisburgh , in what was later called the Southampton Plot , attempted to place him on the throne instead of Henry 's newly crowned son — their mutual cousin — leading to the execution of Conisburgh and the other plotters . 
 Henry IV was plagued with financial problems , the political need to reward his supporters , frequent rebellions and declining health — including leprosy and epilepsy . The Percy family had been some of Henry 's leading supporters , defending the North from Scotland largely at their own expense , but revolted in the face of lack of reward and suspicion from Henry . Henry Percy ( Hotspur ) was defeated and killed at the Battle of Shrewsbury . In 1405 , Hotspur 's father Henry Percy , 1st Earl of Northumberland , supported the Archbishop of York , Richard le Scrope , in another rebellion , after which the elder Percy fled to Scotland and his estates were confiscated . Henry had Scrope executed in an act comparable to the murder of another Archbishop — Thomas Beckett by men loyal to Henry II . This would probably have led to Henry 's excommunication but the church was in the midst of the Western Schism , with competing popes keen on Henry 's support ; it protested but took no action . In 1408 , Percy invaded England once more and was killed at the Battle of Bramham Moor . In Wales , Owain Glyndŵr 's widespread rebellion was only suppressed with the recapture of Harlech Castle in 1409 , although sporadic fighting continued until 1421 . 
 Henry IV was succeeded by his son Henry V , and eventually by his grandson Henry VI in 1422 . 
 = = Henry V and the Hundred Years ' War = = 
 Henry V of England was a successful and ruthless monarch . He was quick to re @-@ assert the claim to the French throne he inherited from Edward III , continuing what was later called the Hundred Years ' War . The war was not a formal , continuous conflict but a series of English raids and military expeditions from 1337 until 1453 . There were six major royal expeditions ; Henry himself led the fifth and sixth , but these were unlike the smaller , frequent , provincial campaigns . In Henry 's first major campaign — and the fifth major royal campaign of the war — he invaded France , captured <unk> , made a chevauchée to Calais and won a near @-@ total victory over the French at the Battle of Agincourt despite being outnumbered , outmanoeuvred and low on supplies . In his second campaign , he recaptured much of Normandy and in a treaty secured a marriage to Catherine of Valois . The terms of the Treaty of Troyes were that Henry 's and Catherine 's heirs would succeed to the throne of France . This condition was contested by the Dauphin and the momentum of the war changed . In 1421 , Henry 's brother Thomas , Duke of Clarence , was killed at the Battle of Baugé , and Henry V died of dysentery at Vincennes in 1422 . 
 Henry VI of England was less than a year old but his uncles — led by Henry V 's brother John of Lancaster , 1st Duke of Bedford — continued the war . There were more victories , including the Battle of Verneuil , but it was impossible to maintain campaigning at this level . Joan of Arc 's involvement helped the French remove the siege of Orleans and win the Battle of Patay before Joan was captured by the Burgundians , sold to the English , tried as a witch and burned at the stake . The Dauphin was crowned and continued the successful Fabian tactics of avoiding full frontal assault and exploiting logistical advantage . 
 = = Henry VI and the fall of the House of Lancaster = = 
 The Hundred Years ' War caused political division between the Lancastrians and the other Plantagenets during the minority of Henry VI : Bedford wanted to maintain the majority of the Lancastrian ’ s French possessions ; Humphrey of Lancaster , 1st Duke of Gloucester wanted to hold only Calais ; and Cardinal Beaufort desired a negotiated peace . Gloucester 's attacks on Beaufort forced the latter from public life but brought him little advantage as the earl of Suffolk ’ s influence over the king enabled him to direct policy for the rest of the decade . Gloucester remained heir presumptive but in 1441 his ambitious wife , Eleanor Cobham , consulted astrologers on the likelihood of the king 's death and was arrested for treasonable necromancy — although Gloucester was not implicated he was discredited forced into retirement . In 1447 Suffolk had him arrested and within days he died in prison . 
 England 's ally Philip III , Duke of Burgundy defected to Charles , when the English ambassadors ' refusal to renounce the claim to the French crown stalled negotiations , signing the Treaty of Arras ( 1435 ) . The French reorganised the superior numbers of their feudal levies into a modern professional army and retook Paris , Rouen , Bordeaux and Normandy . Victories at the Battle of Formigny in 1450 and the Battle of Castillon in 1453 brought the war to an end with the House of Lancaster losing forever all its French holdings , except Calais and the Channel Islands . 
 Henry VI proved to be a weak king and vulnerable to the over @-@ mighty subjects who developed private armies of retainers . Rivalries often spilled over from the courtroom into armed confrontations , such as the Percy – Neville feud . Without the common purpose of the war in France , Henry 's cousin Richard of York , 3rd Duke of York , and Richard Neville , 16th Earl of Warwick , used their networks to defy the crown . Henry became the focus of discontent as the population , agricultural production , prices , the wool trade and credit declined in the Great Slump . This led to radical demands from the lower classes . In 1450 , Jack Cade raised a rebellion to force Henry to address the economic problems or abdicate his throne . The uprising was suppressed but conflict remained between villagers , gentry and aristocracy . Society remained deeply unsettled and radical demands continued to be suppressed such as those from the yeoman brothers John and William <unk> . 
 Henry 's marriage to Margaret of Anjou prompted criticism from Richard Plantagenet , Duke of York , because it included the surrender of Maine and an extended truce with France . York was Henry 's cousin through his descent from Edward III sons Lionel of Antwerp , 1st Duke of Clarence , and Edmund , Duke of York . This gave York political influence but he was removed from English and French politics through his appointment as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland . On returning to England , York was conscious of the fate of Henry 's uncle Humphrey at the hands of the Beauforts and suspicious that Henry intended to nominate Edmund Beaufort , 2nd Duke of Somerset , as heir presumptive , and recruited military forces . Armed conflict was avoided because York lacked aristocratic support and was forced to swear allegiance to Henry . However , when Henry later underwent a mental breakdown , York was named regent . Henry was trusting and not a man of war , but Margaret was more assertive and showed open enmity towards York — particularly after the birth of a male heir that resolved the succession question and assured her position . 
 According to historian Robin Storey , " If Henry 's insanity was a tragedy ; his recovery was a national disaster " . When Henry 's sanity returned , the court party reasserted its authority but York and his relatives , the Nevilles , defeated them at the First Battle of St Albans . Historian Anthony Goodman suggests that around 50 men were killed ; among them were Somerset and two Percy lords , Henry Percy , 2nd Earl of Northumberland , and Thomas Clifford , 8th Baron de Clifford , creating feuds that would confound reconciliation attempts despite the shock to the ruling class caused by the armed conflict . Threatened with treason charges and lacking support , York , Richard Neville , 5th Earl of Salisbury , and Richard Neville , 16th Earl of Warwick , fled abroad . Henry was captured by the opposition when the Nevilles returned and won the Battle of Northampton . York joined them , surprising parliament by claiming the throne and then forcing through the Act of Accord stating that Henry would remain as monarch for his lifetime and that York would succeed him . The disinheriting of Henry 's son Edward was unacceptable to Margaret so the conflict continued . York was killed at the Battle of Wakefield and his head was displayed at Micklegate Bar , York , along with those of Edmund , Earl of Rutland , and Richard Neville , Earl of Salisbury — both of whom were captured and beheaded . 
 Margaret gained the support of the Scottish queen Mary of Guelders , and with a Scottish army she pillaged into southern England . The citizens of London feared the city being plundered and enthusiastically welcomed York 's son Edward , Earl of March . Margaret 's defeat at the Battle of Towton confirmed Edward 's position and he was crowned . Disaffected with Edward 's marriage to Elizabeth Woodville and preferment of her formerly Lancastrian @-@ supporting family , Warwick and Clarence defected to the Lancastrians . The alliance was sealed with the marriage of Henry 's son Edward to Anne , Warwick 's daughter . Edward and Richard , Duke of Gloucester , fled England . When they returned , Clarence switched sides at the Battle of Barnet and Warwick and his brother were killed . Henry , Margaret and Edward of Lancaster were caught at the Battle of Tewkesbury before they could escape back to France . Edward of Westminster , Prince of Wales , was executed on the battlefield and John Beaufort , Marquess of Dorset , was killed in the fighting — meaning that when his brother Edmund Beaufort , 4th Duke of Somerset , was executed two days later , the Beaufort family became extinct in the legitimate male line . The captive Henry was murdered on 21 May 1471 in the Tower of London and buried in Chertsey Abbey , extinguishing the House of Lancaster . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Shakespeare ’ s history plays = = = 
 It is a source of irritation to historians that Shakespeare ’ s influence on the perception of the later medieval period exceeds that of academic research . While the chronology of Shakespeare 's history plays runs from King John to Henry VIII , they are dominated by eight plays in which members of the House of Lancaster play a significant part , voicing speeches on a par with those in Hamlet and King Lear . These plays are : 
 Richard II 
 Henry IV , Part 1 
 Henry IV , Part 2 
 Henry V 
 Henry VI , Part 1 
 Henry VI , Part 2 
 Henry VI , Part 3 
 Richard III . 
 According to the historian Norman Davies , the plays were constrained by the political and religious requirements of Tudor England . While they are factually inaccurate , they demonstrate how the past and the House of Lancaster are remembered in terms of myth , legend , ideas and popular misconceptions . Shakespeare avoided contentious political and religious issues to dubiously illustrate Tudor England as having rejected medieval conflict and entered an era of harmony and prosperity . The famous patriotic " <unk> 'd isle " speech is voiced by John of Gaunt , a man who spent the majority of his life in Aquitaine , and is a piece of poetic licence that illustrates English prejudices . Henry V is one @-@ sided with little sympathy for the French . Many of these historical lines illustrate historical myth rather than realism . 
 = = = Succession = = = 
 Lancastrian cognatic descent from John of Gaunt and Blanche 's daughter Phillipa continued in the royal houses of Spain and Portugal . The remnants of the Lancastrian court party coalesced support around Henry Tudor — a relatively unknown scion of the Beauforts . They had been amongst the most ardent supporters of the House of Lancaster and were descended illegitimately from John of Gaunt by his mistress Katherine Swynford . Although later legitimised by Richard II , Henry IV had formally and permanently debarred them from the succession to avoid competition with the House of Lancaster ’ s claims to the throne . By some calculations of primogeniture , there were as many as 18 people — including both his mother and future wife — with more right to the throne . By 1510 , this figure had increased with the birth of an additional 16 possible Yorkist claimants . 
 With the House of Lancaster extinct , Henry claimed to be the Lancastrian heir through his mother Lady Margaret Beaufort . His father was Henry VI 's maternal half @-@ brother . In 1485 , Henry Tudor united increasing opposition within England to the reign of Richard III with the Lancastrian cause to take the throne . To legitimise his questionable claim , Henry married Elizabeth of York — Edward IV of England 's daughter — and promoted the House of Tudor as a dynasty of dual Lancastrian and Yorkist descent . 
 = = = Religion , education and the arts = = = 
 The Lancastrians were both pious and well read . Henry IV was the first English king known to have possessed a vernacular Bible , supported the canonization of John Twenge , gave a pension to the <unk> Margaret <unk> and maintained close relations with several Westminster <unk> . His household accounts as king record conventional payments to large numbers of paupers ( 12 @,@ 000 on Easter day 1406 ) and the intercession for him of twenty @-@ four <unk> domini regis at 2d each per day . However , his reliance on the church was both personal and political . Archbishop Arundel gave the Lancastrians vital support and carried other bishops with him . In return the church required support for religious orthodoxy against heresy . Lollards were suppressed and heresy was made a capital offence in England under the statute of De <unk> comburendo even though Henry could not afford to overly antagonize his supporters with Lollard sympathies , including those among his Lancastrian retainers . 
 According to the author of the Gesta Henrici <unk> , Henry V aimed ‘ to promote the honour of God , the extension of the Church , the deliverance of his country and the peace and tranquillity of kingdoms ’ . He was deeply religious , engaged with ecclesiastical issues and saw that his role as king was to honour God , extend the church , fight heresy and defend the established social order . All his victories , especially Agincourt , were attributed to divine intervention . Henry V founded Syon Abbey in 1415 , as penance for his father ’ s execution of Archbishop Scrope , and three monasteries in London : for Carthusian , <unk> and Celestine orders . The equally devout Henry VI continued the architectural patronage begun by his father , founding Eton College and King 's College , Cambridge and leaving a lasting educational and architectural legacy in buildings including King 's College Chapel and Eton College Chapel . 
 The Lancastrian regime was founded and legitimised by formal lying that was both public and official . This has been described as " a series of unconstitutional actions " based " upon three major acts of perjury " . The historian K.B. McFarlane found it hard " to think of another moment of comparable importance in medieval English political history when the supply of information was so effectively manipulated as it was by Henry IV on this occasion " . The Lancastrians patronised poets for panegyric purposes for years before Henry IV ascended the throne , including Geoffrey Chaucer who dedicated The Book of the Duchess to Blanche of Lancaster around 1368 . In 1400 , poets in the pay of Henry IV were directed to propaganda purposes . John Gower based his Cronica <unk> on the official Lancastrian accounts of the usurpation : " The Record and Process of the Deposition of Richard II " from 1399 . Gower also produced a number of further favourable works including " In praise of peace " which was dedicated to Henry IV . 
 = = Earls and Dukes of Lancaster ( first creation ) = = 
 = = Dukes of Lancaster ( second creation ) = = 
 = = Lancastrian Kings of England = = 
 = = Family tree = = 
 = Symphony No. 8 ( Sibelius ) = 
 Jean Sibelius 's Symphony No. 8 was his final major compositional project , occupying him intermittently from the mid @-@ 1920s until around 1938 , though he never published it . During this time Sibelius was at the peak of his fame , a national figure in his native Finland and a composer of international stature . How much of the Eighth Symphony was completed is unknown ; Sibelius repeatedly refused to release it for performance , though he continued to assert that he was working on it even after he had , according to later reports from his family , burned the score and associated material in 1945 . 
 Much of Sibelius 's reputation , during his lifetime and subsequently , derived from his work as a symphonist . His Seventh Symphony of 1924 has been widely recognised as a landmark in the development of symphonic form , and at the time there was no reason to suppose that the flow of innovative orchestral works would not continue . However , after the symphonic poem Tapiola , completed in 1926 , his output was confined to relatively minor pieces and revisions to earlier works . The Eighth Symphony 's premiere was promised to Serge Koussevitzky and the Boston Symphony Orchestra on several occasions , but as each scheduled date approached Sibelius demurred , claiming that the work was not ready for performance . Similar promises made to the British conductor Basil Cameron and to the Finnish Georg Schnéevoigt likewise proved illusory . 
 After Sibelius 's death in 1957 , news of the Eighth Symphony 's destruction was made public , and it was assumed that the work had disappeared forever . In the 1990s , when the composer 's many notebooks and sketches were being catalogued , scholars first raised the possibility that some of the music for the lost symphony might have survived . Since then , several short manuscript sketches have been tentatively identified with the Eighth , three of which ( comprising less than three minutes of music ) were recorded by the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra in 2011 . While a few musicologists have speculated that , if further fragments can be identified , it may be possible to reconstruct the entire work , others have suggested that this is unlikely given the ambiguity of the extant material . The propriety of publicly performing music that Sibelius himself had rejected has also been questioned . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jean Sibelius was born in 1865 in Finland , since 1809 an autonomous grand duchy within the Russian Empire having earlier been under Swedish control for many centuries . The country remained divided between a culturally dominant Swedish @-@ speaking minority , to which the Sibelius family belonged , and a more nationalistically @-@ minded Finnish @-@ speaking , or " Fennoman " majority . In about 1889 Sibelius met his future wife , Aino Järnefelt , who came from a staunch Fennoman family . Sibelius 's association with the <unk> helped to awaken and develop his own nationalism ; in 1892 , the year of his marriage to Aino , he completed his first overtly nationalistic work , the symphonic suite Kullervo . Through the 1890s , as Russian control over the duchy grew increasingly oppressive , Sibelius produced a series of works reflecting Finnish resistance to foreign rule , culminating in the tone poem Finlandia . 
 Sibelius 's national stature was recognised in 1897 when he was awarded a state pension to enable him to spend more time composing . In 1904 he and Aino settled in Ainola , a country residence he built on the shores of Lake Tuusula in Järvenpää , where they lived for the remainder of their lives . Although life at Ainola was not always calm and carefree — Sibelius was often in debt and prone to bouts of heavy drinking — he managed over the following 20 years to produce a large output of orchestral works , chamber music , piano pieces and songs , as well as lighter music . His popularity spread across Europe to the United States where , during a triumphant tour in 1914 , he was awarded an honorary doctorate by Yale University . At home his status was such that his 50th birthday celebrations in 1915 were a national event , the centrepiece of which was the Helsinki premiere of his Fifth Symphony . 
 By the mid @-@ 1920s Sibelius had acquired the status of a living national monument and was the principal cultural ambassador of his country , independent since 1917 . According to his biographer Guy Rickards , he invested " his most crucial inspiration " into the seven symphonies he composed between 1898 and 1924 . The Sibelius scholar James Hepokoski considers the compact , single @-@ movement Seventh Symphony , which Sibelius completed in 1924 , to be the composer 's most remarkable symphonic achievement , " the consummate realization of his late @-@ style rethinking of form " . It was followed in 1926 by Tapiola , a tone poem in which , says Rickards , Sibelius " pushed orchestral resources into quite new regions ... Tapiola was thirty or forty years ahead of its time " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 The first reference to the Eighth Symphony in Sibelius 's diary is dated 12 September 1926 : " working on the new one " . However , some of the initial ideas for the new symphony were almost certainly set down earlier , since it was Sibelius 's compositional habit to set aside themes and motifs for use in later projects . Thus , one of the extant sketches for his Seventh Symphony , on which he was engaged in 1923 – 24 , contains a ringed motif marked " VIII " . By the autumn of 1927 Sibelius was able to inform the New York Times music critic Olin Downes — one of his greatest admirers — that he had set down two movements of the Eighth on paper and had composed the rest in his head . 
 Early in 1928 Sibelius made one of his regular visits to Berlin , to imbibe the city 's musical life and to compose . He sent positive work @-@ in @-@ progress reports to Aino : the symphony , he said , will be " wonderful " . Back home in Ainola in September , he told his sister that he was " writing a new work , which will be sent to America . It will still need time . But it will turn out well . " In December 1928 , however , when his Danish publisher Wilhelm Hansen asked him how the work was developing , Sibelius was less forthcoming ; the symphony existed , he said , only in his head . Thereafter Sibelius 's reports of the symphony 's progress became equivocal , sometimes contradictory , and difficult to follow . 
 = = = Progress and prevarication = = = 
 Probably at the instigation of Downes , Sibelius had promised the world premiere of his new symphony to Serge Koussevitzky and the Boston Symphony Orchestra . For several years , in a protracted correspondence with the conductor and Downes , Sibelius hesitated and prevaricated . In January 1930 he said the symphony was " not nearly ready and I cannot say when it will be ready " , but in August that year he told Koussevitzky that a performance in the spring of 1931 was possible . Nothing resulted from this . In the summer of 1931 Sibelius told Downes that not only was the Eighth Symphony almost ready for the printers , he also had several other new works pending . Thus encouraged , in December 1931 Koussevitzky used the Boston Evening Transcript to announce the work for the orchestra 's 1931 – 32 season . This brought a swift telegram from Sibelius , to the effect that the symphony would not , after all , be ready for that season . 
 Koussevitzky then decided to perform all of Sibelius 's symphonies in the Boston Symphony 's 1932 – 33 season , with the world premiere of the Eighth as the culmination . In June 1932 Sibelius wrote to Koussevitzky suggesting that the Eighth be scheduled for the end of October . A week later he retracted : " I am very disturbed about it . Please do not announce the performance . " Further promises , for December 1932 and January 1933 , brought forth no scores . Koussevitzky was by now losing hope , yet he inquired once more , in the summer of 1933 . Sibelius was evasive ; he made no promise of delivery but would " return to the matter at a later date " . So far as Koussevitzky and the Boston Symphony were concerned , the matter ended there . Sibelius had made agreements with other conductors ; he had promised the European premiere to Basil Cameron and the Royal Philharmonic Society , and the first Finnish performance to Georg Schnéevoigt , who had recently taken over direction of the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra . These arrangements were , however , subject to the illusory Boston premiere , and thus were stillborn . Later in the decade , Eugene Ormandy , a fervent admirer of Sibelius who directed the Philadelphia Orchestra from 1936 , is thought to have lobbied strongly for the right to perform the premiere , should the symphony in due course emerge . 
 During his <unk> with Koussevitzky , Sibelius continued to work on the symphony . In 1931 he again spent time in Berlin , writing to Aino in May 1931 that " the symphony is advancing with rapid strides " . Progress was interrupted by illness , but towards the end of the year Sibelius was confidently asserting that " I am writing my eighth symphony and I am full of youth . How can this be explained ? " In May 1933 , as he continued to deny Koussevitzky , Sibelius wrote in his diary that he was deeply immersed in composition : " It is as if I had come home ... I 'm taking everything in another way , more deeply . A gypsy within me . Romantic . " Later that summer he informed a journalist that his new symphony was nearly complete : " It will be the reckoning of my whole existence – sixty @-@ eight years . It will probably be my last . Eight symphonies and a hundred songs . It has to be enough . " 
 At some stage in that summer the formal copying of the symphony began . On 4 September 1933 Paul Voigt , Sibelius 's long @-@ time copyist , sent a bill for making a fair copy of the first movement — 23 pages of music . Sibelius informed him — the note survives — that the complete manuscript would be about eight times as long as this excerpt , indicating that the symphony might be on a larger scale than any of its seven predecessors . Aino Sibelius later recalled other visits to Voigt that autumn at which Sibelius , whose mood she described as gloomy and taciturn , delivered further piles of music manuscript to the copyist . 
 = = = Limbo = = = 
 Various reports appeared to confirm that the symphony 's release was imminent . The Finnish composer Leevi Madetoja mentioned in 1934 that the work was virtually complete ; an article by the Swedish journalist Kurt <unk> indicated that two movements were complete and the rest sketched out . As pressure to produce the symphony increased , Sibelius became increasingly withdrawn and unwilling to discuss his progress . In December 1935 , during an interview in connection with his 70th birthday celebrations , he indicated that he had discarded a whole year 's work ; this pointed to a full @-@ scale revision of the Eighth . However , when The Times 's correspondent asked for details of the work 's progress Sibelius became irritated . He was furious when Downes continued to pester him for information , on one occasion shouting " Ich kann nicht ! " ( " I cannot ! " ) . 
 A receipt found among Sibelius 's papers refers to a " Symphonie " being bound by the firm of <unk> & <unk> in August 1938 . While it is not established that this transaction related to the Eighth , the Sibelius scholar Kari Kilpeläinen points out that none of the earlier symphony scores carry the unnumbered heading " Symphonie " , and asks : " Could he have omitted the number to prevent news of the now completed Eighth from spreading ? Or did he not give the work a number at all , because he was not satisfied with it ? " The composer 's daughter Katarina spoke of the self @-@ doubt that afflicted her father at this time , aggravated by the continuing expectations and fuss that surrounded the Eighth Symphony . " He wanted it to be better than the other symphonies . Finally it became a burden , even though so much of it had already been written down . In the end I don 't know whether he would have accepted what he had written . " 
 Sibelius remained in Finland during the Winter War of 1939 – 40 , despite offers of asylum in the United States . After the war ended in March 1940 he moved with his family to an apartment on <unk> ( later renamed <unk> or ' Sibelius Street ' in his honour ) in the <unk> district of Helsinki , where they remained for a year . During that time they were visited by the pianist Martti <unk> , who was able to examine the contents of Sibelius 's safe . <unk> later reported to his pupil Einar Englund that among the music kept there was a symphony , " most likely the Eighth " . 
 = = Destruction = = 
 Back in Ainola , Sibelius busied himself by making new arrangements of old songs . However , his mind returned frequently to the now apparently moribund symphony . In February 1943 he told his secretary that he hoped to complete a " great work " before he died , but blamed the war for his inability to make progress : " I cannot sleep at nights when I think about it . " In June he discussed the symphony with his future son @-@ in @-@ law Jussi Jalas and provided another reason for its non @-@ completion : " For each of my symphonies I have developed a special technique . It can 't be something superficial , it has to be something that has been lived though . In my new work I am struggling with precisely these issues . " Sibelius also told Jalas that all rough sketches and drafts were to be burned after his death ; he did not want anyone labelling these rejected scraps as " Sibelius letzten [ sic ] Gedanken " ( Sibelius 's last thoughts ) . 
 At some time in the mid @-@ 1940s , probably in 1945 , Sibelius and Aino together burned a large number of the composer 's manuscripts on the stove in the dining room at Ainola . There is no record of what was burned ; while most commentators assume that the Eighth Symphony was among the works destroyed , Kilpeläinen observes that there had been at least two manuscripts of the work — the original and Voigt 's copy — as well as sketches and fragments of earlier versions . It is possible , says Kilpeläinen , that Sibelius may not have burned them all . Aino , who found the process very painful , recalled later that the burning appeared to ease Sibelius 's mind : " After this , my husband appeared calmer and his attitude was more optimistic . It was a happy time " . The most optimistic interpretation of his action , according to The Philadelphia Inquirer 's music critic David Patrick Stearns , is that he got rid of old drafts of the symphony to clear his mind for a fresh start . In 1947 , after visiting Ainola , the conductor Nils @-@ Eric <unk> claimed to have seen a copy of the Eighth on the shelf , with separate choral parts . The musicologist Erkki <unk> posits the idea of two burnings : that of 1945 which destroyed early material , and another after Sibelius finally recognised that he could never complete the work to his satisfaction . 
 Although Sibelius informed his secretary that the symphony had been burned , the matter remained a secret confined to the composer 's private circle . During the remaining years of his life , Sibelius from time to time hinted that the Eighth Symphony project was still alive . In August 1945 he wrote to Basil Cameron : " I have finished my eighth symphony several times , but I am still not satisfied with it . I will be delighted to hand it over to you when the time comes . " In fact , after the burning he had altogether abandoned creative composing ; in 1951 , when the Royal Philharmonic Society requested a work to mark the 1951 Festival of Britain , Sibelius declined . As late as 1953 he told his secretary , Santeri <unk> , that he was working on the symphony " in his mind " ; only in 1954 did he admit , in a letter to the widow of his friend Adolf Paul , that it would never be completed . Sibelius died on 20 September 1957 ; the next day his daughter Eva Paloheimo announced publicly that the Eighth Symphony did not exist . The burning of the manuscript became generally known later , when Aino revealed the fact to the composer 's biographer Erik W. Tawaststjerna . 
 Critics and commentators have pondered the reasons why Sibelius finally abandoned the symphony . Throughout his life he was prone to depression and often suffered crises of self @-@ confidence . Alex Ross , in The New Yorker , quotes an entry from the composer 's 1927 diary , when the Eighth Symphony was allegedly under way : " Isolation and loneliness are driving me to despair ... Am abused , alone , and all my real friends are dead . My prestige here at present is rock @-@ bottom . Impossible to work . If only there were a way out . " Writers have pointed to the hand tremor that made writing difficult and to the alcoholism that afflicted him at numerous stages of his life . Others have argued that Sibelius 's exalted status as a national hero effectively silenced him ; he became afraid that any further major work would not live up to the expectations of the adoring nation . Andrew Barnett , another of the composer 's many biographers , points to Sibelius 's intense self @-@ criticism ; he would withhold or suppress anything that failed to meet his self @-@ imposed standards : " It was this attitude that brought about the destruction of the Eighth Symphony , but the very same trait forced him to keep on revising the Fifth until it was perfect . " The historian Mark McKenna agrees that Sibelius became stifled by a combination of perfectionism and increasing self @-@ doubt . The myth , sustained for more than 15 years , that Sibelius was still working on the symphony was , according to McKenna , a deliberate fiction : " To admit that he had stopped completely would be to admit the unthinkable — that he was no longer a composer " . 
 = = Discoveries = = 
 After his death Sibelius , though remaining popular with the general public , was frequently denigrated by critics who found his music dated and tedious . René Leibowitz , a proponent of the music of Arnold Schoenberg , published a pamphlet describing Sibelius as " the worst composer in the world " ; others dismissed him as irrelevant in what was perceived for a time as an irresistible movement towards atonality . This climate diminished curiosity about the existence of material from a possible Sibelius Eighth , until late in the 20th century , when critical interest in the composer revived . In 1995 Kilpeläinen , who had published a survey of the Sibelius manuscripts held in the Helsinki University Library , wrote that all that could definitely be connected to the Eighth Symphony were a single page from a draft score and the ringed melody fragment marked " VIII " within the Seventh Symphony sketches . He added , however , that the library contained further Sibelius sketches from the late 1920s and early 1930s , some of which are akin to the ringed fragment and which could conceivably have been intended for the Eighth Symphony . Kilpeläinen also revealed that " [ j ] ust recently various documents have come to light which no one dreamt even existed . Maybe there are still some clues to the 8th Symphony hidden away and just waiting for some scholar to discover them . " 
 In 2004 , in an article entitled " On Some Apparent Sketches for Sibelius 's Eighth Symphony " , the musical theorist <unk> Josephson identifies around 20 manuscripts or fragments held in the Helsinki University Library as being relevant to the symphony and concludes that : " Given the abundance of preserved material for this work , one looks forward with great anticipation to a thoughtful , meticulous completion of the entire composition " . Another Sibelius scholar , Timo Virtanen , has examined the same material and is more restrained , concluding that although some of the sketches may relate to the Eighth Symphony , it is not possible to determine exactly which , if any , these are . Even the fragment marked " VIII " , he maintains , cannot with certainty be said to relate to the symphony , since Sibelius often used both Roman and Arabic numerals to refer to themes , motifs or passages within a composition . Virtanen provides a further note of caution : " We should be aware that [ the fragments ] are , after all , drafts : unfinished as music , and representing only a certain stage in planning a new composition " . 
 Despite his reservations , in October 2011 Virtanen cooperated with another scholar , Vesa Sirén , to prepare three of the more developed fragments for performance . The sketches were copied and tidied , but nothing not written by Sibelius was added to the material . Permission from the Sibelius Rights Holders was secured , and John Storgårds , chief conductor of the Helsinki Philharmonic , agreed to play and record these excerpts at the orchestra 's rehearsal session on 30 October 2011 . The pieces comprise an opening segment of about a minute 's duration , an eight @-@ second fragment that might be part of a scherzo , and a final scrap of orchestral music again lasting roughly a minute . Sirén describes the music as " strange , powerful , and with daring , spicy harmonies — a step into the new even after Tapiola and the music for The Tempest " . Stearns gives a more detailed insight : " The first excerpt is classic Sibelian announcement of a first movement . There 's a genteel orchestral thunderclap that throws open the door to a harmonic world that is Sibelius ' alone , but has strange dissonances unlike any other work . Another glimpse sounds like the beginning of a scherzo , surprisingly spring @-@ like with a buoyant flute solo . Another snippet has a classic Sibelian bassoon solo , the sort that speaks of primal things and goes to a dark , wintry underworld . " 
 = = Speculation = = 
 Although only the first movement , copied by Voigt , is fully accepted as having been completed , the intended scale and general character of the Eighth Symphony may be inferred from several sources . Sibelius 's correspondence with Voigt and with his binders , in 1933 and 1938 respectively , indicates the possibility of a notably large @-@ scale work . Apart from Nils @-@ Eric <unk> 's 1947 observation , there are also indications from Voigt that the work may have contained choral elements , along the lines of Beethoven 's Ninth . 
 From the available fragments of music , both Virtanen and Andrew Mellor of Gramophone detect hints of Tapiola , particularly in the first of the three extracts . Kilpeläinen points to some of Sibelius 's late minor works , in particular the " Five Esquisses " for piano Op. 114 ( 1929 ) , as providing evidence that in his final compositional years Sibelius was " progressing towards a more abstract idiom : clear , ethereal images little touched by the human passions " . Further originality , Kilpeläinen says , is found in the " <unk> " music for organ , composed in 1931 for the funeral of Sibelius 's friend <unk> Gallen @-@ <unk> , a work that Aino Sibelius admitted might have been based on Eighth Symphony material : " Did the new symphony " , asks Kilpeläinen , " thus also represent a modern sound unlike that of his previous style , with bleak , open tones and unresolved dissonances ? " After the recording of the fragments , Storgårds could recognise the composer 's late style , adding that " the harmonies are so wild and the music so exciting that I 'd really love to know how he went on with this . " Sibelius 's only preserved comment on the music itself , as distinct from his occasional progress reports , is a remark to Schnéevoigt in December 1932 : " You have no idea how clever it is " . 
 Scholars and critics are divided in their views about the value of the recovered excerpts . On the one hand , Josephson is convinced that sufficient material exists for a reconstruction of the entire symphony and eagerly awaits the undertaking of this task . This view is echoed by Stearns : " [ T ] here 's absolutely no reason not to attempt a completion " . Others , however , are more circumspect : Virtanen , in particular , emphasises that although the music is irrefutably late Sibelius , it has not been established beyond doubt that any of it belongs to the Eighth Symphony . Sirén , who played a major role in organising the performance of the fragments , believes that completion is impossible on the basis of existing sketches , and would be dependent on further discoveries . He also surmises that Sibelius , having rejected the work , would not have relished hearing the fragments played , a viewpoint which McKenna endorses : " Watching the performance on YouTube , I could not help but think how disappointed the composer would have been to hear his unfinished music performed . " Reviewing the recorded excerpts in Gramophone , Mellor remarks that even if further manuscripts should come to light , the Sibelius Rights Holders would have full control over the material and would decide whether performance was appropriate . Mellor concludes : " We 've had to wait some 80 years to hear less than three minutes of music , and the mystery of the Eighth isn 't set to unfold any more rapidly from here " . 
 = St Mary 's Church , Llanfair @-@ yng @-@ Nghornwy = 
 St Mary 's Church , Llanfair @-@ yng @-@ Nghornwy is a medieval parish church in the north @-@ west of Anglesey , north Wales . The date of foundation of the church , which is in the village of Llanfair @-@ yng @-@ Nghornwy , is unknown , but the oldest parts date from the 11th or 12th century . It has twice been enlarged : in the 15th century , when the chancel was rebuilt , and in the 16th century , when a chapel was added to the south of the chancel , separated by three arches . The tower at the west end is from the 17th century . A south porch of unknown date has been converted into a vestry , and the church is now entered through the tower . 
 St Mary 's is a Grade I listed building , a national designation given to buildings of " exceptional , usually national , interest " , in particular because it is regarded as " a fine rural parish church , incorporating significant early Medieval fabric " . Writers in the 19th century commented on the " lofty square tower " , the " very good " east window , and the " many elegant monuments " ; the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones called St Mary 's " one of the best specimens of an old parish church in the island " . In the 21st century , one writer has noted the " impressive lychgate " and a guide to the buildings of the region calls it " the most important church in north west Anglesey " . 
 The church is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , one of nine in a combined parish , although as of 2013 there has not been an incumbent priest since September 2009 . People associated with the church include James Williams , a 19th @-@ century rector who was awarded a gold medal for his efforts to save lives at sea , and his great @-@ grandson , the artist Sir Kyffin Williams . Both are buried in the churchyard . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Mary 's Church is the parish church for the village of Llanfair @-@ yng @-@ Nghornwy in the north @-@ west of Anglesey , north Wales . It is set in a churchyard at the side of a minor road , in the south @-@ east of the village . The area is near the coast , about 8 miles ( 13 km ) from the port town of Holyhead . Llanfair @-@ yng @-@ Nghornwy takes its name in part from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " ‑ fair " is a modified form of the saint 's name ( Mair being Welsh for " Mary " ) . The parish ’ s coastal position is reflected in its full name , which means " St Mary 's in the promontory " , or " St Mary in the angle of the waters " . 
 It is uncertain when the first church was constructed on the site . There was a church in Llanfair @-@ yng @-@ Nghornwy before 1254 , mentioned in the Norwich Taxation of that year . The oldest parts of the present structure are the nave walls and the arch between the nave and the chancel ( to the east of the nave ) ; these date from the 11th or 12th century . In the 15th century , the chancel was reconstructed and enlarged ; in the following century , a chapel was added to the south of the chancel , separated by an arcade of three arches . In her 1833 history of Anglesey , Angharad Llwyd said that the south chapel " belongs exclusively " to one of the local landed estates , and the chancel belonged to another . 
 A tower was added at the west end in the 17th century , perhaps in 1660 according to a 2009 guide to the buildings of the region . At some stage , a porch was added to the south @-@ west corner of the nave , but it has " no datable features " . In the middle of the 19th century the porch entrance was blocked off and replaced by a window , and since then access to the church has been through a door on the west side of the tower . Some restoration work was carried out in 1847 by the Sheffield @-@ based architects <unk> and Hadfield . Their plans included a proposal to add a chapel to the north side , but this did not happen . Further work was undertaken in 1860 , and some repairs were carried out in the chancel and south chapel in the 1930s under the architect and historian Harold Hughes . 
 St Mary 's is still used for worship by the Church in Wales . It is one of nine churches in the combined benefice of Bodedern with Llanfaethlu . It is within the deanery of <unk> and Talybolion , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2013 , there is no incumbent priest at the church , and there has not been one since September 2009 . 
 James Williams , rector of St Mary 's from 1821 to 1872 , helped to establish the Anglesey Association for the Preservation of Lives from Shipwreck in 1828 , in the wake of a storm that caused a boat to sink with 140 deaths . He was awarded a gold medal by the Royal National Institute for the Preservation of Life from Shipwreck ( later renamed the Royal National Lifeboat Institution ) in 1835 , for his efforts in the rescue of a boat during a gale . Angharad Llwyd , writing when Williams was at St Mary 's , noted that " this benevolent gentleman , aided by his lady , ever alert in the cause of humanity , are generally among the first on the shore , in case of accident , well supplied with restoratives , and other necessaries , to comfort and protect the suffering mariners . " The artist Sir Kyffin Williams ( 1918 – 2006 ) was a great @-@ grandson of James and his wife Frances . At his request , a memorial to them was put up on the south wall of the chapel . James , Frances and Kyffin are buried in the churchyard . The churchyard also contains the Commonwealth war graves of a Royal Navy sailor of World War I and another from World War II . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 St Mary 's is a medieval church , built using rubble masonry dressed with freestone and displaying Perpendicular details . The roof is made of slate with stone copings . Internally , the timbers of the roofs of the nave , chancel and chapel are exposed . The beams running the length of the nave are decorated at intervals by painted plaster shield designs . The chancel roof is from the late 15th century , and the chapel roof is from the early part of the following century . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The church is entered through the door at the west side of the tower , with modern double doors between the tower and the nave set into a plain square doorway dating from the 17th or 18th century . The nave is 27 feet 9 inches by 13 feet 8 inches ( 8 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 2 m ) . Between the nave and the chancel there is a plain round arch , from the 11th or 12th century , a step up , and a rail . At the east end of the chancel , there is a further step up from the chapel into the sanctuary , which has some 18th @-@ century gravestones set into it . The late 15th @-@ century chancel , which measures 32 feet 6 inches by 14 feet ( 9 @.@ 9 by 4 @.@ 3 m ) , has some memorials from the 18th and early 19th centuries . One is to a bonesetter called Evan Thomas ( died 1814 ) , erected by Thomas Bulkeley , 7th Viscount Bulkeley ; another , to Emma Viscountess Bulkeley Williams , is made from ornately decorated marble . 
 The three arches between the chancel and chapel rest on octagonal columns . One of the arches has inscribed upon it , in early 16th @-@ century lettering , SCA <unk> <unk> PRO ME <unk> A <unk> ( " Saint Mary pray for me David ap Iago " ) ; another has a stone with a roughly carved face . There was once a rood screen across the chancel , as shown by markings on the north wall and on the westernmost of the arches . It was still in position in 1867 , when one visitor mentioned it in his notes on the church . <unk> has been fixed to the east and south walls of the sanctuary in the chapel as a reredos . The chapel measures 32 feet 6 inches by 14 feet 6 inches ( 9 @.@ 9 by 4 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 The font is at the rear of the nave on the north side . It is octagonal on the outside , with a circular bowl inside . A survey of church plate within the Bangor diocese in 1906 recorded : a large silver chalice , inscribed with the donor 's name and the year 1713 ; a plain silver paten , dated 1724 – 25 ; and a pewter flagon , from about 1710 . 
 = = = Windows = = = 
 The nave has two windows . The south window , to the east of the vestry , is from the 14th century . It has two lights ( sections of window separated by mullions ) with flat tops and is decorated with stone tracery . A survey of the church in 1937 by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire noted the window ’ s " crude workmanship and design . " The window on the north nave wall has three lights with rounded tops . It too has been dated to the 14th century , but other sources say that it is from the 16th century . A 2009 guide to buildings of north @-@ west Wales says that the window is " typically 16th @-@ century " . 
 The 15th @-@ century window at the east end of the chancel has three lights topped with cinquefoils ( a pattern of five joined circles ) . The lights are decorated with tracery , and set in a pointed arch frame with a hood mould . Stained glass from 1850 depicts ( from north to south ) Christ with children , Christ at a table , and the cross . The north window in the chancel is a 19th @-@ century copy of the north nave window . There are two windows in the chapel , each with three lights ; one in the east wall from the 16th century set in an arch with a hood mould , the other in the south wall set in a flat @-@ headed frame . 
 = = = Tower and porch = = = 
 The tower has external buttresses and the door on the west side is set in a pointed arch frame with a hood mould . The buttresses and door were added to the tower after it was built ; the 1937 Royal Commission survey described them as " modern " . There are two stages ( levels ) to the tower ; the tall upper stage is slightly narrower than the base , which measures 8 feet 6 inches by 8 feet 9 inches ( 26 by 2 @.@ 7 m ) . The tower has simple rectangular openings in the north , east and south walls . There is a 17th @-@ century bell in the west wall of the tower in a plain arch opening ; the top of the wall is crenellated . Behind the parapet at the top of the tower , there is a short spire in the shape of a pyramid , made from wood and covered in slates . 
 The south porch has been described as " unusually long " ; it measures 11 feet 6 inches by 8 feet 9 inches ( 3 @.@ 5 by 2 @.@ 7 m ) and has been used as a vestry since the external doorway was blocked off and converted into a window . The 14th @-@ century doorway from the nave into the vestry has a pointed head in a square frame , and was described in the 1937 survey as having an " unusual design " . The porch roof may be from the late medieval period . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 St Mary 's has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade I listed building – the highest grade of listing , designating " exceptional , usually national , interest " ; fewer than 2 per cent of the listed buildings in Wales are in this category . It was given this status on 12 May 1970 , as " a fine rural parish church , incorporating significant early Medieval fabric , including a 12th @-@ century chancel arch " . Cadw ( the Welsh Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also notes the " good late Medieval additions , including a fine 16th @-@ century arcaded chapel ” , and says that St Mary 's is of " special interest " because of its early date , " and for the quality of its later detail " . 
 Writing in 1833 , before the restoration of 1847 , Angharad Llwyd described the church as " a spacious ancient structure , partly in the Norman style , with a lofty square tower , of rude architecture " . She noted the " massive circular pillars and arches " in the chancel , and the " peculiar good taste " of the architecture of the recently rebuilt rectory . The 19th @-@ century writer Samuel Lewis remarked upon the " many elegant monuments " in the church . 
 Writing in 1862 , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones said that it was " one of the largest churches in this division of Anglesey " He said that it had recently been " judiciously repaired and restored " by James Williams and was " now one of the best specimens of an old parish church in the island " , adding that the east window was " good in detail and in execution " . 
 The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited the church in 1867 . He said that the east window was " a very good Perpendicular one of three lights , early in the style . " He described the churchyard as " secluded , and shaded by fine trees " and the tower as " rude and plain " , noting that the " open bell arch " on the west side was comparable to the one at St Mary 's Church , Llanerchymedd . 
 A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey describes the " fairly large church " as standing in a " quiet wooded location " . It also comments upon the " impressive lychgate " at the entrance to the churchyard and the " squat pyramidal structure " on top of the tower . A 2009 guide to the buildings of the former county of Gwynedd calls St Mary 's " the most important church of north @-@ west Anglesey " and says that it has " an unusual plan " . 
 = Benjamin Hardin Helm = 
 Benjamin Hardin Helm ( June 2 , 1831 – September 21 , 1863 ) was a Kentucky politician , attorney , Confederate brigadier general , and a brother @-@ in @-@ law of Abraham Lincoln . He was also the son of Kentucky Governor John L. Helm . Helm was born in Bardstown , Kentucky . He attended the Kentucky Military Institute and the West Point Military Academy and then went to study law at the University of Louisville and Harvard University . He served as a state legislator and the state 's attorney in Kentucky . He also served as the assistant inspector @-@ general for the Kentucky state guard . Helm was offered the position of Union Army paymaster by his brother @-@ in @-@ law , President Abraham Lincoln , a position which he declined . Helm felt it was an honor to serve in the Confederate States Army , where he was initially a colonel and later promoted to brigadier general . Helm commanded the 1st Kentucky Brigade more commonly known as The Orphan Brigade . He died on the battlefield during the Battle of Chickamauga . Helm was married to Emilie Todd , the half @-@ sister of Mary Todd Lincoln . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The son of lawyer and politician John L. Helm and Lucinda Barbour Hardin , Benjamin Hardin Helm was born in Bardstown , Kentucky on June 2 , 1831 . In the winter of 1846 , at age 15 , Helm enrolled at the Kentucky Military Institute , where he remained for three months . He left on his 16th birthday to accept an appointment in West Point the same day . Helm graduated in 1851 near his 20th birthday , ranked 9th in a class of 42 cadets . He became a brevet second lieutenant in the 2nd U.S. Dragoons . He served at a cavalry school at Carlisle , Pennsylvania , and at Fort Lincoln , Texas , but resigned his commission after a year , when he was diagnosed with inflammatory rheumatism . 
 Helm then studied law at the University of Louisville and Harvard University , graduating in 1853 and practicing law with his father . In 1855 , he was elected to the House of Representatives of Kentucky from Hardin County , and was the state 's attorney for the 3rd district of Kentucky from 1856 to 1858 . In 1856 , Helm married Emilie Todd , a half @-@ sister of Mary Todd Lincoln . 
 In 1860 , he was appointed assistant inspector @-@ general of the Kentucky State Guard , which he was active in organizing . Kentucky remained officially neutral in the American Civil War , but his brother @-@ in @-@ law , now President Abraham Lincoln , offered him the position of paymaster of the Union Army . Helm declined the offer , and returned to Kentucky to raise the 1st Kentucky Cavalry Regiment for the Confederate Army . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Helm was commissioned a colonel on October 19 , 1861 , and served under Brigadier General Simon B. Buckner in Bowling Green , Kentucky . Helm and the 1st Kentucky were then ordered south . He was promoted to brigadier general on March 14 , 1862 and , three weeks later , received a new assignment to raise the 3rd Kentucky Brigade , in the division of Major General John C. Breckinridge . During the Battle of Shiloh , Helm used his brigade to guard the Confederate flanks . In 1862 , he was also sent to protect the Arkansas , an ironclad warship of the Confederate Navy under construction in Yazoo City , Mississippi . Serving under Breckinridge in January 1863 , he was given command of the First Kentucky Brigade , commonly known as the " Orphan Brigade " . Helm 's brigade was assigned to the Army of Tennessee , where it participated in the 1863 Tullahoma and Chickamauga campaigns . Near the end of the spring of 1863 , Breckenridge ordered Helm to deploy the brigade to Vicksburg , Mississippi to participate in General Joseph E. Johnston 's unsuccessful attempt to break the siege . Helm called it " the most unpleasant and trying [ campaign ] of his career " . 
 = = Battle of Chickamauga and death = = 
 In the fall of 1863 , the 1st Kentucky Brigade formed a part of General Braxton Bragg 's counteroffensive against Union Major General William Rosecrans in Chattanooga , Tennessee . At 9 : 30 am on September 20 , 1863 , the divisions of Generals Breckinridge and Patrick Cleburne were ordered to move forward . Helm 's brigade and the others in Breckinridge 's division drove into the Federals ' left . General Cleburne 's division , which was intended to strike near the center of the line , was delayed by heavy fire from Union soldiers , leaving the left flank unguarded . Repeated attempts to overwhelm the Federals were in vain , though some of Helm 's Kentuckians and <unk> managed to reach within 39 yards ( 36 m ) of the Federal line . In less than an hour of the order given to advance , fully one third of the Orphan Brigade had been lost . While the remainder of Helm 's men clashed with the Union line , a sharpshooter from the 15th Kentucky Union Infantry shot Helm in the chest . Bleeding profusely , he remained in the saddle a few moments before toppling to the ground . After being carried off the battlefield , Helm 's surgeons concluded that his wounds would be fatal . Helm clung to life for several hours . Knowing that his health was deteriorating , he asked who had won the battle . When assured that the Confederates had carried the day , he muttered : " Victory ! , Victory ! , Victory ! " . On September 21 , 1863 , Gen. Helm succumbed to his wounds . 
 Following his death , Abraham Lincoln and his wife went into private mourning at the White House . Mary Lincoln 's niece recalled : " She knew that a single tear shed for a dead enemy would bring torrents of scorn and bitter abuse on both her husband and herself . " However , the widowed Emilie Todd Helm was granted safe passage to the White House in December 1863 . 
 In an official report of the Battle of Chickamauga , General Daniel Harvey Hill stated that Benjamin Helm 's " gallantry and loveliness of character endeared him to everyone . " In a letter to Emilie Todd Helm , General Breckinridge said , " Your husband commanded them [ the men of the Orphan brigade ] like a thorough soldier . He loved them , they loved him , and he died at their head , a patriot and a hero . " 
 = Westminster Assembly = 
 The Westminster Assembly of Divines was a council of theologians ( or " divines " ) and members of the English Parliament appointed to restructure the Church of England which met from 1643 to 1653 . Several Scots also attended , and the Assembly 's work was adopted by the Church of Scotland . As many as 121 ministers were called to the Assembly , with nineteen others added later to replace those who did not attend or could no longer attend . It produced a new Form of Church Government , a Confession of Faith or statement of belief , two catechisms or manuals for religious instruction ( Shorter and Larger ) , and a liturgical manual , the Directory for Public Worship , for the Churches of England and Scotland . The Confession and catechisms were adopted as doctrinal standards in the Church of Scotland and other Presbyterian churches , where they remain normative . Amended versions of the Confession were also adopted in Congregational and Baptist churches in England and New England in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries . The Confession became influential throughout the English @-@ speaking world , but especially in American Protestant theology . 
 The Assembly was called by the Long Parliament before and during the beginning of the First English Civil War . The Long Parliament was influenced by Puritanism , a religious movement which sought to further reform the church . They were opposed to the religious policies of King Charles I and William Laud , Archbishop of Canterbury . As part of a military alliance with Scotland , Parliament agreed that the outcome of the Assembly would bring the English Church into closer conformity with the Church of Scotland . The Scottish Church was governed by a system of elected assemblies of elders called presbyterianism , rather than rule by bishops , called episcopalianism , which was used in the English church . Scottish commissioners attended and advised the Assembly as part of the agreement . Disagreements over church government caused open division in the Assembly , despite attempts to maintain unity . The party of divines who favoured presbyterianism was in the majority , but political and military realities led to greater influence for the congregationalist party . Congregationalists favoured autonomy for individual congregations rather than the subjection of congregations to regional and national assemblies entailed in presbyterianism . Parliament eventually adopted a presbyterian form of government , but it lacked the power the presbyterian divines desired . During the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 , all of the documents of the Assembly were repudiated and episcopal church government was reinstated in England . 
 The Assembly worked in the Reformed Protestant theological tradition , also known as Calvinism . It took the Bible as the authoritative word of God , from which all theological reflection must be based . The divines were committed to the Reformed doctrine of predestination — that God chooses certain men to be saved and enjoy eternal life rather than eternal punishment . There was some disagreement at the Assembly over the doctrine of particular redemption — that Christ died only for those chosen for salvation . The Assembly also held to Reformed covenant theology , a framework for interpreting the Bible . The Assembly 's Confession is the first of the Reformed confessions to teach a doctrine called the covenant of works , which teaches that before the fall of man , God promised eternal life to Adam on condition that he perfectly obeyed God . 
 = = Background = = 
 Parliament called the Westminster Assembly during a time of increasing hostility between Charles I , monarch of England and Scotland , and the Puritans . Puritans could be distinguished by their insistence that worship practices be supported implicitly or explicitly by the Bible , while their opponents gave greater authority to traditional customs . They believed the Church of England , which had separated itself from the Catholic Church during the English Reformation , was still too heavily influenced by Catholicism . They sought to rid the church and nation of any of these remaining influences . This included the Church 's episcopal polity , or rule by a hierarchy of bishops . Puritans , unlike separatists , did not leave the established church . Under Charles , the Puritans ' opponents were placed in high positions of authority , most notably William Laud who was made Archbishop of Canterbury in 1633 , even though these " high churchmen " were in the minority . Puritans were forced to keep their views private or face fines and imprisonment . Laud promoted advocates of Arminianism , a theological perspective opposed to the Reformed theology of the Puritans . Worship practices such as kneeling at communion , bowing at the name of Christ , and the placement of communion tables at the East end of churches were also reinstated . To the Puritans , these seemed to be a step in the direction of Catholicism . 
 There were also conflicts between the king and the Scots , whose church was ruled by a system of elected assemblies called presbyterianism . James , Charles 's predecessor as King of Scotland , made it clear that he intended to impose elements of episcopal church government and the Book of Common Prayer on the Scots beginning in 1604 . The Scots considered this a reversion to Roman Catholicism . Charles furthered English impositions on the Church of Scotland in 1636 and 1637 . This led to the First Bishops ' War between Charles and the Scots in 1639 . Charles called what came to be known as the Short Parliament to raise funds for the war , but he soon dissolved it when it began voicing opposition to his policies . Following the Second Bishops ' War with the Scots in 1640 , Charles was forced to call another parliament to raise additional funds . 
 What came to be known as the Long Parliament also began to voice vague grievances against Charles , many of which were religious in nature . Parliament had many Puritans and Puritan @-@ sympathizing members , who generally opposed the existing episcopal system , but there was little agreement over what shape the church should take . Later in 1640 , the Root and Branch petition was presented to the House of Commons , the lower house of Parliament . It was signed by about 15 @,@ 000 Londoners and called for total elimination of the episcopal system . Committees were organized in the House of Commons to enact religious reforms , leading to the imprisonment of Archbishop Laud and his supporters in the Tower of London as retaliation for their repression of Puritans . The Court of High Commission and the Star Chamber , courts which had inflicted severe punishments on Puritan dissenters , were also abolished . 
 = = Calling the assembly = = 
 The idea of a national assembly of theologians to advise Parliament on further church reforms was first presented to the House of Commons in 1641 . Such a proposal was also included in the Grand Remonstrance , a list of grievances which Parliament presented to Charles on 1 December that year . Charles responded on 23 December that the church required no reforms . Undeterred , Parliament passed three bills in 1642 appointing an assembly and stipulating that its members would be chosen by Parliament . Charles , whose royal assent was required for the bills to become law , was only willing to consider such an assembly if the members were chosen by the clergy . This was the practice for selection of members of Convocation , the assembly of clergy of the Church of England . 
 Defying the king , between 12 February and 20 April 1642 , each county delegation of England in Commons chose two divines , in addition to two for each county of Wales , four for London , and two for each University ( Oxford and Cambridge ) . County delegations often chose divines from their own county , but not always . Commons chose the members in this way to ensure that their local constituencies were represented in the decision . The House of Lords , Parliament 's upper house , added another fourteen names on 14 May , to which Commons agreed . Meanwhile , relations continued to deteriorate between the king and Parliament . Charles raised the royal standard at Nottingham on 22 August , marking the beginning of the First English Civil War . The start of the war lent support to the cause of the Assembly in Parliament , because holding it would convince the Scots that Parliament was serious about reforming the church and induce the Scots to come to their aid . On the other hand , the war added strain to the already busy Parliament . 
 Parliament finally passed an ordinance to hold the assembly on its own authority without Charles 's assent on 12 June 1643 . It named as many as 121 ministers and thirty non @-@ voting parliamentary observers : twenty from Commons , and ten from the House of Lords . The Assembly was almost entirely English ; Parliament appointed Englishmen for the counties of Wales , but the French stranger churches ( churches of Protestant refugees from Catholic France ) sent two ministers in place of any from the Channel Islands . Many of the divines were internationally recognized scholars of the Bible , ancient languages , <unk> , and scholastic theology . Many were also famous preachers . Most of these theologians had retained their positions in the Church during the tenure of William Laud . Some had been ejected from their churches or cited by ecclesiastical courts for their views . Some had fled to the Continent , and one to the American colonies . Nonetheless , they all considered themselves members of the Church of England and had received episcopal ordination . Most were conformists , meaning they agreed to follow the Act of Uniformity 1558 and the Book of Common Prayer . 
 The Assembly was strictly under the control of Parliament , and was only to debate topics which Parliament directed . Assembly members were not permitted to state their disagreements with majority opinions or share any information about the proceedings , except in writing to Parliament . Parliament chose William Twisse , an internationally respected theologian , to be the Assembly 's prolocutor or chairman . Due to Twisse 's ill health , Cornelius Burges , whom Parliament appointed as one of several assessors , served as prolocutor pro tempore for most of the Assembly . Twenty @-@ two appointed members of the Assembly died before 1649 , and they along with those who did not attend for other reasons were replaced by another nineteen members . Three non @-@ voting scribes were also added in 1643 . 
 = = Revising the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles = = 
 The Assembly 's first meeting began with a sermon by William Twisse in the nave of Westminster Abbey on 1 July 1643 . The nave was so full that the House of Commons had to send members ahead to secure seats . Following the sermon , the divines processed to the Henry VII Chapel , which would be their place of meeting until 2 October when they moved to the warmer and more private Jerusalem Chamber . After their initial meeting they adjourned for about a week , as Parliament had not yet given specific instructions . 
 On 6 July , they received a set of rules from Parliament and were ordered to examine the first ten of the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles , the current doctrinal standard of the Church of England , and " to free and vindicate the Doctrine of them from all Aspersions of false Interpretations " . After a day of fasting , the Assembly took a vow , as directed by Parliament , to " not maintain any thing in Matters of Doctrine , but what I think , in my conscience , to be truth " . The divines organized themselves into three standing committees , though each committee was open to any member of the Assembly . The committees would be assigned topics and prepare propositions for debate in the full Assembly following each morning of committee meetings . In addition , over 200 ad hoc committees were appointed for tasks such as examination of candidate preachers , college fellows , and suspected heretics . 
 The Assembly resolved , after some debate , that all the doctrines of the Thirty @-@ Nine articles would need to be proven from the Bible . Assembly members were prone to long speeches and they made slow progress , frustrating the leadership . The eighth of the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles recommended the Apostles ' Creed , Nicene Creed , and Athanasian Creed , considered to be basic statements of orthodoxy , to be received and believed . The Assembly was unable to resolve conflicts between those who would not be bound by creeds and those who wished to retain the existing language that the creeds be " thoroughly received and believed " . The " <unk> " , who took the former position , argued that the articles only require the " matter " of the creeds be believed . On 25 August the article was put off until the rest of the articles could be dealt with . This early disagreement on fundamental issues revealed deep rifts between different factions of the assembly . 
 = = Debating church government = = 
 From the beginning of the First Civil War , the Long Parliament recognized that they would need assistance from the Scots . In return for a military alliance , the Scottish Parliament required the English to sign the Solemn League and Covenant in 1643 , which stipulated that the English would bring their church into greater conformity with the Church of Scotland . The Scottish Parliament sent commissioners to London to represent Scotland 's interests to the English Parliament . Eleven of these , four theologians and seven members of Parliament , were also invited to the Assembly . The commissioners were given the opportunity to become full voting members of the Assembly but declined , preferring to maintain their independence as commissioners of their own nation and church . Samuel Rutherford , George Gillespie , and Alexander Henderson were the most outspoken of the commissioners . 
 On 12 October 1643 , Parliament ordered the Assembly to cease work on the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles and to begin to frame a common form of church government for the two nations . The Assembly would spend a quarter of its full sessions on the subject of church government . The majority of the Assembly members supported presbyterian polity , or church government by elected assemblies of lay and clerical representatives , though many were not dogmatically committed to it . Several members of this group , numbering about twenty and including William Twisse , favoured a " primitive " episcopacy , which would include elements of presbyterianism and a reduced role for bishops . 
 There were also several congregationalists , who favoured autonomy for individual local churches . Their most influential divines were Thomas Goodwin , Philip Nye , <unk> Simpson , Jeremiah Burroughs , and William Bridge . They were often called the " dissenting brethren " in the Assembly . They have sometimes been labelled " Independents " , but they rejected this term . The Assembly members for the most part reserved the label " Independent " for separatists who left the established church . The congregationalist divines cannot be equated with separatists and <unk> , as they had accepted episcopal ordination and remained in the Church of England . Their influence was assisted by the success of Oliver Cromwell and his New Model Army in the ongoing civil war . Cromwell and many others in the army supported congregationalism . 
 A third group of divines were known as <unk> , a term for those who believed that the state should have significant power over the church . The entire Assembly was Erastian in the sense that the body had been called by Parliament and was completely under state control . Those labelled " Erastian " at the Assembly believed the civil authority , rather than church officers , should hold the power of church discipline . This included the power to withhold communion from unrepentant sinners . They did not see any particular form of church government as divinely mandated , and because of this the dissenting brethren allied with them when it became clear that a presbyterian establishment would be much less tolerant of congregationalism than Parliament . There were only two divines at the Assembly who held the Erastian view , John Lightfoot and Thomas Coleman , but the presence of members of Parliament , especially John Selden , as well as the fact of parliamentary oversight of the Assembly , gave Erastian views disproportional influence . 
 Several episcopalians , supporters of the existing system of bishops , were also included in the summoning ordinance , but Parliament may have nominated them to lend greater legitimacy to the Assembly and not have expected them to attend because Charles had not approved of the Assembly . Only one , Daniel <unk> , participated , and he only until his arrest for treason in October 1643 . 
 Debate on church officers began on 19 October . The Assembly began with the issue of ordination , as many of the divines were concerned about the rise of various sectarian movements and the lack of any mechanism for ordination of ministers of the established church . While some members did not seem to think ordination necessary for preachers ( though they should not administer the sacraments without it ) , a majority of the divines thought any regular preaching without ordination unacceptable and wished to erect a provisional presbytery for purposes of ordination . There was also debate at this early stage over the nature of the visible church . The congregationalists considered a church to be a single local congregation , while the majority considered the national church to be a unity and were alarmed at the prospect of a disintegrated English church . Despite these debates , up until the end of 1643 there was hope that a common church government could be framed that would be satisfactory to all parties involved . 
 On 3 or 4 January 1644 , the five leading dissenting brethren signalled a break with the rest of the Assembly when they published An <unk> Narration , a polemical pamphlet appealing to Parliament . It argued that the congregational system was more amenable to state control of religious matters than that of the presbyterians because they did not desire the church to retain any real power except to withdraw fellowship from aberrant congregations . By 17 January , the majority of the Assembly had become convinced that the best way forward was a presbyterian system similar to that of the Scots , but the dissenting brethren were allowed to continue to state their case in hope that they could eventually be reconciled . It was hoped that by avoiding asserting that presbyterianism was established by divine right , the congregationalists could be accommodated . 
 Despite these efforts , on 21 February it became clear just how fundamentally opposed the groups were . Philip Nye , one of the dissenting brethren , asserted in a speech that a presbytery set over local congregations would become as powerful as the state and was dangerous to the commonwealth , provoking vigorous opposition from presbyterians . The next day , the Assembly finally began to establish a prescription for presbyterian government . Owing to a strong belief in the unity of the church , the Assembly continued to try to find ways to reconcile the dissenting brethren with the majority throughout 1644 , including the establishment of a special committee for that purpose in March . However , on 15 November , the dissenting brethren presented their reasons for disagreement with the rest of the Assembly to Parliament , and on 11 December the majority submitted a draft of a presbyterian form of government . 
 = = Conflicts with Parliament = = 
 Relations between the Assembly and Parliament were already deteriorating in 1644 , when Parliament ignored the Assembly 's request that " grossly ignorant and notoriously profane " individuals be barred from communion . While members of Parliament agreed that the sacrament should be kept pure , many of them disagreed with the presbyterian majority in the Assembly over who had the final power of excommunication , taking the Erastian view that it was the state . Also , by 1646 , Oliver Cromwell 's New Model Army had won the war on behalf of Parliament . Cromwell , along with a majority of the army , was strongly in favour of religious toleration for all sorts of Christians even if the national church was to be presbyterian . His rise to power as a result of his military victories made the idea of a strictly presbyterian settlement without freedom of worship for others very unlikely . Parliament at least wanted to know which sins in particular were grave enough to trigger excommunication by the church ; the Assembly was reticent to provide such information , as the majority considered the power of the church in this area to be absolute . 
 In May 1645 , Parliament passed an ordinance allowing <unk> to appeal the church 's sentences to Parliament . Another ordinance on 20 October contained a list of sins to which the church would be limited in its power to excommunicate . To the majority of the divines ' dismay , an even more Erastian ordinance was proposed in March 1646 . The Assembly published a protest , provoking the Commons to charge it with breach of privilege and to submit nine questions to the divines on the matter . Votes were to be included with the answers , an attempt to force the divines associated with the protest petition to reveal themselves . 
 The Nine Queries , as they came to be called , focused on the divine right ( jure divino ) of church government . While the presbyterian divines were capable of defending their vision for church government as established by divine right in the Bible , they were unwilling to answer the queries because doing so would further expose the disunity of the Assembly and weaken their case in Parliament . In July 1647 , the New Model Army invaded London and conservative members of Parliament were forced out . Parliament passed an ordinance establishing religious tolerance and ensuring that the Assembly 's vision of a national , compulsory presbyterian church would never come to fruition . In London , where support for presbyterianism was greatest , presbyteries were established in only sixty @-@ four of 108 city parishes , and regional presbyterian classes were only formed in fourteen of England 's forty counties . A planned national general assembly never met . Many presbyterians did , however , establish voluntary presbyteries in what was a de facto free church situation until the Restoration in 1660 , when a compulsory episcopal system was reinstated . 
 The new Form of Government was much more acceptable to the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland . They passed it on 10 February 1645 , contingent on some particularities of presbyterian government which were expected to be worked out in a forthcoming Directory for Church Government . At the same time they announced their desire to formally unite the two churches . Following the rise of Cromwell and the secret Engagement of some Scots with Charles this hope was abandoned , and the documents were never formally adopted . The General Assembly ceased to function under Cromwell and the kings who succeeded him from 1649 to 1690 . 
 = = Confession , catechisms , and the Directory for Public Worship = = 
 During and after the debates over church government , the Assembly framed other documents which did not cause open rifts . The Directory for Public Worship , which was to replace the Book of Common Prayer , was swiftly written in 1644 and passed by Parliament on 3 January 1645 . The Directory , accepted by the Scots as well , took a middle course between the presbyterians and congregationalists . The presbyterians for the most part preferred a fixed liturgy while congregationalists favoured extemporaneous prayer . The Directory consisted of an order for services with sample prayers . The Assembly also recommended a psalter , translated by Francis Rous for use in worship . 
 A Confession of Faith to replace the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles was begun in August 1646 . While there is little record of the actions of the Assembly during the writing of the Confession , it is clear that there were significant debates in the Assembly over almost every doctrine found in it . The Confession was printed and sent to Parliament in December . The House of Commons requested scripture citations be added to the Confession , which were provided in April 1648 . Parliament approved the Confession with revisions to the chapters on church censures , synods and councils , and marriage on 20 June 1648 . The General Assembly of the Church of Scotland had already adopted the Confession without revision in 1647 . The restoration of Charles II in 1660 effectively made this legislation a nullity . 
 The Assembly had already done significant work on a catechism between December 1643 and January 1647 containing fifty @-@ five questions , before it decided to create two catechisms rather than one . The Larger Catechism , intended to assist ministers in teaching the Reformed faith to their congregations . The Shorter Catechism was based on the Larger Catechism but intended for use in teaching the faith to children . Parliament demanded scripture proofs for the catechisms as well . The Scots General Assembly approved both catechisms in 1648 . 
 The Assembly understood its mandate under the Solemn League and Covenant to have been fulfilled on 14 April 1648 when it delivered the scripture citations to Parliament , and the Scottish Commissioners had already left by the end of 1647 . The Assembly continued to meet primarily for the purpose of examination of ministers for ordination . Most of the divines were unhappy with the republican Commonwealth that emerged after Colonel Pride 's Purge of the Long Parliament in 1648 . As a result , a majority stopped attending rather than agree to the oath of Engagement to the Commonwealth that was imposed in 1649 . Newspapers continued to report on the meetings of the Assembly as late as March 1653 . The Assembly must have stopped meeting sometime between then and Cromwell 's dissolution of the Rump Parliament on 20 April 1653 . 
 = = Theology = = 
 The Assembly was a product of the British Reformed tradition , taking as a major source the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles as well as the theology of James Ussher and his Irish Articles of 1615 . The divines also considered themselves to be within the broader European Reformed tradition . They were in frequent correspondence with continental Reformed theologians , and sought their approval . They also drew upon the pre @-@ Reformation British theological tradition , which emphasized biblical knowledge and was influenced by the Augustinian theological tradition exemplified by Anselm , Thomas <unk> , and John Wycliffe . The recorded debates of the Assembly are full of citations of church fathers and medieval scholastic theologians . 
 The Confession starts with the doctrine of revelation , or how people can know about God . The divines believed knowledge of God was available to people through nature as well as the Bible , but they also believed that the Bible , or Scripture , is the only way in which people attain saving knowledge of God . The doctrine of Scripture was also a particularly important area of debate at the time . Scholars had begun to argue that the Hebrew vowel points , marks added to the text to aid in pronunciation , of the Old Testament were probably not part of the original . This caused significant debate between Reformed polemicists and Roman Catholics . Catholics argued that such a discovery demonstrated the need for an authoritative magisterium to interpret the Bible as opposed to the Protestant doctrine of <unk> , that the essential teachings of the Bible could be interpreted by anyone . English Reformed writers in particular took up the work of defending the Reformed doctrine . The divines had a strong view of the inspiration of the Bible , and believed that God revealed himself in the propositions found in Scripture . While the issue of biblical inerrancy , the belief that there are no errors in the Bible , did not arise until the eighteenth century , the divines clearly did not believe the Bible to contain any errors . Many of the divines held a rather mechanical view of biblical inspiration , believing that not only the words and ideas but also the letters and vowel points of the Hebrew text were inspired by God . On the other hand , they acknowledged that the text was written by humans in their own styles . They did not make any distinction between essential and incidental matters with respect to biblical inspiration . 
 Puritans believed that God is sovereign over all of history and nature and that none of what were called his decrees would be frustrated . There was significant debate in the Assembly over the relationship of God 's decree of predestination , or choice to save some people , to the redemption purchased by Christ 's death . Many of the Reformed during this period taught that Christ died with the purpose only to save those who were eternally chosen to be saved , a doctrine called particular redemption . A vocal minority of the divines of the Assembly argued for a position known as hypothetical universalism . Edmund <unk> held such a view , and he argued that Christ 's death , as well as saving those who had been chosen , offered salvation to all people on condition that they believe . The Assembly 's Confession did not teach such a view , and its language is much more amenable to a particular redemption interpretation , but there is a general agreement among scholars that the Confession 's language allows an hypothetical universalist interpretation . 
 Covenant theology is an interpretive framework used by Reformed theologians which was significantly developed during the seventeenth century . Under this scheme , as articulated by the Assembly , God 's dealings with men are described in terms of two covenants : the covenant of works and covenant of grace . The Westminster Confession was the first major Reformed symbol to explicitly mention the covenant of works ( sometimes called the covenant of life ) , in which God offered Adam eternal life on condition of perfect obedience . In the fall of man , Adam broke the covenant of works by eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil . To remedy this , God offered salvation apart from human initiative in what was called the covenant of grace . This covenant allowed man to enjoy eternal life despite his inability to obey God 's law perfectly . The idea of the covenant of grace was a much more common feature of orthodox Reformed theology . The Westminster divines set these two covenants against each other as the two major ways in which God deals with people . 
 The divines were even more strongly opposed to Catholicism than to William Laud and his followers , the <unk> . They associated both Catholicism and <unk> with Arminianism and persecution . Before the civil war , the divines saw these two groups as the greatest threat to the church . With the rise of radical sectarian movements during the war , the divines became much more concerned with these groups than polemics against Catholicism . The divines were particularly concerned with those they labeled antinomians . This was a loose term for those who saw the moral law as in some way no longer relevant for Christians . The divines saw these groups as more immediately threatening than Catholicism . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The work of the Westminster Assembly was repudiated by the Church of England during the Restoration in 1660 . The Act of Uniformity 1662 , a law requiring even greater adherence to the Book of Common Prayer and support for episcopalianism than had previously been required , forced Puritan ministers to leave the Church . Though some presbyterians continued to desire to be readmitted to the established church , restrictions on worship for non @-@ conformists led to presbyterians putting aside differences with congregationalists and adopting congregational church orders . 
 The Civil War brought with it the end of the consensus among English Protestants that there should be a single church imposed by the state , though there was still not complete freedom of religion . The ideals of the dissenting brethren of the Assembly were significant in the rise of denominationalism , the doctrine that the church is found in several institutions rather than a single one in a given location . Though Protestants already commonly recognized the validity of churches in different territories , the outcome of the Assembly 's debates marks the wider acceptance of the idea that several true churches may be found in the same territory . 
 The Confession produced by the Assembly was adopted with amendments by Congregationalists in England in the form of the 1658 Savoy Declaration , as well as by Particular Baptists in the form of the 1689 Baptist Confession . When the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland was reestablished in 1690 following the Glorious Revolution , it ratified the Westminster Confession , but not any other document produced at Westminster . The Confession remains , according to the 1929 Declaratory Articles , the Church of Scotland 's " principal subordinate standard " , subordinate to the Bible . <unk> of the Shorter Catechism has been made a requirement for children in many Presbyterian churches . 
 The migrations and missionary efforts of each of these groups lead to the widespread significance of the Westminster Assembly throughout the English @-@ speaking world . The Assembly 's Confession was particularly influential in American Protestant theology . It was included with congregationalist changes as part of the 1648 Cambridge Platform , a statement produced by ministers of colonial Massachusetts and the surrounding region , and again in colonial Connecticut as part of the 1708 Saybrook Platform . The Confession was modified for American Baptists in the 1707 Philadelphia Confession . The Adopting Act of 1729 required American Presbyterians to agree to the theology of the Assembly 's Confession , and the Confession remains a part of the Presbyterian Church ( USA ) ' s Book of Confessions . The Confession has been called " by far the most influential doctrinal symbol in American Protestant history " by the historian of religion Sydney E. Ahlstrom . 
 = Stephen V of Hungary = 
 Stephen V ( Hungarian : V. István , Croatian : Stjepan V. , Slovak : Štefan V ; before 18 October 1239 – 6 August 1272 , Csepel Island ) was King of Hungary and Croatia between 1270 and 1272 , and Duke of Styria from 1258 to 1260 . He was the oldest son of King Béla IV and Maria Laskarina . King Béla had his son crowned king at the age of six and appointed him Duke of Slavonia . Still a child , Stephen married Elizabeth , a daughter of a chieftain of the Cumans whom his father settled in the Great Hungarian Plain . 
 King Béla appointed Stephen Duke of Transylvania in 1257 and Duke of Styria in 1258 . The local noblemen in Styria , which had been annexed four years before , opposed his rule . Assisted by King Ottokar II of Bohemia , they rebelled and expelled Stephen 's troops from most parts of Styria . After Ottokar II routed the united army of Stephen and his father in the Battle of Kressenbrunn on 12 July 1260 , Stephen left Styria and returned to Transylvania . 
 Stephen forced his father to cede all the lands of the Kingdom of Hungary to the east of the Danube to him and adopted the title of junior king in 1262 . In two years , a civil war broke out between father and son , because Stephen accused Béla of planning to disinherit him . They concluded a peace treaty in 1266 , but confidence was never restored between them . Stephen succeeded his father , who died on 3 May 1270 , without difficulties , but his sister , Anna and his father 's closest advisors fled to the Kingdom of Bohemia . Ottokar II invaded Hungary in the spring of 1271 , but Stephen routed him . In next summer , a rebellious lord captured and imprisoned Stephen 's son , Ladislaus . Shortly thereafter , Stephen unexpectedly fell ill and died . 
 = = Childhood ( 1239 – 1245 ) = = 
 Stephen was the eighth child and first son of King Béla IV of Hungary and his wife , Maria , a daughter of Theodore I Lascaris , Emperor of Nicaea . He was born in 1239 . Archbishop Robert of Esztergom baptised him on 18 October . The child , heir apparent from birth , was named after Saint Stephen , the first King of Hungary . 
 Béla and his family , including Stephen , fled to Zagreb after the Mongols had annihilated the royal army in the Battle of Mohi on 11 April 1241 . The Mongols crossed the frozen Danube in February 1242 and the royal family ran off as far as the well @-@ fortified Dalmatian town of Trogir . The King and his family returned from Dalmatia after the Mongols unexpectedly withdrew from Hungary in March . 
 = = Junior king = = 
 = = = Duke of Slavonia ( 1245 – 1257 ) = = = 
 A royal charter of 1246 mentions Stephen as " King , and Duke of Slavonia " . Apparently , in the previous year , Béla had his son crowned as junior king and endowed with the lands between the river Dráva and the Adriatic Sea , according to historians Gyula Kristó and Ferenc Makk . The seven @-@ year @-@ old Stephen 's provinces — Croatia , Dalmatia and Slavonia — were administered by royal governors , known as bans . 
 In a letter addressed to Pope Innocent IV in the late 1240s , Béla IV wrote that " [ o ] n behalf of Christendom we had our son marry a Cuman girl " . The bride was Elizabeth , the daughter of a leader of the Cumans whom Béla had invited to settle in the plains along the river Tisza . Elizabeth had been baptized , but ten Cuman chieftains present at the ceremony nevertheless took their customary oath upon a dog cut into two by a sword . 
 = = = Duke of Transylvania and Styria ( 1257 – 1260 ) = = = 
 When Stephen attained the age of majority in 1257 , his father appointed him Duke of Transylvania . Stephen 's rule in Transylvania was short @-@ lived , because his father transferred him to Styria in 1258 . Styria had been annexed in 1254 , but the local lords rose up in rebellion and expelled Béla IV 's governor , Stephen Gutkeled , before Stephen 's appointment . Stephen and his father jointly invaded Styria and subdued the rebels . In addition to Styria , Stephen also received two neighboring counties — Vas and Zala — in Hungary from his father . He launched a plundering raid in Carinthia in the spring of 1259 , in retaliation of Duke Ulrich III of Carinthia 's support of the Styrian rebels . 
 Stephen 's rule remained unpopular in Styria . With support from King Ottokar II of Bohemia , the local lords again rebelled . Stephen could preserve only Pettau ( present @-@ day Ptuj , Slovenia ) and its region . On 25 June 1260 , Stephen crossed the river Morava to invade Ottokar 's realm . His military force , which consisted of Székely , Romanian and Cuman troops , routed an Austrian army . However , in the decisive Battle of Kressenbrunn King Béla 's and Stephen 's united army was vanquished on 12 July , primarily because the main forces , which were under King Béla 's command , arrived late . Stephen , who commanded the advance guard , barely escaped from the battlefield . The Peace of Vienna , which was signed on 31 March 1261 , put an end to the conflict between Hungary and Bohemia , forcing Béla IV to renounce of Styria in favor of Ottokar II . 
 = = = Conflicts and civil war ( 1260 – 1270 ) = = = 
 Stephen returned to Transylvania and started to rule it for the second time after 20 August 1260 . He and his father jointly invaded Bulgaria and seized Vidin in 1261 . His father returned to Hungary , but Stephen continued the campaign alone . He laid siege to Lom on the Danube and advanced as far as <unk> in pursuit of Tsar Constantine Tikh of Bulgaria . However , the Tsar succeeded in avoiding any clashes with the invaders and Stephen withdrew his troops from Bulgaria by the end of the year . 
 Stephen 's relationship with Béla IV deteriorated in the early 1260s . Stephen 's charters reveal his fear of being disinherited and expelled by his father . He also accused some unnamed barons of inciting the old monarch against him . On the other hand , Stephen 's charters prove that he made land grants in Bihar , Szatmár , <unk> , and other counties which were situated outside Transylvania . 
 Archbishops Philip of Esztergom and Smaragd of Kalocsa undertook to mediate after some clashes occurred between the two kings ' partisans in the autumn . According to the Peace of Pressburg , which was concluded around 25 November , Béla IV and his son divided the country and Stephen received the lands to the east of the Danube . When confirming the treaty on 5 December , Stephen also promised that he would not invade Slavonia which had been granted to his younger brother , Béla , by their father . On this occasion , Stephen styled himself " Junior King , Duke of Transylvania and Lord of the Cumans " . 
 A Bulgarian nobleman , Despot Jacob Svetoslav sought assistance from Stephen after his domains , which were situated in the regions south of Vidin , were overrun by Byzantine troops in the second half of 1263 . Stephen sent reinforcements under the command of Ladislaus II Kán , Voivode of Transylvania to Bulgaria . The Voivode routed the Byzantines and drove them out of Bulgaria . Stephen granted Vidin to Jacob Svetoslav who accepted his suzerainty . 
 The reconciliation of Stephen and his father was only temporary . Stephen confiscated the domains of his mother and sister , Anna — including Beszterce ( present @-@ day Bistrița , Romania ) and <unk> — which were located in the lands under his rule . Béla IV 's army crossed the Danube under Anna 's command after 1 August 1264 . She besieged and took Sárospatak and seized Stephen 's wife and children . Voivode Ladislaus Kán turned against Stephen and led an army , which consisted of Cuman warriors , to Transylvania . Stephen routed him at the fort of <unk> ( now Deva , Romania ) . King Béla 's Judge royal , Lawrence arrived at the head of a new army and forced Stephen to retreat to <unk> ( now Codlea , Romania ) . The Judge royal lay siege to the fortress , but Stephen 's partisans relieved it . Stephen launched a counter @-@ offensive and forced his father 's army to retreat . He gained a decisive victory over his father 's army in the Battle of <unk> in March 1265 . The two archbishops mediated a new consolidation between father and son , which confirmed the 1262 division of the country . Béla and Stephen signed the peace treaty in the Convent of the Blessed Virgin on the Rabbits ' Island ( now Margaret Island in Budapest ) on 23 March 1266 . 
 During the civil war in Hungary , Stephen 's vassal , Despot Jacob Svetoslav submitted himself to Tsar Constantine Tikh of Bulgaria . In the summer of 1266 , Stephen invaded Bulgaria , seized Vidin , Pleven and other forts and routed the Bulgarians in five battles . Jacob Svetoslav again accepted Stephen 's suzerainty and was reinstalled in Vidin . From then on , Stephen used the title " King of Bulgaria " in his charters . 
 Béla and Stephen together confirmed the liberties of the " royal servants " , from then on known as noblemen , in 1267 . A double marriage alliance between Stephen and King Charles I of Sicily — Stephen 's son , Ladislaus married Charles 's daughter , Elisabeth , and Charles 's namesake son married Stephen 's daughter , Mary — strengthened Stephen 's international position in 1269 . Confidence was never restored between Béla and Stephen . On his deathbed , the old King requested King Ottokar II of Bohemia to give shelter to his daughter Anna and his partisans after his death . 
 = = Reign ( 1270 – 1272 ) = = 
 The senior King died on 3 May 1270 . His daughter , Anna , seized the royal treasury and fled to Bohemia . Henry Kőszegi , Nicholas <unk> , and Lawrence Aba — Béla 's closest advisors — followed her and handed over Kőszeg , Borostyánkő ( Bernstein , Austria ) and their other castles along the western borders to Ottokar II . Stephen nominated his own partisans to the highest offices ; for instance , Joachim Gutkeled became Ban of Slavonia , and Matthew Csák was appointed Voivode of Transylvania . Stephen granted Esztergom County to Archbishop Philip who crowned him king in Esztergom on or after 17 May . 
 The Polish chronicler Jan Długosz writes that Stephen made " a pilgrimage to the tomb of St. Stanisław " in Cracow and visited his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Boleslaw the Chaste , Duke of Cracow at the end of August . The two monarchs renewed " the old alliance between Hungary and Poland " and entered into an alliance " to have the same friends and the same enemies " . Stephen also met Ottokar II on an island of the Danube near Pressburg ( present @-@ day Bratislava , Slovakia ) , but they only concluded a truce . 
 Stephen launched a plundering raid into Austria around 21 December . King Ottokar invaded the lands north of the Danube in April 1271 and captured a number of fortresses , including Dévény ( now Devín , Slovakia ) , Pressburg and Nagyszombat ( present @-@ day Trnava , Slovakia ) . Ottokar routed Stephen at Pressburg on 9 May , and at Mosonmagyaróvár on 15 May , but Stephen won the decisive battle on the <unk> River on 21 May . Ottokar withdrew from Hungary and Stephen chased his troops as far as Vienna . The two kings ' envoys reached an agreement in Pressburg on 2 July . According to their treaty , Stephen promised that he would not assist Ottokar 's opponents in Carinthia , and Ottokar renounced the castles he and his partisans held in Hungary . The Hungarians soon recaptured Kőszeg , Borostyánkő and other fortresses along the western border of Hungary . 
 According to the Life of Stephen 's saintly sister , Margaret , who had died on 18 May 1270 , Stephen was present when the first miracle attributed to her occurred on the first anniversary of her death . Stephen , in fact , initiated Margaret 's canonization at the Holy See in 1271 . In the same year , Stephen granted town privileges to the citizens of Győr . He also confirmed the liberties of the Saxon " guests " in the Szepesség region ( present @-@ day Spiš , Slovakia ) , contributing to the development of their autonomous community . On the other hand , Stephen protected the Archbishop of Esztergom 's rights against the conditional nobles of the archbishopric who attempted to get rid of their obligations . 
 Ban Joachim Gutkeled kidnapped Stephen 's ten @-@ year @-@ old son and heir , Ladislaus and imprisoned him in the castle of Koprivnica in the summer of 1272 . Stephen besieged the fortress , but could not capture it . Stephen fell ill and was taken to the Csepel Island . He died on 6 August 1272 . Stephen was buried near to the tomb of his sister , Margaret , in the Monastery of the Blessed Virgin on Rabbits ' Island . 
 = = Family = = 
 Stephen 's wife , Elizabeth was born around 1239 , according to historian Gyula Kristó . A charter of her father @-@ in @-@ law , Béla IV , refers to one <unk> , a Cuman chieftain as his kinsman , implying that <unk> was Elizabeth 's father . Stephen 's first child by Elizabeth , Catherine was born around 1256 . She was given in marriage to Stephen Dragutin , the elder son and heir of King Stephen Uroš I of Serbia , in about 1268 . Her sister , Mary was born around 1257 and married the future Charles II of Naples in 1270 . Their grandson , Charles became King of Hungary in the first decade of the 14th century . 
 According to historian Gyula Kristó , Stephen 's third ( unnamed ) daughter was the wife of Despot Jacob Svetoslav . Stephen 's third ( or fourth ) daughter , Elizabeth , who was born in about 1260 , became a Dominican nun in the Monastery of the Blessed Virgin on Rabbits ' Island . She was appointed prioress in 1277 , but her brother , Ladislaus , kidnapped and married her to a Czech baron , <unk> of Falkenstein , in 1288 . Stephen 's youngest daughter , Anna , was born in about 1260 . She married Andronikos Palaiologos , son and heir of the Byzantine Emperor , Michael VIII . 
 Stephen 's first son Ladislaus was born in 1262 . He succeeded his father in 1272 . Stephen 's youngest child , Andrew , was born in 1268 and died at the age of 10 . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 145 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 145 ( PA 145 ) is a 20 @.@ 89 mi ( 33 @.@ 62 km ) long north – south state highway in the Lehigh Valley area of eastern Pennsylvania . It connects Interstate 78 ( I @-@ 78 ) and PA 309 in Lanark , Lehigh County to PA 248 in Weiders Crossing , Northampton County . PA 145 is the main north @-@ south arterial into Allentown , the third @-@ largest city in the state . The route enters the city on South 4th Street and follows multiple streets to downtown , where it follows the one @-@ way pair of 6th Street northbound and 7th Street southbound . North of Allentown in Whitehall Township , a seven @-@ mile ( 11 @.@ 2 km ) portion of PA 145 is known as MacArthur Road , named in honor of General Douglas MacArthur . MacArthur Road is a divided highway ; between U.S. Route 22 ( US 22 ) and Eberhart Road , it is six lanes wide with a Jersey barrier and jughandles while the remainder of the road a four @-@ lane divided highway . MacArthur Road is the location of the main commercial center of the Lehigh Valley . North of Eagle Point , PA 145 becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road that parallels the Lehigh River , crossing the river into Northampton County at Treichlers . The route continues along the east bank of the river and passes through Walnutport before reaching its northern terminus . PA 145 is dedicated as the Battle of the Bulge Veterans Memorial Highway in honor of the veterans who fought in the Battle of the Bulge . 
 The section of road south of downtown Allentown was originally designated as part of US 309 when the U.S. Highway System was established in 1926 . Between 1928 and 1930 , PA 312 ran concurrent with US 309 on this stretch of road . PA 145 was first designated in 1928 between intersections with PA 45 ( now PA 248 ) in Weiders Crossing and Bath , heading south to Cementon before turning east to Bath . A portion of PA 329 was designated between Cementon and Allentown along Coplay Road , Mickley Pike , and 7th Street , ending at US 22 , US 309 , PA 29 , and PA 43 at 7th and Hamilton streets . The Seventh Street Pike was built between the 1920s and 1941 as a straight north @-@ south road in Whitehall Township ; PA 329 was relocated onto it in the 1930s . In 1941 , PA 145 and PA 329 switched alignments , with PA 145 heading south along Seventh Street Pike and 7th Street to US 22 / US 309 / PA 29 at Tilghman Street in Allentown and PA 329 heading east to Bath . Seventh Street Pike was renamed to MacArthur Road in the early 1950s . In the 1950s , the southern terminus of PA 145 was cut back to the US 22 freeway in Whitehall Township and US 309 and PA 29 were rerouted to bypass Allentown . The MacArthur Road section of PA 145 was widened into a divided highway in 1970 . In the 1980s , a proposal was made to extend PA 145 and US 222 through Allentown to provide numbered routes in the city . PA 145 was extended south to its current terminus by 1991 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 145 begins at an interchange with I @-@ 78 at exit 60 and PA 309 in the community of Lanark in Upper Saucon Township , Lehigh County . South of this interchange , the roadway continues southeast as part of PA 309 while northbound PA 309 heads west along I @-@ 78 . From this interchange , PA 145 heads northwest on South Pike Avenue , a divided highway with two northbound lanes and one southbound lane . The road becomes undivided at the Vera Cruz Road / Oakhurst <unk> intersection and ascends South Mountain with S @-@ curves , passing through forested areas with some homes . The route reaches the community of Summit Lawn at the peak of South Mountain , where it intersects Rock Road , which heads southwest to provide access to westbound I @-@ 78 / northbound PA 309 . Here , PA 145 turns north and enters Salisbury Township , where it descends the mountain with one northbound lane and two southbound lanes through forests with a few residences . At the base of South Mountain , the route heads into the city of Allentown and becomes South 4th Street , heading into residential areas . The road crosses <unk> Avenue and narrows to two lanes , running north @-@ northwest past businesses as it heads into the Mountainville neighborhood . PA 145 continues past homes and businesses , curving to the north as it passes to the east of a shopping center . After passing through the Mountainville neighborhood , the route turns west onto Susquehanna Street and passes over Norfolk Southern 's Reading Line and Trout Creek . 
 PA 145 curves north and becomes South 5th Street before it splits into a one @-@ way pair . The northbound direction follows South 5th Street north and Auburn Street west to an intersection with South 6th Street and Lehigh Street while the southbound direction follows South 6th Street south and Wyoming Street east . The one @-@ way streets , which carry two lanes of traffic in each direction , pass through urban residential neighborhoods , with northbound PA 145 passing Good Shepherd Hospital along South 5th Street . Past the one @-@ way pair , the route follows Lehigh Street , a three @-@ lane road with one northbound lane and two southbound lanes , through urban residential and commercial areas , crossing Little Lehigh Creek before intersecting Martin Luther King , Jr . Drive . After this intersection , the road ascends a long hill . PA 145 splits into another one @-@ way pair at Union Street , with the northbound direction following two @-@ lane South 6th Street and the southbound direction following three @-@ lane South 7th Street . The route heads into the commercial downtown of Allentown , intersecting the northern terminus of northbound PA 222 at West Walnut Street , which is one @-@ way eastbound . A block later , PA 145 intersects West Hamilton Street , with the Sailors and Soldiers Monument located at the center of the intersection between 7th and Hamilton streets . Past this intersection , northbound PA 145 follows North 6th Street and southbound PA 145 follows North 7th Street , with southbound PA 145 passing to the east of the PPL Center sports arena . Past the arena , the route intersects West Linden Street , which is one @-@ way westbound and serves as the southbound beginning of PA 222 . Continuing north , PA 145 leaves the downtown area and passes through urban areas of homes and businesses , intersecting Tilghman Street . A short distance later , northbound PA 145 turns west on two @-@ way , two @-@ lane West Washington Street to rejoin southbound PA 145 at North 7th Street . 
 PA 145 continues north on North 7th Street , a three @-@ lane road with one northbound lane and two southbound lanes that is lined with urban homes . The route widens to four lanes and crosses Sumner Avenue on a tall bridge , at which point it leaves Allentown for Whitehall Township . Here , the route becomes four @-@ lane divided MacArthur Road and intersects Mickley Road / 6th Street as it heads into commercial areas . The road crosses Jordan Creek and passes between businesses to the west and residential areas to the east before it comes to an interchange with the US 22 freeway . Past this interchange , PA 145 becomes a six @-@ lane divided highway with a Jersey barrier and several intersections controlled by jughandles . The route traverses the main commercial center of the Lehigh Valley , passing to the west of Lehigh Valley Mall . After intersecting Grape Street , the road passes to the west of Whitehall Mall before coming to another intersection with Mickley Road . PA 145 continues past shopping centers and businesses , intersecting Schadt Avenue and curving to the northwest . 
 After the Eberhart Road intersection in the community of <unk> , the road narrows to a four @-@ lane divided highway and runs through a mix of farmland and commercial development , turning to the north . The route continues through wooded areas with some nearby farms and residential commercial development and reaches an intersection with PA 329 in Eagle Point , located east of Egypt and west of Northampton . Past this intersection , PA 145 continues north through rural areas with some development , crossing into North Whitehall Township . The route intersects Second Street and narrows to a two @-@ lane undivided , unnamed road as it heads along the west bank of the Lehigh River . The road continues through wooded areas alongside the river before it curves northwest away from it and reaches the community of <unk> Station . PA 145 passes homes and businesses , curving to the north again . The route heads into farmland with some homes , turning to the west and widening into a four @-@ lane divided highway . 
 PA 145 crosses the Lehigh River on the Treichlers Bridge , at which point it enters Lehigh Township in Northampton County . The route passes over Norfolk Southern 's Lehigh Line before it descends off the Treichlers Bridge and intersects Blue Mountain Drive in the community of Treichlers . Past this , PA 145 heads south on two @-@ lane undivided Riverview Drive and passes through a mix of farms and homes to the west of the river and the railroad tracks . The road begins a long curve to the west and then to the northwest as it continues parallel to the Lehigh River , heading into wooded areas with some development . The route passes through the community of Lockport and runs west through a mix of farms and woods before it enters the borough of Walnutport . PA 145 curves north and becomes South Best Avenue , heading through residential areas with some businesses . The route becomes North Best Avenue and heads into commercial areas , briefly becoming a divided highway before intersecting Main Street . The road becomes undivided again and continues into wooded areas with some development . The route leaves Walnutport for Lehigh Township again , where the name changes back to Riverview Drive . PA 145 continues north and reaches its northern terminus at PA 248 in the community of Weiders Crossing , a short distance south of the northern terminus of PA 873 at PA 248 and the Lehigh Gap in Blue Mountain . At the northern terminus , the route also encounters the Appalachian Trail . 
 = = History = = 
 When routes were first legislated in Pennsylvania following the passage of the Sproul Road Bill in 1911 , the present @-@ day PA 145 corridor was legislated as part of Legislative Route 153 south of Allentown and as Legislative Route 175 in Northampton County . With the creation of the U.S. Highway System in 1926 , the present @-@ day route heading south out of Allentown was designated as part of US 309 . In 1928 , PA 312 was designated concurrent with US 309 between Center Valley and Allentown . The concurrent PA 312 designation was removed from US 309 by 1930 . US 309 entered Allentown from the south on Jordan Street ( now South 4th Street ) and intersected PA 43 at Susquehanna Street , at which point it turned west to join PA 43 . US 309 / PA 43 curved north on 5th Street and turned west on Auburn Street to intersect PA 29 at Lehigh Street . From here , US 309 / PA 29 / PA 43 continued north along Lehigh Street , Union Street , and 7th Street to the center of Allentown . 
 PA 145 was first designated in 1928 to run from PA 45 ( now PA 248 ) in Weiders Crossing east to PA 45 ( now PA 248 ) in Bath , heading south along its current alignment and continuing along the river to Cementon , where it turned east and passed through Northampton before continuing to Bath . When first designated , the route was paved between Treichlers and Bath . By 1930 , the entire length of PA 145 was paved . The road between Cementon and Allentown was designated by 1930 as part of PA 329 . This route followed Coplay Road from Cementon to Coplay and then ran along Mickley Pike through Whitehall Township before entering Allentown on 7th Street , where it ended at US 22 , US 309 , PA 29 , and PA 43 at the intersection of 7th and Hamilton streets . In the 1930s , PA 329 was realigned to follow Seventh Street Pike ( now MacArthur Road ) through Whitehall Township . The Seventh Street Pike was built starting in the later part of the 1920s to provide a straight north @-@ south road in Whitehall Township . The road between Allentown and <unk> church was widened to three lanes in the 1930s . The southern terminus of PA 329 was cut back to US 22 , US 309 , and PA 29 at Tilghman Street in Allentown in the 1930s , with US 309 / PA 29 replacing the route along 7th Street between Tilghman and Hamilton streets . The concurrent PA 43 designation was also removed from US 309 . In 1941 , PA 145 was realigned to follow Seventh Street Pike south from Eagle Point to Allentown and 7th Street in Allentown to US 22 / US 309 / PA 29 at 7th and Tilghman streets in Allentown , with PA 329 realigned to follow the former alignment of PA 145 between Cementon and Bath . The section of Seventh Street Pike between Center Street and Eagle Point was constructed as a concrete road in 1941 . The portion of PA 145 along Seventh Street Pike was widened to four lanes between Allentown and west of Coplay by 1947 . In the early 1950s , Seventh Street Pike was renamed to MacArthur Road in honor of General Douglas MacArthur , a World War II hero . 
 Following the completion of the US 22 freeway in 1955 , the southern terminus of PA 145 was cut back to the cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 78 / US 22 in Whitehall Township . Also , US 309 and PA 29 were rerouted to bypass Allentown to the south and west in the 1950s , leaving the former alignment unnumbered . By 1961 , PA 145 was realigned to bypass the center of Walnutport to the east along Best Avenue , having previously passed through the borough on Washington Street , Main Street , Cherry Street , and Spruce Street . In 1970 , PA 145 was widened into a divided highway between US 22 and north of PA 329 . The section of the route in Whitehall Township developed into a major retail center for the Lehigh Valley in the second half of the 20th century , with the construction of several businesses along with the Whitehall Mall and the Lehigh Valley Mall . In 1984 , PennDOT proposed to extend PA 145 to I @-@ 78 and PA 309 in Lanark . Traffic engineer Samuel D. <unk> said that Allentown was one of few Pennsylvania cities without a traffic route going through it . He supported his idea by saying that motorists also might be aided if US 222 was extended along Hamilton Boulevard to connect with the proposed PA 145 corridor . By 1991 , the extension of PA 145 south from US 22 to I @-@ 78 / PA 309 along its current alignment was completed . PA 145 was dedicated as the Battle of the Bulge Veterans Memorial Highway in 2008 in honor of the veterans who fought in the Battle of the Bulge during World War II . In 2012 , a project began to improve PA 145 's interchange with US 22 . The project reconstructed the bridge carrying PA 145 over US 22 and replaced the cloverleaf interchange with a modified diamond interchange to improve traffic flow . The reconstruction project , which cost $ 13 @.@ 8 million , was planned to be finished in December 2013 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Drosera anglica = 
 Drosera anglica , commonly known as the English sundew or great sundew , is a carnivorous plant species belonging to the sundew family Droseraceae . It is a temperate species with a generally circumboreal range , although it does occur as far south as Japan , southern Europe , and the island of Kauaʻi in Hawaiʻi , where it grows as a subtropical sundew . It is thought to originate from an <unk> hybrid of D. rotundifolia and D. linearis , meaning that a sterile hybrid between these two species doubled its chromosomes to produce fertile progeny which stabilized into the current D. anglica . 
 = = Morphology = = 
 Drosera anglica is a perennial herb which forms an upright , stemless rosette of generally linear @-@ spatulate leaves . As is typical for sundews , the laminae are densely covered with stalked mucilaginous glands , each tipped with a clear droplet of a viscous fluid used for trapping insects . The lamina , which is 15 – 35 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 – 1 @.@ 38 in ) long , is held semi @-@ erect by a long petiole , bringing the total leaf size to 30 – 95 mm . Plants are green , coloring red in bright light . In all populations except those in Kaua 'i , D. anglica forms winter resting buds called hibernacula . These consist of a knot of tightly curled leaves at ground level , which unfurl in spring at the end of the dormancy period . The root system is weak and penetrates only a few centimeters , serving mainly as an anchor and for water absorption . Nitrogen is in short supply in bogs and trapping and digesting insects provides an alternate source . 
 Drosera anglica flowers in the summer , sending up peduncles 6 – 18 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 – 7 @.@ 1 in ) . long bearing several white flowers which open individually . Like other sundews , the flowers have five sepals , petals , and stamens . The petals for this species are 8 – 12 mm long , and the flowers have branched 2 @-@ lobed styles . The odorless , nectar @-@ less flowers do not rely on insect pollinators for pollination , rather setting seed well through self @-@ pollination ( <unk> ) . The black ovoid seed forms in a dehiscent capsule and is 1 to 1 ½ mm long . 
 = = Carnivory = = 
 Like all sundews , D. anglica uses stalked mucilaginous glands called tentacles which cover its laminae to attract , trap , and digest small arthropods , usually insects . These are attracted by a sugary scent exuded by the glands , and upon alighting on the plant adhere to the sticky drops of mucilage . Although most of its prey consists of small insects such as flies , bulkier insects with large wings are also caught . Small butterflies , damselflies , and even dragonflies can become immobilized by the plant 's sticky mucilage . 
 The plant 's initial response to contact with prey consists of <unk> ( movement in response to touch ) tentacle movement , with tentacles bending toward the prey and the center of the leaf to maximize contact . D. anglica is also capable of further movement , being able to bend the actual leaf blade around prey to further the digestion process . Tentacle movement can occur in a matter of minutes , whereas the leaf takes hours or days to bend . When something gets caught , the tentacles touching the prey exude additional mucilage to mire down the prey , which eventually dies of exhaustion or is asphyxiated as the mucilage clogs its tracheae . Once the prey has been digested and the resulting nutrient solution has been absorbed by the plant , the leaf unfurls , leaving only the prey 's exoskeleton behind . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Drosera anglica grows in open , non @-@ forested habitat with wet , often calcium @-@ rich soils . These include bogs , marl fens , quaking bogs , cobble shores , and other calcareous habitats . This tolerance of calcium is relatively rare in the rest of the genus . D. anglica is often associated with various sphagnum mosses , and many times grows in a soil substrate that is entirely composed of living , dead , or decomposed sphagnum . The sphagnum wicks moisture to the surface while simultaneously acidifying it . What soil nutrients are not seeped away by the constant moisture are often used up by the sphagnum or made unavailable by the low soil pH . Since nutrient availability is low , competition from other plants is diminished , allowing the carnivorous English sundew to flourish . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Drosera anglica is one of the most widely distributed sundews in the world . It is generally circumboreal , meaning that it is found at high latitudes around the globe . In a few areas , however , it is found farther south , particularly in Japan , southern Europe , the Hawaiian island of Kauaʻi , and California . Plants from Hawaiʻi , where it is known as <unk> , are generally smaller than normal and do not experience a winter dormancy period . Its natural habitat includes 12 U.S. states , including Alaska , and 11 Canadian provinces and territories . The altitudinal range is from 5 m to at least 2000 m . 
 = = Special origins = = 
 All North American Drosera species except for D. anglica have a chromosome count of 2n = 20 . In 1955 , Wood noted that D. anglica had a chromosome count of 2n = 40 , and hypothesized that it was of hybrid <unk> origin . Since the leaf morphology of D. anglica is an intermediary between that of D. rotundifolia and D. linearis and the two occur sympatrically in several locations , Wood conjectured that D. anglica likely originated from a hybrid between these two . 
 All North American Drosera species produce sterile hybrids . The natural hybrid D. rotundifolia × D. linearis ( conventionally but incorrectly referred to as Drosera × anglica ) , is also sterile but is morphologically similar to the modern D. anglica . Errors in meiosis during ovule and pollen production , however , can result in a chromosome doubling which can allow for viable seed to be produced . The resulting plants , known as <unk> , would be fertile . Woods noted that this appeared to be an ongoing process with D. anglica <unk> from D. rotundifolia × D. linearis through <unk> in multiple locations . The question remains as to why D. anglica is so widespread , whereas the range of D. linearis is limited to the Great Lakes region of North America . The greater adaptability of D. anglica to varied habitat conditions could be a major factor . 
 = = Botanical history = = 
 Drosera anglica was first described by William Hudson in 1778 . It has frequently been confused with the other circumpolar long @-@ leaf Drosera , D. intermedia . This confusion was fueled by the resurfacing of an older name , D. longifolia ( described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753 ) , which was regarded as being too ambiguous in description and had been applied to specimens of both D. anglica and D. intermedia . Herbarium specimens were also a mix of the two species . These points led Martin Cheek to propose D. longifolia for rejection as a species name in 1998 . The proposal was accepted and the taxon listed as rejected in 1999 . 
 = = Hybrids = = 
 Several naturally occurring hybrids involving D. anglica exist . These include : 
 These are all sterile . In addition , several man @-@ made hybrids have been made . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = New York State Route 111 = 
 New York State Route 111 ( NY 111 ) is a state highway located in Suffolk County , New York , in the United States . It runs north – south for 9 @.@ 42 miles ( 15 @.@ 16 km ) through the towns of Islip and Smithtown , connecting NY 27A in the town seat of Islip to the east end of the NY 25 and NY 25A concurrency in Smithtown 's Village of the Branch . Most of the road is a two @-@ lane highway , save for several short four @-@ lane stretches in the vicinity of interchanges along the route . NY 111 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York as an East Islip – Village of the Branch highway , using what is now County Route 17 ( CR 17 ) south of Hauppauge . It was realigned to serve the hamlet of Islip in 1966 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 111 begins at an intersection with NY 27A ( Main Street ) in the town of Islip . The route proceeds north through the hamlet of Islip along the two @-@ lane Islip Avenue , passing through a short residential stretch ahead of an intersection with CR 50 ( Union Boulevard ) . NY 111 soon crosses the nearby Montauk Branch of the Long Island Rail Road just east of the Islip station , from where it continues north past various businesses and residences . As the road heads northward , it intersects with <unk> Street , a connector to NY 27 ( Sunrise Highway ) eastbound . After crossing over NY 27 , the route intersects with a ramp serving the westbound lanes and Islip Boulevard , which connects NY 27 westbound to NY 111 . 
 Past Sunrise Highway , the route serves many blocks of residences prior to entering a cloverleaf interchange with the Heckscher State Parkway ( exit 43 ) . After this junction , NY 111 continues north as a two @-@ lane residential street to the hamlet of Central Islip . Here , the residences give way to various businesses as NY 111 and Islip Avenue briefly bend to the northwest for several blocks . Another north @-@ northwesterly stretch follows , bringing the highway over another Long Island Rail Road line , this time the Ronkonkoma Branch . Past the railroad overpass , NY 111 intersects with CR 100 ( Suffolk Avenue ) , at which point NY 111 leaves Islip Avenue and changes names to Joshua 's Path . 
 One block north of CR 100 , Caleb 's Path forks off to the northwest while NY 111 splits to the northeast along Joshua 's Path , serving a long stretch of homes in the northern part of Central Islip . Several blocks to the north , NY 111 intersects with CR 67 ( Long Island Motor Parkway ) at an at @-@ grade intersection on the northern edge of the community . Now out of Central Islip , the route traverses industrialized areas surrounding a large Y intersection with CR 17 ( Wheeler Road ) in Hauppauge . NY 111 takes on the Wheeler Road name , and the route immediately enters an interchange ( exit 56 ) with the Long Island Expressway ( I @-@ 495 ) . From here , the route bends northeast along Wheeler Road , paralleling the <unk> River as it serves the northern part of the town of Islip . 
 The highway passes the American Real Estate School and a campus of Empire State College before intersecting NY 454 ( Veterans Highway ) . Not far from NY 454 , NY 111 has a short concurrency with CR 76 ( Townline Road ) along the Islip – Smithtown and then the names changes to Hauppauge Road town line before fully crossing into Smithtown . After forking from CR 76 , NY 111 continues northeast through the hamlet of Hauppauge , crossing NY 347 ( Smithtown Bypass ) at @-@ grade as it runs across another residential stretch . The route soon enters Village of the Branch , where it bends northward into a large commercial area at the center of the community . Here , NY 111 intersects with East Main Street , which enters the junction from the west as NY 25 and NY 25A . At this point , NY 25 continues eastward as Middle Country Road , NY 111 terminates , and NY 25A turns northward on NY 111 's right @-@ of @-@ way , changing names to North Country Road . 
 = = History = = 
 The origins of NY 111 date back to 1914 when the state of New York awarded a contract on July 29 to improve a 9 @.@ 56 @-@ mile ( 15 @.@ 39 km ) highway in the towns of Islip and Smithtown to state highway standards . The road covered by the project began at Main Street in East Islip and headed north on Carleton Avenue and Wheeler Road to Hauppauge , from where it continued northeast to Village of the Branch via Hauppauge Road . Reconstruction of the road cost $ 263 @,@ 359 ( equivalent to $ 3 @.@ 72 million in 2016 ) , and the rebuilt road was added to the state highway system on June 1 , 1922 , as unsigned State Highway 1208 ( SH 1208 ) . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , hundreds of state @-@ maintained highways were assigned a posted route designation for the first time . One of these was SH 1208 , which became NY 111 . 
 On September 13 , 1966 , NY 111 was realigned south of Hauppauge to follow a slightly more westerly alignment to the hamlet of Islip along Joshua 's Path and Islip Avenue , two streets that ran parallel to the route 's original path on Carleton Avenue and Wheeler Road . Ownership and maintenance of NY 111 's former routing was transferred to Suffolk County , which redesignated the road as CR 17 . The ultimately cancelled eastern extension of the Northern State Parkway would have crossed NY 111 just south of Village of the Branch at a point north of Mount Pleasant Road . An interchange between the parkway and NY 111 was planned at that location . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Suffolk County . 
 = Ford Nation = 
 Ford Nation was an opinion and discussion programme that aired on the Canadian news channel Sun News Network . The show featured two sitting Toronto politicians , mayor Rob Ford and his brother , city councillor Doug Ford , Jr . , and was pulled from the network after only one airing on November 18 , 2013 . An online version of the show aired on YouTube for five episodes between February and April , 2014 . The title is a reference to the ardent , mainly suburban supporters of the Fords and their populist conservative agenda . 
 = = Background = = 
 From February 2012 to November 3 , 2013 , the Fords hosted The City , a weekly two @-@ hour Sunday afternoon show on CFRB radio which Rob Ford described as " an unfiltered take on the work we do every day at Toronto City Hall . " After months of controversy involving the mayor , criticism of the station for letting the Fords use the show as a " bully pulpit " where their political allies were promoted and opponents cut down , and complaints to the Canadian Broadcast Standards Council alleging the show breached its code of ethics , CFRB announced in November 2013 that it and the Fords had " mutually determined " to end The City . 
 On November 14 , the brothers were tapped by Sun News Network to host a weekly pre @-@ taped one @-@ hour program on the TV network , to be titled Ford Nation . 
 = = Content = = 
 The lone airing of Ford Nation was broadcast on Monday , November 18 , 2013 , taking the 8PM ( ET ) slot normally occupied by Sun News Network 's The Source with Ezra Levant . The format included a back @-@ and @-@ forth dialogue between Rob Ford and Doug Ford , with the former <unk> the personal mistakes he has made as mayor ( " It is what it is . I 've admitted to my mistakes . " ) . Segments included discussions with Levant and Toronto Sun columnist Joe Warmington . Levant 's appearance included a commentary critical of the Toronto Star 's investigations into Rob Ford , with Levant likening the media 's treatment of the mayor over his recent controversies to the paparazzi 's hounding of Princess Diana . 
 = = Cancellation and revival as web series = = 
 On November 19 , 2013 , less than 24 hours after Ford Nation 's debut , Sun News Network announced it was cancelling the program after just one episode . Sun News cited high production costs involved with the premiere episode ; the show , taped one day before its airing , reportedly took five hours to record and an additional eight hours to edit . Additionally , the show met with advertiser resistance about being associated with the controversial politicians . Doug Ford , in a later conversation with The National Post , insisted that the brothers entered into the project with Sun with the understanding that Ford Nation was a " one @-@ off " project , one that was not intended to evolve into prolonged status . 
 Despite the show 's expense and its immediate cancellation , Ford Nation 's sole episode attracted an audience of 155 @,@ 000 viewers for the original broadcast , plus an additional 45 @,@ 000 for its replay on prime time in Western Canada and 65 @,@ 000 downloads of the program online . The audience was , according to Sun News vice @-@ president Kory <unk> , " by far the most successful thing , from an audience perspective , the network has ever done , " topping a 2012 charity boxing match between Liberal MP Justin Trudeau and Conservative Senator Patrick <unk> . 
 Rob Ford 's celebrity status had , according to Doug Ford , caught the eye of several reality television producers in both Canada and the United States . Councillor Ford stated that the brothers passed on those offers , but took an interest in suggestions by videographers for an online program that would retain the Ford Nation title and be posted weekly on YouTube . The program employed a format similar to what the Fords enjoyed on CFRB 's The City , with the Fords " [ getting ] the message out " on various topics in a " professional , yet simple " presentation , with occasional interactions with guests and audiences . 
 Councillor Ford announced the new show would be released on YouTube " before Christmas " 2013 . A series of short videos of under 5 minutes in length was launched on YouTube on February 10 , 2014 . In one segment , Mayor Ford admitted lying about his drug use . Others were lighter in tone and included predictions for the Stanley Cup playoffs and other remarks . In the second video , Ford named 18 councillors he wanted defeated , offering his support to any campaign opposing them . Each weekly " episode " consisted of 3 to 5 short videos of 1 to 5 minutes in length . Comments were disabled ; however , the brothers occasionally answered viewer emails in the segments . The National Post described the program as " a bizarro world version of Wayne 's World " . 
 Five episodes of the web series aired , with some episodes broken up into several parts . No new episodes were filmed after April 2014 when Rob Ford entered rehab following the emergence of a second video of him smoking crack cocaine . 
 = RNA = 
 <unk> acid ( RNA ) is a polymeric molecule implicated in various biological roles in coding , decoding , regulation , and expression of genes . RNA and DNA are nucleic acids , and , along with proteins and carbohydrates , constitute the three major macromolecules essential for all known forms of life . Like DNA , RNA is assembled as a chain of nucleotides , but unlike DNA it is more often found in nature as a single @-@ strand folded onto itself , rather than a paired double @-@ strand . Cellular organisms use messenger RNA ( mRNA ) to convey genetic information ( using the letters G , U , A , and C to denote the nitrogenous bases guanine , uracil , adenine , and cytosine ) that directs synthesis of specific proteins . Many viruses encode their genetic information using an RNA genome . 
 Some RNA molecules play an active role within cells by catalyzing biological reactions , controlling gene expression , or sensing and communicating responses to cellular signals . One of these active processes is protein synthesis , a universal function wherein mRNA molecules direct the assembly of proteins on ribosomes . This process uses transfer RNA ( tRNA ) molecules to deliver amino acids to the ribosome , where ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) then links amino acids together to form proteins . 
 = = Comparison with DNA = = 
 Like DNA , most biologically active RNAs , including mRNA , tRNA , rRNA , snRNAs , and other non @-@ coding RNAs , contain self @-@ complementary sequences that allow parts of the RNA to fold and pair with itself to form double helices . Analysis of these RNAs has revealed that they are highly structured . Unlike DNA , their structures do not consist of long double helices , but rather collections of short helices packed together into structures akin to proteins . In this fashion , RNAs can achieve chemical catalysis , like enzymes . For instance , determination of the structure of the ribosome — an enzyme that catalyzes peptide bond formation — revealed that its active site is composed entirely of RNA . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Each nucleotide in RNA contains a ribose sugar , with carbons numbered 1 ' through 5 ' . A base is attached to the 1 ' position , in general , adenine ( A ) , cytosine ( C ) , guanine ( G ) , or uracil ( U ) . Adenine and guanine are purines , cytosine and uracil are pyrimidines . A phosphate group is attached to the 3 ' position of one ribose and the 5 ' position of the next . The phosphate groups have a negative charge each , making RNA a charged molecule ( <unk> ) . The bases form hydrogen bonds between cytosine and guanine , between adenine and uracil and between guanine and uracil . However , other interactions are possible , such as a group of adenine bases binding to each other in a bulge , or the <unk> <unk> that has a guanine – adenine base @-@ pair . 
 An important structural feature of RNA that distinguishes it from DNA is the presence of a hydroxyl group at the 2 ' position of the ribose sugar . The presence of this functional group causes the helix to mostly adopt the A @-@ form geometry , although in single strand dinucleotide contexts , RNA can rarely also adopt the B @-@ form most commonly observed in DNA . The A @-@ form geometry results in a very deep and narrow major groove and a shallow and wide minor groove . A second consequence of the presence of the 2 ' -hydroxyl group is that in conformationally flexible regions of an RNA molecule ( that is , not involved in formation of a double helix ) , it can chemically attack the adjacent phosphodiester bond to cleave the backbone . 
 RNA is transcribed with only four bases ( adenine , cytosine , guanine and uracil ) , but these bases and attached sugars can be modified in numerous ways as the RNAs mature . <unk> ( Ψ ) , in which the linkage between uracil and ribose is changed from a C – N bond to a C – C bond , and <unk> ( T ) are found in various places ( the most notable ones being in the <unk> loop of tRNA ) . Another notable modified base is hypoxanthine , a deaminated adenine base whose nucleoside is called inosine ( I ) . <unk> plays a key role in the wobble hypothesis of the genetic code . 
 There are more than 100 other naturally occurring modified nucleosides , The greatest structural diversity of modifications can be found in tRNA , while <unk> and nucleosides with 2 ' -O @-@ <unk> often present in rRNA are the most common . The specific roles of many of these modifications in RNA are not fully understood . However , it is notable that , in ribosomal RNA , many of the post @-@ transcriptional modifications occur in highly functional regions , such as the peptidyl transferase center and the subunit interface , implying that they are important for normal function . 
 The functional form of single @-@ stranded RNA molecules , just like proteins , frequently requires a specific tertiary structure . The scaffold for this structure is provided by secondary structural elements that are hydrogen bonds within the molecule . This leads to several recognizable " domains " of secondary structure like hairpin loops , bulges , and internal loops . Since RNA is charged , metal ions such as Mg2 + are needed to stabilise many secondary and tertiary structures . 
 The naturally occurring enantiomer of RNA is D @-@ RNA composed of D @-@ ribonucleotides . All chirality centers are located in the D @-@ ribose . By the use of L @-@ ribose or rather L @-@ ribonucleotides , L @-@ RNA can be synthesized . L @-@ RNA is much more stable against degradation by RNase . 
 Like other structured biopolymers such as proteins , one can define topology of a folded RNA molecule . This is often done based on arrangement of intra @-@ chain contacts within a folded RNA , termed as circuit topology . 
 = = Synthesis = = 
 Synthesis of RNA is usually catalyzed by an enzyme — RNA polymerase — using DNA as a template , a process known as transcription . Initiation of transcription begins with the binding of the enzyme to a promoter sequence in the DNA ( usually found " upstream " of a gene ) . The DNA double helix is unwound by the helicase activity of the enzyme . The enzyme then progresses along the template strand in the 3 ’ to 5 ’ direction , synthesizing a complementary RNA molecule with elongation occurring in the 5 ’ to 3 ’ direction . The DNA sequence also dictates where termination of RNA synthesis will occur . 
 Primary transcript RNAs are often modified by enzymes after transcription . For example , a poly ( A ) tail and a 5 ' cap are added to eukaryotic pre @-@ mRNA and introns are removed by the spliceosome . 
 There are also a number of RNA @-@ dependent RNA polymerases that use RNA as their template for synthesis of a new strand of RNA . For instance , a number of RNA viruses ( such as poliovirus ) use this type of enzyme to replicate their genetic material . Also , RNA @-@ dependent RNA polymerase is part of the RNA interference pathway in many organisms . 
 = = Types of RNA = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Messenger RNA ( mRNA ) is the RNA that carries information from DNA to the ribosome , the sites of protein synthesis ( translation ) in the cell . The coding sequence of the mRNA determines the amino acid sequence in the protein that is produced . However , many RNAs do not code for protein ( about 97 % of the transcriptional output is non @-@ protein @-@ coding in eukaryotes ) . 
 These so @-@ called non @-@ coding RNAs ( " <unk> " ) can be encoded by their own genes ( RNA genes ) , but can also derive from mRNA introns . The most prominent examples of non @-@ coding RNAs are transfer RNA ( tRNA ) and ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) , both of which are involved in the process of translation . There are also non @-@ coding RNAs involved in gene regulation , RNA processing and other roles . Certain RNAs are able to catalyse chemical reactions such as cutting and ligating other RNA molecules , and the catalysis of peptide bond formation in the ribosome ; these are known as ribozymes . 
 = = = In length = = = 
 According to the length of RNA chain , RNA includes small RNA and long RNA . Usually , small RNAs are < 200 nt in length , and long RNA are > 200 nt . Long RNAs , also called large RNAs , mainly include long non @-@ coding RNA ( <unk> ) and mRNA . Small RNAs mainly include 5.8S ribosomal RNA ( rRNA ) , 5S rRNA , transfer RNA ( tRNA ) , microRNA ( miRNA ) , small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) , small nucleolar RNA ( snoRNAs ) , Piwi @-@ interacting RNA ( piRNA ) , tRNA @-@ derived small RNA ( <unk> ) and small rDNA @-@ derived RNA ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = In translation = = = 
 Messenger RNA ( mRNA ) carries information about a protein sequence to the ribosomes , the protein synthesis factories in the cell . It is coded so that every three nucleotides ( a codon ) correspond to one amino acid . In eukaryotic cells , once precursor mRNA ( pre @-@ mRNA ) has been transcribed from DNA , it is processed to mature mRNA . This removes its introns — non @-@ coding sections of the pre @-@ mRNA . The mRNA is then exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm , where it is bound to ribosomes and translated into its corresponding protein form with the help of tRNA . In prokaryotic cells , which do not have nucleus and cytoplasm compartments , mRNA can bind to ribosomes while it is being transcribed from DNA . After a certain amount of time the message degrades into its component nucleotides with the assistance of ribonucleases . 
 Transfer RNA ( tRNA ) is a small RNA chain of about 80 nucleotides that transfers a specific amino acid to a growing polypeptide chain at the ribosomal site of protein synthesis during translation . It has sites for amino acid attachment and an anticodon region for codon recognition that binds to a specific sequence on the messenger RNA chain through hydrogen bonding . 
 <unk> RNA ( rRNA ) is the catalytic component of the ribosomes . Eukaryotic ribosomes contain four different rRNA molecules : 18S , 5.8S , 28S and 5S rRNA . Three of the rRNA molecules are synthesized in the nucleolus , and one is synthesized elsewhere . In the cytoplasm , ribosomal RNA and protein combine to form a nucleoprotein called a ribosome . The ribosome binds mRNA and carries out protein synthesis . Several ribosomes may be attached to a single mRNA at any time . Nearly all the RNA found in a typical eukaryotic cell is rRNA . 
 Transfer @-@ messenger RNA ( <unk> ) is found in many bacteria and plastids . It tags proteins encoded by mRNAs that lack stop codons for degradation and prevents the ribosome from stalling . 
 = = = Regulatory RNAs = = = 
 Several types of RNA can downregulate gene expression by being complementary to a part of an mRNA or a gene 's DNA . MicroRNAs ( miRNA ; 21 @-@ 22 nt ) are found in eukaryotes and act through RNA interference ( RNAi ) , where an effector complex of miRNA and enzymes can cleave complementary mRNA , block the mRNA from being translated , or accelerate its degradation . 
 While small interfering RNAs ( siRNA ; 20 @-@ 25 nt ) are often produced by breakdown of viral RNA , there are also endogenous sources of <unk> siRNAs act through RNA interference in a fashion similar to miRNAs . Some miRNAs and siRNAs can cause genes they target to be methylated , thereby decreasing or increasing transcription of those genes . Animals have Piwi @-@ interacting RNAs ( piRNA ; 29 @-@ 30 nt ) that are active in germline cells and are thought to be a defense against transposons and play a role in gametogenesis . 
 Many prokaryotes have CRISPR RNAs , a regulatory system similar to RNA interference . Antisense RNAs are widespread ; most downregulate a gene , but a few are activators of transcription . One way antisense RNA can act is by binding to an mRNA , forming double @-@ stranded RNA that is enzymatically degraded . There are many long noncoding RNAs that regulate genes in eukaryotes , one such RNA is Xist , which coats one X chromosome in female mammals and inactivates it . 
 An mRNA may contain regulatory elements itself , such as riboswitches , in the 5 ' untranslated region or 3 ' untranslated region ; these cis @-@ regulatory elements regulate the activity of that mRNA . The untranslated regions can also contain elements that regulate other genes . 
 = = = In RNA processing = = = 
 Many RNAs are involved in modifying other RNAs . Introns are spliced out of pre @-@ mRNA by spliceosomes , which contain several small nuclear RNAs ( snRNA ) , or the introns can be ribozymes that are spliced by themselves . RNA can also be altered by having its nucleotides modified to other nucleotides than A , C , G and U. In eukaryotes , modifications of RNA nucleotides are in general directed by small nucleolar RNAs ( snoRNA ; 60 @-@ 300 nt ) , found in the nucleolus and <unk> <unk> snoRNAs associate with enzymes and guide them to a spot on an RNA by basepairing to that RNA . These enzymes then perform the nucleotide <unk> rRNAs and tRNAs are extensively modified , but snRNAs and mRNAs can also be the target of base modification . RNA can also be methylated . 
 = = = RNA genomes = = = 
 Like DNA , RNA can carry genetic information . RNA viruses have genomes composed of RNA that encodes a number of proteins . The viral genome is replicated by some of those proteins , while other proteins protect the genome as the virus particle moves to a new host cell . Viroids are another group of pathogens , but they consist only of RNA , do not encode any protein and are replicated by a host plant cell 's polymerase . 
 = = = In reverse transcription = = = 
 Reverse transcribing viruses replicate their genomes by reverse transcribing DNA copies from their RNA ; these DNA copies are then transcribed to new RNA . <unk> also spread by copying DNA and RNA from one another , and telomerase contains an RNA that is used as template for building the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes . 
 = = = Double @-@ stranded RNA = = = 
 Double @-@ stranded RNA ( dsRNA ) is RNA with two complementary strands , similar to the DNA found in all <unk> dsRNA forms the genetic material of some viruses ( double @-@ stranded RNA viruses ) . Double @-@ stranded RNA such as viral RNA or siRNA can trigger RNA interference in eukaryotes , as well as interferon response in vertebrates . 
 = = = Circular RNA = = = 
 Recently , it was shown that there is a single stranded covalently closed , i.e. circular form of RNA expressed throughout the animal and plant kingdom ( see <unk> ) . circRNAs are thought to arise via a " back @-@ splice " reaction where the spliceosome joins a downstream donor to an upstream acceptor splice site . So far the function of circRNAs is largely unknown , although for few examples a microRNA sponging activity has been demonstrated . 
 = = Key discoveries in RNA biology = = 
 Research on RNA has led to many important biological discoveries and numerous Nobel Prizes . Nucleic acids were discovered in 1868 by Friedrich Miescher , who called the material ' nuclein ' since it was found in the nucleus . It was later discovered that prokaryotic cells , which do not have a nucleus , also contain nucleic acids . The role of RNA in protein synthesis was suspected already in 1939 . Severo Ochoa won the 1959 Nobel Prize in Medicine ( shared with Arthur Kornberg ) after he discovered an enzyme that can synthesize RNA in the laboratory . However , the enzyme discovered by Ochoa ( polynucleotide phosphorylase ) was later shown to be responsible for RNA degradation , not RNA synthesis . In 1956 Alex Rich and David Davies hybridized two separate strands of RNA to form the first crystal of RNA whose structure could be determined by X @-@ ray crystallography . 
 The sequence of the 77 nucleotides of a yeast tRNA was found by Robert W. Holley in 1965 , winning Holley the 1968 Nobel Prize in Medicine ( shared with Har Gobind Khorana and Marshall Nirenberg ) . In 1967 , Carl Woese hypothesized that RNA might be catalytic and suggested that the earliest forms of life ( self @-@ replicating molecules ) could have relied on RNA both to carry genetic information and to catalyze biochemical reactions — an RNA world . 
 During the early 1970s , retroviruses and reverse transcriptase were discovered , showing for the first time that enzymes could copy RNA into DNA ( the opposite of the usual route for transmission of genetic information ) . For this work , David Baltimore , Renato <unk> and Howard Temin were awarded a Nobel Prize in 1975 . In 1976 , Walter Fiers and his team determined the first complete nucleotide sequence of an RNA virus genome , that of bacteriophage MS2 . 
 In 1977 , introns and RNA splicing were discovered in both mammalian viruses and in cellular genes , resulting in a 1993 Nobel to Philip Sharp and Richard Roberts . Catalytic RNA molecules ( ribozymes ) were discovered in the early 1980s , leading to a 1989 Nobel award to Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman . In 1990 , it was found in Petunia that introduced genes can silence similar genes of the plant 's own , now known to be a result of RNA interference . 
 At about the same time , 22 nt long RNAs , now called microRNAs , were found to have a role in the development of C. elegans . Studies on RNA interference gleaned a Nobel Prize for Andrew Fire and Craig Mello in 2006 , and another Nobel was awarded for studies on the transcription of RNA to Roger Kornberg in the same year . The discovery of gene regulatory RNAs has led to attempts to develop drugs made of RNA , such as siRNA , to silence genes . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 In March 2015 , complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life , including uracil , cytosine and thymine , were reportedly formed in the laboratory under outer space conditions , using starting chemicals , such as pyrimidine , found in meteorites . Pyrimidine , like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) , the most carbon @-@ rich chemical found in the Universe , may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar dust and gas clouds , according to the scientists . 
 = Standing Up in the Milky Way = 
 " Standing Up in the Milky Way " is the first aired episode of the American documentary television series Cosmos : A Spacetime Odyssey . It premiered on March 9 , 2014 , simultaneously on various Fox television networks , including National Geographic Channel , FX , Fox Life , and others . The episode is presented by the series host astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson , directed by Brannon Braga , produced by Livia <unk> and Steven Holtzman , and written by Ann Druyan and Steven Soter . 
 The series represents a follow @-@ up of the 1980s television series Cosmos : A Personal Voyage by Carl Sagan . , also hosted by Tyson , and explores astronomy , space and time , astrophysics , biology , and other diverse areas of science . In this episode , Tyson takes a tour of the Solar System and the Milky Way galaxy , explores the life of Renaissance philosopher Giordano Bruno and his vision of the cosmos , goes through a Cosmic Calendar from the beginning of the universe until the present , and ends with a tribute to Carl Sagan . The episode was first presented with a brief introduction by the President of the United States Barack Obama . 
 The episode received positive reviews by critics , but was criticized on issues like the historical accuracy in the presentation of Giordano Bruno 's life . It was also nominated for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series at the 66th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards , an award it won . 
 = = Episode summary = = 
 The episode begins with Tyson setting off on the " Ship of the Imagination " to discover Earth ’ s cosmic address within the Virgo Supercluster and its place in space and time . As the viewer floats along with him past the planets of our Solar System , he skims over Venus ; he shows this planet 's intense greenhouse effect , as well as its extremely high temperatures . Then he explores Jupiter 's Great Red Spot , a hurricane three times the size of Earth , and provides the first comparison showing how Earth 's size diminishes when contrasted with the Spot 's expanding view . He passes Voyager 1 , the farthest man @-@ made object from Earth , and explains the Voyager Golden Record and its purpose . 
 Tyson explains how human sight is limited in the cosmos and , as an example , shows us how extremely dark rogue planets are " seen " with infrared sensors . He then examines the bubble theory , and how our observable universe might be just a bubble in a " never @-@ ending " set of bubbles , analogous to drops of a waterfall . 
 In an animated segment of this episode , Tyson discusses the life and vision of the 16th @-@ century Italian philosopher Giordano Bruno ( voiced by Seth MacFarlane ) as the person who championed a much more expansive understanding of the Earth 's place in the universe , with the Sun being just one star among all the others . Later , he presents the history of the Universe on Carl Sagan 's Cosmic Calendar . The episode ends with Tyson 's brief speech about Carl Sagan 's life and career , and how Sagan inspired him to become an astrophysicist . 
 = = Production = = 
 Ann Druyan , Steven Soter , and astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson were planning on producing a new , updated sequel to Carl Sagan 's Cosmos : A Personal Voyage and continued pitching the idea to various television stations even after Sagan 's death . In 2008 producer Seth MacFarlane met with Tyson at the Science & Entertainment Exchange , where Tyson told him about rebooting the Cosmos series . MacFarlane took interest in the idea and presented it to the Fox Broadcasting Company television network . 
 " Standing Up in the Milky Way " was directed by Brannon Braga , and written by Druyan and Soter . The narrative sequence of the episode introduced the life of philosopher Giordano Bruno voiced by the series ' executive producer Seth MacFarlane , and other additional characters voiced by MacFarlane and actor Paul Telfer . The special effects for the episode were done by the <unk> VFX studio from New York including " <unk> of star clusters , galaxies and nebula " for the show . The episode also introduces a new " Ship of the Imagination " redesigned by concept artist Ryan Church , which was described by The Verge as " J.J. Abrams ’ Enterprise . " The animated sequences of the episode were produced by Kara Vallow . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode premiered with a 2 @.@ 1 / 5 in the 18 @-@ 49 rating / share and 5 @.@ 77 million Americans watching it live on Fox . However , Nielsen estimated that a total of " 8 @.@ 5 million watched Sunday on the total of 10 Fox @-@ owned networks , including Fox broadcast , National Geographic and FX . " Series executive producer Seth MacFarlane posted on the online social networking website Twitter that 12 million overall viewers watched the Cosmos premiere live in the US alone and 17 @.@ 5 million with DVR . 
 " Standing Up in the Milky Way " was critically well accepted . John Teti from The A.V. Club gave the episode a mark of " B " . He stated " Cosmos : A Spacetime Odyssey is both ambitious and quaint . It attempts to convey humanity ’ s most expansive ideas in the space of a weekly 44 @-@ minute TV series . That ’ s ambitious , " giving a positive review on the show 's creation . He did criticize the show for its " sloppy scripting that crops up more often later in the episode . " Max Nicholson from IGN gave the episode a grade of 8 @.@ 5 ( " Great " ) , concluding " the docu @-@ series is unapologetic in its somewhat controversial depiction of organized religion , but it extends an olive branch for creative thinking and plays with concepts of faith in its whimsical view of the macrocosm . " A positive review was also given by Slate journalist Phil Plait , who said that he sees the episode " as making the more interesting and bigger point about suppression of thought and the grandeur of freedom of exploration of ideas . " 
 Other reviews have criticized the historical accuracy of the segment on Giordano Bruno and question why the show did not portray more important astronomers of the time period , such as Copernicus or Galileo , or earlier medieval natural philosophers , such as Nicole Oresme and Nicholas of Cusa , who presented the possibility of a plurality of worlds centuries earlier than Bruno . Reviewers also complained that the segment was historically inaccurate in its portrayal of Bruno 's troubles as stemming almost entirely from his belief in many worlds . 
 During the premier broadcast of the episode on March 9 , 2014 , on Oklahoma City Fox affiliate KOKH @-@ TV , the episode was interrupted for 15 seconds . The brief interruption of the episode by an advertisement for FOX 25 Primetime News at Nine coincided with a monologue by Tyson in which he describes human evolution . KOKH issued a statement of apology for the event , which also rejected accusations that the incident was intentional , but " the result of operator error . " 
 = 1995 British Grand Prix = 
 The 1995 British Grand Prix ( formally the XLVIII British Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 16 July 1995 at Silverstone Circuit , Silverstone , Northamptonshire , England . It was the eighth round of the 1995 Formula One season . The 61 @-@ lap race was won by Johnny Herbert for the Benetton team after he started from fifth position . Jean Alesi finished second in a Ferrari , with David Coulthard third in a Williams car . The remaining points @-@ scoring positions were filled by Olivier Panis ( Ligier ) , Mark Blundell ( McLaren ) and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen ( Sauber ) . Herbert 's victory was his first in Formula One , and the Benetton team 's fifth of the season . 
 The race was dominated , however , by the fight between World Drivers ' Championship protagonists , Michael Schumacher ( Benetton ) and Damon Hill ( Williams ) . Hill , who started from a pole position achieved during qualifying sessions held in variable weather conditions , retained his lead during the opening stages of the race whilst Schumacher , who was alongside him on the starting grid , fell behind Alesi in the run to the first corner . Despite being held up behind the slower Ferrari until it pitted , Schumacher used a more favourable one @-@ stop strategy to move ahead of Hill , who made two pit stops for fuel and tyres , on lap 41 . Four laps later , Hill attempted to pass Schumacher , but the two collided and were forced to retire from the race . This promoted Herbert and Coulthard , who were battling for third place , into the fight for the lead . Coulthard passed Herbert , but dropped to third , behind Alesi , after incurring a stop @-@ go penalty for speeding in the pit lane . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Heading into the eighth race of the season , Benetton driver Michael Schumacher was leading the Drivers ' Championship with 46 points ; ahead of Williams driver Damon Hill on 35 , and the two Ferrari drivers , Jean Alesi and Gerhard Berger , on 26 and 17 points respectively . The Constructors ' Championship was closer , with Benetton on 48 points leading Ferrari and Williams on 43 and 42 points respectively . After a hesitant start to the season , Schumacher had won three of the previous four Grands Prix , and arrived at Silverstone as the man to beat . Hill , on the other hand , had won the 1994 British Grand Prix and was eager to repeat the feat in front of his home fans . He had also set the fastest lap time in pre @-@ event testing at Silverstone during the final week of June , almost a second in front of team @-@ mate David Coulthard , and a further 0 @.@ 2 seconds ahead of Schumacher . The McLaren , Jordan , Footwork and Pacific teams also took part in these test sessions . Hill was also under some additional pressure going into the weekend , as his wife , Georgie , was due to give birth to their third child imminently . 
 There was one driver change going into the event : the Footwork team 's lead driver , Gianni Morbidelli , was replaced by compatriot Massimiliano Papis , an International Formula 3000 race winner who had also been the test driver for Team Lotus in 1994 , before the outfit withdrew from the sport ahead of the 1995 season . Papis brought valuable sponsorship from Altea , a tie manufacturer , to the underfunded team , which supplemented the income already being provided by his pay driver team @-@ mate , Taki Inoue , to cover the team 's budget for the year . Morbidelli was kept on as the team 's test driver , and later returned to racing action at the Pacific Grand Prix later in the year . 
 Pre @-@ race discussion centred on the following year 's driver line @-@ up , with Schumacher rumoured to be moving to Ferrari to replace Berger , who was considering a move to Williams . Hill 's future was also uncertain , as was his team @-@ mate David Coulthard 's , due to the McLaren team possessing an option on his services for 1996 . Sauber driver Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen was also linked to a possible vacant position for 1996 in the Williams team . Schumacher 's future plans dictated the rest of the driver market , due to his status as the reigning World Champion — and , indeed , the only such champion of all the contemporary drivers — and reputation as the best driver currently in Formula One . It was also reported that Schumacher 's team @-@ mate , Johnny Herbert , was in imminent danger of losing his Benetton seat to test driver Jos Verstappen , who was available due to the collapse of the Simtek team after the Monaco Grand Prix and was contractually owed race drives by team principal Flavio Briatore . Despite taking a podium finish earlier in the year , Herbert had rarely been close to Schumacher 's pace and had only completed two laps in the two previous Grands Prix . A potential new entry was also being discussed : the Japanese racing car constructor Dome was in the process of building a Formula One car with which to enter the World Championship in 1997 . 
 Several teams had made modifications to their cars in preparation for the event . Ferrari made changes to the 412T2 chassis 's sidepods to improve airflow around the tyres , and reverted to a diffuser design used earlier in the season . The Ligier team had Martin Brundle 's car fitted with power steering for the first time and he chose to use it for the race , but team @-@ mate Olivier Panis , who had run with the system earlier in the season , decided against it . McLaren revised its troubled MP4 / 10B chassis 's suspension geometry , and Mika Häkkinen 's car was equipped with a more powerful version of its Mercedes V10 engine for Sunday 's warm @-@ up session and the race itself . Team principal Ron Dennis also re @-@ hired experienced designer Steve Nichols , who had worked for the outfit in the 1980s , in the week before the race . Footwork also arrived with revised suspension , whilst the Jordan team ran with brake disc sensors on its car . Further down the field , the Forti team introduced the revised version of its FG01 chassis for Roberto Moreno . Lead driver Pedro Diniz had first driven the car in its revised specification at the preceding French Grand Prix . The revised aerodynamic package included a higher nose and new sidepods . Both drivers also tested a new development of the Ford @-@ Cosworth ED engine in practice . 
 In the week leading up to the race , Williams chief designer Adrian Newey reignited the controversy over the similarities between the Benetton B195 and Ligier JS41 chassis , which had first flared up at the season @-@ opening Brazilian Grand Prix . Despite the fact that a Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) investigation had declared the JS41 legal earlier in the season , Newey stated that " as far as suspension geometry and aerodynamics are concerned , I 'd say they are identical . [ ... ] Taken to a logical conclusion , we 'll be in an IndyCar position . It is very dangerous . " As part of the Williams team 's own preparations for the race , Hill tested a Williams FW17 equipped with brakes made from steel , rather than the standard carbon fibre , and was reputedly impressed by their performance . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Two practice sessions were held before the race ; the first was held from 09 : 30 to 11 : 15 local time on Friday , and an identically timed session was also held on Saturday . Each driver was limited to 23 laps of free practice per day . The qualifying period was split into two one @-@ hour sessions ; the first was held on Friday afternoon from 13 : 00 to 14 : 00 local time , with the second held on Saturday afternoon at the same time . The fastest time set by each driver from either session counted towards his final grid position . Each driver was limited to twelve laps per qualifying session . 
 Schumacher set the pace in Friday free practice , which took place in dry and cloudy weather conditions , with a time of 1 : 29 @.@ 238 . Hill was less than four hundredths of a second behind , ahead of Alesi , Coulthard , Herbert and Berger ; the drivers from the top three teams in the Constructors ' Championship thus filled the top six positions . Despite his fastest time , Schumacher was unhappy with the handling of his Benetton , reporting more understeer than had been present in pre @-@ event testing at the circuit . 
 Weather conditions for Friday qualifying were dry and sunny , albeit blustery , which meant that drivers had to cope with strong crosswinds in the circuit 's many high @-@ speed corners . The session was marked by an intense fight for pole position between championship protagonists Schumacher and Hill , which was watched by a crowd of 37 @,@ 000 spectators . Schumacher initially set the pace with a time of 1 : 29 @.@ 151 , which he later improved to 1 : 28 @.@ 387 . Hill initially struggled to match his rival 's time in the final , <unk> sector of the lap , but made a set @-@ up change and took provisional pole with a time of 1 : 28 @.@ 124 in the final ten minutes . Schumacher — who had increased the level of downforce on his car to compensate for the understeer , only to find that the reduction in straightline speed was too great — was demoted to second position , but was confident that he and the team could improve the car 's handling for Saturday 's session . Coulthard was more than 0 @.@ 8 seconds slower than Hill in third place , and blamed the strong crosswinds for making his car feel very unstable at the rear end . Berger and Alesi set the fourth and sixth fastest times respectively for Ferrari , both drivers disadvantaged by a lack of straightline speed compared to the Renault @-@ powered Williams and Benetton cars , and the fact that the Italian team was not allowed to take part in pre @-@ event testing at the circuit as per the FIA 's regulations . Team principal Jean Todt , however , described lack of testing as " a feeble excuse " for the team 's loss of form compared with earlier races in the season . Herbert separated the Ferrari drivers in the second Benetton , also complaining of rear @-@ end stability problems with his car . Eddie Irvine set the seventh quickest time in his Jordan despite suffering a recurring brake balance problem , ahead of Häkkinen in the faster of the two McLarens . This formation was continued on the fifth row of the grid , which was occupied by Rubens Barrichello in the other Jordan and Mark Blundell in the other McLaren . Brundle qualified in 11th position , more than a second in front of Ligier team @-@ mate Panis in 13th ; both drivers complained that their cars rode the bumps on the track badly . The two were split by Frentzen in the quicker of the two Saubers , who set a best time 1 @.@ 5 seconds faster than his own team @-@ mate , Jean @-@ Christophe Boullion , in 16th . Ukyo Katayama was 14th quickest for the Tyrrell team , ahead of Pierluigi Martini 's Minardi , the latter 's best qualifying performance of the season . Behind Boullion , Papis set the 17th fastest time in his first Formula One qualifying session , split from team @-@ mate Taki Inoue by Luca Badoer in the second Minardi , who was unable to complete his allocated laps after spinning and breaking the car 's gearbox . The times were completed by Diniz and Moreno in the Fortis , who sandwiched Bertrand Gachot 's Pacific car . Two drivers failed to set times : Mika Salo failed to stop his Tyrrell at the pit @-@ lane weighbridge despite the presence of a red light — indicating that his car had been selected to be weighed — and the stewards excluded his times as a result . Andrea Montermini did not take part in the session at all due to a failure of his car 's brake master cylinder ; the underfunded Pacific team lacked the resources to bring a spare car to the event . 
 Saturday free practice took place in mixed weather conditions : the session was initially dry , but was then hit by a rain shower which dampened it somewhat ; the times were thus slower and more spread out down the field than the previous day . Schumacher set the fastest time of 1 : 31 @.@ 390 , and said that he believed that his car 's handling was much improved compared with its performance on Friday . He was followed by Alesi , Coulthard , Herbert , Panis and Frentzen . Hill was left in 22nd position as a result of spinning off in the difficult conditions and then breaking his car 's transmission as he attempted to restart . Alesi had a controversial session : he set a fast time under yellow flag conditions for Hill 's spin . He later tangled with Gachot 's Pacific and recovered to the pit entry at high speed , where he had to spin to avoid marshals who were pushing the other Pacific of Montermini back to its garage . The race stewards witnessed the incident , but mistakenly called up Alesi 's team @-@ mate , Berger , instead . Alesi , once the correct identity of the driver involved had been established , was not penalised . 
 It continued to rain throughout Saturday 's qualifying session ; the slower conditions meant that none of the top 24 drivers could improve upon their times from the previous day , setting the order of the starting grid and guaranteeing Hill pole position . Only Salo and Montermini 's times counted for their starting positions : the Tyrrell driver set the fourth @-@ fastest time of the session , albeit 12 seconds slower than Moreno 's dry @-@ weather Friday time , to take 23rd position on the grid ; Montermini set a time almost four seconds slower again to complete the field . Many teams chose to complete only limited running in the wet conditions , to the frustration of the crowd : Häkkinen , Inoue and Gachot did not set a time , whilst Blundell , Diniz and Martini completed only exploratory laps . There was also frustration amongst the drivers and teams who felt that they had underperformed on Friday , and for Häkkinen and Irvine who had both been scheduled to run with more powerful engines which should have given an advantage in dry conditions . The Benetton mechanics also had a busy session : first Schumacher slid off the road at Stowe corner and had to rejoin the track by using part of the old circuit ; then Herbert lost control of his car on standing water at the fast Copse corner , spearing off the road into a heavy impact against the tyre barriers . Herbert was uninjured and the Benetton mechanics were able to repair the B195 's monocoque . Coulthard set the quickest time of the session with a lap of 1 : 29 @.@ 752 , ahead of Schumacher , Alesi and Salo , with Hill , Barrichello , Brundle , Badoer , Irvine and Frentzen completing the top ten . Hill admitted that the wet session was " a bit of a let @-@ down " , and was cautious on his race prospects , as he had failed to win from his two pole positions earlier in the season , but was delighted with the outcome nonetheless . Schumacher was also disappointed with the weather conditions , but was optimistic that his car was fully competitive in either the dry or wet . 
 The lack of on @-@ track action caused by the wet conditions and the two @-@ day qualifying system was a cause for concern amongst the Formula One paddock , members of which believed that members of the public who had paid to attend the session ( spectator numbers were estimated at 40 @,@ 000 ) , or watch it on television , were being short @-@ changed as a result . McLaren team principal Ron Dennis argued that the restriction on the use of the teams ' spare cars should be lifted in the event of wet weather conditions , whilst Pacific designer Frank Coppuck advocated a points system for qualifying , in addition to aggregating the times over both days . FIA President Max Mosley confirmed that the current qualifying procedure was to be the subject of a review , with possible changes due to be introduced for the 1996 season . One @-@ day qualifying was subsequently introduced from the 1996 Australian Grand Prix onwards . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 On Sunday morning , a pre @-@ race warm @-@ up session took place at 09 : 30 local time , and lasted for 30 minutes . It took place in dry weather conditions . Häkkinen , using his uprated Mercedes engine for the first time , set the session 's fastest time with a lap of 1 : 29 @.@ 685 . Despite the fact that the time was set on brand @-@ new tyres , unlike many of those recorded by the opposition , it was still an encouraging boost for the McLaren team , which had endured a troubled season thus far . He was followed in the timesheets by Hill , Coulthard , Alesi , Berger and Schumacher . Hill reported that his car handled well in race trim , whilst Schumacher concentrated on fuel consumption tests , and did not attempt to set a particularly quick time . Berger , meanwhile , downplayed Ferrari 's chances , predicting that only a wet race would give either him or Alesi a chance of race victory . Herbert was down in 12th position as a result of a broken shock absorber , which was replaced in time for the race . 
 It began to rain half an hour before the start of the race but soon stopped , so that the track was almost entirely dry by 14 : 00 , with an ambient temperature of 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) . A total of approximately 110 @,@ 000 spectators attended the race , of whom 20 @,@ 000 watched from grandstands . For the first time in the event 's history , general admission tickets were limited , to ensure that all spectators could get a good view of the track . Whilst on a reconnaissance lap , Montermini performed an illegal practice start , for which Pacific was given a fine of $ 5 @,@ 000 , suspended for three races . 
 When the race started , Hill maintained his advantage into the first corner , whilst Alesi made a fast start to slot into second position ahead of Schumacher . Salo also had an excellent getaway , rising to 17th place by the end of the first lap . Berger and Irvine , meanwhile , made poor starts as they struggled with slipping clutches , dropping to ninth and 13th positions respectively . At the end of the first lap , Hill led by 1 @.@ 1 seconds from Alesi , who was followed by Schumacher , Coulthard , Herbert , Häkkinen , Barrichello , Brundle , Berger , Frentzen , Blundell , Panis , Irvine , Martini , Katayama , Boullion , Salo , Papis , Inoue , Gachot , Badoer , Diniz , Montermini and Moreno . On the second lap , Irvine tried to pass Panis at the Abbey chicane , but spun in the process and dropped further back , shortly before his engine cut out , making him the first retirement of the race . Elsewhere in the field , Berger passed Brundle , and Montermini moved ahead of Diniz . At the front of the pack , Hill was in control , extending his lead over Alesi to 6 @.@ 2 seconds by lap 5 and to 12 seconds by lap 12 . For his part , Schumacher was being held up by Alesi , the two cars running in formation in the early stages of the race . He was , however , unable to get close enough to attempt an overtaking manoeuvre , due to the aerodynamic turbulence created by the airflow over the Ferrari . There were passing opportunities further down the order , however : Blundell and Panis both overhauled Frentzen in the early laps ; Katayama and Boullion moved ahead of Martini ; and Badoer passed Gachot . At the tail of the field , Diniz made the first of three pit stops on lap 6 to investigate gear selection problems with his Forti from which he retired eight laps later , and his team @-@ mate Moreno also made an early stop on the tenth lap but continued , albeit one lap down on the leader . 
 As Hill extended his lead , the stewards informed the Jordan and Ligier teams that Barrichello and Panis had jumped the start , for which they were served with ten @-@ second stop @-@ go penalties . Both drivers had previously been penalised for the same offence at the French Grand Prix , and also the Monaco Grand Prix . Panis took his penalty on lap 12 and dropped from 11th to 14th position ; Barrichello pitted to serve his identical penalty three laps later , from seventh place , and rejoined in 11th . Both drivers later protested their innocence . Lap 15 also saw the first scheduled pit stop , as Coulthard , also held up by Alesi behind Schumacher , took on fresh fuel and tyres earlier than planned in a bid to move ahead of the Ferrari when it made its own visit to the pit lane . As he rejoined the race , Coulthard 's Williams suffered an electronic failure that affected the car 's throttle control when changing gears , but continued the race in ninth place regardless . The next few laps saw a flurry of activity in the pit lane as those drivers on two @-@ stop strategies pitted at around one @-@ third race distance , and also several retirements . On lap 17 , Brundle spun out of seventh place at <unk> and beached his car in the gravel trap , and Inoue retired from 18th position after a similar mistake resulted in a stalled engine . On the same lap , Montermini pitted from 19th place , which he maintained upon rejoining the race . On the following lap , Alesi made his pit stop from second position , releasing Schumacher , and rejoined in front of Coulthard , whilst Barrichello , recovering from his penalty , passed Frentzen for what had become eighth place . Schumacher slowly began to reduce Hill 's lead , which had grown to 19 @.@ 5 seconds . Salo pitted on lap 19 , dropping behind Papis and the Minardi drivers , but gained a position on Boullion when the Sauber driver stopped on the next lap . By this stage Häkkinen and Berger had risen to fourth and fifth respectively , but both retired on lap 21 : Häkkinen 's McLaren suffering a progressive electronic problem which caused its hydraulic system to fail ; Berger pulling off the track shortly after making his first pit stop due to an incorrectly fitted left @-@ front wheel . The remaining two @-@ stoppers pitted on laps 21 and 22 : Herbert came in from third place and retained his position by rejoining ahead of Alesi and Coulthard ; Blundell dropped from fourth to seventh , Gachot retained 16th ; and Barrichello and Panis made their first scheduled stops , the Jordan dropping from seventh to eighth and the Ligier rejoining in 11th from ninth . At the head of the field , Hill came in on lap 22 , rejoining nine seconds behind Schumacher , who now led the race . Two further retirements also occurred during this stage of the race : Montermini spun out of 17th place on lap 22 , whilst Katayama , who was due in for a pit stop of his own , retired from eighth position when his engine cut due to fuel starvation on the following lap . At the end of lap 23 , the running order was Schumacher , Hill , Herbert , Alesi , Coulthard , Frentzen , Blundell , Barrichello , Martini , Papis , Panis , Badoer , Salo , Boullion , Gachot and Moreno . 
 On new tyres , Hill began to reduce Schumacher 's nine @-@ second lead , but after a few laps Schumacher began to ease away again as he had a lighter fuel load than the Williams . It became apparent to the teams , as the race approached half @-@ distance , that Schumacher had opted for a one @-@ stop strategy and that both he and Hill only had one stop remaining each . Frentzen , Papis and the Minardi drivers also opted for a single @-@ stop race ; Papis and Martini 's worn tyres allowing Panis to overtake them soon after his second stop . Papis made his first Formula One race pit stop on lap 28 , only to hit the barrier at the exit of the pit lane , causing damage to his Footwork 's suspension which caused him to spin off and retire on the same lap that he rejoined the circuit . On the next lap Frentzen dropped from sixth to eighth position as a result of his sole stop , and was then passed by Panis four laps later ; Martini likewise dropped from 10th to 13th on lap 30 ; and Badoer also moved from 10th to 13th when he made his stop on lap 32 . At the front of the field , Hill moved back into the lead of the race when Schumacher made his pit stop on lap 31 , rejoining in second place with a deficit of 20 seconds . Hill now pushed hard in his efforts to build up a sufficient lead over Schumacher — setting the race 's fastest lap time of 1 : 29 @.@ 752 on lap 37 — to maintain first place after his second pit stop . Salo began the second round of pit stops on the next lap , and was followed in due course by Alesi , Herbert , Barrichello , Boullion , Gachot , Blundell , Panis and Coulthard . Coulthard 's stop , despite moving him ahead of Alesi , was problematic : his car 's electronic failure meant that his pit @-@ lane speed @-@ limiter system did not work , and he exceeded the 80 kilometres per hour ( 50 mph ) pit @-@ lane speed limit , an infraction of the Sporting Regulations which , like jumping the start , entailed a ten @-@ second stop @-@ go penalty . Hill made his own second stop on lap 41 with a 27 @-@ second lead over Schumacher and the two were almost level as Hill reached the end of the pit lane , but Schumacher 's extra momentum allowed him to move ahead in the run to the <unk> , <unk> and Chapel sequence of fast corners . At the completion of the scheduled pit stops by lap 44 , the running order was Schumacher and Hill in close attendance , then a gap back to a similar battle between Herbert and Coulthard , then Alesi , Blundell , Barrichello , Panis , Frentzen — whom Panis had just passed for the third time — Martini , Badoer , Salo , Boullion , Gachot and Moreno , the last of whom retired four laps later with a lack of hydraulic pressure in his Forti 's pneumatic engine valves . 
 Schumacher and Hill now had similar fuel loads , but Hill had a fresh set of tyres and immediately began pressuring Schumacher , quickly reducing the gap to less than half @-@ a @-@ second . On lap 46 , Hill attempted a passing manoeuvre at Stowe corner , but was unable to complete it , due to the presence of Boullion 's lapped Sauber . Further around the lap , Hill tried again , diving up the inside of Schumacher at the entry to the Priory left @-@ hander , but Schumacher turned in to take the racing line and the two collided , both spinning into the gravel trap , which caused their retirement from the race . The retirement of the two leaders promoted their team @-@ mates into their own battle for the lead ; the two almost colliding at the same corner as Coulthard attempted to pass Herbert by making a lunge up the inside of his car , as Hill had done to Schumacher . Coulthard had not been informed about his stop @-@ go penalty by the team , as they did not want to distract him , but he saw the penalty notification on one of the large television screens situated around the circuit . He passed Herbert on lap 49 , but took his penalty two laps later and dropped to third position , behind Alesi . The Ferrari driver was still close behind Herbert , but cut his pace in the final laps as his 412T2 's oil pressure began to fade . With the top three positions settled , attention switched to Barrichello , who had closed up to the back of Blundell 's car and was faster than the McLaren driver . On the penultimate lap , Barrichello lined up his car to attempt a pass , but Blundell defended his position and the two collided : Barrichello crashed out , but Blundell was able to continue with a punctured left @-@ rear tyre which allowed Panis to overtake him on the last lap . It was the second year in succession that Barrichello had collided with a McLaren driver in the closing stages , as he had made contact with Häkkinen on the last corner of the last lap the previous year when also battling for fourth place . 
 Thus Herbert took the chequered flag after 61 laps — at an average speed of 195 @.@ 682 kilometres per hour ( 121 @.@ 591 mph ) — to win his first Formula One race at his 74th attempt , a result that also moved him from sixth to fourth in the Drivers ' Championship . Alesi and Coulthard completed the podium , moving Ferrari ahead of Williams in the battle for second place in the Constructors ' Championship . Panis finished fourth , ahead of Blundell , who managed to finish despite his car running on three wheels for the final lap . Frentzen finished a lap down and completed the points @-@ scoring positions , forty seconds ahead of a close group comprising Martini , Salo and Boullion . Salo closed in on the Minardi driver late in the race after passing his team @-@ mate , but was edged onto the grass whilst attempting a pass on the Hangar Straight and spun through 360 degrees . Badoer finished a further ten seconds behind this group , having also been passed by Boullion after his final pit stop . Barrichello was classified in 11th place , ahead of Gachot , who took his first race finish since the 1992 Belgian Grand Prix three laps behind Herbert . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Herbert 's maiden Formula One victory was very popular amongst the spectators and team personnel , as not only was it his home race , but also because it came after a series of setbacks earlier in his career , not least a serious accident in an International Formula 3000 race at Brands Hatch in 1988 that left him with severe foot injuries which threatened his racing career . In the post @-@ race press conference , Herbert paid tribute to three people who had particularly helped the progress of his career : his wife , Becky ; Peter Collins , of whom Herbert said that " he got me into F1 twice " ; and Benetton team principal Flavio Briatore for giving him his 1995 drive . Herbert 's win also came in front of his parents , Bob and Jane , who were selling his fan club merchandise at the circuit during the race meeting . In addition , the victory secured his immediate future within the Benetton team . Alesi declared himself " very happy " with his second place , but admitted to " giving up " in the second half of the race , as he knew that overtaking Herbert or Coulthard when they were ahead of him would have been almost impossible . For Coulthard , his result was bittersweet : he was pleased to finish the race despite the failure of his car 's electronics , but disappointed to lose an almost certain victory due to his pit @-@ lane speeding penalty . A few days later , he described his race in a magazine column as " one of those disappointing days when everything goes wrong " . 
 The majority of media attention , however , was focussed on the aftermath of the collision between Schumacher and Hill on lap 46 . Tension between the two had already been intensified by an incident during the French Grand Prix , where Schumacher had accused Hill of brake @-@ testing him . After the crash , Schumacher blamed Hill , saying that : " I think what Damon did was both stupid and totally unnecessary . There was no room for two cars there , and it 's not an overtaking place . If I hadn 't been there , I think he 'd have gone straight on into the gravel . He just came from nowhere . Even in front of your home crowd , I think you have to keep your temperament under control . It was more or less the same situation at Adelaide last year [ the occasion of the 1994 Australian Grand Prix , in which a collision between the two settled the Drivers ' Championship in Schumacher 's favour ] , where he also tried to dive inside when there was no room . " Hill was more cautious in his assessment of the incident , commenting that : " I thought I saw an opportunity that I could take an advantage of , but I 'm afraid Michael is a harder man to pass than that , and we had an accident — which I would describe as ' a racing accident ' " . Journalists Alan Henry , Nigel Roebuck and Luc Domenjoz agreed that Hill 's lunge up the inside had been over @-@ optimistic , but not malicious in intent . Similarly , BBC commentator and former driver , Jonathan Palmer , said that Hill 's manoeuvre was the result of " a rush of blood to the head " . Journalist Joe Saward was amongst those who speculated , however , that Schumacher had played a role in the collision by taking a wider line into the Priory corner than usual , and thus encouraging Hill to attempt the manoeuvre . The incident was subject to a stewards ' investigation , which resulted in both drivers being given a severe reprimand and a warning that " future similar actions may result in severe penalties " . The collision overshadowed the fact that , in the opinion of Roebuck , Benetton had again chosen a better race strategy than Williams , and that Schumacher would have had a comfortable lead had he not been stuck behind Alesi in the early stages of the race . There was also similar ill @-@ feeling between Barrichello and Blundell after their collision on lap 60 . Barrichello accused Blundell of brake @-@ testing him prior to the incident , and of causing the crash by changing his driving line too quickly , whilst Blundell denied the allegations and drew attention to Barrichello 's similar collision with Häkkinen the previous year . The stewards also investigated this incident and gave Blundell a severe reprimand for his actions . 
 In the week following the race , it was reported in several British newspapers that Frank Williams , founder and team principal of the Williams team , had visited the Benetton garage after the race where he had apologised to Schumacher and Briatore for the incident , during which he had allegedly referred to Hill as a " <unk> " . On the same day , a Williams team spokesman stated that Hill was backed by Frank Williams and technical director Patrick Head , and that the incident was a natural part of motor racing . Frank Williams then issued a personal statement denying the newspaper reports . Hill also telephoned the owner of Formula One 's commercial rights , Bernie Ecclestone , for advice on how to handle the situation . Ecclestone advised him to apologise to Schumacher , which Hill decided against . The crash was still the main talking point throughout the sport by the time of the German Grand Prix , exacerbated by the fact that Hill 's home race was immediately followed by Schumacher 's . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Natural Born Kissers = 
 " Natural Born Kissers " is the twenty @-@ fifth and final episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 17 , 1998 . Homer and Marge discover that the fear of getting caught while making love is a turn on and start making love in public places . This episode is rated TV @-@ 14 in the United States , and was at one point rated M in Australia . It was the first episode written by Matt Selman and was the only episode to be directed by <unk> Hall . Some networks list the episode by the title , " Margie , May I Sleep With Danger ? " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 It is Homer and Marge 's eleventh wedding anniversary and Grampa does not arrive at the Simpson house to babysit the children , spoiling Homer and Marge 's evening together . Later that evening , Homer and Marge attempt to have sexual intercourse , but lack enthusiasm . The following day , it is discovered that the refrigerator 's motor has burned out so Homer and Marge make their way to a hardware store to buy another one . On the way , the car gets stuck in the muddy driveway in the middle of farm country . Homer and Marge rush into the nearest barn to avoid a sudden storm . A farmer discovers the barn door is open and suspects trespassers . He enters the barn , nearly catching Homer and Marge , who are hiding in the hay loft , but leaves after failing to locate them . When the coast is clear , Homer and Marge have inspired sexual intercourse in the hay loft . 
 Homer and Marge think their marriage has been recharged and go for a romantic weekend at a Bed and Breakfast , but soon fall into their old patterns . However , a maid walks in on them and they conclude they are both aroused when they risk being caught during intimate moments , so they have sex behind window curtains in a room full of people . Their love life is recharged and one day they begin to have sex on the same miniature golf course windmill where Bart was conceived . This time they come too close to being caught having public sex , and while they manage to escape , they have to flee through Springfield in the nude . In the end , the two are seen in a football stadium , and a naked photograph of Homer and Marge appears in the local newspaper . The next day , Bart and Lisa see the picture and their parents begin to explain sex to them . Before they go into detail , however , they decide to go back to the miniature golf course . 
 In a subplot , Bart and Lisa stay at the Springfield Retirement Castle with Grampa , and they discover a metal detector in his closet . While Bart uses it to look for pirate treasure , they uncover an alternate ending to Casablanca . The Old Jewish Man reveals that he was once a studio executive who tried to add the happy ending to the film . He pays Bart and Lisa to re @-@ bury it . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Natural Born Kissers " was the first episode written by Matt Selman , who partly based it on his parents ' marriage . The episode was the only time that show runner Mike Scully ever got a call from Fox where they suggested not doing the episode . They were worried about the sexual content , the nudity , and how it was going to be handled . They disliked several of the phrases used in the episode , such as the term " ass <unk> ' " . In an interview , Matt Groening said : " The network censors couldn 't believe it , and neither could I : the cow at the peephole while Homer and Marge make love in a hayloft ; neighbors groping Homer when he and Marge are caught nude inside the windmill at the Sir <unk> @-@ A @-@ Lot mini golf course ; Homer dangling naked from a hot @-@ air balloon , his ass dragging against the glass of a Crystal Cathedral @-@ like church . " The producers fought the censors and in the end , very little of the script was modified . Marge 's buttocks is also shown on television for the first time . Marge and Homer in the golf course is a reference to the season three episode " I Married Marge " , although in that episode they are in a castle , rather than a windmill . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The airplane restaurant " Up , Up and Buffet ! " is based on a submarine shaped restaurant that was near the Fox studio named " Dive ! " . A supposed alternate ending to the 1942 film Casablanca is shown in the episode , and the Old Jewish Man gives Bart and Lisa a copy of It 's A Wonderful Life with a " killing @-@ spree ending " . The song " Spanish Flea " plays during the radio commercial for Divorce Specialists . The song " Rock the Casbah " by The Clash plays over the end credits . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Natural Born Kissers " finished 29th in ratings for the week of May 11 – 18 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , King of the Hill , and Ally McBeal . 
 Matt Groening listed the episode as being his eighth favorite episode , and the aroused cow is one of his all @-@ time favorite act break jokes . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote , " a superb episode which actually makes Marge and Homer 's love life seem very real ; everyone needs a bit of spice now and again , and they find theirs . The balloon trip is hysterical , and the attempts to explain their behaviour to a very worldly @-@ wise Bart and Lisa are magnificent . " The episode was part of a DVD boxed set release called The Simpsons Kiss and Tell : The Story of Their Love , and in his review of the release , Andy Dougan of the Evening Times characterized the episode along with " Large Marge " , " Three Gays of the Condo " , and " The Way We Weren 't " , as " four of the funniest episodes of recent series " . The DVD release was also reviewed favorably by Louis R. <unk> in the Chicago Tribune , where the episode was seen as " more ridiculous " than " Large Marge " . 
 = 1906 – 17 Stanford rugby teams = 
 The Stanford rugby teams of 1906 to 1917 represented Stanford University as the school 's only football program during those years , replacing American football with rugby union . The school had played American football from 1892 to 1905 , but in 1906 , concerned with the growing levels of violence in football , Stanford and other universities changed to rugby . Stanford played twelve seasons of rugby , during which it played other college teams , club teams from the United States , Canada , and Australia , as well as the New Zealand national team and Australia national team . Despite the team 's success , it became clear that other schools were not adopting rugby in large numbers , and after rival California returned to football in 1915 , Stanford faced a limited number of potential opponents ; and after a year of playing neither sport officially due to World War I , the school returned to American football in 1919 . 
 = = Switch to rugby = = 
 American football in the early 1900s had become increasingly violent ; with no forward pass , the ball carrier would be typically pushed and pulled up the field by his own players in massive formations that often resulted in serious injuries . In 1905 , 18 deaths , three at the college level , were attributed to football ; 159 serious injuries were also reported , 88 at the college level . 
 Reform was demanded by such voices as U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt , who decried the brutality and foul play of the game , and called a meeting of school presidents to discuss the issue . As a result , before the next season began , new rules were put in place to discourage such play . The forward pass was also introduced to open up the game and reduce the role of dangerous mass formations . Despite the planned changes , a number of universities banned the sport for the coming year , including Columbia , NYU , and Northwestern . 
 Several universities on the West Coast , led by California and Stanford , replaced the sport with rugby . At the time , the future of football was very much in doubt and these schools believed that rugby would eventually be adopted nationwide . Other schools that made the switch included Nevada , St. Mary 's , Santa Clara , and USC ( in 1911 ) . However , due to the perception that West Coast football was inferior to the game played on the East Coast anyway , East Coast and Midwest teams shrugged off the loss of the teams and continued playing football . With no nationwide movement , the available pool of rugby teams to play remained small . The schools scheduled games against local club teams and reached out to rugby powers in Australia , New Zealand , and especially , due to its proximity , Canada . The annual Big Game between Stanford and California continued as rugby , with the winner invited by the British Columbia Rugby Union to a tournament in Vancouver over the Christmas holidays , with the winner of that tournament receiving the Cooper Keith Trophy . 
 = = Return to football = = 
 In 12 seasons of rugby , Stanford was remarkably successful : the team had three undefeated seasons , three one @-@ loss seasons , and an overall record of 94 wins , 20 losses , and 3 ties for a winning percentage of <unk> . However , after a few years , the school began to feel the isolation of its newly adopted sport , which was not spreading as many had hoped . Students and alumni began to clamor for a return to football to allow wider intercollegiate competition . The pressure at rival California was stronger ( especially as the school had not been as successful in the Big Game as they had hoped ) , and in 1915 California returned to football . As reasons for the change , the school cited football rule changes , the overwhelming desire of students and supporters to play football , interest in playing other East Coast and Midwest schools , and a patriotic desire to play an " American " game . 
 California 's return to football increased the pressure on Stanford to also change back in order to maintain the rivalry . Stanford played its 1915 , 1916 , and 1917 " Big Games " as rugby against Santa Clara and California 's football " Big Game " in those years was against Washington , but both schools desired to restore the old traditions . The onset of World War I gave Stanford an out : in 1918 , the Stanford campus was designated as the Students ' Army Training Corps headquarters for all of California , Nevada , and Utah , and the commanding officer , Sam M. Parker , decreed that football was the appropriate athletic activity to train soldiers and rugby was dropped . 
 After the war , Stanford resumed its football program and relegated rugby to a minor sport . Several Stanford rugby players who played during those years — including Daniel Carroll , Dink Templeton , Morris Kirksey , Erwin <unk> , John Patrick , and Charles Doe — went on to win a gold medal for the United States in rugby at the 1920 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Season results = = 
 = = = 1906 season = = = 
 In its first season of rugby , Stanford retained head football coach James F. Lanagan as its first rugby coach . Lanagan had coached the football team for three years , including an undefeated 1905 season . With no experience playing or coaching rugby , Lanagan initially offered his resignation , but Stanford insisted he stay on , so he traveled to Vancouver , British Columbia to study the sport . Stanford won its first five games , including two wins over a visiting club team from Vancouver . As winners of the first Big Game against California played as rugby , Stanford competed against Vancouver @-@ area club teams for the Cooper Keith Trophy , losing two games and tying one . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1907 season = = = 
 In Stanford 's second season of rugby , Jimmy Lanagan returned as coach and the team finished 8 – 4 . Stanford continued its series with Nevada , Vancouver , and Victoria and added games against Bay Area club team the Barbarians and a Los Angeles club called the Castaways . Stanford won its second Big Game rugby match , earning a second straight tournament in British Columbia . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1908 season = = = 
 Lanagan returned for his final year as Stanford 's coach and the team finished 12 – 2 , winning not only its third consecutive Big Game , but also going on to win the Cooper Keith Trophy in the end @-@ of @-@ season Vancouver tournament . Stanford added two games against San Francisco 's Olympic Club and played a final game against the Australian national team , the Wallabies . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1909 season = = = 
 Following Lanagan 's departure , George Presley was named Stanford 's new rugby coach . Presley played one year of rugby under Lanagan in 1906 and had been an assistant coach in 1907 and 1908 . Presley also coached Stanford 's baseball team . Stanford won its first eight games — seven by shutout — but then lost Big Game for the first time in seven years . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1910 season = = = 
 In Presley 's second year as coach , Stanford was led by Ben Erb and Jim <unk> . The season was almost identical to the previous year : the team won its first seven games by shutout , and then lost Big Game to undefeated California . Stanford led in that game 6 – 0 , but did not score again as California won 25 – 6 . This Big Game is recognized as the first intercollegiate game to feature card stunts . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1911 season = = = 
 In the 1911 season , Stanford went 10 – 3 and added USC to the schedule , as the school dropped football in favor of rugby . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1912 season = = = 
 In Presley 's last year as coach , Stanford finished with a 5 – 3 – 1 record , its worst record of the rugby era . Stanford avoided a fourth straight loss in the Big Game by tying California . Despite an outstanding 30 – 8 – 1 overall record as coach , coach Presley was 0 – 3 – 1 against the Bears . 
