 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1913 season = = = 
 Floyd C. Brown succeeded George Presley as coach . Like Presley , Brown had played for and served as an assistant under the previous coach . Stanford finished with an 8 – 3 record , including its first Big Game win in five years , led by Danny Carroll , who had won a gold medal in the 1908 Summer Olympics as a member of the Australia national rugby union team and who was now earning a degree in geology from Stanford . Stanford played its final rugby game against USC , who returned to American football the next year , and suffered two blowout losses to the famed New Zealand All Blacks , who were on a North American tour . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1914 season = = = 
 Brown 's second year as coach was the best in Stanford rugby history : the team was undefeated entering the Big Game at California , who was also undefeated . A record crowd of 26 @,@ 000 turned out to see Stanford defeat the Bears , 26 – 8 . This would be the last Big Game for several years as California returned to football for the 1915 season . Despite Stanford 's success in rugby , the previous year 's humiliating defeats to the All Blacks and the switch by rivals USC and California to football intensified the sentiment for Stanford to switch back as well . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1915 season = = = 
 By 1915 , there was only one other U.S. college playing intercollegiate rugby : Santa Clara . The rest of Stanford 's schedule was made up of local club and all star teams . The team played to a scoreless tie with the Olympic Club team to start the season , but recovered to win the rest of the games on the schedule . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1916 season = = = 
 In their last full season of rugby , Stanford won all its games except the " Big Game " against Santa Clara , played for the second year at Ewing Field in San Francisco . This was Stanford 's first loss since 1913 . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = = = 1917 season = = = 
 Like the two coaches before him , Stanford 's new head coach Jim Wylie was a former Stanford player . He had also been a member of the New Zealand All Blacks team that had crushed Stanford 's team in 1913 . But with World War I imminent , Stanford played just one game , the " Big Game " against Santa Clara , winning 15 – 11 . This was also Stanford rugby 's last game as a major sport . The following year , Stanford president Ray Lyman Wilbur canceled all intercollegiate athletic events due to students ' enlisting in the military for the war , and due to Stanford 's designation as the regional headquarters of the Students ' Army Training Corps . When Stanford reformed a team in 1919 , the school returned to American football as its major gridiron sport . 
 = = = = Schedule = = = = 
 = Join Hands = 
 Join Hands is the second studio album by the English post @-@ punk band Siouxsie and the Banshees . It was released in September 1979 by the record label Polydor . Upon its release , it was hailed by the British press , including Melody Maker , Sounds , NME and Record Mirror . 
 Join Hands took the topic of World War I as its inspiration . Musically , it is darker than the band 's debut album The Scream : it sounds more claustrophobic and more haunting . It was the last album with the band 's first recorded line @-@ up , as the guitarist John McKay and the drummer Kenny Morris quit the group after a disagreement at the beginning of the British Join Hands tour on the day of the album 's release . 
 The record peaked at No. 13 on the UK Albums Chart . " Playground Twist " was the sole single released from the album . In 2015 , Join Hands was repressed on vinyl with the very first artwork that the band had presented to Polydor in 1979 . 
 = = History , content and music = = 
 Join Hands was written over a period of six months . In 1979 , the band watched news reports from Iran , including scenes of repression and curfews ; it was one of the first times they had seen images of people being shot and killed on television . In England , the political situation was also unstable , with rubbish piling up in the streets of London . Siouxsie Sioux saw it as " a real time , everything in flocks and uncertain but also festering underneath , and because this stuff from the past that was just left there rotting there and it needed to be acknowledged and then cleaned up , not just swept away still rotting " . The band were inspired by these events . The theme of war emerged through the songs : Rather than a pro @-@ military message , the lyrics were meant to capture the spirit of what things were like at the time . Miranda Sawyer stated that Join Hands took " the very un @-@ rock 'n'roll topic of World War I as its inspiration " . 
 The album 's references to poppies represented the idea of " loss , of flesh and blood and hopelessness " . The themes of the songs also included " child @-@ like terror , attacks on social and spiritual conditioning , various kinds of death and torture , and loneliness " . Some songs were also about families and nursing . For the critic Ronnie Gurr , " All lyrical options are left completely open " . 
 The album opens with the sound of tolling bells before the beginning of " Poppy Day " . The words were based on John McCrae 's poem " In Flanders Fields " , which was written in 1915 after the loss of a friend during a battle in World War I. " Poppy Day " , a short track with a long introduction building over what one journalist called " shards of John McKay 's guitar " and a " strident militaristic backbeat " , had been shaped after Steven Severin had observed the televised two minutes of silence in memory of the war dead on Sunday , 12 November 1978 . " We wanted to write a song that would fittingly fill that gap " , he stated . On the inner sleeve of the album , the mention " 2 minutes of silence " was added next to the lyrics of the song . 
 " Regal Zone " , featuring saxophone by McKay , also covers the subject of war and is about the conflict in Iran . " Placebo Effect " addresses the use of placebos in medicine , while " Icon " displays echoes of iconoclasm , with the destruction of paintings featuring religious images , or statues and symbols of old authoritarian regimes . " Premature Burial " , " ostensibly inspired " by Edgar Allan Poe 's short story of the same name , is the track from which the album title had been taken . It is , in Siouxsie 's words , " an expression of claustrophobia , of being hemmed in both by society 's and people 's limitations " . For the writer Mark <unk> , the line " We 're all sisters and brothers " looked like a mockery of the Summer of Love . The song 's conclusion features what sounds like " a formal choir backing for a retreating Red Army in its magnificent defeat " . 
 Beginning the second side , " Playground Twist " is a " swirling mass of flanged guitars " with church bells ; it includes a nursery rhyme section . The song " talks about adults who act like children and children who think they 're adults " . Siouxsie explained : " It 's about the cruelty of children and that whole aspect of being thrown out into the playground in the winter in howling gales and left to fend for yourself . It 's not the sort of thing you 're supposed to write pop songs about " . It was the band 's third single in less than a year and " probably the best " , according to the music historian Clinton Heylin . The single did not sound catchy , but it nevertheless entered the top 30 . Severin later recalled the head of A & R at Polydor telling him he expected a commercial failure . 
 The lullaby " Mother / Oh Mein Papa " is an interpretation of the German song " O mein Papa " with words by Siouxsie . Phil Sutcliffe called it " a raw wound of a song offered by Siouxsie from her own life and surely shared and picked and scratched at by everyone who hears it " . Over a music box , two voices sing simultaneous love and hatred for the same mother . The positive lyric is upfront and the negative one is in the background . The final track of the album is a studio recording of " The Lord 's Prayer " , the song that Siouxsie and the Banshees had famously played at their debut live performance at the 100 Club Punk Festival in September 1976 . It was recorded in one take ; after every session in the first week , they put down a version of " The Lord 's Prayer " . Before entering the studio , the band had recorded a John Peel session in early April in which they had premiered the tracks " Placebo Effect " , " Playground Twist " , " Regal Zone " and " Poppy Day " . The band then went into Air Studios on Oxford Street in London to record the album in May . By June , they had mixed it . 
 Join Hands was different from The Scream : It was darker , more experimental , less abrasive , with a new " claustrophobic " mood . McKay 's guitar @-@ playing generates a " barrage of sound " while Severin 's " bass carries the tune " . The recording took place under a strained atmosphere . McKay and Kenny Morris withdrew and became uncommunicative with the rest of the band and their manager and co @-@ producer of the album , Nils Stevenson . Unlike the sessions for The Scream , the music was recorded without Siouxsie , as she added her vocals later . Morris did not take part in the mixing sessions , while Siouxsie was heavily involved . Commenting a few days before the album 's release , Jon Savage wrote about the music : " The songs are delivered with the stifling intensity of inner violence in a locked room " . Kris Needs remarked that Join Hands was , in retrospect , an ironic title for a record which split the group in two . The album reflected how the band felt at the time : " We were lonely and isolated and that comes across in the music " , stated Siouxsie in 2003 . She added : " Musically , Join Hands was an uncompromising album but it still sounds modern today " . 
 = = Cover artwork , release and tour = = 
 Initially , the group wanted to release an album cover using an edited image from a Holy Communion card , showing children joining hands . The image had been photocopied several times , so it had become distorted . The art direction was by John Maybury , a college friend of Morris . Their manager , Stevenson , was unable to determine who owned the copyright and advised that the band would be bankrupted if they were sued as a result . Polydor also became nervous about copyright infringement , so the artwork was pulled at the last minute ; the record company 's executives also disliked its religious nature . As a UK tour had already been scheduled to coincide with the release of the album , there was no possibility of delaying the release . 
 Stevenson suggested an alternative cover . He instructed the Polydor art department to design artwork using four statues from the Guards Memorial , from a photo session the band had recently done in front of the monument which commemorates the war dead of the Great War . Four of the soldier statues were cut out from the shot of the band . Siouxsie found the sleeve a workable solution , as she was drawn in by the imagery conjured up by the words for " In Flanders Fields " , which inspired " Poppy Day " . For her , it was the linchpin for the album . The poppy reproduced on the album cover is a symbol of Remembrance Day . The designer , Rob O 'Connor , said about the layout : " The wreath of poppies was devised to help add colour and create a graphic device " . An embossed sleeve was planned , with the four soldiers inked in the card , but was not used , as the band did not received the proofs in time . Morris and McKay blamed Stevenson , Siouxsie and Severin , although it was Polydor that refused the extra expense at the last minute . Nevertheless , Severin succeeded in pushing for a gatefold cover : " We wanted it all white because you were supposed to do it all black , and you were supposed to have blackmail lettering on it and so we had it nice and classic " , he stated . Maybury 's drawings of the band were used on the inner spread ; it was the only part of the original design that survived . 
 Join Hands was issued on 7 September 1979 by the record label Polydor . It reached No. 13 in the UK Albums Chart . At that time , the breach between McKay and Morris and the rest of the group had become important . A warm @-@ up show in Ireland had caused problems for McKay , forcing him to play without all his effects pedals , as none of the gear had turned up . Finally , after a disagreement at a record shop over Stevenson 's decision to sell test pressing copies ( which the band had received for free ) of the album to fans after the shop run had run out of stock , McKay and Morris abruptly left the band the day of the album 's release , just a few hours before a concert at the Capitol Theatre in Aberdeen . It was a spur @-@ of @-@ the @-@ moment decision , but they never returned . Severin later remarked , " Is there another band that that 's happened to ? I don 't think so " . 
 A 2006 remastered edition included two bonus tracks : the non @-@ album single " Love in a Void " and the previously unreleased instrumental " Infantry " . The album , this time with the Maybury @-@ designed sleeve , was reissued on vinyl for Record Store Day in April 2015 . This edition had the original collection of tracks , but " Infantry " was made the album 's closer , as was initially intended . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , the album was well received by reviewers . Sounds gave Join Hands a grade of 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , with the reviewer , Pete Silverton , noting a change in the sound : " The mix is different to the last album . Now there 's a clarity which frames Sue 's voice like it was a thing of treasure " . Silverton also wrote that some of the songs have " Siouxsie 's voice double @-@ tracked with devastating effect " . Jon Savage , a Melody Maker reviewer , described the first track , " Poppy Day " , as a " short , powerful evocation of the Great War graveyards in Flanders " . He also wrote that " Placebo Effect " " has a stunning flanged guitar intro , chasing clinical lyrics covering some insertion or operation " . About " Icon " , Savage wrote : " The brilliantly reverbed guitar is a perfect foil for Siouxsie 's soaring and , for once , emotional vocal . " Savage noted that the five songs of the first side " rise and fall into another in a stunning segue " . Similarly , Paul Morley wrote in NME that " Side one 's five songs [ ... ] are all addictive Banshees mini @-@ dramas " . Ronnie Gurr , a Record Mirror reviewer , also hailed the record , saying : " Poppy Day establishes the band 's perfect employ of atmospherics and sets the tone of all the tracks " . " Mother " was compared to the soundtrack of an Alfred Hitchcock film , with Gurr noting that the " track features a musical box , echoes menacing guitar grumblings and Siouxsie providing vocals that would befit any of Hitchcock 's best <unk> " . Gurr concluded that with " Severin 's truly disturbing scratchings " , Join Hands was a dangerous work that " should be heard " . 
 In a retrospective review published in 1989 , Steve Lamacq wrote in NME that Join Hands was " a more absorbing , haunting LP " than the band 's debut album . Lamacq rated it 8 out of 10 , though he said that the version of " The Lord 's Prayer " was " out of place " . AllMusic 's David Cleary considered " Icon " the best track on the album , commenting that it " survives an unpromising beginning to open out into a faster main section with fuller vocal sound and gutsier guitar work " , but Cleary panned the rest of Join Hands , describing it as " almost uniformly grim , with dragging tempos , bleak lyrics , long and wandering free @-@ form structures , static and often unfocused harmony and thick , colorless arrangements " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Join Hands is considered a post @-@ punk album by Heylin and listed as such on AllMusic . According to Simon Reynolds , it is also seen as a precursor of the gothic rock genre due to several of its songs . Its " funereal " atmosphere " inspired a host of gothic impersonators " , according to Mojo , but " none of whom matched the Banshees ' run of singles " . 
 AllMusic commented that " some of [ Join Hands ' ] selections appear to strongly anticipate the work of Joy Division 's second album , Closer , especially ' Placebo Effect ' , whose guitar sound was a clear inspiration for that of the Manchester band 's song ' Colony ' . " In the 2007 film Control , the sleeve of Join Hands is shown in a scene where Ian Curtis ' wife , Deborah ( who co @-@ wrote the screenplay ) , looks through her husband 's record collection . 
 Join Hands was later namechecked by other critically acclaimed musicians . James Murphy , the leader of LCD Soundsystem , expressed an appreciation of the album stating the first records he bought were Join Hands , The Fall 's Grotesque and The Birthday Party 's " Nick the Stripper " . " All three of those records are three of my favourite things I 've ever heard " , he said . In late 2008 , Morrissey chose the track " Mother " in his playlist when he was interviewed for BBC Radio 2 . Johnny Marr said he was a big admirer of second albums from several bands including Siouxsie and the Banshees . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Siouxsie Sioux , except as noted , all music composed by Siouxsie and the Banshees ( Sioux , Steven Severin , John McKay , Kenny Morris ) , except as noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Siouxsie and the Banshees 
 Siouxsie Sioux – vocals , piano 
 Steven Severin – bass guitar 
 John McKay – guitar , saxophone 
 Kenny Morris – drums , percussion 
 Technical 
 Mike <unk> – production , engineering 
 Nils Stevenson – production 
 Ian Morais – engineering assistance 
 Rob O 'Connor – sleeve design 
 Adrian Boot – sleeve photography 
 John Maybury – sleeve illustration 
 = Ornatifilum = 
 Ornatifilum ( Latin ornatus + <unk> , <unk> filament ) is an artificial form genus , which is used to categorise any small , branched filaments with external ornamentation . 
 It has been applied to microfossils of Devonian age with fungal affinities , though these taxa have since been recognized as an early growth form of Tortotubus . 
 = = Background = = 
 The form genus Ornatifilum was erected by Burgess and Edwards in 1991 to describe tubular fossils retrieved by acid maceration from the late Silurian . It was originally intended as a form genus , to facilitate stratigraphy and environmental reconstruction ; the fossils do not display enough features to classify them confidently , even at a kingdom level . 
 The organisms comprise tubes of around 10 μm diameter , with an ornamented , granular surface texture . These fossils were compared to late Silurian ( Ludlow epoch ) fossils retrieved from the <unk> beds by Sherwood @-@ Pike and Gray , and the genus was used when similar fossils were recovered from the Scottish island of Kerrera by Charles Wellman ten years later . Similar , unornamented filaments are known from the USA . However , these latter fossils have now been assigned to Tortotubus . 
 = = O. <unk> = = 
 The type species of the genus consists of flattened filaments – perhaps an artefact resulting from post @-@ burial pressure . Their branching is typically at obtuse angles ; the irregularly sized grana , which ornament their surfaces , are concentrated at branching points . They are often found as individuals , but sometimes group together into " wefts " , as Wellman has termed them . The filaments are septate , with the septa looking like " pinch points " where the tube is slightly constricted – like a twisted balloon . No sign of perforation was visible in the septa ; perforate spores are only found in red algae and fungi , but their absence does not preclude their presence in one of these groups : indeed the perforations are difficult to see or image . There are no other diagnostic features of this species that allow classification in any group . Surface ornamentation is a common convergent feature , found for example in liverwort rhizoids and some fungi , so does not help in classification . The specimens recovered are most common in near @-@ shore environments ; however , they are never abundant . 
 = = O. <unk> = = 
 O. <unk> is a junior synonym of Tortotubus <unk> . It has a more complex appearance than O. <unk> . For a start , its surface ornament – which covers most of the surface uniformly – takes an array of forms , with " grana , <unk> , spinae verrucae and occasionally <unk> " present . Further , side @-@ branches and the flask @-@ shaped protuberances occasionally protrude from the tubes , on which the ornament is larger ( 2 @.@ 5 μm rather than ~ 1 μm ) . Such branching typically occurs in pairs across the main thread . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = Action of 22 August 1795 = 
 The Action of 22 August 1795 was a minor naval engagement during the French Revolutionary Wars between a squadron of four British Royal Navy frigates and two frigates and a cutter from the Navy of the Batavian Republic . The engagement was fought off the Norwegian coastal island of Eigerøya , then in Danish Norway , the opposing forces engaged in protecting their respective countries ' trade routes to the Baltic Sea . War between Britain and the Batavian Republic began , undeclared , in the spring of 1795 after the Admiralty ordered British warships to intercept Batavian shipping following the conquest of the Dutch Republic by the French Republic in January 1795 . 
 A British squadron of four frigates under the command of Captain James Alms was patrolling the entrance to the Skagerrak in August 1795 when three sails were spotted off the Norwegian coast to the north . Closing to investigate , the ships were discovered to be a Batavian squadron of two frigates and a small cutter . In the face of the larger British squadron the Batavian force turned away , sailing southeast along the Norwegian coast with the British approaching from the south in an effort to cut them off from the neutral Danish shore . At 16 : 15 the leading British ship HMS Stag caught and engaged the rearmost Batavian ship Alliantie ; the remainder of the British squadron continued in pursuit of the Batavian squadron . For an hour Alliantie held out against the more powerful Stag and was eventually compelled to surrender . The remainder of the Batavian squadron escaped due to a fierce rearguard action by the frigate Argo , reaching the safety of the Danish harbour at Eigerøya . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the winter of 1794 – 1795 the armies of the French Republic overran the Dutch Republic , reforming the country into a client state named the Batavian Republic . The Dutch Republic was part of the Coalition against Republican France formed in the War of the First Coalition at the start of the French Revolutionary Wars , and their closest ally in Northern Europe was Great Britain . In Britain the Admiralty was alarmed by developments in the Netherlands , particularly the seizure of the Dutch Navy by French cavalry units while the fleet was frozen into its winter harbour , and gave orders that the Royal Navy was to detain Dutch merchant and naval ships . As a result , the Batavian Republic and Great Britain began an undeclared war in the spring of 1795 . 
 In response to the threat that the Batavian fleet posed , the Admiralty established a new British fleet to oppose it . The Admiralty named this force , under the command of Admiral Adam Duncan , the North Sea Fleet . The fleet was based at Yarmouth in East Anglia and consisted mainly of older and weaker second @-@ line vessels . Duncan was also provided with a number of frigates , essential in securing the safe movement of the Baltic trade . Much of Britain 's vital naval stores were obtained from Scandinavia and the trade routes through the Baltic Sea and North Sea were vital to the maintenance of the Royal Navy . One Navy squadron that sailed from The Downs on 8 August 1795 with instructions to cruise off the mouth of the Skaggerak in the Eastern North Sea , consisted of four ships : 36 @-@ gun HMS Reunion under Captain James Alms , 32 @-@ gun HMS Stag under Captain Joseph Sydney Yorke , 50 @-@ gun HMS Isis under Captain Robert Watson and 28 @-@ gun HMS Vestal under Captain Charles White . 
 The Scandinavian trade routes were equally important for the Batavian Navy , and to protect their merchant shipping from attack by British frigates , the Batavian authorities also sent a frigate squadron to the region , consisting of the 36 @-@ gun frigates Alliantie and Argo and the 16 @-@ gun cutter Vlugheid . On the afternoon of 22 August 1795 the Batavian force was sailing southeast along the coast of Norway , then part of Danish Norway , tacking to port towards the land , when the British squadron was spotted approaching from the south . 
 = = Battle = = 
 With their ships heavily outnumbered by the approaching British , the Batavian squadron made all sail along the coastline with the intention of sheltering in the neutral Danish harbour of Eigerøya ( referred to in British sources as <unk> or <unk> ) . Sighting the Batavian ships to the north , Alms ordered his squadron to give chase . Soon the fastest British ship , Stag made use of favourable wind to pull ahead of the others and at 16 : 15 succeeded in cutting off the rearmost Batavian vessel Alliantie from its companions . Although Alliantie with its 36 @-@ guns was a stronger ship than the 32 @-@ gun Stag , its main battery was of only 12 @-@ pounder cannon compared to Yorke 's 18 @-@ pounder guns . This , coupled with the presence nearby of the rest of the British squadron meant that Alliantie , in the words of naval historian William James , " from the first , had no chance of success . " 
 Despite the odds against him , the Batavian captain engaged Stag , Yorke laying his ship alongside Alliantie and the frigates exchanging broadsides for an hour before the Batavian captain , his situation hopeless and his ship outnumbered and battered , surrendered at 17 : 15 . While Stag and Alliantie fought their duel , the action continued elsewhere , with the remaining Batavian ships making progress eastwards along the Norwegian coastline with the British squadron attempting to cut them off from the channel between Eigerøya and the Norwegian mainland in which the Batavian ships could shelter , protected by Danish neutrality . Vlugheid rapidly outdistanced pursuit , but Argo was slower and came under heavy but distant fire from Reunion and Isis , replying in kind . Argo was subsequently found to have been hit thirty times by 24 @-@ pounder shot and had much of its sails and rigging torn away , requiring extensive repairs . Eventually the Batavian persistence paid off , and Vlugheid and Argo successfully escaped into the neutral harbour of Eigerøya before Alms could intercept them . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Alms sent the captured Alliantie back to Britain under the command of Lieutenant Patrick <unk> of Stag and gave despatches to the Admiralty to Lieutenant William <unk> of Reunion to deliver . He himself remained at sea with the squadron , completing their assigned patrol . British casualties included four killed and 13 wounded on Stag , one killed and three wounded on Reunion and two wounded on Isis . Only Vestal escaped without any damage or casualties . Batavian casualties in the engagement are not known due to the failure of Alms to record Alliantie 's losses in his report to the Admiralty , an omission which James criticises him for . It is known that Argo lost two men killed and 15 wounded in the chase . The surviving Batavian ships remained at anchor in the Eigerøya channel until the spring of 1796 when they successfully returned to the Netherlands . 
 Alliantie was subsequently taken to Spithead and purchased for the Royal Navy as the frigate HMS Alliance , for which prize money was distributed to the crews of the British ships , shared equally among them . The sailors on Isis alone shared £ 240 ( the equivalent of £ 22 @,@ 362 as of 2016 ) . Over the ensuing months and years , Duncan 's fleet was largely successful in protecting the North Sea trade routes from the depredations of raiders from the Batavian ports and in 1797 inflicted a crushing defeat on the Batavian fleet at the Battle of Camperdown . 
 = Comet ( magazine ) = 
 Comet was a pulp magazine which published five issues from December 1940 to July 1941 . It was edited by F. Orlin Tremaine , who had edited Astounding Stories , one of the leaders of the science fiction magazine field , for several years in the mid @-@ 1930s . Tremaine paid one cent per word , which was higher than some of the competing magazines , but the publisher , H @-@ K Publications , was unable to sustain the magazine while it gained circulation , and it was cancelled after less than a year when Tremaine resigned . Comet published fiction by several well @-@ known and popular writers , including E.E. Smith and Robert Moore Williams . The young Isaac Asimov , visiting Tremaine in Comet 's offices , was alarmed when Tremaine asserted that anyone who gave stories to competing magazines for no pay should be blacklisted ; Asimov promptly insisted that Donald Wollheim , to whom he had given a free story , should make him a token payment so he could say he had been paid . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Although science fiction ( sf ) had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . By the end of the 1930s the field was booming . At the end of 1940 H @-@ K Publications , a small New York publishing operation owned by Harold Hersey , decided to launch a new sf magazine , titled Comet . The first issue was dated December 1940 . The editor was F. Orlin Tremaine , who was well @-@ known to and respected by the growing readership of science fiction because of his successful stint as editor of Astounding Stories in the early 1930s . 
 Tremaine paid a cent a word for stories , which was more than many of the other sf magazines that were crowding the field at the time ; the respectable pay rate no doubt helped him , but it put the magazine under additional financial pressure . Two other magazines launched at about the same time , Cosmic Stories and Stirring Science Stories , edited by Donald A. Wollheim , both paid nothing at all to writers , on the basis that if the magazines were successful , money might be available in the future . This annoyed Tremaine , and Isaac Asimov , who gave Wollheim a story for Cosmic Stories , later recalled Tremaine telling him that " any author who donated stories to Wollheim , and thus contributed to the destruction of competing magazines who paid , should be blacklisted in the field " . Asimov was sufficiently upset that he later obtained token payment from Wollheim so that he could assert he had been paid for his story . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Tremaine was able to acquire some worthwhile material , and the magazine showed improvement over its five issues . Among the better @-@ known stories Tremaine obtained was " Vortex Blaster " , by E.E. Smith ; this was the first in a series about Storm Cloud , later collected in book form . Other well @-@ received stories included " The Street That Wasn 't There " , by Clifford D. Simak and Carl Jacobi , and " Dark Reality " , by Robert Moore Williams . Sam Moskowitz , later a well @-@ known sf critic and historian , published some science fiction stories early in his career ; his first sale was to Tremaine , with " The Way Back " , which appeared in the January 1941 issue of Comet . There was also a " Short , Short Story Corner " which was targeted at new writers , though established authors were also asked to submit very short stories for this feature . Another competition , this time aimed at fans rather than writers , offered a prize of $ 25 to the fan who had to overcame the most difficulties in order to attend the 1941 World Science Fiction Convention in Denver . 
 The Futurians , a group of New York science fiction fans many of whom would later go on to become well @-@ known sf writers , often produced stories that were the result of collaborations between four , five , or even more of their members . One example , " The Psychological Regulator " was originally written by Wollheim . It was rejected by Tremaine and rewritten , first by Robert A.W. Lowndes , then by John Michel , and then by Elsie <unk> , with Tremaine rejecting it again after each rewrite . Finally C.M. Kornbluth rewrote it and Tremaine accepted the story , publishing it in the March 1941 issue of Comet . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Comet was printed in pulp format , 128 pages , and was priced at 20 cents ; all five issues were edited by Tremaine . There was one volume of five issues ; the first four were subtitled " Stories of Super Time and Space " . The schedule was initially monthly , but switched to bimonthly after the first issue . There were no overseas reprint editions or anthologies of stories from the magazine . 
 = Kaksparsh = 
 Kaksparsh is a 2012 Indian Marathi period drama film directed by Mahesh Manjrekar and produced by Aniruddha Deshpande and Medha Manjrekar . The film stars Sachin Khedekar , Priya Bapat , Medha Manjrekar , Savita Malpekar and Ketaki Mategaonkar . Based on a short story by Usha <unk> by the same name , the film depicts the tumultuous events in a Chitpavan Brahmin family , set around 1930 – 1950 in Konkan . The film was a commercial success and got critical acclaim for its direction , screenplay by Girish Joshi and also for the performances by its actors , especially Khedekar for his portrayal of Hari Damle as a head of the family . 
 In 1989 , the short story was adapted into a Marathi play <unk> with actor @-@ director Vinay Apte playing the lead . Apte had desires to make a film based on it . However , his attempts were not successful . Sachin Khedekar , who went to play the lead in the cinematic adaptation of the story , had seen the play and came across the story again in 2007 . Khedekar requested Girish Joshi to complete the adapted screenplay and together approached Manjrekar in 2009 to make a film on the story . Kaksparsh 's shooting was completed in 26 days – from 5 to 30 December 2011 and was released on 4 May 2012 , on the occasion of centenary of Indian Cinema . 
 The film won several awards on release including Best Film award at Maharashtra State Film Awards , <unk> , and 11th Pune International Film Festival . It is also the first Marathi film to have a home media release in Blu @-@ ray . With the success of Kaksparsh , a Hindi and Tamil remake of Kaksparsh is also being directed by Mahesh Manjrekar with Arvind Swamy and Tisca Chopra as the leads . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Hari Damle ( Sachin Khedekar ) , head of a Chitpavan <unk> family , lives in the village <unk> in Konkan with his wife Tara ( Medha Manjrekar ) , their three children , his younger brother Mahadev ( Abhijit Kelkar ) , and his widowed aunt , Namu <unk> ( Savita Malpekar ) . Hari arranges the marriage of Mahadev with a pre @-@ pubescent girl , Durga ( Ketaki Mategaonkar ) , renamed as Uma after marriage . However , Mahadev dies before the consummation of the marriage . Hari performs death rituals ( Śrāddha ) for Mahadev but crows ( symbolic of the spirit of the deceased in Hinduism ) refuse to touch the offerings . Hari mumbles something while offering food after which crow touches the offerings . 
 Brahmin community in the village now expects widow Uma to have her head shaved ( a ritual ) . Hari opposes and does not allow any rituals to be performed for her as a widow . Hari stands behind Uma in all her difficulties which raise doubts about his intentions , including that by his wife , Tara . Years later , when Tara is diagnosed of a terminal disease , the now grown @-@ up Uma ( now played by Priya Bapat ) takes charge of the household . Before Tara dies , she realises her mistakes and requests Hari to marry Uma which he readily refuses . 
 In the meantime , Hari gets his son <unk> ( <unk> Kulkarni ) married . Once Hari finds Uma sitting outside the room of the newly married couple , listening to their playful banter . Disgusted by Uma 's behaviour , Hari starts avoiding her . Upset by this behaviour , Uma tries to talk her heart out to Hari 's friend Balwant ( Sanjay <unk> ) and requests him to find out the reason . Coincidentally , Hari overhears this and severs his relations with Balwant . Unaware of the reason for Hari 's changed behaviour , Uma starts staying aloof , while her health starts degrading . Worried <unk> requests his sister Shanti ( Manava Naik ) to talk to Uma . Frustrated and unknowing of what loss she had throughout her life , Uma opens her heart but situation raises more questions about her relation with Hari . 
 Uma decides to go on a fast and relents to none of the family member 's request to quit . Hari , left with no other option , explains his behaviour . Hari reveals to Uma that when he was performing death rituals for Mahadev and offerings were not accepted by crow for a long time , he took a vow that he would not let any other man touch Uma . Thus , he did not allow practised rituals of shaving her head to be performed and also declined Tara 's request of their marriage . When he learned through Tara that Uma has started loving him , he stopped talking to her , in spite of his love towards Uma . 
 He eventually accepts that he loves Uma and would marry her , breaking his vow . Knowing the truth , Uma forgives Hari and agrees to the proposal . Hari fetches Mangala sutra but finds out that Uma is dead . He realises that Uma has sacrificed her life for his love where she did not want Hari to break his vow . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Based on a short story Kaksparsh written by Usha <unk> , a Marathi play <unk> premiered on 16 December 1989 . Actor @-@ director Vinay Apte had done the role of Hari Damle in the play and Sukanya Kulkarni as Uma . Apte had tried making a film based on the story but was not successful . Sachin Khedekar had seen the play and came across the story again in 2007 . He showed the story to Girish Joshi ( screenplay writer of the film ) who then developed a complete adapted screenplay from the story which had a length of 4 – 5 pages . Later , Khedekar and Joshi approached Mahesh Manjrekar in 2009 to make a film on the story . However , <unk> was busy with his other projects and could not plan the film . Manjrekar said that when he heard the story for the first time , he considered it to be better than other Indian love stories like Bajirao @-@ Mastani or Salim @-@ Anarkali . Manjrekar had to wait as he did not have the copyrights for the story . He said that it " took more than three years to make this film " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 After Manjrekar finished his projects , he decided to start Kaksparsh and signed Khedekar to portray the lead role of Hari Damle . The director said that there was no compulsion for him to cast Khedekar . He did it " because he was the best to pull it off . " Earlier Manjrekar had signed another actress to play the role of Tara Damle , however the actress declined to join the schedule at the last moment , thus Manjrekar was forced to look out for the alternative . His wife , Medha Manjrekar , had done a small role in his debut film <unk> ( 1995 ) and also made a comeback in another film De Dhakka ( 2008 ) written by him . As Medha was working as a producer for Kaksparsh , Mahesh Manjrekar approached her to play the role . 
 Manjrekar had worked with Priya Bapat in Me <unk> Bhosale <unk> ( 2009 ) and had mentioned about Kaksparsh to her . He desired Bapat to play the lead role of Uma , however the film couldn 't start as planned . When Manjrekar planned for the film , he called Bapat again who got married to Umesh Kamat in the meantime . Manjrekar had seen 2011 National Award winning film Shala and was impressed with a teen @-@ aged character played by Ketaki Mategaonkar and decided to cast her as a young Uma . Savita Malpekar was cast to play the role of Khedekar 's widowed aunt . Malpekar had to shave her head to prepare for the role . Manjrekar insisted that the film cast including Savita Malpekar should shave the head for their roles and avoid wearing a prosthetic bald patch . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Kaksparsh was shot in the real locations than sets and was mainly shot in <unk> , a village near <unk> in Konkan . As the film 's story @-@ line was set around 1930 – 1950 , Manjrekar was concerned about the authentic production design for the film . He appointed two production designers , Prashant Rane and Abhishek <unk> , who had challenges of depicting pre and post Indian independence era . Rane had worked with Manjrekar earlier for De Dhakka ( 2008 ) . Kaksparsh 's shooting was completed in 26 days ; starting from 5 December 2011 till 30 December 2011 . The initial shooting scheduled started at Ranade Wada in Pune . The film also had a few scenes in and surrounding the temple but as most of the temples in Konkan region have been restored from their damages over the period of time , Manjrekar feared that the plastering done to repair the damages would not give the desired authentic feel to the film . Thus , the next schedule was shifted to Krishna Ghat , Wai , Maharashtra . 
 As a director , Manjrekar believed that the mansion shown in the film " plays a major character " and was certain that finding the appropriate mansion would be a difficult job . The production designing team had searched for various location across Konkan but most of the mansions had electrical wiring across which was a major obstacle for the shooting as Konkan then did not have electricity . Finally , Manjrekar was introduced to a mansion owned by Avinash Nene near <unk> which suited the period where third and final schedule of the film was carried out . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for the film is composed by Rahul Ranade and music director duo Ajit <unk> and Sameer Mhatre , popularly known as Ajit @-@ Sameer . Poet @-@ Actor Kishor Kadam ( " <unk> " ) and <unk> Joshi have written the lyrics for the songs . Being a period film set in 1930 , soundtrack mainly consists of traditional songs in the form of Ovee , a type of <unk> stanza in Marathi poetry . Rahul Ranade used Vibhavari Joshi 's voice for all of his compositions except " <unk> <unk> " . Joshi rendered all her songs without any musical accompaniment . 
 As most of the songs are in the form of Ovee , Ranade decided to use the traditional musical format . He took help of Sarojini Babar , a Marathi writer @-@ politician who had studied the songs of the period depicted in the film . Babar introduced Ranade to her sister , Kumud Pawar , who have made a collection of various traditional Ovee . For two situation songs , Ranade requested Kishor Kadam to write the lyrics . 
 The duo Ajit @-@ Sameer composed two theme tracks and one song ( " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ) for the film 's soundtrack . A noted Hindustani classical vocalist , <unk> Pathak , rendered the song and was appreciated for " its vocal and soulfulness " and won Best Playback Singer ( Female ) at 2012 Zee Gaurav Puraskar . Soundtrack also made use of " Are Sansar Sansar " , much @-@ quoted couplet from one of the poems written by a noted Marathi poetess <unk> <unk> . The song is narrated and rendered by film 's lead actors , Sachin Khedekar and Ketaki Mategaonkar respectively and is arranged by Sameer Mhatre . Before taking up acting , Mategaonkar had participated in singing reality show Sa Re Ga Ma Pa Marathi L 'il Champs . 
 The soundtrack was released after the film 's release and was acclaimed for " bringing an authentic and subtle flavour to the period of the film . " Kishore Kadam was also appreciated for writing lyrics which suitably noted the traditions followed by women during the period . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kaksparsh was released on 4 May 2012 which also marked a beginning of the 100th year of Indian cinema . The film received wide critical acclaim and was a commercial success . It got critical acclaim for the direction by Mahesh Manjrekar , its screenplay by Girish Joshi and for the performances by its actors , especially Sachin Khedekar for his portrayal of Hari Dada Damle as the head of the family . Ajit Reddy 's cinematography and Ajit @-@ Sameer 's music were also praised . The film was said to have brought the " best out of " the director . Manjrekar said that he " expected to it be a hit , but not expected such a landslide hit " . The film was noted to have a " strong script " and well presented " a sensitive issue . " It was called as " the best love story in Marathi films . " It was marketed as a love story , and a review in Maharashtra Times by <unk> Pote noted that " the film has gone beyond a love story " . The film also said to have shown " the mores of the period quite accurately " . Aniruddha Bhatkhande of weekly Marathi magazine <unk> criticised the film in his review by saying that the actual film is a way different than the " attractive " promos . He further said that the film 's costume designs are flawed and as most of the film is shot indoor , it gives a feeling to the viewers that they are watching a recorded theatre play . 
 = = = Remake = = = 
 With the success of Kaksparsh , it was reported in June 2012 that Manjrekar is planning a remake in Hindi starring Amitabh Bachchan . However , the director readily clarified that he is not planning for a remake and he did contact Bachchan for the film but not for the remake . Later in January 2014 , Manjrekar announced that a Hindi and Tamil remake of Kaksparsh is being directed by himself starring Arvind Swamy , Tisca Chopra , Adinath Kothare and Ketaki Mategaonkar . Swamy will be portraying Khedekar 's role whereas Chopra will be seen as Swamy 's wife , originally played by Medha Manjrekar . Mategaonkar will reprise her role from the original and <unk> <unk> will be playing the older Uma . Milind Soman is reported to play Swamy 's friend and Adinath Kothare will play Mahadev 's character which was originally played by Abhijit Kelkar . Murali Sharma will be seen portraying a negative character . The veteran Bollywood actress Tanuja will be portraying the role of widowed aunt , played by Savita Malpekar in the original . The music will be composed by Ilaiyaraaja with <unk> and Vibhavari Apte Joshi rendering their first Tamil song . Adinath Kothare 's wife Urmila <unk> will be doing a guest appearance . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The film won several awards on release . 
 2012 11th Pune International Film Festival 
 Government of Maharashtra " Sant Tukaram " Best Marathi Feature Film Award 
 Special Jury Award : Sachin Khedekar 
 2012 Maharashtra State Film Awards 
 2012 Marathi International Cinema and Theatre Awards ( <unk> ) 
 2012 Prabhat Film Awards 
 Best Actor ( Male ) : Sachin Khedekar ( Shared with Vikram Gokhale for <unk> ) 
 Best Background score : Ajit @-@ Sameer 
 2012 Screen Awards Marathi 
 Best Actress : Priya Bapat 
 2012 Zee Gaurav Puraskar 
 Other Awards 
 All India Marathi Film Federation — <unk> Puraskar 
 Majha Awards – Medha Manjrekar 
 = Siletzia = 
 Siletzia is the massive formation of early to middle Eocene epoch marine basalts and interbedded sediments in the forearc of the Cascadia subduction zone ; this forms the basement rock under western Oregon and Washington and the southern tip of Vancouver Island . It is now fragmented into the Siletz and Crescent terranes . 
 Siletzia corresponds geographically to the Coast Range Volcanic Province ( or Coast Range basalts ) , but is distinguished from slightly younger basalts that erupted after Siletzia accreted to the continent and differ in chemical composition . The Siletzia basalts are tholeiitic , a characteristic of mantle @-@ derived magma erupted from a spreading ridge between plates of oceanic crust . The younger basalts are alkalic or calc @-@ alkaline , characteristic of magmas derived from a subduction zone . This change of composition reflects a change from marine to continental volcanism that becomes evident around 48 to 42 Ma ( millions of years ago ) , and is attributed to the accretion of Siletzia against the North American continent . 
 Various theories have been proposed to account for the volume and diversity of <unk> magmatism , as well as the approximately 75 ° of rotation , but the evidence is insufficient to determine Siletzia 's origin ; the question remains open . 
 The accretion of Siletzia against the North American continent approximately 50 million years ago ( contemporaneous with the initiation of the bend in the Hawaiian @-@ Emperor seamount chain ) was a major tectonic event associated with a reorganization of the earth 's tectonic plates . This is believed to have a caused a shift in the subduction zone , termination of the Laramide orogeny that was uplifting the Rocky Mountains , and major changes in tectonic and volcanic activity across much of western North America . 
 = = Exposures and discovery = = 
 The rock of Siletzia has been exposed in various places by tectonic uplift ( as around the periphery of the Olympic Mountains ) , anticlinal folding ( such as the Black Hills and Willapa Hills in southwestern Washington ) , and <unk> onto other formations ( along various faults in central and southern Oregon ) . These exposures have been variously named the Metchosin Formation of Vancouver Island , the Crescent Formation , Black Hills , and Willapa Hills volcanics of Washington , and the Siletz River Volcanics and Roseburg Formation of Oregon . ( See map . The Grays River Volcanics of Washington and Tillamook Volcanics of Oregon are now considered post @-@ Siletz . ) Elsewhere Siletzia is covered by younger volcanic and sedimentary deposits . 
 The discovery of Siletzia began in 1906 with Arnold 's description and naming of a small exposure on the north side of the Olympic Peninsula near Port Crescent . Though this exposure is small , he recognized as very likely that much more of it was buried under younger deposits . With recognition that similar rock exposed at other outcrops is part of the same formation , the name is now generally applied to all early and middle Eocene basalts on the Olympic Peninsula and Puget Lowland . 
 The Metchosin formation at the southern tip of Vancouver Island was described in a series of reports ( 1910 , 1912 , 1913 , 1917 ) by Clapp , who recognized it as correlative with the Crescent formation on the other side of the Strait of Juan de Fuca . Weaver recognized that these " Metchosin volcanics " included various Eocene basalts in western Washington and the Oregon Coast Range as far south as the Klamath Mountains . The Siletz River Volcanics was described in 1948 by Snavely and Baldwin after exposures near the Siletz River , Oregon , and the Roseburg and related formations in southern Oregon described in various reports from the 1960s on . 
 " Siletzia " was coined in 1979 by Irving to describe the full extent of these Eocene basalts and interbedded sedimentary formations . 
 = = Extent = = 
 The map shows the exposures ( black ) and inferred near @-@ surface extent ( pink ) of Siletzia , the latter being what can be detected in the upper crust by <unk> , gravitational , or seismological studies . 
 There are only two exposed contacts of Siletzia with the older ( pre @-@ Cenozoic ) North American basement . One is near Roseburg , Oregon , where it is thrust against formations of the Klamath Mountains ( discussed below ) , the other is along the Leech River Fault on the southern end of Vancouver Island , where it has pushed the pre @-@ Cenozoic Pacific Rim formation beneath the <unk> Terrane ) . Everywhere else the contact between Siletzia and the rest of the continent is concealed under younger deposits , especially the Cascade Range volcanics . The contact around the Olympic Mountains is actually the bottom contact with the underlying oceanic sediments , tilted up by the uplift of the Olympics and exposed by erosion of about 10 to 12 km of overlying deposits . 
 The location of the near @-@ surface contact between the Crescent Formation and the pre @-@ Cenozoic metamorphic basement of the continent — what has been the termed the Coast Range Boundary Fault ( <unk> ) — is largely uncertain . The Leech River Fault extends southeast past Victoria , B.C. to cross the Strait of Juan de Fuca , possibly connecting with the southeast striking Southern Whidbey Island Fault ( <unk> ) . This extends to the Rattlesnake Mountain Fault Zone ( <unk> ) , some 25 kilometers east of Seattle , which is believed to be the western edge of the pre @-@ Cenozoic basement . However , gravity data indicates that at this latitude the Crescent Formation ( at least near the surface ) extends no further east than Seattle . 
 Further south , near Mount St. Helens , is a similar situation , where the St. Helens Fault Zone ( <unk> ) is believed to be the eastern edge of the Crescent Formation , but the pre @-@ Cenozoic continental basement is near Mount Rainier . Separating these is the marine sedimentary formation known as the Southern Washington Cascades Conductor ( SWCC ) ; it is possible that it was deposited over a fragment of Siletzia . Or not : the oldest parts of the SWCC likely predate Siletzia , and the nature and location of the contact between these two formations is unknown . 
 In central Oregon , Siletzia forms a platform on which the older , now defunct volcanoes of the Western Cascades rest . The younger High Cascades to the east are believed to rest on sediments that accumulated in the basin between Siletzia and the continent . 
 In southern Oregon , Siletzia has been thrust against the Mesozoic Klamath Mountains of southern Oregon along the Klamath — Blue Mountain Lineament ( <unk> ) . Near Roseburg this contact is exposed at the Wild Safari Fault where the Late Jurassic Dothan Formation has been thrust over the Roseburg Formation . 
 Off the coast of southern Oregon , the western edge of Siletzia is the Eocene Fulmar fault . This is a strike @-@ slip fault , where part of Siletzia has been split off ; the missing piece may be the Yakutat terrane now at the head of the Gulf of Alaska . Further north , the terrane boundary is believed to come ashore near the Columbia River . 
 The way the Crescent Formation wraps around the Olympic Mountains ( " <unk> " on the map ) may reflect <unk> bending as a result of being crushed against Vancouver Island . It has also been attributed to loss of the deposits originally overlying the Olympics prior to their uplift , resembling a dome where top and western end has been removed . 
 Siletzia 's actual thickness , and the estimates of that thickness , vary . Under Oregon , the Siletz terrane appears to extend 25 to possibly 35 km into the trough between the subducting Juan de Fuca plate and the edge of the continent , where it is slipping over sediments accumulated in the bottom of the trough . The Crescent terrane ( under Washington ) is believed to be thinner , from as little as 12 and 22 km under the western and eastern ends of the Strait of Juan de Fuca , but possibly as much as 20 and 35 km thick . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The various formations of Siletzia are characterized as marine tholeiitic pillow basalts and volcanic breccia , often interbedded with sedimentary layers of continental origin , lying on oceanic crust . These are usually capped by a layer of alkalic volcanics deposited <unk> . All this suggests these formations were initially deposited in an oceanic environment , possibly as seamounts or an island arc . 
 On the Olympic Peninsula the Blue Mountain unit at the base of the Crescent Formation includes sediments ( including large boulders of quartz diorite ) of continental origin , showing that the continent was close by ; other sediments were eroded from the pre @-@ Cenozoic rock of Vancouver Island and the northern Cascade Range . At the southern end are sediments derived from the Klamath Mountains , while sand of the overlying Tyee Formation has an isotopic composition corresponding to rock of the Idaho Batholith . 
 = = Age = = 
 Eruption of the Siletzia basalts has been placed roughly in the late Paleocene through the mid Eocene ; more specific dates have been difficult to obtain and somewhat variable . Early K @-@ Ar ( potassium @-@ argon ) and 40Ar @-@ 39Ar ( argon @-@ argon ) radiometric dating by Duncan gave dates of 57 and 62 Ma ( million years ago ) to the northern and southern ends , and a date of 49 Ma for the Grays River volcanics near the center of Siletzia . This is suggestive of a spreading ridge ( as previously noted by McWilliams 1980 ) , and has been a strong constraint on models of how Siletzia formed . Other researchers have since found younger dates ( 50 @-@ 48 Ma ) for the Crescent basalts , removing much of the age symmetry . 
 More recent dating based on 40Ar @-@ 39Ar , U @-@ Pb ( uranium @-@ lead ) , and <unk> shows a narrower range of ages from 56 Ma in the south to 50 or 49 Ma in the north . 
 = = Size = = 
 Siletzia is massive : over 400 miles ( 600 kilometers ) long , almost half that much across ( and likely further at depth ) . The original deposits were from 16 to 35 kilometers thick . Weaver , reckoning a minimal thickness of only 3 @,@ 000 feet , still estimated " nearly 10 @,@ 000 cubic miles of rock " ; he put the total volume to be as great , if not greater , than the better known Columbia River Basalts . Snavely et al . , recognizing at least 10 @,@ 000 feet of thickness , and as much as 20 @,@ 000 feet under eruptive centers , estimated the volume to be in excess of 50 @,@ 000 cubic miles ( over 200 @,@ 000 km3 ) . Duncan ( 1982 ) estimated around 250 @,@ 000 km3 ( about 60 @,@ 000 cubic miles ) , which exceeds the volume of most continental rift zones , and some flood basalt provinces . A recent estimate put the volume at 2 million cubic km . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 When lava solidifies it retains an imprint of the earth 's magnetic field , thus recording how it was oriented . Measurements of such paleomagnetic fields in the Oregon Coast Range show rotations of 46 to 75 ° , all of it following the presumed accretion to the continent ( alternately , formation ) of the Siletz terrane at about 50 Ma . These rotations are all clockwise , and show a strong correlation with the age of the rock : about one and a half degrees of rotation per million years . These paleomagnetic rotations and other evidence show that Siletzia — or the part of it constituting the Siletz terrane ( " SZ " on map , above ) , from the Klamath Mountains to the Columbia River — has rotated clockwise as a single , coherent block . 
 Did Siletzia pivot about its northern end or southern end ? This question has attracted considerable attention , with the evidence now favoring a northern pivot . A key piece of evidence is that the Crescent Formation is laid over sediments ( the Blue Mountain unit ) derived from the continent , including boulders of quartz diorite some 65 million years old ; this requires the Crescent Formation to have formed close to the continent . 
 This model has Siletzia forming on the continental margin along what is now the Olympic @-@ Wallowa Lineament ( OWL ; a zone of topographical features of unknown age and tectonic significance ) , with the southern end of Siletzia and the Klamath Mountains ( joined to Siletzia ) near the Idaho Batholith in central Idaho . Further evidence for this comes from the sand of the Tyee Formation that overlie the Roseburg Formation . Not only does this sand have the same isotopic composition of rock in the Idaho Batholith ( and of sand now coursing down the Snake and Columbia Rivers ) , but it appears to have not been transported very far from its source . This implies that the Tyee Formation was much closer to the Idaho Batholith when it was deposited , and subsequently rotated away . Geodetic surveys show that the region continues to rotate , likely as a result of extension of the Basin and Range province and asthenospheric flow around the southern edge of the subducting Juan de Fuca plate . 
 North of the Columbia River , matters are more complicated . First , in southwestern Washington there is only half as much rotation as seen in rocks of similar age in Oregon . This is the basis for believing the Crescent terrane has broken from the Siletz terrane ( perhaps because they formed on different oceanic plates ) , and undergone a different rotational history . Second , in Washington there is more variation in the amount of rotation and more faulting , which has led to a speculation that the Crescent terrane has broken up into eight or nine crustal blocks . 
 At Bremerton , on the east side of the Olympics , the measured rotations are less , and within the statistical error bounds of being zero ; while further north , near Port Townsend , the rotation is slightly counter @-@ clockwise . On Vancouver Island the <unk> are counter @-@ clockwise , and other evidence shows that the tip of the island has been bent , presumably as a result of the collision of Siletzia . The northwestern tip of the Olympic Peninsula also shows counter @-@ clockwise rotation , of around 45 degrees . This raises a question of how much of the arcuate shape of the Crescent Formation is due to loss of material from the center after uplift by the Olympic Mountains , and how much reflects <unk> bending . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Siletzia 's origin is not yet determined , and ( as of 2011 ) lacks a definite answer . Theories are still being developed , and even the details the theories depend on " have remained enigmatic " . Following are several of the most notable models . 
 Models of how Siletzia formed are of two general types : ( 1 ) Formation well offshore ( possibly as seamounts , like the Hawaiian @-@ Emperor seamount chain , or a hotspot at a spreading ridge , like Iceland ) and then accretion to the continent ; ( 2 ) formation inshore , on or near the continental margin ( perhaps as a result of <unk> extension , or of a slab window ) . All current models then have Siletzia rifting away from the continental edge about a northern pivot . Studies of Siletzia 's origins have generally focused on accounting for two principal observations : the large <unk> ( described above ) , and the voluminous output ( over 50 @,@ 000 cubic miles , exceeding the volume of most continental rift zones , and some flood basalt provinces ) . Accounting for the observed volumes of basalt requires an enhanced magmatic source , for which most models invoke either the presence of the Yellowstone hotspot , or slab windows . The latter would have resulted from the subduction of the Farallon — Kula ( or possibly Farallon — Resurrection ) spreading ridge . The relation with the Kula @-@ Farallon spreading ridge is an important element in all models , though its location through that epoch is not well determined . 
 = = = Simpson & Cox 1977 : Two models = = = 
 Seeking to explain the observed clockwise <unk> , and noting that Siletzia appeared to have rotated as a rigid block , Simpson & Cox ( 1977 ) proposed two models . First was rotation about a southern pivot in contact with the Klamath Mountains . This has various problems , especially because at the northern end sediments and even boulders from the continent are found at the base of the Crescent Formation , showing that it was near the continent from the beginning . In the second model ( subsequently refined by Hammond 1979 ) , Siletzia was originally adjacent to the Olympic @-@ Wallowa Lineament , then rifted from the continent and rotated about a northern pivot near the Olympic Peninsula . Because sediments also show the Klamaths in close contact from the start , this requires the Klamaths to have moved with Siletzia . Originally there were conflicts in the understanding of when the Klamaths moved , and with the age and amount of rotation of the Clarno Formation in central Oregon . These were largely cleared up in a study of the Clarno Formation by <unk> et al . ( 1986 ) and illustrated with a <unk> reconstruction as of 38 Ma . 
 = = = Offshore model : A captured island chain ? = = = 
 An early and widely cited paper by Duncan ( 1982 ) ( drawing on features of the fairly new theory of plate tectonics ) exemplifies the off @-@ shore or " seamount " type of models . It featured a set of radiometrically determined ( K @-@ Ar and 40Ar @-@ 39Ar ) ages that were younger in the center ( for the Grays River volcanics ) and older at the ends . This <unk> symmetric age progression strongly suggested the pattern seen at spreading ridges , where the older rock is carried away on both sides from where the new rock erupts . Duncan considered five models ( but none involving rifting or ridge subduction ) , favoring one where a hotspot — presumably the Yellowstone hotspot — intersected the Farallon @-@ Kula spreading ridge ( such as at Iceland ) to generate a chain of islands . These islands were then accreted to the continent as the underlying oceanic crust was subducted . 
 This study has been criticized on multiple grounds , particularly regarding the ages . Duncan himself noted that measurement of the northern ages may have been affected by loss of argon due to low @-@ grade metamorphism , and that there might be bias in respect of stratigraphic position . The latter was demonstrated by a recent study that showed , on the basis of geochemistry , that the Grays River volcanics followed the Siletzia eruptions , and thus are not representative of the initial phase of Siletz magmatism . Recent dating also shows a more monotonic trend of south to north age progression ( " <unk> " ) . 
 The range of the original ages was also a problem , as the rate of Kula @-@ Farallon spreading over that time would produce a chain of seamounts much longer than observed , and too far away from the continent to explain the continentally derived sediments . This objection is attenuated somewhat in that the newer ages show a smaller range of ages . 
 = = = Inshore models = = = 
 Various models have Siletzia forming inshore , on or near the continental margin . While all current models have Siletzia rifting away from the continent after accretion or formation , a subclass of " rifted " models consider the rifting to have caused the Siletzia eruptions . 
 Wells et al . 1984 proposed that the Siletzia basalts might have " leaked " through transform faults ( perpendicular to a spreading ridge ) during changes in direction of the tectonic plates . The size of these eruptions and their location in this region is attributed to proximity to the Yellowstone hotspot . This " leaky transform " theory seems to be largely rejected , likely because the plate motion model it was based on was shown to be faulty . 
 Wells , et al . , alternately suggested that as a terrane at the margin of the continent was pushed over the Yellowstone hotspot , it was rifted away from the continent by the upwelling magma , which then formed the Siletzia basalts . This idea was further developed by Babcock et al . ( 1992 ) , who suggested rifting might have been initiated by a change in plate direction , or by kinematic effects as the Kula @-@ Farallon ridge migrated along the continental margin . One such effect is the formation of a slab window ( or slab gap ) which would allow increased upwelling of magma . 
 = = = Slab windows = = = 
 That spreading ridges could be subducted was recognized early in the development of plate tectonic theory , but there was little consideration of the ensuing effects . In the 1980s came realization that the magma welling up from the asthenosphere through the subducted ridge would not reach seawater , and thus not be quenched to form rock and close the gap . Continued spreading would lead to a widening gap or " window " in the subducting plate through which there could be increased flow of magma The implications of this for Siletzia were first shown by <unk> & Taylor ( 1989 ) and Babcock et al . ( 1992 ) ( following the pioneering work by Dickinson & Snyder 1979 ) . <unk> et al . ( 2003 ) subsequently identified the fan @-@ shaped wake of volcanics of distinctive geochemistry left by the widening Kula @-@ Farallon slab window across northeastern Washington and into Idaho . 
 Madsen et al . ( 2006 ) showed that most of the Eocene and subsequent magmatism from Alaska to Oregon " is explainable in terms of ridge subduction and slab window tectonics . " That is , a slab window — and a single subducted ridge can give rise to multiple slab windows — can provide adequate magmatism without having to invoke a hotspot ( mantle plume ) . ( So much so that it has been suggested that the Yellowstone hotspot may have been initiated by a slab window . ) Mantle plumes and slab windows both feature voluminous magmatism ; the main difference is that slab windows would form only where the spreading ridge is subducted . This implies formation at the continental margin , and then rifting , in the manner of the second class of models . 
 = = = Gulf of Alaska = = = 
 Any model of the origin of Siletzia must account for interactions with plate boundaries that were being subducted under North America through the Eocene . Early studies were plagued by indeterminate locations for these boundaries , particularly of the Kula @-@ Farallon ( K @-@ F ) spreading ridge : basalts at the head of the Gulf of Alaska ( along the Alaska panhandle ) have ages and compositions corresponding to the Siletz volcanics , suggesting that the K @-@ F ridge was offshore of the Yukon at the same time it was offshore of Washington . This can be resolved by assuming that by about 56 Ma the eastern part of the Kula plate had broken away to form the Resurrection plate , with the new Kula @-@ Resurrection ( K @-@ R ) spreading ridge running up the Gulf of Alaska towards Kodiak Island , and the former K @-@ F ( now R @-@ F ) ridge reaching Washington . Subduction of this plate under western Canada was rapid , and it disappeared entirely with subduction of the K @-@ R ridge about 50 Ma . 
 This scenario then permits rapid transport north of crustal blocks such as the Yakutat terrane . Now lying southeast of Cordova at the head of the Gulf of Alaska , paleomagnetic evidence indicates it was formed at a latitude corresponding to Oregon or northern California . Similarly , certain schists on <unk> Island are believed to have been contiguous with the Leech River Schists ( Leech River Complex ) on Vancouver Island around 50 Ma , and subsequently transported northward with other elements of the Chugach @-@ Prince William terrane . 
 = = After accretion : 50 @-@ 42 Ma = = 
 Whether formed far offshore as seamounts , or close inshore by a slab window , the <unk> basalts were laid down on a subducting oceanic plate : the Siletz terrane on the Farallon plate , and the Crescent terrane most likely on the adjoining Resurrection plate ( previously broken away from the Kula plate , which had previously broken away from the Farallon plate ) . In both cases the Siletzia mass was drawn toward the subduction zone , which possibly ran diagonally across what is now Washington , approximately at the position of the Olympic @-@ Wallowa Lineament . However , <unk> was too big to be subducted , and it accreted to the continent . Accretion is sometimes called " docking , " but is more akin to a collision : various peripheral structures are first folded or crushed , then the main structures are deformed when they come into contact , and various parts get pushed over other parts , all this playing out over several million years . To the extent that the accretion of Siletzia to North America can be given a definite date most studies give it as about 50 Ma . This date has added significance as it is also the start of a change in direction of the Pacific plate , as seen in the bend in the Hawaiian @-@ Emperor seamount chain , and also a change in the Pacific Northwest from compressional to extensional tectonics . This may also be when the last of the Resurrection plate was subducted under British Columbia . Initiation of the north @-@ striking right @-@ lateral Straight Creek Fault at ~ 48 Ma likely resulted from strain accumulated during the accretion of Siletzia . 
 As Siletzia accreted it also jammed the existing subduction zone , halting subduction of the Farallon plate . This terminated the Laramide orogeny that had been uplifting the Rocky Mountains , and triggered the ignimbrite sweep , a wave of large @-@ volume silicic magmatism that swept over much of western North America between 50 and 20 Ma . This undoubtedly affected the enigmatic and controversial Challis Arc ( stretching from southeastern British Columbia to the Idaho Batholith , roughly parallel with the Olympic @-@ Wallowa Lineament ) , but the details of this are unknown . 
 Subduction , having ceased at the existing zone , eventually reinitiated further to the west as the current Cascadia subduction zone . Volcanism from the new subduction zone ( such as the Grays River Volcanics and <unk> Volcanics ) reached the surface about 42 Ma , thereby initiating the rise of the ancestral Cascade Range . 
 Several other significant events occurred around 42 Ma , including cessation of metamorphism of the Leech River Schists ( resulting from the Metchosin / Crescent Formation being thrust under Vancouver Island ) and the end of strike @-@ slip motion on the Straight Creek Fault ; these may reflect the last movement of Siletzia relative to North America . On a broader scale , there was a change in absolute direction of the Pacific plate ( marked by the end of the bend in the Hawaiian @-@ Emperor seamount chain ) , and a change in the convergence of the Kula plate with the North American plate . 
 As subduction waned so did the force that had clamped Siletzia against the continent , and the tectonic regime shifted from compressional to extensional . Deposition of sand from the then proximal Idaho Batholith into the Tyee Formation in southern Oregon may have continued as late as 46 @.@ 5 Ma , but was interrupted when Siletzia rifted from the continent and began rotating away . What initiated rifting is unknown . Wells et al . ( 1984 , p . 290 ) suggested that as the continent overrode the Yellowstone hotspot , the upwelling plume tore away a previously accreted terrane . Babcock et al . ( 1992 ) suggested a change in the rate at which the plates were converging , or the " kinematic effects " ( such as a slab window ) from the passage of the Kula @-@ Farallon ridge ( or Resurrection @-@ Farallon ridge ) . 
 = Ukiyo @-@ e = 
 The ukiyo @-@ e genre of art flourished in Japan from the 17th through 19th centuries . Its artists produced woodblock prints and paintings of such subjects as female beauties ; kabuki actors and sumo wrestlers ; scenes from history and folk tales ; travel scenes and landscapes ; flora and fauna ; and erotica . The term ukiyo @-@ e ( <unk> IPA : [ <unk> ] ) translates as " pictures of the floating world " . 
 Edo ( modern Tokyo ) became the seat of government for the military dictatorship in the early 17th century . The merchant class at the bottom of the social order found themselves the greatest beneficiaries of the city 's rapid economic growth . Many indulged in the entertainments of kabuki theatre , courtesans , and geisha of the pleasure districts . The term ukiyo ( " floating world " ) came to describe this hedonistic lifestyle . Printed or painted ukiyo @-@ e images of this environment emerged in the late 17th century and were popular with the merchant class , who had become wealthy enough to afford to decorate their homes with them . 
 The earliest success was in the 1670s with Moronobu 's paintings and monochromatic prints of beautiful women . Colour prints came gradually — at first added by hand for special commissions . By the 1740s , artists such as Masanobu used multiple woodblocks to print areas of colour . From the 1760s the success of Harunobu 's " brocade prints " led to full @-@ colour production becoming standard , each print made with numerous blocks . The peak period in terms of quantity and quality was marked by portraits of beauties and actors by masters such as Kiyonaga , Utamaro , and Sharaku in the late 18th century . This peak was followed in the 19th century by a pair of masters best remembered for their landscapes : the bold formalist Hokusai , whose Great Wave off Kanagawa is one of the best @-@ known works of Japanese art ; and the serene , atmospheric Hiroshige , most noted for the series The Fifty @-@ three Stations of the Tōkaidō . Following the deaths of these two masters , and against the technological and social modernization that followed the Meiji Restoration of 1868 , ukiyo @-@ e production went into steep decline . 
 Some ukiyo @-@ e artists specialized in making paintings , but most works were prints . Artists rarely carved their own woodblocks for printing ; rather , production was divided between the artist , who designed the prints ; the carver , who cut the woodblocks ; the printer , who inked and pressed the woodblocks onto hand @-@ made paper ; and the publisher , who financed , promoted , and distributed the works . As printing was done by hand , printers were able to achieve effects impractical with machines , such as the blending or gradation of colours on the printing block . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e was central to forming the West 's perception of Japanese art in the late 19th century – especially the landscapes of Hokusai and Hiroshige . From the 1870s Japonism became a prominent trend and had a strong influence on the early Impressionists such as Degas , Manet , and Monet , as well as Post @-@ Impressionists such as van Gogh and Art Nouveau artists such as Toulouse @-@ Lautrec . The 20th century saw a revival in Japanese printmaking : the shin @-@ hanga ( " new prints " ) genre capitalized on Western interest in prints of traditional Japanese scenes , and the sōsaku @-@ hanga ( " creative prints " ) movement promoted individualist works designed , carved , and printed by a single artist . Prints since the late 20th century have continued in an individualist vein , often made with techniques imported from the West such as screen printing , etching , mezzotint , and mixed media . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ history = = = 
 Japanese art since the Heian period ( 794 – 1185 ) had followed two principal paths : the nativist Yamato @-@ e tradition , focusing on Japanese themes , best known by the works of the Tosa school ; and Chinese @-@ inspired kara @-@ e in a variety of styles , such as the monochromatic ink wash painting of <unk> <unk> and his disciples . The Kanō school of painting incorporated features of both . 
 Since antiquity , Japanese art had found patrons in the aristocracy , military governments , and religious authorities . Until the 16th century , the lives of the common people had not been a main subject of painting , and even when they were included , the works were luxury items made for the ruling samurai and rich merchant classes . Later works appeared by and for townspeople , including inexpensive monochromatic paintings of female beauties and scenes of the theatre and pleasure districts . The hand @-@ produced nature of these <unk> @-@ e limited the scale of their production , a limit that was soon overcome by genres that turned to mass @-@ produced woodblock printing . 
 During a prolonged period of civil war in the 16th century , a class of politically powerful merchants had developed . These <unk> allied themselves with the court and had power over local communities ; their <unk> of the arts encouraged a <unk> in the classical arts in the late 16th and early 17th centuries . In the early 17th century Tokugawa Ieyasu ( 1543 – 1616 ) unified the country and was appointed Shogun with supreme power over Japan . He consolidated his government in the village of Edo ( modern Tokyo ) , and required the territorial lords to assemble there in alternate years with their entourages . The demands of the growing capital drew many male labourers from the country , so that males came to make up nearly seventy percent of the population . The village grew during the Edo period ( 1603 – 1867 ) from a population of 1800 to over a million in the 19th century . 
 The centralized shogunate put an end to the power of the <unk> and divided the population into four social classes , with the ruling samurai class at the top and the merchant class at the bottom . While deprived of their political influence , those of this class most benefited from the rapidly expanding economy of the Edo period , and their improved lot allowed for leisure that many sought in the pleasure districts — in particular Yoshiwara in Edo — and collecting artworks to decorate their homes , which in earlier times had been well beyond their financial means . The experience of the pleasure quarters was open to those of sufficient wealth , manners , and education . 
 Woodblock printing in Japan traces back to the <unk> <unk> in 770 CE . Until the 17th century such printing was reserved for Buddhist seals and images . Movable type appeared around 1600 , but as the Japanese writing system required about 100 @,@ 000 type pieces , hand @-@ carving text onto woodblocks was more efficient . In Saga Domain , calligrapher <unk> <unk> and publisher <unk> Soan combined printed text and images in an adaptation of The Tales of Ise ( 1608 ) and other works of literature . During the Kan 'ei era ( 1624 – 1643 ) illustrated books of folk tales called <unk> , or " orange @-@ green books " , were the first books mass @-@ produced using woodblock printing . Woodblock imagery continued to evolve as illustrations to the <unk> genre of tales of hedonistic urban life in the new capital . The rebuilding of Edo following the Great Fire of <unk> in 1657 occasioned a modernization of the city , and the publication of illustrated printed books flourished in the rapidly <unk> environment . 
 The term " ukiyo " , which can be translated as " floating world " , was homophonous with an ancient Buddhist term signifying " this world of sorrow and grief " . The newer term at times was used to mean " erotic " or " stylish " , among other meanings , and came to describe the hedonistic spirit of the time for the lower classes . Asai <unk> celebrated this spirit in the novel Ukiyo Monogatari ( " Tales of the Floating World " , c . 1661 ) : 
 " living only for the moment , savouring the moon , the snow , the cherry blossoms , and the maple leaves , singing songs , drinking sake , and diverting oneself just in floating , unconcerned by the prospect of imminent poverty , buoyant and carefree , like a gourd carried along with the river current : this is what we call ukiyo . " 
 = = = Emergence of ukiyo @-@ e ( late 17th – early 18th centuries ) = = = 
 The earliest ukiyo @-@ e artists came from the world of Japanese painting . Yamato @-@ e painting of the 17th century had developed a style of outlined forms which allowed inks to be dripped on a wet surface and spread out towards the outlines — this outlining of forms was to become the dominant style of ukiyo @-@ e . 
 Around 1661 , painted hanging scrolls known as Portraits of Kanbun Beauties gained popularity . The paintings of the Kanbun era ( 1661 – 73 ) , most of which are anonymous , marked the beginnings of ukiyo @-@ e as an independent school . The paintings of Iwasa Matabei ( 1578 – 1650 ) have a great affinity with ukiyo @-@ e paintings . Scholars disagree whether Matabei 's work itself is ukiyo @-@ e ; assertions that he was the genre 's founder are especially common amongst Japanese researchers . At times Matabei has been credited as the artist of the unsigned Hikone screen , a byōbu folding screen that may be one of the earliest surviving ukiyo @-@ e works . The screen is in a refined Kanō style and depicts contemporary life , rather than the prescribed subjects of the painterly schools . 
 In response to the increasing demand for ukiyo @-@ e works , Hishikawa Moronobu ( 1618 – 1694 ) produced the first ukiyo @-@ e woodblock prints . By 1672 , Moronobu 's success was such that he began to sign his work — the first of the book illustrators to do so . He was a prolific illustrator who worked in a wide variety of genres , and developed an influential style of portraying female beauties . Most significantly , he began to produce illustrations , not just for books , but as single @-@ sheet images , which could stand alone or be used as part of a series . The Hishikawa school attracted a large number of followers , as well as imitators such as Sugimura <unk> , and signalled the beginning of the popularization of a new artform . 
 Torii <unk> I and Kaigetsudō Ando became prominent emulators of Moronobu 's style following the master 's death , though neither was a member of the Hishikawa school . Both discarded background detail in favour of focus on the human figure — kabuki actors in the yakusha @-@ e of <unk> and the Torii school that followed him , and courtesans in the bijin @-@ ga of Ando and his Kaigetsudō school . Ando and his followers produced a stereotyped female image whose design and pose lent itself to effective mass production , and its popularity created a demand for paintings that other artists and schools took advantage of . The Kaigetsudō school and its popular " Kaigetsudō beauty " ended after Ando 's exile over his role in the Ejima @-@ <unk> scandal of 1714 . 
 Kyoto native Nishikawa <unk> ( 1671 – 1750 ) painted technically refined pictures of courtesans . Considered a master of erotic portraits , he was the subject of a government ban in 1722 , though it is believed he continued to create works that circulated under different names . <unk> spent most of his career in Edo , and his influence was considerable in both the Kantō and Kansai regions . The paintings of Miyagawa Chōshun ( 1683 – 1752 ) portrayed early 18th @-@ century life in delicate colours . Chōshun made no prints . The Miyagawa school he founded in the early @-@ 18th century specialized in romantic paintings in a style more refined in line and colour than the Kaigetsudō school . Chōshun allowed greater expressive freedom in his adherents , a group that later included Hokusai . 
 Early ukiyo @-@ e masters 
 = = = Colour prints ( mid @-@ 18th century ) = = = 
 Even in the earliest monochromatic prints and books , colour was added by hand for special commissions . Demand for colour in the early @-@ 18th century was met with tan @-@ e prints hand @-@ tinted with orange and sometimes green or yellow . These were followed in the 1720s with a vogue for pink @-@ tinted beni @-@ e and later the lacquer @-@ like ink of the <unk> @-@ e . In 1744 , the <unk> @-@ e were the first successes in colour printing , using multiple woodblocks — one for each colour , the earliest beni pink and vegetable green . 
 A great self @-@ promoter , Okumura Masanobu ( 1686 – 1764 ) played a major role during the period of rapid technical development in printing from the late 17th to mid @-@ 18th centuries . He established a shop in 1707 and combined elements of the leading contemporary schools in a wide array of genres , though Masanobu himself belonged to no school . Among the innovations in his romantic , lyrical images were the introduction of geometrical perspective in the uki @-@ e genre ; in the 1740s ; the long , narrow <unk> @-@ e prints ; and the combination of graphics and literature in prints that included self @-@ penned haiku poetry . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e reached a peak in the late 17th century with the advent of full @-@ colour prints , developed after Edo returned to prosperity under <unk> <unk> following a long depression . These popular colour prints came to be called nishiki @-@ e , or " brocade pictures " , as their brilliant colours seemed to bear resemblance to imported Chinese <unk> brocades , known in Japanese as <unk> nishiki . The first to emerge were expensive calendar prints , printed with multiple blocks on very fine paper with heavy , opaque inks . These prints had the number of days for each month hidden in the design , and were sent at the New Year as personalized greetings , bearing the name of the patron rather than the artist . The blocks for these prints were later re @-@ used for commercial production , obliterating the patron 's name and replacing it with that of the artist . 
 The delicate , romantic prints of Suzuki Harunobu ( 1725 – 1770 ) were amongst the first to realize expressive and complex colour designs , printed with up to a dozen separate blocks to handle the different colours and half @-@ tones . His restrained , graceful prints invoked the classicism of waka poetry and Yamato @-@ e painting . The prolific Harunobu was the dominant ukiyo @-@ e artist of his time . The success of Harunobu 's colourful nishiki @-@ e from 1765 on led to a steep decline in demand for the limited palettes of <unk> @-@ e and <unk> @-@ e , as well as hand @-@ coloured prints . 
 A trend against the idealism of the prints of Harunobu and the Torii school grew following Harunobu 's death in 1770 . Katsukawa <unk> ( 1726 – 1793 ) and his school produced portraits of kabuki actors with greater fidelity to the actors ' actual features than had been the trend . Sometime @-@ collaborators <unk> ( 1735 – c . 1790 ) and Kitao <unk> ( 1739 – 1820 ) were prominent <unk> of women who also moved ukiyo @-@ e away from the dominance of Harunobu 's idealism by focusing on contemporary urban fashions and celebrated real @-@ world courtesans and geisha . <unk> was perhaps the most prolific ukiyo @-@ e artist of the 17th century , and produced a larger number of paintings and print series than any predecessor . The Kitao school that <unk> founded was one of the dominant schools of the closing decades of the 18th century . 
 In the 1770s , Utagawa Toyoharu produced a number of uki @-@ e perspective prints that demonstrated a mastery of Western perspective techniques that had eluded his predecessors in the genre . Toyoharu 's works helped pioneer the landscape as an ukiyo @-@ e subject , rather than merely a background for human figures In 19th century , Western @-@ style perspective techniques were absorbed into Japanese artistic culture , and deployed in the refined landscapes of such artists as Hokusai and Hiroshige , the latter a member of the Utagawa school that Toyoharu founded . This school was to become one of the most influential , and produced works in a far greater variety of genres than any other school . 
 Early colour ukiyo @-@ e 
 = = = Peak period ( late 18th century ) = = = 
 While the late 18th century saw hard economic times , ukiyo @-@ e saw a peak in quantity and quality of works , particularly during the Kansei era ( 1789 – 1791 ) . The ukiyo @-@ e of the period of the Kansei Reforms brought about a focus on beauty and harmony that collapsed into decadence and disharmony in the next century as the reforms broke down and tensions rose , culminating in the Meiji Restoration of 1868 . 
 Especially in the 1780s , Torii Kiyonaga ( 1752 – 1815 ) of the Torii school depicted traditional ukiyo @-@ e subjects like beauties and urban scenes , which he printed on large sheets of paper , often as <unk> horizontal diptychs or triptychs . His works dispensed with the poetic dreamscapes made by Harunobu , opting instead for realistic depictions of idealized female forms dressed in the latest fashions and posed in scenic locations . He also produced portraits of kabuki actors in a realistic style that included accompanying musicians and chorus . 
 A law went into effect in 1790 requiring prints to bear a censor 's seal of approval to be sold . Censorship increased in strictness over the following decades , and violators could receive harsh punishments . From 1799 even preliminary drafts required approval . A group of Utagawa @-@ school offenders including Toyokuni had their works repressed in 1801 , and Utamaro was imprisoned in 1804 for making prints of 16th @-@ century political and military leader Toyotomi Hideyoshi . 
 Utamaro ( c . 1753 – 1806 ) made his name in the 1790s with his bijin ōkubi @-@ e ( " large @-@ headed pictures of beautiful women " ) portraits , focusing on the head and upper torso , a style others had previously employed in portraits of kabuki actors . Utamaro experimented with line , colour , and printing techniques to bring out subtle differences in the features , expressions , and backdrops of subjects from a wide variety of class and background . Utamaro 's individuated beauties were in sharp contrast to the stereotyped , idealized images that had been the norm . By the end of the decade , especially following the death of his patron Tsutaya Jūzaburō in 1797 , Utamaro 's prodigious output declined in quality , and he died in 1806 . 
 Appearing suddenly in 1794 and disappearing just as suddenly ten months later , the prints of the enigmatic Sharaku are amongst ukiyo @-@ e 's best known . Sharaku produced striking portraits of kabuki actors , introducing a greater level of realism into his prints that emphasized the differences between the actor and the portrayed character . The expressive , contorted faces he depicted contrasted sharply with the serene , mask @-@ like faces more common to artists such as Harunobu or Utamaro . Published by Tsutaya , Sharaku 's work found resistance , and in 1795 his output ceased as mysteriously as it had appeared , and his real identity is still unknown . Utagawa Toyokuni ( 1769 – 1825 ) produced kabuki portraits in a style Edo townsfolk found more accessible , emphasizing dramatic postures and avoiding Sharaku 's realism . 
 A consistent high level of quality marked ukiyo @-@ e of the late 18th @-@ century , but the works of Utamaro and Sharaku often overshadow those other masters of the era . One of Kiyonaga 's followers , <unk> Eishi ( 1756 – 1829 ) , abandoned his position as painter for Shogun Tokugawa <unk> to take up ukiyo @-@ e design . He brought a refined sense to his portraits of graceful , slender courtesans , and left behind a number of noted students . With a fine line , <unk> <unk> ( fl . 1786 – 1808 ) designed portraits of delicate courtesans . The Utagawa school came to dominate ukiyo @-@ e output in the late Edo period . 
 Edo was the primary centre of ukiyo @-@ e production throughout the Edo period . Another major centre developed in the Kamigata region of areas in and around Kyoto and Osaka . In contrast to the range of subjects in the Edo prints , those of Kamigata tended to be portraits of kabuki actors . The style of the Kamigata prints was little distinguished from those of Edo until the late 18th century , partly because artists often moved back and forth between the two areas . Colours tend to be softer and pigments thicker in Kamigata prints than in those of Edo . In the 19th century many of the prints were designed by kabuki fans and other amateurs . 
 Masters of the peak period 
 = = = Late flowering : flora , fauna , and landscapes ( 19th century ) = = = 
 The <unk> Reforms of 1841 – 1843 sought to suppress outward displays of luxury , including the depiction of courtesans and actors . As a result , many ukiyo @-@ e artists designed travel scenes and pictures of nature , especially birds and flowers . Landscapes had been given limited attention since Moronobu , and they formed an important element in the works of Kiyonaga and <unk> . It was not until late in the Edo period that landscape came into its own as a genre , especially via the works of Hokusai and Hiroshige . The landscape genre has come to dominate Western perspectives of ukiyo @-@ e , though ukiyo @-@ e had a long history preceding these late @-@ era masters . The Japanese landscape differed from the Western tradition in that it relied more heavily on imagination , composition , and atmosphere than on strict observance of nature . 
 The self @-@ proclaimed " mad painter " Hokusai ( 1760 – 1849 ) enjoyed a long , varied career . His work is marked by a lack of the sentimentality common to ukiyo @-@ e , and a focus on formalism influenced by Western art . Among his accomplishments are his illustrations of Takizawa Bakin 's novel Crescent Moon , his series of sketchbooks , the Hokusai Manga , and his popularization of the landscape genre with Thirty @-@ six Views of Mount Fuji , which includes his best @-@ known print , The Great Wave off <unk> one of the most famous works of Japanese art . In contrast to the work of the older masters , Hokusai 's colours were bold , flat , and abstract , and his subject was not the pleasure districts but the lives and environment of the common people at work . Established masters Eisen , Kuniyoshi , and Kunisada also followed Hokusai 's steps into landscape prints in the 1830s , producing prints with bold compositions and striking effects . 
 Though not often given the attention of their better @-@ known forebears , the Utagawa school produced a few masters in this declining period . The prolific Kunisada ( 1786 – 1865 ) had few rivals in the tradition of making portrait prints of courtesans and actors . One of those rivals was Eisen ( 1790 – 1848 ) , who was also adept at landscapes . Perhaps the last significant member of this late period , Kuniyoshi ( 1797 – 1861 ) tried his hand at a variety of themes and styles , much as Hokusai had . His historical scenes of warriors in violent combat were popular , especially his series of heroes from the Suikoden ( 1827 – 1830 ) and <unk> ( 1847 ) . He was adept at landscapes and satirical scenes — the latter an area rarely explored in the dictatorial atmosphere of the Edo era ; that <unk> could dare tackle such subjects was a sign of the weakening of the Shogunate at the time . 
 Hiroshige ( 1797 – 1858 ) is considered Hokusai 's greatest rival in stature . He specialized in pictures of birds and flowers , and serene landscapes , and is best known for his travel series , such as The Fifty @-@ three Stations of the Tōkaidō and The Sixty @-@ nine Stations of the Kiso <unk> , the latter a cooperative effort with Eisen . His work was more realistic , subtly coloured , and atmospheric than Hokusai 's ; nature and the seasons were key elements : mist , rain , snow , and moonlight were prominent parts of his compositions . Hiroshige 's followers , including adopted son Hiroshige II and son @-@ in @-@ law Hiroshige III , carried on their master 's style of landscapes into the Meiji era . 
 Masters of the late period 
 = = = Decline ( late 19th century ) = = = 
 Following the deaths of Hokusai and Hiroshige and the Meiji Restoration of 1868 , ukiyo @-@ e suffered a sharp decline in quantity and quality . The rapid Westernization of the Meiji period that followed saw woodblock printing turn its services to journalism , and face competition from photography . Practitioners of pure ukiyo @-@ e became more rare , and tastes turned away from a genre seen as a remnant of an obsolescent era . Artists continued to produce occasional notable works , but by the 1890s the tradition was moribund . 
 Synthetic pigments imported from Germany began to replace traditional organic ones in the mid @-@ 19th century . Many prints from this era made extensive use of a bright red , and were called aka @-@ e ( " red pictures " ) . Artists such as Yoshitoshi ( 1839 – 1892 ) led a trend in the 1860s of gruesome scenes of murders and ghosts , monsters and supernatural beings , and legendary Japanese and Chinese heroes . His One Hundred Aspects of the Moon ( 1885 – 1892 ) depicts a variety of fantastic and mundane themes with a moon motif . Kiyochika ( 1847 – 1915 ) is known for his prints documenting the rapid modernization of Tokyo , such as the introduction of railways , and his depictions of Japan 's wars with China and with Russia . Earlier a painter of the Kanō school , in the 1870s Chikanobu ( 1838 – 1912 ) turned to prints , particularly of the imperial family and scenes of Western influence on Japanese life in the Meiji period . 
 Meiji @-@ era ukiyo @-@ e 
 = = = Introduction to the West = = = 
 Aside from Dutch traders , who had had trading relations dating to the beginning of the Edo period , Westerners paid little notice to Japanese art before the mid @-@ 19th century , and when they did they rarely distinguished it from other art from the East . Swedish naturalist Carl Peter Thunberg spent a year in the Dutch trading settlement Dejima , near Nagasaki , and was one of the earliest Westerners to collect Japanese prints . The export of ukiyo @-@ e thereafter slowly grew , and at the beginning of the 19th century Dutch merchant @-@ trader Isaac <unk> 's collection drew the attention of connoisseurs of art in Paris . 
 The arrival in Edo of American Commodore Matthew Perry in 1853 led to the Convention of Kanagawa in 1854 , which opened Japan to the outside world after over two centuries of seclusion . Ukiyo @-@ e prints were amongst the items he brought back to the United States . Such prints had appeared in Paris from at least the 1830s , and by the 1850s were numerous ; reception was mixed , and even when praised ukiyo @-@ e was generally thought inferior to Western works which emphasized mastery of naturalistic perspective and anatomy . Japanese art drew notice at the International Exhibition of 1867 in Paris , and became fashionable in France and England in the 1870s and 1880s . The prints of Hokusai and Hiroshige played a prominent role in shaping Western perceptions of Japanese art . At the time of their introduction to the West , woodblock printing was the most common mass medium in Japan , and the Japanese considered it of little lasting value . 
 Early Europeans promoters and scholars of ukiyo @-@ e and Japanese art included writer Edmond de Goncourt and art critic Philippe <unk> , who coined the term " Japonism " . Stores selling Japanese goods opened , including those of Édouard <unk> in 1862 and art dealer Siegfried Bing in 1875 . From 1888 to 1891 Bing published the magazine Artistic Japan in English , French , and German editions , and curated an ukiyo @-@ e exhibition at the École des Beaux @-@ Arts in 1890 attended by artists such as Mary Cassatt . 
 American Ernest Fenollosa was the earliest Western devotee of Japanese culture , and did much to promote Japanese art — Hokusai 's works featured prominently at his inaugural exhibition as first curator of Japanese art Museum of Fine Arts in Boston , and in Tokyo in 1898 he curated the first ukiyo @-@ e exhibition in Japan . By the end of the 19th century , the popularity of ukiyo @-@ e in the West drove prices beyond the means of most collectors — some , such as Degas , traded their own paintings for such prints . Tadamasa Hayashi was a prominent Paris @-@ based dealer of respected tastes whose Tokyo office was responsible for evaluating and exporting large quantities of ukiyo @-@ e prints to the West in such quantities that Japanese critics later accused him of siphoning Japan of its national treasure . The drain first went unnoticed in Japan , as Japanese artists were immersing themselves in the classical painting techniques of the West . 
 Japanese art , and particularly ukiyo @-@ e prints , came to influence Western art from the time of the early Impressionists . Early painter @-@ collectors incorporated Japanese themes and compositional techniques into their works as early as the 1860s : the patterned wallpapers and rugs in Manet 's paintings were inspired by ukiyo @-@ e 's patterned kimonos , and Whistler focused his attention on ephemeral elements of nature as in ukiyo @-@ e landscapes . Van Gogh was an avid collector , and painted copies in oil of prints by Hiroshige and Eisen . Degas and Cassatt depicted fleeting , everyday moments in Japanese @-@ influenced compositions and perspectives . Ukiyo @-@ e 's flat perspective and unmodulated colours were a particular influence on graphic designers and poster makers . Toulouse @-@ Lautrec 's lithographs displayed his interest not only in ukiyo @-@ e 's flat colours and outlined forms , but also in their subject matter : performers and prostitutes . He signed much of this work with his initials in a circle , imitating the seals on Japanese prints . Other artists of the time who drew influence from ukiyo @-@ e include Monet , La Farge , Gauguin , and Les Nabis members such as Bonnard and Vuillard . French composer Claude Debussy drew inspiration for his music from the prints of Hokusai and <unk> , most prominently in La mer ( 1905 ) . Imagist poets such as Amy Lowell and Ezra Pound found inspiration in ukiyo @-@ e prints ; Lowell published a book of poetry called Pictures of the Floating World ( 1919 ) on oriental themes or in an oriental style . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e influence on Western art 
 = = = Daughter traditions ( 20th century ) = = = 
 The travel sketchbook became a popular genre beginning about 1905 , as the Meiji government promoted travel within Japan to have citizens better know their country . In 1915 , publisher <unk> Watanabe introduced the term shin @-@ hanga ( " new prints " ) to describe a style of prints he published that featured traditional Japanese subject matter and were aimed at foreign and upscale Japanese audiences . Prominent artists included <unk> <unk> , called the " Utamaro of the Taishō period " for his manner of depicting women ; <unk> Itō , who brought more modern sensibilities to images of women ; and <unk> Kawase , who made modern landscapes . Watanabe also published works by non @-@ Japanese artists , an early success of which was a set of <unk> and Japanese @-@ themed prints in 1916 by the English Charles W. Bartlett ( 1860 – 1940 ) . Other publishers followed Watanabe 's success , and some shin @-@ hanga artists such as <unk> and Hiroshi Yoshida set up studios to publish their own work . 
 Artists of the sōsaku @-@ hanga ( " creative prints " ) movement took control of every aspect of the printmaking process — design , carving , and printing were by the same pair of hands . Kanae Yamamoto ( 1882 – 1946 ) , then a student at the Tokyo School of Fine Arts , is credited with the birth of this approach . In 1904 he produced Fisherman using woodblock printing , a technique until then frowned upon by the Japanese art establishment as old @-@ fashioned and for its association with commercial mass production . The foundation of the Japanese Woodcut Artists ' Association in 1918 marks the beginning of this approach as a movement . The movement favoured individuality in its artists , and as such has no dominant themes or styles . Works ranged from the entirely abstract ones of Kōshirō Onchi ( 1891 – 1955 ) to the traditional figurative depictions of Japanese scenes of Un 'ichi Hiratsuka ( 1895 – 1997 ) . These artists produced prints not because they hoped to reach a mass audience , but as a creative end in itself , and did not restrict their print media to the woodblock of traditional ukiyo @-@ e . 
 Prints from the late @-@ 20th and 21st centuries have evolved from the concerns of earlier movements , especially the sōsaku @-@ hanga movement 's emphasis on individual expression . Screen printing , etching , mezzotint , mixed media , and other Western methods have joined traditional woodcutting amongst the printmaker 's techniques . 
 Descendents of ukiyo @-@ e 
 = = Style = = 
 Early ukiyo @-@ e artists brought with them a sophisticated knowledge of and training in the composition principles of classical Chinese painting ; gradually these artists shed the overt Chinese influence to develop a native Japanese idiom . The early ukiyo @-@ e artists have been called " Primitives " in the sense that the print medium was a new challenge to which they adapted these centuries @-@ old techniques — their image designs are not considered " primitive " . Many ukiyo @-@ e artists received training from teachers of the Kanō and other painterly schools . 
 A defining feature of most ukiyo @-@ e prints is a well @-@ defined , bold , flat line . The earliest prints were monochromatic , and these lines were the only printed element ; even with the advent of colour this characteristic line continued to dominate . In ukiyo @-@ e composition forms are arranged in flat spaces with figures typically in a single plane of depth . Attention was drawn to vertical and horizontal relationships , as well as details such as lines , shapes , and patterns such as those on clothing . Compositions were often asymmetrical , and the viewpoint was often from unusual angles , such as from above . Elements of images were often cropped , giving the composition a spontaneous feel . In colour prints , contours of most colour areas are sharply defined , usually by the linework . The aesthetic of flat areas of colour contrasts with the modulated colours expected in Western traditions and with other prominent contemporary traditions in Japanese art patronized by the upper class , such as in the subtle monochrome ink brushstrokes of <unk> brush painting or tonal colours of the Kanō school of painting . 
 The colourful , ostentatious , and complex patterns , concern with changing fashions , and tense , dynamic poses and compositions in ukiyo @-@ e are in striking contrast with many concepts in traditional Japanese aesthetics . Prominent amongst these , wabi @-@ sabi favours simplicity , asymmetry , and imperfection , with evidence of the passage of time ; and <unk> values subtlety , humility , and restraint . Ukiyo @-@ e can be less at odds with aesthetic concepts such as the racy , urbane stylishness of iki . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e displays an unusual approach to graphical perspective , one that can appear underdeveloped when compared to European paintings of the same period . Western @-@ style geometrical perspective was known in Japan — practised most prominently by the Akita ranga painters of the 1770s — as were Chinese methods to create a sense of depth using a <unk> of parallel lines . The techniques sometimes appeared together in ukiyo @-@ e works , geometrical perspective providing an illusion of depth in the background and the more expressive Chinese perspective in the fore . The techniques were most likely learned at first through Chinese Western @-@ style paintings rather than directly from Western works . Long after becoming familiar with these techniques , artists continued to harmonize them with traditional methods according to their compositional and expressive needs . Other ways of indicating depth included the Chinese tripartite composition method used in Buddhist pictures , where a large form is placed in the foreground , a smaller in the midground , and yet a smaller in the background ; this can be seen in Hokusai 's Great Wave , with a large boat in the foreground , a smaller behind it , and a small Mt Fuji behind them . 
 There was a tendency since early ukiyo @-@ e to pose beauties in what art historian Midori <unk> called a " serpentine posture " , which involves the subjects ' bodies twisting unnaturally while facing behind themselves . Art historian <unk> Kōno posited that this had its roots in traditional <unk> dance ; Haruo Suwa countered that the poses were artistic licence taken by ukiyo @-@ e artists , causing a seemingly relaxed pose to reach unnatural or impossible physical extremes . This remained the case even when realistic perspective techniques were applied to other sections of the composition . 
 = = = Themes and genres = = = 
 Typical subjects were female beauties ( " ' bijin @-@ ga ' " ) , kabuki actors ( " ' yakusha @-@ e ' " ) , and landscapes . The women depicted were most often courtesans and geisha at leisure , and promoted the entertainments to be found in the pleasure districts . The detail with which artists depicted courtesans ' fashions and hairstyles allows the prints to be dated with some reliability . Less attention was given to accuracy of the women 's physical features , which followed the day 's pictorial fashions — the faces stereotyped , the bodies tall and lanky in one generation and petite in another . Portraits of celebrities were much in demand , in particular those from the kabuki and sumo worlds , two of the most popular entertainments of the era . While the landscape has come to define ukiyo @-@ e for many Westerners , landscapes flourished relatively late in the ukiyo @-@ e 's history . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e prints grew out of book illustration — many of Moronobu 's earliest single @-@ page prints were originally pages from books he had illustrated . E @-@ hon books of illustrations were popular and continued be an important outlet for ukiyo @-@ e artists . In the late period , Hokusai produced the three @-@ volume One Hundred Views of Mount Fuji and the fifteen @-@ volume Hokusai Manga , the latter a compendium of over 4000 sketches of a wide variety of realistic and fantastic subjects . 
 Traditional Japanese religions do not consider sex or pornography a moral corruption in the Judaeo @-@ Christian sense , and until the changing morals of the Meiji era led to its suppression , shunga erotic prints were a major genre . While the Tokugawa regime subjected Japan to strict censorship laws , pornography was not considered an important offense and generally met with the censors ' approval . Many of these prints displayed a high level a draughtsmanship , and often humour , in their explicit depictions of bedroom scenes , voyeurs , and oversized anatomy . As with depictions of courtesans , these images were closely tied to entertainments of the pleasure quarters . Nearly every ukiyo @-@ e master produced shunga at some point . Records of societal acceptance of shunga are absent , though Timon Screech posits that there were almost certainly some concerns over the matter , and that its level of acceptability has been exaggerated by later collectors , especially in the West . 
 Scenes from nature have been an important part of Asian art throughout history . Artists have closely studied the correct forms and anatomy of plants and animals , even though depictions of human anatomy remained more fanciful until modern times . Ukiyo @-@ e nature prints are called ' ' kachō @-@ e ' ' , or " flower @-@ and @-@ bird pictures " , though the genre was open to more than just flowers or birds , and the flowers and birds did not necessarily appear together . Hokusai 's detailed , precise nature prints are credited with establishing kachō @-@ e as a genre . 
 The <unk> Reforms of the 1840s suppressed the depiction of actors and courtesans . Aside from landscapes and kachō @-@ e , artists turned to depictions of historical scenes , such as of ancient warriors or of scenes from legend , literature , and religion . The 11th @-@ century Tale of Genji and the 13th @-@ century Tale of the Heike have been sources of artistic inspiration throughout Japanese history , including in ukiyo @-@ e . Well @-@ known warriors and swordsmen such as Miyamoto Musashi ( 1584 – 1645 ) were frequent subjects , as were depictions of monsters , the supernatural , and heroes of Japanese and Chinese mythology . 
 From the 17th to 19th centuries Japan isolated itself from the rest of the world . Trade , primarily with the Dutch and Chinese , was restricted to the island of Dejima near Nagasaki . <unk> pictures called Nagasaki @-@ e were sold to tourists of the foreigners and their wares . In the mid @-@ 19th century , Yokohama became the primary foreign settlement after 1859 , from which Western knowledge proliferated in Japan . Especially from 1858 to 1862 Yokohama @-@ e prints documented , with various levels of fact and fancy , the growing community of world denizens with whom the Japanese were now coming in contact ; triptychs of scenes of Westerners and their technology and technology were particularly popular . 
 Specialized prints included <unk> , deluxe , limited @-@ edition prints aimed at connoisseurs , of which a five @-@ line <unk> poem was usually part of the design ; and uchiwa @-@ e printed hand fans , which often suffer from having been handled . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e genres 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Paintings = = = 
 Ukiyo @-@ e artists often made both prints and paintings ; some specialized in one or the other . In contrast with previous traditions , ukiyo @-@ e painters favoured bright , sharp colours , and often delineated contours with sumi ink , an effect similar to the linework in prints . Unrestricted by the technical limitations of printing , a wider range of techniques , pigments , and surfaces were available to the painter . Artists painted with pigments made from mineral or organic substances , such as safflower , ground shells , lead , and cinnabar , and later synthetic dyes imported from the West such as Paris Green and Prussian Blue . Silk or paper <unk> hanging scrolls , <unk> handscrolls , or byōbu folding screens were the most common surfaces . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e paintings 
 = = = Print production = = = 
 Ukiyo @-@ e prints were the works of teams of artisans in several workshops ; it was rare for designers to cut their own woodblocks . Labour was divided into four groups : the publisher , who commissioned , promoted , and distributed the prints ; the artists , who provided the design image ; the <unk> , who prepared the woodblocks for printing ; and the printers , who made impressions of the woodblocks on paper . Normally only the names of the artist and publisher were credited on the finished print . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e prints were impressed on hand @-@ made paper manually , rather than by mechanical press as in the West . The artist provided an ink drawing on thin paper , which was pasted to a block of cherry wood and rubbed with oil until the upper layers of paper could be pulled away , leaving a translucent layer of paper that the block @-@ cutter could use as a guide . The block @-@ cutter cut away the non @-@ black areas of the image , leaving raised areas that were inked to leave an impression . The original drawing was destroyed in the process . 
 Prints were made with blocks face up so the printer could vary pressure for different effects , and watch as paper absorbed the water @-@ based sumi ink , applied quickly in even horizontal strokes . Amongst the printer 's tricks were embossing of the image , achieved by pressing an <unk> woodblock on the paper to achieve effects , such as the textures of clothing patterns or fishing net . Other effects included burnishing by rubbing with agate to brighten colours ; varnishing ; overprinting ; dusting with metal or mica ; and sprays to imitate falling snow . 
 The ukiyo @-@ e print was a commercial art form , and the publisher played an important role . Publishing was highly competitive ; over a thousand publishers are known from throughout the period . The number peaked at around 250 in the 1840s and 1850s — 200 in Edo alone — and slowly shrank following the opening of Japan until about 40 remained at the opening of the 20th century . The publishers owned the woodblocks and copyrights , and from the late 18th century enforced copyrights through the Picture Book and Print Publishers Guild . Prints that went through several pressings were particularly profitable , as the publisher could reuse the woodblocks without further payment to the artist or woodblock cutter . The woodblocks were also traded or sold to other publishers or <unk> . Publishers were usually also vendors , and commonly sold each other 's wares in their shops . In addition to the artist 's seal , publishers marked the prints with their own seals — some a simple logo , others quite elaborate , incorporating an address or other information . 
 Print designers went through apprenticeship before being granted the right to produce prints of their own that they could sign with their own names . Young designers could be expected to cover part or all of the costs of cutting the woodblocks . As the artists gained fame publishers usually covered these costs , and artists could demand higher fees . 
 In pre @-@ modern Japan , people could go by numerous names throughout their lives , their childhood <unk> personal name different from their <unk> name as an adult . An artist 's name consisted of a <unk> artist surname followed by an <unk> personal art name . The <unk> was most frequently taken from the school the artist belonged to , such as Utagawa or Torii , and the <unk> normally took a Chinese character from the master 's art name — for example , many students of Toyokuni ( <unk> ) took the " kuni " ( <unk> ) from his name , including Kunisada ( <unk> ) and Kuniyoshi ( <unk> ) . The names artists signed to their works can be a source of confusion as they sometimes changed names through their careers ; Hokusai was an extreme case , using over a hundred names throughout his seventy @-@ year career . 
 The prints were mass @-@ marketed and by the mid @-@ 19th century total circulation of a print could run into the thousands . Retailers and travelling sellers promoted them at prices affordable to prosperous townspeople . In some cases the prints advertised kimono designs by the artist behind the print . From the second half of the 17th century , prints were frequently marketed as part of a series , each print stamped with the series name and the print 's number in that series . This proved a successful marketing technique , as collectors bought each new print in the series to keep their collections complete . By the 19th century , series such as Hiroshige 's Fifty @-@ three Stations of the Tōkaidō ran to dozens of prints . 
 Making ukiyo @-@ e prints 
 = = = = Colour print production = = = = 
 While colour printing in Japan dates to the 1640s , early ukiyo @-@ e prints used only black ink . Colour was sometimes added by hand , using a red lead ink in tan @-@ e prints , or later in a pink safflower ink in beni @-@ e prints . Colour printing arrived in books in the 1720s and in single @-@ sheet prints in the 1740s , with a different block and printing for each colour . Early colours were limited to pink and green ; techniques expanded over the following two decades to allow up to five colours . The mid @-@ 1760s brought full @-@ colour nishiki @-@ e prints made from ten or more woodblocks . To keep the blocks for each colour aligned correctly registration marks called <unk> were placed on one corner and an adjacent side . 
 Printers first used natural colour dyes made from mineral or vegetable sources . The dyes had a translucent quality that allowed a variety of colours to be mixed from primary red , blue , and yellow pigments . In the 18th century , Prussian blue became popular , and was particularly prominent in the landscapes of Hokusai and Hiroshige , as was <unk> , where the printer produced gradations of colour or the blending of one colour into another . Cheaper and more consistent synthetic aniline dyes arrived from the West in 1864 . The colours were harsher and brighter than traditional pigments . The Meiji government promoted their use as part of broader policies of Westernization . 
 = = Criticism and historiography = = 
 Contemporary records of ukiyo @-@ e artists are rare . The most significant is the Ukiyo @-@ e <unk> ( " Various Thoughts on Ukiyo @-@ e " ) , a collection of commentaries and artist biographies . <unk> <unk> compiled the first , no @-@ longer @-@ extant version around 1790 . The work did not see print during the Edo era , but circulated in hand @-@ copied editions that were subject to numerous additions and alterations ; over 120 variants of the Ukiyo @-@ e <unk> are known . 
 Before World War II , the predominant view of ukiyo @-@ e stressed the centrality of prints ; this viewpoint ascribes ukiyo @-@ e 's founding to Moronobu . Following the war , thinking turned to the importance of ukiyo @-@ e painting and making direct connections with 17th @-@ century Yamato @-@ e paintings ; this viewpoint sees Matabei as the genre 's originator , and is especially favoured in Japan . This view had become widespread among Japanese researchers by the 1930s , but the militaristic government of the time suppressed it , wanting to emphasize a division between the Yamato @-@ e scroll paintings associated with the court , and the prints associated with the sometimes anti @-@ authoritarian merchant class . 
 The earliest comprehensive historical and critical works on ukiyo @-@ e came from the West . Ernest Fenollosa was Professor of Philosophy at the Imperial University in Tokyo from 1878 , and was Commissioner of Fine Arts to the Japanese government from 1886 . His Masters of <unk> of 1896 was the first comprehensive overview and set the stage for most later works with an approach to the history in terms of epochs : beginning with Matabei in a primitive age , it evolved towards a late @-@ 18th @-@ century golden age that began to decline with the advent of Utamaro , and had a brief revival with Hokusai and Hiroshige 's landscapes in the 1830s . Laurence Binyon , the Keeper of Oriental Prints and Drawings at the British Museum , wrote an account in Painting in the Far East in 1908 that was similar to Fenollosa 's , but placed Utamaro and Sharaku amongst the masters . Arthur Davison <unk> built on the works of Fenollosa and Binyon with a more comprehensive Chats on Japanese Prints in 1915 . James A. Michener 's The Floating World in 1954 broadly followed the chronologies of the earlier works , while dropping classifications into periods and recognizing the earlier artists not as primitives but as accomplished masters emerging from earlier painting traditions . For Michener and his sometime collaborator Richard Lane , ukiyo @-@ e began with Moronobu rather than Matabei . Lane 's Masters of the Japanese Print of 1962 maintained the approach of period divisions while placing ukiyo @-@ e firmly within the genealogy of Japanese art . The book acknowledges artists such as Yoshitoshi and Kiyochika as late masters . 
 <unk> Takahashi 's Traditional Woodblock Prints of Japan of 1964 placed ukiyo @-@ e artists in three periods : the first was a primitive period that included Harunobu , followed by a golden age of Kiyonaga , Utamaro , and Sharaku , and closed with a period of decline following the declaration beginning in the 1790s of strict sumptuary laws that dictated what could be depicted in artworks . The book nevertheless recognizes a larger number of masters from throughout this last period than earlier works had , and viewed ukiyo @-@ e painting as a revival of Yamato @-@ e painting . Tadashi <unk> further refined Takahashi 's analysis by identifying the decline as coinciding with the desperate attempts of the shogunate to hold on to power through the passing of draconian laws as its hold on the country continued to break down , culminating in the Meiji Restoration in 1868 . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e scholarship has tended to focus on the cataloguing of artists , an approach that lacks the rigour and originality that has come to be applied to art analysis in other areas . Such catalogues are numerous , but tend overwhelmingly to concentrate on a group of recognized geniuses . Little original research has been added to the early , foundational evaluations of ukiyo @-@ e and its artists , especially with regard to relatively minor artists . While the commercial nature of ukiyo @-@ e has always been acknowledged , evaluation of artists and their works has rested on the aesthetic preferences of connoisseurs and paid little heed to contemporary commercial success . 
 Standards for inclusion in the ukiyo @-@ e canon rapidly evolved in the early literature . Utamaro was particularly contentious , seen by Fenollosa and others as a degenerate symbol of ukiyo @-@ e 's decline ; Utamaro has since gained general acceptance as one of the form 's greatest masters . Artists of the 19th century such as Yoshitoshi were ignored or marginalized , attracting scholarly attention only towards the end of the 20th century . Works on late @-@ era Utagawa artists such as Kunisada and Kuniyoshi have revived some of the contemporary esteem these artists enjoyed . Many late works examine the social or other conditions behind the art , and are unconcerned with valuations that would place it in a period of decline . 
 Novelist Jun 'ichirō Tanizaki was critical of the superior attitude of Westerners who claimed a higher aestheticism in purporting to have discovered ukiyo @-@ e . He maintained that ukiyo @-@ e was merely the easiest form of Japanese art to understand from the perspective of Westerners values , and that Japanese of all social strata enjoyed ukiyo @-@ e , but that Confucian morals of the time kept them from freely discussing it , social mores that were violated by the West 's flaunting of the discovery . 
 Since the dawn of the 20th century historians of manga — Japanese comics and cartooning — have developed narratives connecting the art form to pre @-@ 20th @-@ century Japanese art . Particular emphasis falls on the Hokusai Manga as a precursor , though Hokusai 's book is not narrative , nor does the term manga originate with him . In English and other languages the word manga is used in the restrictive sense of " Japanese comics " or " Japanese @-@ style comics " , while in Japanese it indicates all forms of comics , cartooning , and caricature . 
 = = Collection and preservation = = 
 The ruling classes strictly limited the space permitted for the homes of the lower social classes ; the relatively small size of ukiyo @-@ e works was ideal for hanging in these homes . Little record of the patrons of ukiyo @-@ e paintings has survived . They sold for considerably higher prices than prints — up to many thousands of times more , and thus must have been purchased by the wealthy , likely merchants and perhaps some from the samurai class . Late @-@ era prints are the most numerous extant examples , as they were produced in the greatest quantities in the 19th century , and the older a print is the less chance it had of surviving . Ukiyo @-@ e was largely associated with Edo , and visitors to Edo often bought what they called <unk> @-@ e ( " pictures of the Eastern capital " ) as souvenirs . Shops that sold them might specialize in products such as hand @-@ held fans , or offer a diverse selection . 
 The ukiyo @-@ e print market was highly diversified as it sold to a heterogeneous public , from <unk> to wealthy merchants . Little concrete is known about production and consumption habits . Detailed records in Edo were kept in a wide variety of courtesans , actors , and sumo wrestlers , but no such records pertaining to ukiyo @-@ e remain — or perhaps ever existed . Determining what is understood about the demographics of ukiyo @-@ e consumption has required indirect means . 
 Determining at what prices prints sold is a challenge for experts , as records of hard figures are scanty and there was great variety in the production quality , size , supply and demand , and methods , which went through changes such as the introduction of full @-@ colour printing . How expensive prices can be considered is also difficult to determine as social and economic conditions were in flux throughout the period . In the 19th century , records survive of prints selling from as low as 16 mon to 100 mon for deluxe editions . Jun 'ichi Ōkubo suggests that prices in the 20s and 30s of mon were likely common for standard prints . As a loose comparison , a bowl of soba noodles in the early 19th century typically sold for 16 mon . 
 The dyes in ukiyo @-@ e prints are susceptible to fading when exposed even to low levels of light ; this makes long @-@ term display undesirable . The paper they are printed on deteriorates when it comes in contact with acidic materials , so storage boxes , folders , and mounts must be of neutral pH or alkaline . Prints should be regularly inspected for problems needing treatment , and stored at a relative humidity of 70 % or less to prevent fungal <unk> . 
 The paper and pigments in ukiyo @-@ e paintings are sensitive to light and seasonal changes in humidity . Mounts must be flexible , as the sheets can tear under sharp changes in humidity . In the Edo era , the sheets were mounted on long @-@ <unk> paper and preserved scrolled up in plain paulownia boxes placed in another lacquer wooden box . In museum settings display times must be limited to prevent deterioration from exposure to light and environmental pollution . Scrolling causes concavities in the paper , and the <unk> and <unk> of the scrolls causes <unk> . Ideal relative humidity for scrolls should be kept between 50 % and 60 % ; brittleness results from too dry a level . 
 Because ukiyo @-@ e prints were mass @-@ produced , collecting them presents considerations different from the collecting of paintings . There is wide variation in the condition , rarity , cost , and quality of extant prints . Prints may have stains , <unk> , wormholes , tears , creases , or <unk> , the colours may have faded , or they may have been retouched . Carvers may have altered the colours or composition of prints that went through multiple editions . When cut after printing , the paper may have been trimmed within the margin . Values of prints depend on a variety of factors , including the artist 's reputation , print condition , rarity , and whether it is an original pressing — even high @-@ quality later printings will fetch a fraction of the valuation of an original . As of 2009 , the record price for an ukiyo @-@ e print sold at auction was € 389 @,@ 000 for Sharaku 's portrait of kabuki actor Arashi <unk> . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e prints often went through multiple editions , sometimes with changes made to the blocks in later editions . Editions made from recut woodblocks also circulate , such as legitimate later reproductions , as well as pirate editions and other fakes . <unk> <unk> ( 1870 – 1927 ) , a producer of ukiyo @-@ e reproductions , developed a method of <unk> woodblocks to print fresh colour on faded originals , over which he used tobacco ash to make the fresh ink seem aged . These refreshed prints he resold as original printings . Amongst the defrauded collectors was American architect Frank Lloyd Wright , who brought 1 @,@ 500 <unk> prints with him from Japan to the US , some of which he had sold before the truth was discovered . 
 Ukiyo @-@ e artists are referred to in the Japanese style , the surname preceding the personal name , and well @-@ known artists such as Utamaro and Hokusai by personal name alone . Dealers normally refer to ukiyo @-@ e prints by the names of the standard sizes , most commonly the 34 @.@ 5 @-@ by @-@ 22 @.@ 5 @-@ centimetre ( 13 @.@ 6 in × 8 @.@ 9 in ) <unk> , the 22 @.@ 5 @-@ by @-@ 19 @-@ centimetre ( 8 @.@ 9 in × 7 @.@ 5 in ) <unk> , and the 38 @-@ by @-@ 23 @-@ centimetre ( 15 @.@ 0 in × 9 @.@ 1 in ) <unk> — precise sizes vary , and paper was often trimmed after printing . 
 Many of the largest high @-@ quality collections of ukiyo @-@ e lie outside Japan . Examples entered the collection of the National Library of France in the first half of the 19th century . The British Museum began a collection in 1860 that by the late 20th century numbered 70 @,@ 000 items . The largest , surpassing 100 @,@ 000 items , resides in the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston , begun when Ernest Fenollosa donated his collection in 1912 . The first exhibition in Japan of ukiyo @-@ e prints was likely one presented by <unk> Matsukata in 1925 , who amassed his collection in Paris during World War I and later donated it to the National Museum of Modern Art , Tokyo . The largest collection of ukiyo @-@ e in Japan is the 100 @,@ 000 pieces in the Japan Ukiyo @-@ e Museum in the city of Nagano . 
 = = = = Academic journals = = = = 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = Deepwater stingray = 
 The deepwater stingray or giant stingaree ( Plesiobatis daviesi ) is a species of stingray and the sole member of the family Plesiobatidae . It is widely distributed in the Indo @-@ Pacific , typically over fine sediments on the upper continental slope at depths of 275 – 680 m ( 900 – 2 @,@ 230 ft ) . This species reaches 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) in length and 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in width . It has an oval pectoral fin disc with a long , flexible , broad @-@ angled snout . Most of the entire latter half of its tail supports a distinctively long , slender , leaf @-@ shaped caudal fin . Its coloration is dark above and white below , and its skin is almost completely covered by tiny dermal denticles . 
 <unk> on crustaceans , cephalopods , and bony fishes , the deepwater stingray may hunt both on the sea floor and well above it in open water . It is probably aplacental viviparous , with the mother supplying her gestating young with histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . Captured rays merit caution due to their long , venomous stings . This species is taken by deepwater commercial fisheries , but in numbers too small to significantly threaten its population . Therefore , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed it as Least Concern . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The first scientific description of the deepwater stingray was authored by John H. Wallace , as part of a 1967 <unk> Report from the Oceanographic Research Institute , Durban . He named the new species daviesi in honor of David H. Davies , the late director of the ORI , and placed it in the genus <unk> based on its long , low caudal fin and lack of a dorsal fin . The type specimens were collected during September 1996 near the Limpopo River mouth in Mozambique : the holotype is a mature male 92 cm ( 36 in ) across , and the paratype is an immature male 33 cm ( 13 in ) across . Other common names for this species include Davies ' stingray and giant stingray . 
 In a 1990 morphological phylogenetic study , <unk> Nishida concluded that the deepwater stingray and the sixgill stingray ( Hexatrygon bickelli ) were the most basal stingrays ( suborder <unk> ) . Therefore , he moved this species to its own genus , Plesiobatis , and family , Plesiobatidae ; the name is derived from the Greek <unk> ( " primitive " ) and <unk> ( " ray " ) . Subsequent morphological studies have corroborated the basal position of Plesiobatis , but disagreed on its relationships to nearby taxa . John McEachran , Katherine Dunn , and Tsutomu Miyake in 1996 could not fully resolve the position of Plesiobatis , thus they assigned it provisionally to the family <unk> . McEachran and Neil <unk> in 2004 found Plesiobatis to be the sister taxon of Urolophus , and recommended that it be placed in the family Urolophidae . Until the phylogeny is better @-@ resolved , authors have tended to preserve the family Plesiobatidae . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Records of the deepwater stingray come from a number of locations scattered widely in the Indo @-@ Pacific : KwaZulu @-@ Natal in South Africa and Mozambique , the Gulf of Mannar , the northern Andaman Islands , the South China Sea , the Ryukyu Islands and the Kyushu @-@ Palau Ridge , along the southern coastline of Australia , northwestern Australia from the Rowley Shoals to Shark Bay , northeastern Australia from Townsville to <unk> , New Caledonia , and Hawaii . This bottom @-@ dwelling species generally inhabits the upper continental slope at depths of 275 – 680 m ( 900 – 2 @,@ 230 ft ) , over muddy or silty substrates . An anomalous record from only 44 m ( 144 ft ) deep off Mozambique was made . It seems to be locally common in tropical Australian waters , but may be rarer elsewhere . 
 = = Description = = 
 The deepwater stingray has a flabby body , with enlarged pectoral fins forming a disc usually longer than it is wide . The leading margins of the disc converge at a broad angle . The snout is thin and measures over six times as long as the diameter of the orbit ; the snout tip protrudes slightly from the disc . The small eyes are positioned just ahead of the spiracles , which have angular posterior rims . The large , circular nostrils are placed closed to the mouth , to which they are connected by a pair of broad grooves . Between the nostrils is a broad curtain of skin with a strongly fringed posterior margin . The wide , straight mouth contains 32 – 60 tooth rows in either jaw , increasing in number with age . Each tooth is small with a low , blunt cusp ; in adult males the teeth at the center are sharp and backward @-@ pointing . The five pairs of gill slits are small and placed beneath the disc . 
 The pelvic fins are small and have blunt outer corners . The moderately thick tail measures 93 – 102 % as long as the disc and lacks lateral skin folds and dorsal fins . One or two serrated stinging spines are present atop the tail , just ahead of the halfway point . The slender caudal fin originates a short distance behind the sting ; it is symmetrical above and below , and terminates in a rounded leaf @-@ like shape . The skin is densely covered by fine dermal denticles , that become sparse to absent on the pelvic fins , towards the ventral disc margin , and around the mouth . The deepwater stingray is purplish brown to blackish above ; some rays also have irregular darker blotches and spots . The underside is white , with a narrow dark border along the lateral disc margins . The tail is entirely dark , and the caudal fin is black . This large species grows up to 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) long , 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) across , and 118 kg ( 260 lb ) in weight off southern Africa , though it is not known to exceed 2 @.@ 0 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long off Australia . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The diet of the deepwater stingray consists of cephalopods , crustaceans ( including penaeid prawns , crabs , and lobsters ) , and bony fishes ( including eels ) . Its long , flexible snout is well @-@ suited for rooting through sediment , while the presence of mesopelagic species in its diet suggest that it may also hunt well above the sea floor . One recorded individual was found severely gouged by kitefin sharks ( Dalatias licha ) , which are capable of excising plugs of flesh , cookiecutter @-@ like , from larger animals . The deepwater stingray is presumed to be similar to other stingrays in being aplacental viviparous , and having the developing embryos nourished by maternally produced histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . Given its large size and deepwater habits , it is probably not highly prolific , with a small litter size and a long gestation period . The young are apparently born at close to 50 cm ( 20 in ) long , as evidenced by the capture of a free @-@ living specimen of that size that still bore a yolk sac scar . Males and females mature sexually at 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 7 m ( 4 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 6 ft ) and 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 0 m ( 6 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long respectively . The maximum size , and likely also the maturation size , varies between geographic regions . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 When captured , the deepwater stingray flails its powerful tail violently , and its long , venomous sting can inflict a serious injury to a fishery worker . It is caught incidentally by deepwater bottom trawls and longlines ; the meat may be sold but is poorly regarded . None of the deepwater commercial fisheries operating within its range ( including those off South Africa , Taiwan , Indonesia and Australia ) are extensive , and thus only small numbers of deepwater stingrays are landed . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has determined this species to be minimally threatened by human activity , and listed it under least concern . However , should deepwater fisheries expand in the future , it may be susceptible to depletion due to its probable rarity and low reproductive rate . 
 = Paper Mario = 
 Paper Mario , known in Japanese as Mario Story ( <unk> , Mario Sutōrī ) and originally known as Super Mario RPG 2 , is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 64 game console . It was first released in Japan on August 11 , 2000 , in North America on February 5 , 2001 , and in Europe and Australia on October 5 , 2001 . Paper Mario was re @-@ released for Nintendo 's Wii Virtual Console in July 2007 as well as Wii U Virtual Console in 2015 . 
 Paper Mario is set in the Mushroom Kingdom as the protagonist Mario tries to rescue Princess Peach from Bowser , who has imprisoned the seven " Star Spirits " , lifted her castle into the sky and has successfully defeated his foe after stealing the Star Rod from Star Haven and making himself invulnerable to any attacks . To save Mushroom Kingdom , rescue Peach , get the castle back , and defeat Bowser , Mario must locate the Star Spirits , who can negate the effects of the stolen Star Rod , by defeating Bowser 's minions guarding the star spirits . The player controls Mario and a number of partners to solve puzzles in the game 's overworld and defeat enemies in a turn @-@ based battle system . The battles are unique in that the player can influence the effectiveness of attacks by performing required controller inputs known as " action commands " . 
 Paper Mario is the second Mario role @-@ playing game to be released ( following Super Mario RPG ) and is the first installment for the Paper Mario series . Paper Mario is the predecessor to the GameCube game Paper Mario : The Thousand @-@ Year Door , the Wii game Super Paper Mario , the 3DS game Paper Mario : Sticker Star and the Wii U game Paper Mario : Color Splash . The game received a positive reaction from the media , attaining an aggregate score of 88 % from Game Rankings and 93 % from Metacritic . It was rated the 63rd best game made on a Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's " Top 200 Games " list in 2006 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Paper Mario combines traditional role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) elements with concepts and features from the Mario series . For the majority of the game , the player controls Mario , who can jump and use his hammer to overcome physical obstacles placed in the game 's overworld . Many of the game 's puzzles and boundaries are based upon the abilities of Mario 's partners , who each have a specialised skill required for progression in the game . The player accumulates partners as they advance into different locations ; only one partner can accompany Mario in the overworld , although the player can interchange them at any time . These characters also assist Mario in the game 's turn @-@ based battles , where damage inflicted against them results in temporary paralysis as the characters do not have individual HP statistics . Attacks in the game are similar to those in traditional RPGs , although the player can influence the power of a move when attacking or defending by timing a button @-@ press accurately or performing some other action command as required . Mario and his partners have a finite capacity to perform special moves , with each of these consuming a particular number of flower points ( FP ) when performed . Such statistics can be increased by earning Star Points ( experience points ) in combat to level up . There is also an on @-@ screen gauge to display Star Energy , which is required to perform another type of move that accumulate in number as the player advances through the game . The player can locate hidden battle upgrades in the game 's overworld , which promotes one partner character to a new rank at a time . 
 Progression through Paper Mario depends upon interaction with the game 's non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) , who will often offer clues or detail the next event in the storyline . As in other RPGs , the player can find or purchase items from NPCs to help in and outside of combat . Badges can also be obtained that yield bonuses ranging from added moves to gradual health restoration during combat ; each consumes a set number of Badge Points ( BP ) , meaning Mario can only equip a limited number of badges at a time . Princess Peach is playable at particular points in the game as a recurring sidequest . The objectives and actions of each transition to Peach vary , although most are stealth @-@ based . 
 = = Plot and setting = = 
 The game is set in the Mushroom Kingdom , beginning as Mario and Luigi are relaxing in their house when the mail arrives with a letter , which turns out to be an invitation from Peach to a party . Mario and Luigi then head to the castle , and as Mario is about to have some quiet time with Peach , her castle is suddenly lifted by Bowser 's fortress . After his invasion and victory over Mario , the attached fortress serves as the location for playable side quests of the kidnapped Peach . In the main quest , Mario tries to retrieve all of the 7 imprisoned Star Spirits on land , where most of the locations are linked to the central Toad Town , which acts as the game 's hub area . The story 's main conflict arises when Bowser invades Star Haven , the residence for the Star Spirits , and steals the Star Rod . 
 = = = Story and characters = = = 
 The game 's story centers on Mario as he tries to reclaim the seven Star Spirits , who have been incarcerated in playing cards by Bowser and his assistant , <unk> Koopa . Their combined power is required to negate the effects of the Star Rod , which makes Bowser invincible . Once Mario rescues all of them , he uses their assistance to defeat Bowser and rescue Peach . The story is presented in the context of a novel , with each adventure involving the rescue of a Star Spirit denoted as a single chapter . Peach is playable between chapters , where she allies with a star kid named Twink in the castle to relay vital information to Mario regarding his quest . 
 Mario allies with eight partners in total , each of whom represents a different type of enemy from the Mario series . These allies are : 
 <unk> ( <unk> ( <unk> ) ) a Goomba , who has the ability to tell the player about any character , any environment , and any enemy . 
 Kooper ( <unk> ( <unk> ) ) a Koopa Troopa , with the ability to throw his shell at otherwise unreachable objects . 
 <unk> ( Pinky ( <unk> , <unk> ) ) a Bob @-@ omb , with the ability to blow up weak parts of walls . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ( <unk> ) ) a <unk> , with the ability to help Mario cross gaps too large to jump across . 
 Lady Bow ( <unk> ( <unk> ) ) a Boo , with the ability to make Mario become invisible and transparent . 
 Watt ( <unk> ( <unk> ) ) a Li 'l Sparky , with the ability to light up rooms ( also , the only ally in the game with the ability to penetrate an enemy 's defenses ) and to see hidden objects . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ( <unk> ) ) a Cheep @-@ Cheep , with the ability to allow Mario to swim . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) ) a Lakitu , with the ability to allow Mario to traverse dangerous environments , such as spikes and lava . 
 After Peach 's castle is sent back to the ground and Mario defeats Bowser , he recounts his tale to Luigi , who had remained at home while Mario went on the adventure . Peach throws a huge party to honor Mario and his allies for saving the entire kingdom , which is then followed by a parade during the credits . In the end , Mario and Peach exit their parade float and gaze up the sky , seeing fireworks . This part will not end until the player turns off the console . When restarted , the file will restart from the last save . 
 = = Development = = 
 Paper Mario was developed by Intelligent Systems . Kumiko Takeda and Kaori Aoki wrote the game 's script , while Naohiko Aoyama was the art director responsible for the game 's distinctive graphical style . The game was initially called Super Mario RPG 2 , and was first revealed at Nintendo Space World ' 97 , a former video game trade show hosted by Nintendo . Critics compared the game 's 2D character style to PaRappa the Rapper . Shigeru Miyamoto , who consulted on the project , stated that the game was being developed with amateur gamers in mind . He had earlier revealed at E3 that around twenty developers were actively involved with the project . Paper Mario was re @-@ released on the Wii Virtual Console in 2007 , and the Wii U Virtual Console in 2015 . The game was also released for the iQue Player in 2004 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The game 's soundtrack was first released in Japan on September 21 , 2000 , with the game 's original title by Enterbrain , and distributed by the magazine Famitsu . It was followed in the United States a few months later as a Nintendo Power exclusive with the illustration from the international game cover . It included both the original music to the game , as well as sound effects , in 78 tracks on two discs . All of the game 's compositions were written by Yuka Tsujiyoko , with reprise arrangement of previous Super Mario themes by Koji Kondo . The game 's other event and sound effects music were composed by <unk> Senda . The game 's music mostly received positive reviews , with Lucas M. Thomas of IGN.com describing it as " vividly appointed with catchy , expressive tunes and comical audio cues . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Paper Mario received critical acclaim . IGN 's Matt Casamassina praised the game 's accessibility , commenting that " it serves as the perfect introductory game to any person hoping to explore the genre " . Nonetheless , other reviewers complained about the " brain @-@ dead easy " puzzles and bosses requiring " basic strategy at best " . The game 's nostalgic value was lauded , with reviewers noting the sense of familiarity with the Mario series present in the game 's settings and characters . The game has often been compared to the previous Mario RPG title , Super Mario RPG . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell judged that " Paper Mario is a vastly superior game to <unk> " , while IGN compared the game 's simple plot unfavourably with the SNES game and RPGFan claimed that some of Paper Mario 's story was copied from it . RPGFan also questioned the name of Paper Mario , as there were , in their opinion , insufficient gameplay features or aspects which used the paper theme to justify the name . 
 Critics lauded the game 's blend of RPG and platforming aspects . GameSpot noted the " exciting and somewhat strategic " battle system , which requires the player exploit the enemies ' weak points . The " refreshing " action command features was praised in particular for adding originality to a battle formula that was present in many games of the same genre . IGN claimed the game was " the best RPG for Nintendo 64 " , calling it " fantastically deep , intuitively designed , and wonderfully rewarding " . Despite this , enemy design itself was bemoaned for being " corny and generic " , with notable exceptions to some of the Paper Mario 's original boss characters . Eurogamer noted how " Of the various characters you meet , none is of less importance than any other " , welcoming the partner characters and their relating puzzles . GameSpot praised the game 's use of humour and side quests , with references to the control of Peach in particular . 
 The reaction to the game 's visuals was generally positive . IGN noted some paper @-@ based visual effects such as when Mario folds in a bed to sleep , but complained about character zoom @-@ ins , which revealed " a pixelated mass of colors " . Although reviewers claimed that the novel graphical style was initially confusing , most welcomed the style eventually , with GameSpot claiming that it was " extremely well done " . The audio was also mainly praised , although reviewers criticised the lack of voice acting and character @-@ specific sound effects . RPGFan were particularly critical of the game 's " generic filler music " , despite enjoying use of multiple songs simultaneously . 
 The game was also well received upon release for the Virtual Console , with IGN 's Lucas M. Thomas stating " it 's held up very well even placed into context against its GameCube and Wii era sequels , and it 's an RPG for goodness sakes " . Paper Mario also proved popular on the Virtual Console , reaching a high of " second most downloaded game " in the US in August 2007 . 
 Paper Mario was the top selling game in Japan on the week of its release , selling more than 276 @,@ 000 copies , and the top @-@ selling game for two weeks in other regions . It was ranked # 141 on Electronic Gaming Monthly 's " Greatest 200 Videogames of their Time " in February 2006 , the 63rd best game made on a Nintendo system in Nintendo Power 's " Top 200 Games " list , and the 13th greatest Nintendo 64 game of all time by the same magazine . It currently ranks as the sixth @-@ highest scoring Nintendo 64 game on Metacritic , the ninth highest rated video game of 2001 , and the highest @-@ scoring Nintendo 64 game released that year . 
 = 1885 Navy Midshipmen football team = 
 The 1885 Navy Midshipmen football team represented the United States Naval Academy in the 1885 college football season . The team was the fourth intercollegiate football squad to represent the United States Naval Academy , and marked the first time that the school played a multiple @-@ game season . The squad was captained by halfback Cornelius Billings . The year began with a blowout victory over St. John 's College , but was followed by close losses to Johns Hopkins University and the Princeton Tigers reserves squad . The season continued a seven @-@ season , eight game rivalry between the Naval Academy and Johns Hopkins , and began a ten @-@ game , seven @-@ year rivalry with St. John 's . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 According to Ellsworth P. <unk> 's biographer C. Douglas Kroll , the first evidence of a form of football at the United States Naval Academy came in 1857 , but the school 's cadets lost interest in the game shortly afterward . The Naval Academy 's first ever football team was fielded in 1879 . The squad was entirely student @-@ operated , receiving no official support from Naval Academy officials . The team was entirely funded by its members and their fellow students . The 1879 team participated in just one game , which resulted in a scoreless tie . It was played against the Baltimore Athletic Club , apparently on the Academy superintendent 's cow pasture . Navy would not field a football team in 1880 or 1881 , due to the lack of support from officials . When football returned to the academy in 1882 , the squad was led by player @-@ coach Vaulx Carter , and won 8 – 0 in a match with Johns Hopkins , starting a seven @-@ year rivalry between the schools . The 1883 season resulted in Navy 's first ever loss , a 2 – 0 defeat by Johns Hopkins . Navy returned the favor the following year , defeating Hopkins in a close 9 – 6 game . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Naval Academy scheduled three games for the 1885 season , breaking from the tradition of playing only Johns Hopkins . According to Morris Allison Bealle , " Football at Annapolis had shed its swaddling clothes when the autumn of 1885 rolled around . Some of the faculty actually gave in and admitted that football might , at that , be or become an interesting diversion " so the squad was allowed to schedule three games . The first was played against St. John 's College , also located in Annapolis . The game kicked off a brief rivalry with St. John 's , which would conclude in 1911 with Navy winning eighteen of twenty @-@ one contests . The 1885 match was a 46 – 10 blowout victory over St. John 's . The second game of the season was the annual Thanksgiving Day match against Johns Hopkins . After winning the previous year , Navy fell to Johns Hopkins 12 – 8 . The season concluded with the Naval Academy challenging the Princeton freshman team , a game which ended in a 10 – 0 shutout loss for Navy . 
 = = Players = = 
 The 1885 Naval Academy team was made up of thirteen players at four different positions . The squad consisted of seven rushers , two fullback , three halfbacks , and a quarterback : 
 = = Postseason and aftermath = = 
 The first postseason college football game would not be played until 1902 , with the Pasadena Tournament of Roses ' establishment of the east – west tournament game , later known as the Rose Bowl . The Midshipmen would not participate in their first Rose Bowl until the 1923 season , when they went 5 – 1 – 2 and tied with the Washington Huskies 14 – 14 in the match . As a result of the lack of a competition , there were no postseason games played after the 1885 season . According to statistics compiled by <unk> , Houlgate , the National Championship Foundation , Parke Davis , and the Helms Athletic Foundation , Princeton was declared the 1885 season champion . 
 The 1885 season brought Navy 's overall win – loss record to an even 3 – 3 – 1 . It also brought the Academy 's record against Johns Hopkins to 2 – 2 tie . The season marked the first time a team for the Naval Academy would play a multiple @-@ game season . In 1886 , their schedule was expanded from three games to five , and continued to grow through subsequent years . It was the worst single @-@ season record for the Academy until 1888 , when they went 1 – 4 . Navy would finish the 1880s with four winning seasons , and an overall record of 14 – 12 – 2 . The school would outscore their opponents 292 – 231 , and would finish the 19th century with an overall record of 54 – 19 – 3 . 
 = Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome = 
 Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome , also called Keipert syndrome , is a rare congenital syndrome first described by J.A. Keipert and colleagues in 1973 . The syndrome is characterized by a <unk> nose , broad thumbs and halluces ( the big toes ) , brachydactyly , sensorineural hearing loss , facial features such as hypertelorism ( unusually wide @-@ set eyes ) , and developmental delay . It is believed to be inherited in an X @-@ linked recessive manner , which means a genetic mutation causing the disorder is located on the X chromosome , and while two copies of the mutated gene must be inherited for a female to be born with the disorder , just one copy is sufficient to cause a male to be born with the disorder . Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome is likely caused by a mutated gene located on the X chromosome between positions <unk> – q28 . The incidence of the syndrome has not been determined , but it is considered to affect less than 200 @,@ 000 people in the United States , and no greater than 1 per 2 @,@ 000 in Europe . It is similar to <unk> , <unk> , Rubinstein and Teunissen @-@ <unk> syndrome . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome is congenital and is characterized by a number of nasal , facial and cranial features . These include a broad and high , sometimes depressed nasal bridge ( top of the nose , between the eyes ) and a flattened nasal tip . This can give the nose a shortened , arch @-@ like appearance . <unk> ( unusually wide @-@ set eyes ) , prominent frontal bones and supraorbital ridge ( the eyebrow ridge ) , bilateral <unk> folds ( an extra flap of skin over the eyelids ) , a broad forehead and an overall enlarged head circumference have also been observed . A bulging of the upper lip with an exaggerated cupid 's bow shape , and maxillary hypoplasia ( underdevelopment of the upper jaw ) with retraction have also been reported . 
 Several anomalies affecting the digits ( fingers and toes ) have been observed with the syndrome . A broadening of the thumbs and big toes ( halluces ) was reported in two brothers . The broadening was apparent in all distal phalanges of the fingers , although the pinkies were unaffected yet appeared to be <unk> ( warped , or bent toward the other fingers ) . Additional <unk> described this broadness of the thumbs and big toes , with brachydactyly ( shortness ) in the distal phalanges of the other digits except the pinkies in affected individuals . On X @-@ rays of a two @-@ year @-@ old boy with the disorder , the brachydactyly was shown to be caused by shortening of <unk> ( joint @-@ ends ) of the distal phalanges . The broadness and brachydactyly of the big toes in particular may give them a stunted , rounded and stub @-@ like appearance . 
 The auditory , or " acoustic " abnormalities observed with the syndrome include sensorineural hearing loss and hoarseness . Two affected Turkish brothers with a mild form of this hearing loss , and a hoarse voice were reported . A <unk> examination of both brothers revealed swelling of the vocal cords , and a malformed epiglottis . <unk> @-@ associated hearing impairment and <unk> was also observed in a 10 @-@ year @-@ old girl and her father , and in a number of other cases . 
 Other characteristics seen with the syndrome include developmental delay , growth retardation , pulmonary stenosis ( an obstruction of blood @-@ flow from the right ventricle of the heart to the pulmonary artery ) with associated dyspnea ( shortness of breath ) , and renal agenesis ( failure of the kidneys to develop during the fetal period ) . <unk> testes , hyperactivity and aggressive behavior have also been noted . 
 = = Genetics = = 
 Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome is thought to be caused by a mutation in a gene on the X chromosome . A 2007 study concluded , based on analysis of microsatellite markers ( small gene sequences found in common among individuals having the same ethnicity , ancestry or genetic disease ) of the family described by Keipert , that this gene was likely located on the long arm of the X chromosome between positions <unk> – q28 . This is not definitive , however , and no specific gene has been named . 
 The syndrome is strongly believed to be inherited in an X @-@ linked recessive manner . When a female carries a mutated gene on one of her two copies of the X chromosome , there is a 50 % chance of passing the mutation on to her children . Much like her , a daughter inheriting this mutation will be a carrier , but will not herself have the associated disease . However , a son who inherits the mutation will have the disease ; this is because males have only one copy of the X chromosome and therefore could only express the disease mutation . 
 This form of inheritance for Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome is not yet absolute , though , as a girl has been reported with the disorder . It is suggested that further analysis is needed for the inheritance to be formally established . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The constellation of anomalies seen with Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome result in a distinct diagnosis . The diagnostic criteria for the disorder are broad distal phalanges of the thumbs and big toes , accompanied by a broad and shortened nose , sensorineural hearing loss and developmental delay , with predominant occurrence in males . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome is similar to several syndromes that share its features . <unk> of the distal phalanges , sensorineural deafness and pulmonary stenosis are common with <unk> syndrome . In <unk> syndrome , developmental delay , distal brachydactyly and sensorineural hearing loss are reported ; features of Teunissen @-@ <unk> syndrome include nasal aberrations and broadness of the thumbs and big toes , also with brachydactyly . Broad thumbs and big toes are primary characteristics of Rubinstein syndrome . 
 = = Management = = 
 A number of features found with Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome can be managed or treated . <unk> hearing loss in humans may be caused by a loss of hair cells ( sensory receptors in the inner ear that are associated with hearing ) . This can be hereditary and / or within a syndrome , as is the case with nasodigitoacoustic syndrome , or attributed to infections such as viruses . For the management of sensorineural hearing loss , hearing aids have been used . Treatments , depending upon the cause and severity , may include a pharmacological approach ( i.e. , the use of certain steroids ) , or surgical intervention , like a cochlear implant . 
 Pulmonary , or pulmonic stenosis is an often congenital narrowing of the pulmonary valve ; it can be present in nasodigitoacoustic @-@ affected infants . Treatment of this cardiac abnormality can require surgery , or non @-@ surgical procedures like balloon <unk> ( widening the valve with a balloon catheter ) . 
 = = History and epidemiology = = 
 The syndrome was initially described in 1973 by James A. Keipert and associates . They reported of two brothers with broad distal phalanges , sensorineural hearing loss , and facial features consistent with what would become known as Keipert or " nasodigitoacoustic " syndrome . Although no specific rate of incidence has been determined , the syndrome is considered a rare disease by both the Office of Rare Diseases ( <unk> ) at the National Institutes of Health , and <unk> . This suggests , respectively , that Nasodigitoacoustic syndrome affects less than 200 @,@ 000 people in the U.S. , or affects no greater than 1 per 2 @,@ 000 people in Europe . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Gorlin , R. J. ; Toriello , H. V. ; Cohen , M. M. ( 1995 ) . Hereditary hearing loss and its syndromes . U. S. : Oxford University Press. pp. 208 – 209 . Retrieved April 21 , 2011 . 
 = Geri and Freki = 
 In Norse mythology , Geri and Freki ( Old Norse , both meaning " the ravenous " or " greedy one " ) are two wolves which are said to accompany the god Odin . They are attested in the Poetic Edda , a collection of epic poetry compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , in the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , and in the poetry of skalds . The pair has been compared to similar figures found in Greek , Roman and Vedic mythology , and may also be connected to beliefs surrounding the Germanic " wolf @-@ warrior bands " , the <unk> . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The names Geri and Freki have been interpreted as meaning either " the greedy one " or " the ravenous one " . The name Geri can be traced back to the Proto @-@ Germanic adjective * <unk> , attested in Burgundian <unk> , Old Norse <unk> and Old High German ger or giri , all of which mean " greedy " . The name Freki can be traced back to the Proto @-@ Germanic adjective * <unk> , attested in Gothic <unk> @-@ <unk> " covetous , avaricious " , Old Norse <unk> " greedy " , Old English <unk> " desirous , greedy , gluttonous , audacious " and Old High German <unk> " greedy " . John Lindow interprets both Old Norse names as <unk> adjectives . Bruce Lincoln further traces Geri back to a Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European stem * <unk> , which is the same as that found in Garmr , a name referring to the hound closely associated with the events of Ragnarök . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Grímnismál , the god Odin ( disguised as Grímnir ) provides the young Agnarr with information about Odin 's companions . Agnarr is told that Odin feeds Geri and Freki while the god himself consumes only wine : 
 The pair is also alluded to via the kenning " <unk> 's ( Odin 's ) hounds " in Helgakviða Hundingsbana I , verse 13 , where it is related that they roam the field " greedy for the corpses of those who have fallen in battle " . 
 In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning ( chapter 38 ) , the enthroned figure of High explains that Odin gives all of the food on his table to his wolves Geri and Freki and that Odin requires no food , for wine is to him both meat and drink . High then quotes the above @-@ mentioned stanza from the poem Grímnismál in support . In chapter 75 of the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál a list of names for wargs and wolves is provided that includes both Geri and Freki . 
 In skaldic poetry Geri and Freki are used as common nouns for " wolf " in chapter 58 of Skáldskaparmál ( quoted in works by the skalds Þjóðólfr of Hvinir and Egill Skallagrímsson ) and Geri is again used as a common noun for " wolf " in chapter 64 of the Prose Edda book Háttatal . Geri is referenced in kennings for " blood " in chapter 58 of Skáldskaparmál ( " Geri 's ales " in a work by the skald Þórðr Sjáreksson ) and in for " carrion " in chapter 60 ( " Geri 's morsel " in a work by the skald Einarr Skúlason ) . Freki is also used in a kenning for " carrion " ( " Freki 's meal " ) in a work by Þórðr Sjáreksson in chapter 58 of Skáldskaparmál . 
 = = Archaeological record = = 
 If the rider on horseback on the image on the <unk> Runestone has been correctly identified as Odin , then Geri and Freki are shown taking part in hunting an elk or moose . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Freki is also a name applied to the monstrous wolf Fenrir in the Poetic Edda poem Völuspá . Folklorist John Lindow sees irony in the fact that Odin feeds one Freki at his dinner table and another — Fenrir — with his flesh during the events of Ragnarök . 
 Historian Michael <unk> connects Geri and Freki with archaeological finds depicting figures wearing wolf @-@ pelts and frequently found wolf @-@ related names among the Germanic peoples , including <unk> ( " Wolf @-@ Frock " ) , <unk> ( " Wolf @-@ Hide " ) , <unk> ( " Grey @-@ Mask " ) , <unk> ( " Garb @-@ Wolf " ) and Wolfgang ( " Wolf @-@ Gait " ) , <unk> ( " Wolf @-@ Runner " ) , and <unk> ( " Wolf @-@ Dancer " ) and myths regarding wolf warriors from Norse mythology ( such as the <unk> ) . Spiegel believes this to point to the pan @-@ Germanic wolf @-@ warrior band cult centered on Odin that waned away after Christianization . 
 Scholars have also noted Indo @-@ European parallels to the wolves Geri and Freki as companions of a divinity . 19th century scholar Jacob Grimm observed a connection between this aspect of Odin 's character and the Greek Apollo , to whom both the wolf and the raven are sacred . Philologist Maurice Bloomfield further connected the pair with the two dogs of Yama in Vedic mythology , and saw them as a Germanic counterpart to a more general and widespread Indo @-@ European " Cerberus " <unk> . Michael Speidel finds similar parallels in the Vedic Rudra and the Roman Mars . Elaborating on the connection between wolves and figures of great power , he writes : " This is why Geri and Freki , the wolves at Woden 's side , also <unk> on the throne of the Anglo @-@ Saxon kings . Wolf @-@ warriors , like Geri and Freki , were not mere animals but mythical beings : as Woden 's followers they bodied forth his might , and so did wolf @-@ warriors . " 
 Bernd Heinrich theorizes that Geri and Freki , along with Odin and his ravens Huginn and Muninn , reflect a symbiosis observed in the natural world among ravens , wolves , and humans on the hunt : 
 In a biological symbiosis one organism typically shores up some weakness or deficiency of the other ( s ) . As in such a symbiosis , Odin the father of all humans and gods , though in human form was imperfect by himself . As a separate entity he lacked depth perception ( being one @-@ eyed ) and he was apparently also uninformed and forgetful . But his weaknesses were compensated by his ravens , Hugin ( mind ) and Munin ( memory ) who were part of him . They perched on his shoulders and reconnoitered to the ends of the earth each day to return in the evening and tell him the news . He also had two wolves at his side , and the man / god @-@ raven @-@ wolf association was like one single organism in which the ravens were the eyes , mind , and memory , and the wolves the providers of meat and nourishment . As god , Odin was the ethereal part — he only drank wine and spoke only in poetry . I wondered if the Odin myth was a metaphor that playfully and poetically encapsulates ancient knowledge of our prehistoric past as hunters in association with two allies to produce a powerful hunting alliance . It would reflect a past that we have long forgotten and whose meaning has been obscured and badly frayed as we abandoned our hunting cultures to become herders and agriculturists , to whom ravens act as competitors . 
 = Delaware Route 18 = 
 Delaware Route 18 ( DE 18 ) is a state highway located in Sussex County , Delaware . It runs from Maryland Route 318 ( MD 318 ) at the Maryland border east of Federalsburg , Maryland to U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) in Georgetown . DE 18 runs concurrent with DE 404 from its intersection with that highway southeast of Bridgeville to the eastern terminus , where DE 404 continues eastward to Five Points on US 9 . The route passes through rural areas of western Sussex County . What would become DE 18 was built as a state highway in stages during the 1920s and 1930s . By 1936 , DE 18 was designated to run from the Maryland border east through Georgetown to Lewes . In 1974 , the route east of Georgetown was replaced by US 9 and US 9 Business ( US 9 Bus . ) . DE 404 was designated along the eastern portion of DE 18 by 1987 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 18 begins at the Maryland border , where it continues west into that state as MD 318 . From the state line , the route heads east on two @-@ lane undivided Federalsburg Road , passing through agricultural areas with some woods and homes . In Clarksons Crossroads , DE 18 turns southeast onto Cannon Road while Federalsburg Road continues northeast toward Bridgeville . The road continues to the community of Cannon , where it crosses Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . East of Cannon , the route comes to an intersection with US 13 . Following this , DE 18 heads northeast through farm fields , reaching a junction with DE 404 . 
 At this point , DE 18 heads east concurrent with DE 404 along Seashore Highway , running through a mix of farmland and woodland with some residences , passing through tracts of the Redden State Forest . Farther east , DE 18 / DE 404 heads into Georgetown , running to the north of Delaware Technical Community College 's Jack F. Owens Campus . The road intersects US 113 and the western terminus of DE 404 Truck in a commercial area and continues east . The two routes head southeast onto North Bedford Street , passing homes and businesses . The road comes to an intersection with US 9 at The Circle in the center of Georgetown , where the Sussex County Courthouse is located . At this point , DE 18 ends and DE 404 continues east along US 9 . 
 DE 18 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 12 @,@ 176 vehicles at the west end of Georgetown to a low of 2 @,@ 582 vehicles at the US 13 intersection . The portion of DE 18 concurrent with DE 404 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what would eventually become DE 18 was under contract as a state highway from southeast of Bridgeville to Georgetown and from Georgetown to Harbeson ; the remainder existed as an unimproved county road . The state highway was completed between Cannon and present @-@ day US 13 and from southeast of Bridgeville east to Lewes by 1924 , with the exception of a portion within Georgetown . The part of present @-@ day DE 18 west of Clarksons Crossroads was under proposal as a state highway by this time also . A year later , the portions of the route west of Clarksons Crossroads and within Georgetown were upgraded to state highway status . In 1927 , plans were made to replace the 1914 @-@ built county @-@ maintained bascule bridge over the Lewes and Rehoboth Canal in Lewes . Replacement of this bridge by the state was completed in 1929 . By 1931 , the state highway was finished between Clarksons Crossroads and Cannon . The portion of road from US 13 east to the current west end of the DE 404 concurrency was completed as a state highway a year later . 
 DE 18 was designated to run from the Maryland border west of Cannon east to Lewes Beach on the Delaware Bay by 1936 , following its current alignment east to Georgetown and continuing east through Gravel Hill , Harbeson , and Lewes . In 1974 , the eastern terminus of DE 18 was cut back to its current location in Georgetown , with an extended US 9 replacing the route between Georgetown and Five Points and US 9 Bus. replacing DE 18 from Five Points to Lewes . DE 404 was extended to run concurrent with DE 18 from east of <unk> to Georgetown by 1987 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sussex County . 
 = What Separates Me from You = 
 What Separates Me from You is the fourth studio album by American rock band A Day to Remember , and their third for Victory . Originally planned for release in late @-@ October 2010 , the album was delayed by a few weeks until mid @-@ November . The album , which was recorded mainly at The Wade Studios in Ocala , Florida , from May to July 2010 , was the first to feature guitarist Kevin Skaff . The album was produced mostly by Chad Gilbert , with help from Andrew Wade and the band 's vocalist , Jeremy McKinnon . " All I Want " was released as the first single . It reached number 12 on the U.S. Alternative Songs chart and number 25 on the Rock Songs chart . 
 The album debuted on the U.S. Billboard 200 at number 11 , and number 1 on several charts : Top Hard Rock Albums , Top Independent Albums , Top Modern Rock / Alternative Albums in the U.S. and the Rock Album Chart in the UK . The band played two songs from the album on their national TV debut in January 2011 , and then went on The Game Changers Tour to help promote the album ; shortly afterwards touring worldwide in support of the release . Two later singles off the album charted : " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " , released in May , reached number 32 on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart , and radio single " It 's Complicated " , released in October , peaked at number 34 on the same chart . What Separates Me from You was met with generally favorable reviews , with critics praising the album 's sound . The album was certified gold by the RIAA in March 2016 . 
 = = Background = = 
 While the band was touring Homesick ( 2009 ) , a line @-@ up change occurred when guitarist Tom Denney wanted to settle down . Four Letter Lie guitarist Kevin Skaff was added in his place ; Denney , however , was retained to work with the band behind the scenes . All of the songs for What Separates Me from You were written while the band were touring in 2009 and 2010 , and as early as March 2010 , vocalist Jeremy McKinnon stated that A Day to Remember already had " all of the pop / punk song ideas written [ ... ] And we 're then going to write five heavier songs " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 = = = Styles and amount of material = = = 
 Guitarist Neil Westfall said in a 2010 interview with Alter the Press ! : " We 've written a few jams , we 're always constantly writing , like I think we wrote some parts the other day . " Westfall also said once the band return home from touring , they were " going to drop everything and start writing and doing pre @-@ production full time . " At this point , the band had ten songs and were trying to condense them into five , then planning to write five more . Westfall said the band completed the final " few songs when we were back home with Tom ( Denney ) and Chad ( Gilbert ) . " On the pace of writing , McKinnon said : " It seems like a really fast thing that has happened but we 've been constantly working on it the entire time . " On the songs themselves , he said : " the pop @-@ punk stuff has a darker edge to it . I wrote it like that , it 's still pop @-@ punk but with a darker edge " . The album was influenced by Finch 's What It Is to Burn ( 2002 ) . The album " came together song by song " as McKinnon mentioned , with the band coming up with 15 – 16 song ideas . McKinnon stated in an interview with <unk> that there 's songs " that didn 't make this record that we 're saving . " There is a track on the album that was previously written for Homesick . 
 When asked about how he comes up with song titles , McKinnon said : " I 've got my iPhone , and I go on my notes and every time I see something I like I write it down , so a lot of the time titles are something that mean something to us only , or to someone I know only . " He called What Separates Me from You " the slowest for stuff like that " , when referring to song titles . Westfall said that the album 's title and the songs ' subjects were about " Separating your self from your peers and really coming into your own . " McKinnon said What Separates Me from You was " a lot more personal and darker " than Homesick , and that it was " a natural progression of what we were doing " with " the same core " as the band 's preceding albums . Asked whether the album reached new heights , he said it " was definitely the next step " for the band . However , the band originally had no idea on how the album would turn out : " It was a little bit all over the place , because of me coming in , Tom [ Denney ] leaving and all this new stuff that was going on " , as stated by guitarist Kevin Skaff . Skaff said that McKinnon originally had a different name for the album that " he really wanted , but found it was actually the name of a Terror ( hardcore band ) album . " 
 = = = Tracks 1 – 5 = = = 
 It was important to the band that " Sticks & Bricks " opened the album , as it was an " in @-@ your @-@ face " song . McKinnon said in an interview with USAToday that the opening lyric ( " I am fueled by all forms of failure " ) was " 100 % directed at everyone who ever doubted our band " . He stated that it " is one of the meaner , heavier songs that we 've ever done as a band . " " All I Want " is " about being in a band " , according to McKinnon , and was one of the final songs written for the album . The song came about from an idea by McKinnon that he expanded on guitar in the middle of recording for the album , and wrote most of it in one night . A rough version was recorded between McKinnon and producer Chad Gilbert before the band had arrived at the studio . McKinnon said the song was more of a " singing version " of the band 's song " I 'm Made of Wax , Larry , What Are You Made Of ? " . 
 " It 's Complicated " was written while the band were abroad in Amsterdam ; the original version differed significantly from the final version . Andrew Wade flew out to the band in an attempt to work on the song immediately . " This Is the House That Doubt Built " was among one of the first to be written for the album , written almost in one sitting while McKinnon had his acoustic guitar with him , while the band was abroad . " 2nd Sucks " was about people who viewed being in a band as being a sort of competition . 
 = = = Tracks 6 – 10 = = = 
 " Better Off This Way " was one of the first written for the album , and re @-@ written " at least 3 different times " . The song was the final one finished for the album . The title for " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " came from an occasion when McKinnon and bassist Joshua Woodard were in a rough neighborhood in West Palm Beach , Florida . A piece of the song came from a recording session for Homesick when Gilbert said he had an idea for the melody , which McKinnon took a while to write over : " Chad had a cool idea , vocally , for something " . In an interview with PopCrush in 2011 , McKinnon said the song was when you get the " feeling like you 're stuck in a place that 's leading you nowhere " and " standing up for yourself and taking charge of your life . " " You Be Tails , I 'll Be Sonic " was written with the band 's former guitarist , Tom Denney ; the song was made up of several separate pieces from different song ideas , with a chorus McKinnon had re @-@ written 4 times . 
 Referring to " You Be Tails , I 'll Be Sonic " , Skaff said that the song 's title — a reference to Tails and Sonic from the video game series — had " really came out of nowhere . " McKinnon said the song is a " more personal song [ ... ] It discusses how the choices I 've made to put my best foot forward in my career , in a sense , have really done damage to my personal life . " Both " You Be Tails , I 'll Be Sonic " and " Out of Time " talk about " how I feel like I 'm doing what I want with my life , but I think , " Wow , I just did something that really affected me . " " " Out of Time " was also one of the first songs written for the album , and was written while the band was in Australia . McKinnon said the song was the most personal on the record . Skaff had a major hand in writing " If I Leave " . The song describes " different things you got through being on the road " and " a relationship ending when you 're not really around enough to actually take care of it in person . " On being asked whether he knew it would be the final song on the album , McKinnon said " It just felt right [ ... ] seemed like a good ending " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Before showing the songs to the band , McKinnon and Skaff worked on them alone . When the pair had all of the song ideas , they worked on them as a full @-@ band , with pre @-@ production being undertaken in , as Skaff commented , " a makeshift studio " by Andrew Wade . Woodard commented that the band had " been going in from 11am until 9pm and all we do is sit around and play . " Between demoing the songs , and their final forms on the album , Woodard said " crazy things were happening – verses became choruses " , with Chad Gilbert assisting the band with arrangements and writing . As the band thought they were getting better as songwriters , Woodard stated , " it 's getting more heavy and more pop . " One song that the band recorded was " screwed up really bad and it didn 't make the record " , as Skaff comments , as the group recorded it at a fast pace and when McKinnon tried to " sing it was like rap music . [ imitates rap singing ] And we were like ' that 's not good ' . " Asked if the band would use it as a possible B @-@ side , Skaff said " its possible [ ... ] might use it for the next record or something like that . " 
 What Separates Me from You was recorded from May to July 23 , 2010 , in three locations , per the album booklet : The Wade Studios in Ocala , Florida , The Back of a Bus with No AC in Germany and A Closet in New Jersey , the latter of which being where the backing vocals for " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " were recorded . The album was mixed by David Bendeth and Dan <unk> , and produced by Gilbert with assistance by Wade and McKinnon . Wade also produced the band 's previous album , Homesick . It was the first album featuring Skaff on guitar , following Tom Denney 's <unk> after Homesick . " All I Want " , " It 's Complicated " , " This Is the House That Doubt Built " and " If I Leave " were mixed by Bendeth , while the rest of the album tracks were mixed by <unk> . Mastering for the album had taken place at Sterling Sound by Ted Jensen . 
 = = Release = = 
 In July 2010 , it was announced that the band would bring out the album in October . The album 's title and cover art were revealed by the band in a live video via Victory Record 's official website on September 21 . On the same day , the album was available for pre @-@ order . McKinnon later said in an interview that the album 's cover was meant " to be a little more serious . It has the vibe of a painting . " Featured on the album cover is the band 's ex @-@ guitarist Denney , video director Drew Russ , and producer Gilbert . A supposed track listing for the album was posted on the internet with mentions of guest appearances by Ed McRae and Florence Welch , from Your Demise and Florence and the Machine respectively . McKinnon said it wasn 't the true track list , then proceeded to post the actual track list on October 13 . On October 1 , the band held a contest , to tie in with the release of the album , where fans could win their catalog on vinyl and a signed copy of the album . The group released a short preview of new song " 2nd Sucks " on October 6 . On October 7 , the album 's first single , " All I Want " , was debuted on KROQ Radio . The single was officially released on October 12 . As the choice of a single , Westfall said " All I Want " " was a great transition song from Homesick " . On October 21 , a full version of " 2nd Sucks " was posted for streaming on Victory 's Facebook page . 
 Originally set for release on October 26 , 2010 , the album was delayed until November 15 in the UK and the proceeding day in the U.S. The album was leaked a few days prior to release . A listening party for the album was held at The Hard Rock Hotel in Chicago on November 15 for a small number of fans , which was followed by a Q & A session with the band . On January 6 , 2011 , the band released the music video for the single " All I Want " . The video , which was filmed back in October 2010 , features members from numerous musical groups . On January 11 , 2011 , the band made their national television debut while performing the songs " All I Want " and " Better Off This Way " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . Skaff recalled the TV performance as " fun " , calling Jimmy Kimmel " a good guy " , and " a great experience " to be on Kimmel 's show . Beginning in March , to help promote What Separates Me from You , the band went on The Game Changers Tour . The band performed over half of the new album while on The Game Changers tour . McKinnon commented : " The new songs live have worked great . " 
 On April 16 , 2011 , A Day to Remember released a special for Record Store Day , which was an exclusive limited edition 7 " vinyl of " All I Want " . " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " impacted radio on May 24 . The band filmed the music video for " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " in one day in Los Angeles when the group had a day @-@ off from touring ; it was released through MTV2 on June 7 . It was revealed in September that " It 's Complicated " would be released as the third single from the album on October 25 , though it was only released as a radio single . " 2nd Sucks " would become the band 's third music video off the album . A promotional CD of " This Is the House That Doubt Built " was released on December 19 . The band played an acoustic version of " It 's Complicated " for MTV on February 14 , 2012 . The music video for " 2nd Sucks " was released on February 27 , 2012 . 
 = = Further releases and song appearances = = 
 Vinyl editions were released on December 6 , 2010 . Several tracks from the album have appeared in MTV 's show Jersey Shore . Another vinyl pressing , this time on white vinyl , was released on December 27 . Two tracks were featured on various artist compilations : " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " on <unk> 's Warped Tour 2011 Tour Compilation and " If I Leave " on the Victory compilation Victory Records 2012 New Music Sampler . Six of the album 's ten tracks are currently available on the Rock Band games : " 2nd Sucks " , " All I Want " , " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " , " Better Off This Way " , " Sticks & Bricks " , and " It 's Complicated " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 What Separates Me from You received generally favorable reviews . James Christopher Monger of Allmusic said , " [ It ] is whiney , petulant , immature , hopeless , and thoroughly addicting , as the ten songs contained within the gatefold packaging [ ... ] are as immaculately crafted and engaging as they are blindingly self @-@ absorbed . " Brendan Manley from Alternative Press wrote , " The vitriolic delivery seems sincere , but even if you don ’ t buy into all of the personal / emotional factors underpinning Separates ( smack @-@ talking the smack @-@ talkers / a recent , devastating breakup / assorted perils of touring ) , the album simply kills . " However , Christine Caruana of Loud Online said , " [ It ] is very much typical of its genre . Lyrics filled with standard teenage angst , fast , distorted guitars and heavy , yet boring , drum fills to imitate a metal sound . " While Dan Rankin of Blare Magazine said the album was " essentially just another fat kid on the already rusty trampoline that is this genre . " Brooke Daly of Tastemakers said that the album was one of the band 's " more solid releases " with less repetition than on Homesick . Despite " taking on a poppier sound " being risky in his opinion , the band managed to " pull it off " . Jacob Testa , for Mind Equals Blown , noted that he found himself " wanting to listen to it again and again " , saying that the album featured " a lot of creativity and maturation " . 
 The album peaked at number 11 on the U.S. Billboard 200 , becoming A Day to Remember 's personal best , as Homesick peaked at number 21 . The album also charted at number 1 on the UK Rock Album Chart , number 66 on the UK Albums Chart , number 24 on the ARIA Chart in Australia , and number 4 on the German Newcomer Chart . The album had sold 80 @,@ 000 copies as of December 2010 , with 152 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. as of April 2011 , and 300 @,@ 000 copies by January 2013 . In March 2016 , What Separates Me from You was certified gold in the U.S. " All I Want " charted on both Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks and Rock Songs charts , at number 12 and number 25 , respectively . 
 The album was voted by fans as number 3 of Kill Your Stereo 's Album of the Year 2010 . Matt Heafy , frontman and guitarist of the metal band Trivium , listed the album as the 6th best album of 2010 . Trey <unk> of Shadows Chasing Ghosts ranked the album one of his top 15 albums of 2010 . " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " charted on both of these charts , but at number 32 and number 48 , respectively . " All Signs Point to Lauderdale " was voted as number 10 in the " 10 Best Rock Songs of 2011 " by AOL Radio . " It 's Complicated " charted on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart , at number 34 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Jeremy McKinnon , except " 2nd Sucks " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel per booklet . 
 = = Chart positions and certifications = = 
 = The Childhood of Jack Harkaway = 
 The Childhood Of Jack Harkaway is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . Adapted from S. Bracebridge <unk> 's Jack Harkaway story series by Lloyd Lonergan , the film depicts the life of the title character . Given to the care of strangers after his birth , Jack grows up and is sent to a school at age 12 . After being severely and unjustly punished by the schoolmaster , Jack runs away and comes across two thieves plotting a robbery . Jack hurries to the house and warns the mistress of the planned robbery . The robbery is foiled and the lady of the house is very grateful , but Jack 's schoolmaster and his guardian arrive to take him back . She recognizes the guardian as the man who forced her to turn over Jack and turns them out of the house . The film 's cast and production credits are unknown . The film was released on December 23 , 1910 , it was met with favorable reviews and saw a wide national release . In 1988 , a severely deteriorated nitrate print of the film was known to exist and it was likely transferred to the Library of Congress archives in 1997 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film is not lost , but a modern synopsis has not been published . The official synopsis of the film was published in The Moving Picture World on December 24 , 1910 . It states : " Jack Harkaway is of aristocratic birth , being the son of a wealthy Englishman 's daughter and a poor young man , with whom she has eloped . Her parents bring about a separation and compel her to place the child in the hands of strangers , who are bribed to keep his whereabouts a secret from his mother . At the age of 12 Jack is placed in a school , the master of which is prejudiced against him , owing to the boy 's mischievous disposition . After having received severe and unjust punishment from the schoolmaster , Jack decides to run away from school , and escapes from the room in which he is locked , through the window . Wandering along a country road , he accidentally overhears two sneak thieves planning to rob a house . Jack makes his way to the house in time to warn its mistress of the proposed robbery . Two [ man ] servants are placed in hiding , when the would @-@ be thieves put in an appearance there and are immediately captured . Jack is given a fine supper by the lady of the house , who is very grateful to him . And when the schoolmaster , accompanied by Jack 's guardian , arrives , she is touched by the boy 's appeal not to be turned over to his rough @-@ looking ' friends . ' Upon getting a closer view of the man who calls himself the lad 's guardian , she realizes that he is the man to whom she was forced to give over her child . The man admits that Jack is her own boy , and the picture ends with the men being turned out of the house and Jack restored to his mother 's arms . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Lloyd Lonergan wrote the scenario based on S. Bracebridge <unk> 's Jack Harkaway story series . Film historian Q. David Bowers states that it was based on a stage play based upon a series of boys ' stories , but does not cite a specific credit for which adaptation or work it was based on . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on December 23 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release , theaters which showed the film are noted in Indiana , Oklahoma , South Dakota , Missouri , Pennsylvania , and Arizona . Reviews of the film were mixed , with the The Moving Picture World describing the film as a " heart story which will interest because it presents more or less unpleasant possibilities of this character . The acting is well done , and the film will prove popular with most audiences . " The New York Dramatic Mirror reviewer found the film to be interesting , but stated that it " would have seemed more natural had [ Jack Harkaway 's mother ] not recognized [ Jack ] as her son until the appearance of [ his foster father ] , into whose care she had given her child . If two of the scenes had been broken it might have been more consistent . The men came up to plot their robbery too soon after Jack 's hiding . They also appeared in the house immediately after the plan laid to capture them . They surely would have seen the light and would not have ventured so soon . " 
 A surviving , but very deteriorated 35 mm nitrate print of the film was known to exist in 1988 . It was described as being in various states of decomposition throughout the entire reel , including severe shrinkage and brittle or torn perforations . This print is 925 feet long and was held by John E. Allen , Inc. though it is not specifically known if it transferred to the Library of Congress in 1997 . 
 = Hurricane Linda ( 2015 ) = 
 Hurricane Linda was a strong tropical cyclone in September 2015 that resulted in heavy rains across portions of Mexico and the Southwestern United States . The seventeenth named storm and eleventh hurricane of the season , Linda developed southwest of Mexico from a low pressure area on September 5 . Under warm sea surface temperatures and low to moderate wind shear , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Linda by September 6 and a hurricane by the next day . A well @-@ defined eye soon formed within the storm 's central dense overcast and Linda reached its peak intensity as a 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) Category 3 major hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale on September 8 . Thereafter , the storm moved into a stable environment and an area of lower sea surface temperatures , causing rapid weakening . Convective activity dissipated and Linda degenerated into a remnant low on September 10 . The lingering system persisted southwest of Baja California , ultimately opening up into a trough on September 14 . 
 In Mexico , the storm brought rainfall to nine states , causing flooding , especially in Oaxaca , Sinaloa , and Zacatecas . In Oaxaca , mudslides resulted in the closure of multiple highways and damage to over a dozen homes . Flooding in <unk> affected approximately 1 @,@ 000 homes with hundreds damaged , prompting dozens of families to evacuate . Several small communities were temporarily isolated after flood waters covered bridges . Localized flooding in Zacatecas damaged crops and 25 dwellings ; damage reached approximately 500 @,@ 000 pesos ( US $ 30 @,@ 000 ) . Although Linda did not directly impact land , moisture from the storm was pulled northeast into the Southwestern United States and enhanced the local monsoon . Los Angeles received 2 @.@ 39 in ( 61 mm ) of rain , contributing to the city 's second wettest September on record . One fatality in the state occurred from a drowning at San Bernardino National Forest . Utah was impacted by major flash flooding incidents — with rainfall amounting to 1 @-@ in @-@ 100 year levels — which left 21 deaths in the state : 14 near Hildale and 7 in Zion National Park . Damage across the Southwest amounted to US $ 3 @.@ 7 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on August 21 . By four days later , the system spawned Tropical Storm Erika over the eastern Atlantic . The southern portion of the wave persisted westward and moved over Central America on August 30 . Shower and thunderstorm activity associated with the wave began to increase over the next few days as it crossed the Gulf of Tehuantepec . Convection was enhanced further on September 2 as a Kelvin wave interacted with the tropical wave , eventually resulting in the development of a broad low pressure area . Early the following day , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) issued a Tropical Weather Outlook ( TWO ) for a cluster of clouds that showed signs of organizing into a tropical system . Wind shear was forecast to become more conducive for tropical cyclogenesis over the next few days . Although the shear remained moderately strong , the low acquired a well @-@ defined center of circulation by September 4 . Following further organization of deep convection , Tropical Depression Fifteen @-@ E developed at 18 : 00 UTC on September 5 while located about 490 mi ( 790 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , Colima . 
 Under the influence of a strong mid @-@ level ridge over northern Mexico , the depression moved northwestward into an area of moderate northeasterly vertical wind shear and warm sea surface temperatures . By 06 : 00 UTC on September 6 , the system strengthened into Tropical Storm Linda . Due to a decrease in wind shear , Linda began to undergo rapid deepening shortly thereafter . Between that day and early on September 7 , the storm increased in convective banding and developed central dense overcast ; satellite imagery also indicated that an eye was forming around that time . At 06 : 00 UTC on September 7 , Linda intensified into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Just six hours later , the cyclone reached Category 2 status . Due to a slight increase in wind shear and possibly an intrusion from dry air , Linda temporarily remained steady in intensity while passing between Socorro Island and Clarion Island . Operationally , the NHC briefly downgraded Linda to a Category 1 hurricane at 0 : 300 UTC on September 8 , though post @-@ analysis concludes that the storm remained a Category 2 . 
 Strengthening resumed by early on September 8 , when the system became a Category 3 hurricane , which coincided with satellite imagery indicating a banded eye feature . Around 12 : 00 UTC , Linda attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 950 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . Early on September 9 , the hurricane rapidly weakened after entering a region of slightly colder sea surface temperatures , falling to Category 2 by 06 : 00 UTC and to Category 1 intensity only six hours later . Around that time , Linda began encountering a dry , stable air mass and ocean temperature under 26 @.@ 0 ° C ( 78 @.@ 8 ° F ) . At 18 : 00 UTC on September 9 , the cyclone weakened to a tropical storm while also losing convective coverage . After the remaining showers and thunderstorms detached from the low @-@ level circulation , Linda transitioned into a post @-@ tropical cyclone around 12 : 00 UTC the following day while situated about 260 mi ( 415 km ) west @-@ southwest of Punta Eugenia , Baja California Sur . The remnants weakened over the next few days , until degenerating into a trough while still well west of Baja California on September 14 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 The outer bands of Linda brought rainfall to nine states across Mexico : Baja California , Baja California Sur , Colima , Jalisco , Nayarit , Sinaloa , Sonora and Zacatecas . Within Sinaloa , flooding affected the municipalities of Angostura , Culiacán , Mazatlán , Rosario , and Salvador Alvarado . Rainfall accumulations peaked at 7 @.@ 4 in ( 187 mm ) in Rosario . Flooding affected approximately 1 @,@ 000 homes in the state with hundreds damaged , prompting dozens of families to evacuate . Several small communities were temporarily isolated as flood waters covered bridges . Civil officials declared an emergency for the municipalities of Rosario and Salvador Alvarado in the wake of Linda . Scattered power outages occurred in Mazatlán city . Scattered thunderstorms in Oaxaca resulted in multiple landslides and flooding , prompting closure of several highways and damaging more than a dozen homes . Localized flooding attributed to Linda in Zacatecas damaged crops and 25 homes ; losses reached 500 @,@ 000 pesos ( US $ 30 @,@ 000 ) . Waves of 6 @.@ 6 to 9 @.@ 8 ft ( 2 to 3 m ) likely impacted coastal areas of Baja California , Baja California Sur , Sinaloa , and Sonora . Additionally , Linda passed roughly 100 mi ( 155 km ) west of Socorro Island on September 7 ; sustained winds reached 28 mph ( 45 km / h ) with gusts to 41 mph ( 66 km / h ) . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 = = = = California = = = = 
 <unk> moisture pulled north from Linda to produce thunderstorms across portions of California starting on September 10 . Flooding and rock slides prompted numerous road closures . One person drowned in the San Bernardino National Forest . Moisture from the hurricane 's remnants partially contributed to an enhanced monsoon across the Southwestern United States , combining with a seasonable upper @-@ level trough to bring above @-@ average rainfall to many areas . Strong winds from a thunderstorm on September 14 knocked five rail cars off their track , costing insurance companies $ 1 @.@ 4 million . On September 15 , Los Angeles received 2 @.@ 39 in ( 61 mm ) of rain , contributing to the city 's second @-@ wettest September day since records began in 1877 ― second only to September 25 , 1939 . Water penetration along State Route 91 in the city resulted in a 50 yd ( 46 m ) crack in the road . Rainfall of 1 to 2 in ( 25 to 51 mm ) was common around San Diego ; an underground parking lot in the Midway neighborhood was flooded . Flood @-@ related losses throughout the state reached $ 875 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = Utah = = = = 
 After degenerating into a remnant low on September 10 , moisture associated with the former tropical cyclone spread across the Southwestern United States . Aided by above @-@ average water vapor levels and the aforementioned upper @-@ level trough , scattered thunderstorms developed across the region on September 14 . Two major incidents of flash flooding resulted in 21 deaths in Utah , the deadliest flash flood event in the state 's history . The previous deadliest event was on August 13 , 1923 , when seven people died near Farmington . Flash floods occur annually in Washington County , Utah , with an average of one to two flash flood days per year since 1950 . 
 During the afternoon of September 14 , two successive thunderstorms produced more than 2 in ( 51 mm ) of rain — a 1 @-@ in @-@ 100 year event — near Hildale , Utah in Washington County . The National Weather Service issued a strongly worded flash flood warning at 20 : 22 UTC ( 2 : 22 p.m. MDT ) for the area , stating " Move to higher ground now . Act quickly to protect your life " . The first storm resulted in a 3 @.@ 42 ft ( 1 @.@ 04 m ) rise along the Short Creek , as measured by a stream gauge in Colorado City , Arizona , in 19 minutes around 21 : 18 UTC ( 3 : 18 p.m. MDT ) , with residents gathering nearby to observe . Between 22 : 48 and 23 : 05 UTC ( 4 : 48 and 5 : 05 p.m. MDT ) , a second surge of water swept down the creek with the Colorado City gauge reporting a rise of 5 @.@ 36 ft ( 1 @.@ 63 m ) ; the gauge stopped reporting at 23 : 47 UTC ( 5 : 47 p.m. MDT ) . The second flood swept away two vehicles carrying a collective 16 people while they were observing the rising waters . Thirteen people were killed and three children were rescued . Six bodies were recovered in Utah and two in Arizona , 2 @.@ 5 mi ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) downstream . Other bodies were found up to 7 mi ( 11 km ) downstream . 
 Alongside the fatalities , the floods left several blocks of the town without power . Water lines , bridges , and other infrastructure sustained varying degrees of damage . Several homes sustained water and mud damage . Total losses in Washington County reached $ 750 @,@ 000 . Flooding continued downstream into Arizona , rendering multiple roads impassible and damaging bridges around Colorado City ; losses in the city amounted to $ 500 @,@ 000 . Around 150 federal personnel and 500 community volunteers , including 70 – 80 percent of Hildale 's residents , conducted search and rescue in the immediate aftermath . Twenty @-@ four members of Utah Task Force One and twenty @-@ six personnel from the Utah National Guard were dispatched to Hildale to assist in search and rescue along Short Creek . Dangerous conditions along the creek slowed the operation . By September 17 , 300 personnel were searching for a 6 @-@ year @-@ old boy who was still missing . Ultimately , thousands of people from more than 60 agencies took part in the search for the final victim ; efforts were called off by September 29 and the missing boy was presumed dead . Local residents continued periodic searches for the boy through December . The Utah Department of Public Safety granted the Public Safety Award to Washington County Sheriff Cory <unk> , Hildale Mayor Philip Barlow and , Hildale Marshall ’ s Office Chief Jeremiah <unk> for their response coordination . Following the floods , the Washington County allocated $ 1 @.@ 6 million through the Natural Resources Conservation Service for repair costs and mitigation efforts for future floods . Of this total , $ 1 @.@ 5 million went to Hildale . The United States Department of Agriculture also provided $ 100 @,@ 000 through the Emergency Watershed Protection program . 
 The second flash flood incident occurred in Keyhole Canyon at Zion National Park after 0 @.@ 63 in ( 16 mm ) of rain fell between 22 : 30 and 23 : 30 UTC ( 4 : 30 and 5 : 30 p.m. MDT ) . For the two @-@ day period ending September 14 , the park saw 1 @.@ 89 in ( 48 mm ) of rain . The earlier flash flood warning prompted officials at the park to close all canyons by 21 : 30 UTC ( 3 : 30 p.m. MDT ) . A group of seven <unk> entered Keyhole Canyon between 21 : 30 and 22 : 30 UTC ( 3 : 30 and 4 : 30 p.m. MDT ) . Flow along the Virgin River dramatically increased following the rains , with the river 's North Fork experiencing a rise from 55 ft3 ( 1 @.@ 5 m3 ) per second to 2 @,@ 630 ft3 ( 74 @.@ 5 m3 ) per second in just 15 minutes . All seven people were swept away by the ensuing flood and died . Rescue operations were launched that evening ; however , dangerous conditions in the canyons resulted in the search being held off until the following day . The bodies of the <unk> were discovered miles apart along Clear Creek and Pine Creek . 
 Elsewhere , a man from Hurricane , Utah , 15 mi ( 24 km ) west of Hildale , died on September 14 after being swept away by floods while traveling remote dirt roads . His vehicle was discovered in Mohave County , Arizona on September 17 about 7 mi ( 11 km ) south of the Arizona – Utah border and his body was found a further 6 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) away the following day . In Utah County , Utah , the rain resulted in traffic accidents and mudslides , including several at American Fork Canyon that shut down parts of State Route 92 and State Route 144 . Scattered thunderstorms caused sporadic damage across Arizona , leaving $ 205 @,@ 000 in losses . 
 = Georg Forster = 
 Johann Georg Adam Forster ( German pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; November 27 , 1754 – January 10 , 1794 ) was a naturalist , ethnologist , travel writer , journalist , and revolutionary . At an early age , he accompanied his father , Johann Reinhold Forster , on several scientific expeditions , including James Cook 's second voyage to the Pacific . His report of that journey , A Voyage Round the World , contributed significantly to the ethnology of the people of Polynesia and remains a respected work . As a result of the report , Forster was admitted to the Royal Society at the early age of twenty @-@ two and came to be considered one of the founders of modern scientific travel literature . 
 After returning to continental Europe , Forster turned toward academia . He traveled to Paris to seek out a discussion with the American revolutionary Benjamin Franklin in 1777 . He taught natural history at the Collegium Carolinum in the <unk> , Kassel ( 1778 – 84 ) , and later at the Academy of Vilna ( Vilnius University ) ( 1784 – 87 ) . In 1788 , he became head librarian at the University of Mainz . Most of his scientific work during this time consisted of essays on botany and ethnology , but he also prefaced and translated many books about travel and exploration , including a German translation of Cook 's diaries . 
 Forster was a central figure of the Enlightenment in Germany , and corresponded with most of its adherents , including his close friend Georg Christoph Lichtenberg . His ideas and personality influenced Alexander von Humboldt , one of the great scientists of the 19th century . When the French took control of Mainz in 1792 , Forster became one of the founders of the city 's Jacobin Club and went on to play a leading role in the Mainz Republic , the earliest republican state in Germany . During July 1793 and while he was in Paris as a delegate of the young Mainz Republic , Prussian and Austrian coalition forces regained control of the city and Forster was declared an outlaw . Unable to return to Germany and separated from his friends and family , he died in Paris of illness in early 1794 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Georg Forster was born in the small village of <unk> ( <unk> Dwór ) near Danzig ( Gdańsk ) , in the province of Royal Prussia , in the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth . He was the oldest of seven surviving children of Johann Reinhold Forster and Justina Elisabeth ( née Nicolai ) . His father was a naturalist , scientist and Reformed pastor . In 1765 , the Russian empress Catherine II commissioned the pastor to travel through Russia on a research journey and investigate the situation of a German colony on the Volga River . Georg , then ten years old , joined him . On the journey , which reached the Kalmyk steppe on the lower Volga , they discovered several new species , and the young Forster learned how to conduct scientific research and practice cartography . He also became fluent in Russian . 
 The report of the journey , which included sharp criticism of the governor of Saratov , was not well received at court . The Forsters claimed they had not received fair payment for their work and had to move house . They chose to settle in England in 1766 . The father took up teaching at the Dissenter 's Academy in Warrington and also translation work . At the age of only thirteen , the young Forster published his first book : an English translation of Lomonosov 's history of Russia , which was well received in scientific circles . 
 = = Around the world with Captain Cook = = 
 In 1772 , Forster 's father became a member of the Royal Society . This and the withdrawal of Joseph Banks resulted in his invitation by the British admiralty to join James Cook 's second expedition to the Pacific ( 1772 – 75 ) . Georg Forster joined his father in the expedition again and was appointed as a draughtsman to his father . Johann Reinhold Forster 's task was to work on a scientific report of the journey 's discoveries that was to be published after their return . 
 They embarked HMS Resolution on July 13 , 1772 , in Plymouth . The ship 's route led first to the South Atlantic , then through the Indian Ocean and the Southern Ocean to the islands of Polynesia and finally around Cape Horn back to England , returning on July 30 , 1775 . During the three @-@ year journey , the explorers visited New Zealand , the Tonga islands , New Caledonia , Tahiti , the Marquesas Islands and Easter Island . They went further south than anybody before them , almost discovering Antarctica . The journey conclusively disproved the Terra Australis Incognita theory , which claimed there was a big , habitable continent in the South . 
 Supervised by his father , Georg Forster first undertook studies of the zoology and <unk> of the southern seas , mostly by drawing animals and plants . However , Georg also pursued his own interests , which led to completely independent explorations in comparative geography and ethnology . He quickly learned the languages of the Polynesian islands . His reports on the people of Polynesia are well regarded today , as they describe the inhabitants of the southern islands with empathy , sympathy and largely without Western or Christian bias . 
 Unlike Louis Antoine de Bougainville , whose reports from a journey to Tahiti a few years earlier had initiated uncritical noble savage romanticism , Forster developed a sophisticated picture of the societies of the South Pacific islands . He described various social structures and religions that he encountered on the Society Islands , Easter Island and in Tonga and New Zealand , and ascribed this diversity to the difference in living conditions of these people . At the same time , he also observed that the languages of these fairly widely scattered islands were similar . About the inhabitants of the Nomuka islands ( in the Ha 'apai island group of present @-@ day Tonga ) , he wrote that their languages , vehicles , weapons , furniture , clothes , tattoos , style of beard , in short all of their being matched perfectly with what he had already seen while studying tribes on Tongatapu . However , he wrote , " we could not observe any subordination among them , though this had strongly characterised the natives of Tonga @-@ <unk> , who seemed to descend even to servility in their obeisance to the king . " 
 The journey was rich in scientific results . However , the relationship between the Forsters and Cook and his officers was often problematic , due to the elder Forster 's fractious temperament as well as Cook 's refusal to allow more time for botanical and other scientific observation . Cook refused scientists on his third journey after his experiences with the Forsters . 
 = = Founder of modern travel literature = = 
 These conflicts continued after the journey with the problem of who should write the official account of the travels . Lord Sandwich , although willing to pay the promised money , was irritated with Johann Reinhold Forster 's opening chapter and tried to have it edited . However , Forster did not want to have his writing corrected " like a theme of a School @-@ boy " , and stubbornly refused any compromise . As a result , the official account was written by Cook , and the Forsters were deprived of the right to compile the account and did not obtain payment for their work . During the negotiations , the younger Forster decided to release an unofficial account of their travels . In 1777 , his book A Voyage Round the World in His Britannic Majesty 's Sloop Resolution , Commanded by Capt. James Cook , during the Years , 1772 , 3 , 4 , and 5 was published . This report was the first account of Cook 's second voyage ( it appeared six weeks before the official publication ) and was intended for the general public . The English version and his own translation into German ( published 1778 – 80 ) earned the young author real fame . The poet Christoph Martin Wieland praised the book as the most important one of his time , and even today it remains one of the most important journey descriptions ever written . The book also had a significant impact on German literature , culture and science , influencing such scientists as Alexander von Humboldt and it inspired many ethnologists of later times . 
 Forster wrote well @-@ polished German prose , which was not only scientifically accurate and objective , but also exciting and easy to read . This differed from conventional travel literature of the time , insofar as it presented more than a mere collection of data – it also demonstrated coherent , colourful and reliable ethnographical facts that resulted from detailed and sympathetic observation . He often interrupted the description to enrich it with philosophical remarks about his observations . His main focus was always on the people he encountered : their behavior , customs , habits , religions and forms of social organization . In A Voyage Round the World he even presented the songs sung by the people of Polynesia , complete with lyrics and notation . The book is one of the most important sources concerning the societies of the Southern Pacific from the times before European influence had become significant . 
 Both Forsters also published descriptions of their South Pacific travels in the Berlin @-@ based Magazin von <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Magazine of strange new travel accounts " ) , and Georg published a translation of " A Voyage to the South Sea , by Lieutenant William Bligh , London 1792 " in 1791 – 93 . 
 = = Forster at universities = = 
 The publication of A Voyage Round the World brought Forster scientific recognition all over Europe . The respectable Royal Society made him a member on January 9 , 1777 , though he was not even 23 years old . He was granted similar titles from academies ranging from Berlin to Madrid . These appointments , however , were unpaid . 
 In 1778 , he went to Germany to take a teaching position as a Natural History professor at the Collegium Carolinum in Kassel , where he met Therese Heyne , the daughter of classicist Christian Gottlob Heyne . She later became one of the first independent female writers in Germany . They married in 1785 ( which was after he left Kassel ) and had three children , but their marriage was not happy . From his time in Kassel on , Forster actively corresponded with important figures of the Enlightenment , including Lessing , Herder , Wieland and Goethe . He also initiated cooperation between the Carolinum in Kassel and the University of Göttingen where his friend Georg Christoph Lichtenberg worked . Together , they founded and published the scientific and literary journal <unk> Magazin der Wissenschaften und <unk> . Forster 's closest friend , Samuel Thomas von <unk> , arrived in Kassel shortly after Forster , and both were soon involved with the Rosicrucians in Kassel . 
 However , by 1783 Forster saw that his involvement with the Rosicrucians not only led him away from real science , but also deeper into debt ( it is said he was not good at money ) ; for these reasons Forster was happy to accept a proposal by the Polish Komisja Edukacji Narodowej ( Commission of National Education ) and became Chair of Natural History at Vilnius University in 1784 . Initially , he was accepted well in Vilnius , but he felt more and more isolated with time . Most of his contacts were still with scientists in Germany ; especially notable is his dispute with Immanuel Kant about the definition of race . In 1785 , Forster traveled to Halle where he submitted his thesis on the plants of the South Pacific for a doctorate in medicine . Back in Vilnius , Forster 's ambitions to build a real natural history scientific center could not get appropriate financial support from the Polish authorities . Moreover , his famous speech on natural history in 1785 went almost unnoticed and was not printed until 1843 . These events led to high tensions between him and the local community . Eventually , he broke the contract six years short of its completion as Catherine II of Russia had offered him a place on a journey around the world ( the <unk> expedition ) for a high honorarium and a position as a professor in Saint Petersburg . This resulted in a conflict between Forster and the influential Polish scientist Jędrzej Śniadecki . However , the Russian proposal was withdrawn and Forster left Vilnius . He then settled in Mainz , where he became head librarian of the University of Mainz , a position held previously by his friend Johannes von Müller , who made sure Forster would succeed him when Müller moved to the administration of Elector Friedrich Karl Josef von <unk> . 
 Forster regularly published essays on contemporary explorations and continued to be a very prolific translator ; for instance , he wrote about Cook 's third journey to the South Pacific , and about the Bounty expedition , as well as translating Cook 's and Bligh 's diaries from these journeys into German . From his London years , Forster was in contact with Sir Joseph Banks , the initiator of the Bounty expedition and a participant in Cook 's first journey . While at the University of Vilnius he wrote the article " <unk> und die <unk> Colonie in Botany @-@ Bay " , published in the <unk> <unk> Taschenbuch ( Berlin , December 1786 ) , an essay on the future prospects of the English colony founded in New South Wales in 1788 . 
 Another interest of his was <unk> – one of the main goals of his failed expedition to be financed by Catherine II had been to reach India . He translated the Sanskrit play Shakuntala using a Latin version provided by Sir William Jones ; this strongly influenced Herder and triggered German interest in the culture of India . 
 = = Views from the Lower Rhine = = 
 In the second quarter of 1790 , Forster and the young Alexander von Humboldt started from Mainz on a long journey through the Southern Netherlands , the United Provinces , and England , eventually finishing in Paris . The impressions from the journey were described in a three volume publication <unk> vom <unk> , von Brabant , Flandern , Holland , England und <unk> im April , Mai und Juni 1790 ( Views of the Lower Rhine , from Brabant , Flanders , Holland , England , and France in April , May and June 1790 ) , published 1791 – 94 . Goethe said about the book : " One wants , after one has finished reading , to start it over , and wishes to travel with such a good and knowledgeable observer . " The book includes comments on the history of art that were as influential for the discipline as A Voyage Round the world was for ethnology . Forster was , for example , one of the first writers who gave just treatment to the Gothic architecture of Cologne Cathedral , which was widely perceived as " barbarian " at that time . The book conformed well to the early Romantic intellectual movements in German @-@ speaking Europe . 
 Forster 's main interest , however , was again focused on the social behavior of people , as 15 years earlier in the Pacific . The national uprisings in Flanders and Brabant and the revolution in France sparked his curiosity . The journey through these regions , together with the Netherlands and England , where citizens ' freedoms were equally well developed , in the end helped him to resolve his own political opinions . From that time on he was to be a confident opponent of the ancien régime . With other German scholars , he welcomed the outbreak of the revolution as a clear consequence of the Enlightenment . As early as July 30 , 1789 , shortly after he heard about the Storming of the Bastille , he wrote to his father @-@ in @-@ law , philologist Christian Gottlob Heyne , that it was beautiful to see what philosophy had nurtured in people 's minds and then had realized in the state . To educate people about their rights in this way , he wrote , was after all the surest way ; the rest would then result as if by itself . 
 = = Life as a revolutionary = = 
 = = = Foundation of the Mainz Republic = = = 
 The French revolutionary army under General Custine gained control over Mainz on October 21 , 1792 . Two days later , Forster joined others in establishing a Jacobin Club called " Freunde der Freiheit und <unk> " ( " Friends of Freedom and Equality " ) in the Electoral Palace . From early 1793 he was actively involved in organizing the Mainz Republic . This first republic located on German soil was constituted on the principles of democracy , and encompassed areas on the left bank of the Rhine between Landau and Bingen . Forster became vice @-@ president of the republic 's temporary administration and a candidate in the elections to the local parliament , the <unk> @-@ Deutscher <unk> ( Rhenish @-@ German National Convention ) . From January to March 1793 , he was an editor of Die neue <unk> Zeitung oder Der <unk> ( The new Mainz newspaper or The People 's Friend ) . In his first article he wrote : 
 Die <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> dieser <unk> , wo die <unk> <unk> ward . 
 The freedom of the press finally reigns within these walls where the printing press was invented . 
 This freedom did not last long , though . The Mainz Republic existed only until the retreat of the French troops in July 1793 after the Siege of Mainz . 
 Forster was not present in Mainz during the siege . As representatives of the Mainz National Convention , he and Adam Lux had been sent to Paris to apply for Mainz – which was unable to exist as an independent state – to become a part of the French Republic . The application was accepted , but had no effect , since Mainz was conquered by Prussian and Austrian troops , and the old order was restored . Forster lost his library and collections and decided to remain in Paris . 
 = = = Death in revolutionary Paris = = = 
 Based on a decree by Emperor Francis II inflicting punishments on German subjects who collaborated with the French revolutionary government , Forster was declared an outlaw and placed under the Imperial ban ; a prize of 100 ducats was set on his head and he could not return to Germany . Devoid of all means of making a living and without his wife , who had stayed in Mainz with their children and her later husband Ludwig Ferdinand Huber , he remained in Paris . At this point the revolution in Paris had entered the Reign of Terror introduced by the Committee of Public Safety under the rule of Maximilien Robespierre . Forster had the opportunity to experience the difference between the promises of the revolution of happiness for all and its cruel practice . In contrast to many other German supporters of the revolution , like for instance Friedrich Schiller , Forster did not turn back from his revolutionary ideals under the pressure of the terror . He viewed the events in France as a force of nature that could not be slowed and that had to release its own energies to avoid being even more destructive . 
 Before the reign of terror reached its climax , Forster died after a rheumatic illness in his small attic apartment at Rue des Moulins in Paris in January 1794 , at the age of thirty @-@ nine . At the time , he was making plans to visit India . 
 = = Views on nations and their culture = = 
 Forster had partial Scottish roots and was born in Polish Royal Prussia , and therefore was by birth a Polish subject . He worked in Russia , England , Poland and in several German countries of his time . Finally , he finished his life in France . He worked in different milieus and traveled a lot from his youth on . It was his view that this , together with his scientific upbringing based on the principles of the Enlightenment , gave him a wide perspective on different ethnic and national communities : 
 All peoples of the earth have equal claims to my good will ... and my praise and blame are independent of national prejudice . 
 In his opinion all human beings have the same abilities with regard to reason , feelings and imagination , but these basic ingredients are used in different ways and in different environments , which gives rise to different cultures and civilizations . According to him it is obvious that the culture on Tierra del Fuego is at a lower level of development than European culture , but he also admits that the conditions of life there are much more difficult and this gives people very little chance to develop a higher culture . Based on these opinions he was classified as one of the main examples of 18th @-@ century German cosmopolitanism . 
 In contrast to the attitude expressed in these writings and to his Enlightenment background , he used insulting terms expressing prejudice against Poles in his private letters during his stay in Vilnius and in a diary from the journey through Poland , but he never published any manifestation of this attitude . These insults only became known after his death , when his private correspondence and diaries were released to the public . Since Forster 's published descriptions of other nations were seen as impartial scientific observations , Forster 's disparaging description of Poland in his letters and diaries was often taken at face value in Imperial and Nazi Germany , where it was used as a means of science @-@ based support for a purported German superiority . The spreading of the " Polnische <unk> " ( Polish economy ) stereotype is most likely due to the influence of his letters . 
 Forster 's attitude brought him into conflict with the people of the different nations he encountered and made him welcome nowhere , as he was too revolutionary and <unk> for Germans , proud and opposing in his dealings with Englishmen , too unconcerned about Polish science for Poles , and too insignificant politically and ignored while in France . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Forster 's death , his works were mostly forgotten , except in professional circles . This was partly due to his involvement in the French revolution . However , his reception changed with the politics of the times , with different periods focusing on different parts of his work . In the period of rising nationalism after the Napoleonic era he was regarded in Germany as a " traitor to his country " , overshadowing his work as an author and scientist . This attitude rose even though the philosopher Karl Wilhelm Friedrich Schlegel wrote about Forster at the beginning of the 19th century : 
 Among all those authors of prose who are justified in laying claim to a place in the ranks of German classics , none breathes the spirit of free progress more than Georg Forster . 
 Some interest in Forster 's life and revolutionary actions was revived in the context of the liberal sentiments leading up to the 1848 revolution . But he was largely forgotten in the Germany of Wilhelm II and more so in the Third Reich , where interest in Forster was limited to his stance on Poland from his private letters . Interest in Forster resumed in the 1960s in East Germany , where he was interpreted as a champion of class struggle . The GDR research station in Antarctica that was opened on October 25 , 1987 , was named after him . In West Germany , the search for democratic traditions in German history also lead to a more diversified picture of him in the 1970s . The Alexander von Humboldt foundation named a scholarship program for foreign scholars from developing countries after him . His reputation as one of the first and most outstanding German ethnologists is indisputable , and his works are seen as crucial in the development of ethnology in Germany into a separate branch of science . 
 The ethnographical items collected by Georg and Johann Reinhold Forster are now presented as the Cook @-@ Forster @-@ Sammlung ( Cook – Forster Collection ) in the Sammlung für <unk> anthropological collection in Göttingen . Another collection of items collected by the Forsters is on display at the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford . 
 = = Works = = 
 A Voyage Round the World in His Britannic Majesty 's Sloop Resolution , Commanded by Capt. James Cook , during the Years , 1772 , 3 , 4 , and 5 ( 1777 ) ( preview ) 
 De Plantis <unk> Insularum <unk> Australis <unk> Botanica ( 1786 ) available online at Project Gutenberg 
 <unk> Insularum Australium Prodromus ( 1786 ) available online at Project Gutenberg 
 Essays on moral and natural geography , natural history and philosophy ( 1789 – 97 ) 
 Views of the Lower Rhine , Brabant , Flanders ( three volumes , 1791 – 94 ) 
 Georg Forsters Werke , Sämtliche Schriften , Tagebücher , Briefe , Deutsche Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin , G. Steiner et al . Berlin : Akademie 1958 
 Werke in vier <unk> , Gerhard Steiner ( editor ) . Leipzig : Insel 1965 . ASIN : <unk> 
 Reise um die Welt , Gerhard Steiner ( editor ) . Frankfurt am Main : Insel , 1983 . ISBN 3 @-@ 458 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 <unk> vom <unk> , Gerhard Steiner ( editor ) . Frankfurt am Main : Insel , 1989 . ISBN 3 @-@ 458 @-@ <unk> @-@ X 
 Georg Forster , Briefe an Ernst Friedrich Hector <unk> . Neu <unk> <unk> aus der Gold- und <unk> , Michael Ewert , Hermann <unk> ( editors ) . Georg @-@ Forster @-@ Studien <unk> 4 . Kassel : Kassel University Press 2009 . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 485 @-@ 1 
 = Gavin Volure = 
 " Gavin Volure " is the fourth episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 40th overall episode of the series . It was written by co @-@ executive producer John Riggi and directed by Gail Mancuso . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on November 20 , 2008 . Guest stars in this episode include John McEnroe , Steve Martin , and Bobb 'e J. Thompson . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) meets one of her boss 's , Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) , friends , Gavin Volure ( Martin ) , when the pair attend a dinner party . Gavin , after offering Jack a secret business opportunity , becomes enamored of Liz . Jack encourages the relationship until he discovers Gavin is not as successful as he claimed . Also , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) invests his money in Gavin 's business . Meanwhile , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) fears that his sons are trying to kill him . 
 " Gavin Volure " received generally good reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 7 @.@ 1 million households during its original broadcast . For his performance in this episode , Martin received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in the category for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) brings Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) along to a dinner party hosted by his friend Gavin Volure ( Steve Martin ) . Gavin becomes intrigued by Liz and invites her to spend the weekend with him , which she accepts . She wonders how the relationship between them will work , as he is agoraphobic . Gavin explains his daily routines to Liz , and also discloses that due to his phobias , he cannot be intimate with women . Liz starts to think that maybe a relationship with Gavin could work . As Liz gets ready to leave , Gavin admits to her that he is not agoraphobic , and that he is under house arrest for arson , fraud , embezzlement , and racketeering . This shocks Liz , and when she returns to New York , she tells Jack about it . Jack feels awful for investing NBC page Kenneth Parcell 's ( Jack McBrayer ) money with Gavin , after Gavin told him he was forming a new company and interested Jack to be part of it . Later , Gavin escapes from house arrest and shows up at the 30 Rock studios . There , he tells Liz that he was on his way to the Canadian border but came back to bring her with him . After Liz refuses to go with him , and not wanting to go to prison , Gavin climbs to the top of the TGS with Tracy Jordan set and threatens to jump . Jack tries to talk Gavin out of jumping , distracting him in the process , resulting in Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) tackling Gavin down . 
 Meanwhile , Tracy begins to question the reason why his sons want to spend so much time with him . One day , Tracy sees a special about Lyle and Erik Menendez — the two brothers who became famous for killing their parents — which leads him to believe that his sons are plotting to kill him . As a result , Tracy buys a life @-@ Japanese sex doll that looks like him to use as a decoy to fool them . Eventually , Tracy realizes that he overreacted with his sons but warns his son , Tracy Jr . ( Bobb 'e J. Thompson ) , that if he were to die , that he and his brother will face jail time . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Gavin Volure " was written by co @-@ executive producer John Riggi , making it his sixth writing credit after " Blind Date " , " The Head and the Hair " , " Corporate Crush " , " Cougars " , and " Succession " . The episode was directed by Gail Mancuso , making it her fifth for the series . " Gavin Volure " originally aired on November 20 , 2008 , on NBC in the United States as the fourth episode of the show 's third season and the 40th overall episode of the series . 
 In September 2008 , it was announced that comedian actor Steve Martin would guest star on 30 Rock . He played the titular character of this episode . Martin and series creator Tina Fey starred in the 2008 comedy movie Baby Mama . In the episode , stock footage of the Arkansas Governor 's Mansion was used for exterior shots of the home of Gavin Volure . This episode was actor Bobb 'e J. Thompson 's first appearance as Tracy Jordan 's son , Tracy Jr . , on the show . He later guest starred in the episodes " The Bubble " and " Sun Tea " . Former professional tennis player John McEnroe played himself in this episode as he is a guest at Gavin 's dinner party , and represents art collecting and yelling . McEnroe first appeared in the January 18 , 2007 , 30 Rock episode " The Head and the Hair " as the host of a game show . 
 Two filmed scenes from " Gavin Volure " were cut out from the airing . Instead , the scenes were featured on 30 Rock 's season three DVD as part of the deleted scenes in the Bonus feature . In the first scene , Jack Donaghy , in a voice over , talks about the Edison Terrace — located in the rooftop gardens of the General Electric Building . " It 's a private rooftop garden reserved for the CEOs of this company . The inner temple of American business . The only outsider ever admitted is a mute cleaning lady who has never laid with a man . " The scene features six men , including fictional CEO of General Electric on the show , Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) . In the second scene , Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) intern ( Liz Holtan ) is excited to work with her and tells her that she wants to be just like her . Jenna believes the intern wants to become an actress , prompting her to pull the intern 's earring off . The latter scene was included in the October 15 , 2009 , 30 Rock episode " Season 4 " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " Gavin Volure " was watched by 7 @.@ 1 million households in its original American broadcast . It earned a 3 @.@ 4 rating / 8 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 4 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This episode ranked number one among the broadcast networks in men aged 18 – 34 , tied with Grey 's Anatomy 's " In the Midnight Hour " , and number two in adults 18 – 34 . However , this was a decrease from the previous episode , " The One with the Cast of Night Court " , which was watched by 7 @.@ 5 million American viewers . Steve Martin received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards for his work in this episode , but lost it to singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake for hosting Saturday Night Live . 
 Since airing , " Gavin Volure " has received good reception amongst television critics . TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich praised " Gavin Volure " , citing that it was a " funny episode " and said that Martin was a " pretty good fit on 30 Rock . He plays the zany and off @-@ kilter so well . " IGN contributor Robert Canning said the episode was " funny " and as with Mitovich , believed that Martin was a " perfect fit for Gavin , playing him both as the suave sophisticate we first meet and the screwy , on @-@ the @-@ run Gavin that ends the episode . " Canning enjoyed Tracy 's plot and gave this episode an 8 @.@ 9 out of 10 rating . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad was complimentary towards Martin 's appearance , writing that he and season two guest stars Jerry Seinfeld and Carrie Fisher " belong in the 30 Rock world , and Martin is quietly funny as the agoraphobic ... rich ... friend of Jack 's who likes Liz " . Entertainment Weekly 's Jeff Labrecque commented that Tracy 's story was the " weaker subplot " , but was favorable to Tina Fey and Martin , opining they " speak the same language " , and he would not mind seeing the Gavin character back . The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin enjoyed Kenneth in the episode , citing that he was " hilarious " , and in regards to the episode itself , Rabin said that it " wasn 't one of the all @-@ time greats but it brought the funny at a rapid clip " . In conclusion , Rabin gave the episode a B + . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall for The Star @-@ Ledger noted that " Gavin Volure " was " one of the weakest 30 Rock episodes ever " . He explained that he was " flummoxed " that this episode featuring Alec Baldwin , Fey , and Martin " together only made me laugh once , and not at any of them . " 
 = Scream & Shout = 
 " Scream & Shout " is a song by American recording artists will.i.am and Britney Spears , taken from the former 's fourth studio album # willpower . It was released on November 20 , 2012 by Interscope Records as the second single from the album , and sent to mainstream radio in the United States on November 27 . The song was written by will.i.am , Jef Martens and Jean Baptiste and was produced by Martens under the alias Lazy Jay , with additional production by will.i.am. " Scream & Shout " is an upbeat dance @-@ pop song ; its lyrics are about having a good time on a night out . It interpolates a sample of the lyric " Britney , bitch " , which was used on Spears ' 2007 single " Gimme More " . 
 " Scream & Shout " received mixed reviews from music critics . Some critics described the song as a dark club track , but others criticized the use of Auto @-@ Tune on the vocals . The song was a commercial success worldwide , topping the charts in over 24 countries and reached the top ten in Australia , Sweden , and South Korea . In the United States , the song peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and became the first number one song of the newly established Dance / Electronic Songs chart . In the United Kingdom , " Scream & Shout " became will.i.am 's second consecutive number one single , Spears ' sixth number one and her first chart @-@ topper since " Everytime . " 
 An accompanying music video directed by Ben Mor was shot in October 2012 , and premiered in the U.S. during a live episode of The X Factor on November 28 . The theme of the music video is multiplicity , and critics complimented its futuristic setting . " Scream & Shout " also served as the theme song for a television commercial for Beats by Dr. Dre Color headphones . A remixed version of the song , featuring rappers Hit @-@ Boy , Waka Flocka Flame , Lil Wayne and Sean Combs , was uploaded to will.i.am 's official YouTube account on January 25 , 2013 , after it was leaked on the internet earlier the same day . A music video for this version was filmed in January 2013 and released on February 14 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 After Spears spent a year promoting her seventh studio album Femme Fatale ( 2011 ) , RCA Records executive vice president of promotions Joe <unk> said that Spears would take a year off from the music business to " be a mom and get married . " On April 2012 , E ! Online reported that Simon Cowell was negotiating with Spears for her to join the second US season of the music competition show The X Factor , reportedly offering her $ 15 million . On May 9 , 2012 , reports that Spears had contracted to judge the show appeared . On May 14 , 2012 , it was officially confirmed that Spears and pop singer Demi Lovato would join The X Factor as judges . On August 28 , 2012 , Spears confirmed that she was recording new material with will.i.am , and said on social network Twitter , " Can 't wait for y 'all to hear @ <unk> 's next single featuring me . " They had worked together the previous year on two tracks for Femme Fatale , one of which , called " Big Fat Bass " , was included on the album . The song , rumored to be named " Sexy Sexy " at the time , was going to be released on will.i.am 's album # willpower on October 15 , 2012 ; however , will.i.am changed the release date after several tracks from the album were leaked online . He said , " I ’ m trying to finish # willpower … & now because of all the leaks I have push the album back to make new songs … " 
 On October 12 , 2012 , Spears confirmed that the track would be called " Scream & Shout " . On November 17 , 2012 , the song was leaked in full online . When asked about how he felt about it being released earlier than expected , will.i.am said , " Well , that 's done . You can 't undo it . It 's out . It made it real . But once things go to the editing and coloring , it 's not in your control . " Spears used her official Facebook account to express her sadness about the early release of the song , but added , " I AM super excited that my fans seem to love it as much as will.i.am and I do . It hits radio <unk> and iTunes later in the week . " Billboard confirmed the release of " Scream & Shout " on U.S. radio station 102 @.@ 7 KIIS @-@ FM on November 19 at 12 : 00 pm Pacific Standard Time . The same day , the song had its United Kingdom radio premiere on Capital FM at 8 : 00 pm Greenwich Mean Time , and had a digital promotional release in Europe . The song was released for digital download worldwide the following day , and was officially sent to mainstream radio through Interscope Records on November 27 , 2012 @.@ will.i.am revealed the cover art for " Scream & Shout " on November 19 through his Facebook account . British singer Tulisa Contostavlos co @-@ wrote the original version of " Scream & Shout " with Jean Baptiste and recorded it under the title " I Don 't Give A Fuck " . The track was intended for Contostavlos ' debut album The Female Boss ( 2012 ) . However , the producer of the track , Lazy Jay , did not want Contostavlos to have the song and gave it to will.i.am , who re @-@ wrote the song with Spears in mind . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Scream & Shout " is an upbeat dance @-@ pop track written in the key of D minor and has a moderate tempo of 130 beats per minute . It contains lyrics about having an enjoyable night out . The track begins with Spears rapping the first eight lines with Nicki Minaj @-@ esque vocals . As the song proceeds to its chorus , will.i.am joins Spears on vocals . " Scream & Shout " interpolates a sample of the lyric " It 's Britney , bitch " , which was first used on Spears ' 2007 single " Gimme More " , and is used before every breakdown on the track . 
 Spin writer Marc Hogan wrote that " Scream & Shout " has similarities to Azealia Banks ' song " 212 " ( 2011 ) , and compared " Scream & Shout " ' s background vocals to those of " Are We All We Are " ( 2012 ) by P ! nk . Keith Caulfield of Billboard said that the song " features a very different look for Spears , whose voice is <unk> to a nearly unrecognizable degree . " After the song was leaked , a reviewer for Idolator said , " we 're pleased to report that it 's pretty good — and slightly kooky , " and that the lyrics , " When you hear us in the club / You 're gonna turn this shit up " are " probably accurate " . Idolator also praised the use of the " It 's Britney , bitch " line . Rebecca <unk> of E ! Online wrote that the track is " clubby , catchy , cool " , and compared Spears ' vocals to those of Madonna , and wrote about the use of pitch @-@ correcting software Auto @-@ Tune on the song . Bill Lamb of About.com wrote that " the digital effects are seamless and the use of modulations of Britney Spears ' voice to build the chorus sounds perfectly natural in this context " , and that , " the spacey , free form bridge is beautiful despite will.i.am 's singing talent limitations . " A Rap @-@ Up reviewer noted the use of Auto @-@ Tune on will.i.am 's vocals only . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Scream & Shout " received mixed reviews from music critics . Michael Murray of RyanSeacrest.com said the song " is like nothing we ’ ve ever heard " , commenting that will.i.am utilizes " his signature electric beats " while Spears embraces an alter @-@ ego . MTV contributor Jocelyn Vena called the track " a club banger " , and said it is " an amped up dance @-@ floor anthem , full of tempo changes , sassy one @-@ liners and dubstep aplenty . " Robert Copsey of Digital Spy wrote that upon first hearing the track he found it confusing , but after repeated plays he found it a " surprisingly catchy robo @-@ pop stomper . " After detailing the release of " Scream & Shout " , a reviewer for Take 40 Australia wrote that the track " has all the hallmarks of a hit Will.i.am song " . An AOL On reviewer called it a " dance floor anthem " and stated that " perhaps the best part of the song is the best one @-@ liner from Britney 's ' Gimme More ' – " It 's Britney B " . " 
 Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV Buzzworthy called " Scream & Shout " a " futuristic electro jam " , and wrote that parts of it " had us weeping and repenting , like that moment where Brit does a heavy Madonna @-@ fied English accent and that other time will.i.am goes all ' Gimme More ' on us with ' It 's Britney , bitch ' . " Chris <unk> of HitFix rated the track a B- , and wrote that , " the dubstep @-@ y beat on offer is certainly a booty @-@ shaker , but it lacks the extra " oomph " and originality that would make " Scream and Shout " a truly memorable single . It 's the kind of club track that 's serviceable enough in the moment , but it 's not likely to stick in your head on the cab ride home at 2 a.m. " . Emily Exton of PopDust contributor wrote that Spears ' contribution is an improvement from " will 's monotonous requests to ' lose control ' , ' let it go ' and ' hit the floor ' , " but said that the song needed " something more from Britney to balance this out . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard news writer wrote that will.i.am " could have utilized Spears ' presence in a more efficient manner , but [ the song 's ] goal of inspiring awkward dance moves via its impossibly straightforward chorus ... is soundly accomplished . " 
 Yahoo ! ' s Kathleen Perricone gave " Scream & Shout " a mixed review , and said it was " not exactly worthy of all the hype " , and Alicia Lutes of Hollywood.com criticized its lyrical meaning and repetitive production . Malene Arpe of Toronto Star wrote that it " is really terrible and rather than making you want to scream and shout , it sorta lulls you into a nice nap @-@ like state of ceasing to care around the three @-@ minute mark . " The Huffington Post journalist Kia Makarechi called the song a " competent piece of airy dance pop " , and wrote that the only mildly inspiring moment on " Scream & Shout " is the sample from " Gimme More " . An editorial writer from Popjustice was negative towards " Scream & Shout " and Pitbull 's song " Feel This Moment " ( 2012 ) , stating that what the " two songs represent is pop music writhing around in its own shit . " Kurt Schlosser of <unk> also criticized the song 's lyrical content , and wrote that it " plays like a forgotten sample from a Black Eyed Peas song , with Britney doing the Fergie talkie parts ... " and that it is will.i.am 's song . 
 It is also the victor of Billboard 's 2013 reader @-@ voted March Madness contest , against hits by Kelly Clarkson , Rihanna and P ! nk , among others . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Scream & Shout " made its first chart appearance on November 28 , 2012 , debuting at number 27 on the Spanish Singles Chart , before leaving the top thirty the next week . On its fourteenth week , the song reached the top of the chart . On the French Singles Chart , for the week of November 19 , 2012 , " Scream & Shout " debuted at number 6 . The next week it reached number 2 , staying there for two weeks . On the week ending January 26 , 2013 , the song peaked at number 1 . In the United Kingdom , " Scream & Shout " became will.i.am 's fourth consecutive top five single , and debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 2 . It was also Spears ' first UK top five hit since " Womanizer " , which peaked at number 3 in 2008 . On January 13 , 2013 , it reached number 1 , where it stayed for two weeks , making it will.i.am 's second consecutive number one single and Spears ' first number one since " Everytime " ( 2004 ) . In two months of release , it sold over 513 @,@ 000 units in the UK according to the Official Charts Company . " Scream & Shout " also debuted at number 1 on the UK R & B Chart , where it stayed for seven weeks . Elsewhere in Europe , the song remained number one in Germany for nine consecutive weeks , Belgium ( Flanders ) and Luxembourg for eight weeks , Netherlands for seven straight weeks ( her first number 1 since " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " in 2000 ) , Belgium ( Wallonia ) and Finland for five straight weeks , Austria , Denmark , Ireland , Italy , Norway and Switzerland for four weeks and Scotland for three weeks . It also reached the top ten in Czech Republic , Hungary , Poland , Slovakia and Sweden . In South Korea , it entered the Gaon Chart at number 3 , with over 30 @,@ 000 digital units sold . 
 In the United States , because of low airplay and streaming , " Scream & Shout " first entered the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 3 , before debuting at number 12 on the Hot 100 . It was Spears ' 29th appearance on the Hot 100 and her fourth @-@ highest debut . The song rose from number 66 to number 1 on the Hot Digital Songs , with 196 @,@ 000 digital units sold , becoming Spears ' seventh number 1 on the component chart and will.i.am 's second as a solo artist . The song 's rise is the greatest in the chart 's history , beating the 57 – 1 rise of Zac Efron , Andrew Seeley and Vanessa Hudgens ' " Breaking Free " ( from Disney 's High School Musical ) the week of February 11 , 2006 . " Scream & Shout " also debuted at number 33 on the Pop Songs component chart , becoming Spears ' 30th hit on that chart and equaling Mariah Carey for the second @-@ most entries in the chart 's 20 @-@ year history . It peaked at number 3 . The song also entered the Latin Pop Airplay component chart at number 33 , where it peaked at number 20 . On the week ending January 19 , 2013 , " Scream & Shout " reached number eight on the Hot 100 , becoming will.i.am 's third solo top 10 hit and his first as a lead artist . It also passed 1 million in digital sales in the country that week . It peaked at number three on the chart . The song debuted at number 39 in Canada , and reached number 3 the following week . Four weeks later it reached number one , staying there for four weeks and becoming will.i.am 's first Canadian number one single and Spears 's ninth . " Scream & Shout " was the first number @-@ one single on Billboard 's new Dance / Electronic Songs chart in its first issue , published on January 26 , 2013 . As of July 2013 , the song has sold 3 million digital copies in the United States . 
 The song entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 26 on December 3 , 2012 , reaching number 2 the following week , where it remained for another week before reaching number 1 on December 24 , 2012 , becoming the 2012 New Zealand Christmas number 1 , and earning a 2 times Platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand for selling over 30 @,@ 000 units there . " Scream & Shout " debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number 32 on December 9 , 2012 . The following week , it reached number 5 and peaked at number 2 on the week ending December 23 , 2012 , making it Spears ' highest @-@ charting single in Australia since " Piece of Me " ( 2008 ) . It also topped the Australian Dance Chart and has been certified 6 times Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association denoting sales of 420 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After confirming he was working with Spears on August 2012 , will.i.am tweeted her saying " OMG ... your lookin fit & hot ... can 't wait to shoot the video to our song ... your fans are <unk> love it ... " . The music video was directed by Ben Mor and filmed on October 13 – 14 , 2012 , in Los Angeles . Behind the scenes footage of the video recording — in which according to the Daily Mirror Spears wore a Herve Leger dress and black gloves — was leaked on October 14 . When asked about the video 's concept and style , will.i.am said that it will include " uber fresh fashion " , and that he intended to release the video and song together . 
 On November 23 , 2012 , a short preview of the music video was aired during a promotional commercial for X Factor . Jessica Sager of Pop Crush wrote that will.i.am " sports a black suit , while Spears rocks a futuristic , black , seemingly ' Barbarella ' -inspired look . " On November 26 , 2012 , will.i.am tweeted that the video edit had been finished , and added , " I 'm so happy and excited for everyone to see it ... " . The music video for " Scream & Shout " premiered in the US during a live episode of The X Factor on November 28 , 2012 , and was made available for viewing on VEVO immediately after the show 's broadcast on the west coast . 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The music video 's theme is multiplicity . Mor said that the idea " was essentially trying to reduce what the song is about to symbols . And that 's what it was ... just really keeping it clean and iconic . " The video opens with intercalated beauty shots of will.i.am and Spears , until the scene cuts to will.i.am using his iPhone camera add @-@ on and social network <unk> + . will.i.am says " bring the action " , and Spears is seen wearing a skin @-@ tight skirt and a long @-@ sleeved top with bare midriff and cleavage . Spears performs fast movements to the song 's beat and sings the lyrics . She is then seen atop a white box and posing to the camera . When the track 's chorus begins , will.i.am appears in front of an empty black background and is joined by Spears , who is now wearing a corseted leotard accented with feathers , standing on a moving walkway , and they sing together . After the first " Britney , bitch " line is heard , dancers perform to " Scream & Shout " . The video cuts to intercalated scenes of flaming disco balls , Spears image multiplied , and will.i.am wearing several gold accessories , including a cap with a gold plate that reads ' King ' . Mor said that the video has no narrative , and that , " there 's no deep meaning to any of it ... To me it was just about , you know , every scene is like a photo . I just liked it , I liked seeing the human heads , and I liked seeing the gold chains off of the plaques and then making it scroll . And then it was an awesome way to introduce characters , some friends of will ... so that it wasn 't just about them . " Amy Sciaretto of Pop Crush compared Spears ' look on the video to a " sexy , futuristic librarian " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The accompanying pop video received a positive reception from fans , according to Softpedia blogger Elena Gorgan . Following the premiere on The X Factor , will.i.am thanked his fans for their overwhelmingly positive feedback , tweeting , " Wow ! ! ! I feel so excited and full of energy right now ! ! ! I want to # <unk> . Thank you all . " Bruna Nessif of E ! Online said that the video " wasn 't too crazy , but it definitely provided the futuristic vibe that will.i.am is famous from , " and Melinda Newman of HitFix praised Spears ' hairstyle and make @-@ up , and wrote , " the futuristic , minimalistic clip is a cheap @-@ looking affair that displays no chemistry between [ will.i.am and Spears ] " . Katie Atkinson of MTV compared Spears ' persona on the video to Brigitte Bardot and wrote , " if anyone doubted her enduring sex appeal , Spears proved she 's still got it , in a midriff @-@ baring <unk> dress ... and a corseted leotard accented with feathers in later scenes . " <unk> critic Jenny Mensah said that Spears " sounds less Southern belle and more Swedish dominatrix in the video , as she takes on a deep , authoritative voice . " Hollywood.com blogger Leanne Aguilera wrote that despite not dancing in the video , Spears " does look phenomenal . With her teased blonde locks , sexy ( yet age @-@ appropriate ) pencil skirt and the highest of high heels , Ms. Spears looks sultry yet sophisticated . " 
 Writing for <unk> , Donna Kaufman praised will.i.am and Spears on the video , saying that the latter " looks like the pop star of the future , " while Daily Mail 's Chelsea White wrote that Spears " looks like a re @-@ imaging of a Versace model from the 1990s albeit one from space . " Erin Strecker of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Spears ' style on the video is similar to her " Stronger " ( 2000 ) music video and that will.i.am , " for his part , does his best to get it started with a KING crown and plenty of technological devises , before performing some futuristic slow @-@ mo running and watching approvingly as the back @-@ up dancers party on . " Yahoo ! Music blogger Wendy Geller wrote that Spears ' accent on the song was " terrible " , that " her physique is looking undeniably good " on the video , and that Spears " is looking to be in a much , much healthier place than she was the last time she tried to sound all cockney . So she gets a pass in our book . " Sadao Turner of RyanSeacrest.com said that the video looked like a Sharper Image Catalog coming to life in a nightclub , and T. Kyle of MTV Buzzworthy wrote that " ' Scream & Shout ' is pure fire , and Britney 's parts in the video are ... very cool and amazing " . 
 Andrew <unk> of Out wrote that the product placement seen throughout the video is nothing new , complimented Spears confidence and sex appeal , and that Spears " gives Lana Del Rey a run for her money with a spy @-@ like <unk> . " The Huffington Post journalist Jessica <unk> wrote that despite Spears ' outfits in the video were " sizzling hot " , that " [ h ] er blonde hair looks great and her body is amazing , and you know we love her oodles of gold bling , " and that it was the " hottest Britney music video look " since " Toxic " ( 2004 ) . <unk> Toribio of Terra called the video will.i.am 's " high @-@ end technological wonderland " and wrote that " for all the choreography going on in this clip ... all we get is [ Spears ] standing and sitting pretty . " Idolator 's Sam Lansky wrote that he was unsatisfied , and that the video " is more boundary @-@ testing than the audio , it 's all the things you 'd expect : Futuristic , with some unsubtle product placement and a lot of ostensibly cool effects . Cool cars ! Speakers ! Will.i.am wearing a hat that says “ KING ” ! We ’ d hoped for more . " 
 = = Usage in media = = 
 " Scream & Shout " was used as a backing track to a television commercial to promote Beats by Dr. Dre Color headphones . The commercial featured celebrities Azealia Banks , Zedd , Ellie Goulding , Lil Wayne , 2 Chainz , Zendaya , Cam Newton , LeBron James and will.i.am. The song was heard on an episode of Celebrity Big Brother 11 in the United Kingdom on January 2013 . On January 26 , 2013 , a parody of the song was featured in a sketch of Saturday Night Live , in which the lyrics were changed to " When I walk down the street , all eyes on me " . On September 29 , 2013 , the song was played during the warm @-@ up of the Star Magic Games 2013 at the Lourdes School of Mandaluyong . " Weird Al " Yankovic covered the song as part of his polka medley " NOW That 's What I Call Polka ! " for his 2014 album Mandatory Fun . " Scream & Shout " is featured in Dance Central Spotlight as DLC and the next @-@ gen versions of Grand Theft Auto V on Non @-@ Stop Pop FM . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Spears and will.i.am did not perform any televised performances of " Scream & Shout " together , however , Will.i.am did perform the song , most notably at the NRJ Music Awards . The song was used in an interlude on Britney : Piece of Me , Spears ' Las Vegas residency show . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 After the track was leaked online , Spears said she was " gonna do some sick remixes too " and asked " who would you like to remix Scream & Shout ? " On January 1 , 2013 , will.i.am said that he would release a club remix of " Scream & Shout " featuring American rapper Waka Flocka Flame and producer Hit @-@ Boy . An early version of the remix was leaked on January 25 , 2013 . The remix features Waka Flocka Flame , Hit @-@ Boy , and rappers Diddy and Lil Wayne . Following the leak , will.i.am uploaded the finished version to his YouTube account . It was released for digital download on January 29 , 2013 . Because it is significantly different from the original version , the remix is being tracked separately on the Billboard charts . On the week ending February 16 , 2013 , it debuted at number 49 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . An accompanying music video was filmed in Los Angeles , California on January 23 , 2013 , and will.i.am said that the remix is " so freaking fresh that we had to do a video for it . " The video was due to premiere on February 15 , 2013 at BET 's 106 & Park . However , the day before its planned release it was leaked online through Youku , and was therefore uploaded to VEVO the same day . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Instrumentation recorded at The Blue Room in Hoogstraten , Belgium . 
 Will.i.am 's vocals recorded at The Record Plant in Hollywood , California . 
 Britney Spears 's vocals recorded at Studio Malibu in Malibu , California . 
 Mixed at The Record Plant in Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Jef " Lazy Jay " Martens – producer , keyboards , drums , midi programming , songwriter 
 will.i.am – songwriter , additional producer , lead vocals , engineer , background vocals , synths , bass , drum programming , moog bass 
 Jean Baptiste – songwriter 
 David Levy - vocal producer 
 Dylan Dresdow – mixing 
 Britney Spears – guest vocals , background vocals 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of " Scream & Shout " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cubeb = 
 Cubeb ( Piper <unk> ) , or tailed pepper is a plant in genus Piper , cultivated for its fruit and essential oil . It is mostly grown in Java and Sumatra , hence sometimes called Java pepper . The fruits are gathered before they are ripe , and carefully dried . Commercial cubebs consist of the dried berries , similar in appearance to black pepper , but with stalks attached – the " tails " in " tailed pepper " . The dried pericarp is wrinkled , and its color ranges from grayish @-@ brown to black . The seed is hard , white and oily . The odor of cubebs is described as agreeable and aromatic and the taste as pungent , acrid , slightly bitter and persistent . It has been described as tasting like allspice , or like a cross between allspice and black pepper . 
 Cubeb came to Europe via India through the trade with the Arabs . The name cubeb comes from Arabic <unk> ( <unk> ) , which is of unknown origin , by way of Old French <unk> . Cubeb is mentioned in alchemical writings by its Arabic name . In his Theatrum Botanicum , John Parkinson tells that the king of Portugal prohibited the sale of cubeb to promote black pepper ( Piper nigrum ) around 1640 . It experienced a brief resurgence in 19th @-@ century Europe for medicinal uses , but has practically vanished from the European market since . It continues to be used as a flavoring agent for gins and cigarettes in the West , and as a seasoning for food in Indonesia . 
 = = History = = 
 In the fourth century BC , Theophrastus mentioned komakon , including it with cinnamon and cassia as an ingredient in aromatic confections . Guillaume <unk> and Claudius <unk> have identified komakon with cubeb , probably due to the resemblance which the word bears to the Javanese name of cubeb , <unk> . This is seen as a curious evidence of Greek trade with Java in a time earlier than that of Theophrastus . It is unlikely Greeks acquired them from somewhere else , since Javanese growers protected their monopoly of the trade by sterilizing the berries by scalding , ensuring that the vines were unable to be cultivated elsewhere . 
 In the Tang Dynasty , cubeb was brought to China from Srivijaya . In India , the spice came to be called <unk> <unk> , that is , " Chinese cubeb " , possibly because the Chinese had a hand in its trade , but more likely because it was an important item in the trade with China . In China this pepper was called both <unk> , and <unk> , the cognate Sanskrit word . Li <unk> thought it grew on the same tree as black pepper . Tang physicians administered it to restore appetite , cure " demon vapors " , darken the hair , and perfume the body . However , there is no evidence showing that cubeb was used as a condiment in China . 
 The Book of One Thousand and One Nights , compiled in the 9th century , mentions cubeb as a remedy for infertility , showing it was already used by Arabs for medicinal purposes . Cubeb was introduced to Arabic cuisine around the 10th century . The Travels of Marco Polo , written in late 13th century , describes Java as a producer of cubeb , along with other valuable spices . In the 14th century , cubeb was imported into Europe from the Grain Coast , under the name of pepper , by merchants of Rouen and Lippe . A 14th @-@ century morality tale exemplifying gluttony by the Franciscan writer Francesc <unk> describes the eating habits of a worldly cleric who consumes a bizarre concoction of egg yolks with cinnamon and cubeb after his baths , probably as an aphrodisiac . 
 Cubeb was thought by the people of Europe to be repulsive to demons , just as it was by the people of China . Ludovico Maria <unk> , a Catholic priest who wrote about methods of exorcism in the late 17th century , includes cubeb as an ingredient in an incense to ward off incubus . Even today , his formula for the incense is quoted by neopagan authors , some of whom also claim that cubeb can be used in love sachets and spells . 
 After the prohibition of sale , culinary use of cubeb decreased dramatically in Europe , and only its medicinal application continued to the 19th century . In the early 20th century , cubeb was regularly shipped from Indonesia to Europe and the United States . The trade gradually diminished to an average of 135 t ( 133 long tons ; 149 short tons ) annually , and practically ceased after 1940 . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The dried cubeb berries contain essential oil consisting monoterpenes ( <unk> 50 % , α @-@ <unk> , and carene ) and sesquiterpenes ( caryophyllene , copaene , α- and β @-@ cubebene , δ @-@ cadinene , germacrene ) , the oxides <unk> and 1 @,@ 8 @-@ <unk> and the alcohol cubebol . 
 About 15 % of a volatile oil is obtained by distilling cubebs with water . <unk> , the liquid portion , has the formula <unk> . It is a pale green or blue @-@ yellow viscous liquid with a warm woody , slightly <unk> odor . After rectification with water , or on keeping , this deposits rhombic crystals of camphor of cubebs . 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) is a crystalline substance existing in cubebs , discovered by Eugène <unk> and Capitaine in 1839 . It may be prepared from cubebene , or from the pulp left after the distillation of the oil . The drug , along with gum , fatty oils , and <unk> of magnesium and calcium , contains also about 1 % of cubebic acid , and about 6 % of a resin . The dose of the fruit is 30 to 60 grains , and the British Pharmacopoeia contains a tincture with a dose of 4 to 1 dram . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Medicinal = = = 
 In India , the ancient texts of Ayurveda ( Sanskrit <unk> ् <unk> ) include cubeb in various remedies . Charaka and Sushruta prescribe a cubeb paste as a mouthwash , and the use of dried cubebs internally for oral and dental diseases , loss of voice , halitosis , fevers , and cough . Unani physicians use a paste of the cubeb berries externally on male and female genitals to intensify sexual pleasure during coitus . Due to this attributed property , cubeb was called " <unk> @-@ ul @-@ <unk> " . 
 In traditional Chinese medicine cubeb is used for its alleged warming property . In Tibetan medicine , cubeb ( ka ko la in Tibetan ) is one of bzang po drug , six fine herbs beneficial to specific organs in the body , with cubeb assigned to the spleen . 
 Arab physicians of the Middle Ages were usually versed in alchemy , and cubeb was used , under the name <unk> , when preparing the water of al <unk> . The Book of One Thousand and One Nights mentions cubeb as a main ingredient in making an aphrodisiac remedy for infertility : 
 The mixture , called " seed @-@ thickener " , is given to Shams @-@ al @-@ Din , a wealthy merchant who had no child , with the instruction that he must eat the paste two hours before having intercourse with his wife . According to the story , the merchant did get the child he desired after following these instructions . Other Arab authors wrote that cubeb rendered the breath fragrant , cured affections of the bladder , and that eating it " enhances the delight of coitus " . 
 In 1654 , Nicholas Culpeper wrote in the London <unk> that cubebs were " hot and dry in the third degree ... ( snip ) they cleanse the head of <unk> and strengthen the brain , they heat the stomach and provoke lust " . A later edition in 1826 informed the reader that " the Arabs call them Quabebe , and Quabebe Chine : they grow plentifully in Java , they stir up venery . ( snip ) ... and are very profitable for cold griefs of the womb " . 
 The modern use of cubeb in England as a drug dates from 1815 . There were various preparations , including oleum cubebae ( oil of cubeb ) , tinctures , fluid extracts , oleo @-@ resin compounds , and vapors , which were used for throat complaints . A small percentage of cubeb was commonly included in lozenges designed to alleviate bronchitis , in which the antiseptic and <unk> properties of the drug are useful . The most important therapeutic application of this drug , however , was in treating gonorrhea , where its antiseptic action was of much value . William Wyatt Squire wrote in 1908 that cubebs " act specifically on the <unk> @-@ urinary mucous membrane . ( They are ) given in all stages of gonorrhea " . As compared with <unk> in this connection cubeb has the advantages of being less disagreeable to take and somewhat less likely to disturb the digestive apparatus in prolonged administration . 
 The volatile oil , oleum cubebae , was the form in which cubeb is most commonly used as a drug , the dose being 5 to 20 minims , which may be suspended in mucilage or given after meals in a wafer . The drug exhibited the typical actions of a volatile oil , but exerted some of these to an exceptional degree . As such , it was liable to cause a cutaneous erythema in the course of its excretion by the skin , had a marked diuretic action , and was a fairly efficient disinfectant of the urinary passages . Its administration caused the appearance in the urine of a salt of cubebic acid which was precipitated by heat or nitric acid , and was therefore liable to be mistaken for albumin , when these two most common tests for the occurrence of albuminuria were applied . 
 The National Botanic Pharmacopoeia printed in 1921 tells that cubeb was " an excellent remedy for flour albus or whites . " 
 = = = Culinary = = = 
 In Europe , cubeb was one of the valuable spices during the Middle Ages . It was ground as a seasoning for meat or used in sauces . A medieval recipe includes cubeb in making sauce <unk> , which consists of almond milk and several spices . As an aromatic confectionery , cubeb was often candied and eaten whole . <unk> <unk> , a vinegar infused with cubeb , cumin and garlic , was used for meat marinades in Poland during the 14th century . Cubeb can still be used to enhance the flavor of savory soups . 
 Cubeb reached Africa by way of the Arabs . In Moroccan cuisine , cubeb is used in savory dishes and in pastries like <unk> , little diamonds of semolina with honey and dates . It also appears occasionally in the list of ingredients for the famed spice mixture Ras el hanout . In Indonesian cuisine , especially in Indonesian <unk> ( curries ) , cubeb is frequently used . 
